 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers: Inhibiting the Adoption of ...McAvoy, John;Butler, Tom
Journal of Information Technology Case and Application Research; 2009; 11, 1; ABI/INFORM Collection
pg. 23A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
A Failure to Learn By Software Developers: 
Inhibiting the Adoption of an Agile Software 
Development Methodology 
ABSTRACT John McAvoy and Tom Butler 
University College Cork, Ireland 
j.mcavoy@ucc.ie tbutler@afis.ucc.ie The adoption of an Agile software development methodology can be impacted by many 
stakeholders. In the parlance of Chris Argyris, the adoption of Agile 
is an exercise in learning 
-behavioral change created by Agile 
's values. This paper presents a case study investigating the 
failures associated with the introduction of elements of a new software development methodology 
by the software developers within a software development team. Although Argyis' work is often 
portrayed at the organizational level, this case study examines individual learning. The failure to 
adopt aspects of the new methodology is seen as a failure to learn by the individual software 
developers within the team. This paper posits that learning 
is more than a pedagogical view of 
learning a new skill; learning also involves changes in individual behaviors, attitudes and 
opinions. As methodology adoption involves changes to the software developers' activities and 

values, this study investigates the introduction of an Agile Method as a learning experience. This 

case study concentrates on one particular group of stakeholders 
-the software developers 
-and examines the affect their traits can have on the learning activity of adopting an Agile 
methodology in a project. Extant research focuses on the traits of software developers but does 
not inc01porate influences from the values inherent in Agile. The objective of this case study is to 
examine the traits of individual programmers to determine the impact they can have on the 
adoption of an Agile methodology by examining, in depth, the introduction of Agile by the 
software developers in a team. This leads to the research question which asks 
if and how the 
traits of software developers can negatively impact on the behavioral changes required for the 
learning inherent in an Agile adoption? 
Keywords: Learning, Behaviors, Agile Adoption, Software developers, Cognitive dissonance 
INTRODUCTION Previous research illustrates how learning occurs and fails to occur: to be effective, learning 
involves a change in behaviors and beliefs (Argyris, 1976). The new deployment of a software 
development methodology is an exercise in change -a change in actions that lead to new 
behaviors (Larsen, 2001). Such change is, in effect, an exercise in learning. Previous research 
examined learning in the context of a development group (cf. McAvoy & Butler, 2007). While 
the original research guides much of the discussion on learning, this study examines the 
introduction of an Agile method (usually referred to simply as Agile) in the context of individual 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
23  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
software developers, and determines why their individual learning experience was at times 
ineffectual. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, the Agile method and philosophy are 

described. Then, theories of how learning occurs in individuals are presented. Next, a 
relationship between the values of Agile and learning behaviors is posited; it is also argued that 
the values inherent in Agile should promote learning. Subsequently, the traits of software 
developers are presented as possible moderators of the behavior changes required for an Agile 
adoption and the learning inherent in the adoption. This leads to the research questions, which ask 
if and how the traits of software developers can affect the behavioral changes essential for the 
learning required for effective Agile adoption? The case study of the adoption of an Agile method 
is then presented, the findings of which illustrate how the traits of individual software developers, 
paradoxically so highly regarded by Agile methods, inhibited learning in the project. The final 
section offers conclusions and recommendations. 
AGILE V ALOES AND METHODOLOGIES 
The Agile philosophy is encapsulated in the Agile manifesto. The agile manifesto, available at 
http://agilemanifesto.org, is a collection of values, or espoused values (Wendorff, 2002), that 
underlie all agile methodologies. 
Ł Individuals and interactions over processes and tools 
Ł Working software over comprehensive documentation 

Ł Customer collaboration over contract negotiation 
Ł Responding to change over following a plan 
Agile places a much greater emphasis than other methodologies on software developers by 
concentrating on the humanistic aspects of software development (Stephens 
& Rosenberg, 2003). 
People issues are at the core of the Agile methodologies and this is evident in the levels of 
empowerment that software developers possess (Boehm 
& Turner, 2004). Developers are 
empowered because, rather than rigid plans and documentation controlling the development 
process, the Agile methods move the ownership and control of the project back to the software 
developers. The move to empowerment of skilled software developers acts in tandem with new 
attitudes from the project stakeholders towards change; change is a positive aspect of a project as 
opposed to being perceived as a problem to overcome (Riehle, 2001). Along with a new set of 
values, the Agile methods introduce new processes or methods to software development. These 
processes fit with the values of Agile as described in the manifesto above. An example Agile 
process, and the most written about, is pair programming. Pair programming is described in 
Hazzan & Tomayko (2003 p.55), Maurer 
& Martel (2002), Natsu 
et al. 
(2003), and Turk 
et al. 
(2005) as a practice where "any piece of code should be written by two software developers, each 
of whom has a different role." While one software developer is typing, the other has a strategic 
outlook, determining what the best approach to the problem should be. 
AGILE AS AN EXPERIENCE IN LEARNING 
Researchers and authors have described the introduction of Agile as a culture change ( cf. 
Bossavit, 2002; Coram 
& Bohner, 2005; Drobka, Noftz, 
& Raghu, 2004; Simons 
& Nadkarny, JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
24  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
2002). This paper notes this observation and therefore concentrates on the change brought about 
by the introduction of Agile through the lens of the learning experiences (behavioral changes) of 
the software developers. 
Argyris (1976) describes learning as the detection and correction of errors. In a later work, 
Argyris (1995) adds that learning also occurs when there is a match between people's intentions 
and the consequences of their actions. Individuals and teams introduce Agile with the aim of 
creating better software faster; this is achieved by following the values of the Agile manifesto. 
Often, the decision to introduce Agile is based on the need to correct problems with an existing, 
more rigid, methodology (Schuh, 2001; Spayd, 2003) 
Learning and Behaviors 
Argyris and Schon (1978) illustrate the relationship between intentions and consequent behavior 
by connecting learning and behavior through espoused theories (intentions) and theories in use 
(consequences or realities). Espoused theories are the intentions that individuals describe, and 
conceive themselves as having -for example the intention to introduce Agile to a project. 
Theories in use guide how individuals actually behave -what intentions actually guide social 
actors, as opposed to what they profess guides them. Espoused theories comprise beliefs and 
attitudes which influence intentions. In addition to learning requiring that intentions correspond 
with consequences, learning also occurs where there is a match between the beliefs individuals 

profess, to themselves and others, and the beliefs that can be construed from their actions 
(Easterby-Smith & Lyles, 2003) -for example a manager may profess a belief in delegation of 

decision making (their espoused theory), yet their behavior is one where only trivial decisions are 
delegated. This implies that the manager actually believes that delegation of decision making is 
not for important decisions (their theory in use). 
Single and Double Loop Learning 
Argyris (1994; 1995; 1997; 2002) argues that there are two forms of learning-single and double 
loop. Argyris uses the often-cited example of a thermostat to demonstrate single loop learning. In 
this scenario, temperature is measured against a predefined value and the thermostat turns on or 
off the heat source to maintain the temperature at this value. In single loop learning, the norms 

and beliefs that chose the temperature are unchanged-for example, the reason why the 
temperature is set to 28 degrees as opposed to 32 degrees. Double loop learning occurs when 
strategies are examined, along with the assumptions behind those strategies. Using the original 
analogy of a thermostat to demonstrate single loop learning, the analogy of the thermostat is 
further developed by stating that if the thermostat could question why it was set to a temperature, 
or to examine why it worked a certain way, then the thermostat would be engaged in double loop 
learning (Argyris, 1997, 2002; Blackman, Connelly, & Henderson, 2004; Denhardt, Denhardt, & 
Aristigeuta, 2002). Double loop learning not only questions the facts, it questions the logic behind 
the facts: thus, norms and values are questioned leading to the emergence of new theories in use 
(Argyris, 1995; Argyris 
& Schon, 1978; Blackman 
et al., 
2004; Bokeno, 2003; Easterby-Smith 
& Lyles, 2003). 
The use of an Agile methodology appears to promote opportunities for double loop learning as 
opposed to single loop learning -this is, in theory, a positive benefit of adopting Agile. 
It should JITCAR Volume I I, Number I, 2009 
25  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
be noted that this can only be implied, as there is no extant research investigating a link between 
Agile and double loop learning. Despite the lack of extant research, existing literature on single 
and double loop learning could be interpreted as implying that Agile encourages and creates 
double-loop learning (see table 2). 
It should be noted, though, that this study argues that the 
implied link between Agile and double loop learning can actually be negative; however, the 
review of existing literature above would strongly suggest a positive link. 
As described above, Argyris & Schon ( 1978) illustrate the relationship between intentions and 
consequences by connecting learning and behavior through theories in use (consequences) and 
espoused theories (intentions). Human behavior can be categorized as following a particular 
theory in use, typically Model I behavior. Model I behavior is operationalized by Argyris as the 

need to win at any cost, the suppression of negative feelings, an emphasis of rationality, stability, 
and the avoidance of risk. This type of behavior leads to the desire to protect the individual from 
criticism, which leads to individuals being overly defensive: this has the consequence of choice 
reduction and the elimination of mechanisms for valid feedback. As a result, individuals 
exhibiting Model I behavior have little genuine feedback on, or testing of new ideas. Agyris 
(1976; 1994; 1995; 1997; 2002) describes this behavioral model as being underpinned by single 
loop learning, as by censoring what is said and heard, double-loop learning is prevented. Model II 
behavior moves away from the repressive censoring behaviors of Model 
I. The governing 
variables of Model II behavior are valid information, free and informed choice, and commitment 
to decision and actions. This model is based on double loop learning and is a move away from the 
concept of winning to one of open debate. The comparison between Model I and Model II can be 
seen in Table 
1. Model I / 
Single Loop Learning 
Model II / 
Double Loop Learning 
Suppression of negative feeling. Limited Valid information 
feedback. Censorship. 
Importance of rationality, stability, 
and the 
Free and informed choice / Open debate 
avoidance of risk. Rationality is used to justify 
one's own views and discount those of others. 
Winning (not losing or being seen 
as Commitment to decisions and actions 
incompetent) Table 1: 
Comparison of Argyris' Model I and Model II behavior 
Salaway (1987) warns that Model 1 behavior is not automatically bad behavior, and Model II 
behavior is not necessarily good. Model I behavior is efficient in dealing with routine problems -
unlike typical Agile projects -while Model II behavior is appropriate where there is a need for 
considerable cooperation and co-dependence -as with Agile projects. Agile, therefore, should 
strive for and require Model II behaviors. The governing variables for Model II behavior, and the 
JITCAR Volume I 1, Number I, 2009 
26  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
double loop learning it is based on, appear to be matched by the values of Agile, as seen in Table 
2: this proposes a relationship between the two. 
It should be noted that, although Argyris uses 
Model II and double-loop interchangeably, Bokeno (2003) is more specific by stating that, 
ideally, Model I behavior leads to single-loop learning, while Model II behavior leads to 
loop learning. 
Model II Governing Variables 
Agile values 
Double Loop Learning 
"The agile manager fosters an environment 
where members of a team are able to make 
decisions and base them on the best 
information available" [Schuh, 2004, p. 
Valid information 
164]. Agile meetings are held to ensure sharing of 
information useful to the team; superfluous 
information and discussions are banned 
(Astels et al., 2002; Boehm 
& Turner, 2004; 
Poole, 2004) 
Agile projects should have rules governing 
behavior including: Everyone should have 
Free and informed choice / Open debate 
an equal voice; Everyone's contribution is 
valuable; Attack issues not people; Keep 
privacy within the team; Respect each other 
and your differences; Everyone participates 
(Highsmith, 2004). 
As everyone is involved though participative 
decision making, the software developers 
Commitment to decisions and actions 
will implement the decisions that are made 
(Highsmith, 2004) 
A decision is implemented if it is accepted by 
those that make it (Von Bergen 
& Kirk, 1978; Vroom, 1974). 
Table 2: 
Double loop learning and Agile 
Argyris highlights that Model I behavior is the norm in most situations. Double loop learning is 
thus a rare occurrence in individuals and teams as single-loop learning appears to be the norm. 
The failure to achieve Model II behavior is, therefore, a failure to achieve double-loop learning. 
It would appear from Table 2 that the use of an Agile methodology seems to favor and enhance 
opportunities for double loop learning by permitting software developers to transcend the 
limitations of Model I behavior. In an ideal situation, therefore, the use of Agile should 
demonstrate double loop learning seen through Model II behavior. 
JITCAR Volume I I, Number I, 2009 
27  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
Although Agile should promote, and appears to assist, Model II behavior, not all Agile adoptions 
are successful. Success here can mean that the project delivers software on time and on budget, 
meeting requirements. 
It can also mean that the Agile methods are properly applied and used. 
If the Agile principles are not applied, this can be considered as a learning failure. Coram 
& Bohner (2005) and Lindstrom 
& Jeffries (2004) describe patterns of success and failure in Agile projects. 
Rumpe & Schroeder (2002) show how the majority of XP (an Agile methodology) adopters they 
surveyed found their projects to be successful, yet examples of failures in organizations adopting 
Agile are provided in Bossavit (2002), Hodgetts (2004), Schwaber (2002), and Grossman 
et al. 
(2004). In some cases, therefore, there can be ineffective learning in Agile projects. 
If, as argued herein, the attributes of Agile match those of Model II behaviors, then a failure to 
adopt Agile by the software developers is essentially a failure to achieve double-loop learning. 
Back & Seaker (2004) argue that an individual's personality influences their ability to achieve 
double loop learning, so this study concentrates on the personalities and traits of software 
developers to determine their impact on learning. At the core of Agile software development are 
the software developers, so any impact on Agile adoption (the behavioral changes inherent in 
learning), in this context, will be a major one. In the next section we examine factors which may 
impact on the introduction of an Agile methodology, factors which may affect learning as defined 
by behavioral change. 
POTENTIAL CONCERNS WITH THE PROMINENT ROLE OF SOFTWARE 
DEVELOPERS IN AN AGILE PROJECT 
There is a stereotypical view of software developers which is often summed up by the word 
'geek'. Research, though, has demonstrated that this stereotype is often based in reality (Licker, 
1985). Couger 
et al. 
(1979) found that software developers have a very low Social Need Strength 
(SNS) -the need to interact with others -compared to other professional groups (Capretz, 2002; 
Couger & McIntyre, 1988; Licker, 1985; Sawyer & Guinan, 1998); as such, they tend to be 
'loners' rather than 'team players'. Researchers and other commentators have labeled software 
developers as anti-social (Yourdon, 1993), lacking in people skills (Wiegers, 2001), introverted 
(Badawy, 1997), and socially repressed (Olson & Stimmel, 2002). Such software developer 
characteristics would appear to present a problem for the adoption of an Agile methodology, 
especially as software developers working closely with their colleagues and customers is stressed 

as a critical factor in the success of an Agile project (Highsmith, 2004). Model II behavior, based 
on double loop learning, is grounded in team goals, so an inability of software developers to work 
in teams could be problematic for their individual learning -the inherent behavior changes 
required for an Agile approach. 
How software developers are motivated can affect the success of the learning associated with the 
introduction an Agile methodology. Somewhat paradoxically, software developers are motivated 
by recognition from their peers; this is despite their low SNS as described above. Software 
developers place a lot of value on a good reputation among their peers (Raymond, 1999), and try 
to impress their peers with their programming skills (Sawyer & Guinan, 1998). Recognition from 
peers, though, would not mitigate a further problem with software developers and their dealings 
with others -customers specifically. Technical employees tend to be blind to what customers 
need (Workman, 1997). They can get into arguments with customers over technical approaches, 
JJTCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
28  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
their attitude being described as arrogant. Software developers regard their views as being 
superior to those of the users (Cooper, 2004), and they develop systems that do what the software 
developers themselves want. As customers are considered to be at the core of an Agile project 
(Turk et al., 2005), this has the potential to present a major problem for Agile projects. Developer 
interaction with the customer is regarded as key to success. 
Unfortunately, for those wishing to adopt an Agile methodology, the traits exhibited by these 
stereotypes do not appear to be the only ones to have a potentially detrimental impact on the 
learning/behavioral changes required for an Agile adoption. How an Agile project is managed 
will also affect the success of an adoption of a new methodology, as it heavily influences the 
software developers. Agile project management has been defined as the empowerment of the 
software developers to rapidly deliver value to the customer (Augustine, 2005). Traditional 
project management would attempt to control the negative impacts of the developers' traits by 
imposing a standardized structure which relies less on the developers' skills and abilities. By 
empowering the developers, which is a core element of Agile project management, the 
developers, and their traits, have a greater impact in the project. A further concern with this new 
approach of empowering the software developers derives from the fact that project management 
has traditionally followed an engineering or scientific approach (Boody & Buchanan, 1992; 
Humphrey, 1996), and assumes that work is done in a systematic way by software developers, 
who themselves follow an engineering approach (Capretz, 2002). Nevertheless, questions have 
been raised as to whether software developers really follow an engineering approach. Software 
developers have been described as artists, or at least believing themselves to be artists (Jones 
& McLean, 1970). 
Perceptions of software developers as artists is seen as problematic, and even described as 
anarchy (Yourdon, 1993): thus software developers have been described as unmanageable 
because of their traits (Licker, 1983 ). In a more recent work, Howard (2001) adds that it can be 
difficult to manage software developers who resent the imposition of rules or processes, 
especially creative and knowledgeable people (Acuna 
& Juisto, 2004). The project management 
of a collection of individuals who perceive themselves as artists is therefore a potential problem 
for the introduction of an Agile project. Project management in an Agile software development 
initiative moves away from an engineering approach to one of reliance on the software 

developers. Project management has traditionally operated from an industrial engineering 

approach (Carmel & Sawyer, 1998), where all tasks are broken down and performed 
systematically -akin to a bureaucratic approach epitomized by single loop learning. Making the 
transition from this rigorous approach to one of trusting in the abilities of the software developers 
that constitute an 'artists' colony' raises several concerns. 
A potential problem with an Agile software developers as a 'colony of artists' has been 
highlighted by Weinberg (1971 ), who provides one differentiation between poet/artist and 
software developer -that is in the evaluation of work. A critique of an object of art or a piece of 
literature can be good or bad, depending on the critic's taste. A program, on the other hand, can 
be judged by running it -it will work or not (Weinberg, 1971) or, more specifically, it will meet 
the requirements of the user. Software developers, with their artistic temperaments, are 
notoriously bad at evaluations. A prime example of this is in others evaluating their progress, or 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
29  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
lack of viz. software developers (as a class) "are often a dour and apologetic lot who are 
constantly explaining why things can't be done on time and up to specification" (Coffee, 2001, 
p.187). This appears to match the description of Model I behavior. 
There are, nonetheless, additional arguments that this artistic perspective can have a detrimental 
effect on development practice, especially in the introduction of an Agile method and the inherent 
learning within the adoption. Software developers that debug their own programs can indulge in 
blame shifting, denial, excuses, and even ignoring the problem (Hunt 
& Thomas, 2000). This is 
characterized as ego protection, which again matches descriptions of Model I behavior. Thus, a 
further concern for those introducing an Agile methodology is raised, as the role of testing lies 
with the software developer (ultimately it lies with the customer but is initially a concern of the 
software developer). With agile methods, software developers are required to continually test 
their own code; The separate role of tester does not exist in Extreme Programming ( one of the 
major Agile methods). 
Weinberg took the existing theory of cognitive dissonance and used it to explain why software 
developers cannot test their own work ( contrary to those who advocate Agile methods, although 
written before their advent). The original theory of cognitive dissonance was described by 
Festinger, in the 1950's, and has been used more recently in connection with software developers 
(cf. Hunt & Thomas, 2002; Koutsoukos, 2006). Cognitive dissonance occurs when individuals 
experience dissonance and avoid it. The dissonance ( or conflict in a person's mind) is where a 
person's self image, or understanding, is challenged and is avoided by adjusting beliefs. In a 
review of research into cognitive dissonance, it was noted by researchers that research has shifted 
from a need to maintain logical consistency in beliefs, to recognition of the importance of 
maintaining self-esteem (Greenwald & Ronis, 1978). In the l 970's, Weinberg applied the 
cognitive dissonance theory in an examination of software developers. Weinberg describes the 
situation where software developers test their own code. Cognitive dissonance implies that the 
software developers will not see what they don't want to see -in this case, bugs in their code 
(Weinberg, 1971 ). 
RESEARCH MODEL AND QUESTIONS 
Although there is no extant research examining how the traits of software developers affect the 
learning/behavioral changes required in the introduction of an Agile methodology, it appears that 
literature from other domains suggests that there may be concerns. These are potentially the 
factors which cause Model I as opposed to Model II behavior. This research therefore examines if 
the traits of software developers can impact upon the adoption of an Agile methodology, as 
viewed through the eyes of the behavior change inherent in learning. 
Leaming is often viewed as a pedagogical issue: learning a new skill or teaching students in a 
classroom. Learning in this research is based on Argyris' concept of the behavioral change 
required of the individual. 
It is proposed that the traits of software developers can inhibit 
loop learning, so the research questions to be answered are 
1. Can the traits of software developers impede the double-loop learning and Model 
II behavior required in the adoption of Agile? 
If so: 
JITCAR Volume I 1, Number 1, 2009 
30  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
2. Which traits create adoption problems? 
3. How do these traits impede adoption? 
4. What can be done to mitigate the negative impacts of these traits? 
The model shown in Figure 1 describes how learning is achieved by individuals changing from 
Model I behavior to Model II behavior. A successful Agile adoption requires successful learning, 
so a successful adoption will have inherent changes to Model II behavior; it is proposed here that 
the traits of software developers can impede this learning. The model shows how the Agile 
philosophy can play a positive role in the move to Model II behavior (as can peer motivation), but 
other developer traits can negatively impact on the success of the adoption, and the learning 
required. Leaming itself cannot be seen, but by observing behavioral change from Model I to 
Model II, it can be implied. Similarly, if the traits of developers are impeding learning, this will 
be observed by a prominence of Model I behavior over the Model II behavior required for a 
successful Agile adoption. 
Agile Philosophy 
Developer Traits 
+ Peer motivation 
Low SNS 
1---------Artistic perspective 
i---------, Cognitive Dissonance 
Successful Agile Adoption 
Developer Learning, as indicated by 
movement from Model I to 
Model II 
behaviors Figure 1: 
Research Model: Software developers' traits preventing learning 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
This paper's basic premise is that the successful adoption and use of Agile methods is related to 
the ability of software developers to adopt Model II behaviors. The objective of this study was, 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
31  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
therefore, to examine how software developers learned (in the context of behavioral changes as 
opposed to pedagogical learning), or did not learn, in the introduction of an Agile method. Factors 
which aided software developers' learning and, also, those which constrained learning were to be 
identified and explained. Klein 
& Myers (1999, p.75) maintain that in the interpretivist mode of 
research "theory is used ... more as a 'sensitizing device' to view the world in a certain way"; 
hence the inclusion of previous sections on learning theory. 
A qualitative, interpretive, case-based research strategy was therefore adopted (cf. Walsham, 
1995), using a single case for analysis ( cf. Yin, 2003)-a software development project team 
working in the software division of a large US multinational telecoms manufacturer. Stake 
(1995) contends that case studies can be intrinsic, instrumental, or collective in focus. An 
instrumental case study is one where the case forms a backdrop or context and is of secondary 
importance. Such a study is undertaken to build or extend a theory or to explore a particular 
phenomenon as it is manifested in the 
cas~that is the purpose of the present study. The software 
team was studied over a nine month period, with one of the researchers playing an active role in 
the team in facilitating the deployment of the Agile methodology. In this capacity he was both a 
'fly-on-the-wall' and an active participant at key stages (cf. Yin, 2003). Social actors, such as 
senior project managers, section managers, and members of other software development teams 
were also included in the case study to gather background information on the team studied. 
As indicated, problems with learning and behaviors are often latent or hidden, even from those 
involved in the process. Individuals in groups, such as software development teams, are usually 
unable to determine why these problems occur, for a variety of social and psychological reasons 
mentioned above. This situation calls for the application of research approaches that are sensitive 
to such issues (Jorgensen, 1989). Thus, to investigate the impact on learning, by software 
developers in an Agile adoption, necessitates a longitudinal case study that permits the team to be 
examined in context and over time (as per Yin, 2003). Furthermore, the investigation of the 
software developers' traits that inhibit learning involves the examination of phenomena that 
would be normally hidden from, or not observable by, outsiders; indeed, individuals themselves 
may not be aware of the existence of such influences (Goleman, 1996). In addition, as software 
development (and Agile software development in particular) occurs in a social setting, it brings 

with it the complexities inherent in social settings. When dealing with such complexity, case 
based research is recommended (Gordon, 2008); examples of the use of case studies to examine a 
social setting can be seen in Furumo & Melcher (2006), who found the impact of social structure 
on an ERP implementation, and Joshi (2005) who examined the impact of the user on the 

adoption of a system. 
Further, Argyris (1976) illustrates how individuals are unable to discern the difference between 

what they believe in and what they actually do ('espoused theories' versus 'theories in use') and it 
is clear from Argyris that phenomena such as the inability for reflexivity are usually hidden from 
those affected by the phenomenon. Surveys, questionnaires, and other such approaches are 
therefore unsuitable research methods as a respondent cannot, or may not wish to, identify the 
differences between their 'espoused theories' and 'theories in use'. Thus, to overcome these 
difficulties, a qualitative research approach utilizing participant observation was adopted for the 
case study (cf. Yin, 2003). 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
32  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
Case studies have been used to examine software development, and it is argued that it is the most 
appropriate method. Kitchenham 
et al. 
(1995) propose case studies as the optimum research 
approach when investigating the introduction of a new tool or method in software development. 
In their investigation into software processes, Curtis 
et al. 
(1988) noted that many of their 
research unit (The Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation) were proponents of 

quantitative experimental research. Curtis 
et al., 
though, favored research in the field to enable 
timely insight into problems experienced by companies. In support of their choice, they argue that 
quantitative studies concentrate on the processes and mechanisms involved, yet software is 
developed by humans and the problem is a behavioral one. In addition, it is argued that there is a 
need for research on systems development in real organizational settings (Fitzgerald, 1997). 
Specific to Agile software development, Layman 
et al. 
(2006) argue that most reports, from 
practitioners and researchers, on Agile success has been anecdotal, a point with which Maurer & 
Martel (2002), Layman 
et al. 
(2004), Turk 
et al. 
(2005), and Kahkonen & Abrahamsson (2003) 
concur, and argue for a case based approach to provide sound empirical evidence. A number of 
case studies have employed participant observation to conduct research on software development 
projects. For example, a qualitative approach involving a participant observation case study was 
used by researchers to investigate the characteristics of an Agile software development team and 

provided rich insights that could not be obtained by other research methods (Robinson 
& Sharp, 2005). In the present study, one of the researchers was previously employed by the organization studied. 
Thus, he had ready access to key informants and a range of other social actors in the case. This 
conferred upon him the advantage of being a 'cultural insider' (B0dker 
& Pedersen, 1991 ). Molla 
& Bhalla (2006) describe a similar case study approach, using participant observation. One author 
was a cultural insider, having worked in the company, while the second author examined the data 
for potential bias. Molla and Bhalla's research differs from this research in that they describe their 
participant observation as being retrospective (being based on one author's previous experience), 
while the research in this case study occurred in 'real time'; the team was researched over the 

nine month period of the project in which Agile software development was introduced. 
Extensive case and field notes were taken on all formal interviews, meetings, informal 
conversations, and observations while on-site at the research location (Ezey, 2003). A wealth of 
documentary evidence was also gathered. All project documentation was made available to the 
researcher, from process documents to performance statistics. While observation was the primary 
data source, supplemental and confirmatory information was acquired through documents and 
interviews. Each member of the team was interviewed, often on several occasions, at various 
stages of the project. While the majority of the interviews were conducted with individuals, the 
entire group was also interviewed as a unit, to determine if there were differences between public 
statements and individual realities -espoused views in the group setting and theories in use of the 
individuals. The goal was not to examine group behaviors but to determine the impact of the team 
on individual behavior (and the learning inherent in behavior change). Observation took place 
over the nine month period, the duration of time in the field was predominantly a full working 
day every week ( on alternate days); this led to a total observation time of approximately 300 
hours. On occasion, when additional information and clarification was required, individual team 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
33  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
members would meet with the researcher outside of the work setting for short interviews. 
Observation was not restricted to the work place, as the researcher was invited to several social 
events outside of the work place. These events took place in restaurants, bars, and even the homes 
of the software developers. This proved to be the most difficult for observation as it was not 
possible to take notes during the social events 
-at a social event people would not want someone 
recording their actions 
-so notes were written after the event. In the workplace setting, the 
individual software developers agreed not to request to see the field notes from observations as 
they were being recorded. Once the notes had been written up, the software developers could see 
them, although only once was this requested and the software developer had no issue with the 
observations in the field notes. During formal interviews, the software developers were shown the 
transcription of their interviews as a matter of course. 
Following Yin (2003), an analytic generalization approach was employed with saw the data 
interpreted in light of the theoretical concepts described above. Thus the data analysis was 

informed by the conceptual elements (e.g. 'espoused theories' and 'theories 
in use' and the 
attributes of software developers were identified at the level of the individual); this allowed the 
different themes, categories, and patterns to be identified in the case data (Yin, 2003). The case 
data was coded using a scheme based on a combination of open-coding (which permitted the 
identification of new themes and categories in the data) and the seed-categories suggested by 
priori concepts discussed above ( cf. Stake, 1995). These are described as preformed codes, as per 
Seaman ( 1999), but, in agreement with Attride-Sterling (2001 ), it was acknowledged that these 
codes would change as themes emerged from the case. 
FIELD OBSERVATIONS 
The case chosen for study was a large US multinational telecommunications company, which 
designs and manufactures a range of products, from cell-phone switches and base stations, to 
mobile telephone products. Its software division develops software used in the monitoring, 
control and operation of mobile phone networks throughout the US, Europe, the Middle East, and 
Africa. It is significant that the organization's policies and culture recently promoted software 
process improvement initiatives, such as Agile approaches. The unit of study selected in the case 
study (Yin, 2003) was a software development team of six software developers and a project 
manager. The team developed system administration applications for the installation, upgrade, 
and maintenance of a large application which monitored mobile phone networks. The team was 
purposively chosen for inclusion in the study, as it had decided to introduce an Agile software 
development methodology to help improve its software development processes and products. 
This team were early adopters of the Agile approach in this organization, as no other team in their 
section had attempted to adopt and use Agile methods. 
The team made a collective decision to adopt a new Agile software development methodology, 
which was a hybrid of proven Agile methods, at the start of a new software development project. 
There was unanimous agreement among the team that this new methodology was required. The 

team members had reflected on their existing processes and methods and decided that an Agile 
approach would better meet the needs of the team and the project. Each software developer stated 
that they were looking forward to using the Agile method, one went as far as saying that he was 

"looking forward to ending the tyranny of the old approach." The old approach, referred to by the 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
34  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
software developer, was the traditional waterfall method, with a heavy emphasis on 
documentation and predictability through plans. The Agile approach moves away from this 

emphasis and the software developers felt that they could more effectively do their job using the 

Agile method. In interviews, three software developers stated that this (the Agile method) was 
going to let them do their job properly; the other three software developers described the new 
approach as freedom from rigid and ineffective processes. 
Initially, Agile was adopted successfully with iterations and user stories (a variant of 
requirements) being adopted by the team. While traditionally the team was expected to produce 
and stick with rigid plans, the use of iterations allows for more flexible planning which takes into 
account the reality of changing requirements. Documentation from Change Control Boards, over 
the previous five years, showed that the requirements could change by 30% up to 60%. 
Associated with that were the project plans from the previous five projects, which showed that the 
plan never reflected the reality of the project; this aligned with the continuous changes in 

requirements. It should be noted that the team were not trying to use the irrelevance of the plans 
as an excuse for missed deadlines or poor performance. Despite the fact that this team's 
requirements changed more than any other team, project management documents, and interviews 
with senior managers, showed this team as the most effective and productive in the organization. 
The move to user stories was a further example of the team's success with the initial adoption of 
Agile. User stories are simplified requirements documents; in fact, a user story can be as simple 
as a single line description along with associated development estimates, risks, etc. Traditionally, 
the team were required to produces volumes of requirements documents, most of which ended up 
"gathering dust", to quote one software developer, and "taking up space in my office", to quote 

another. The team, based on the Agile principle of eliminating unnecessary documentation, 
reviewed all their documentation requirements and drew a red pen through two-thirds of it. With 
support from the Quality Assurance department, they adopted new, more Agile, documents which 
only recorded what would actually be useful. The best example of the redundant documentation 
was the traditional requirement for pseudo code to be documented before coding, to guide the 
development. The reality was that the pseudo code was written after coding was complete, thus 
making it not just irrelevant but 
"a complete waste of my time." Pseudo code was the first part of 
requirements/design documents to be crossed out with the red pen. 
The team initially discussed each aspect of the Agile adoption, used consent in decision making, 

and were committed to the adoption of Agile. During the first month of the project, each move to 
a new Agile process, and the new behaviors required, was formally discussed by the team in 
meetings. Recorded notes from these meetings showed that the team discussed the benefits from 
using a particular Agile process, while at the same time ensuring that the process could be used 
effectively by the team. Interviews with the individual software developers after the meetings 
showed that the software developers wanted to use the processes, and were quite strong in their 
support. For example, the use of iterations was discussed in the team. While the majority of Agile 
researchers recommend an iteration length of 4 weeks, the software developers discussed and 
decided upon a 6 week iteration. There is nothing in the existing Agile literature to suggest that 6 
week iterations will be problematic (the opposite in fact) but what is noteworthy is that this was a 
collective decision after a team debate. While the six week period was not a universal choice -it 
was the majority choice though -two software developers who argued for 8 week iterations still 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
35  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn 
By Software Developers 
expressed support for the choice. It was specifically put to the two 'dissenters', by the researcher, 
that the team had gone against their choice. One replied that "at least with an Agile approach I get 
to express my view', while the second stated the "you win some you lose some, at least with 
Agile I get to win some." As such, they were demonstrating the Model II behaviors of open 
debate and commitment to decisions -effective learning. As the project progressed, though, it 
became clear that some aspects of the Agile adoption were not proceeding as planned, and the 
developers' view of Agile changed from willingness to try, to one of rejection. Studying the 
software developers for the traits described above provided some illustration as to why problems 
were occurring, and why learning would be ineffective without the required new behaviors. 
While ultimately the customers were multinational telecommunications companies, the 
immediate customer was in-house. The team developed system administration applications for the 
installation, upgrade, and maintenance of a large application which monitored mobile phone 
networks. The 
-in-house customer used the team's products internally to facilitate the other 
development teams. This created a unique situation where the team required input from other 
groups while at the same time providing functionality to these other teams to perform their 
development tasks -in effect the other teams were their customers. 
Although the stereotypical view of software developers as 'geeks' was seen in the team, a low 
Social Need Strength (SNS) was not apparent. The software developers did have their own 
language and jargon which was unique to software developers. They had their own in-jokes 
which would have appeared odd to outsiders, as they were specific to software development and 
the individual members of the team. Despite this, there was no indication of a lack of social skills 
or a low SNS. While one of the software developers was introverted ('odd' to use the phrase of 
his fellow software developers), it would not be unusual to find one introvert in any group of six, 
no matter whether they were software developers or not. The remaining software developers 
maintained social relationships with their colleagues and members of other teams. They 
socialized together outside of work, either as a group or with spouses or partners, and could be 
considered as friends. Interviews with staff external to the group (quality group, senior project 
managers, and section managers) all described the team as a good collective unit -"possibly the 
best [software development] team in the company". Another senior manager stated say how much 

he personally liked and respected the professionalism of individuals within the team. However, he 
qualified this statement by adding that they could be difficult to deal with as a group--they were 
"too tight" as a group, and were often suspicious of the motivations and attitudes of colleagues 
outside the group. This perspective was echoed by yet another senior manager, who described the 
group as "sometimes being overly defensive, but could be relied upon to deliver." 
The software developers never ref erred to themselves as artists, although some of their statements 

did show that they did not necessarily regard themselves as 'stuffy engineers'. The software 
developers continually argued that their job was predominantly a creative one, where coding 
played a smaller part than most people assumed -"some managers in this place think that all we 
do is pump out code. It's more about thinking than typing." This was verified through 
observation. Approximately 30% of their time was spent writing code, the rest of their time being 
spent in discussion with fellow software developers, thinking, or what would be described as 
team bonding -be that simply going for coffee as a group or what could be described as water-
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
36  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
cooler sessions. These 'water-cooler sessions' were informal gatherings that took place, 
discussing everything from politics to sport, or personal issues. 
Nine months of observations, allied with interviews with related social actors external to the 
team, did not highlight any specific concerns with an 'artistic temperament' in the individual 
software developers. At times, though, individual software developers were annoyed by feedback 
from individuals outside of the team. Collectively, the software developers did not appreciate 
feedback (negative or constructive) from those outside of their team. They did feel a personal 
ownership of their work and resented when others found fault with it. A typical response to 
negative feedback was "what would he know about it, he doesn't have any idea what we do." 
Variations of this were frequently heard throughout the project. Interestingly, the individual 
( outside the group) who could best be described as their internal customer did not cause offence 
with his feedback. This individual used the team's output internally and was respected by the 
team. In fact, his feedback and opinion was actively sought by the software developers. The Agile 
principle of customer involvement was thus accepted by the team. This is not to say that all 
feedback from their customer was accepted, but it was obvious that feedback from the customer 
was much more welcome than feedback from others external to the group. When asked about 

this, the software developers stated that the internal customer at least knew what they did, as 
opposed to their frequent complaints about others' opinions 
-"unlike the other people in this 
place, Jim [the internal customer] knows what he is talking about." 
The software developers' reactions to feedback from those outside the team did suggest the 
possibility of cognitive dissonance, and was further investigated. Rather than listening to 
outsiders' feedback, they were automatically dismissed 
-"did you hear the latest brilliant 
suggestion from PMO [the Project Management Office]. I love it when they pretend they know 
what we're doing. We should have our own suggestion box for their ideas that automatically 
shreds the pages." As indicated, cognitive dissonance is seen where a person's self image, or 
understanding, is challenged and is avoided by adjusting belief. Rather than accepting that their 
work or opinion may be incorrect, the software developers avoided this by dismissing the views 
of outsiders which would cause dissonance. The possibility exists that the software developers 
were correct and that PMO suggestions should be ignored, but the PMO had successfully guided 
multiple releases companywide and were well regarded by the parent organization in the United 
States; it can therefore be assumed that not all of their ideas were bad. The software developers' 
negative view of 'outsiders' was not restricted to just the PMO group, most other groups 
suggestions were dismissed as an annoyance 
-"another stupid idea from the GUI group. Why 
don't they stick to messing up their own stuff?" 
Further investigation of dissonance in this study concentrated on self-testing, which was 
identified by Weinberg as posing particular problems for software developers (Weinberg, 1971 ). 
Following the Agile principle of testing, tests were developed in collaboration with the customer 
(the internal customer in this case) and tests were run by the software developers themselves. 

Finally, the customer tested the finished product, or release. Discussions with the internal 
customer (and other members of his group) portrayed the Agile team as effective in testing 
-"never has one of their PR' s [bugs] stopped a release. You couldn't say that for the other teams." 
Agile's reliance on self-testing did not appear to have a detrimental effect on the final product. 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
37  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
Analysis of test reports and statistics found no major differentiation between the Agile team and 
other non-Agile teams; in fact the Agile team was rated highly with regard to reliable code. From 
this, it can be deduced that self-testing, and the possibility of cognitive dissonance affecting 
testing, was not having any noticeable impact on testing by the Agile team. 
The one noticeable impact of software developers' traits on the introduction of Agile, and the 
learning activity associated, was in pair-programming; in pair programming the software 
developers code in pairs, one typing and one reviewing the work. After requirements had been 
defined and documented, the concept of pair-programming was introduced to the software 
developers. It was met with universal resistance to the extent that it was not used by the team. 
Although other aspects of Agile had been adopted by the team, pair programming was never 
implemented and the reasoning behind this was further investigated. Each software developer was 
asked why pair programming was resisted and a common thread was visible in their responses. 
Each of the other software developers explained that they had too little time for two software 
developers to do one task -"waste of my time", "too much external pressure for speed". When it 
was pointed out that existing research had shown how pair programming could be more 
productive, this was collectively dismissed as outsiders not understanding how this team works -
"what would he [referring to author of a book on XP] know about how we work here." This 
dismissal, of the work of 'outsiders', highlighted the possibility of cognitive dissonance. The 
individual software developers were confronted by the researcher with observations of other 
episodes of activities which could be regarded as ineffective use of time -the justification they 
used to dismiss pair-programming. Each finally admitted that their concern with pair 
programming was actually the possibility of their pair seeing errors or inadequacies in their work. 
This was not a lack of trust in their fellow developers, the software developers explicitly stated 
that they trusted their colleagues and this was demonstrated by the openness of code development 
where all software developers were allowed to make changes to their colleagues' code. This was 
rather a problem with the software developers striving to ensure a positive impression of their 
developing abilities from their colleagues. Rather than risking their colleagues finding fault in 
their work, they argued against pair programming based on a false claim that it would waste their 
time -the software developers had convinced themselves that this was true rather than accepting 
their own faults or insecurities. 
From a learning perspective, both Model I (as typified as single-loop learning) and Model II (as 
typified as double-loop learning) were observed (see Table 3 below). Contrary to the stereotype, 
the software developers collectively constituted an effective and cohesive team, demonstrating an 

ability to discuss issues openly within the group. They were also committed to decisions taken -
both of which are Model II behaviors. Conversely, individual software developers suppressed 
negative feedback (through cognitive dissonance) and appeared to value winning-also described 
as avoiding being seen as incompetent. These behaviors are associated with Model I behavior and 
are an impediment to learning -in this case the adoption of an Agile methodology. 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
38  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
Model I Behavior Model II Behavior Suppression of negative feeling. Limited Valid information 
feedback. Censorship. 
The software developers rejected and censored The software developers were willing to listen 
the opinions of "outsiders" 
to input from the customer 
Importance of rationality, stability, and the Free and informed choice/ Open debate 
avoidance of risk. Rationality is used to 
justify one's own views and discount those of 
others. The move to pair programming came with the The decision to adopt Agile was informed and a 
risk for the individual software developers that collective decision. The absence of a low SNS 
colleagues would find fault with their work. meant that software developers were willing to 
The risk was avoided and cognitive dissonance get involved in group discussions and debate 
created a rational for this avoidance. 
Winning (not losing or being seen as Commitment to decisions and actions 
incompetent) The fear of being seen as incompetent by their There was initial commitment to adopting 
colleagues negated any benefits of 
parr Agile, yet there was a lack of commitment to 
programmmg pair programming due to the inherent 
characteristics of the software developers 
Table 3: 
Leaming and lack of learning from the software developers 
CONCLUSIONS While the overall project was a success, the adoption itself was not completely successful, as 

described above. Although this may appear paradoxical, the project was a success because of a 
talented team which succeeded without the full use of Agile. 
It is debatable if a less skilled team 
could have had an unsuccessful adoption while still achieving project success. This research, 
though, examines the success of the adoption. By viewing learning as behavioral change (as per 
Argyris), it can be seen that the learning required in the adoption of Agile was not completely 
successful in that the new Model II behaviors were not fully acquired. 
Software developers may differ from other professionals, but the stereotypical descriptions of 
them were not applicable in this research. Despite previous studies suggesting that software 
developers have a low SNS, and this research originally suggesting that this may affect the 

learning exercise of the adoption of Agile, the team of software developers studied in this case 
JJTCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
39  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
study did not demonstrate a low SNS. 
It should be noted that most of the research on software 
developers' SNS occurred decades ago, prior to the use of Agile, so a new generation of software 
developers do not appear to have the same problem in social or team based situations -a 
prerequisite for Agile projects. 
It cannot be determined from this case if a low SNS would have 
the negative impacts predicted, yet it is noteworthy that the low SNS did not occur as would have 
been assumed; in fact the developers demonstrated a high SNS. Further, the description of teams 
of software developers as an 'artists' colony' was not disproved in this research; the software 
developers did show traits which would align with this view, but these trait did not appear as a 
major concern in this particular adoption of an Agile methodology. Further research would be 
required in other teams to find if the artistic temperament dominates and, if so, what impact it has. 
The research model, in Figure 1, predicted a low SNS and an artistic perspective as having a 

negative impact. They were not observed to be present or impacting on the adoption, so it cannot 
be determined from this case if and what their impact would be. 
It is worth noting, though, that 
they may not impact at all. 
Cognitive dissonance was viewed as a problem for software developers in previous research by 
Weinberg ( 1971 ), but this concerned software developers testing their own code. Again, the 
findings did not show this to be of concern when adopting an Agile methodology. Cognitive 

dissonance, however, was evident, but not where initially expected. 
It was created in the 
individual software developers, specifically when the software developers received feedback or 

suggestions from those external to the team. This is the sole example of an artistic trait impacting 
on the Agile project; it was predicted that the artistic attributes of developers would cause 
problems with others evaluating their work, and this was seen. 'Outsiders' views were dismissed 
as irrelevant, rather than the software developers accepting the possibility that they may need to 

change their views or behavior. This is cognitive dissonance, where the real problems are hidden 
or excused. Significantly, however, feedback from the customer was accepted by the software 
developers, which was positive in terms of Agile's adoption. The research model, though, 
predicted a negative impact from cognitive dissonance in the area of testing. This was not seen in 
the case. 
Although feedback from those external to the team was problematic for an Agile adoption, the 
primary concern seen was with internal feedback or evaluation. The software developers feared 
negative feedback from their follow team members; this was something seen in previous research 
(Sawyer & Guinan, 1998) (albeit these studies were not Agile specific). Interestingly, while the 
developers feared negative feedback from their fellow developers, they were open to feedback 
from the customer. While the customer was respected by the team, he was not regarded as a peer, 
or an actual member of the team. As such, his feedback was not internal feedback, so did not 
cause the same problems. The customer was seen on the fine line that separated outsiders from 
peers; he was neither a peer nor an outsider. Although a successful balance between respect for 
the customer and the necessity for distance between the team and the customer was achieved in 
this case study, it needs to be acknowledged that this could be problematic in other Agile projects. 
If the customer is too removed from the team then the necessary respect for the customer and 
their opinions may not exist. Conversely, if the customer is too integrated in the team, then the 
developers may adopt the same avoidance of negative feedback from a peer. Re-examining 
Figure 1, peer motivation was predicted as having a positive impact on the adoption/learning. In 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
40  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
fact, this case shows how peer motivation, specifically the desire for recognition from peers, 
actually had a negative impact on the adoption. 
In this case study, in an effort to avoid negative internal feedback (from their peers), the software 
developers displayed cognitive dissonance by deliberately blaming time constraints on the failure 
to adopt pair-programming. Dissonance arises where a person's self image is challenged and is 
avoided by adjusting beliefs. As such, the possibility of fellow software developers seeing faults 
in their work (the likelihood of which increased while working closely together in pair 
programming) created a challenge to the software developers' self-image. The software 
developers reduced this dissonance by dismissing pair programming as ineffective use of 
resources; without true reflection on the reasons, though, learning could not take place. 

Interestingly, the cohesion of the group, demonstrated by the collective purported view that pair 
programming was a waste of resources, helped the software developers to reduce dissonance. It is 
easier to decrease dissonance when you appear to be consistent with your peers, especially in a 
cohesive unit. The impact of cohesion on an individual's dissonance reduction was noted by 
psychologists in the early 1960' s (Brehm 
& Cohen, 1962). 
It is relevant to this study as it further 
shows the software developers as a cohesive unit as opposed to software developers having a low 
SNS. As such, returning to the research question, the major trait that negatively impacted on the 
behavioral changes required for the learning inherent in an Agile adoption was the fear of 
negative feedback from peers, and cognitive dissonance arose in an attempt to disguise this trait. 
The research model in Figure 1 predicted cognitive dissonance impacting negatively on the 
requirement for self-testing of code. Again, this was not seen, but as described above, cognitive 
dissonance actually added to the negative impact of peer motivation, by disguising the real 
problem. It is not the aim of this study to make generalizations from this single case. The nature of the 
present research necessitated an approach that was descriptively rich and in-depth, rather than one 
which could make generalizable statements. Based on this case study, we argue that the output 
highlights important concerns for those considering the adoption of Agile. There are no 
certainties that similar issues will arise in other adoptions, but the issues described here do merit 
consideration by stakeholders striving to ensure effecting learning in an adoption. 
RECOMMENDATIONS From a learning perspective, while the software developers' traits exhibited both a positive and 
negative impact on the adoption of Agile, it is clear that much of the negative impact could be 
mitigated by the closer involvement and questioning of a project manager or team leader. 
If the software developers' views and traits had been questioned, there is a greater chance that 
undesirable behavior could have been addressed, and learning could have occurred. However, 
software developers themselves could not do this -cognitive dissonance is not easily corrected by 
the individual concerned. As previously noted, Agile projects require less involvement and 
instruction from a project manager than in traditional projects. 
It is likely that this reduction in 
project manager involvement, aligned with the software developers' requirements for peer 
recognition, ultimately led to the failure to introduce pair programming. This outcome in the 
adoption of Agile must be balanced with the other positive software developer traits that aligned 
well with the Agile philosophy. With more involvement from the project manager, Model I type 
JJTCAR Volume I 1, Number 1, 2009 
41  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
learning behaviors could be identified by the team for what they are, and a transition to effective 
learning through Model II behaviors made, thereby increasing the prospects of success for the 
Agile adoption. This necessitates a manager skilled in reflection, and in enabling reflection in 
others. In essence, this ties back to Argyris' original description of his theory of learning, where 
he recommends intervention to help individuals recognize ineffective learning. 
In addition, while Agile project managers must use a new approach to management, moving away 
from 'engineering' based approaches, there needs to be a balance between empowerment 
(delegation of control to software developers) and the necessity for intervention to ensure 
reflection by the developers. To ensure reflection by the individual software developers, the 
project manager must accept that the stereotypical low SNS of software developers may no longer 
be accurate, and acknowledge the impact that the team can have on the individual's ability to 
adapt new behaviors. 
REFERENCES 1. Acuna, S., & Juisto, N. 
(2004). Assigning people to roles in software projects 
Software: Practice and 
experience, 34(7), 
675-696. 2. Argyris, C. 
(1976). Single-loop and double-loop models in research on decision making. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 21(3), 
363-375. 3. Argyris, C. (1994). 
Good communication that blocks learning. 
Harvard Business Review, 72(4), 
77-85. 4. Argyris, C. (1995). 
Action science and organizational learning. 
Journal of Managerial Psychology, 
10(6), 20-26. 5. Argyris, C. (1997). 
Double loop learning in organizations. 
Harvard Business Review, 
55(5), 115-125. 
6. Argyris, C. 
(2002). Double loop learning, teaching, and research. 
Academy of Management Learning 
and Education, 1 
(2), 206-218. 
7. Argyris, C., & Schon, D. 
(1978). Organizational learning: A theory of action perspective. 
MA, USA: 
Addison-Wesley. 8. Astels, D., Miller, G. and Movak, M. 
(2002) A practical guide to extreme programming. 
NJ, USA: 
Prentice Hall. 
9. Attride-Sterling, J. (2001). Thematic networks: an analytical tool for qualitative research. 
Qualitative Research, 1(3), 
385-405. 10. Augustine, S. 
(2005). Managing Agile Projects. 
IA, USA: Prentice Hall. 
I 1. Back, K., 
& Seaker, R. (2004). Project performance: Implications of personality preferences and 
double loop learning. 
Journal of American Academy of Business, 4(1 
), 292-297. 12. Badawy, M. 
(1997). The role of the technical manager. 
In R. Katz (Ed.), 
The human side of managing 
technological innovation 
(229-236). NY, USA: Oxford University Press. 
13. Beck, K. 
(2000). Extreme programming explained Embrace change. 
NY, USA: Addison Wesley. 
14. Blackman, D., Connelly, 
J., & Henderson, S. 
(2004). Does double loop learning create reliable 
knowledge? The Learning Organization, 11(1), 
11-27. 15. B0dker, K., & Pedersen, 
J. (1991). Workplace cultures: Looking at artifacts, symbols and practices. 
In K. Greenbaum & M. Kyng (Eds.), 
Design at Work: Cooperative Design of Computer Systems 
(121-136). NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
16. Boehm, B., & Turner, 
R. (2004). Balancing agility and discipline: 
Pearson Education, MA, USA. 
17. Bokeno, R. (2003). The work of Chris Argyris as critical organization practice. 
Journal of 
Organizational Change Management, 16(6), 
633-649. 18. Boody, D., & Buchanan, D. 
(1992). Take the lead. Interpersonal skills for project managers. 
Hertfordshire, UK: Prentice Hall. 
JJTCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
42  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
19. Bossavit, 
L. (2002). The unbearable lightness of programming: A tale of two cultures. 
Cutter IT 
Journal, 15(9), 5-11. 20. Brehm, 
J., & Cohen, A. (1962). 
Explorations in cognitive dissonance. 
NY, USA: John Wiley 
& Sons. 21. Capretz, 
L. (2002). Are software engineers really engineers. 
World Transactions on Engineering and 
Technology Education, 
1(2), 233-235. 22. Carmel, E., 
& Sawyer, S. (1998). Packaged software development teams: What makes them different. 
Information Technology and People, 
11(1), 7-19. 23. Coffee, P. (2001). No more excuses: Innovation technology and irrelevant tangents. In 
L. Constantine (Ed.), Beyond chaos: The expert edge in managing software development. 
NJ, USA: Addison-Wesley. 
24. Cooper, A. (2004). 
The inmates are running the asylum. 
IN, USA: Sams Publishing. 
25. Coram, M., 
& Bohner, S. (2005). 
The impact of agile methods on software project management. 
Paper presented at the IEEE International Conference on the Engineering of Computer-Based Systems, 
Greenbelt, MD, USA. 
26. Couger, 
J., & McIntyre, S. (1988). Motivation norms of knowledge engineers compared to those of 
software engineers. 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 
4(3), 82-93. 27. Couger, 
J., Zawacki, R., 
& Oppermann, E. (1979). Motivation levels of MIS managers versus those of 
their employees. 
MIS Quarterly, 
3(3), 47-56. 28. Curtis, B., Krasner, H., & Iscoe, N. (1988). A field study of the software design process for large 
systems. Communications of the ACM, 
31(11), 1268-1287. 
29. Denhardt, R., Denhardt, 
J., & Aristigeuta, M. (2002). 
Managing behavior in public and nonprofit 
organizations. CA, USA: Sage Publications. 
30. Drobka, 
J., Noftz, D., 
& Raghu, R. (2004). Piloting XP on four mission-critical projects. IEEE 
Software, 21(6), 70-75. 
31. Easterby-Smith, 
M., & Lyles, M. (2003). Re-reading organizational learning: Selective memory, 
forgetting, and adaptation. Academy of Management Executive, 17(2), 51-55. 
32. Ezey, P. (2003). Integration and its challenges in participant observation. 
Qualitative Research, 
3(2), 191-205. 33. Fitzgerald, B. (1997). The use of systems development methodologies in practice: a field study. 
Information Systems Journal, 
7(3), 210-212. 
34. Fururno, 
K., & 
Melcher, A. (2006). The importance of social structure in implementing ERP systems: 
A case study using Adaptive Structuration theory. 
Journal of Information Technology Case and 
Application Research, 
8(2), 39-58. 35. Goleman, D. (1996). 
Vital Lies Simple Truths: The Psychology of Seif-Deception. 
NY, USA: Simon 
and Schuster Books. 
36. Gordon, S. (2008). The case for case-based research. 
Journal of Information Technology Case and 
Application Research, 
IO( I), 
1-6. 3 7. Greenwald, A., & Ronis, D. (1978). Twenty years of cognitive dissonance: Case study of the evolution 
ofa theory. 
Psychological Review, 
85(1), 53-57. 38. Grossman, F., Bergin, 
J., Leip, D., Merrit, S., 
& Gotel, 0. (2004). One XP experience: introducing 
agile (XP) software development into a culture that is willing but not ready. 
Paper presented at the 
Conference of the Centre for Advanced Studies on Collaborative research Ontaario, Canada. 
39. Hazzan, 
0., & Tomayko, J. (2003). The reflective practitioner perspective in extreme programming. 
Paper presented at the Extreme programming and agile methods 
-Xp/Agile universe 2003, New 
Orleans. 40. Highsmith, 
J. (2004). Agile project management. 
MA, USA: Pearson Education. 
41. Hodgetts, P. (2004). 
Refactoring the development process: Experiences with the incremental adoption 
of Agile practices. 
Paper presented at the Agile Development Conference (ADC04) Salt Lake City. 
42. Howard, A. (200 I). On site: Software engineering project management. 
Communications of the A CM 
44(5), 23-24. 43. Humphrey, W. (1996). Making software manageable. 
Crosstalk, 9(12), 3-6. 
JITCAR Volume 
I I, 
Number I, 2009 43  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
44. Hunt, A., & Thomas, D. (2000). 
The pragmatic programmer. 
MA, USA: Addison Wesley Longman. 
45. Hunt, A., & Thomas, D. (2002). Software archaeology. 
IEEE Software, 
19(2), 20-22. 46. Jones, 
M., & McLean, E. ( 1970). Management problems in large-scale software development projects. 
Industrial Management Review, 
11(3), 1-16. 47. Jorgensen, D. (1989). 
Participant observation: A methodology for human studies. 
CA, USA: Sage 
Publications. 48. Joshi, K. (2005). Understanding user resistance and acceptance during the Implementation of an order 
management system: A case study using the equity implementation model. 
Journal of Information 
Technology Case and Application Research. 
7(1), 6-20. 
49. Kahkonen, T., & Abrahamsson, P. (2003). 
Digging into the fundamentals of extreme programming 
building the theoretical base for agile methods. 
Paper presented at the 29th Euromicro Conference, 
Antalya, Turkey. 
50. Kitchenham, B., Pickard, 
L., & Pfleeger, S. (1995) Case studies for method and tool evaluation. 
IEEE Software, 12(4), 52-62. 51. Klein, K., & Myers, M. (1999). A Set of Principles for Conducting and Evaluating Interpretive Field 
Studies in Information Systems. MIS Quarterly, 23(1), 67-94. 
52. Koutsoukos, G. (2006). 
Mentality patterns: Capturing and dealing explicitly with recurring turns of 
mind in software development. 
Paper presented at the 13th European Conference EuroSPI, Joensuu, 
Finland. 53. Larsen, 
T. (2001). The phenomenon of diffusion. In M. Ardis & B. Marcolin (Eds.), 
Diffusing software 
product and process innovations 
(35-50). MA, USA: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
54. Layman, 
L., Williams, L., & Cunningham, 
L. (2004). Exploring extreme programming in context: an 
industrial case study. 
Paper presented at the Agile Development Conference (ADC04), Salt Lake City. 
55. Layman, 
L., Williams, L., & Cunningham, 
L. (2006). Motivations and measurements in an agile case 
study. Journal of Systems Architecture, 
52(11), 654-667. 
56. Licker, P. (1983). The Japanese Approach: A Better Way To Manage Programmers. 
Communications of the ACM, 26(9), 
631-636. 57. Licker, P. (1985). 
The Art of Managing Software Development People. 
NY, USA: John Wiley & Sons. 
58. Lindstrom, 
L., & Jeffries, R. (2004). Extreme Programming and Agile software development 
methodologies. Information Systems Management, 
21(3), 41-52. 59. Maurer, F., & Martel, S. (2002). Extreme Programming: Rapid Development for Web-Based 
Applications. IEEE Internet Computing, 6(1 
), 86-90. 60. McAvoy, J., & Butler, T. (2007) 
A failure to learn in a software development team: The unsuccessful 
introduction of an Agile method 
Paper presented at the 16th International Conference on Information 
Systems Development Galway, Ireland. 
61. Molla, A., & Bhalla, A. (2006). Business transformation through ERP: A case study of an Asian 
company. Journal of Information Technology Case and Application Research, 8(1 
), 34-54. 62. Natsu, H., Favela, J., 
Moran, A., Decouchant, D., & Martinez-Enriquez, A. (2003). 
Distributed Pair 
Programming on the Web 
Paper presented at the 4th Mexican International Conference on Computer 
Science Tlaxcala, Mexico. 
63. Olson, D., & Stimmel, 
C. (2002). The manager pool. Patterns for radical leadership: 
Addison-Wesley. NJ, USA. 
64. Poole, C. (2004) 
Distributed product development using extreme programming 
Paper presented at the 
Extreme programming and agile processes in software engineering 5th International Conference 
Garrnisch-Partenkirchen, Germany. 
65. Raymond, E. ( 1999). 
The cathedral and the bazaar. 
CA, USA: O'Reilly & Associates. 
66. Riehle, D. (200 l ). A comparison of the value systems of Adaptive Software Development and Extreme 
Programming: How methodologies may learn from each other. In G. Succi & M. Marchesi (Eds.), 
Extreme Programming explained 
(35-50). Boston, USA: Addison-Wesley. 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
44  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
67. Robinson, H., 
& Sharp, H. (2005). 
The social side of technical practices. 
Paper presented at the 6th 
International Conference on Extreme Programming and Agile processes in software engineering 
(XP2005), Sheffield, UK. 
68. Rumpe, 
B., & 
Schroeder, A. (2002). 
Quantitative survey on Extreme Programming projects. 
Paper presented at the International Conference on Extreme Programming and Flexible Processes in Software 
Engineering (XP2002), Alghero, Italy. 
69. Salaway, G. (1987). 
An organizational learning approach to information systems development. 
MIS Quarterly, 11(2), 
245-264. 70. Sawyer, S., 
& Guinan, P. (1998). Software development: Processes and performance. 
IBM Systems 
Journal, 37(4), 552-569. 71. Schuh, P. (2001). Recovery, Redemption, and Extreme Programming. 
IEEE Software, 18(6), 
34-41. 72. Schuh, P. (2004) 
Integrating agile development in the real world. 
NY, USA: Delmar Thomson 
Leaming 73. Schwaber, 
K. (2002). When and where Agile suceeds. 
Cutter IT Journal, 15(9), 
22-27. 74. Seaman, C. (1999). Qualitative methods in emperical studies of software engineering. 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 25(4), 
557-572. 75. Simons, M., 
& Nadkamy, C. (2002). Extreme India. 
Cutter IT Journal, 15(9), 
28-33. 76. Spayd, M. (2003). 
Evolving agile in the enterprise: implementing XP on a grand scale. 
Paper presented at the Agile Development Conference, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
77. Stake, 
R. ( 
1995). The art of case study research. 
CA, USA: Sage Publications. 
78. Stephens, M., & Rosenberg, D. (2003). 
Extreme Programming refactored: The case against XP. 
Heidleberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag. 
79. Turk, D., France, R., & Rumpe, 
B. (2005). Assumptions underlying Agile software development 
processes. Journal of Database Management, 16( 
4), 62-87. 
80. Von Bergen, C., & Kirk, 
R. ( 
1978) Groupthink: When too many heads spoil the decision, 
Management Review, 67(3), 44-49. 81. Vroom, V. (1974) A normative model of managerial decision-making, In Pugh, D (Ed.), 
Organization theory. Third Edition 
(309-328). London, UK: Penguin Books. 
82. Walsham, G. (1995). Interpretive Case Studies in IS Research: Nature and Method. 
European Journal 
of Information Systems, 4( 
l ), 7 4-81. 
83. Weinberg, G. (1971). 
The psychology of computer programming. 
NY, USA: Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Co. 84. Wendorff, P. (2002). 
Organisational Culture in Agile Software Development. 
Paper presented at the 
Product Focused Software Process Improvement : 14th International Conference, PROFES 2002, 
Rovaniemi, Finland. 
85. Wiegers, K. (2001). First things first: A project managers primer. In 
L. Constantine (Ed.), 
Beyond chaos: The expert edge in managing software development 
(49-55). NJ, USA: Addison-Wesley. 
86. Workman, J. (1997). Engineers' interactions with marketing groups in an engineering-driven 
organization. In 
R. Katz (Ed.), 
The human side of managing technological innovation 
(535-549). NY, 
USA: Oxford University Press. 
87. Yin, 
R. (2003). Case Study Research: Design and Method. 
CA, USA: Sage Publications. 
88. Yourdon, E. (1993). 
Decline and fall of the American programmer. 
NJ, USA: Prentice Hall Inc. 
John McAvoy 
is a lecturer in Business Information Systems at University College Cork, Ireland. 
Prior to lecturing, John had a variety of roles 
in the Information Systems field, ranging from 
systems administration to managing software development teams. 
JITCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
45  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.A Failure to Learn By Software Developers 
Tom Butler 
is a Senior Lecturer in Business Information Systems at University College Cork, 
Ireland. Before lecturing, Tom had an extensive career in the telecommunications industry. Tom 
has also successfully managed a development project for the United Nations. 
JJTCAR Volume 11, Number 1, 2009 
46 