 Article
The challenges that challenge: engaging with agile 
practitioners© concerns
˘ˇˆ
˙˝˘˛˘!"#"#! $%&&' 
Gregory, P ORCID: 0000-0001-7891-6666, Barroca, L, Sharp, H, Deshpande, A and Taylor, KJ 
ORCID: 0000-0003-4840-9991 (2016) The challenges that challenge: engaging with agile 
practitioners© concerns. Information and Software Technology, 77 . pp. 92-104. ISSN 0950-5849  
(˚˙˝˛˘)#˛˘˝˝)#)+!"
˚˚˜  -"˝" $'"$'$. /"˝))"&'$."'0"''0
1˚˝˛#3
˜  ,,,˘ # 
))5"
1˚˝˛#˘˘3˘
˜  ,,,˘ 
˘˘ˇ˘˘˘˝#˝
3˝,
3˝6
˘6˝
!
˝˝
˛˝˙˝˘ ˝
+˝˚˝
)˝˘)˝
˜  ˘! ˘˝ 
CLoK
3˘˝˘˝ˇ,˘
,,,"!"#""#!
 The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging 
With Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
 Peggy Gregory
a*, Leonor Barroca
b, Helen Sharp
b, Advait Deshpande
b, Katie Taylor
a a University of Central Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE, UK 
 b The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton 
Keynes MK7 6AA, UK
 ajgregory, 
kjtaylor@uclan.ac.uk
, leonor.barroca, helen.sharp, 
advait.deshpande@open.ac.uk
 * Corresponding author
 Abstract
 Context
: There conti
nues to be concern that research is not addressing the challenges that practice 
faces. For the benefit of academia and industry, researchers need to be aware of practitioners™ 
challenges and their context so that relevant and applicable research is underta
ken.
 Objective
: This paper investigates two research questions: what challenges do agile practitioners face? 
and, how do practitioner challenges manifest themselves in an organisational setting? It aims to map 
the practitioner challenge landscape, explore 
challenge characteristics, compare findings with previous 

literature and identify implications for research that is relevant to practice.
 Method
: A combination of methods was used: elicitation 
of practitioner challenges 
collected 
using a 
Challenge Wall at 
a series of 
practitioner events; organisational Case Study
 using interviews, document 
analysis and observation
; and online Survey. Findings were
 then
 compared to previous publications.
 Results
: Challenges collected from the Challenge Wall 
were
 grouped unde
r 
27 sub
themes and seven 
themes: Claims and Limitations, Organisation, Sustainability, Culture, Teams, Scale, and Value. 

Investigating one challenge
 in the Case Study uncovered a set of new challenges, which were inter
-related. 
Over 
50% 
of survey responden
ts 
experienced challenges highlighted in the Case Study
.  Conclusion
: The landscape of agile practitioner challenges is complex and intertwined. Some 
challenges
, such as doing agile in a non
-agile environment,
 are multi
-dimensional, affect many aspects 
of 
practice, and may be experienced simultaneously as business, organisational, social and adaptation 
problems. Some challenges
, such as understanding cultural change or measuring agile value,
 persist
 and 
are hard to address
, while others
, such as adoption, 
change focus over time.
 Some challenges
, such as 
governance and contracts,
 are under
-research
ed, while 
others
, such as business and IT transformation,
 have 
been researched 
but 
findings have not had the expected
 impact. 
Researchers wishing to address 
practit
ioner challenges need 
to 
treat the
m in context rather than in isolation
 and improve knowledge 
transfer
.  Keywords
 Agile Methods, Agile Software Development, Challenges, Evidence
-based Software Engineering, DSDM
  2 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   1 Introduction
 Successfully adopting and usin
g agile approaches within an organisation is challenging. As agile 
approaches mature and their use becomes more widespread 
[1]
, the nature of the challenges that 
practitioners and organisations face is changing. New challenges are emerging and the focus of
 existing 
challenges is shifting, reflecting the current state of practice. Some challenging activities, for example 
setting up a Scrum team, have been the subject of research and are now better understood 
[2, 3]
. There 
is a growing body of research litera
ture, experience reports, books and guidelines providing 
suggestions for those seeking help. Even so, some known challenges still pose problems in practice. 
Additionally, new challenges are emerging as organisations push the boundaries of existing techniqu
es 
and try new approaches or move into unknown territory. 
  Agility is a very broadly understood concept that is difficult to define clearly 
[4]
. The Agile Manifesto 
declaration and principles remain the de facto delineation of agile 
[5]
 to which authors f
requently refer. 
In practice, discussion often focuses on specific methods, but even then there are many options for 

organisations to choose from. A recent survey 
[1]
 confirms that a wide variety of methods are used in 
industry; the most common being Scrum
, followed by: ‚home
-grown™ approaches, Extreme 
Programming (XP), Scrum/XP Hybrid, Lean Software Development, Feature Driven Development and 

Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM). In this paper the term ‚agile practitioners™ is defined 
widely to mean a
nyone working in an organisation who is involved in either making decisions about 

agile or using an agile approach. This covers a wide range of roles from executive directors to software 

developers. We have not imposed our own definition of agile on this w
ork, but follow Lyytinen and 
Rose 
[6]
, in relying on research participants to use their own definitions of agility. 
  If academic research is to be relevant to practice, researchers need to keep abreast of practitioner 
challenges, have a grounded understan
ding of them, and be able to tackle the changing landscape of 
practitioner challenges as it evolves.  This paper seeks to address two research questions: 
 
RQ1: 
 What challenges do agile practitioners face?
 RQ2: 
 How do practitioner challenges manifest them
selves in an organisational setting?
 The first research question explores the landscape of practitioners' agile challenges. The aim is to 

capture an overview of challenges 
- the breadth rather than the depth.
  This question is addressed by 
the Challenge Wa
ll study described in section 3.1.
 The second research question explores challenges 
within organisations and aims to uncover rich detail about those challenges. This is addressed by the 

Case Study described in section 3.2 and the Survey described in sectio
n 3.3.
  The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
 3  In answering these research questions we also compare the current landscape with previous reports of 
practitioner challenges, consider what challenges have been tackled in the research literature, and 

discuss the nature of agile practitioner challen
ges.
  
This paper is an extended version of Gregory et al. 
[7]
, which presented a snapshot of challenges 
gathered from pract
itioners using a Challenge Wall
 and discussed how the challenge landscape has 
changed. This extended paper continues and deepens that
 discussion by bringing in empirical data from 
an organisational Case Study and a Survey and exploring challenge characteristics. 
  In this paper, Section 2 presents previous literature on the need for industrial engagement with 

academic research and previ
ous investigations of practitioner challenges. Section 3 has three sections. 
The first introduces the Challenge Wall and presents the results of a thematic analysis of challenges 

collected during 2013 and 2014; the second presents a Case Study and reports 
a detailed investigation 
into practitioner challenges in one organisation; and the third presents results from an online Survey 
undertaken to expand insights from the Case Study. Section 4 returns to the research questions and 

discusses the implications of
 the findings and Section 5 presents conclusions.
 2 Related Work
 A series of papers ha
s charted 
the progress of agile research since its early days. In 2003 Abrahamson 
et al found ‚a jungle of emerged software development methods™, and a lack of empirical 
evidence to 

support ideas 
[8]
. In 2008, Dingsøyr et al 
[9]
, stated that the primary challenge for agile research was to 
combine academic rigour with industrial relevance, suggesting that researchers could use research 

methods such as action research as a w
ay to increase relevance and impact. In a systematic review in 
the same year, Dybå and Dingsøyr concluded that there was a need for more empirical research, and 
suggested that researchers should aim to understand the drivers of agile adoption as well as it
s effects 
[10]
. The call for more research continued in 2009 by Abrahamson et al. 
[11]
, who also identified a need 
for more rigour and industrial studies, as well as highlighting a lack of clarity about what was meant by 
agility. More recently the research
 landscape has changed. Both Dingsøyr et al in 2012 
[12]
 and Chuang 
et al in 2014 
[13]
 have reported an increase in published research, indicating a maturing field.
  
Research in agile has addressed a number of specific topic areas highlighted in several sy
stematic 
literature reviews; these include reviews of the state of research, synthesis of research themes and 

identification of challenges. For example, a 2011 review of agile global software engineering literature 

[14]
 concluded that research was increasi
ng but there was a predominance of industrial experience 
reports which report on modifications to practice based on contextual factors. A 2014 review of 
 4 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   communication in agile global software development identified seven research themes, and reported 
that 
about half of the chosen papers were experience reports 
[15]
. The predominance of industrial 
experience reports in the agile literature has been noted by a number of authors 
[14
-16]
. Experience 
reports are extremely useful as they tell a contextualised sto
ry about an organisation, and in doing so 
describe practice, suggest practical techniques, and provide guidelines. However, there are limitations 

to this type of literature. They rarely use theory or try to develop a deeper understanding of the 

phenomena a
nd situations they report on.  They also usually tell positive stories of problems solved 

rather than describing persistent difficulties, worsening situations or failures. As a result they provide 
snapshots of successful practice, but almost certainly do n
ot represent the state
-of-the
-practice. Indeed, 
few papers describe major unresolved problems or failures, resulting in a general publication bias 
towards only reporting success. Since many lessons are learnt in response to mistakes and failures, this 

bias
, although unsurprising, is not helpful. This problem is not specific to the agile area, and has been 
noted in other disciplines 
[17]
.  
Industrial experience reports have limitations but so does academic research, in particular, 

guaranteeing its relevance 
to practice. To address this limitation, other approaches have been used to 

identify research questions. For example, during a panel discussion at XP2010 (
http://xp2010.org/
) 
practitioners said researchers did not always 
address questions they wanted answering. During the rest 
of the conference delegates were asked to suggest and vote on topics that should be researched, in 
order to create a prioritised list of ‚burning issues™ for the agile research community 
[18]
 (see Ta
ble 5)
. During an XP2013 workshop Dingsøyr and Moe elicited and ranked 
eight 
research challenge
 topics
 for 
large
-scale agile software development 
[19]
 from a mixture of practitioners and academics. 
Topics 
were, in ranked order, Inter
-team coordination; Lar
ge project organisation/portfolio management; 
Release planning and architecture; Scaling agile practices; Customer collaboration; Large
-scale agile 
transformation; Knowledge sharing and improvement and Agile contracts. 
Taking this approach to 

identifying r
esearch questions is a more direct way of ensuring research relevance, but how relevant 
the challenges are to practice depends on who is suggesting them.
  The work presented in this paper explores challenges 
with
 agile development. Several attempts have 
been made to categorise challenges faced in the application of agile. Gandomani et al. 
[20]
 identified 
four categories of challenges faced by organisations when migrating to agile: organisation and 
management; people; process; and tools related challenges. T
his classification is based solely on 
existing literature. Using grounded theory, van Waardenburg and van Vliet 
[21]
 investigated the 
challenges caused by the co
-existence of agile methods and plan
-driven development, and discussed 
mitigation strategies fo
r those challenges.  This work is based on 21 interviews with agile practitioners 
from two large enterprises in the Netherlands. They organised the challenges under two categories: 
 The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
 5  ‚Increased landscape complexity™ and ‚
Lack of business involvement™. The pa
per exposes consequences 
of the former category as ‚
Problems with communication™, ‚
Dependent definition of done™, and 
‚Difficulties to create change™. The consequences of the latter category are 
‚Problems with requirements 
gathering
™, ‚Slow reaction to cha
nge
™, ‚Problems with requirements prioritisation
™ and 
‚Limited feedback 
from the business
™.  For both challenge categories, mitigation strategies were proposed that focused on 
communication between the agile and traditional part of the organisation, and th
e communication 
timing. 
  Conboy et al 
[22]
 identified nine themes for challenges experienced by 17 large multinational 
organisations using agile methods. The research focused on challenges encountered by people involved 
in the agile development process. T
he themes were: developer fear as a result of the transparency of 
skill deficiencies; the need for developers to be ﬁmaster of all tradesﬂ; dependency on social skills; 

deficiency of developers™ business knowledge; the need to understand and learn values a
nd principles 
of agile, not just the practices; lack of developer motivation to use agile methods; implications of 
devolved decision
-making; the need for agile compliant performance evaluation; and absence of specific 
recruitment policies and absence of tr
ained IT graduates for agile. 
  These related works are discussed further in section 4.1and 4.3 in the light of our findings.
 3 Investigating Practitioner Challenges
 This section 
presents
 three studies undertaken to investigate agile practitioners™ challen
ges
. Section 3.1 
reports
 the
 Challenge Wall study, 
undertaken to answer RQ1, what challenges do practitioners face? 
Section 3.2 
reports
 a Case Study
 investigation of challenges experienced by the London office of a large 
financial organisation, undertaken 
to answer RQ2, 
how do practitioner challenges manifest themselves 
in an organisational setting
? Section 3.3 reports an online Survey
 developed to investigate further the 
Case Study findings
, and to further explore
 RQ2.
 3.1 Challenge Wall
 This section repor
ts how a Challenge Wall (Figure 1) was used to collect challenges from agile 
practitioners and presents a thematic analysis of the findings.
 3.1.1 Approach
 A Challenge Wall was deployed at five Agile Conferences and events between October 2013 and October 
2014: the Agile Business Conference, London, October 2013 (
www.agileconference.org
); DSDM 
Members Day, Manchester, November 2013 (
www.dsdm.org
); XP, Rome, May 2014 (
www.xp2014.org
); 
AgileNorth, Preston, June 2014 (
www.agilenorth.org
); and the Agile Business Conference, London, 
 6 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   October 2014 (
www.agileco
nference.org
). Attendees were mostly agile practitioners and business 
representatives, except for the XP Conference in 2014 that was attended by a mixture of practitioners 
and academics. Four of the events were based in the UK; the XP Conference was based
 in Rome. 
Practitioner and business attendees represented a range of organisational roles. 
The job roles of 
attendees at
 the 
2013
 and
 2014 ABC Conference
s and the DSDM 
Manchester 
Members Day 2014
, the 
only event
s about which we had access to such data, 
are
 shown in Figure 2. 
  Figure 
1: The Challenge Wall at ABC 2013
   The Challenge Wall was set up by positioning a poster in a visible place in the conference or event 
venue and providing a stack of pens and small blank challenge car
ds. Delegates were encouraged to fill 
out the cards anonymously (Figure 
3), and these were then attached to the wall next to the poster for 

others to read. Delegates wrote one challenge per card, and could fill in as many cards as they wished. 

The Challeng
e Wall gradually grew throughout the event, and became a trigger for discussions between 
delegates and the authors about the nature and context of the challenges identified. 
 Figure 
2: Job roles for 
attendees at 
ABC 201
3, ABC 2014 
and DSDM 
Manchester 
Members Day
 2015
   A thematic analysis approach was used for data analysis 
[23]
. Three researchers each completed an 
independent thematic analysis of the challenges
. These analyses were done separately, with no initial 
list of themes. 
Each researcher used their own individual approach. Two researchers worked by 
 The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
 7  identifying codes first w
hich they then grouped into sub
themes, the third fo
cused solely on identifying 
sub
themes. The 
two different researchers reviewed the independent lists. T
hey verbally clarified the 
meaning of the descriptors used by the other researchers, and created a merged list of subthemes. 
Merging started by looking at subtheme names and their associated challenges, and went on to identify 
high
-level themes, which were
 used as grouping mechanisms for the more detailed subthemes. 
Discussion focussed on whether to merge or split subthemes, finding appropriate names for subthemes, 

and identifying broad themes at the right level of granularity. For example, ‚Culture™ and ‚C
hanging 
Mindsets/Culture™ had been identified as subthemes by two of the independent analysts, but a 
distinction between organisational culture and national culture had not been made, so the reviewers 
created these as themes. They regrouped the data into n
ine themes and 27 subthemes.  This set of 
themes was revised again through discussions between all researchers using Skype calls and emails, 

and the final set of seven themes and 27 subthemes was agreed. For example, through group discussion 

at this final 
stage it was decided that ‚Organisational Culture™ and ‚National Culture™ would be more 
appropriate as subthemes grouped under the broader theme of ‚Culture™. 
 Figure 
3: A Challenge Card
  3.1.2 Findings
 One hundred and ninety
-four
 challenge cards were collected.  Four were disregarded as inappropriate, 
because they were too difficult to understand. As a result of the thematic analysis described above the 

remaining 190 challenges determined the seven themes and 27 subthemes. Table 1
 shows the themes 
and subthemes along with a description and an example challenge from each subtheme
 (excerpts of 
collected data are shown in italics). 
The table is ordered, largest first, by the number of challenges in the 
themes and subthemes, with the n
umber of challenges in each group provided in brackets.
  
The thematic analysis of the Challenge Wall data highlighted two striking groups containing a high 

number of challenges: Claims and Limitations with 46 challenges (with the dominance of 
misconception
s, shortcomings, and hype), and Organisation with 44 challenges (with most highlighting 
business concerns, management buy
-in and understanding, stakeholder commitment and engagement 
and a concern for agile within a non
-agile environment). Culture, Teams an
d Sustainability were 
 8 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   medium
-sized groupings. Scaling and Value were the two smallest thematic groups. Value only 
contained seven challenge cards.
  The challenge statements were diverse, as shown through the 
identification of 27 sub
themes. Some 
challenge s
tatements were brief, for example:
 ‚Getting started™
; and
 ‚Tailoring™
. Others were lengthy, for example:
 ‚Agile is just an umbrella term. So agile itself cannot be a problem. Adoption of agile approaches 
depends on understanding of the many techniques and 
ability or willingness to adopt an 
appropriate set of them. Flexibility or lack of it is the main problem
™. There was some repetition of content, for example four agile in a non
-agile environment challenges 
were almost identical:
 ‚Using agile in waterfall 
environments™
; and
 ‚It is agile but business still have a waterfall thinking™
; and
 ‚It is agile but most of the business are not™
; and
 ‚It is agile, rest of business isn't™
. Nevertheless there was a lot of variety. Challenges were expressed at different gr
anularities, so some 
were quite high level, for example:
 ‚Fully engaging the business™
. Others, however, were more detailed and at a lower level of granularity, for example:
 ‚The system team having a different opinion of ﬁdone criteriaﬂ compared to a sub
-team. The sub
-team counted ﬁdoneﬂ as working in the system, whereas the system
-team only called each ‚unit™ as 
ﬁdoneﬂ prior to integration. We (the sub
-team) felt this was naïve.
 Some of the challenge statements covered many topics, and were therefore diffi
cult to classify, for 
example a challenge such as: 
 ﬁChanging from a command and control/mechanistic worldview to a future of autonomous, self
-managed agents in a systemic organisation is too much if the system does not change itself 
Œ including leaders
ﬂ. This was classified under 
the sub
theme Organisational culture in the Culture theme but could also have 
been classified under Commitment/engagement in the Organisation theme or Team practices in the 
Teams theme or Process improvement in the Sustainability t
heme. 
   The Challenges That
 Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
 9   Table 
1: Themes and s
ubthemes identified from Challenge Wall cards, ordered by number of cards (in brackets) 
  Main Theme
 Subthemes
 Description of Subthemes
 Example Challenge
 1 Claims and 
Limitations (46)
 Misconceptions
 (2
3)
 The multi
-faceted aspects of agile are open to many 
different interpretations
 ‚"Shallow Adoption" where practices or processes are 
followed mechanically without deep insight into 
underlying values™
 Shortcomings
 (14)
 Areas where information is sparse,
 limited or where 
methods are used inappropriately
 ‚Credibility in areas it has not traditionally been used (e.g. 
public sector)™
 Hype
 (8)
 Misleading or excessive claims about agile approaches
 ‚It™s become a buzzword and as such threatening its own 
exis
tence. It has to be implemented thoroughly and 
comprehensively to get great outcomes™
 Failure
 (1)
 Only limited evidence is available about failures
 ‚Some believe it to be a ﬁsilver bulletﬂ to their problems, 
only to realise and not like that it just exp
oses their 
existing issues™
 2 Organisation 
(44)
 Business & IT 
transformation (11)
 Requires business and IT to collaborate to establish 
agility throughout the entire value chain
 ‚It™s still seen as an IT methodology. It needs the business 
teams to buy into
 it and join the party™
 Management buy
-in 
& understanding 
(10)
 Traditional management may see agile as just another IT 
method that can be implemented and structured to 'fit' 
existing organisational norms
 ‚Misconceptions of what ‚agile™ means. Perceived 
as quicker 
by business owners™
 Agile in a non
-agile 
environment 
 (10)
 Teams successfully adopt agile but operate in an 
environment where wider organisational structures are 
more traditional
 ‚IT is agile but most of the business are not™
 Commitment/ 
Engagement (7)
 Success can be challenged by lack of awareness or 
commitment from other stakeholders
 ‚It only works if all stakeholders get involved and support 
the agile process™
 Adoption
 (4)
 Concerns around 'how to' introduce agile ways of 
working eithe
r into teams or into the wider organisation
 ‚What is the holistic business case to move to agile?™
 Fear
 (2)
 Fear of change and the unknown as agile appears less 
structured with people 'doing their own thing' whilst 
using a whole new set of jargon
 ‚Tradi
tional practitioners may fear and resist the change 
given control moves to the team (self
- organising teams)™
 3 Culture
 (31)
 Organisational 
culture (13)
 The organisation requires a philosophical belief in people 
over process
 ‚Changing from a command and c
ontrol/mechanistic 
worldview to a future of autonomous, self
-managed agents 
in a systemic organisation is too much if the system does 
not change itself 
Œ including leaders™
 Changing mindsets 
(7)
 Agile is more than a set of practices used by IT requiring
 wide ranging change to work patterns
 ‚It™s a mind set not a methodology. Without a change in 
mind set the result will not be met™
 National culture (5)
 Differences in national culture, particularly between East 
and West, compound issues with organisatio
nal culture
 ‚Is it possible to do agile with all nationalities and 
cultures?™
  10 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
    Culture contd.
 Distributed teams
 (5)
 Business realities are often contrary to the agile need for 
co-located teams, with teams distributed across the UK, 
Europe or worldwide
 ‚It
 requires co
-location in a digital world, where travel is 
too expensive™
 Trust (1)
 Providing a safe environment to develop and innovate
 ‚What is the cost for not investing in trust?™
 4 Teams
 (24)
 Team practices
 (11)
 Uncertainty and perhaps lack of trai
ning in specific 
practices or techniques
 ‚How to estimate/ better estimate the effort to support 
planning?™
 Leadership
 (5)
 Traditional project management approaches of 
'command and control' need to be replaced by a 
facilitation style of leadership
 ‚That
 the manifesto lacks Leadership over Management™
 Finding good people
 (4)
 Agile requires skilled, self
-directed and motivated team 
players
 ‚Getting the right people interested
- decision makers and 
users™
 Individual 
motivation (4)
 Agile philosophies ar
e often at odds with organisational 
reward structures that value individuals
 ‚It sometimes marginalises lonely problem solvers™
 5 Sustainability
 (23)
 Process 
improvement (15)
 Once adopted, agile requires on
-going change and 
commitment in order to become s
ustainable and 
embedded within teams and the organisation
 ‚If it is codified it becomes "bureaucratic" and if not it is 
too diverse to be taken seriously™
 Documentation 
 (4)
 Tensions arise when management sees documentation as 
a way to demonstrate contr
ol whilst developers focus on 
code over documents
 ‚That it has become an excuse not to do any documentation 
or planning beyond the sprint and product backlog™
 Contracts 
 (3)
 Standard contracts require detailed upfront 
specifications that are contrary to
 the evolving approach 
of agile
 ‚Some think they need a contract™
 Knowledge sharing 
(1)
 Needs a positive learning environment to motivate 
individual commitment in order to establish effective 
knowledge sharing
 ‚We innovate but we don™t really share inno
vations™
 6 Scaling
 (15)
 Large projects
 (10)
 Working at programme level where team practices need 
to scale across multiple teams in large complex projects
 ‚Agility in large projects effecting several applications, 
platforms, techniques™
 Governance
 (5)
 Traditional mechanisms that ensure projects achieve 
regulatory or legal compliance are often process driven 
and bureaucratic
 ‚Have not yet found any clear view on how the ‚governance™ 
at Business Case level works or could work in relation to 
outcomes, costs
 and benefits™
 7 Value
 (7)
 Business value
 (4)
 To counter criticism of waterfall approaches where 
organisations tended to focus on process rather than 
product, agile projects must demonstrate value
 ‚Ensuring that projected value is achieved™
 Measurement
 (3)
 Many organisation use wide ranging metrics but these 
are not always appropriate or necessary to agile projects
 ‚The lack of well formulated and defined measurement 
practices™
  The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 11
  3.1.3 Reliability and Limitations
 We follow Lincoln and Guba 
[24]
 in using
 credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability 
to discuss the reliability and validity of qualitative research. Credibility 
assesses whether
 the study 
measures what is intended 
[25]
. It involves adopting appropriate methods, developing fa
miliarity with 
the research context and establishing that results are believable from the perspective of the research 
participants. Transferability 
refers to
 the applicability of study results to other situations 
[25]
. It is 
addressed through accurate desc
riptions of the research context and assumptions brought to the 
research. Dependability 
assesses
 whether the same results would be achieved if the study were 
repeated
. It is addressed by reporting detailed descriptions of the research process to enable fut
ure 
researchers to repeat the work 
[25]
. Confirmability 
assesses whether
 findings reflect research 
participants™ experiences not the preferences of the researchers, and is related to the issue of objectivity
 [25]
. This is addressed through the corroboratio
n of research analysis by more than one researcher and 
recognition of the study shortcomings. These terms are used below and also in the other Reliability and 

Limitations sections: 3.2.4 and 3.3.3.
  
Credibility, transferability and dependability of the
 Cha
llenge Wall
 findings are 
enhanced by the 
detailed descriptions of 
the data collection approach and context
 provided in this section
. Collecting 
data through face
-to-face contact with respondents at several events 
enhance
s credibility
 as the 
researchers are
 able to confirm that challenges were a genuine expression of respondents™ views. 
There 
were several limitations to the data collection
 approach
. Few software developers or testers attend 
such events therefore their views were not well represented in the d
ataset. The data capture occurred 
at conferences, and 
as participants were outside their normal working environment it is possible that 
this influenced the challenges captured. The challenge cards were filled in anonymously so they could 

not be linked to j
ob roles. The events at which data was collected were all ‚pro
-agile™, and respondent 
sampling was potentially skewed by this context. The data set only provides an insight into challenges 

at a particular time in a continually evolving landscape of challen
ges. 
  Confirmability of the analysis was strengthened by the researchers using a process of first working 
independently, and then collaboratively, to develop an understanding of the data. There were some 

disagreements between the researchers about theming
 choices, resulting in the need for 
negotiated
 decisions. The credibility of the analysis was not checked with participants, as data was collected 

anonymously. 
 3.2 Case Study
 The challenge cards presented in the previous section provide an overview of the
 landscape of 
practitioner challenges, but they cannot capture any detail or context. Investigating challenges in more 
 12 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   depth requires a different approach that allows the context and detail to be accounted for.  A case study 
is ﬁan empirical method aimed a
t investigating contemporary phenomena in their contextﬂ 
[26]
, and 
hence is appropriate for this purpose. Specifically, as the aim is to investigate practitioner challenges in 

context, an exploratory case study approach was taken. 
 Following an email sent 
to the DSDM members™ mailing list asking for companies facing agile challenges 
to get in touch with us, the research team were approached in March 2013 by the London
-based Office 
of a large multinational organisation in the finance sector (whom we shall ca
ll BigBank). Initially, the 
challenge they were facing was presented as one of reporting from the agile teams in the London Office 
to the Head Office, which was based in a different country.
 Over the course of the case study,
 it became 
clear that there wer
e many different challenges being faced by staff in different roles, and working with 
the London Office staff, 
the essence of the challenge became characterized as ﬁAgile projects in a non
-agile environmentﬂ.
 3.2.1 Context
 About two years before the case s
tudy started, the London office of BigBank decided to adopt the 
Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM). DSDM is an end
-to-end framework for agile project 
management and delivery, whose underlying philosophy is to align projects with strategic business 

g
teams adopted a Scrum
-based approach working within timeboxes (the DSDM term for sprints) and 
using a Prioritised Requirements List (the DSDM term for a p
roduct backlog).
 The DSDM framework 
also provides guidance for Project Management Office (PMO) management. The PMO is a department, 

commonly found in large organisations, whose function is to facilitate IT project management across 

the whole organization b
y making strategic decisions about projects, programmes and portfolios and 
ensuring repeatable processes.  
 By the time of the study 
the London office had adopted DSDM in its 
entirety
, however, the use of DSDM was not mature. 
  
Influential in the decision 
to adopt DSDM, was the fact that several projects had failed in recent years, 
which had left uncertainty in the relationship between the Head Office and the London office. This 

background exacerbated the challenge and brought it into sharp focus. BigBank c
hose DSDM because 
they were operating in a regulated environment, and they needed to ensure that the approach they 
chose provided structure and governance mechanisms as well as agile processes. The agile transition 
was supported by management, and was achi
eved by a mix of employee training and help from 
consultants. Agile culture was gradually embraced and software was being delivered in regular 
increments. However their projects were approved, budgeted and monitored by Head Office who 

continued to use a wa
terfall approach and had a hierarchical structure.
   The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 13
  It soon became apparent that the use of agile practices was starting to cause problems between the 
London office and the Head Office. Representatives from the Head Office appeared sceptical about the 

agil
e approach. They always wanted to know more detail and asked questions which seemed to the 
London office to be irrelevant, or asked for an unnecessary amount of detail.
  It seemed that they 
suspected the London Office was not really in control of their pro
jects. As our main 
contact at BigBank
 said ﬁ
There are challenges when reporting to <Head Office>. They expect detailed plans up front, and seem 
to believe that we are ‚making it up as we go along™
ﬂ. The London office tried to address these concerns 
by trai
ning Head Office staff in agile practices and the DSDM framework, mapping the agile process to 
the waterfall governance process, and using
 a range of different reporting styles and approaches to 
communication. However, concerns and challenges remained. 
 3.2.2 Approach
 The aim of the case study was to address RQ2: How do practitioner challenges manifest themselves in 
an organisational setting?
 To this end, the investigation focused on exploring in depth the challenge 
being faced by BigBank, and understanding
 it in context. 
  Over the course of three months the research team regularly visited the company and collected data 

using interviews, group meetings and document review. 
Initially, the researchers were presented with 
a wide range of issues, which were gra
dually reviewed and refined
.  The focus was narrowed onto one 
project to scope the investigation (that we shall call FireFly). Firefly™s aim was to migrate existing 
systems from a mainframe environment to a framework more commonly used within the domain. D
ata 
collection was undertaken when FireFly was in the last quarter of its planned timescale.
  Table 
2: List of job roles of Case Study interviewees
 Jobs roles interviewed
 Interview
 questions
 Manager of Project Management Office (PM
O) (the 
gatekeeper)
 Semi
-structured interview, based around the 
following questions
 1.
 From your experience, what are the biggest 
problems with reporting between London and 
Head Office
? 2.
 What feedback do you get internally
 (in London)
?  
 3.
 What feedback do you g
et from Head Office
 4.
 What is your role in the process of reporting? 
 5.
 Could you please tell us a little bit about your 
background?
 6.
 Have you worked with agile teams before?
 7.
 Is there anything else you™d like to add?
  Head of Project Management Office (PMO)
 Agile Coach
 Visionary for FireFly
 Project Manager for FireFly
 Head of Regulatory Department
 Deputy Head of Technology Department
 FireFly Sponsor, interface with senior 
management in Head Office
 Head of Risk Regulation and Data Technology
 (a 
dev
eloper role)
 Head of Internal Audit
   14 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   The main data collection instrument was a set of 
semi
-structured 
interviews
, conducted 
during August 
2013
, with the group meetings and document review providing background and supporting 
information
. Nine interviews
 were conducted with staff members who were identified by 
our contact at 
BigBank
 as being particularly impacted by the challenge initially identified. 
Interviews ranged between 
20 minutes and an hour. 
The aim was to get a wide perspective on how the challe
nge manifested itself 
within the organisation, directly addressing RQ2. 
Initially, developers were not represented by any of 
the interviewees and one was added at our request.  However his was the shortest interview as he was 

not impacted by the challenges
 we were investigating. The majority of communication with Head Office 
was conducted through project managers and the PMO, leaving developers to focus on their daily tasks. 

Protecting developers from this kind of challenge is a fundamental practice for agi
le software 
development. 
The ten roles represented by the interviewees 
and the questions asked during the 
interview 
are summarised in Table 2; Firefly™s visionary and its project manager were interviewed 
together, at their request. 
  
Four researchers were 
involved in data collection and analysis (three of the co
-authors and one other 
researcher).  The approach of affinity diagramming 
[27]
 was adopted for analysis (see Figure 
4). 
Following this approach, each researcher individually extracted a list of sub
-challenges from the data 
collected and a one
-day analysis session was held in order to discuss and consolidate the issues raised. 
Related issues were collected into groups and the groups were described according to the underlying 

sub
-challenge.
  Figure 
4: Affinity diagram of Case study sub
-challenges (some labels are greyed out to avoid identification)
   
These sub
-challenges were then considered in th
e context of the themes and sub
themes identified 
through the Challenge Wall study
.    The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 15
  3.2.3 Findings
 The four key sub
-challenges that emerged through the affinity diagram analysis were:
 1.
 How can different parts of the organisation communicate effectively when Head Office 
management values formal, written communication while the London Offi
ce agile teams value 
informal, verbal communication and minimal documentation
 2.
 How to demonstrate control when Head Office management expects certainty of time, budget, 

and specifications from the beginning of the project but agile emphasises the delivery o
f fit
-for
-purpose, business value
 3.
 How to overcome Head Office management perception of re
-prioritisation and de
-scoping as 
lack of control
 4.
 How to respond to Head Office management who expect consistency in reporting right from the 
start even when 
the use o
f agile is 
still 
maturing
.  In order to verify these sub
-challenges and the main challenge characterisation, these findings were 
discussed with our collaborators 
at BigBank 
in December 2013. They welcomed the analysis and agreed 
with the findings. The fact
 that the original challenge evolved into many different sub
-challenges was 
not a surprise to 
them
, indicating that they recognised the complexity of the situation. In addition, it 
was clear that they perceived two parts to the first challenge: 
how
 to comm
unicate effectively, and 
what
 needs to be reported. Building on this analysis and discussion, the main challenge widened its focus 
from only reporting, and became characterised as 
ﬁAgile projects in a non
-agile environmentﬂ.
 According to the categories pre
sented in Table 1, this is a 
subtheme
 of the Organisation theme, but the 
challenges were also linked to other themes and 
subtheme
s.  To investigate this further, these sub
-challenges are considered in the context of the other themes and 
subtheme
s in Table 
1. 
  
The first challenge can be linked to the Organisational Culture 
subtheme
 of Culture. The Head Office 
wanted detailed, formal, hierarchical communication that was fully documented, but the London office 

preferred to use team
-based, face
-to-face, verbal
 communication to discuss detail and to produce 
minimal, ‚just
-enough™ documentation for record
-keeping. The documentation overhead demanded by 
Head Office took additional time for the London team. It undermined their agile approach and indicated 

a lack of
 trust. Head Office worked in a different language to the London office so some communication 
needed to be translated. This took time and introduced the potential for misunderstandings, 
which in 

turn sometimes led to additional queries for more information
. Also, at Head Office employees rotated 
positions every two years, which involved not only a role change but also a Department change. This 

increased the challenge of establishing a mutual understanding of agile. 
 
  16 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   The second challenge links to the Busine
ss Value 
subtheme
, of the Value theme. As the Head Office 
environment did not fully accept and recognise the agile principles that the London office were using it 
was difficult to demonstrate progress and achievement of business value. 
From Head Office™s p
oint of 
view ‚value™ was associated with projects being on
-time, on
-budget and delivered according to 
specification. In contrast, the London office focused on delivering fit
-for
-purpose products that 
provided business value. 
The London office wanted to 
dem
onstrate control without retrofitting agile 
progress reports into templates designed for a waterfall environment, find the right level of detail for 

measuring and reporting progress and ensure that the information provided was interpreted correctly. 
 
 
The 
third and fourth challenges link to the Organisation theme: the third to Management buy
-in and 
understanding, and the fourth to Adoption. The London office was 
evolving their
 agile 
practice to suit 
their environment, 
and 
their approach was not yet mature
. Head Office needed educating about the new 
approach. 
The Project Management Office (PMO) was still building up their agile knowledge base and 
introducing new processes. The reporting for different projects was not yet fully consistent and project 

report te
mplates were still evolving. This compounded the perceived lack of full control and the 
likelihood that inconsistencies would be seen as problems. Because of lack of buy
-in and understanding, 
Head Office
 considered some agile techniques such as reprioritis
ation and de
-scoping as indicators a 
lack of control, rather than legitimate processes. Even small changes to a project™s scope were 

considered to indicate a lack of control and hence failure to deliver.
  The challenges found in the context of BigBank adde
d rich detail to one of the 
sub
themes
 in Table 1,
 but 
they also highlighted the interconnectedness of the themes identified 
from
 the Challenge Wall
. 3.2.4 Reliability and Limitations
 Credibility, transferability and dependability of the findings are relate
d to the data collection approach 
and context, and the detailed descriptions provided of them. Limitations were the short period of time 
over which the study was conducted, and the fact that it was undertaken in one organisation. Many of 

the details descri
bed were specific to the organisation itself, as no other organisation would experience 
exactly the same set of conditions. The work was only done with staff at the London office and there 

was no access to Head Office staff. 
  
Confirmability was achieved t
hrough four researchers working on and discussing the analysis of the 
data. The analysis was presented to and discussed with several members of BigBank towards the end of 

the study period to ensure credibility by research participants. 
  The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 17
  3.3 Online Survey
 An online Survey was developed to investigate further the Case Study findings. Specifically the aim was 
to understand whether others experienced the sub
-challenges, and if there were other sub
-challenges 
related to the main challenge of running agile projec
ts in a non
-agile environment.
 3.3.1 Approach
 The Survey asked for the respondent™s role/job, which agile methods the respondent™s organisation had 
adopted and the extent to which that organisation had adopted agile. The Survey went on to ask 
whether respo
ndents had experienced the sub
-challenges from the Case Study. These were modified 
from their previous form to better reflect 
the findings presented in section 3.2
, and to be suitable for a 
survey format. The question
s are
 reproduced in Table 3. Responses 
were elicited in the form of 'Yes', 
'No', and 'Don't know'. The ‚Don™t know™ option was included 
to capture situations in which 
respondents could not answer the question because 
their role meant that they
 did not have access to 
that information. 
The survey
 was aimed at respondents who were working in the context of ﬁAgile 
projects in a non
-agile environmentﬂ, but not in exactly the same setting as BigBank. The Survey was 
developed iteratively and piloted by some staff from BigBank before being released onli
ne.
  
An invitation to complete the Survey was sent to more than 20 agile forums/message boards, LinkedIn 
and Meetup groups. The forums included yahoo on specific methods (Extreme Programming, Scrum 
Development, Agile Testing, Agile Project Management, Agil
e Usability and Lean Agile) and local and 

international forums (Agile Scotland, AgileNorth, Agile Staffordshire, Agile Wales, BCS Agile, Agile 

Alliance and Scrum Alliance); the LinkedIn groups were mostly of practitioners (Scrum Practitioners, 

Agile Coachi
ng, DSDM, Agile Project Management, Agile Project Managers, Lean Agile Software 
Development Community, Agile .net Practitioners, Agile Coaching, Agile Managers Forum, Agile Project 
and Program Portfolio Management); the Meet
-up groups reached were worldwid
e (Agile Sydney, Agile 
London Discussion Group, Agile Project Management, Agile Denver, The Chicago Agile Methodology 
Group, Agile Auckland, Agile
-evangelists, Agile UX and Agile Testing). The Survey was conducted 
through SurveyMonkey over a period of nine
 months (June 2014 to February 2015).  
  
Data was analysed using summary statistics and thematic analysis. Answers to closed questions were 

counted and collated as percentages. Answers to the open question were classified using the thematic 

classification 
scheme developed from the Challenge Wall data. Three researchers were involved in the 
data analysis. 
 3.4.2 Findings
 There were 181 distinct responses to the Survey. The roles of respondents are shown in Figure 
5. There 

was considerable variation in respon
ses describing which agile methods were used. Scrum was used by 
43% of respondents, a mix of Scrum and Kanban by 15%, DSDM by 6%, and a mix of Scrum and XP by 
 18 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   4%. Of the other responses 14% mentioned using an ad hoc mix of methods including examples such a
s ‚Scrum/Kanban/XP™ and ‚Scrum/SAFe™; 4% used a single method including Kanban (2), XP (1), AWD (1), 
Lean (1), SAMBA (1), SAFe (1); and 13% did not answer the question. Scrum was the most widely 

mentioned method, included in 69% of respondents
™ answers. Wh
en asked the extent to which their 
organisation had adopted agile 76% stated that their organisation had only partially adopted agile, 14% 
stated their organisation had fully adopted agile and 10% stated their organisation had not adopted 
agile at all. 
 Fi
gure 
5: Job roles of survey respondents
  Summary statistics shown in the three right hand columns of Table 3 show that more than 50% of 

respondents had faced one or more of the ﬁagile projects in a non
-agile environmentﬂ sub
-challenges 
identified through 
the Case Study, providing evidence that they are experienced in a range of settings. 
 Table 
3: Have you experienced any of the following challenges while working with agile methods that you are 
currently using?
  Yes
 No Don™t know
 Agile teams struggle to identify how to communicate their progress to 
management
 51.53%
 41.10%
 7.36%
 Agile teams struggle to identify what needs to be reported to 
management
 53.61% 36.75% 9.64% Management expects certainty of time, budget, and specificati
ons from 
the beginning of the project
 75.31% 18.52% 6.17% Re-prioritisation and de
-scoping is perceived by management as lack of 
control
 50.62% 38.27% 11.11% Management expects consistency in reporting right from the start even 
when the teams are still i
n the process of transitioning to Agile
 53.99% 33.13% 12.88% Other (please specify)
     Thirty
-six responses were given to the ‚Other (please specify)™ part of the question. 
These
 identified 
‚them and us™ issues, relating to process, mandatory procedures
, micro
-management, expectations, 
 The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 19
  documentation, reporting, lack of experience and understanding of agile. 
 Although these challenges 
were identified in the context of ‚agile in a non
-agile environment™, they also can be classified within 
different themes 
and subthemes (see Table 4). 
  Table 
4: Challenges
 identified in the context of 
‚agile in a non
-agile environment™
 can be classified in different themes 
and subthemes
 Main Theme
 Subthemes
 Example Challenge
 Claims and 
Limitations 
 Misconceptions
  ‚Management uses the term "agile" to account for pushing the teams 
harder, even towards constant overtime™
 Organisation 
 Business & IT 
transformation
 ‚Setting proper expectations within other parts of the organization™
 Management buy
-in &
 understanding 
 ‚During agile adoption, management occasionally micromanages 
until the Scrum teams have demonstrated a consistent delivery 
process. Once teams hit their strides with consistent velocities, 
Management tends to better understand and appreciat
e agile 
philosophies™
 Agile in a non
-agile 
environment 
  ‚Communication requirements for agile team not met by 
management/non
-agile teams™
 Commitment/ 
Engagement 
 ‚Customers do not have agile experience™
 Adoption
 ‚Nobody knows agile except for me.  O
ne of my challenges is bringing 
a large number of people up to speed not just with the 'rules' but also 
the 'why' so that they can make pragmatic decisions™
 Culture
   Organisational 
culture
 ‚People are uncomfortable with the team members being 
accountable
 for the outcomes and results™
 Changing mindsets
 ‚Parts of the team still want to work according to the Waterfall 
process™
 Sustainability
 Process 
improvement 
 ‚Inter
-sprint priority changes™
 Contracts 
 ‚We struggle to produce documentation that is par
t of the contract™
  These findings illustrate how challenges are not only multi
-faceted, but also complex and interrelated. 
 3.3.3 Reliability and Limitations
 Credibility, transferability and dependability of the findings are related to the data collectio
n approach 
and context, and the detailed descriptions provided of them. Limitations come from the convenience 

sampling approach used, the use of 
an 
online 
survey 
which made it impossible to check the credentials 
of respondents
 or the accuracy of the answer
s, and the lack of contextual information gathered about 
respondents. Confirmability was established by the analysis being undertaken by two researchers, 
however this could not be checked with participants as data was collected anonymously. 
 4 Discussion
 The work presented in the previous section focussed on answering two research questions. This section 
returns to those research questions and discusses the implications of our findings. Section 4.1 

summarises findings in answer to RQ1 and discusses how the 
landscape of challenges has changed over 
 20 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   time by comparing our findings with previous research on agile practitioners™ challenges. Section 4.2 
summarises findings in answer to RQ2 and discusses why challenges are difficult to characterise by 

considering th
ematic perspectives and the systemic nature of challenges in organisational settings. 
Section 4.3 compares 
the landscape of challenges identified in this paper
 with topics investigated in the 
research literature and discusses the implications for research 
that is relevant to practice.
 Section 4.4 
discusses overall limitations and generalisability.
 4.1 What Challenges Do Agile Practitioners Face?
 In answer to RQ1, ‚W
hat challenges do agile practitioners face?™ 27 
subtheme
s and seven themes were 
identified. I
t was found that practitioners face a wide range of challenges, which can be expressed at 
different levels of granularity, many of which are multi
-faceted and interlinked.  The Challenge Wall 
data provided an opportunistic snapshot of the agile practitione
r community™s current concerns. But 
change is inevitable, and we now discuss how practitioner concerns have evolved over time by 

comparing the Challenge Wall data, collected from 2013 to 2015, with challenges collected at XP2010 
and reported 
by Freudenberg
 and Sharp 
[18]
 (Table 5
).
  Table 
5:
  Comparison of themes from this study with practitioners™ top ten research questions from 
[18]
 Freudenberg and Sharp top ten research questions
 (numbers indicate ranking by size)
 Themes/Subthemes 
 (numbers indicate rank
ing by size)
 1. Agile and large projects
 6. Scaling
 2. What factors can break self
-organization?
 3. Culture/Organisational culture 
 3. Do teams really need to always be collocated to 
collaborate effectively?
 3. Culture/Distributed teams 
 4. Architectur
e and agile
Šhow much design is enough 
for different classes of problem?
 6. Scaling/Large projects
 5. Hard facts on costs of distribution (in $,£,• and so 
on)
 3. Culture/Distributed teams 
 6. The correlation between release length and success 
rate
 1. Claims and Limitations/Shortcomings 
Sustainability/Process Improvement
 7. What metrics can we use with
 minimal side effects?
 7. Value/Measurement
 8. Distributed agile and trust
Šwhat happens around 
8Œ12 weeks?
 3. Culture/Distributed teams 
 9.  Statistics and data about how much money/time is 
saved by agile
 (Time mentioned in several challenges from 
differ
ent themes
) 10. Sociological studies
Šwhat were the personalities 
in successful/failed agile teams?
 4. Teams/ Finding good people
  Some research questions from 2010 are still a challenge today although 
they have
 changed
 emphasis
, 
towards organisational co
ncerns and away from internal agile team matters
. For example
, scaling 
challenges 
now relate to organisations, 
rather than
 large projects:
 ‚How do you scale up to a large project over many months or even years?™
; ‚Scaling due to complexity (rather than lar
ge projects)™
; and 
 ‚Scaling across a large enterprise/companies.™
  The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 21
  The challenge of m
etrics
 is now 
less about side effects 
and
 more about what management wants and 
how to measure value:
 ‚Agile is about measuring value, but management want efficiency, defec
t metrics etc. How to 
demonstrate team is efficient and improving efficiency?™ 
  ‚Lack of focus on business value (and identifying what it means).™
  Similar concerns were found in 
BigBank™s
 first sub
-challenge 
about
 communicat
ing
 effectively when 
Head Offi
ce management value
d different
 kinds of
 communication 
than
 the London Office. 
 Co
-location of
 teams 
is still an issue
 (under the Culture theme) but trust ha
s emerged
 as a key concern
.    
The research questions 
relating to
 specificities of agile practice su
ch as: ‚Architecture and agile
Šhow 
much design is enough for different classes of problem?™; and ‚The correlation between release length 

and success rate™ seem to have less importance now. The 
current 
challenges 
around
 agile practices are 
not
 ‚how to™ chal
lenges but are misconceptions and shortcomings. For example:
 ‚It™s hard to make it work with clunky legacy systems™
 Or from the Survey findings:
 ‚Teams and managers breaking out of Scrum methodology & framework to reduce what they 
perceive as "framework" w
aste™
 The lack of ‚how to™ challenges suggests a move away from understanding agile towards a wider 
concern of 
sustainability
 within more or less hostile environments. The high number of agile challenges 
in the Organisation theme and of organisation
-relate
d ones in other themes reinforces this point.
 4.2 How Do Practitioner Challenges Manifest Themselves in Organisational Settings? 
 In answer to RQ2, ‚How do practitioner challenges manifest themselves in an organisational setting?™, 
the Case Study revealed 
a web of detailed, inter
-linked sub
-challenges. The Survey confirmed that these 
were experienced in different contexts by over 50% of respondents. Even when a specific challenge 

area was the focus, other interlinked challenges were uncovered through the st
udy, and we found those 
challenges could be categorised under other challenge themes. 
  
The
 challenge analysis 
shows 
that some challenges 
relate
 to more than one thematic category, and if 
viewed
 from a different perspective 
or investigated in more depth 
could be categorised differently. 
For 
example, BigBank™s 
main challenge was an 
example of the 
subtheme
 ‚agile projects in a non
-agile 
environment™ in the Organisation theme. However
, when 
this
 challenge was investigated in depth 
four 
sub
-challenges
 were iden
tified
. As discussed at the beginning of
 section 3.2.3 
 these sub
-challenges 
could be linked to four specific sub
-themes in the 
Culture
, Value
 and Organisation 
theme
s.   
We suggest that the seven 
themes are more useful if they are seen as ™perspectives™ or
 ‚lenses™
. These 
perspectives are not distinct boxes into which challenges can be fitted, but standpoints or perspectives 
 22 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   from which the challenges can be 
viewed
.  The Organisation theme looks at challenges from the 
standpoint of organisational structures 
and processes whereas the Team theme uses the perspective of 
groups of individuals. Culture uses the perspective of the ethos and rules that are in play within 

working environments.  Sustainability uses the standpoint of longevity and time, Scaling uses si
ze and 

Value uses the perspective of benefit or worth. Claims and Limitations uses the perspective of how agile 
itself is perceived and how those perceptions themselves create challenges. Seen in this way some agile 
challenges are multi
-dimensional problem
s that are experienced simultaneously as business, 
organisational, social and adaptation problems.
  
The inter
-related themes identified in this study reflect the complex and multi
-faceted environments in 
which software is developed.  There is a long tradit
ion of applying systems theory to organisations 
[28, 
29]
. Also, several authors have used a Complex Adaptive Systems view to explain agile methods in 
organisational contexts 
[30
-33]
. A system is an interconnected set of elements forming a whole that has 
properties belonging to the whole.  A complex adaptive system uses transformative feedback loops to 
enable continuous improvement, has emergent and potentially unpredictable behaviour, distributed 
rather than centralised control; a shallow rather than a deep
 structure; and is enhanced by growth and 
evolution 
[30]
. From this viewpoint an agile adoption should transform the whole organisation 
[34]
. Some practitioners™ challenges, therefore, are multi
-dimensional and either the challenges themselves, 
or the chan
ges needed to address them, are disruptive to the organisational system within which they 
sit. 
  On the one hand this complexity is not surprising, but on the other it provides a salutary lesson for 
researchers wishing to investigate practitioner challenge
s. There is a tension between taking account of 
this complexity and developing specific research questions. It is often the case that resource and 

funding constraints dictate a tight research focus, but this is at odds with the landscape this work has 
unco
vered. Different kinds of empirical study are used by researchers,
 which can be
 broadly 
categorised as in vivo, in vitro and in silico 
[35]
. The findings here particularly support the need for in 
vivo case studies
, the use of systems approaches to research
 such as action research 
[36]
, soft systems 
methodology 
[29]
 and systems dynamics 
[37]
, and recognition that a simplistic view of practitioner 
challenges 
is not helpful for practitioners
.  4.3 Which Challenges Are Being Addressed by Research
? Findings show
 that practitioners face a wide range of challenges that change over time, are complex and 
interlinked. We now look at which challenges are being addressed by research.  We compare themes 

and subthemes from this study with areas identified in Dybå and Ding
søyr™s 2008 systematic literature 
review 
[10]
 (Table 6
). We discuss findings from this study in the light of a
 more recent 
 systematic 
literature review
, in 2014
, by Chuang et al 
[13]
 that 
highlights what 
research 
has been carried out 
on 
 The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 23
  specific subthemes
 . Also relevant, is the investigation by van Waardenburg and van Vliet 
[21]
 of agile 
within a plan
-driven environment
, omitted by Chuang et al 
[13]
. Table 
6:
  Comparison of themes and subthemes from this study with Dybå and Dingsøyr™s topics 
[10]
* Dybå an
d Dingsøyr topics
 Themes from this 
study
 Subthemes from this study
 Introduction and adoption
   Introduction and adoption
 Organisation
 Adoption
 Development process
  (Not mentioned in our challenge list)
 Knowledge and project   
management
 Sustainability
 Knowledge sharing
 Human and social factors
   Organisational culture
 Culture
 Organisational culture
 Collaborative work
 Teams
 Team practices
 Team characteristics
 Teams
 Finding good people
 Perceptions of agile
   Customer perceptions
 Organisation
 Commitm
ent/engagement
 Developer perceptions
 Teams
 Organisation
 Individual motivation
 Adoption
 Student perceptions
  (Not mentioned in our challenge list)
 Comparative studies
   Project management
 Organisation
 Sustainability
 Management buy
-in and 
understanding
 Process improvement
 Productivity
 Sustainability
 Process Improvement
 Product quality
  (Not mentioned in our challenge list)
 Work practices and job 
satisfaction
 Teams
 Team practices
 * Dybå and Dingsøyr identify four topic groups and 13 topics, which are m
apped to four themes and nine subthemes from this study. 
  Organisation, Sustainability, Culture and Teams are themes that have been subject 
to research interest 
for some time. For example the topic groupings identified in Dybå and Dingsøyr™s systematic re
view 
[10]
 are reflected in these four themes from our challenge set. Also, van Waardenburg and van Vliet 
[21]
 identify ‚lack of business involvement™ as one of their two categories of challenges (the other being 
‚increased landscape complexity™) which maps
 to our 
subtheme
 Management buy
-in and 
understanding. 
 Gandomani et al 
[20]
 identify ‚organisation and management related™ as one their 
challenge themes; this includes challenges that we have classified under Organisation (e.g. 
‚transforming [–] from ﬁcomm
and and controlﬂ to ﬁleadership and collaboration™ﬂ™ that we classified 
under Business and IT transformation) but also under Culture (‚Changing mindset of people and their 

organisational culture™ under Changing mindsets). Conboy et al 
[22]
 focus on people
-related challenges 
some of which relate directly to subthemes; for example, ‚Developer fear caused by transparency of 

skills deficiencies™ relates to Organisation; ‚lack of agile specific recruitment policies and suitably 

trained IT graduates™ relates to F
inding the right people (Teams), ‚Lack of developer motivation to use 
agile methods™ relates to Individual motivation (Teams). 
However some subthemes within 
three of 

these four main themes
 (Organisation, Sustainability, and Teams
), such as Business and IT 
transformation, Fear, Contracts, Documentation and Leadership, do not seem very evident in the 
literature searches we have conducted for our industrial partners. This would, however, need to be 
 24 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   confirmed by a more up
-to-date systematic literature review. T
he need for business as well as IT 
transformation, was of particular concern in the Challenge Wall data, with 11 challenge cards 
identifying this topic. Examples of challenges identified included:
 ‚Its take up outside of the delivery function. That it is h
as been coined by IT for IT without 
the business guys. Which organisational changes are triggered by IT without anybody 
noticing/caring/managing those changes?
™; and
 ‚That everyone seems to think that it starts and stops in software development. How other 
disciplines blend in is a big challenge™.
 A similar example
 from the Survey
 is: ‚Senior management does not communicate detail of the Agile transformation to middle 
management
.™
 BigBank™s third challenge 
(‚
How to overcome Head Office management perception 
of re
-prioritisation 
and de
-scoping as lack of control
‚) 
also refers to the need for business transformation.
  
Scaling is also a topic that has been written about and discussed by practitioners 
[38, 39]
. Chuang et al 
[13]
 reference seven papers on scaling,
 including large or complex projects (searching on ‚scale™, ‚large™, 
‚complex™) and none on governance (searching on ‚governance™, ‚PMO™). Dingsøyr and Moe reported 
from an XP2013 Workshop at which research challenges in large
-scale agile development were 
discussed, that there were few research studies on the topic 
[19]
. A recent systematic literature review 
on agile governance, identified a small but growing research base 
[40]
.  The two themes Value, and Claims and Limitations identified in our challenge s
et are generally less 
commonly reported in the empirical research literature, although some of the associated subthemes are 

more researched. In the references in Chuang et al 
[13]
 we found no papers on the topic of business 
value (searching on ‚value™); ei
ght discussing measurement (‚metrics™, ‚measurement™); and none on 
claims or limitations (‚misconception™, ‚shortcoming™, ‚fail™, ‚hype™, ‚lack™, ‚claim™, ‚limitation™).
  Challenge Wall participants identified 46 challenges on the theme of Claims and Limit
ations. Comments 
indicate a certain amount of frustration, but range over a number of topics, including:
 ‚Religious approach™;
 ‚Everyone wants to reinvent it™;
 ‚Throwing away some of the old useful ideas™; and
 ‚The lack of a project management framework fo
r coordinating multiple teams and or work.™
 And from the Survey findings:
  The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 25
   ‚Lack of understanding the agile philosophy by Top Management, while strong from development 
team™
  While there is some literature about the concept of agility 
[6, 41]
, there is ver
y little about 
misconceptions, hype and failure. Agile hype is discussed by Janes and Succi 
[42]
 who suggest agile has 
followed the Gartner Hype Cycle, and is stuck in the ‚Trough of Disillusionment™ as a result of what they 
call the ‚guru phenomenon™. In 
a grounded theory study of agile practitioners Hoda et al 
[43]
 identify 
agile hype and scepticism as factors that negatively affected customer involvement in agile projects. 
There are some discussions in the consultant literature 
[44]
, however we could fin
d no empirical 
research that specifically focussed on investigating this topic. 
  There is very little research into agile failure, another subtheme of Claims and Limitations. McAvoy and 

Butler 
[45]
 report the failure of a team to adopt an agile method, id
entifying ineffective decision
-making 
and actions, which occurred as a result of the team™s desire to become more cohesive, as one of the key 

drivers of the failure. This is a gap, and has been mentioned by other researchers 
[13]
. It is somewhat 
surprising
 as anecdotally it is not uncommon to hear stories of failure and organisational abandonment 
of agile. 
  We also compared our findings with the research areas Dingsøyr et al established in their 2008 
preliminary roadmap paper 
[9]
 as goals for research achi
evements by 2015. They indicate some areas 
for priority in research: maturity, coverage, understanding and impact. They assess that research was 

having little impact on everyday practice in industry and suggest that ﬁincreased application of research 

metho
ds like action research 
[36]
 can be helpful ensuring the relevance, and help provide a larger body 
of knowledge that can lead to a broader impact on industry.ﬂ
  
Research 
in the area 
has 
grown
 significantly 
[13]
, action research is being used 
[46, 47]
 and r
esearch 
may be getting more relevant and is definitely increasing the body of knowledge. However, some 

perspectives from our challenge list are: 
 ‚That there is no academic research supporting the claimed success™
; and,
 ‚It is isolated from many fields, e.
g., a good research could be about bringing information 
visualisation theory and methods into agile project management in a systematic way.™
 This suggests that even if research has been done, the gap between research and what industry wants 

to know has not
 yet been bridged. 
 4.4 Limitations
 This paper is an extension of an earlier publication
 [7]
. Additional empirical data
 from
 the case study 
adds depth of analysis and the 
survey 
extends and validates the previous findings
.  Overall limitations 
 26 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   for the gene
ralisability of the research are related to
 the 
number and type of practitioners accessed
 and 
the venues at which data was collected. 
In all three studies
 the focus of data collection
 was not
 specifically
 at the level of
 the development team
. Managers
 of v
arious types
 are
 better represented than 
developers
, analysts or testers
 in the Challenge Wall and Survey data and the challenge investigated 
in 
the Case Study did not impact on developers.
 Much of the work was undertaken in the UK, with a focus 
on the DSD
M community. 
It is therefore likely that the 
data collected reflects 
manager
-level 
perspectives more closely than developer perspectives,
 and 
because of this some
 concerns may
 not
 be represented. 
  This paper presents a snapshot of Agile challenges faced b
y the industry 
at one point in time
. Further 
research with a broader and larger set of participants and additional methods 
such as
 workshops, 
round
-table discussions, and focus groups
 would strengthen the findings. 
 5 Conclusions
 If research is to have rea
l impact in the practitioner community, researchers need to understand and 

address the challenges that this community faces. The research questions addressed in this paper help 
to inform this endeavo
ur by mapping the landscape of current practitioner chall
enges, identifying the 
persistent yet evolving nature of challenges and illustrating the complexity that emerges when 
challenges are studied in an organizational context. 
Specifically, this work shows that:
 1.
 The landscape of practitioner challenges is compl
ex and the challenges are interlinked. Attempts by 
researchers to address these challenges need to recognise this and to treat the challenges in context 
rather than in isolation. 
 2.
 Some challenge areas have persisted for many years, and are just hard to add
ress successfully. For 
example, identifying and measuring agile value, and understanding cultural change are highly 
contextual and complex. These challenge areas 
will continue to
 benefit from further research
 because it needs to keep abreast of cultural ch
ange
. 3.
 Some challenge areas appear to have persisted for many years, but further analysis shows that the
ir focus 
has changed, specifically towards organisational concerns
. As agile 
is adopted
 outside the IT 
function some agile challenges 
become
 systemic
. Fu
rther research and work with relevant 
disciplines needs to increase.
 4.
 Practitioners are less concerned about adopting agile and more concerned about sustaining agile. 
The sustainability of agile has not been widely researched.
 5.
 Other challenge areas have als
o not been widely researched, specifically 
governance, business 
engagement and transformation, failure, and the impact of claims and limitations. Future research 

would be beneficial in some of these areas, but it is not the answer to all of them as some wo
uld best 
 The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 27
  be addressed by further or different education and training 
Œ e.g. those challenges classified as 
misconceptions and hype. 
 6.
 Some challenge areas 
appear in the current landscape of challenges but 
have 
also 
been 
the subject 
of research 
studies
, such
 as business and IT transformation, 
changing mindsets, finding the right 
people
 and scaling
. This implies that
 the
 research being done is not having the expected impact. 
This 
suggests
 further dissemination
 of the results
, or 
re
-packaging of the results
 to 
encourage
 practitioner implementation. 
  Overall, the picture is one of a
 complex, multi
-faceted and 
constantly changing landscape of practitioner 
challenges. In the last five years (between 2010 and 2015) concerns of sustainability and organizational 
cont
ext have grown, and these would benefit from both further research
 and improvements in 
knowledge transfer. Furthermore, given the complex nature of the challenge landscape, engaged Case 

Study research 
will continue to be of
 paramount importance. 
 6 Acknowl
edgements
 We 
would like to thank 
the conference attendees, survey respondents, 
our collaborators
 at BigBank
, and our funders: the Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM) Consortium, the Open University 

and the University of Central Lancashire.
  7 Referen
ces
  [1] E. Papatheocharous, A.S. Andreou: Empirical Evidence and State of Practice of Software Agile Teams, 
Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, 26  855
-866 (2014)
 [2] N.B. Moe, T. Dingsøyr, T. Dyba: Understanding Self
-organising Teams in Agile Sof
tware 
Development, in:  19th Australian Conference on Software Engineering, IEEE,  (2008)
 [3] N.B. Moe, T. Dingsøyr, T. Dyba: A Teamwork Model for Understanding an Agile Team: A Case Study 

of a Scrum Project, Information and Software Technology, 52  480
-49
1 (2010)
 [4] M. Laanti, J. Similä, P. Abrahamsson: Definitions of Agile Software Development and Agility, in: F. 

McCaffery, R. O™Connor, R. Messnarz (Eds.) Systems, Software and Services Process Improvement, 

Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 247
-258 (2013)
 [5] Agile Manifesto: 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org
, in,  (2001)
 [6] K. Lyytinen, G.M. Rose: Information System Development Agility as Organisational Learning, 

European Journal of Information Systems, 15  183
-199 (2006)
  28 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   [7] P. Gregory, L. Barroca, K.J. Taylo
r, D. Salah, H. Sharp: Agile Challenges in Practice: A Thematic 
Analysis, in: C. Lassenius, T. Dingsøyr, M. Paasivaara (Eds.) Proceedings of the 16th International 
Conference XP 2015, Springer, Helsinki, Finland, LNBIP 212, pp. 64
-80 (2015)
 [8] P. Abrahams
son, J. Warsta, M.T. Siponen, J. Ronkainen: New Directions on Agile Methods: A 
Comparative Analysis, in:  International Conference on Software Engineering, IEEE, Portland, Oregon 
USA,  (2003)
 [9] T. Dingsøyr, T. Dybå, P. Abrahamsson: A Preliminary Roadmap 
for Empirical Research on Agile 
Software Development, in:  Proceedings of AGILE, IEEE, Toronto, Canada, pp. 83
-94 (2008)
 [10] T. Dybå, T. Dingsøyr: Empirical Studies of Agile Software Development: A Systematic Review, 

Information and Software Technology, 5
0  833
-859 (2008)
 [11] P. Abrahamsson, K. Conboy, X. Wang: "Lots Done, More To Do": The Current State of Agile Systems 

Development Research, European Journal of Information Systems, 18  281
-284 (2009)
 [12] T. Dingsøyr, S. Nerur, V. Balijepally, N.B. Moe: A
 Decade of Agile Methodologies: Towards 
Explaining Agile Software Development, The Journal of Systems and Software, 82  1213
-1221 (2012)
 [13] S. Chuang, T. Luor, H. Lu: Assessment of Institutions, Scholars, and Contributions on Agile Software 
Development (
2001
-2012), Journal of Systems and Software, 93  84
-101 (2014)
 [14] S. Jalili, C. Wohlin: Global Software Engineering and Agile Practices: A Systematic Review, Journal of 
Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and Practice,   (2011)
 [15] Y.I. Alzoubi
, A.Q. Gill: Agile Global Software Development Communication Challenges: A Systematic 
Review, in:  PACIS14,  (2014)
 [16] J. Ferreira: User Experience Design and Agile Development: Integration as an On
-going 
Achievement in Practice, in, PhD Thesis, Open Uni
versity,  (2011)
 [17] K. Dwan, D.G. Altman, J.A. Arnaiz, J. Bloom, A. Chan, E. Cronin, E. Decullier, P.J. Easterbrook, E. Von 
Elm, C. Gamble, D. Ghersi, J.P.A. Ioannidis, J. Simes, P.R. Williamson: Systematic Review of the Empirical 

Evidence of Study Publi
cation Bias and Outcome Reporting Bias, PloS one, 3  e3081 (2008)
 [18] S. Freudenberg, H. Sharp: The Top 10 Burning Research Questions from Practitioners, IEEE 

Software, September/October  8
-9 (2010)
 [19] T. Dingsøyr, N.B. Moe: Research Challenges in Large
-Scale Agile Software Development, ACM 
SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, 38  38
-39 (2013)
 [20] T.J. Gandomani, H. Zulzalil, A.A.A. Ghani, A.B.M. Sultan, M.Z. Nafchi: Obstacles in Moving to Agile 
Software Development Methods: At a Glance., Journal of Comp
uter Science, 9  620
-625 (2013)
 [21] G. van Waardenburg, H. van Vliet: When Agile Meets the Enterprise, Information and Software 
Technology, 55  2154
-2171 (2013)
 [22] K. Conboy, S. Coyle, X. Wang, M. Pikkarainen: People over Processes: Key Challenges in Ag
ile 
Development, IEEE Software, 28  48
-57 (2011)
  The Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
      
 29
  [23] V. Braun, V. Clarke: Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3  
77
-101 (2006)
 [24] Y.S. Lincoln, E.G. Guba: Naturalistic Inquiry, Sage, (1985)
 [25] A.K. Shenton: Strat
egies for Ensuring Trustworthiness in Qualitative Research Projects, Education 
for Information, 22  63
-75 (2004)
 [26] P. Runeson, M. Höst: Guidelines for Conducting and Reporting Case Study Research in Software 

Engineering, Empirical Software Engineering, 
14  131
-164 (2009)
 [27] H. Beyer, K. Holtzblatt: Contextual Design: Defining Customer
-Centered Systems, Elsevier, (1997)
 [28] F.E. Kast, J.E. Rosenzweig: General Systems Theory: Applications for Organization and 

Management, Academy of management journal, 1
5  447
-465 (1972)
 [29] P. Checkland, J. Scholes: Soft Systems Methodology: A 30
-year Retrospective, John Wiley & Sons, 
(1999)
 [30] P. Meso, R. Jain: Agile Software Development: Adaptive Systems Principles and Best Practices, 
Information Systems Management,
  19
-30 (2006)
 [31] R. Vidgen, X. Wang: Coevolving Systems and the Organization of Agile Software Development, 
Information Systems Research, 20  355
-376 (2009)
 [32] S. Augustine, B. Payne, F. Sencindiver, S. Woodcock: Agile Project Management: Steering fro
m the 
Edges, Communications of the ACM, 48  85
-89 (2005)
 [33] S. Nerur, R. Mahapatra, G. Mangalaraj: Challenges of Migrating to Agile Methodologies, 

Communications of the ACM, 48  73
-78 (2005)
 [34] M. Laanti, O. Salo, P. Abrahamsson: Agile Methods Rapidly 
Replacing Traditional Methods at Nokia: 

A Survey of Opinions on Agile Transformation, Information and Software Technology, 53  276
-290 
(2011)
 [35] V.R. Basili: The Role of Controlled Experiments in Software Engineering Research, in:  Empirical 

Software Eng
ineering issues. Critical Assessment and Future Directions, Springer, Berlin, pp. 33
-37 
(2007)
 [36] D. Avison, F. Lau, M.D. Myers, P.A. Nielsen: Action Research, Communications of the ACM, 1  94
-97 
(1999)
 [37] D.C. Lane, R. Oliva: The Greater Whole: Toward
s a Synthesis of System Dynamics and Soft Systems 
Methodology, European Journal of Operational Research, 107  214
-235 (1998)
 [38] J. Eckstein: Agile Software Development in the Large: Diving into the Deep, Dorset House 

Publishing, New York, (2004)
 [39] J. 
Sutherland: Agile Can Scale: Inventing and Reinventing SCRUM in Five Companies, Cutter IT 
Journal, 14  5
-11 (2001)
  30 The 
Challenges That Challenge: Engaging with Agile Practitioners™ Concerns
                http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.03.003
   [40] A.J.H.d.O. Luna, P. Kuruchten, M.L.G.d.E. Pedrosa, H.R. de Almeida Neto, H.P. de Moura: State of the 
Art of Agile Governance: A Systemat
ic Review, International Journal of Computer Science & information 
Technology, 6  121
-141 (2014)
 [41] K. Conboy: Agility from First Principles: Reconstructing the Concept of Agility in Information 

Systems Development, Information Systems Research, 20  329
-354 (2009)
 [42] A. Janes, G. Succi: The Darker Side of Agile Software Development, in:  International Symposium on 

New Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming and Software, ACM, pp. 215
-228 (2012)
 [43] R. Hoda, J. Noble, S. Marshall: The Impac
t of Inadequate Customer Collaboration on Self
-Organising 
Agile Teams, Information and Software Technology, 53  521
-534 (2011)
 [44] J. Brousseau: Beyond the Hype of a New Approach, in:  Cutter IT Journal, Cutter Consortium, pp. 25
-30 (2004)
 [45] J. McAvoy,
 T. Butler: A Failure to Learn in a Software Development Team: The Unsuccessful 
Introduction of an Agile Method, in: W. Wojtkowski, G. Wojtkowski, M. Lang, K. Conboy, C. Barry (Eds.) 

Information Systems Development: Challenges in Practice, Theory and Educa
tion, Springer US,  (2010)
 [46] P. Svejvig, A.D.F. Nielsen: The Dilemma of High Level Planning in Distributed Agile Software 
Projects: An Action Research Study in a Danish Bank., in:  Agility Across Time and Space, Springer, pp. 
171
-182 (2010)
 [47] L. Barr
oca, H. Sharp, D. Salah, K.J. Taylor, P. Gregory: Bridging the Gap Between Research and Agile 
Practice: An Evolutionary Model, International Journal of System Assurance Engineering and 

Management,  1
-12 (2015)
   