  1 Preprint
   A teamwork model for understanding an agile team: a case study of a Scrum project
  Nils Brede Moe*
, Torgeir Dings¿yr and Tore Dyb„
  SINTEF 
 NO-7465 Trondheim, Norway
 {nilsm, torgeird, tored}@sintef.no
 Telephone: +4793028687 
 Fax: +47 73 59 29 77
 *Corresponding author
   Reference: 
Moe, N. B., Dings¿yr, T. and Dyb„, T. (2010). A teamwork model for understanding an 
agile team: A case study of a Scrum project. Information and Software Technology 52(5): 480
-491. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950584909002043
    2 Abstract
 Context: 
Software development depends significantly on team performance, as does any process 
that involves human interaction.
 Objective: 
Most current development methods argue that teams should self
-manage
. Our objective 
is thus to provide a better understanding of the nature of self
-managing agile teams, and the 
teamwork challenges that arise when introducing such teams.
 Method: 
We conducted extensive fieldwork for nine months in a software development company 
that introduce
d Scrum. We focused on the human sensemaking, on how mechanisms of teamwork 
were understood by the people involved.
 Results: 
We describe a project through Dickinson and McIntyreÕs teamwork model, focusing on
 the 
interrelations between essential teamwork co
mponents. 
Problems with team orientation, team 
leadership and coordination in addition to highly specialized skills and corresponding division of 
work were important barriers for achieving team effectiveness.
 Conclusion: 
Transitioning from individual work 
to self
-managing teams requires a reorientation 
not only by developers but also by management. This transition takes time and resources, but 
should not be neglected. In addition to Dickinson and McIntyreÕs teamwork components, we found 
trust and shared men
tal models to be of fundamental importance.
 Keywords: 
Agile software development, scrum, software engineering, teamwork, empirical 
software engineering, case study.
   3 1 Introduction
 Software development depends significantly on team performance, as does any 
process that 
involves human interaction. A common definition of a team is Òa small number of people with 
complementary skills who are committed to a common purpose, set of performance goals, and 
approach for which they hold themselves mutually accountableÓ
 [22]
.  The traditional perspective on software development is rooted in the rationalistic paradigm, 
which promotes a plan
-driven product
-line approach to software development using a standardized, 
controllable, and predictable software engineering 
process 
[15]
. Today, this traditional mechanistic 
worldview is challenged by the agile perspective that a
ccords primacy to uniqueness, ambiguity, 
complexity, and change, as opposed to prediction, verifiability, and control. The goal of 
optimization is being replaced by those of flexibility and responsiveness 
[33]
.  Setting up a work team is usually motivated by benefits such as increased productivity, 
innovation, and employee satisfaction. Research on software develop
ment teams has found that 
team performance is linked with the effectiveness of teamwork coordination 
[19, 25]
. In the 
traditional plan
-driven approach, work is coordinated in a hierarchy that involves a command
-and
-control style o
f management in which there is a clear separation of roles 
[33, 34]
. In the agile 
approach, work is coordinated by the self
-managing team, in which the team itself decides how 
work is coordinated 
[8]
.  A team that follows a plan
-driven model often consists of independently focused self
-managing professionals, and a transition to self
-managing teams is one of the biggest challenges 
when introducing agile (change
-driven) development 
[33]
. Neither
 culture nor mind
-sets of people 
can be changed easily, which makes the move to agile met
hodologies all the more formidable for 
many organiz
ations 
[8]
. In addition, it is not sufficient to put individuals together in a group, tag 
  4 them Òself
-managingÓ, and expect that they will automatically know how to coordinate and work 
effec
tively as an agile team.
 Our objective is to provide a better understanding of the nature of self
-managing agile 
teams, which can in turn benefit the effective application of agile methods in software development. 
To this end, we conducted a longitudinal s
tudy that draws on the general literature of teamwork and 
self-managing teams. Such a study can provide valuable insights for understanding the challenge of 
introducing the self
-managing agile team. We sought to answer the following research question:
 How 
can we explain 
the teamwork 
challenges
 that arise when introducing a self
-managing agile 
team
? The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of the literature 
on teamwork and agile software development. Section 3 describe
s our research question and 
method in detail. Section 4 presents results from a nine
-month fieldwork of teamwork in a Scrum 
team. Section 5 contains a discussion of the findings. Section 6 concludes and provides 
suggestions for further work.
 2 Background: 
teamwork and agile software development 
 In this section, we give a short introduction to the field of teamwork, teamwork in agile 
development, and the 
teamwork model that is used as the basis for our work.
 2.1 Teamwork 
 The topic of teamwork has attracted
 research from several disciplines 
[10, 17, 41]
. The concept of 
teamwork carries with it a set of values that encourage listening and 
responding constructively to 
views expressed by others, giving others the benefit of the doubt, providing support, and 
recognizing the interests and achievements of others 
[22]
. Such values are important because they 
  5 promote individual performance, 
which boosts team performance, and they help teams to perform 
well as a group, and good team performance boosts the performance of the organization.
 Research on teamwork includes the development of tests to identify personality 
characteristics, because it 
has often been argued that good teams need a certain blend of 
personalities. Examples are the Belbin test 
[7]
 and the Myers
-Briggs Type indicator. There is also a 
great deal of research on climate at work group and team level. The most studied model of team 
climate is that of 
[48]
 who suggests that four climate factors (vision, participative safety, task 
orientation, and support for innovation) are essential for team innovation
 to occur. 
 Furthermore, there are studies of teams over time
, which
 indicate that teams go through set 
phases. The most well
-known of these studies are those of Tuckman 
[46]
, who identified the phases 
as forming, storming, norming, and performing. Other s
tudies have focused on the relationships 
between team members and argue that group cohesiveness is important for team success (cited in 
[41]
). However, the use of teams does not always result in success for the organization 
[17]
. Team 
performance is complex, and the actual performance of a team depends not only on the competence 
of th
e team itself in managing and executing its work, but also on the organizational context 
provided by management.
 Much research has been devoted to what is described as self
-managing, autonomous, or 
empowered teams 
[17, 23, 26, 45, 47
]. One of the reasons that the use of self
-managing teams has 
become popular is that some research suggests that their use promotes more satisfied employees, 
lower turnover, and lower absenteeism 
[10]
. Others also claim that self
-managing teams are a 
prerequisite for the success of innovative projects 
[20, 44]
.  Although the majority of studies report that using self
-managing teams has positive effects, 
some studies offer a more mixed assessment; such teams can be d
ifficult to implement, and they 
  6 risk failure when used in inappropriate situations or without sufficient leadership and support 
[18]
. In addition, research on tea
m performance indicates that the effects of autonomous work groups are 
highly situational dependent and that the effects of autonomous work
-group practices depend on 
such factors as the nature of the workforce and the nature of the organization 
[10, 17]
. Further, 
autonomy on 
the individual level may conflict with autonomy on the group level. When a team as a 
whole is given a great deal of autonomy, it does not follow that the individual team members are 
given high levels of individual autonomy. Barker 
[5]
, for example, pointed out that self
-managing 
groups may end up controlling group members more rigidly than they do under traditional 
management styles, while Markham and Markham 
[29]
 suggested 
that it may be difficult to 
incorporate both individual autonomy and group autonomy in the same work group. For Individuals 
to be motivated and satisfied with their jobs they need to have control over their own work and over 
the scheduling and implementati
on of their own tasks 
[1, 26]
. 2.2 Teamwork in agile development: the Scrum team
 In a software team, the members are jointly responsible for the end product and must develop 
shared mental models by negotiating shared understandings about both the teamwork and the task 
[28]
. Project goals, system requirements, project plans, project risks, individual responsibilities, and 
project status must be visible and underst
ood by all parties involved 
[21]
.   Most current development methods have it as a premise that software teams should self
-organize or
 self-manage 
[36, 42]
. Scrum, which is a project
-management
-oriented agile 
development method, was inspired by a range of fields, such as complexity theory, system 
dynamics, and Nonaka and TakeuchiÕs theory of knowledge creation 
[35]
, and has adapted aspects 
of these fields to a setting of software development. Sel
f-management is a defining characteristic in 
Scrum. Compared with traditional command
-and
-control oriented management, Scrum represents a 
  7 radically new approach for planning and managing software projects, because it brings decision
-making authority to the
 level of operational problems and uncertainties. 
 Rising and Janoff 
[36]
 describe Scrum as a development process for small teams, which 
includes a series of short development phases or iterations (ÒsprintsÓ). A Scrum team is given 
significant authori
ty and responsibility for many aspects of their work, such as planning, 
scheduling, assigning tasks to members, and making decisions: "The team is accorded full authority 
to do whatever it decides is necessary to achieve the goal" 
[43]
.   However, despite the popularity of the method, a systematic review of empirical studies of 
agile development 
[16]
 found o
nly one case study of Scrum in the research literature prior to 2006.
 2.3 Dickinson and McIntyreÕs teamwork model
 The issue of what processes and components comprise teamwork and how teamwork contributes to 
team effectiveness and team performance has been 
much studied 
[9, 19, 26, 30, 39]
, but 
there is no 
consensus concerning its conceptual structure 
[38]
.  Salas et al. 
[40]
 identify 136 different models in 
their literature review and 
present a representative sample of 11 models and frameworks 
 Using recent research and previous reviews, Dickinson and McIntyre 
[13]
 identified and 
defined seven core components of teamwork. Using these components and their relationships as a 
basis
, they proposed the teamwork model that is used in this work. The model consists of a learning 
loop of the following basic teamwork components: communication, team orientation, team 
leadership, monitoring, feedback, 
back
up, and coordination (Fig 1).
   8   Fig
. 1: The 
Dickinson and McIntyre teamwork model 
[13]
,  We selected the Dickinson and McIntyre teamwork model for the following reasons:
 1. It includes the most common elements that are considered in most research on teamwork 
processes 
[38, 39]
. In addition, it considers important elements that are required in self
-managed 
teams: team orientation, functional redundancy and backup behavior 
[32, 35]
, communication, 
feedback and learning 
[33]
, and shared leadership 
[22]
. Further, the model covers important 
elements that are found in software teams, s
uch as 
coordination of work 
[25]
. 2. It specifies what teamwork skills should be observed, in that the model is presented with a 
conceptual framework for developing m
easures of teamwork performance that can ensure 
effective individual and team performance 
[13]
, pp.22). 3. It considers the teamwork process as a learning loop in which teams are characterized as 
adaptable and dynamically changing over time. 
Continuou
s self
-management requires a 
  9 capacity for double
-loop learning that allows operating norms and rules to change along with 
transformation in the wider environment 
[32]
. Team Orientation:
 Refers to the team tasks and the attitudes that team members have towards one another. 
It reflects an acceptance 
of team norms, the level of group cohesiveness, and the importance of team 
membership, e.g.,
 ¥ assigning high priority to team goals,
 ¥ participating willingly in all relevant aspects of the team.
 Team Leadership:
 Involves providing direction, structure, and s
upport for other team members. It does not 
necessarily refer to a single individual with formal authority over others. Team leadership can be shown by 
several team members, e.g.,
 ¥ explaining to other team members exactly what is needed from them during an a
ssignment, 
 ¥ listening to the concerns of other team members.
 Monitoring:
 Refers to observing the activities and performance of other team members and recognizing 
when a team member performs correctly. It implies that team members are individually competent
 and that 
they may subsequ
ently provide feedback and back
up, e.g.,
 ¥ being aware of other team membersÕ performance,
 ¥ recognizing when a team member performs correctly. 
 Feedback:
 Involves the giving, seeking, and receiving of information among team members. 
Giving 
feedback refers to providing information regarding other membersÕ performance. Seeking feedback refers to 
requesting input or guidance regarding performance and to accepting positive and negative information 
regarding performance, e.g.,
 ¥ responding t
o other membersÕ requests for information about their performance,
 ¥ accepting time
-saving suggestions offered by other team members.
 Backup:
 Involves being available to assist other team members. This implies that members have an 
understanding of other memb
ersÕ tasks. It also implies that team members are willing and able to provide 
and seek assistance when needed, e.g.,
 ¥ filling in for another member who is unable to perform the task,
 ¥  helping another member correct a mistake.
 Coordination:
 Refers to team me
mbers executing their activities in a timely and integrated manner. It 
implies that the performance of some team members influences the performance of others. This may involve 
an exchange of information that subsequently influences another memberÕs perform
ance. Coordination 
represents the output of the model and reflects the execution of team activities such that members respond 
as a function of the behavior of others, e.g.,
 ¥ passing performance
-relevant data to other members in an efficient manner,
 ¥ facilita
ting the performance of other membersÕ jobs.
 Communication:
 Involves the exchange of information between two or more team members in the 
prescribed manner and using appropriate terminology. Often, the purpose of communication is to clarify or 
acknowledge t
he receipt of information, e.g.,
 ¥ verifying information prior to making a report,
   10 ¥ acknowledging and repeating messages to ensure understanding. 
 Table 1
: The Dickinson and McIntyre teamwork model: definitions of teamwork components.
  Each component of the 
model is explained in Table 1. According to Dickinson and 
McIntyre, team leadership and team orientation are ÔinputÕ components of teamwork because at 
least one of these attitudes is required for an 
individual to participate in a team task. T
eam leadership
 can be shown by several team members 
that
 is also a prerequisite for a teamÕs being self
-managing. In such teams,
 team members should share the authority to make decisions, rather than 
having (a) a centralized decision structure in which one person (e.g.,
 the team leader) makes all the 
decisions or (b) a decentralized decision structure in which all team members make decisions 
regarding their work individually and independently of other team members 
[20]
. So, while t
he 
traditional perspective of a single leader suggests that the leadership function is a specialized role 
that cannot be shared without jeopardizing group effectiveness, when leadership is shared, group 
effectiveness is achieved by empowering the members o
f the team to share the tasks and 
responsibilities of leadership 
[22]
.  In the Dickinson and McIntyre model, the components of monitoring, feedback, and backup 
are the intermediate processes for ensuring effective teamwork. Finally, the ÔoutputÕ com
ponent is 
coordination because it defines the performance of the team. Communication is a transversal 
component of particular importance, because it links the other components. 
To build software 
effectively, there is a need for tight coordination among the
 various efforts involved so that the 
work is completed and fits together 
[25]
.  In the rest of the paper, we will explain the challenges that arise when introduci
ng agile 
methods by appeal to the mechanisms that influence teamwork that are suggested by 
Dickinson and 
McIntyre 
[13]
.   11 3 Research Method
 We designed a 
single
-case holistic study 
[49]
 of 
a project that used Scrum, focusing on mechanisms 
that influence teamwork. 
When designing the study, we focused on human sensemaking and on 
how the mechanisms of teamwork were understood by the people involved
. Given that our study 
was an interpretative field study, we used the seven principles for conducting such studies that were 
proposed by Klein and Myers 
[24]
 in order to determine the main choices that were related to 
research method. 
Table 
2 gives an ove
rview of these principles and a description of how we used 
them.
 The principles for interpretive Field Research 
[24]
 How we used each principle
 1. The fundamental principle of the 
hermeneutic circle.
  We improved our understanding of the project 
by moving back and forth between p
hases and 
events. The project had three main phases, which 
had different teamwork characteristics. For each 
of the phases, we described concrete events. The 
data analysis involved multiple researchers 
having ongoing discussions about the findings.
 2. The 
principle of contextualization
  To clarify for our readers how situations 
emerged, we describe the work and organization 
of the company, as well as the context of the 
project we used to study teamwork. 
 3. The principle of interaction between 
researchers 
and subjects
  The researchersÕ understanding of the project 
developed through observations, interviews and 
discussi
ons with the team participants in the 
coffee breaks and during lunch. We discussed 
project status, progress, and how issues were 
perceived by
 team participants. 
 4. The principle of abstraction and 
generalization
 We describe our findings and relate them to the 
model of 
Dickinson and McIntyre 
[13]
. 5. The principle of dialogical reasoning
  We use Dickinson and McIntyreÕs model to 
ident
ify areas of investigation in the case. Our 
assumptions are also based on the general 
literature of teamwork and self
-management. 
 Our social background is European. 
 6. The principle of multiple interpretations
 To collect multiple, and possibly contradi
ctory 
interpretations of events we collected data from 
  12  all participants in the project and from multiple 
data sources. The case study narrative and 
findings have been presented to Alpha and led to 
feedback.
 7. The principle of suspicion 
  By means of the 
analysis, we were sensitive to 
how roles and personalities affected attitudes to 
teamwork to discover false preconceptions. 
 In addition to observations, we also performed 
interviews with different roles at different levels, 
and multiple interviews with al
l team members. 
This increased the chance of unveiling possibly 
incorrect or incomplete meanings.
 Table 2
: The use of Klein and MyersÕ principles in this field research
 3.1 Study Context
 The field study was conducted in a company that introduced Scrum in 
order to improve their ability 
to deliver iteratively and on time, increase quality, and improve teamwork. 
The company has three 
regional divisions with one separate ICT division. The ICT division consists of a consulting 
department, an IT management depar
tment, and a development department. The ICT division 
develops and maintains a series of off
-the
-shelf software products that are developed in
-house, in 
addition to software development projects for outside customers. During the study, the development 
depa
rtment had 16 employees, divided into a Java and a .Net group. 
 The goal of the project studied was to develop a plan and coordination system for owners of 
cables (e.g., electricity, fiber) and pipes (water, sewer). We refer to the project as ÒAlphaÓ, beca
use 
this was the first project for which the company used agile methods, in this case Scrum. Alpha 
produced a combination of textual user interfaces and map functionality. Alpha was to use a 
commercial package for the map functionality, which was to be cus
tomized by a well
-known 
subcontractor located in another city. The subcontractor could only deliver their part of the system 
four weeks before the first deliverable to the customer. This was recognized as a risk, but it was 
decided that it would be even ri
skier to develop this component internally. The company would also 
  13 be responsible for maintenance and support after final installation. Four thousand hours, six 
developers, one Scrum master, and a product owner were allocated to the project. The product 
owner was employed by the same company as the developers and acted as a representative for the 
client, which was the local government of a Norwegian city. Internally, there were plans for reusing 
deliveries from Alpha and to re
-sell the product to other publ
ic departments when it was finished. 
An extra 800 hours were allocated to achieve this aim. Before Alpha was begun in May 2006, some 
initial architectural work was done and some coding activities had started. Alpha used .Net 
technology and was supposed to 
last for 
ten months. 
 The developers had usually worked alone on projects divided into modules or on smaller 
projects, so Alpha was the first experience of working on a larger project for most.
  3.2 Data Sources and Analysis
 The two 
first
 authors conducted
 direct observation and collected documents throughout the whole 
project. In addition, we interviewed the Scrum master, product owner, and developers (
Table 
3). The interview guide covered the 
components in the Dickinson and McInt
yre model 
in addition to 
questions related to Scrum (
Appendix A).
 Source
 Comment 
 Observations and 
informal dialogues
 Participant observation and observation of the daily stand
-up, sprint and planning 
meetings, sprint reviews, and sprint retrospective as 
well as other meetings. The 
60 observations and informal dialogues were documented in field notes, which 
also include pictures.
 Interviews
 We interviewed the Scrum master and three developers in June 2006, five of the 
developers in September 2006, and all
 developers, the Scrum master, and the 
product owner after the project was completed (March 2007). The 17 interviews 
were all transcribed. 
 Documents 
 Product backlog, sprint backlogs, burn
-down charts, minutes from review, 
retrospective and planning meet
ings. 
 Table 3
: Data sources
    14 We visited the team once or twice a week, conducting a total of 60 observations, each of 
which lasted from 
ten minutes to eight hours. We observed project meetings and developers 
working. We often discussed AlphaÕs status and
 progress, and how team participants perceived 
issues during their coffee breaks and lunch. Notes were taken on dialogues, interactions, and 
activities. The dialogues were transcribed and integrated with notes to produce a detailed record of 
each session. 
We also collected Scrum artifacts, such as product backlogs, sprint backlogs, and 
burn-down charts. 
All data from the interviews, observations, and documents were imported into a 
tool for analyzing qualitative data, Nvivo (
www.qsrinternational.com
). We categorized interesting 
expressions, observations, and text from documents, using the teamwork concepts proposed by 
Dickinson and McIntyre as the main categories. 
 We used a variety of strategies to analyze the
 material 
[27]
. First, we described the project 
and context in a narrative to achieve an understanding of what was 
going on in the project. Then, 
we described aspects of teamwork using 
Dickinson and McIntyreÕs 
model by pointing to events in 
three main phases of the project, which had different teamwork characteristics.  
 In the analysis, we emphasized how events were i
nterpreted by different participants in the 
project. Material to describe an event was taken across all sources and synthesized, as shown in the 
example in Fig. 2. 
   15  Fig. 
2: Overview of the coding process. Example material from th
e concept ÒTeam orientationÓ.
 4 Results: teamwork in an agile project
 The team that worked on Alpha organized the project according to generally recommended Scrum 
practices. Plans were made at the beginning of each sprint, after the team had reviewed what 
was produced in the previous sprint. Features were recorded in the sprint backlog. The team that worked 
on Alpha held three project retrospectives to identify and discuss problems and opportunities that 
arose during the development process. Daily meetings 
were organized throughout the project, 
though these were less frequent in the last two sprints. These meetings were usually about updating 
the others on progress, development issues, and the project in general. The daily meetings we 
  16 observed lasted from 10
 to 35 minutes, but were usually shorter than 15 minutes. The product 
owner, who was situated in another city, often participated in these meetings by telephone. He 
participated because both he and the Scrum master thought that it was important to share 
information constantly and participate in the decision
-making process. 
 Alpha began in May 2006, with the first installation planned for October and the final 
installation for November 2006. However, the first installation was not approved until December 
2006 and from January 2007, two developers continued working with change requests until the final 
installation was approved in October 2007. Five of the sprints lasted one month, the sprint during 
summer for two. Fig. 3 shows major events in the project toget
her with a project
-participant 
satisfaction graph. This figure was created by the team in the final project retrospective and was 
based on a timeline exercise 
[12]
. To create the project
-participant satisfaction graph, each team 
member first drew his own graph for the emotional ups and downs during the project, after which 
the graphs
 were merged.
  Fig. 3: Main events in the project and project satisfaction
.  In the initial planning phase, before coding began, several meetings were used to discuss the 
overall architecture, and decide on the technology and development platform. As can 
be seen from 
  17 Fig. 3, the team was frustrated in this period, because of what the team described as Òendless 
discussion without getting anywhereÓ. After Scrum was introduced and code writing began, the 
team was more satisfied with Alpha. In the first retros
pective, the team itself concluded that the 
team members were taking responsibility, that they were dedicated to the project, and that the team 
was protected against external issues. Meetings and work were perceived as well
-coordinated. 
During the first re
trospective, a developer said: 
 Earlier we worked more alone, and when you got a project doomed to failure, you would get a lot of negative 
response. That was unpleasant. Now we share both the risk and opportunities.
 The team was satisfied with their perfo
rmance in sprints 1
-4. However, in sprint 5, problems with 
integrating a deliverable from the subcontractor emerged, which resulted in the two last sprints 
being chaotic and the project being delayed. During this period, we saw many empty pizza boxes in 
the office space, which indicated that the developers were working late. Developers told us they 
also worked at weekends. The team became less satisfied, as shown in Fig. 3. 
 However, after the client had approved the first installation, the team became more
 satisfied. 
In the last retrospective, the team described the project as a good one, except for the problems 
related to the deliverable from the subcontractor. Then again, the team saw this as something 
beyond their control. 
 Despite the teamsÕ overall sat
isfaction with the teamwork, throughout the project we 
observed problems with completing the backlog and following the sprint plan, unproductive 
meetings, developers often being silent in the planning meetings, and developers often reporting 
working on iss
ues other than those that it had been initially planned to work on. In addition, the 
developers received little feedback when talking about what they were doing. In what follows, we 
will use the data we collected to try to explain some of our observations.
    18 4.1 Introducing Scrum: Sprints 1
-2 The project leader participated in a Scrum master certification course. The first sprint was initiated 
with a two
-day Scrum course. The first day was spent on introducing Scrum to the whole 
development department, the s
econd on planning the first sprint for Alpha.
 The first sprint completed most of the backlog, and the team was satisfied with the progress. 
However, in the first retrospective, the team reported problems with both defining a stable sprint 
backlog and finis
hing it. We observed these problems as well. The team also ended up working on 
tasks that were not discussed or identified during the sprint
 planning meeting. 
  Fig. 4
: From the review and retrospective meeting in sprint 2. 
  In this company, each team me
mber is usually assigned to work on a specific software 
module from the beginning to the end. This way of working is known as an isomorphic team 
structure 
[21]
. The advantages with this structure are that 
it is organizationally simple, it allows 
  19 many tasks to be completed in parallel, and task responsibilities can be clearly defined and 
understood.
 The Scrum master subscribed to this vi
ew [interview]: 
 Let the person who knows most about the task perform it! We cannot afford several people doing the same 
thing in this project. We need to continue working as we have done before.
 The team mostly kept this structure after introducing Scrum.
 A developer said [interview]: 
 Because we have to deliver every month, there is never time to swap tasks.
 Because of the division of work, the developers typically created their own plan for their own 
module, often without discussing it with the team. A d
eveloper commented [interview]:
  Some are more motivated by the perfect technical solution, than thinking of when things need to be done. 
 In this phase, one developer even implemented features for future projects, without informing the 
others (this kind o
f behavior is 
often referred to as decision hijacking 
[3]
). This was discussed in a 
daily stand
-up of the second sprint:
 Developer: The customer databases will be used by several applications, so I have implemented support for 
dealing with various technologies, including Oracle. It t
ook a lot of time. 
 Scrum master: Did we not agree on postponing this?
 Developer: We need this later and now it is done.
  This illustrates how developers prioritized individual goals over team goals, and subsequently a lack 
of 
team orientation
. As a result
 of this incident, the Scrum master lost trust
 in this developer and 
started to supervise him. Consequently, the developer was not part of the 
team
 leadership
 any more, 
even when discussing modules where he was seen as the expert. We observed that he was 
sometimes absent from the daily meetings. 
This is consistent with findings from 
Bandow
 such that 
if team members do not feel that their input is valued, they may be less willing to share information 
[4]
.    20 The Scrum master also observed that the team was not reporting problems. In interviews, we 
found that the developers thought that the Scrum master was overreacting to problems stated at the 
daily meetings, whic
h resulted in the team not reporting problems when the Scrum master was 
present. After the Scrum master confronted the team with this issue, the situation improved. 
However, for the rest of the project, the Scrum master still felt that problems were report
ed too late. 
This was confirmed by our observations of 
daily stand
-ups. 
 In the second retrospective of Alpha, we found two more reason for problems not being 
reported: problems were discovered late and they were seen as personal. One developer said:
 Peopl
e working alone results in the team not discovering problems, because you do not get feedback on your 
work.
 Because of the isomorphic team structure, the developers perceived new emerging tasks and new 
problems as personal; as a result, they
 did not seek a
ssistance when needed. 
They focused on their 
own modules, which resulted in problems with 
monitoring
 each other and subsequently with giving 
feedback 
and implementing 
backup behavior
. In the second retrospective meeting, one developer 
said: 
 When we discov
er new problems, we feel we own them ourselves, and that we will manage to solve them 
before the next meeting tomorrow. But this is not the case, it always takes longer. 
 When
 individuals are independent and have more control over their schedule and the 
implementation of their tasks, there is less interaction between the group members 
[26]
. One 
developer said [Retrospective sprint 2]: 
 When it comes to the daily scrum, I do not pay attention when Ann is talking. 
For me, what she talks about is a 
bit far off the topic and I cannot stay focused. She talks about the things she is working on. I guess this 
situation is not good for the project. 
   21 In Alpha, this resulted in problems with 
communication
, giving 
feedback
, a
nd the possibility of 
monitoring 
teammates. In addition, 
team orientation
 was hindered, because information sharing and 
feedback
 was delayed by people not listening. It seemed that the isomorphic team structure resulted 
in individual goals being seen as mo
re important than team goals.
 In this phase, the team spent more than 100 hours rewriting a module. The developer 
responsible for the module said [interview]: 
 I was supposed to create a database that every project could use. After I had created it, I expl
ained how it was 
done during a stand
-up, and then I went on vacation. Later, when they started using it, they did not understand 
how it was supposed to be used, and they decided to rewrite the whole module. The team had probably not 
understood what I was t
alking about when I explained the database in the daily stand
-up. If I had not gone on 
vacation they would not have needed to do the rewriting É
 another problem is the daily meeting. ItÕs only a 
short debrief, there is never time to discuss what you are wo
rking on. 
 The developer did not verify that the team had understood how he had implemented the module 
(communication
), and no one gave 
feedback
 to the effect that they did not understand how the 
module was implemented during the stand
-up. In addition to m
issing 
monitoring
, the lack of 
communication and feedback was the reason for the rewriting, and the consequence was reduced 
progress and team efficiency. 
 In the second retrospective, the team concluded [retrospective report]:
 The team must work more on th
e same tasks, and then no one will sit alone. Working alone results in 
knowledge not being disseminated, and there is no backup. Also, problems are being discovered late and 
developers not getting feedback on their work. 
 4.2 Everyday work: Sprints 3
-4 Whe
n the team was getting used to planning and conducting sprints, work was perceived as 
motivating and developers expressed satisfaction at having something completed early in the 
  22 project. However, in this phase, many expressed having problems in transferrin
g what was written 
in the sprint backlog to actual work tasks. Initially, the team viewed this difficulty as being caused 
by the introduction of ÒfeaturesÓ rather than the specification of technical requirements. However, 
the difficulty seemed to run deepe
r. One developer expressed: 
 I have the impression that the sprint backlog has been somewhat distanced from what we have really planned 
to do.
 Another stated: 
 It is really difficult to get answers to questions, because no
-one really knows where we are goi
ng. 
 This indicates that the team lacked a clear idea
 of how to achieve the final result. Applying two 
different visions for Alpha, one covering the Alpha project and the other future projects, did not 
help this situation and weakened the 
team orientation
. Team leadership
 was already weak and was 
seldom shown by team members other than the Scrum master and the product owner. The product 
owner described the challenge with giving clear direction, support, and structure to the developers 
[interview]: 
 You need
 to give an answer according to what you think, and sometimes IÕm not certain IÕm giving the right 
answerÉ. and you need to give a quick answer; otherwise the developers will start doing something else.
 The team discussions, 
communication
, and 
feedback
 improved in this period. One developer said 
[interview]:
 Using Scrum forces us to work closer with each other, and the result is more communication.
 Another said:
 The good thing about Scrum is that Scrum reminds us to talk to each other about the project.
 How
ever, often, discussions ended without conclusion. One developer said [interview]:
   23 When we discuss technical issues, it often ends in a kind of ÒreligiousÓ discussion, and then I give up. And 
then you let people continue to do what they are doing.
 This sho
ws a challenge with respect to 
team leadership.
 The person leading the discussion does not 
listen to the concerns of other team members. 
 In this period, we observed the structure of the stand
-up proposed by Scrum being followed. 
However there was little 
communication, coordination
, and 
feedback
 between the developers in 
these meetings. One developer said after a stand
-up: The daily meetings are mostly about reporting to the Scrum master. When he is not there, the meetings are 
better because then we communi
cate with each other. 
 Another developer said:
 When he is in the meeting we often end up only giving a brief report about status and not the issues we need to 
talk about. 
 Without a clear understanding of the system being developed, planning was difficult.
 In addition, 
the monthly planning meetings somehow excluded the developers and turned out to constitute 
communication
 only between the Scrum master and the product owner. During the retrospective, 
the team identified a need to spend more time planning, bu
t two of the developers whom we 
observed being silent in the planning meeting thought that they spent too much time on planning. 
Nevertheless, a lack of thorough discussion was probably one reason for important tasks sometimes 
not being identified before t
he end of each sprint. This reduced the validity of the common backlog, 
did not strengthen the 
communication, coordination
 of tasks
 or the possibility of giving 
feedback
, and again resulted in the developers focusing more on their own plan, thereby weakeni
ng the 
team 
orientation
. Another reason for the developers performing tasks other than those identified in the 
planning meeting was the need to adapt to the constantly changing environment. The high 
  24 complexity of the project and open issues regarding techn
ology, client, and subcontractor resulted 
in a high level of uncertainty when creating the sprint backlog. We observed the team being 
sensitive to changes in both the internal and external environment. However, the team
 did not 
manage to update the plan to
 adapt to the changing conditions. Subsequently, it was unclear how 
much progress had been made, which made it difficult to 
monitor
 team membersÕ performance.  
 Despite the lack of
 monitoring
, the developers did sometimes look at each otherÕs code. One 
dev
eloper described [interview] the difficulty of giving 
feedback
 and raised the issue of trust 
regarding this matter: 
 You look at someoneÕs code, and then you think, that was a strange way of doing it. There is no problem 
getting criticism from people you f
eel safe with, but when you get feedback from people you do not like, it is 
different. It is also difficult to give feedback when you are not 100% sure you know that your way of doing it is 
better.
 4.3 Emergency Scrum: Sprints 5 and 6
 The major event in th
is phase was that the deliverable from the subcontractor was delayed, and 
when it was delivered it was found not to work as intended. The code was unstable and the response 
time was too long. This came as a surprise to the team. One developer said [intervi
ew]:
 This was a shock to us. The end users could not start testing and we had to spend a lot of time trying to fix this. 
It took almost a month to locate the problems.
 Given that the developers were specialized, only two developers worked on this problem, 
even at 
weekends. One developer explained [interview]: 
 ItÕs chaotic now. We work long hours, but I do not do too much. I have done what I was supposed to, and I 
cannot help them. I do not know anything about what they are doing, so it does not help if I t
ry assist. 
 The isomorphic team structure and missing 
monitoring 
resulted in a lack of 
backup behavior.
   25  The integration problem resulted in a backlog not being finished, but it also became evident 
that not being strict about the criteria for marking work 
as having been completed affected this. One 
developer said [interview]: 
 We classified tasks as finished before they were completed and we knew there was still work to be done. It 
seems that the Scrum master wants to show progress and make us look a little
 better than we really are. These 
tasks are then not on the list of the next sprint since they officially are done, but we know there is still some 
more work needed. Each sprint starts with doing things that we have said were finished and then you know you
 will not finish the sprint. 
 The Scrum master and some team members gave the impression that the team was better than they 
actually were and this is related to a particular challenge to
 team leadership
, which is known as 
Òimpression managementÓ 
[32]
. Impression management is a barrier for learning
 and improving 
work practices. 
 Before this last period began, developers had given priority to the project for six months and 
had worked more than initially planned. Now, new projects began to start, and because the 
completion of Alpha was planned to rele
ase resources at this time, several developers were 
supposed to start working full
-time on the new projects. Alpha started losing resources, and this 
became a problem because of poor 
backup
. One developer said [interview]:
 When correcting errors in this ph
ase, each person was responsible for correcting the errors he had introduced. 
This is not how it should have been done. 
 The Scrum master said [interview]: 
 We are having problems in one of the modules, but other developers do not want to fix the problem. 
They want 
to wait for the developer who wrote the code. 
 In this phase, it also became clear that insufficient attention had been paid to long
-term planning. 
One developer said [interview]: 
   26 It turned out that certain parts of the system were simply forgot
ten. There has been a failure somewhere ... the 
product owner and the client asked for things that no one had thought of and that were not in the backlog. 
 Two reasons for this omission of certain parts of the system were that the dissemination of 
informat
ion was not 
coordinated
 among the team
-members and that no one had the responsibility 
for the overall technical solution. Dissemination of information among the team
-members became 
an even bigger challenge at the end. Because the team was losing resources,
 key personnel were 
absent from the daily stand
-up, which resulted in the rest of the team having problems in 
monitoring
 the progress of the project and in coming to a common understanding of the changing situation.
 After the last planned sprint, only two 
developers continued to work on the project, in 
addition to the Scrum master and the product owner. The rest of the team members joined other 
project
s, as had been planned earlier. The two remaining programmers spent 1,400 hours on 
finalizing the project (
correcting errors and doing more testing). The final testing was done 7 
months after the last sprint.
 The client was satisfied with the delivered functionality but not with the system 
performance. 
 5 Discussion
 We have described the introduction of the agi
le process Scrum in a software development project, 
using the teamwork model proposed by 
Dickinson and McIntyre 
[13]
, Fig. 1. We now discuss the 
case in light of our research question:
 ÒHow can we explain the teamwork chal
lenges that arise 
when introducing a self
-managing agile team
?Ó We found the following:
 Dickinson and McIntyre proposed 
that team leadership and team orientation promote team 
membersÕ capability to monitor their teammatesÕ performance. This does not seem t
o be borne out 
  27 by our case study, in a number of ways. Due to the isomorphic team structure, the developers 
focused on their own modules and often created their own plan and made their own decisions. In 
addition, problems were seen as personal. This low te
am orientation on the part of the developers 
resulted in them not knowing what the others were doing, and as a result it was difficult to monitor 
othersÕ performance. The team members seemed to be used to having a very high degree of 
individual autonomy. T
his created problems when the team members tried to change their normal 
way of working to become part of a self
-managed team. Our findings confirm previous research by 
Langfred 
[26]
, such that that there can be 
a negative effect on team performance when teams are 
trying to function as a self
-managed team when the team members have high individual autonomy. 
Team leadership was also not distributed as it should be in a self
-managing team 
[32]
. Only a few 
team-members participated in the decision
-making, and
 the Scrum master focused more on 
command and control than providing direction and support for other team members. The Scrum 
master even ended up supervising one developer because this developer implemented features for 
future projects, without informing t
he others. Because the team
-members felt the Scrum master 
overreacted when they reported problems, they started reporting fewer problems, which again 
limited the possibility of monitoring each other.
 The Dickinson and McIntyre
 model suggests that performan
ce monitoring drives both the 
content of feedback and timely backup behavior. Due to the fact that the team members did not 
monitor each other much, there was little feedback and almost no backup, which become evident 
when the team started to lose resource
s at the end of the project. The team members did provide 
some positive feedback, but several found it difficult to both give and accept negative feedback. 
Our findings also confirm the results of previous research by Levesque et al. 
[28]
, such that when 
the roles that group members play become increasingly specialized and as a result reduce team 
redundancy and backup, there is a corresponding
 decline in the amount of time that team members 
  28 spend working with or communicating with each other. This is also consonant with Marks et al.  
[30]
, such that if effective backup is to be provided, teammates need to be informed of each others' 
work in order to identify wh
at type of assistance is required at a particular time. Marks et al. 
[30]
 identify three ways of providing such backup: (1) providing a teammate with verbal feedback or 
coaching, (2) physically assisting a teammate in carrying out a task, or (3) completing a task for a 
teammate when it is observed that the workload is too much for him. These means seems to be 
missing at Alpha. 
 Dickinson and McIntyre
 argue that, when all the aforementioned teamwork competences 
occur in unison, they serve synergistically as a platform for te
am coordination. The Alpha team had 
problems with all the teamwork competences and as a consequence they had problems coordinating 
the teamwork. Important tasks were even forgotten. Marks et al. 
[30]
 also argue that when teams 
have communication problems they are likely to
 experience problems with coordinating their work. 
 According to the 
Dickinson and McIntyre 
model, the feedback resulting from team 
coordination should serve as input back into the team processes. The team identified early on 
[second retrospective] the nee
d for developers to start working on the same tasks, the lack of 
backup, problems not being reported, and lack of feedback. The researchers observed, and the team 
members thought, that the teamwork improved during the course of the project. However, it see
med 
to be difficult to change the teamwork, because changing meant changing not only the developersÕ
 way of working but also 
organizational structures. 
The team worked better together in the later 
phases, but did not improve the team orientation and team l
eadership in such a way that monitoring 
was improved. One reason is the observation of what Morgan 
[32]
 defines as Òimpression 
management
Ó, when the team 
gave the impression to be better than they actually were. Impression 
management is a barrier to learning 
[32]
. Continuous self
-management requires a capacity for 
  29 learning that allows opera
ting norms and rules to change in response to changes in the wider 
environment 
[32]
. In the 
Dickinson and McIntyre 
model, communication acts as the glue that links together all 
other teamwork processes. In Scrum, the daily stand
-up is the most important mechanism for 
achieving such communication. E
veryone should communicate with everyone else. However, 
because of problems with team leadership and a lack of monitoring, these meetings were mostly 
used by the Scrum master for getting an overview of what was going on in the project. Developers 
were repo
rting to the Scrum master and not talking to each other. Communication improved when 
the Scrum master was absent. As a result of the 
highly specialized skills and corresponding division 
of work, 
there was less interaction and communication between the grou
p members. However, this 
improved in last phase of the project because by that time, the developers had become accustomed 
to talking to each other
 at the daily stand
-up.  5.1 Implications for theory
 The 
Dickinson and McIntyre 
model explains most of our obs
ervations. 
However, it does not model 
any of the critical antecedents and outcomes of the team process. In the case of Alpha, it was 
obvious that the team had problems becoming a well
-functioning team from the beginning, and that 
this was one reason for th
e team having problems in self
-managing. 
 In addition, Dickinson and McIntyre do not describe certain important components, such as 
trust and shared mental models. We observed that the team had not developed trust at the group 
level. A lack of trust among 
the Scrum master and the members of the team was an important 
reason for why problems were not reported and why a team member was given instructions on what 
to do. Our findings are consonant with those of Salas et al. 
[39]
: without sufficient trust, team 
members will expend time and energy protecting, checking, and inspecting each other as opposed to 
  30 collaborating to provide value
-added ideas. It is evident that trust is a prerequisite for shared 
leadership, feedback, and co
mmunication. Our finding regarding the lack of trust also confirms 
previous research on trust 
[4]
, such that team members may not be willing to share informat
ion if 
they fear being perceived as incompetent.  
 The team lacked a shared mental model on what the outcome of the project should be. 
Working cooperatively requires the team to have shared mental models 
[39]
. Our results a
re also 
consonant with Salas et al.Õs 
[39]
 findings that without a shared understanding, the individual 
members may be headed toward different goals, which in turn will lead to ineffective/lack of 
feedback or assistance. Sh
ared mental models are also a prerequisite for communication, 
monitoring, and team orientation. In addition, our finding confirms the results of previous research 
on shared mental models in software development teams, such that not all teams develop 
increa
singly shared mental models over time 
[28]
.  Having problems with trust and developing shared mental models could also be a reason 
why the t
eam did not manage to change the team process more than we observed. In addition, 
the 
previous ways of working in the company hindered effective teamwork, and in this setting the team 
did not succeed in improving their teamwork skills significantly during 
the project. 
 For theory, this study shows that:
 ¥ There is a vast literature on teamwork that is very relevant for agile development and that 
deserves more attention. 
 ¥ Dickinson and McIntyreÕs model
[13]
 should be extended to include trust and shared
 mental models. 
   31 5.2 Implication for practice 
 Agile software development emphasizes that teams should be self
-managed. However, Scrum and 
agile methods offer no advice on how shared leadership should be implemented. A practical 
implication of LangfredÕs 
[26]
 findings is that, if an organization believes in letting teams be more 
self-managing, great care must be taken in the implementation. This is especially important when 
the team members have high individual a
utonomy.
 The Alpha project was the first big project for most developers. Even though they had 
worked together for years, they should probably have spent more time together focusing on 
improving teamwork in the initial phase of the project. The successful 
teams that Katzenbach et al. 
[22]
 observed all gave themselves the time to learn to be a team. If developers who work together 
have problems becoming a team, they will also have problems becoming a self
-managing team. 
 What people should do to provi
de backup is not specified clearly in Scrum. In the literature 
on self
-managed teams, backup behavior has been identified as an important prere
quisite for self
-management 
[32, 35]
. In our study, highly specialized skills and a corresponding division of work 
was the mo
st important barrier to achieving backup and then self
-management. 
 Scrum is not very specific on how to establish monitoring in development teams, although 
this is implicitly a prerequisite for feedback, coordination, and backup. Combining Scrum with, for
 example, the practice of pair programming in XP 
[6]
 would improve monitoring, feedback, and 
backup. 
 We believe that our study has the following main implications for practice:
 ¥ An isomorphic project structure will hinder teamwork because the division of work will make 
it more difficult for developer
s to develop shared mental models, trust each other, 
communicate, coordinate work, and provide backup. One way of handling this is to organize 
cross
-training and appreciate generalist to build redundancy in the organization
 [31]
.    32 ¥ Self-management should be enabled when starting to use agile methods such as Scrum, and 
be aware that high individual autonomy may results in problems creating a self
-managing 
team. 
 ¥ The way in which agile practices are taken up is dependent on the companiesÕ
 former 
development process. Changes take time and resources, and for the company in this study, 
previous practices were sustained throughout their first agile project. 
 ¥ The development process should be adjusted for enabling efficient work, by making room
 for 
reflection and learning. However, achieving learning in software processes is not trivial.
 5.3 Limitations 
 The main limitations of our study are the single
-case design and the possibility of bias in data 
collection and analysis. The fact that we used
 a single
-case holistic design makes us more 
vulnerable to bias and eliminates the possibility of direct replication or the analysis of contrasting 
situations. Therefore, the general criticisms about single
-case studies, such as uniqueness and 
special acce
ss to key informants, may also apply to our study. However, our rationale for choosing 
Alpha as our case was that it represents a critical case for explaining the challenges for teamwork 
that arise when introducing self
-managing agile teams. We used Alpha 
to determine whether we 
could confirm, challenge, or extend 
Dickinson and McIntyreÕs 
[13]
 teamwork model. Our goal was 
not to provide statistical generalizations about a population on the basis of data collected from a 
sample of that population. On
 the contrary, our mode of generalization is analytical, i.e., we used a 
previously developed theory as a template with which we compared the empirical results of the case 
study, which is similar to YinÕs 
[49]
 concept of Level Two inference.
  Another
 possible limitation is that we based much of our data collection and analysis on 
semi-structured interviews 
[14]
. The use of multiple data sources made it possible to find evidence 
  33 for episodes and phenomena from more than one data source; we also observe
d, talked to, and 
interviewed the team members over a period of nine months, which made it possible to study the 
phenomena from different viewpoints as they emerged and changed.
  Could it be that we as researchers influenced the teamwork characteristics by
 our presence in 
the project? Our presence and questions might have made the team members more aware of 
teamwork characteristics, but we do not think their behavior was influenced by our presence. The 
everyday demands of the projects were high, and we did 
not observe changes in behavior that 
seemed to relate to our interview or observation phases.
 5.4 Future work 
 The results of this study point out a number of directions for future research. First
ly,
 our study 
highlights several challenges that must be met
 when self
-managing teams are introduced into agile 
development. Accordingly, further work should focus on identifying and addressing other problems 
that may arise when introducing agile development. 
 Secondly
, the 
extended teamwork model
 should be used
 for studying mature agile 
development teams, in order to get a better understanding of the main challenges in such teams.  
Also
, teams using shorter sprints (e.g. 2
-3 weeks)
 should be studied
, since this will give the team 
more frequent feedback, which
 affec
t team learning
 and the 
other elements in the 
Dickinson and 
McIntyre teamwork model.
 Thirdly, our study tries to answer Ò
How can we explain the teamwork challenges that arise 
when introducing a self
-managing agile team
?Ó through 
Dickinson and McIntyreÕs te
amwork 
model.
 However, 
there are other relevant streams of research
 to address the adoption of methods 
and technology, e.g. the 
diffusion of innovation literature
 [37]
. Other models that attempt to explain 
  34 the relationship between user perceptions, attitudes and use intentions include the techno
logy 
acceptance model (TAM) 
[11]
, and the theory of planned behavior 
[2]
.  6 Conclusion
 We have conducted a 
nine
-month field study of professional develo
pers in a Scrum team. We found 
that the model of 
Dickinson and McIntyre 
[13]
, together with trust and 
shared 
mental models, 
explain our findings. In addition to these teamwork components, highly specialized skills and a 
corresponding division of wo
rk was the most important barrier for achieving
 effective teamwork
.  We have also seen that Scrum has several mechanisms in place for supporting the recommendations 
of the framework, but that many of these mechanisms are not easy to implement in practice.
 Transitioning from individual work to self
-managing teams requires a reorientation not only 
by developers but also by management
. Making such changes takes time and resources, but it is a 
prerequisite for the success of any kind of agile method based on se
lf-management.
 Acknowledgement
 This work was supported by the EVISOFT project, which is partially funded by the Research 
Council of Norway under grant 174390/I40.
 References
 [1] Acuna, S.T., Gomez, M., and Juristo, N., 
How do personalit
y, team processes and task characteristics relate to job 
satisfaction and software quality?
 Information and Software Technology, 2009. 
51(3): p. 627
-639.  [2] Ajzen, I., 
The Theory of Planned Behavior.
 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 
1991. 
50(2): p. 
179-211.  [3] Aurum, A., Wohlin, C., and Porter, A., 
Aligning Software Project Decisions: A Case Study.
 International Journal of 
Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, 2006. 
16(6): p. 795
-818.  [4] Bandow, D., 
Time to create sound 
teamwork.
 The Journal for Quality and Participation, 2001. 
24(2): p. 41.
   35  [5] Barker, J.R., 
Tightening the Iron Cage 
- Concertive Control in Self
-Managing Teams.
 Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 1993. 
38(3): p. 408
-437.  [6] Beck, K. and Anders, C., 
Extre
me Programming Explained: Embrace Change
. Vol. 2nd ed. 2004: Addison
-Wesley.
  [7] Belbin, R.M., 
Team Roles at Work
. 1993, Boston, MA: Butterworth
-Heinemann.
  [8] Boehm, B.W. and Turner, R., 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed
. 2003:
 Addison
-Wesley 
  [9] Burke, C.S., Stagl, K.C., Klein, C., Goodwin, G.F., Salas, E., and Halpin, S.A., 
What type of leadership behaviors 
are functional in teams? A meta
-analysis.
 Leadership Quarterly, 2006. 
17(3): p. 288
-307.  [10] Cohen, S.G. and Bailey, 
D.E., 
What makes teams work: Group effectiveness research from the shop floor to the 
executive suite.
 Journal of Management, 1997. 
23(3): p. 239
-290.  [11] Davis, F.D., 
Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User Acceptance of Information Technol
ogy.
 Mis 
Quarterly, 1989. 
13(3): p. 319
-340.  [12] Derby, E. and Larsen, D., 
Agile retrospectives: making good teams great
. 2006: Pragmatic Bookshelf.
  [13] Dickinson, T.L. and McIntyre, R.M., 
A conceptual framework of teamwork measurement
, in 
Team Perform
ance 
Assessment and Measurement: Theory, Methods, and Applications
, M.T. Brannick, E. Salas, and C. Prince, Editors. 
1997, Psychology Press: NJ. p. 19
-43.  [14] Diefenbach, T., 
Are case studies more than sophisticated storytelling?: Methodological problems
 of qualitative 
empirical research mainly based on semi
-structured interviews.
 Quality and Quantity (in press), 2009.
  [15] Dyb„, T., 
Improvisation in Small Software Organizations.
 IEEE Software, 2000. 
17(5): p. 82
-87.  [16] Dyb„, T. and Dings¿yr, T., 
Empi
rical Studies of Agile Software Development: A Systematic Review.
 Information 
and Software Technology, 2008.
  [17] Guzzo, R.A. and Dickson, M.W., 
Teams in organizations: Recent research on performance and effectiveness.
 Annual Review of Psychology, 1996. 
47: p. 307
-338.  [18] Hackman, J.R., 
The design of Work Teams
, in 
Handbook of organizational behavior
, J. Lorsch, Editor. 1987, 
Prentice
-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, N. J.  .
  [19] Hoegl, M. and Gemuenden, H.G., 
Teamwork Quality and the Success of Innovative Pro
jects: A Theoretical 
Concept and Empirical Evidence.
 Organization science, 2001. 
12(4): p. 435
-449.  [20] Hoegl, M. and Parboteeah, K.P., 
Autonomy and teamwork in innovative projects.
 Human Resource Management, 
2006. 
45(1): p. 67
-79.  [21] Jurison, J., 
Software project management: the manager's view.
 Communications of AIS, 1999. 
2.  [22] Katzenbach, J.R. and Smith, D.K., 
The Discipline of Teams.
 Harvard Business Review, 1993. 
71(2): p. 111
-120.  [23] Kirkman, B.L. and Rosen, B., 
Beyond self
-management: Ante
cedents and consequences of team empowerment.
 Academy of Management Journal, 1999. 
42(1): p. 58
-74.  [24] Klein, H.K. and Myers, M.D., 
A set of principles for conducting and evaluating interpretive field studies in 
information systems.
 MIS quarterly, 1999.
 23(1): p. 67
-93.  [25] Kraut, R.E. and Streeter, L.A., 
Coordination in software development.
 Communications of the ACM, 1995. 
38(3): 
p. 69
-81.    36 [26] Langfred, C.W., 
The paradox of self
-management: Individual and group autonomy in work groups.
 Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 2000. 
21(5): p. 563
-585.  [27] Langley, A., 
Strategies for Theorizing from Process Data
. 1999, Academy of Management. p. 691
-710.  [28] Levesque, L.L., Wilson, J.M., and Wholey, D.R., 
Cognitive divergence and shared mental models in
 software 
development project teams.
 Journal of Organizational Behavior, 2001. 
22: p. 135
-144.  [29] Markham, S.E. and Markham, I.S., 
Self
-management and self
-leadership reexamined: A levels
-of-analysis 
perspective.
 The Leadership Quarterly, 1995. 
6(3): p.
 343-359.  [30] Marks, M.A., Mathieu, J.E., and Zaccaro, S.J., 
A temporally based framework and taxonomy of team processes.
 The Academy of Management Review, 2001. 
26(3): p. 356.
  [31] Moe, N.B., Dings¿yr, T., and Dyb„, T., 
Overcoming Barriers to Self
-Mana
gement in Software Teams.
 Software, 
IEEE, 2009. 
26(6): p. 20
-26.  [32] Morgan, G., 
Images of Organizations
. 2006, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE publications. 504.
  [33] Nerur, S. and Balijepally, V., 
Theoretical reflections on agile development methodologies 
- The traditional goal of 
optimization and control is making way for learning and innovation.
 Communications of the ACM, 2007. 
50(3): p. 79
-83.  [34] Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R., and Mangalaraj, G., 
Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies.
 Communications 
of 
the ACM, 2005. 
48(5): p. 72.
  [35] Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H., 
The knowledge
-creating company: how Japanese companies create the dynamics of 
innovation
. 1995, New York: Oxford University Press. XII, 284 s.
  [36] Rising, L. and Janoff, N.S., 
The Scrum s
oftware development process for small teams.
 IEEE Software, 2000. 
17(4): 
p. 26
-32.  [37] Rogers, E.M., 
Diffusion of Innovations
. Vol. Fourth Edition. 1995, New York: The Free Press.
  [38] Rousseau, V., Aube, C., and Savoie, A., 
Teamwork behaviors 
- A revie
w and an integration of frameworks.
 Small 
Group Research, 2006. 
37(5): p. 540
-570.  [39] Salas, E., Sims, D.E., and Burke, C.S., 
Is there a "big five" in teamwork?
 Small Group Research, 2005. 
36(5): p. 
555-599.  [40] Salas, E., Stagl, K.C., Burke, C.S., an
d Goodwin, G.F. 
Fostering Team Effectiveness in Organizations: Toward an 
Integrative Theoretical Framework
. in 
52nd Nebraska Symposium on Motivation
. 2007. Lincoln, NE.
  [41] Sapsed, J., Bessant, J., Partington, D., Tranfield, D., and Young, M., 
Teamworkin
g and knowledge management: a 
review of converging themes.
 International Journal of Management Reviews, 2002. 
4(1): p. 71
-85.  [42] Schatz, B. and Abdelshafi, I., 
Primavera gets agile: A successful transition to agile development.
 IEEE Software, 
2005. 
22(3): p. 36
-+.  [43] Schwaber, K. and Beedle, 
Agile Software Development with Scrum
. 2001: Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall.
  [44] Takeuchi, H. and Nonaka, I., 
The New New Product Development Game.
 Harvard Business Review, 1986( 64): p. 
137-146   [45] Tata, 
J. and Prasad, S., 
Team Self
-management, Organizational Structure, and Judgments of Team Effectiveness.
 Journal of Managerial Issues, 2004. 
Vol. 16 
(Issue 2): p. p248 
- 265.  [46] Tuckman, B.B.W., 
Developmental sequence in small groups.
 Psychological Bulle
tin, 1965. 
63: p. 384
-99.   37  [47] Uhl
-Bien, M. and Graen, G.B., 
Individual self
-management: Analysis of professionals' self
-managing activities in 
functional and cross
-functional work teams.
 Academy of Management Journal, 1998. 
41(3): p. 340
-350.  [48] West,
 M.A., 
The social psychology of innovation in groups
, in 
Innovation and creativity at work: psychological 
and organizational strategies
, M.A. West and J.L. Farr, Editors. 1990, Wiley: Chichester. p. 309
-333.  [49] Yin, R.K., 
Case study research: design and
 methods
. 2009, Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage. xiv,219 s.
    APPENDIX A: Interview guide
 The respondent was informed of the nature of the study and how long the interview will take. The respondent was told 
why it is important to tape the interview (it incre
ases the validity
  of the study, it enables the researchers to focus on 
what the interviewee wants to say, not what they think he wants to say) and that only the researchers would have access 
to the transcript. The respondent was finally asked if he/she wo
uld agree to the interview being taped.  
  Questions for warm
-up: ¥ What are you working on now?
 ¥ What is the status of the project?
  Main body of the interview:
 ¥ How is work coordinated in the project?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ How are problems tha
t emerge in the project solved?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ Do you have an overview of what others are doing?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ How easy is it to carry on work that was begun by others?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ How do you discover changes in the project?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ How do you deal with changes in the project?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ Does the team have a common project goal?
 o Did earlier projects have a common project goal?
 ¥ Does everyone know the expected outcome of the project?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ Do team members give each other feedback in the project?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ Do team members share relevant project information with each other? 
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ How is the team communication?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ How is the team performance?
 o How was it done in earlier projects?
 ¥ How do you think Scrum is working in the project?
 o What is working?
 o What is not working?
 ¥ Is there anything else you would like to add that you think is interesting in this context, but not covered by the 
questions asked?
   