 Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
www.elsevier.com/locate/infsof
0950-5849/$ - see front matter 
 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2007.02.007
Ethnographically-informed empirica
l studies of software practice
Hugh Robinson, Judith Segal, Helen Sharp
¤Centre for Research in Computing, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, UK
Available online 11 February 2007
Abstract
Over the past decade we have performed a sustained series of qualitative studies of software development practice, focusing on 
social
factors. Using an ethnographically-informed approach, we have addressed four areas of software practice: software quality manag
ement
systems, the emergence of object technology, professional end user development and agile development. Several issues have arise
n from
this experience, including the nature of research questions that such studies can address, the advantages and challenges associ
ated with
being a member of the community under study, and how to maintain rigour in data collection. In this paper, we will draw on our 
studies
to illustrate our approach and to discuss these and other issues.
 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords:
Software practice; Field studies; Qualitative analysis
1. Introduction
Qualitative studies of software practice appear to be
unusual in empirical software engineering research. A recent

taxonomy of the papers published in the journal 
Empirical
Software Engineering
 over the period 1997–2003 
[39] indi-
cates that research in this 
Weld is dominated by quantitative
studies that test hypotheses by means of laboratory experi-
ments, using experimental and control groups and statistical
analysis of the results. Seaman 
[35] makes the case for quali-
tative studies as being necessary complements to quantitative
ones, in that qualitative knowledge is an essential prerequi-

site for the generation and testing of hypotheses and for

interpreting the results of such tests. Whilst we acknowledge
that quantitative studies are clearly important in advancing
the 
Weld, the fact remains that there are circumstances when
it is inappropriate to factor out the complexity that sur-
rounds software practice. As Lethbridge etal. 
[25]
 say:
‘Software engineering involves real people in real envi-
ronmentsƒ Accordingly, to truly understand software
engineering, it is imperative to study people – software
practitioners as they solve real software engineering

problems in real environments’ [p. 311].
Although the sort of study advocated by writers such as
Lethbridge etal. remains a rarity, there are a growing num-
ber of exceptions, including Button and Sharrock 
[7],Singer etal. 
[49]
, Beynon-Davies etal. 
[4]
 and Chong 
[8], aswell as our own work.
Over the last decade, we have carried out a sustained
series of qualitative studies of software development

practice as a social activity. These studies have concen-
trated on four di
Verent areas: the adoption and evolution
of software quality management systems 
[19,45]
, theemergence of object technology 
[42], the particular prob-
lems of professional end-user developers 
[36,37]
 and agile
software development, particularly eXtreme Program-
ming (XP) teams 
[30,31,41]
. The 
Wndings from these stud-
ies have provided insight into
 the social dimensions that
are an intrinsic part of software development, including

shared values, assumptions and beliefs, and the in
Xuence
of particular individuals. They have also elucidated a
variety of practices that allow us to understand how soft-
ware development teams opera
te, and hence to facilitate
deeper re
Xection.
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 
1908 653638; fax: +44 1908 652140.
E-mail addresses:
 h.m.robinson@open.ac.uk
 (H. Robinson), 
j.a.segal@
open.ac.uk
 (J. Segal), 
h.c.sharp@open.ac.uk
 (H. Sharp).
 H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
541
This paper aims
1.To illustrate one approach to qualitative studies of soft-
ware development practice, and the issues that are faced
through such studies.
2.To support others who wish to conduct qualitative stud-
ies of software development practice by providing exem-
plars for them to follow.
We begin by providing an overview of the four areas of
study and highlighting signi
Wcant themes that have emerged
in the planning, conducting and reporting of the studies,
drawing on speci
Wc examples to illustrate our points. In Sec-
tion 
2, we brie
Xy summarise four aspects of our studies: the
research questions, methodology, 
Wndings and their implica-
tions. We then follow this structure in the rest of the paper,
drawing out common issues across all four studies which we

have recognised as signi
Wcant. In Section 
3, we consider the
kind of research questions that are suited to this approach.
In Section 
4, we discuss methodological and practical chal-
lenges we have encountered. Then we explore the nature of

the 
Wndings that result, and in Section 
6 we discuss the
responses we have experienced from two main audiences:
industrial collaborators and fellow academics. Finally, we
provide some concluding remarks and further references

about qualitative research in this area.
1.1. Ethnographically-informed studies
Although the four areas of study listed above di
Ver in
various ways, including application domain and software
technology applied, the studies are all united by focus and

by a common approach. As to 
focus, our studies have all
been of practitioners in the setting of practice, and have, in
particular, focussed on the social interactions which arise as
an intrinsic part of the practice of developing software.
The common approach we share can be described as ‘eth-
nographically-informed’. Ethnography seeks to understand
practice in its own terms, minimizing the impact of the
researchers’ own backgrounds, prejudices and assumptions.

As such, researchers attend to the taken-for-granted, accepted

and un-remarked aspects of practice, deliberately considering
all activities as ‘strange’ 
[16]
. Consequently, no feature of
practice is discounted 
a priori
 and ethnography studies the
totality of practice with all its ‘messy’ characteristics. We illus-
trate this concept of strangeness in Section 
1.2
, below.
All our studies were ethnographically-informed in two
particulars.
1.The essential nature of practice is not known 
a priori
and, importantly, cannot be assumed to be the ‘o
Ycial’
view. Thus, the actuality of practice needs to be ascer-

tained empirically by appropriate studies. Consequently,

our research is not hypothesis driven but is driven by
research questions, as we illustrate below.
2.Since our focus is on the practice of software develop-
ment, as it is carried out in the real world in natural set-
tings, we aspire, as researchers, not to perturb that
practice. That is, we collect our data through a combina-

tion of methods such as observations of practice, inter-
views and discussions with practitioners, and study of
the artefacts of practice, but do not attempt to change or

unduly in
Xuence practice during the course of the study.
We avoid any form of control, intrusion or experiment
and so all our data were naturally occurring. Even our
interview data may be viewed as naturally occurring in

the broad sense of the term, since it was gathered from

practitioners re
Xecting on their normal practice, in their
place of work.
In classic ethnography, the researcher studies practice by
immersing themselves in the area under study for several
months if not years, documenting what takes place via a
range of means that can include contemporaneous 
Weld
notes, audio and video recordings of discussions and meet-

ings, photographs and sketches of the physical layout, cop-
ies of various documents and artefacts, and records of
interviews with practitioners. In some of our studies,

immersion in the setting of practice was not possible

because of considerations of time or of commercial con
W-dentiality. It has become quite common to adapt ethno-
graphic traditions in order to conduct shorter studies which
Wt more easily with a product development cycle, e.g. in
interaction design 
[18,46]
, in software engineering 
[51]
 and
in engineering design 
[1]. In keeping with these shortened
approaches, our studies have not involved total immersion

for several months. In some cases where immersion to any

degree has not been possible, we have collected data by
conducting semi-structured interviews, by studying practice
artefacts and using serendipitous observation.
1.2. An illustration of our approach
Whilst we have appropriately adapted classic ethnogra-
phy, it is worth underscoring our methodological commit-
ment by an example from our data that illustrates
attending to the injunctions of ‘understanding practice in

its own terms’ and ‘considering all activities as ‘strange”.

This example comes from the use of story cards in soft-
ware development by XP teams 
[2,3]
. Story cards are
index cards which have written on them a very brief

description of a required software task along with a small

amount of other information, such as how much devel-
oper e
Vort might be required. Story cards are often
arranged on boards or walls in a way that displays what

work an XP team has elected to carry out over a given

period (an 
iteration
, typically a matter of weeks) and how
that work is progressing. One way to analytically view the
use of story cards would be to focus on a conventional

view of software development, where the story cards are

informal statements of requirements that the XP team use
to develop code. This account would be accurate, but dis-
count key aspects of practice which can be revealed by an

ethnographically-informed analysis. Such an analysis
 542
H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
exploits the principle of ‘strangeness’ and views the busi-
ness of the XP team as that of doing work that allows
them to arrange and move cards in a purposeful fashion.
Here is such an analysis, based on a recent observational
study of an XP team.
At the start of the iteration the team decided how they
would arrange the cards on the wall. Sometimes they
were not happy about the cards they were given and
wrote a few extra ones. Developers always handled cards

carefully and wrote on them very precisely. The team

arranged their cards in three areas which were labelled
Week 1, Week 2 and Week 3. In addition, three other
areas were also labelled (‘Done’) and these had no cards

in them.

Once the cards were arranged on the wall, people took a
card away to one of the machines, stuck it on the
machine, and worked at that machine, usually with

someone else. Cards were only taken from the Week 1

area – cards in the other two were not touched that
week. Developers were very careful to record that they
had taken a card from the wall, writing in a ‘ghost’ card

just where the real card had been. After a day or so, the

card would be put back, with a tick on it, and the ‘ghost’
card erased. The card was not put back where it came
from but in a special place where cards that had been to

a machine were returned to the wall. This was one of the

three other areas that initially had no cards in them (the
other two empty areas remained untouched that week).
Gradually more and more cards were added to this one,

initially empty, area.

Sometimes developers wrote out a new card that was
pink in colour and placed it on a separate piece of wall,
labelled Bugs with other pink cards. People tended to

notice this or remark on it.

Early in each day, the team would meet around the wall
and have a chat. Sometimes a card might be taken down
– carefully – as part of the chat. A developer might (care-

fully) write or change something on the card before it

was placed back on the wall, in the place where it had
come from.
At the start of the next week, the chat around the wall

was quite a bit longer and th
e cards on the wall were re-
arranged so that the area where cards had been taken
from in the 
Wrst week was now empty.
What such an analysis brings out, which a more con-
ventional view of software development would not, is the
crucial role that the cards, the wall and the arrangement
and movement of cards on the wall has for orchestrating
and coordinating the work of software development. The

cards/wall literally ‘keep the score’ in both a musical and a

sporting sense. It suggests that XP teams make use of
resources to manage work which are similar to those
employed in patient care activity by nurses in ward set-
tings (e.g. 
[12, Chapter 5]
). Furthermore, the account
reveals the highly disciplined nature of software develop-
ment in an XP team. If stor
y cards were regarded as just
statements of requirements that are used to develop code,
the disciplined nature of their use might not have been

highlighted.
This perspective also illustrates what it means to pro-
vide an account that seeks to ‘understand practice in its
own terms’, from the point of view of those being

observed, i.e. the developers, rather than being con-
strained by any pre-ordained conceptual or theoretical
framework. We shared the account above with the XP

team concerned. The response was straightforward: 
‘Yes.
The cards are in charge.’
 Indeed, the team’s own internal
wiki has an entry entitled ‘The Care and Feeding of Story-
Cards’. This is not to say that the developers themselves
would have written such an account if asked (indeed the

wiki entry is not phrased in this way), but it is an account
that draws out perspectives that the developers recognize
as valid.
We discuss some of the challenges facing software engi-
neers in taking such a perspective in Section 
4.1
. For clarity,
we should emphasise that the account presented here is one
way of analyzing a situation that illustrates the ‘strange-

ness’ principle and the perspective of ‘understanding prac-

tice in its own terms’. This kind of account is not the
primary form for presenting 
Wndings.
2. Our qualitative studies
In this section we brie
Xy summarise the four areas cov-
ered by our studies. For each area, we highlight the research

question(s) we aimed to address, the research methods we
used, a summary of the 
Wndings, and the implications of
those 
Wndings.
2.1. The adoption and evolution of software quality 
management systems
In this project, we explored the human-related, i.e. non-
technical factors which a
Vect the adoption and evolution of
software quality management systems (SQMSs). Our par-
ticular focus was on the e
Vectiveness of quality initiatives
such as accreditation to ISO9000, and the social factors

aVecting their success, their 
adoption and evolution. Our
main research question was
•What are the social factors that in
Xuence the adop-
tion and evolution of software quality management
systems?
To answer this question, we collected data from 
Wveorganisations using a combination of semi-structured inter-

views, and ethnographic-based observation. The data col-

lected consists of audio and video recordings, items from
noticeboards, technical documentation, marketing bro-
chures, observations of the physical environment and

employees’ habits. We used ethnography 
[16]
 to provide a
framework for studying the culture of a setting, and for
uncovering the knowledge, ideas, beliefs and values which
inform activity. We used discourse analysis 
[28]
 to focus on
 H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
543
the structures of text to explore people’s interactions and
interpretations, and uncover the ways in which cultural

attitudes are transmitted, discussed, developed and perpet-
uated 
[43]
.Through the project, we uncovered organisational and
individual factors relating to our research question and also

identi
Wed tensions that occur between the developers and
the SQMS itself (e.g. 
[19,44]
). The factors we identi
Wed were
as follows:
•Organisational factors: the nature of the company’s
business; the customers, and market pressures.
•Individual factors: the charismatic leader, the quality
manager, the maverick developer, and the pressures on

the individual.
This work has implications for the introduction of stan-
dards documentation within software development and

highlights the signi
Wcant role which in
Xuential individuals
(such as the maverick) have with such endeavours, and the
need to be aware of the developers’ attitude towards the

SQMS and its introduction. More generally, this work also

has resonances with any attempts to introduce new ways of
working.
2.2. The emergence of object technology
In this project, we wanted to understand how object
technology emerged to be a dominant paradigm, but we

wanted to take a contemporaneous perspective, as opposed
to post-hoc
 accounts produced once object technology had
become dominant. To achieve this, we took practice to be

what software developers were writing about object tech-

nology during that period. To this end, we studied materials
of the period such as journal and magazine articles, trade
newspapers, advertisements, and conference proceedings in

order to develop a social account of the emergence of

object technology 
[40,42]
. That is, we attempted to see
things through the eyes of those living through that emer-
gence.
The research questions for this project are listed below,
but it is important to note that these were investigated from
the perspective of contemporaneous materials:
•How did object-oriented technology emerge?
•What were the key constituencies (individuals and
groups) and the key events that shaped object-oriented
technology?
Five researchers studied materials originating from the
late 1970s through to the early 1990s. Our approach was to
review this material and identify papers, articles, calls for

papers, conference announcements or commercial product

advertisements where mention was made of object-oriented
technology in some way. We then analysed this selected
material to understand how object-orientation was

regarded at the time. We use both quantitative counts (e.g.
the number of ‘objectish’ papers in some publication over
time) in a style similar to the textual demographics of Cort-

ada 
[10]
 and a qualitative approach using discourse analysis
[28]
 where the discursive structures employed (how things
are said) are analysed along with what is said. Importantly,

our analysis of the material attends to the contemporane-

ous ‘voice’ of the author/participants, rather than imposing
a view of what might be signi
Wcant based on hindsight.
Using this analysis, we charted the emergence in terms of
three periods: interpretative 
Xexibility; community and dis-
semination; and a pervasive paradigm. We found that the
emergence of object technology revolved around an infor-
mal community that was receptive to its development and

acceptance, and consequently, the role of the community

that built up around the technology was pivotal. One impli-
cation that this work highlights is that a social history of
technology is not the same as the intellectual history of an

idea. The intellectual origins of object-oriented program-

ming lie in the 1960s with the development of the Simula
language 
[11]
. However, a technology is more than just an
intellectual idea or technical insight: it involves signi
Wcant
use by communities of practitioners; advocacy and dissemi-

nation via fora that articulate, con
Wrm and develop the
technology; and social relations implied by the use of the
technology. A consequential implication of this 
Wnding is
that the role of communities within software practice

advancement is key.
2.3. The particular problems of professional end-user 
developers
By ‘professional end-user developers’, we mean profes-
sional people working in highly technical domains, such as

Wnancial mathematics or research scientists, who develop
their own software in order to further their own profes-
sional tasks. The overarching research question which
underlies our studies in this area is:
•How might software engineers best support professional
end-user developers?
In our studies 
[36,37]
, we collected data by interviews and
studies of documentation relevant to practice. We addressed

issues of internal validity by triangulating both our data and

our methods. We interviewed people at di
Verent levels of the
organisation, as well as di
Verent people at the same level, and
people in di
Verent teams with di
Verent responsibilities as well
as di
Verent people in the same team with the same responsi-
bilities. We compared data from our interviews with the
practices and processes laid down in documents and with the
perceptions of managers of the practices and processes to

which practitioners should adhere.
Our main 
Wndings were
1.That professional end-user developers regard software
development as being a marginal activity and are thus

not prepared to put in more e
Vort than is strictly neces-
sary to satisfy the immediate need.
 544
H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
2.That traditional staged software methodologies are
inappropriate for use by professional end-user develop-

ers (especially with regard to the upfront speci
Wcation of
requirements).
3.That there are communication di
Yculties inherent in
relying on project documentation that are over and

above the di
Yculties inherent in communicating highly
technical domain knowledge.
The implications of our 
Wndings are that software engi-
neers should not attempt to support professional end-user
developers by supplying them with tools, techniques or
methods which involve anything but a small perturbation

in their natural way of working 
[38]
. We also suggest that
some practices associated with agile methodologies might
be more appropriate for this class of developers than the
practices of more traditional software development meth-

odologies.
2.4. Agile software development
Agile software development is a relatively new approach
which represents a reaction to what are seen as the failings
of the more traditional plan-driven approach to software

development (e.g. see 
[5]
). In our studies we have focused
mostly on eXtreme Programming (XP), which is one of the
more popular agile methods in the UK. There are several
aspects which distinguish XP from more traditional forms

of software development, and in our context it is key that

XP emphasizes the social nature of software development,
and champions the individual developer. In our studies we
have addressed the following question:
•What is the reality of XP development i.e. how do soft-
ware practitioners develop systems using XP?
This strand of our work is ongoing and to date we have
conducted observational studies in 
Wve mature XP teams.
These observational studies last typically a week, and

involve two observers. The main observer is present for the
duration of the visit, while the second observer attends for a
day or so in order to understand the context of the study,

and hence to be able to contribute sensibly to data analysis.

Both observers are involved in the analysis of data. A fol-
low-up visit in which the observers’ 
Wndings are discussed
with the participants is arranged after about six weeks. In

all cases, we have found that this feedback session has pro-

voked considerable discussion.
We have produced a variety of results from this work,
including:
•The characteristics of XP teams 
[30]
.•The e
Vect of di
Verent organizational cultures on the
practice of XP 
[31]
.•Social aspects of XP’s technical practices 
[32]
.There are various detailed implications from our 
Wnd-ings, e.g. suggestions of how di
Verent organizational cul-
tures might view the adoption of XP, or of how to
maximize the likelihood of an XP team being successful.

More generally, our work has encouraged re
Xection and
sharing of experiences within the practitioner community,
and has provided tangible experiences and information

about XP for fellow software engineering researchers.
3. Research questions
Ethnographically-informed studies of practice are not
appropriate in all circumstances, and there are some kinds
of research question which they cannot answer. For exam-

ple, as discussed in Robinson etal. 
[32]
, ethnographically-
informed studies may take vari
ous roles in a wider research
programme – sometimes it is appropriate for them to play a
major role, sometimes they are more suited to being used in

combination with other methods and under some circum-

stances they can only be of limited use. So under what cir-
cumstances have we found these studies to be useful? How
can you characterize the kinds of research question that

this approach helps to address?
Ethnographically-informed studies do not address
research questions which are based on testing hypotheses
derived from theories. In fact, we try to eschew 
a priori
 the-
ory in our research, treat all our
 data as ‘strange’ and try to
interpret it in the particular setting of its collection. We thus
ask ‘how’ and ‘why’ and ‘what are the characteristics of’
questions rather than ‘Is X better than Y’ or ‘Will this tech-
nique make programmers more productive?’ kinds of ques-

tion. That is, we favour questions such as:
‘How do software practitioners develop systems using
XP?’ rather than ‘Is single programmer coding more

productive than pair programming?’
and
‘Why don’t 
Wnancial mathematicians adhere to a com-
pany manual of software development practice?’ rather

than ‘Does structuring the manual in this way help

Wnancial mathematicians produce more lines of code an
hour?’
and

‘What are the characteristics of a technology adoption?’
rather than ‘How did the ideas of Simula develop into
Java?’
The descriptions that emerge from qualitative studies
addressing these kinds of question capture the rich interde-

pendencies in the context of development 
[21]
 in a way that
hypothesis testing does not. Hypothesis testing often
focuses on questions such as: is X better than Y? But X may

be better than Y in some respects and not others. For exam-

ple, introducing a new software quality procedure might
increase manager visibility of progress but decrease the
motivation of programmers.
Understanding ‘why’ something happens the way it
does, or ‘how’ a particular goal is achieved allows the
 H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
545
participants and the observers to consider the consequences
of changing current practices, or even removing them. For

example, in our work on agile teams, we have considered
‘what if’ questions in the context of modifying the nature of
story cards 
[45]
. As Herbsleb 
[17]
 says:
‘Understanding the underlying mechanisms in play as
people tackle software engineering tasks – mechanisms
rooted in human cognition, social practices, and culture
– is critical to the progress of our 
Weld’ [p. 23]
4. Methodological and practical challenges
There are many issues that need to be considered when
setting up and running a qualitative study, many of which
are covered in textbooks or others’ re
Xections (e.g. 
[33,25]
).For example, conducting 
Weld studies results in substantial
collections of rich data, and this can be a disadvantage as

well as an advantage as it is easy to be overwhelmed by the
amount of data to be analysed.
Here we discuss two issues which have been particularly
signi
Wcant for us: the relationship between the researcher
and the researched, and keeping rigour in qualitative stud-
ies. We have not seen the former discussed in detail else-
where, and addressing the latter is an essential prerequisite

to the acceptance of qualitative studies by the academic

community.
4.1. The relationship between researcher and the researched
The relationship between us as researchers and our par-
ticipants has been particularly signi
Wcant in two respects.
Firstly, we have chosen 
Welds of study where we belong to
the community being studied, i.e. we could reasonably be
described as software engineers 
or as research scientists or
as mathematicians, and this raises both challenges and

advantages. Secondly, ethical issues concerning formal con-

tracts or informed consent agreements have been problem-
atic in our experience.
4.1.1. Researchers as members of the community
A common view of ethnographically-based research is
that it is exempli
Wed by a researcher from one culture, e.g.
England, spending a period of
 immersion in another, quite
diVerent culture, e.g. a nomadic tribe in Africa. The
researcher then tries to elucidate elements of the second cul-

ture, viewing everything as ‘strange’. If the researcher her-

self belonged to this second culture, or was already closely
involved in this culture, then nothing would be ‘strange’,
everything would be as expected, and it would be di
Ycult
for her to discover insights. Of course, the researcher would

not be entirely without expectations, probably derived from
an informal theoretical framework. She could reasonably
expect to 
Wnd evidence of a friendship and kinship culture,
of an oral language and symbol system, and so on, but as

she comes from a quite di
Verent culture, regarding every-
thing as strange is likely to be more instinctive.
Our studies di
Ver from this view as we (the researchers)
share the backgrounds and some of the traditions of our

participants; as observed by Lethbridge etal. 
[25]
, software
engineering researchers are often software engineers them-
selves. In both our object-oriented work and our agile

development work, the researchers are software engineers

by training, have been practitioners in the past, and have
been accepted as members of the respective communities.
In the case of the professional end-users, the researcher can

reasonably be described both as a mathematician and a

research scientist. The team involved in the software quality
studies included a mixture of backgrounds; two researchers
were software engineers with some experience of software

quality systems while one researcher was not a trained soft-

ware engineer but a social scientist.
Being a member of the community under study has both
challenges and advantages for the researcher. The chal-

lenges arise mainly from the tension involved in moving

between two worlds – understanding what is going on at
one level, yet adopting the perspective of viewing every-
thing as strange at the other level. The former understand-

ing is necessary in order to be accepted by the participants,

to ask pertinent questions, recognise what may be relevant
and what not, and to be able to follow activity su
Yciently
so as not to be overwhelmed, while the latter adoption is

needed in order to gain an alternative perspective which

can trigger valuable insights. For example, the account
given in the introduction about the story cards was only
possible by adopting this alternative perspective.
Another facet of this tension arises from the need to be
non-judgmental. When a 
Weld is familiar, it can be di
Ycult
to avoid o
Vering judgmental opinions, yet this is necessary
in order to avoid bias in collecting and interpreting data.

For example, one of the software engineers involved in the

software quality studies was surprised to 
Wnd that the lead
developer kept a print-out of the entire system’s code in his
Wling cabinet drawer. He regarded this as completely unnec-
essary and indicative that the team had an outdated view of

software engineering. He then found it di
Ycult to disregard
this impression and not to comment on it when observing
other team activities.
In the object technology study our experience was
slightly di
Verent. Here, our ‘participants’ were not people
but contemporaneous artefacts. However some of the arte-
facts represented events or movements that we had lived

through ourselves, e.g. notices for a workshop or confer-

ence that one or other of us had attended, journal papers
describing the relationship between expert systems and
object-based systems which one or other of us had read

with a di
Verent purpose many years ago. In this situation,
although the relationships between researcher and
researched were quite di
Verent, the tensions around famil-
iarity were still present. To help maintain our perspective of

‘strangeness’ and reduce the possibility of introducing bias,

we encouraged each other to discuss our experiences and to
put these observations in the context of the current study.
We found that this could di
Vuse feelings of tension and
 546
H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
help to re-focus analysis on the materials rather than our
memories.
The main advantages of being a member of the same cul-
ture as the researched revolve around acceptance and com-
mon vocabulary. At a practical level, acceptance as a fellow

mathematician, software engineer or whatever evokes a

feeling of trust and fellowship which we have found makes
it easier to negotiate access to the settings of practice. Once
admitted to these settings, if the researcher is recognised as

‘one of the tribe’ then the participants can relax and focus

on working in their natural way without feeling the need to
treat the researcher as a guest. Similarly, if the researcher is
comfortable with the same vocabulary as the participants

then conversations and interviews are conducted more eas-

ily.
4.1.2. Formal versus informal
Ethical considerations are paramount when dealing with
human participants (for a more detailed discussion of ethi-

cal issues in this context, see 
[48]
). Here we focus on one
particular area that has exercised us over the years:
informed consent.
Throughout our studies we have been very successful
in recruiting and maintaining good relations with our

collaborators. We believe that one reason for this is that
we have been guided by them 
as to the level of formality
in the relationship, while keeping our approach and

intentions informal. This, in part, stems from the rela-
tionship discussed above: we are observers who are
already, in a strong sense, part of the ‘tribe’. In practice,
this means that we do not ourselves ask individuals to

sign any formal agreement documents. We feel that this

would cause more problems than it would solve. Signing
a formal document would immediately change our rela-
tionship and prompt the individual to be suspicious:
“why am I being asked to sign this agreement? What is it

about the research which makes it necessary for there to
be a formal agreement?” One of our principles is that
practice should be disturbed as little as possible, and

introducing unnecessary formality would undermine that

principle. If the collaborators themselves (at an organisa-
tional or individual level) ask for this level of formality,
then we, of course, agree, and have been party to non-dis-
closure agreements in some cases.
In conducting our research we are bound by several
codes of ethics. One set of ethics we have found to be par-
ticularly relevant to this type of research is that of the Brit-

ish Sociological Association. They include several points

regarding the relationship between the researcher and the
researched. These points cover the need to inform the indi-
viduals about the nature and purpose of the research, their

rights within the research activity relating to the recording

and use of data, their ability to withdraw from the research
whenever they wish, and the plans for con
Wdentiality. The
code also stresses the need to obtain “freely given informed

consent” from individuals. Often this is obtained through a

written document, but we have not used this approach with
individuals for the reasons given above. As alternatives, we
have used verbal consent captured on audio recordings,

email exchanges and the organisation’s own dissemination
mechanisms. For example, when conducting interviews for
the software quality study, we audio-recorded them and

obtained oral consent from the interviewees at the begin-

ning of the session. In the case of one of our agile teams, we
had approached members of the organisation informally
and they themselves sought opinions and agreement from

their colleagues through their wiki site. Responses to this

were recorded through the wiki, and we therefore could be
assured that consent had been given.
Whatever recording mechanism is involved, we begin a
study by explaining to all involved who we are, what we are

doing and what are the rights of the participants. We have
not yet encountered a situation where individuals have
asked to withdraw from a study once it has started. How-

ever we have had access denied to various settings. For

example, one potential collaborator in the agile develop-
ment studies was concerned about the status of the team
within the company. When we initially met with our main

contact, he took us away from the company building to

meet and discuss our research, and although we were able
to brie
Xy visit the team and see th
eir environment, we were
not allowed to conduct a study there.
The need to gain informed consent from participants is
clear, but we have found that an informal approach is often
more appropriate for this kind of study. We have consid-
ered asking for written informed consent, but it has been

clear that, with our participants at least, asking individuals

for written consent would alter the relationship signi
W-cantly making natural observation impossible. We have
found that, whatever decision is taken on this, it is impor-

tant to consider the situation and to act responsibly under

the current circumstances.
Above all, we take our responsibility seriously. Accord-
ing to the British Sociological Association’s code of ethics,

this responsibility covers:
‘both to safeguard the proper interests of those involved
in or a
Vected by their work, and to report their 
Wndingsaccurately and truthfullyƒto ensure that the physical,

social and psychological well-being of research partici-

pants is not adversely a
Vected by the research’
4.2. Keeping rigour in qualitative work
Being rigorous and avoiding bias is important, yet it is
all too easy to introduce it in both qualitative and quantita-

tive studies (see, for example, Kitchenham etal. 
[21,22]
,HuV [20]
). A common view is that there is a bias inherent in
qualitative work which isn’t present in quantitative, but we
refute this view, and agree with the following quote from

Lanubile 
[24]
:‘The objectivity of empirical research comes from a
review process that assures that the analysis relies on all
the relevant evidence and takes into account all the rival
 H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
547
interpretations. This can be done (or not done) in both a
quantitative and a qualitative analysis’ [p. 102]
Taking a rigorous approach to data collection and anal-
ysis is essential in order to avoid bias. In our studies, this
takes the form of three main principles: triangulation, seek-

ing discon
Wrmation and iterative development of under-
standing. The last two of these are also found in the
grounded theory approach to data analysis developed by
Glaser and Strauss 
[13]
. Although we do not follow their
approach in detail, we recognise that there are similarities.
Triangulation is a well-known approach (e.g. 
[33,46]
). In
our studies we employ triangulation by using data from
many di
Verent sources: for example, from interviews with
diVerent people having similar or di
Verent roles; from the
artefacts of practice; from observations of di
Verent roles;
from informal conversations; from contemporaneous arti-
cles of di
Verent types and from di
Verent sources, and so on.
Because of its detailed treatment elsewhere, and the fact

that we have no particular issues with this approach, we do
not discuss this further here.
One aspect of the rigorous approach we take is that all
our Wndings are grounded in the data, and we analyse our
data to check that none of it refutes any of the conclusions
we want to draw. For example, in one of our XP teams, we
were struck by the nature of team leadership. We had

observed that a recent recruit had chaired the company

stand-up at the start of the iteration. Other, more senior
members of sta
V accepted this, did not interrupt or attempt
to guide him in this role, but took his lead. From this obser-

vation we wanted to explore the conclusion that the organi-

sation had a very 
Xat structure. So we looked for
discon
Wrming instances where more junior members of sta
Vwere not allowed to take such roles, or were discouraged

from making these kinds of contribution. In fact, we found

several con
Wrming instances. In team stand-ups, team lead-
ers actively encouraged participation in the planning and
estimating tasks that needed to be undertaken. Note that

we focus here on behavioural con
Wrmation, not just what
people say but what they actually do. In this way, we recog-
nise that many social or human characteristics are disposi-
tional – e.g. evidence for the fact that A respects B is not so

simple as A utters ‘I respect you, B’ but that A’s behaviour

and actions evince respect for B.
Another aspect contributing to rigour and which can
mitigate against inappropriate assumptions or interpreta-

tions is the use of feedback. We check regularly that inter-

pretations resonate with collaborators and that any
particular understanding we are forming is accurate. In our
studies we use both formal and informal feedback. Infor-

mal feedback happens on an ad hoc basis and helps to

ensure that we have not misunderstood. As we attempt to
construct an understanding of the situation, we present ten-
tative 
Wndings to our participants. This allows them to say
‘I may have said that but what I meant was ƒ’ or ‘You

should talk to X – he knows more about Y than I do’ or
other suggestions as to how the interpretation of the situa-
tion could be improved or extended. An example in which
feedback corrected an inappropriate assumption con-

structed on the basis of the researcher’s knowledge of soft-
ware engineering is as follows. In a study of one agile team,
the researcher was observing a pairing session. This pair

were coding and running tests for about an hour; they kept

getting ‘red bars’ (showing that the code repeatedly failed
the set of automatic tests). Neither of the programmers
seemed to be at all frustrated or upset by this. One possible

interpretation is that these two programmers are not at all

bothered by failure (or maybe that they do not care about
their work). However, when the researcher asked one of the
pair about their reaction to failure, he was told that he had

misunderstood what was happening. In fact, the pair were

just starting out and the 
Wrst thing to do was to construct
failing tests. Hence, the repeated ‘red bars’ were a sign of
success, not failure.
This iterative construction of interpretation underpins
hermeneutic investigations, (see, e.g. 
[23]
). But it would not
have been possible had not the researcher and researched
been able to communicate in the same language and appre-

ciate each other’s concerns (see section above about the

relationship between researcher and researched).
More formal feedback usually takes the form of a meet-
ing, often over an informal lunch, during which we discuss

our Wndings with the participants both to o
Ver them some
thoughts for their own re
Xection, and to check our observa-
tions with the participants to see if we have misunderstood.
We discuss the response to our 
Wndings in more depth in
Section 
6.5. The nature of our research 
Wndings
One major driver for empirical studies in software engi-
neering is the aspiration to improve practice. In re
Xecting
on our experience of conducting qualitative studies, we
have found it useful to refer to another 
Weld of research
with the same driver: education. Speci
Wcally, we found
Hammersley’s discussion of the use of qualitative research

in education 
[15]
 to be particularly thought provoking. He
describes the 
Wndings of qualitative researchers thus:
‘they [qualitative researchers] 
have stressed the diverse ori-
entations of people involved in social activities; the way in
which people actively make sense of their surroundings,
and how this shapes what they do; the unintended and
often unforeseen consequences of actions; and the result-
ing contingency of most courses of events’ [p. 394]
We have found similar themes emerging from our data,
and have used them to
•uncover and elucidate problems and thereby delineate
their solution spaces;
•challenge received views; and
•provide rich narrative accounts of practice.
We shall expand on each of these in turn.
 548
H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
5.1. Problems and solutions
Because we ask open-ended questions, the kind of
answers we obtain are not knowable in advance. Instead,

the research question acts as a focus for our investigations.
There is no expectation that our answers provide direct
solutions to speci
Wc problems. Rather, they may provide a
context in which problems can be elucidated and the solu-

tion space delimited. For example, in our studies of profes-
sional end-user programmers, we found that one of their
problems was in the sharing of software development

knowledge. This problem arose in a culture in which it is

assumed that ‘Anyone can develop software’, that is, in a
culture where software development knowledge is per-
ceived as being both trivial in itself and trivial to acquire.

Our studies revealed that potential solutions to this prob-

lem were to be found in supporting informal communica-
tion and knowledge sharing, rather than in any formal
document or computer-based tool 
[36,37]
. We did not set
out with the idea of studying this problem, nor of identify-

ing ways in which to share knowledge; the problem and
potential solutions arose from the data. Similarly, in our
work on software quality, we did not expect to 
Wnd a par-
ticular problem around the role of a maverick individual,

but only discovered that this was an issue while collecting
our data. In this case, we then developed potential solutions
to the problem in consultation with one of our collabora-

tors, and informed by our studies 
[19]
.In some cases, we have uncovered problems, but investi-
gation of the solutions lies outside our immediate study.
For example, in our XP studies we have received comments

from our collaborators that XP development can become

boring after a while, and that pairing can undermine an
individual’s self-con
Wdence. Although we have heard this
anecdotally from more than one source, we have not yet

pursued them to ascertain the kinds of solution that might

be suitable, nor to 
Wnd out how common these reactions
are. This is an example of where ethnographically-informed
studies may help to formulate research questions for the

next study 
[32]
.5.2. Challenging received views
Knowing the actuality of software development practice,
rather than the received view, is an essential prerequisite to
the design of a tool, technique, or methodology to support

that practice.
The following two illustrations from our data, in which
the actuality contrasted with the received wisdom, concern
the emergence of object technology and the role of individ-

uals in pair programming.
Based on our empirical data, object technology was not
perceived as a signi
Wcant development during the early
1980s. For example, in the 6½ years from June 1978 to

December 1985, only nine papers (out of some 400) in

ACM SIGPLAN Notices
 mentioned object technology in
some substantive way. During this time, object technology
is typically discussed in terms of its signi
Wcance for some
existing area of computing (such as programming environ-

ments) rather than as a signi
Wcant development in its own
right. Our evidence locates the constitution of a separate
community that sought to discuss, promote and dissemi-

nate object issues via its own 
fora (such as the 
Wrst OOP-
SLA conference in 1986) as being a crucial turn. This
account of emergence based around the actuality of prac-
tice (what happened contemporaneously) stands in contrast

to the ‘o
Ycial view’ (what is now said to have happened)
where the emergence of object technology is seen to be the
straightforward and seamless 
adoption of manifestly sig-
niWcant developments in the SIMULA 67 language of the
late 1960s (for example, see the celebration publication

entitled 
Happy 25
th 
Anniversary Objects!
 [47]
 published by
SIGS Publications and sponsored by Borland).
The ‘o
Ycial’ view of pair programming is one of each
pair having distinct roles, often characterised as the 
driver
(operating the keyboard and mouse) and 
navigator
 or 
co-
pilot
. Indeed, Kent Beck’s original account 
[2]
 gives this
‘oYcial view’: 
‘One partner, the one with the keyboard and
the mouse, is thinking about the best way to implement this
method right here. The other partner is thinking more strate-
gically.’
 We have observed pair programming in practice
with 
Wve teams and have never found that pair program-
ming conforms to this ‘o
Ycial’ view. Rather, both partners
in the pair engage together in activities such as thinking
more strategically (or in implementing a method), as well as
in a range of other activities such as reasoning about code

behaviour or assessing the potential for refactoring. It is

not uncommon for one of the pair to operate the keyboard
and the other the mouse. Interestingly, Beck’s latest
account of pair programming 
[3] makes no mention of the
distinct roles.
Challenging received views can inform and improve
practice. For example, our work has also indicated that the
computer itself is a key player in pair programming. An XP

expert practitioner and accomplished coach has stated:
“This
 ethnographical work in eXtreme Programming
is proving invaluable, ƒ I am particularly interested in
the most recent work, suggesting that the computer itself

is a participant in XP’s pairing practiceƒ I intend to

explore the idea at greater length, and to use 
this
 work
directly in my forthcoming book on transitioning to the
XP stance.”
5.3. Providing rich accounts of practice
Our qualitative studies have been very good at providing
rich accounts of practice. Hammersley 
[16]
 comments that
‘Much of the knowledge on the basis of which practitioners
work is tacit’ (p. 397). In addition, he highlights the impor-

tance of these accounts in making what is implicit, explicit,

and hence in making the nature of practice transparent and
available for inspection, re
Xection, comment and critique.
Such accounts thus provide practitioners with a mirror of
 H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
549
their practice which might support their activities as ‘re
Xec-
tive practitioners’ 
[34]
, and provide researchers with rich
accounts of the actuality of practice.
For example, our XP studies have shown the importance
of understanding the various dimensions, both ‘technical’

and ‘social’, of software development practices such as pair

programming. So, by way of illustration, we found evidence
that pairing is intense and stressful for developers 
[32]
 and
that this characteristic of pairing a
Vected the way in which
pairing was constituted (for example, in one case, not inte-

grating code after 5 p.m.). Similarly, we found that the par-
ticular way in which the on-site customer role was ful
Wlled
(the individual, their expertise and status, their responsibili-

ties, etc.) in a team had consequences for the way in which

development, including the involvement of the on-site cus-
tomer, was progressed by that team 
[31]
. In both of these
cases, when we fed back our 
Wndings to our collaborators,
these points sparked a lengthy and energetic discussion. It

seemed to give our collaborators the chance to talk about
issues that resonated with their own experience, despite the
fact that the teams held regular retrospectives. This implies

that either these issues had not been recognised by the col-

laborators themselves until we prompted them, or that dis-
cussion of the topics had been curtailed.
Rich accounts help to prompt resonances with our col-
laborators, but they also allow us to unearth ‘the many

small actions’ described below which help to make a meth-
odology successful:
‘Publishing a methodology does not convey the visceral
understanding that forms tacit knowledge. It does not

convey the life of the methodology which resides in 
themany small actions
 that accompany teamwork. People
need to see or personally enact the methodology’ 
[9,p.139, our emphasis].
It is precisely these ‘many small actions’ which we
describe in the rich narrative accounts which result from
our studies.
6. The impact of our research
We discuss the impact our research has had in terms of
the responses we have received from two di
Verent audi-
ences: our direct collaborators and fellow academic
researchers.
6.1. Responses from our direct collaborators
Responses from collaborators have been varied, but gen-
erally positive. For example, feedback sessions in our agile
studies have been greeted with warmth and satisfaction.
Often our 
Wndings resonate with individuals’ own experi-
ences, and these sessions lead to further discussions about a

topic. This both enhances our understanding and promotes
debate within the collaborator team. For example, issues
that sparked further discussion included sustainability in

terms of the intensity of pairing (which one team compared
with marriage), use of space within the o
Yce, the role of the
customer, and software usability. The 
Wnancial mathemati-
cians did not ask us to provide an account of their activi-
ties, and did not expect one, but when presented with our
Wndings, they were pleased to receive a narrative which
made the implicit explicit so that actions could be

inspected.
On the other hand, one of our collaborators in the soft-
ware quality studies assumed that we would be giving more

judgmental feedback. In particular, they wanted to know

how they compared with other organizations, or against the
industry norm. They recognized that our ‘anecdotal’ evi-
dence was fairly accurate, but were unhappy that we did

not provide details of how many people expressed a certain

view, as this meant that “It is quite di
Ycult to decide which
comments we should attach importance to”.
1 They also
asked us directly for advice. Overall, we felt that they had

viewed us as consultants rather than impartial researchers,

although in conclusion they said that they did not feel mis-
led.
Feeding back to our collaborators is an important part
of the process we engage in, and we encourage them to re
X-ect on our observations and to make their own conclusions
about how (if at all) they should respond to any issues we
identify. We have therefore found that it is important to

make it clear to collaborators what to expect, both in terms

of day-to-day activities and in terms of feedback.
In one team, we were told that just being there helped to
support re
Xection in the team. Of course, it is not good
news to us that we are having any kind of e
Vect on the
developers, but some kind of e
Vect is inevitable. This was
reported in a positive light rather than as a disadvantage.
In addition to responses from our direct collaborators,
we have presented work at practitioner conferences and to

other (non-collaborator) development teams, and many of
our Wndings have prompted recognition, e.g. the rhythm of
XP development, the characteristics of successful XP teams,

and the signi
Wcant role that a maverick may play in devel-
opment.
6.2. Responses from academic researchers
Judging from the much higher percentage of published
papers in software engineering which report quantitative,

hypothesis testing, studies than those which report qualita-

tive studies see 
[14,39]
, it seems that software engineering
academics feel more comfortable with the former than the
latter. Quotes such as the following, indicating the per-

ceived supremacy of the former type of study, are not di
Y-cult to 
Wnd in the literature.
‘Can we get by with forms of validation that are 
weaker
than experimentation?’
1These are comments from a written reply they sent in response to a
written report, which they had requested.
 550
H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
‘When 
control is impossible
, researchers will use case
studies, observational studies and other investigative

techniques’ (
[50]
: our emphasis).
It is also quite easy to 
Wnd quotes equating empirical
studies with experiments – and hence totally discounting

qualitative studies – such as the one below.
‘Our goal of this workshop wasƒ to make another step
towards the vision of establishing systematic analysis of
experimental studies
 as part of the foundations of soft-
ware engineering’ 
[6]
.On the face of it, this quote seems uncontroversial, but
the workshop to which it refers was called ‘Realising 
evi-
dence-based
 software engineering’: experiments are not the
only form of empirical studies
, and experimental results not
the only form of evidence.
We have come to realise that if you carry out qualitative
research in a controversial area then one response is not

simply to dismiss your 
Wndings, but to dismiss the area in
its entirety. For example, on several occasions in seminars
and talks, we have found it im
possible to describe our work
with XP teams in the face of a barrage of questions along

the lines of ‘but pair programming doesn’t work’ or ‘The

Planning Game is too ine
Ycient’.
7. Concluding remarks
We have described our ethnographically-informed stud-
ies of various aspects of software development practice, and

discussed several of the issues that have arisen from this

experience. There are, of course, other qualitative
approaches that are appropriate to di
Verent contexts and
diVerent research questions. Further information about
these other approaches is readily available. For example

Robson 
[33]
, Mason 
[26]
, and Oates 
[27]
 are accessible
resources for those who are interested in conducting quali-
tative studies.
References
[1]LJ. Ball, TC. Ormerod, Applying ethnography in the analysis and
support of expertise in engineering design, Design Studies 21 (4)

(2000) 403–421.
[2]K. Beck, eXtreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, Addi-
son-Wesley, San Francisco, 2000.
[3]K. Beck, C. Andres, eXtreme Programming Explained: Embrace
Change, Addison-Wesley, San Francisco, 2005.
[4]P. Beynon-Davies, D. Tudhope, H. Mackay, Information systems
prototyping in practice, Journal of Information Technology 14 (1999)

107–120.
[5]B. Boehm, R. Turner, Balancing Agility and Discipline, Addison-Wes-
ley, San Francisco, 2004.
[6]D. Budgen, B. Kitchenham, Realising evidence-based software engi-
neering: a report from the workshop held at ICSE 2005, in: Proceed-

ings of ICSE-2005. Available from: 
http:/portal.acm.org/dl.cfm
.[7]G. Button, W. Sharrock, Project work: the organisations of collabora-
tive design and development in software engineering, CSCW 5 (4)
(1996) 369–386.
[8]J. Chong, Social behaviors on XP and non-XP teams: A comparative
study, in: Proceedings of Agile 2005, IEEE.
[9]A. Cockburn, Agile Software Development, Addison Wesley, San
Francisco, 2002.
[10]J.W. Cortada, Using textual demographics to understand computer
use: 1950–1990, IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 23 (2001)

34–56.
[11]O.-J. Dahl, K. Nygaard, Simula – an Algol-based simulation lan-
guage, Communications of the ACM 9 (1966) 671–678.
[12]H. Davis, The social management of computing artefacts in nursing
work: an ethnographic account, Ph.D. thesis, University of She
Yeld,
2001.
[13]B.G. Glaser, A. Strauss, Discovery of Grounded Theory, Aldine, Chi-
cago, 1967.
[14]R.L. Glass, I. Vessey, V. Ramesh, Research in software engineering:
an analysis of the literature, Information and Software Technology 44

(2002) 491–506.
[15]M. Hammersley, The relevance of qualitative research, Oxford
Review of Education 26 (3/4) (2000) 393–405.
[16]M. Hammersley, P. Atkinson, Ethnography, Principles in Practice,
Tavistock, London, 1983.
[17]J.D. Herbsleb, Beyond computer science, in: Proceedings of the
International Conference in Software Engineering, ICSE’05, 2005, pp.

23–27.
[18]K. Holtzblatt, J.B. Wendell, S. Woods, Rapid Contextual Design,
Morgan-Kaufmann, San Francisco, 2005.
[19]F.M. Hovenden, S.D. Walker, H.C. Sharp, M. Woodman, Building
quality into scienti
Wc software, The Software Quality Journal 5 (1996)
25–32.
[20]D. Hu
V, How to Lie with Statistics, Penguin Books, London, 1991.
[21]B.A. Kitchenham, S.L. P
Xeeger, etal., Preliminary Guidelines for
Empirical Research in Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering 28 (8) (2002) 721–734.
[22]B. Kitchenham, S. Linkman, J. Fry, Experimenter induced distortions
in empirical software engineering, in: A. Jedlitscha, M. Ciolkowski

(eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd workshop in the Workshop Series on

Empirical Studies in Empirical Software Engineering, 2003, pp. 7–15.
[23]H.K. Klein, M.D. Myers, A set of principles for conducting and evalu-
ating interpretive 
Weld studies in information systems, MIS Quarterly
23 (1) (1999) 67–93.
[24]F. Lanubile, Empirical evaluation of software maintenance technolo-
gies, Empirical Software Engineering 2 (1997) 97–108.
[25]T. Lethbridge, S.E. Sim, J. Singer, Studying Software Engineers: data
collection techniques for software 
Weld studies, Empirical Software
Engineering 10 (2005) 311–341.
[26]J. Mason, Qualitative Researching, second ed., Sage, London, 2002.

[27]B.J. Oates, Researching Information Systems and Computing, Sage
Publications, London, 2006.
[28]J. Potter, M. Wetherell, Discourse and Social Psychology, Sage, Lon-
don, 1987.
[29]H. Robinson, H. Sharp, The characteristics of XP teams, in: Proceed-
ings of XP2004 Germany, June 2004, pp. 139–147.
[30]H.M. Robinson, H. Sharp, Organisational culture and XP: three case
studies, in: Proceed
ings of Agile 2005, July, ppp. 49–58, IEEE Com-
puter Society Press, Denver, CO, 2005, pp. 5–28.
[31]H.M. Robinson, H. Sharp, The social side of technical practices, in:
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Extreme Pro-
gramming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering (XP2005),

20–22 June, Springer Verlag, She
Yeld, 2005.
[32]H. Robinson, J. Segal, H. Sharp, The case for empirical studies of the
practice of software development, in: A. Jedlitscha, M. Ciolkowski

(eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd workshop in the Workshop Series

onEmpirical Studies in Empirical Software Engineering, 2003, pp.

99–108.
[33]C. Robson, Real World Research, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford,
2002.
[34]D.A. Schön, The Re
Xective Practitioner, Temple Smith, London,
1983.
[35]C. Seaman, Methods in empirical studies of software engineering,
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 25 (4) (1999) 557–572.
 H. Robinson et al. / Information and Software Technology 49 (2007) 540–551
551
[36]J. Segal, Organisational learning and software process improvement:
A case study, in: K-D. Altho
V, R.L. Feldmann, W. Muller (Eds.),
Advances in Learning Software Organizations, Lecture Notes in

Computer Science, vol. 2176, Springer, Berlin, 2001, pp. 68–82.
[37]J. Segal, When software engineers met research scientists: a case
study, Empirical Software Engineering Journal 10 (2005) 517–536.
[38]J. Segal, Two principles of end-user software engineering research, in:
1st Workshop on End User Software Engineering, WEUSE, Interna-
tional Conference of Software Engineering, St. Louis Missouri, May

2005.
[39]J. Segal, A. Grinyer, H. Sharp, The type of evidence produced by
empirical software engineers, in: Proceedings of the Workshop on

Realising Evidence-Based Software Engineering, ICSE-2005. Avail-

able from: 
http:/portal.acm.org/dl.cfm
.[40]H. Sharp, H.M. Robinson, Object Technology: Community and Cul-
ture, in: OOPSLA 02 Companion, ACM Press, 2002, pp. 92–93.
[41]H. Sharp, H.M. Robinson, An ethnographic study of XP practice,
Empirical Software Engineering 9 (2004) 353–375.
[42]H. Sharp, H.M. Robinson, M. Woodman, Software engineering: com-
munity and culture, IEEE Software 17 (2000) 40–47.
[43]H. Sharp, M. Woodman, F. Hovenden, Tensions around the adoption
and evolution of software quality management systems: a discourse
analytic approach, International Journal of Human-Computer Stud-
ies 61 (2004) 219–236.
[44]H. Sharp, M. Woodman, F. Hovenden, Using metaphor to analyse
qualitative data: vulcans and humans in software development,

Empirical Software Engineering 10 (2005) 343–365.
[45]H. Sharp, H. Robinson, J. Segal, D. Furniss, The role of story cards
and the Wall in XP teams: a distributed cognition perspective, in: Pro-
ceedings of Agile2006, IEEE Computer Society Press, 2006, pp. 65–75.
[46]H. Sharp, Y. Rogers, J. Preece, Interaction Design, second ed., Wiley,
New York, 2007.
[47]SIGS, Happy 25th Anniversary Objects!, SIGS Publications, 1992.

[48]J. Singer, N. Vinson, Ethical issues in empirical studies of software
engineering, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 28 (2002)

1171–1180.
[49]J. Singer, T. Lethbridge, N. Vinson, N. Anquetil, An examination of
software engineering work practices, in: Centre for Advanced Studies

Conference (CASCON), Toronto, Ont., 1997, pp. 1–15.
[50]W. Tichy, Should computer scientists experiment more? IEEE Com-
puter (1998) 32–48.
[51]S. Viller, I. Sommerville, Coherence: an approach to representing eth-
nographic analyses in systems design, Human–Computer Interaction

(1999) 14.
