 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.INTRODUCING AGILE PRACTICES IN A DOCUMENTATION-DRIVEN SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PRACTICE: A CASE STUDYHeeager, Lise Tordrup
Journal of Information Technology Case and Application Research; 2012; 14, 1; ABI/INFORM Collection
pg. 3Introducing Agile Practices in a 
Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice INTRODUCING AGILE PRACTICES IN A 
DOCUMENTATION-DRIVEN SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
PRACTICE: A CASE STUDY 
ABSTRACT Lise Tordrup Heeager 
Aalborg University, Denmark 
Email: liseh@cs.aau.dk 
The agile and the documentation-driven 
software methods advocate two different wcz.·s of developing software; but research does 
shmr some compatibility between these. Practitioners have an increasing desire to adopt agile 
sofnrare development methods while still being 
compliant with a quality assurance standard. However, due to little empirical research 
documenting softll'are practices that meshes the agile and the documentation-driven methods, it 
is not well understood 
how to do this. This paper presents a case study of a 
software development practice in a pharmaceutical organization. For market reasons the organi::ation had to comp(v 
with the US Food and Drug Administration standard. At the same time significant parts of the 
agile method Scrum had been implemented by the 
software group. The purpose of this paper 
was to l/11(/erstand the possibility of implementing a 
software development practice that meshes the 
agile and the dornmentation-driven 
methoci5 and the challenges of doing this. This case study 
supports the previous literature and 
shows that it is possible to implement a 
so/Mare development practice, that meshes the agile and the documentation-driven 
method5. But, it also 
showed that doing so is not straight 
fonrnrd. It showed that meshing the project characteristics: 
'developers', 'requirements', 'testing' and 'customer-relations' 
was especially difficult. Keywords: Agile Sofnrare Development, Documentation-Driven Sofnrare Development, Quality Standard,·. Scrum, FDA INTRODUCTION In information systems development. an increasing amount of practitioners are interested in 
adopting methods (I), and the matter of choosing the appropriate software method is occupying 
many IT practitioners (2). Within the development of information systems, the agile and the 
documentation-driven methods advocate two different approaches to software development (3 ). 
The agile software methods (e.g. XP and Scrum) promise to deliver software without excessive 

cost ( 4,5). They are based on the assumptions that programs and programming is primary, not 
documentation. Agile development seeks to increase software quality by adhering to a very 
flexible strategy (6). The documentation-driven software methods are most often associated with 
the Waterfall model, but are also represented by quality standards, for example the ISO standards 
(7) and maturity models such as the CMMI (8). They rely on the assumption that to achieve high 
quality, software development processes must be defined and documented. The requirements are 
established and documented before designing, designs are established and documented before 
programming, testing is thorough and documented, and there are procedures through which 
documentation can be changed. 
JITCAR, Volume 14, Number 1, 2012 
3  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
Neither of the agile nor the documentation-driven methods provide the ultimate approach. both 
has strengths and weaknesses (9). The documentation-driven methods work well for stable 
projects, but they lack the ability of handling change. The agile methods embrace change ( 4 
), but lack the ability to handle high complexity ( I 0). Software organizations have therefore become 
increasingly interested in meshing the agile and the documentation-driven methods ( 11 ), in order 
to create a software practice, that takes advantage of the strengths and compensate for the 
weaknesses of the two ( 12). Even though the agile and documentation-driven methods seem 
contradicting, several researchers agree that they are compatible ( 13-16). At this point only little 
empirical research documents how to implement a meshed practice ( 17, 18 ). Due to the 
differences between the methods, meshing the two is not straightforward and it is not well 

understood how to do this ( I 9.20) -especially not when developing safety-critical software 
(21 ). When developing safety-critical software the software practice and the product have to comply 
with strict quality and process standards, that govern how the software should be developed. 
Implementing elements of the agile methods therefore become very challenging. 
To fill this knowledge gap, this paper provides a detailed understanding of how a software group 
has implemented and improved a software practice meshing the agile and the 
driven methods. The purpose was to understand the possibility of implementing a software 

development practice, that meshes the agile and the documentation-driven methods and the 
challenges of doing so. This paper is based on a longitudinal. interpretive case study of a software 
development practice used by a software group in a large, pharmaceutical organization. The 
software group is developing a clinical. highly safety-critical product with embedded software, 
that by law has to comply with quality-and process standards such as the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) standard. But, at the same time the software group has introduced several 
elements of the agile method. Scrum. The analysis gives an overview of the changes and 
improvement of the software practice identified at the two different times of data collection. 
In the following section the theoretical background is presented and the analysis framework 
developed. In the third section the research method is outlined, followed by a description of the 
case. Then the analysis and evaluation of the 
soft\vare development practice is presented. Finally 
the results are discussed and concluded on. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
This section presents the theoretical background for creating the analysis framework. 
The Agile and the Documentation-Driven Methods 
The agile methods were developed based on the shortcoming and failures of 
driven methods. The agile manifest (developed in 2011) expresses some of the differences 
between the agile and the documentation-driven methods. The agile methods value: I) individuals 
and interactions over processes and tools, 
2) working software over extensive documentation 3) 
customer collaboration over contract negotiation and 4) responding to change over following a 
plan (22). Agile methods advocate an iterative, test-driven software development strategy with 
frequent customer feedback. Short iterations, multi-disciplinary teams, knowledge sharing and 
continuous integration allow control over the project and increase visibility (23 ). Agile methods 
J/TCAR. Volume 
14. Number 1, 2012 
4  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
also advocate an informative workspace. in which the development is supported 
by information radiators -the placement of relevant information 
\\ here passersby can see them ( 
24 ). Refactoring (redesigning and rewriting software) is also 
adrncated by the agile methods. as it serves to correct 
for poorly written and redundant code 
(21). eXtreme Programming (XP) 
(4) and Scrum (5) are the two most well-known agile methods. While XP offers an engineering perspective in terms of 
a range of practices and principles: Scrum provides guidance for efficient management of projects 
(25). Scrum operates with three roles and several practices (see table I). 
Role/ ractice 
Scrum master 
Product owner 
Scrum team 
Sprints I Daily scrum 
I meetin i Sprint planning 
. Id meetmg av Sprint review 
meeting Product backlog 
Release backlog 
Sprint backlog 
Scrum boards 
Descri tion 
The Scrum Master is res onsible for the scrum ractice. 
ro·ect teams. The team works for a fixed period of time called a sprint (30 days is 
: recommended). Each scrum team meets daily for a 15-minutes status meeting; these meetings are 
often done standino u . 
The next sprint goal and functionality are determined at the sprint planning 

meetmg. e scrum team t en 
ev1ses t e 
111 1v1 ua tas 
·s to e per orme 
. Th h d . h . d. . d I k b D d The scrum team presents the product increment built during the sprint. 
A prioritized list of all product requirements. 
The subset of the product backlog selected for a release. 
i The tasks devised for a sprint. 
Boards displaying the tasks chosen for the current iteration and their status. 
Table 1. Roles and Practices of Scrum 
(5) The documentation-driven methods strive at creating predictability, repeatability and 
optimization; the methods aim at achieving this by focusing on long-term plans controlled by 
long-term milestones 
(26). They rely on a documentation strategy in order to ensure and prove the 
quality of the product; 
in addition to the end product, documentation of different aspects of the 
software development and the product is produced 
(27). The project is controlled through a 
command-and-control style of management, including a clear separation of roles 
(28). The customer is included in the beginning of the 
project where the requirements are specified 
(27). Documentation-driven methods are often associated with the Waterfall model (consisting of 
sequential development stages), quality standards and maturity models, such as the IS09000 
family of standards (7) and CMMI (8). For safety-critical software development even stricter 
quality standards must be applied; one example is the FDA standard. FDA approval relies on a 

process-driven approach. The manufacturers of the software obtain approval by showing that they 
have applied quality assurance techniques to certain levels of coverage 
(29). The development practice include: 1) identification of the system hazards and a definition of safety requirements, 2) 
a determination of how various components in the system can contribute to these hazards. 3) 

defining derived safety requirements for the components, and 4) the development of the 
components to meet these safety requirements (30). 
The literature shows that the agile and the documentation-driven methods have some differences 
in their focus, in their customer-relations, in the amount of documentation, in their development 
JJTCAR, Volume 
I-I, Number I, 2012 
5  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
strategy and in the 
way they handle requirements. People-issues are at the heart of the agile 
methods ( 
12) as they focus on the social aspects of software development (31 ). It is a significant 
departure from the focus on processes suggested by the documentation-driven methods 
(20). Both the documentation-driven and the agile methods highly value the satisfaction of the customer. 
But, in documentation-driven methods the customer is mainly involved during the early phase of 
the project 
v. hile agile methods 
involve the customer throughout the whole development (32). 
The handling of requirements is also a difference between the agile and the documentation-driven 
methods. While the agile methods base the requirements on user stories created and constantly 
updated by the customer ( 4 ), the documentation-driven methods advocate that the requirements 
are established and documented before designing and so forth (33). The amount of documentation 
is one of the most significant differences between agile and documentation-driven methods. Even 
though agile methods do not cast all documentation aside and it is not necessary to write piles of 
documentation in order to follow a documentation-driven method: agile methods do not support 
the degree of documentation demanded 
by documentation-driven methods (32,34 ). Agile methods 
advocate an iterative software development strategy (35), which opposed to the 
driven methods (which have separate coding and testing phases) include the testing and 
debugging of the written code in each iteration (36). 
Compatibility of the Agile and the Documentation-Driven Methods 
Previous research agrees that the agile and the documentation-driven methods despite the 
differences to some degree are compatible, but disagree about the level of compatibility. Based on 
a literature study Heeager (3 7) concludes that it is possible to implement several agile elements in 
a software development practice and at the same time comply with a quality assurance standard. 
No evidence, however, shows that it is possible to implement a full agile software development 
practice in a documentation-driven setting. 
Some researchers argue that the documentation-driven methods support the agile methods by 
providing a disciplined framework: CMMI for example presents a 
framev,ork for process improvement with guidelines of what to do to improve (38). The documentation-driven methods 
can furthermore help identify the shortcomings of the agile methods by checking the coverage of 
each process area: the potential for improvement can thereby be identified (39). The ISO standard 
has been used to provide structure to a software practice and help ensure the agile method was 
followed ( 40). On the other hand agile practices ensure that processes are implemented efficiently 
while embracing change. The agile method contributes with adaptability, while the 
documentation-driven method contributes 
v,ith discipline (25,41 ). 
Both the agile ( 42) and the documentation-driven ( 13) methods are highly flexible and adaptable. 
Several researchers agree that agile methods can be adapted to ensure compatibility with 
standards, such as the ISO. Wright (43), for example, concludes that companies using XP can 
meet the requirements of standards such as IS09001. The key is to base the quality management 
on the natural outputs of the development practice and not rely on work products produced for the 
sake of the quality assurance. Research also compares the agile methods and CMMI. There is a 
consensus that CMMI level 2 is largely compatible with the agile methods, whereas CMMI level 
3 and agile methods are partially compatible. Comparing the process areas of CMMI with the 
agile methods, Alegria and Bastaricca ( 44) find that the process areas of CMMI level 2 is 72% 
JITCAR, Volume 
1../, Number 1, 2012 
6  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a 
Doc-Driven Software De\. Practice fulfilled. whereas the CMMI 
le\'el 3 is onh· 60% fulfilled. XP and 
CMMI le\el 2 are highh . . compatible. because both XP and CMMI focus on basic project management: but an extension of 
XP is 
however needed to fulfil all requirements (45). XP fulfils many of the CMMI 
le\'el 3 requirements as well: XP for 
example includes mechanisms for verification and criteria for 
completion (46). Comparing the process areas of CMMI level 4 and 5 and agile methods. they 
seem less compatible: XP needs management and infrastructure ( 
4 7). A few case studies, 
however. show that it is possible to comply with CMMI level 4 or 5 ( 41 
.48). While the agile 
method ensures that processes are implemented efficiently. CMMI ensures that all relevant 
processes are considered ( 41 ). 
The Home Grounds of the Agile and the Documentation-Driven Methods 
The home ground concept was introduced by Boehm 
(26): a home ground is project 
characteristics within which a method performs very well. As the home grounds compare the 
agile and the documentation-driven software methods on general project characteristics, they are 
useful for analyzing a specific software practice in order to determine if and how it meshes the 
agile and the documentation-driven methods. This paper will therefore adopt the home grounds as 
the analysis framework (table 
2 and table 3). The descriptions of each characteristic (referred to 
as a category) and its sub category is based on the literature on the agile and the 
driven methods. Both the agile and the documentation-driven home grounds consist of 
12 characteristics divided into 4 categories: personnel, management, technical and application ( 49). 
JITCAR, Volume 
1-1, Number 1, 2012 
7  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.I I I I I Construct Documentation-driven I I I I I I I i I I I Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
Categorv Personnel Characteristics Management Characteristics I Subcategorv driven developers 
: Documentation-I driven customers 
~ocumentation--I ~ven culwre I driven customer 
relations Description I Documentation-driven methods focus on 
planning the project and defining the 
I architecture of the software so that less-
1 1 capable people can contribute with low risk. 
Documentation-driven methods rely on 
contractual plans and specifications written 
and agreed on in the beginning. 
, The people feel comfortable and empowered 
I when there are policies and procedures that 
i define their role in the enterprise; each 
Ł person's tasks are well-defined. 
Documentation-driven methods depend on a 
I , contract between the developers and 
I customers as the basis for customer relations. 
I Documentation-I Documentation-driven methods rely on 
driven planning 
i documented plans and a project manager in 
and control 
i charge of the control. 
D-o--c-u-n-1e_n_t_at-io_n _____ D_o_c_u_m_e_n-ta-t-io-n----d-ri_v_e_n_m--et_h_o_d_s_r_e_ly-he_a_v--i-ly~ driven ' on explicit documented knowledge. 
communications Technical Documentation-
1 Documentation-driven methods use 
Characteristics driven 
requirements I driven rdevelopment driven testing I complete, consistent, traceable, and testable 
1 specifications. Documentation-driven methods rely on 
extensive design. 
Documentation-driven methods use 
I testing based on documented test plans. 
Application Documentation-
1 Documentation-driven projects scale best to 
11 Characteristics driven size large projects (Large teams and products). 
Documentation-I The primary goals of documentation-driven 
j driven primary 
\ methods are predictability, 
stab_ ility, and highj I objective assurance. 111 ~D~o1_:cieur~nn1emnetanttion-Documentation-driven methods work best 
when the requirements are largely 
1 determinable in advance and remain stable. 
Table 2: Analysis framework (documentation-driven characteristics), adapted from Boehm 
(26) JJTCAR, Volume 1./, Number 1. 2012 8  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software 
De\. Practice Construct Category Subcategon Descrietion Agile Personnel Agile Critical people-factors for agile methods include 
characteristics develoi:,ers i amicabili!}:, talent, skill, and communicatfon. 
Agile customers 
Agile methods strongly depend on dedicated, 
collocated customers. 
-~-i Agile culture 
1 In an agile culture, the people feel comfortable and 
1, ' emeowered when there is a high 
de~ree of freedom. Management I Agile customer Agile developers use working software and customer 
characteristics relations participation to instil trust in their track record, the 
systems they have developed, and the expertise of their 
people. ! Agile planning 
: Agile methods see planning as a means to an end rather 
I and control 
! than a means of recording in text. 
I Agile . . Agile methods rely heavily on tacit, interpersonal 
1 communications knowledge. Technical I Agile ! Most agile methods express requirements in terms of 
characteristics ! requirements ! adjustable, informal stories. 
Agile Agile methods advocate simple design, one that 
' development emerges as functionality is implemented. 
' Agile testing 
i Agile methods use executable test cases, which define 
! i reguirements, the develoement is test driven. 
' Application I Agile size Agile methods seem to work best with small to 
characteristics medium teams of people working on relatively small 
I I I applications. Agile primary 
: The primary goals of agile methods are rapid value and 
i objective , responsiveness to change. 
: Agile Agile methods are most applicable to turbulent, high 
environment change environments. 
Table 3: Analysis framework (agile characteristics), adapted from Boehm 
(26) RESEARCH APPROACH 
This is a longitudinal, interpretive single case study (51) of how a safety-critical product with 
embedded software is developed at a pharmaceutical company. The purpose of the study was to 
evaluate the software development practice used by the software group in one of their projects. 
To be able to identify changes in and improvements of the software practice, the empirical data 

was collected and validated iteratively through two phases (Table 4 ). Each phase consisted of 3 
sub phases in order to introduce an iterative approach of data collection, analysis and validation. 
The data collection stretched over a period of approximately 
2 years. JITCAR, Volume 
1./, Number 1, 2012 
9  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
Phase Sub i Duration phase I Data collection 
Data documentation 
:_:_~_j November 2008-b I June 2009 l 7 qualitative interviews based on 
I Interviews audio recorded and 
I an interview 
guide-~-_J transcribed I s ( 4.l.-4) qualitative interviews 
.1-,nterviews audio recorded and 
I b d 
7 · t · "d t "bed i ase on _ 111 erv1ew gu1 es ranscn 
C [ Seminar presentation and 
Meeting audio recorded 
I I validation with 
11 members of 
' the software group 
' I 12 d January 7 qualitative interviews based on 
I Interviews audio recorded and 
I I I 2010-an interview guide 
transcribed August 5 qualitative interviews based on 
Interviews audio recorded and 
2010 an interview guide 
transcribed C I Observations of 
a planning Meetings audio recorded and 
, meeting and a stand-up meeting transcribed 
Table 4: Phases in the interpretive research approach 
The primary data collection technique was interviews; in qualitative research this is an important 
data gathering tool (50). 
It is through the interviews, the researcher has the best opportunity to 
access the interviewee· s interpretations of the actions and events, which have or are taking place 
(51 ). 
The interviewees were chosen in order to include managers, developers and testers. This 
way each sub team of the software group was represented. A triangulation of the data was made 
as the interviews were supplemented by observations and document studies. 
Data Collection: Phase 1 
The first phase included two sub phases of interviews (la+ I b) and a sub phase 
w/ith a seminar presentation and validation of the results so far ( I c). All interviews were organized as diagnostic 
interviews (52), based on a semi-structured interview guide. In the first sub phase (Ia) 7 
qualitative interviews were conducted with: the project manager, the software architect, a 
software tester and four developers from both sub teams. The interview guide included the 
subjects: FDA requirements, agile software development, the requirement specifications, 
handling of errors and general strengths and weaknesses. The second sub phase ( I b) included 
eight interviewees: the project manager, the software architect, a tester and five developers from 
both sub teams. Four of these interviewees participated in the first phase, whereas the last four 
participated for the first time. Two interview guides were used. Interviewees participating for the 
second time were asked questions based on the activities identified in sub phase I a and concluded 
by validating some of the statements from the first interviews. New interviewees were asked 
questions which included the subjects of FDA requirements and agile development before 
discussing the activities and evaluating the statements for the validation of the first phase. The 
findings were written into a report and presented to the software group in a seminar including a 
presentation and a discussion of these. The interviewees from the previous two sub phases 
participated. JJTCAR, Volume 
1-1, Number 1, 2012 
JO  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing A.gile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software 
Dev. Practice Data Collection: Phase 2 
The second phase also included two sub phases 
(2a -'-2b) of intervie\VS and added a sub phase 
(2c) of obserrntions in order to 
verify the procedure and outcomes of the planning meetings and 
stand-up meetings. The data collection was based on a framework of the home grounds of the 
agile and the documentation-driven methods 
(26). The interviews \Vere semi-structured by an interview guide based on the characteristics of the home grounds. The purpose was to follow up 
on the 
ernluation from phase I and to 
identit~· changes in and improvements of the software 
practice. The first sub iteration 
(2a) included seven interviews with: 3 software developers, a 
tester, the 
new software architect, a coordinator 
bet\veen the software group and other groups of 
the project and a consultant specializing in Scrum, who had been affiliated to the software group 
for 5 months. The output of the interviews was an identification and description of activities 
within the characteristics of the home grounds and a revised evaluation. Sub iteration 
2b focused on gaining a detailed description of the activities identified in sub iteration 
2a. It included 5 
interviewees: the former project manager, who was reassigned as responsible for the process, the 
former architect, now functioning as a software developer, the new scrum master. a tester and a 
software developer. The purpose of sub iteration 2c was to determine the procedure and the 
outcome of the planning meetings and stand up meetings. 
It included 2 observations, I observation of a planning meeting and I observation of a stand up meeting. 
The Data Analysis 
In total twenty eight interviews, observations of meetings and document studies were conducted. 
All interviews were audio recorded and transcribed. As coding of the data provides a structured 
analysis process, the interviews were collected into one hermeneutic unit and coded using 
ATLAS.ti V6 (53). The coding was based on the framework of the home grounds of the agile and 
the documentation-driven methods, including the characteristics: agile or documentation-driven 
personnel characteristics, agile or documentation-driven management characteristics, agile or 
documentation-driven technical characteristics and agile or documentation-driven application 
characteristics. The codes consisted of the subcategories of the frameworks, making it easy to 
evaluate the software practice on each project characteristic. The full analysis were written up, 
presented in a report and validated by the software group. 
CASE DESCRIPTION 
This is a study of a software group developing an embedded, clinical device for dispensing drugs. 
Due to the high level of safety-criticality, the overall device project had to be compliant with a 

large number of quality standards ( ex. FDA), some applying directly to the software development 
practice. To obtain approval 
by the FDA one has to show that several quality techniques 
(associated with the documentation-driven methods) have been applied (29). Extensive 

documentation on how the quality has been secured must be written and approved. The 
development must therefore for example include: an identification and definition of system 
hazards and 
safety requirements (30). The project studied was the first and by far the largest and most complicated software project in 
the organization. The study focuses on the software development practice. In the beginning, the 
software development suffered from high complexity, uncertainty of the tasks and shifting 
requirements. This led to a decision of implementing an agile method in the software group. The 
JITCAR, Volume 
N, Number 1, 2012 
11  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
decision was made internally in the software group and did not involve the rest of the project. The 
decision was mainly taken by the software project manager; who was later assigned the role as 
process manager. Scrum was chosen, as it at that point seemed simple and easy to implement. 
The purpose of implementing Scrum was to increase adaptability in order to cope with the 
uncertainties of the project. This is an analysis of how the software development practice has 
gone from being primarily documentation-driven to a practice that meshes elements of the 
documentation-driven FDA standard and elements of the agile software method, Scrum. During 
the period of the case study the software development group expanded from 
17 to approximately 
30 developers. testers and managers. At the end of the study, the software group consisted of the 
software project manager, a software architect, the process manager. a coordinator responsible for 
the coordination with the other parts of the project, the developers and the testers. The software 
project manager was the highest authority of the software group; this role shifted as the software 
group grew larger. At the beginning of the project the process manager was also the software 
project manager. He was very interested in agile software development. whereas the latest 
software project manager had a background in production and was much more traditional in his 
way of thinking. 
The developers were divided into two sub teams, which were coordinated by the scrum master. 
The testers were organized in their own sub team controlled by a test manager. The two sub teams 
of developers worked on the same product backlog. The tasks of the iteration were displayed on 
two scrum boards on the back wall in the office. The developers primarily coordinated within the 
sub teams through the daily stand-up meetings. The developers were responsible for unit testing 
and reviewing the code during each iteration. The test team conducted the integration tests before 
the code was handed to the system engineering group that ran system tests of the increments, 
released every second month. The software development practice was divided into iterations 
which had varied in length but settled on 
2 weeks. Each iteration was initiated with a planning 
meeting, that included a retrospective of the previous iteration and the planning of the future 
iteration. Even though both the developers and the testers ran iterations. the practice of the test 
team was very different from the practice of the developers. The testers used a highly 
documentation-driven development strategy that was managed by the test manager. Each member 
had an area of 
\vhich they were responsible. For example: one was responsible for the design of 
the test cases while another was responsible for implementing the code, and a third responsible 
for automating the tests. 
The product development also involved several other specialized groups: pham1aceutical and 
clinical researchers responsible for the drugs. process engineers responsible for production 

facilities. mechanical engineers responsible for the products mechanical functions dispensing the 
drugs, embedded 
hardv.:are engineers responsible for the computer chips and software developers 
responsible for the software controlling the hardware. In total over I 00 managers. researchers, 
engineers and developers were working on the device project. The software group was working in 
close cooperation and was dependent of the engineers developing the hardware, the mechanics 
and the system engineering group. Prior to this project, the organization had very little experience 
with software development and all software processes were to be developed from scratch. At the 
time of study, the project had been running for several years and was entering the last state of 
refining the product. 
JITCAR, Volume 
1-1, Number 1, 2012 
12  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
ANALYSIS The software development practice is analyzed according to the characteristics of the home 
grounds. The analysis focuses on the changes in and improvements of the software practice. 
Hence, in the analysis the software practice is depicted at two different timestamps: I) at the time 
of the first data collection (year 
2008-2009), referred to as the prior software practice and 
2) at the 
time of the second data collection (year 2010), referred to as the present software practice. During 
the period of study, the software development practice went from being primarily 
driven to include several agile elements. The software group did still face several problems both 
due to internal issues in the software group and external issues caused by the project structure. 
The findings are summarized in table 5 (the prior software practice) and table 6 (the recent 
software practice). The most relevant characteristics are described in further details below. 
Developers At the beginning, the organization had 
very little experience in software development projects. 
The majority of the software developers initially assigned to the project had a background in 
production and documentation-driven software development. Many of these developers were 
reluctant towards the adoption of Scrum, and had problems adjusting to the agile mindset. 
Following quote shows how a software developer expresses this reluctance towards agile 
software development at the first data collection (in the prior software practice): 
"/ think it has 
some damaging consequences; many others in 
the group think the same" 
(a software developer, 
January 2009). Acknowledging that the competences of these software developers were ill suited 
for the project and for the ambition of implementing an agile software practice; the software 
developers hired during the project period had a strong software background and experience with 
agile software development. Additionally, several resources were spent on educating the 
developers, for example: a consultant facilitating the scrum practice was affiliated to the software 
group for six months. The final consequence taken by management of the software group was to 
remove some of the inexperienced developers from the development practice, assigning them to 
documentation related tasks. All of these initiatives had at the time of the recent software practice 
resulted in a more experienced software group, consisting of both agile and documentation-driven 
developers. JITCAR, Volume 
1-1, Number 1, 2012 
13  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
Characteristics Agile Meshed Documentation-driven Developers Primarily documentation-
driven. Customers No customers affiliated. 
Culture Primarily documentation-
driven. Customer relations 
No relations or contact to 
a customer. 
Planning and 
Iterations of 4 weeks 
control length, which often did 
not include testing and 

was sometimes disrupted 
to ensure stability. 
Communications The communication of 
and knowledge 
the developers was 
sharing primarilv face-to-face. 
Requirements The requirements were 
established in the beginning of the project 
and written in documents. 
Development The development was 
regulated by formal 
requirements. Testing Much unit test and 

integration testing was 
postponed. Size A large software group 
Primary objective 
The primary objective of 
the developers was being 
approved by FDA. 
Environment The software group had 

created an agile 
environment with for 
example scrum boards. 
Table 5: Summary of the prior software development practice 
JITCAR, Volume 1-1, Number 1, 2012 14  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a 
Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
Characteristics Agile Meshed Documentation-driven Developers Both documentation-
driven and agile 
developers. Customers No customers affiliated. 
Culture The culture had both 
agile and documentation-
driven aspects. 
Customer relations 
The product owner role No relations or contact to 
was filled 
by the software a customer. 
project manager. 
Planning and The software 
control development was highly 
iterative, using iterations 
of 2 weeks length. 
Communications The communication of 
and knowledge the developers was 
sharing primarilv face-to-face. 
Requirements The requirements 
specifications were 
rewritten. Development The development was 
regulated by formal 
requirements. Testing Much testing still had to 
be done. 
Size The developers were 
divided into sub teams. 
Primary objective 
The primary objective of 
the developers was being 
approved by FDA. 
Environment The software group had 
created an agile 
environment. Table 6: Summary of the recent software development practice 
Customer Relations 
As the device was developed for a market and the end-users were not associated to the project, 
the software group had no relations or contact to a customer, neither in the prior software practice 
nor in the recent software practice. The relation to the end-user was a market analysis done in the 
beginning of the project by the marketing group. This made the customer-relations 
documentation-driven and made it difficult to fill the role of the product owner (advocated by 
Scrum). One solution would have been to assign the product owner role to a person in the project 
with a full overview of the requirements of the device (for example a person from the marketing 
group). In order to do that the software group tried to convince the management that a detached 
product owner was needed, but without any luck. Instead, the software group had (in the recent 
software practice) split the role and assigned the role as official product owner to the software 
JITCAR. Volume 14, Number 1, 2012 
15  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
project manager and the role as technical product owner to the software architect. Neither the 
software project manager nor the sofl:ware architect, 
however. had an adequate overview of the 
product and its requirements to take the decisions expected of a product owner. 
It had furthermore 
unfortunate complications to have a product owner who was also designing and implementing the 
system; no one saw the product with the eyes of the customer. In following quote the software 
architect expresses his concern with this missing product owner role: 
·'Jam complete~r entangled in the s<diware. I have to design the 
software -so if I have 
mis1111derstood something when I write the user stories. then it 
will be implemented in the 
software, guarallteed" (The software architect, 
February 2009). As the requirements (based on written project documents) only were processed 
by the software architect before entering the product backlog the risk that misunderstandings 
occurred and the product did not fit the needs of the end-user was heightened. 
Planning and Control 
The purpose of introducing Scrum was to introduce adaptability in the 
softv,are development practice in order to cope with the complexity. uncertainty and shifting requirements. Initially (in 
the prior software practice) the software group followed the recommendations of Scrum and 
implemented iterations of 4 weeks length. The developers who were reluctant to the idea of an 
agile practice were sceptical towards introducing iterations and had trouble breaking the tasks 
down into smaller bits, that could be implemented and tested within each iteration. Furthermore, 
while the software group tried to use iterative development, the project as a whole was controlled 
by long-term plans and milestones. Hence. the agile. iterative software development strategy was 
embedded in the overall documentation-driven project. The software group was influenced by 
these milestones, that determined the goals and activities for each period in the project and 
therefore highly influenced the priorities and focus. Following quote shows how one of the 
milestones affected the software development: 
"at our previous milestone 
we had to have several 
documents 1wu~1·, at the cost of the progress on the product·· 
( the software architect, June 20 I 0). 
The iterations were also affected as interruptions from other project groups happened regularly, 
even though the scrum master tried to enforce the agile recommendation of not letting anything 
interrupt the developers in the middle of an iteration. Several of these interruptions had to be dealt 
with. as they were serious matters affecting the whole device. The amount of urgent interruptions 
several times forced the software group to break of the iteration concerned. Some of these 
interruptions were caused by severe errors in the existing software discovered at the system test 
run at a release and from changes demanded by other project groups working sequentially. 
After having used iterative software development for a longer period and the number of agile 
developers had increased, several of the developers began to see the advantages of iterative 
development. Lead by the agile consultant, the developers decided to decrease the iteration length 
to 2 weeks ( in the recent 
soft\vare practice). These short iterations had several advantages. 
It gave the developers a steady work rhythm and a dedicated focus, as they constantly were forced to 
focus on the highest prioritized tasks. The short iterations also forced the developers to break the 
tasks down into even smaller bits, which gave an even greater transparency of the content of the 
tasks. This had a positive influence on the developers· ability to estimate the tasks. 
JITCAR, Volume 
1./. Number 1, 2012 
16  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
Communications and Knowledge Sharing 
The communication and 
knO\vledge sharing between the developers 
\\ere primarily face to face, 
both in the prior and in the recent software practice. The developers coordinated daily at the stand 
up meetings: at these meetings the current tasks and the progress of the iteration 
\Vere discussed. In the beginning of the project the developers were 
very sceptical to\vards the stand-up meetings. 
Before the software group was divided into sub teams, the whole group participated in the same 
meetings: due to the growing size of the group these became very time consuming and partly 
uninteresting. After the division of the software group and after the developers gained experience 
in conducting stand-up meetings, several developers did, however. find great value in these 
meetings as they ensured that all members of the sub team kept a shared focus and gave the 
developers a frequent overview of the progress of the iteration. The planning meetings and the 
retrospectives also functioned as forums for communication and knowledge sharing about the 
tasks and the iteration progress. Each sub team of developers had its own planning meetings and 
stand up meetings: the coordination between the teams was facilitated by the scrum master. An 
informative work space in which the scrum boards played a central role was also a primary 
communication channel. At the scrum boards the tasks of an iteration and their status were easily 
accessed. At a weekly status meeting the progress was communicated to the entire software group 
and its management. These meetings were supported by another board focusing on whether or not 
the development followed the overall plan. All of these meetings resulted in a close cooperation 
between the developers: 
"We kno11· each other ve,y well, so 
even though the one you need to talk 
to is not in your own team, you still 
know who to go to" (a software developer, May 20 I 0). Due 
to the requirements of the FDA standard, the software group still did extensive documentation. 
But, the writing of documents played a smaller role in the knowledge sharing within the software 
group, as new documentation was rarely distributed and found uninteresting by most of the 
developers. The development had however still a great focus on documents as these were 
required for the approval of the product. 
Requirements The requirements were established in the beginning of the project based on a market analysis. The 
requirements were written down and communicated through a hierarchy of documents. The 
higher the document was placed in the hierarchy, the harder it was to change the requirement. 
Requirements were also developed based on a hazard analysis which revealed the safety hazards 
of the device. The software requirements written in the software requirements specification were 

by the software group transformed into a product backlog with prioritized and estimated tasks. 
These tasks were by the developers referred to as user stories, but they were not written by users 
and were not in the form of user stories proposed 
by agile methods. Problems with the requirements resulted in a rewriting of the documents in the late stages of 
development (at the time of the recent software practice). Several of the higher requirements 
specifications \Vere filled with requirements which were not specified properly, with requirements 
which were too specific and with conflicting requirements. According to the process manager this 
showed that the organization had not been able to specify the product in the early stages: 
''it is an 
indication that the project or the organi::ation did not 
know what kind of product they 
wanted to develop" (the software process manager, June 20 I 0). The software group experienced difficulties 
interpreting and implementing the requirements. The software developers did not have the 
J!TCAR, Volume 
1-1, Number 1, 2012 
17  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
authority or knowledge to sort out conflicting requirements or fill in the missing details. In the 
end, the process manager therefore pushed a rewriting of these documents through. This rewriting 
of the requirements moved the project characteristic on requirements towards a more meshed 
practice in which requirements are improved during the 
development, however not in an highly, 
iterative and agile way. 
Testing Both in the prior and in the recent software practice, the software group tried to implement 
boxed iterations with a fully implemented and tested increment as output. 
But a lot of the testing 
was postponed until later in the project, the increments were therefore not fully tested before they 

were moved to the system engineering group. One reason was a focus on functionality. The 
quality of many of the unit tests implemented 
was also too low. The lack of testing contributed to 
a low quality of the code, in terms of low stability and in several errors when increments were 
delivered to the system engineering group. The developers had not been trained in writing unit 
tests: "when they decided to 
illfroduce unit tests. they did not 
give people the necessary 
competences to actual(v writing good unit 
tests" (the software architect, February 
2009). Errors detected at the system test (performed by the system engineering group) had to be handled much 
more formally than the errors detected at the unit tests and integration tests. The high amount of 

errors found at the system test therefore decreased the agility. 
In the recent software practice the developers did increase the amount of unit tests done within an 
iteration and the quality of each unit test, as I) the skills of the developers were heightened; 
2) the developers experienced the benefits of unit testing and were 
motivated to increase the amount of 
tests (a positive circle, more tests breeds more tests) 3) the perceived 
value of the testing was 
increased, as the agile consultant had a focus on this issue. The focus on integration test also 
increased heavily, and the number of testers responsible for the integration test of the code 

increased intensely through the project, especially in the last period. However, as the recent test 
team worked on a big backlog of tests, they were not able to test each increment directly after the 
iteration. This created a big cliff between the developers and the testers, whose cooperation was 
almost nonexistent at the time of the recent software practice. 
DISCUSSION In this section the software development practice is discussed according to the literature. Table 6 

summarizes the compatibility of the agile and the documentation-driven methods for each project 
characteristic. JITCAR, Volume 
1-1. Number 1, 2012 
18  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Ori\ en Software 
Dev. Practice Characteristic Description 
Developers Changing the mindsets of developers can be difficult; developers trained in the 
documentation-driven domain may have a hard time adjusting to the agile 
mindset. Customer-relations When developing software for a market. it is difficult to implement a customer-
driven practice. Assigning the product owner role to an internal person with the 
right competences requires an acknowledgement from the management. that this 
Planning and control 
role is 
im[JOrtant. Implementing a highly iterative software practice in a documentation-driven 
setting is possible and doing so can have several advantages. The milestones 
may however affect the content of the iterations. 
Communication and Implementing 
a communication and knowledge sharing strategy 
that is knowledge sharing 
primarilv agile and personalized is possible, but documentation is still needed. 
Requirements Handling the requirements in an agile, iterative manner is difficult when the 
development is affected by the milestones. 
Testing Implementing a test-driven practice may be 
difticult even though both the agile 
and the documentation-driven methods focus on test. 
Table 4. The compatibility of the project characteristics 
Developers Changing from a documentation-driven software development practice to an agile one requires a 
different mindset and different skills 
(23 ). Changing the mindsets of developers can, however, be 
difficult; developers trained in the documentation-driven domain may have a hard time adjusting 
to the agile mindset. As presented in the analysis, the developers were reluctant towards 
implementing Scrum. Based on an empirical study of seven organizations, Cohn and Ford (36) 
also experienced that even though most developers have an appropriate level of scepticism 
towards the adoption of agile practices, some developers do resist the change. Hiring experienced 
developers enhanced the implementation of the Scrum method, in the case study of this paper. 
The literature also highlights 
hmv competent people are needed to make the implementation 
happen. Little evidence is given, that agile methods will work in the absence of above-average 

people (27). 
Customer-Relations The documentation-driven software methods only involve the customer in the beginning of the 
product when creating the requirements ( 49). In agile software development a close customer 
contact and a customer-driven practice is advocated, in order to ensure that the end-product meets 
the needs and expectations of the customer ( 49). Due to this heavy reliance on people, agile 
methods are hard to implement ( 54 ). This case study showed that for a software group developing 
software aimed for the market implementing a customer-driven practice can be very difficult. The 
software group experienced a need for a product owner to (re)define the requirements, but, 
creating a relation to the customer was in this case study impossible as no users were affiliated to 
the project. Murru et al (55) propose that filling the product owner role by an internal person is a 
way to solve this issue. In this case study, it was not possible as the management ( driven by the 
quality standards and not 
by agile principles) did not prioritize this role. Instead this project 
characteristic had a strong documentation-driven character. 
JJTCAR, Volume 14, Number 1, 2012 
19  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
Planning and Control 
Previous literature suggests that the development strategies of the agile and the 
driven methods are incompatible (27). This case study, however, showed that it is possible to 
implement an agile software development strategy by embedding a highly iterative software 
practice in the linear development strategy of the project. Doing so can have several advantages. 
One advantage is the increase of adaptability. The purpose of agile software methods are to be 
adaptable, collaborative, delivery-driven, people oriented and customer-focused (35). Rising and 

Janoff (56) acknowledge the many advantages of iterative software development; they also found 
that breaking the tasks down (to fit within the iterations) into a series of manageable chunks 
increased the transparency of the content of the tasks and eased the estimation. In this case the 

iterations were however affected by the long-term milestones guiding the overall project. The 
activities demanded to pass the milestones, such as documenting the requirements and the 
software design in the early phases influenced the workflow and the focus of the iterations and 
decreased the agility. To solve this issue, Boehm and Turner (34) suggest that milestones should 
be realigned and redefined to better fit the iterative approach. As the software group in this case 
study did not have any influence on the milestones and the fact that the milestones also had to fit 
with the other groups of the project working sequentially, this was not possible. 
Communication and Knowledge Sharing 
While the documentation-driven methods facilitate knowledge sharing primarily through 
documentation, the agile methods facilitate knowledge sharing through informal communications 
among team members ( 49,57). These two different strategies are in the knowledge management 
literature, referred to as personalization and codification (58). This case study showed that a 
primarily agile and personalized knowledge sharing strategy can be implemented in a 
documentation-driven setting. The personalization strategy was preferred by the developers and 

was the strategy most used in practice. They communicated primarily at the planning meetings, 
daily scrum meetings and through the information radiators. Documentation was, however, still 
needed, due to the requirements for safety-critical software development. According to the 
developers vvriting documents was a minor part of their work and their knowledge sharing, but it 
did however still play a central role as they for example had to document each peer review. 
Hence, the software group had to write documentation for the sole purpose of complying with the 
FDA standard. This supports the findings in previous research, which 
shov,s that the agile and the 
documentation-driven software development methods are limited in the compatibility when it 
comes to documentation (32,34). 
Requirements In agile methods the requirements are gathered throughout the iterative lifecycle 
(24 ), whereas in 
documentation-driven development (such as the Waterfall model) the requirements are gathered 
and specified in the beginning of the project (33). The way the requirements are handled is in the 
literature identified as a major challenge to meshing the agile and the documentation-driven 
methods (37). This case study showed how handling the requirements in an agile and iterative 
manner can be difficult. The long-term milestones controlling the overall project may dictate that 
the requirements specifications have to be approved in the beginning of the project. The software 
group was not able to handle their requirements in a highly iterative manner, even though they 
J/TCAR, Volume 14. Number 1, 2012 
20  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a 
Doc-Driven Software De,. Practice experienced problems with the requirements specified. 
But. they did push one rewriting of the 
requirements specifications through, in the late stages of the project. Changing the requirements, 
in the late stages of the project, is, 
howe,er. very expensi,e and an iterative gathering of the 
requirements would therefore have been preferred (4). To deal with this issue a realignment of the 
milestones\\ ill be necessary. 
Testing Agile software methods suggest that test cases are written before the software and that all parts of 
an increment are tested within the iteration. These executable test cases define the requirements, 
while documentation-driven methods rely on documented test plans and procedures (49). Boehm 
and Turner (34) suggest that implementing test 
dri,en de,elopment is a way to mesh the agile and 
the documentation-driven methods. They argue that both the agile and the documentation-driven 
methods focus on test. This case study, however, showed that implementing a test-driven practice 
in a documentation-driven setting can be difficult. The 
softv,are group did not ( despite several 
attempts) succeed in implementing agile testing in their software practice. Much testing was 
postponed until the late stages of the project and in order to comply with the quality standards, 
much effort was put on creating test plans and procedures. Postponing the tests resulted in 

releases of unstable increments to system tests, that returned many errors. Dealing with errors 
found at the system test run by the system engineering group implied a heavy authorization 
process. while errors found at tests within the software group could be handled in a much lighter 
way. CONCLUSION This paper is a study of the software development practice of a software group in a 
pharmaceutical company developing a highly safety-critical software system for drug dispensing. 
The software and the device in which it 
\vas embedded were therefore to be compliant with 
several process standards, for example the FDA standard. The purpose of this paper was to 
understand the possibility of implementing a software development practice, that meshes the agile 
and the documentation-driven methods and the challenges of doing so. To do this, the analysis is 
based on a framework developed from the home grounds (26) of the agile and the 
driven methods. 
The software 
development practice presented in this paper meshes the practices of the agile 
software development method Scrum with a documentation-driven method complying with the 
FDA requirements. The software group was agile as they ran time-boxed iterations of 
2 weeks, including a planning meeting and a retrospective. The control of the tasks and the progress of the 
iterations were supported 
by the use of scrum boards. The developers were divided into small 
self-organizing teams; within these teams they coordinated through daily stand-up meetings, 
while the scrum master facilitated the coordination between the two teams. The software practice 
was however also documentation-driven as the requirements were fixed early in the project and 
there was no customer contact or validation of the interpretation of the requirements before 
implementation. This case study supports the previous literature and shows that it is possible to implement a 
software development practice, that meshes the agile and the documentation-driven methods. But, 
JJTCAR, Volume 
J.I, Number I, 2012 
21  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
it also showed that doing so is not straight forward. It is possible to develop the software in 
iterations within a long-term plan consisting of long-term milestones; but these iterations may be 
affected by the milestones as these are guiding the focus of the project. 
It is possible and 
advantageous to implement an agile. personalized communication and knowledge strategy. but, it 
is necessary to write extensive documentation as well. The case study, however, showed that 
meshing the project characteristics: 
·developers·, ·requirements', ·testing· and 
relations· were especially difficult. For documentation-driven developers it can be 
very hard to change to an agile mindset in which the tasks need to broken down to fit in the iterations and in 
which knowledge sharing is primarily face-to-face. 
It is difficult to handle the software 
requirements in an iterative manner. as the long-term milestones controlling the project require an 
approval of these in the early stages of the project. Implementing a test-driven and a 
driven practice also requires priority from management, for example implementing a functioning 
product owner role needs priority from management. 
REFERENCES I. Avison, D.E. & Fitzgerald, G. 
(2003 ). Where now for development methodologies? Communications 
of the ACM. 
46( I}, 78-82. ' Fitzgerald. B., Russo, N.L. & Stolterman, E. 
(2002). Information systems development: Methods in 
action. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
3. Dahlberg, H., Ruiz, F.S. & Olsson, C.M. 
(2006). The role of extreme programming in a plan-driven 
organization. The Transfer and Diffusion of Information Technology for Organizational Resilience: 
IFIP TC8 WG 8.6 International Working Conference, 291-312. 
4. Beck, K. & Andres, C. (2004). Extreme programming explained: Embrace change. Boston: 
Wesley Professional. 
5. Schwaber, K. & Beedle, M. 
(200 I). Agile software development with Scrum. New Jersey: Prentice 
Hall. 6. (6) Cockburn, A. & Highsmith, J. (2002). Agile software development, the people factor. Computer, 
34(11), 131-133. 
7. Hoyle, D. (2006). ISO 9000 quality systems handbook. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. 
8. Chrissis, M.B. 
& Konrad, M. 
& Shrum, S. (2003). CMMI guidelines for process integration and 
product improvement. Boston: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc. 
9. Boehm, B. & Turner, R. (2003). Observations on balancing discipline and agility. Proceedings of the 
Agile Development Conference, 32-39. 
I 0. Dahlbom, B. 
& Mathiassen, L. ( 1993 ). Computers in context: The philosophy and practice of systems 
design. USA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
11. Pikkarainen, M. & Mantyniemi, A. (2006). An approach for using CMMI in agile software 
development assessments: experiences from three case studies. SPICE 
2006 conference, 4-5. 
12. Galal-Edeen, G.H., Riad, 
A.M. & Seyam, M.S. (2007). Agility versus discipline: Is reconciliation 
possible? International Conference on Computer Engineering & Systems, ICCES'07. 331-33 7. 
13. Baker, S.W. (2005). Formalizing agility: An agile organization's journey toward CMMI accreditation. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference, 185-192. 
14. Heeager, L.T. 
& Nielsen. P.A. (2009). Agile Software Development and its Compatibility 
with a Document-Driven Approach? A Case Study. Australasian Conference on Information Systems, 
205. 15. Manhart, P. 
& Schneider, K. (2004). Breaking the ice for agile development of embedded software: an 
industry experience report. Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software Engineering, 
378-386. JJTCA.R, Volume 
1-1. Number 1, 2012 
22  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software Dev. Practice 
16. Nawrocki. J .. Olek. 
L.. Jasinski. M .. 
Paliswiat. B .. Walter. 
8 .. 
Pietrzak, B. & Godek. P. (2006). 
Balancing agility and discipline with xprince. Rapid Integration of Software Engineering Techniques. 
Second International Workshop. RISE 2005. 266. 
17. Kahkonen. T. & Abrahamsson. 
P. (2004 ). Achieving 
CMMI level 2 with enhanced extreme 
programming approach. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference. PROFES 
2004. 378-392. 18. Pikkarainen. M. (2009). Towards a Bener Understanding ofCMMI and Agile Integration-Multiple 
Case Study of Four Companies. Product-Focused Software Process Improvement: I 0th International 
Conference, PROFES 
2009.401-415. 19. Reifer, D.J. 
(2003). XP and the CMM. IEEE Software, 20(3), 14-15. 
20. Vinekar. V., Slinkman, C. W. & Nerur. S. (2006). Can agile and traditional systems development 
approaches coexist? An ambidextrous view. Information Systems Management. 
23(3 ), 31-42. 21. Vogel, D.A. (2006). Agile Methods: Most are not ready for prime time in medical device software 
design and development. DesignFax Online. 1-6. 
22. Beck K, Beedle M. van Bennekum A, Cockburn A, Cunningham 
W. Fowler M, et al. Manifesto for 
Agile Software Development. 200 
I: Available at: http:. iagilemanifesto.org. Accessed October 9, 
2011. 23. Mahanti. A. (2004). Challenges in enterprise adoption of agile methods -A survey. Journal of 
Computing and Information Technology, 
14(3 ), 197-206. 24. Cockburn, A. (2006). Agile software development: The cooperative game. Boston, USA: 
Wesley Professional. 
25. Jakobsen, C.R. 
& Johnson, K.A. (2008). Mature agile with a twist ofCMMI. Agile, 2008. AGILE'08. 
Conference, 212-217. 
26. Boehm. 
8. (2002). Get ready for agile methods. with care. Computer. 35( I), 64-69. 
27. Nerur, S., Mahapatra, 
R.K. & Mangalaraj. G. (2005). Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies. 
Commun ACM, 48(5). 73-78. 
28. Moe, N.B .. 
Dings0yT. T. & Dyba. T. (2010). A teamwork model for understanding an agile team: A 
case study of a Scrum project. Information and Software Technology. 52(5), 480-491. 
29. Lee, 
I., Pappas, G.J., Cleaveland, R .. Hatcliff, J., Krogh, B.H., Lee, P .. Rubin, H. & Sha. L. (2006). 
High-confidence medical device software and systems. Computer, 39(4). 33-38. 
30. Heimdahl, M.P.E. (2007). Safety and software intensive systems: Challenges old and new. Future of 
Software Engineering (FOSE '07), 137-152. 
31. McAvoy, J. 
& Butler, T. (2009). A failure to learn in a software development team: The unsuccessful 
introduction of an agile method. Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Information 
Systems Development ([SD2007), 1-13. 
32. Paetsch, F., Eberlein, A. & Maurer, F. (2003). Requirements engineering and agile software 
development. Proceedings of the Twelfth International Workshop on Enabling Technologies: 
Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, 308. 
33. Pressman, R.S. (2000). Software engineering -A practitioner's approach. UK: McGraw-Hill Publishing 
Company. 34. Boehm, 8. & Turner, R. (2005). Management challenges to implementing agile processes in traditional 
development organizations. IEEE Software, 
22(5), 30-39. 35. Larman, C. (2004). Agile and iterative development: a manager's guide. Boston, USA: 
Wesley Professional. 
36. Cohn, M. & Ford, D. (2003 ). Introducing an agile process to an organization [software development]. 
Computer, 36(6), 74-78. 
37. Heeager, L.T. (20 I 2). The Agile and the Disciplined Software Approaches: Combinable or Just 
Compatible? Information Systems Development ([SD2011 ). 
38. Elshafey, L.A. & Galal-Edeen, G.H. (2008). Combining CMMI and Agile Methods. Proceedings on 
the 6th International Conference on Informatics and Systems, 27-39 . 
.!ITCAR, Volume 
1../, Number 1, 2012 
23  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Introducing Agile Practices in a Doc-Driven Software 
Dev. Practice 39. Fritzsche. M. & Keil, P. (2007). Agile Methods and CMMI: Compatibility or Conflict? e-lnformatica 
Software Engineering Journal, I 
(I), 9-26. 40. McMichael, B. & Lombardi. 
M. (2007). ISO 9001 and agile development. Proceedings of the AGILE 
2007. 262-265. 
41. Sutherland. J .. Jakobsen, C.R. 
& Johnson, K. (2007). Scrum and cmmi level 5: The magic potion for 
code warriors. AGILE 2007, 272-278. 
42. Theunissen, W.H .. Kourie, D.G. & Watson. B.W. (2003). Standards and agile software development. 
Proceedings of the 2003 annual research conference of the South African institute of computer 
scientists and information technologists on Enablement through technology, 178-188. 
43. Wright, G. (2003). Achieving ISO 9001 certification for an XP company. 
Extreme Programming and Agile Methods, Third XP Agile Universe Conference, 43-50. 
44. Alegria, J.A.H. & Bastarrica, M.C. (2006). Implementing CMMI using a Combination of Agile 
Methods. CLE! electronic Journal, 9( I), 1-15. 
45. Bos, E. & Vriens, C. (2004 ). An agile CMM. proceedings of 4th Conference on Extreme Programming 
and Agile Methods-XP.
1Agile Universe. 129-138. 
46. Laurila, P. (2004). Are CMM and agile methods really compatible? T-76.650 Seminar in software 
engineering, 1-10. 
47. Paulk, M.C. (2001). Extreme programming from a CMM perspective. IEEE Software, 18(6), 19-26. 
48. Anderson, D.J. (2005). Stretching agile to fit CMMI level 3. Proceedings of the Agile Development 
Conference, 193-20 I. 
49. Boehm, B. 
& Turner, R. (2003). Using risk to balance agile and plan-driven methods. Computer, 
36(6), 57-66. 
50. Myers, M.D. 
& Newman, M. (2007). The qualitative interview in IS research: Examining the craft. 
Information and Organization, 17( I). 2-26. 
51. Walsham, G. ( 1995). Interpretive case studies in IS research: nature and method. European journal of 
information systems. 
4(2). 74-81. 52. Iversen, J.K., Nielsen. P.A. 
& N0rbjerg. J. 
( 1998). Problem diagnosis software process improvement. 
Information systems: Current Issues and Future Changes IFIP. 30 66-81. 
53. Muhr, T. ( 1991 ). ATLAS1ti-A prototype for the support of text interpretation. Qualitative Sociology, 
14(4). 349-371. 
54. Paulk, M.C. (2002). Agile methodologies and process discipline. Crosstalk-The Journal of Defense 
Software Engineering, I (I), 15-18. 
55. Murru, 
0., Deias. R. & Mugheddue, G. (2003). Assessing XP at a European internet company. 
Software. IEEE, 20(3). 37-43. 
56. Rising, L. 
& Janoff, N.S. (2002). The Scrum software development process for small teams. Software. 
IEEE, 17(4), 26-32. 
57. Crawford, B., Castro, C. & Monfroy, E. (2006). Knowledge management in different software 
development approaches. Advances in Information Systems, LNCS 4243, 304-313. 
58. Hansen, M.T., Nohria. N. & Tierney, T. (1999). What's your strategy for managing knowledge? Harv 
Bus Rev, 77(2), 106-116. 
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY 
Lise Tordrup Heeager 
received the Master's degree in Informatics from Aalborg University, 
Aalborg, Denmark in 2008. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Department 
of Computer Science, Aalborg University. Her current research interests include information 
systems and software engineering with a particular emphasis on meshing agile and 

documentation-driven methods. 
J!TCAR, Volume 14. Number 1, 2012 
24 