 



 
 UPDATED29 December 2016.  The Attention deficit hyperactivity is a behavior disorder with high global research. Because of this, his relation with the Time Perception is being research by the Neuroscience Institute of the Universidad el Bosque in order to find new ways of treatment of the Disorder, and the Institute needs new technological tools that help them finish their research. Seeing that, we have developed 
an activities manager software for the usage of the 
institute users and activities. Thanks to this system we 
have increase costs of the patients and improve the reliability of the e Perception activities and users manager for research propose. 
  ADHD; Neuroscience; User management; W
eb-based 
test; LEAN. 

 The neuroscience Institute of El Bosque University is studying the relation between time perception and 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) [1]. 
According to the institute, if this relation exists, the 
time perception could be use as treatment for the 
ADHD patients. The institute developed tests and practices for measure the time perception on patients, looking for collect data to the study. The tests and 
practices are realized in the institute and require a 
doctor and the Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all 
of this work for personal or classroom use 
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must 
be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.  Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). CSCW '17 Companion, February 25 - March 
01, 2017, Portland, OR, USA 
ACM 978-1-4503-4688-7/17/02. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3022198.3026361 Cristian P
áez Rincón
 Universidad E
l Bosque
 cpaezr@unbosque.edu.co
 Isaac Montoya Guzm
án Universidad El Bosque
 jimontoya@unbosque.edu.co
 Carlos López 
Ospina
 lopezcarlosa@unbosque.edu.co
  patient. They use a chronometer to record the time in some tests and practices and are limited to the Power 
Point tools and functionalities. The institute is trying to 
improve the investigation increasing the volume of data 
that they can collect but exists two obstacles, the costs 
and coverage. The high costs appears because they need a doctor to collect the tests and practices data results. It means pay the hours that the doctor 
invested for apply the tests and practices. Coverage is 
the other issue into the institute investigation. Only the 
patients in Bogotá and with previous date, will be able 
to present the tests and practices. Patients require time and transport to go to the institute. They expend money and sometimes is hard to schedule a date. The 
use of technology, in the actuality is a tool that let us 
optimize and organize process in way that we can 
reach better results [2]. In the context presented by the institute, it intends use the technology like tool for 
the research [3]. Taking advantage the internet tendency, we were able to extend the coverage in the 
investigation of the institute for their studies. Developing a web application we were able to provide the institute with a tool for their investigation that let 
them improve the coverage and decrease the costs, by 
this way increasing the investigation data for obtaining 
better results in less time and generating less costs. Solution 
Seeing this problem, we proposed a web-based system called SESPET, that handles tests and practices for the 
institute, where the patients can access to the system 
from everywhere with an internet connection and the 
Institute can keep a reliable record of the tests being 
presented. The SESPET system provide the tests and practices to the patients inscribed in the institute. When a patient 
log in the system this will provide the tests and practices assigned and in the specific order required by his researcher. This was important because some of the target patients will have ADHD and the system should keep them focused in the tests and practices. The scalability of the system was also an important 
issue for the institute, since the tests tend to change during the course of the research. For this we made the tests in a way that all his parameters can be changed and modified. Also we made that the system could be able to receive the code of new tests and practices so new tests could be added in a future. Administrator, Researcher and Patient. This user profiles have different access permissions to the system. The Patient can only perform tests and practices, the Researcher can assign those tests and 
practices to the patient with different values and see 
their results, and the Administrator can manage users, assign tests and practices, create new tests and practices and view of the tests results. find a range of the significant results, since this are usually in milliseconds, and provide an export to excel functionality for an easy data analysis. Construction 
development methodology combined with a Kanban 

board to take control of the tasks and generate an agile 
and quality process [4]. Inside the objectives and development there was an important selection phase of 
technology where were concluded the necessary tools 
needed for its development. Following Lean, the 
construction of the platform was made, looking forward to keep a high interaction with the client and generating just the necessary gadgets. About the management of the information, we used relational database MySQL because it allow us to make a business process modeling  (BPM) based on the institute needs and keeping low costs thanks to the free license. To use internet and keeping in mind the experience of developers, we used Java JEE to build the web platform. Inside this, we apply the model view controller architecture letting us to delegate the appropriate task to each responsible and separate the modules. To build the view we used PrimeFaces framework which allow us to be fast with the creation of the interface and also to make it attractive for users. With Hibernate [5], we map out all the database information to have a fast access to them from Java. Finally, we used spring [6] as a part of the controllers to manage the information exchange between the client and the server, it also allow us to provide a security standard to take control over who's allowed to access to a specific functionality of the platform. Keeping in mind this is a test and practice platform, was developed in the way that the institute can parameterize it. This mean the institute could, if they require, add new activities into the platform and can assign the required number of in and out variables to them. The activities are designed to can be develop using Javascript and HTML, bringing a high variety of possibilities to create new activities. 
  Given the increase of the use of in Colombia, by implementing an internet platform that handles the tests and practices for the Institute we already made an improvement in scope. However, we use the surveys to support this fact asking people of all the regions of Colombia if was possible the access to the platform and if was possible to make the tests and practices, we even include some test subjects in Mexico and the United States to support even further this functionality. We obtain that all the users were able to perform the tests and that their information was stored successfully when needed. found that a cost for each appointment was between 
60.000 and 80.000 COP (between 20 and 27 USD) for 
the institute and the costs of transportation for the 
patients was between 4.000 and 8.000 COP (between 
1.35 and 2 USD), making it less appealing for the patients to keep with the support of the research. We tried to remove this costs using the SESPET platform, 
assuming that the use of an online test platform will 
reduce significantly the costs for appointments and 
transport for the patients. We supported this results by applying surveys to different users, we asked for the average costs of helping with the research of the 
Institute through an online platform and most of them 
say that was nearly nothing. We also applied surveys to support the improvement in the user experience. We ask the researchers in the Institute about the experience using the platform and the improvements against the previous methods, obtaining clearly a better performance in the administration of users and tests for the Institute.
 As a first conclusion we can affirm that the use of 
technological tools for research of the time perception is fundamental, since this provides a reliability in the data gathered from the patients, resulting in a better analysis of the study case and, therefore, better results of the researches. Is important for the Institute that the ability 
to access the tests is available for most 
of the potential 
patients,  since this results in more patients, more data for the institute to analyze and best supported results. 
Therefore we can conclude that the increase of scope is 
an important improvement for the research of the 
institute. We can also conclude that the implementation 
of technological tools in Colombia is an important step, since the technological infrastructure is increasing every day. We cannot talk about improvements in scope without talking about cost reduction, since the fact that the platform is on internet and available to all users makes the costs of the Institute and the patients go down by a significant amount, reducing the cost of appointments for the institute and deleting the costs of transportations for the patients. This brings more patients that are willing to help with the research and provides more data and support for the institute research.  Finally, we can conclude that the use of technological tools, as the platform SESPET, for the development of 
researches of the time perception is fundamental, since 
the precision and reliability of the test have to be high 
in order to obtain meaningful results. Also, the 
implementation of technological tools for research institutes in Colombia provides better quality in Colombian researches, helping the country to improve 
the development of new knowledge. 
 [1] Instituto de Neurociencias Universidad el Bosque. 
And Escuela Colombiana de Medicina. Percepción 
del tiempo; una visión global de las diferente
s  perspectivas en  neurociencias. 
[2] S. G. Villate, M. E. Franzán, G. Passaglia, M. 
Cáceres and G. A .Ortiz. Trastornos en la 

percepción del tiempo en pacientes con 

alteraciones dopaminérgicas. Neurología Argentina 
6(4), pp. 212-216. 2014. 
[3] J. Altés. Papel de las tecnologías de la información y 
la comunicación en lamedicina actual. Seminarios 
De La Fundación Española De Reumatología 

14(2), pp. 31-35. 2013. 
[4] R. A. G. Bustos. Métodos de desarrollo de software: 
El desafío pendiente de la estandarización. 

Software Developmen
t Methodologies: A Duel 
Pending 
for Standardization.
 [5] Hibernate official site. - 
http://hibernate.org/
 [6] Spring official site - 
https://spring.io/
 