 JOURNAL OF 
THEORY AND 
  Volume 16 Issue 1  
 Managing Risk Areas in Software Developm
Offshoring: A CMMI Level 5 C
John Stouby Persson
Center for Information Systems Management
Aalborg University 
john@dps.aau.dk
  
 Software companies are increasingly offshoring deve
lopment to countries with high expertise at lower c
ost. Offshoring 
involves particular risk areas that, 
if ignored
level may influence the management of these risk ar
eas. Against this backdrop, we present an interpret
ive case study 
on 
how managers perceive and mitigate the risk areas i
n soft
maturity model integration (CMMI) 
level 5 software company as the client. We f
mitigated 
most of the offshoring risk areas in accordance wit
h the findings of previous rese
area of task distribution wa
s a notable exception. In this case, managers perce
ive
and coupling across sites as risk mitigation rather
 than risk taking. The paper discusses how and why 
managers 
perceived and mitigated 
the risk areas in this way and the implications for
 theory and practice in software 
development offshoring. 
Keywords:
 Distributed Software Development, Case Study, CMMI,
 Scrum, Agile Methods, Offshoring, Risk 
Management, Global Sof
tware Engineering.
 Marcus A Rothenberger acted as 
Senior E
 OURNAL OF 
INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY
HEORY AND 
APPLICATION
  Paper 2 pp. 5 Œ 24 April 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Developm
Offshoring: A CMMI Level 5 C
ase
 John Stouby Persson
 Center for Information Systems Management
  Bjarne Rerup Schlichter
Department of Business Administration
Aarhus University
brs@
badm.au.dk
Abstract:
 Software companies are increasingly offshoring deve
lopment to countries with high expertise at lower c
ost. Offshoring 
if ignored
, 
increase the likelihood of failure. However, the of
fshoring client™s maturity 
level may influence the management of these risk ar
eas. Against this backdrop, we present an interpret
ive case study 
how managers perceive and mitigate the risk areas i
n soft
ware development offshoring with a 
level 5 software company as the client. We f
ou
nd that managers perceive
most of the offshoring risk areas in accordance wit
h the findings of previous rese
arch. However, the risk 
s a notable exception. In this case, managers perce
ive
d 
high task uncertainty, equivocality, 
and coupling across sites as risk mitigation rather
 than risk taking. The paper discusses how and why 
managers 
the risk areas in this way and the implications for
 theory and practice in software 
Distributed Software Development, Case Study, CMMI,
 Scrum, Agile Methods, Offshoring, Risk 
tware Engineering.
 Senior E
ditor for this paper. 
ECHNOLOGY
 ISSN: 1532-3416  
2015 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Developm
ent 
 Bjarne Rerup Schlichter
 Department of Business Administration
 Aarhus University
 badm.au.dk
 Software companies are increasingly offshoring deve
lopment to countries with high expertise at lower c
ost. Offshoring 
increase the likelihood of failure. However, the of
fshoring client™s maturity 
level may influence the management of these risk ar
eas. Against this backdrop, we present an interpret
ive case study 
ware development offshoring with a 
mature capability 
nd that managers perceive
d 
and 
arch. However, the risk 
high task uncertainty, equivocality, 
and coupling across sites as risk mitigation rather
 than risk taking. The paper discusses how and why 
managers 
the risk areas in this way and the implications for
 theory and practice in software 
Distributed Software Development, Case Study, CMMI,
 Scrum, Agile Methods, Offshoring, Risk 
 6 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Development Offshor
ing: A CMMI Level 5 Case
  Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 1 Introduction 
Global competition, the need for flexibility, new t
ypes of expertise, and cost reduction drive softwar
e 
companies to engage in offshoring (Lacity, Khan, & 
Willcocks, 2009; Stephan & Silvia, 2008). Successfu
l 
offshoring requires an organization to effectively 
manage temporal, geographical, and sociocultural 
distances (Holmstrom, Conchúir, Agerfalk, & Fitzger
ald, 2006) and the many other challenges associated
 
with software development in general. Managers deal
 with specific offshoring challenges in terms of ri
sk 
areas in software development offshoring (Iacovou &
 Nakatsu, 2008; Lamersdorf et al., 2012; Persson & 
Mathiassen, 2010; Singh & Nigam, 2012). Risk areas 
represent organizational contexts that include many
 related risk factors, which together possess a thre
at to a software development project™s success (Boe
hm, 
1991). Persson, Mathiassen, Boeg, Madsen, and Stein
son, (2009) argue that eight risk areas are central
 
to managing distributed software development: task 
distribution, knowledge management, geographical 
distribution, collaboration structure, cultural dis
tribution, stakeholder relations, communication 
infrastructure, and technology setup. These risk ar
eas represent the organizational contexts of partic
ular 
concern to managers of software development offshor
ing, but, as with any other risks, they are not 
objective facts (Hansson, 2010). The organizational
 conceptions of risks derive primarily from what 
managers consider to be of value both in and for th
eir organizational practice (Corvellec, 2010). What
 
managers consider to be valuable and, thereby, poss
ibly at risk follows from what they consider to be 
necessary to the success of their managerial practi
ce (Corvellec, 2010). 
CMMI and Scrum are prescriptive approaches for succ
essful software development that are highly 
influential to managerial practice in software comp
anies. CMMI (CMMI Product Team, 2010) includes 
governing principles and operational elements in a 
five-level maturity model for software development 
that 
range from initial, managed, defined, and quantitat
ively managed to optimizing at the highest level. S
crum 
is an iterative and incremental development model w
here planning is concurrent with the development 
activities. Studies suggest addressing offshoring r
isk areas by 1) elevating the organizational maturi
ty of 
the client in terms of the CMMI (Rottman & Lacity, 
2006) and 2) adopting Agile methods such as Scrum 
(Bannerman et al., 2012). Offshoring managers™ perc
eptions and mitigations of the proposed offshoring 
risk areas (Persson et al., 2009) follow from what 
they consider to be necessary to their managerial 
practice™s success. However, little research focuse
s on how offshoring risk area perception and mitiga
tion 
follows from managerial practice when the offshorin
g client is a software company certified at the hig
hest 
maturity level and also using Scrum. Research on ri
sks and risk mitigation in offshoring and global 
software development focus on the vendor environmen
t and we lack research that also focuses on the 
client organization (Verner, Brereton, Kitchenham, 
Turner, & Niazi, 2014). 
We present a case study of how software development
 managers from the mature software company 
Systematic and from their offshoring vendor Conscen
sia consider risk areas both in and for their 
offshoring practice. In 2005, Systematic reached an
d has since sustained a CMMI level 5 certification,
 one 
of the few European companies to do so (Pries-Heje,
 Nørbjerg, Aaen, & Elisberg, 2008). Systematic 
initiated cooperation with the offshoring company C
onscensia in 2010. This offshoring relationship 
provides a unique case for investigating how manage
rs perceive and mitigate risk areas both in and for
 
their offshoring practice involving a mature softwa
re company. We address the following research 
question: 
RQ: 
How do managers perceive and mitigate the risk area
s in software development offshoring 
from a mature (CMMI level 5) software company? 
 Contribution
: This paper contributes to IS research in that it is
 the first in-
depth study of managers™ perceptions and mitigation
s of 
risk areas in development offshoring from a mature 
(CMMI level 5) software company. We analyze eight c
ommon risk 
areas for software development offshoring (Persson 
et al., 2009) in relation to what managers consider
 to be valuable
both in and for their organizational practice (Corv
ellec, 2010). The resulting analysis shows that, 
contrary to 
approaching high task uncertainty, equivocality, an
d coupling across sites as risk taking, a mat
ure organization can 
approach these factors as risk mitigation. We propo
se a socio-
technical explanation of this capability based on 
interrelating the task, structure, actors, and tech
nology (Leavitt, 1964; Lyytinen. Mathiassen, & Ropp
onen, 
1998). The 
stud
y offers new insights that can prove useful for ris
k management practice and research investigating ho
w to 
understand, support, and improve the management of 
software development offshoring. 
  Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation 
7 Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 an
d 3, we introduce the theoretical background on 
software development offshoring and risk management
. In Section 4, we describe the offshoring case and
 
our interpretive case study approach for collecting
 and analyzing data. In Section 5, we analyze the 
managers™ perceptions and mitigations of risk areas
 and identify two risk areas where managers™ 
perceptions and mitigations deviate from the sugges
tions in the literature. In Section 6, we discuss h
ow 
our analysis answers the research question and the 
contributions, implications, limitations, and direc
tions 
for future research. 
2 Software Development Offshoring 
Offshoring leverages resources from a different cou
ntry but in the same company, while offshore 
outsourcing leverages external third-party resource
s situated in a different country (−mite, Wohlin, 
Galvina, & Prikladnicki, 2014). In software develop
ment, these external resources can apply to everyth
ing 
from using contract programmers to third-party faci
lities management. Offshoring setups may pursue hig
h 
levels of cohesion, interdependency, and integratio
n, while other setups pursue high levels of 
independence and low coupling among sites. In the p
ursuit of high cohesion, companies may co-locate 
software developers (Persson, 2013; −mite, Wohlin, 
Gorschek, & Feldt, 2010), adopt Agile methodologies
 
(Jalali and Wohlin 2012; Persson et al. 2012), and 
strive for virtual team setups with high levels of 
trust 
(Siebdrat, Hoegl, & Ernst, 2009; Søderberg, Krishna
, & Bjørn, 2013). In general, both co-located and 
offshore processes for software development concept
ualize the ideal practice at the operational level 
differently. 

CMMI (CMMI Product Team, 2010) promotes an ideal me
thod to develop software and is based on five 
levels of maturity: initial, managed, defined, quan
titatively managed, and optimizing. Elevating CMMI 
certification in the client organization is a best 
practice in offshoring for closing the process gap 
between a 
client and its supplier organizations (Rottman & La
city, 2006). More than half of the worldwide compan
ies 
certified at level 5 are located in the popular off
shoring destination of India, but offshoring to a l
evel 5 
supplier provides no guarantee of successful outcom
es (Matloff, 2005). Furthermore, we have limited 
knowledge about software development offshoring wit
h a certified level 5 company. 
CMMI is, in some cases, combined with Agile methods
 even though the two approaches may contradict 
each other in some aspects (Persson, 2010; Santana 
et al., 2009; Turner & Jain, 2002). The case at 
Systematic presented in this paper documents a succ
essful combination of CMMI level 5 and the Agile 
method Scrum (Sutherland, Ruseng Jakobsen, & Johnso
n, 2008a). Scrum is an iterative and incremental 
development model in which planning occurs concurre
ntly with the development activities, and the produ
ct 
owner divides the work into biweekly or monthly spr
ints. Each sprint is planned to be self-contained, 
which 
leads to a constantly new running version on the ro
ad to the final software product (Jakobsen & 
Sutherland 2009). Agile project management with Scr
um in co-located settings may have a positive 
perceived impact on productivity, quality, and empl
oyee satisfaction (Kautz, Johansen, & Uldahl, 2014)
. 
Scrum and Agile methods in general involve a high c
ohesion approach to offshoring with several account
s 
of success (Bannerman, Hossain, & Jeffery, 2012; Ja
lali & Wohlin, 2012; Persson, Mathiassen, & Aaen, 
2012; Sutherland, Schoonheim, Rustenburg, & Rijk, 2
008b).  
A high CMMI certification or the adoption of Agile 
methods does not guarantee successful offshoring. 
Managers still need to pay attention to the many ri
sks associated with offshoring. In Section 3, we pr
esent 
the theoretical background on risk management in so
ftware development offshoring. Based on the 
literature on risk management, we argue that manage
rial practice (that can be based on the CMMI and 
Agile methods) not only is influenced by but also i
nfluences offshoring risks in how they are perceive
d and 
mitigated. 
3 Risk Management 
A software risk denotes an aspect of a development 
task, process, or environment that, if ignored, 
increases the likelihood of a project™s failure (Ly
ytinen et al., 1998). Both domestic and offshore 
outsourcing in software development involve risks (
Nakatsu & Iacovou, 2009), and a large body of 
research has investigated the risks particular to o
ffshoring and distribution (Verner et al., 2014). N
umerous 
approaches are available for managing software risk
s (e.g., the eight presented by Keshlaf and Riddle 
(2011) in their development effort of a ninth appro
ach for distributed settings). Their ninth approach
 adds 
to other research efforts that propose risk framewo
rks for offshoring and distributing software develo
pment 
(Iacovou & Nakatsu, 2008; Lamersdorf et al., 2012; 
Persson & Mathiassen, 2010; Singh & Nigam, 2012). 
 8 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Development Offshor
ing: A CMMI Level 5 Case
  Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 Persson et al. (2009) present a framework compatibl
e with CMMI (Persson & Mathiassen, 2010) that 
systematically integrates a decade of research on g
lobal software, virtual teams, distributed projects
, and 
outsourcing into eight risk areas. Risk areas repre
sent organizational contexts that include several r
elated 
risk factors, which together possess a threat to a 
software development project™s success (Boehm, 1991
). 
The eight risk areas (Table 1) are each an abstract
ion of three risk factors (Persson et al., 2009) th
at pay 
explicit attention to all of the four basic socio-t
echnical components of organizational change (Lyyti
nen et 
al., 1998). The four socio-technical components of 
task, structure, actors, and technology (Leavitt, 1
964) 
highlight how a risk management approach shapes man
agers™ attention in software development 
(Lyytinen et al., 1998). 
Table
 1.
 Risk Areas for the Distribution of Software Develop
ment 
(A
dapted from Persson et al.
, 2009)
  Risk 
area
 Factors for high risk
 Task 
Task distribution High task uncertainty, equivocali
ty, and coupling across sites. 
Knowledge management Inhibited knowledge creation, 
capture, and creation across sites. 
Structure 
Geographical distribution High spatial, temporal, a
nd goal distribution among sites.  
Collaboration structure 
Breakdowns in collaboration, coordination, and proc
ess alignment 
across sites. 
Actors 
Cultural distribution Dividing language barriers, w
ork culture, and cultural bias across sites.
 Stakeholder relations 
Low stakeholder commitment, mutual trust, and relat
ionship building 
across sites. 
Technology
 Communication infrastructure 
Limited personal communication, media support, and 
teleconference 
management. 
Technology setup 
Poor network capability, tool capability, and confi
guration 
management. 
The framework proposes a structured risk assessment
 of the eight risk areas in Table 1 as a collaborat
ive 
risk management activity in distributed projects (P
ersson et al., 2009). Objectifying risks in such a 
way is, 
however, not the only way of viewing risk assessmen
t. The risk assessment literature has a growing 
awareness that risk cannot be reduced to an objecti
ve fact but rather that it involves psychological, 
social, 
cultural, and political dimensions (Corvellec, 2010
). This awareness can be traced back to March and 
Shapira (1987) who, in investigating managerial per
spectives on risk and risk taking, found that the w
ay 
managers think about risk does not easily fit into 
classical theoretical conceptions (March & Shapira,
 1987). Thus, research need attend to not only ﬁwhat
 is risk?ﬂ but also ﬁhow managers understand 
something as a risk?ﬂ. This is a shift in research 
attention from the nature of risk per se to risk as
 a social 
phenomenon (Boholm & Corvellec, 2011). 

Conventional risk assessment procedures view risk a
s a kind of uncertainty that originates in an adver
se 
event and that should be addressed in formal and sc
ientific terms. Risk involves the loss of some, mor
e or 
less explicit, value. However, value is never self-
evident, unproblematic, or indisputable. Risks emer
ge 
from the process of attaching value to something. I
n organizations, this involves paying particular at
tention 
to managerial practice. What managers consider to b
e valuable and, thereby, possibly at risk, follows 
from 
what they consider to be necessary to their manager
ial practice™s success. Corvellec (2010) argues tha
t 
risk is based on how managers value things, what th
ey consider should be done, and how it should be 
done. From this view, the risk areas that Persson e
t al. (2009) propose imply assumptions about what 
managers should value in software development offsh
oring. Persson et al. (2009) present an implicit 
concept of value from synthesizing research on what
 is necessary to managerial practice™s success. 
However, risks and their related values are variabl
e. What is a risk for some can be a valuable end to
 
others. Likewise, the risks of today may become val
uable ends tomorrow (Boholm & Corvellec, 2011). 
Thus, to improve the risk frameworks for helping ma
nagerial practice such as the one by Persson et al.
 
(2009), research should also explore how managers p
erceive and mitigate the risk areas related to such
 a 
framework. Researchers can use conceptual risk fram
eworks for analyzing insights from explorative 
studies of managerial practice. In this case study,
 the managerial practice is particularly relevant b
ecause 
it takes place in software development offshoring f
rom a mature (CMMI level 5) software company. The 
uniqueness of the case makes it an interesting cont
ribution to the large number of previous case-based
 
research works on systems development and outsourci
ng (Gordon, Blake, & Shankaranarayanan, 2013). 
 Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation 
9 Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 4 Research Approach 
In this section, we present the case and its relate
d context and explain how we collected and analyzed
 the 
data. The case study approach was, in the terms of 
Cavaye (1996), a single case with the interpretive 
use 
of qualitative data for discovery. An interpretive 
approach is particularly useful when addressing pro
blems 
with a dominant social or cultural dimension, such 
as those frequently encountered when studying work 
practices in a globally distributed team setting (C
lear & MacDonell, 2011). This interpretive research
 
approach allowed us to investigate the management o
f offshoring in its organizational and cross-cultur
al 
context as socially constructed and, thus, open to 
several interpretations by organizational actors an
d us 
as researchers (Klein & Myers, 1999; Walsham, 1995;
 Walsham 2006). This research approach concurs 
with the study™s social constructionist view of ris
ks (Boholm & Corvellec, 2011; Corvellec, 2010) beca
use, 
to understand risk definitions, risk researchers sh
ould delve into the logic of practice, analyze how 
people 
(managers) organize their experience, and follow ho
w they navigate their everyday lives (Boholm & 
Corvellec, 2011). 
4.1
 The Case 
Systematic is a software company, established in 19
85, with more than 450 employees in offices in 
Denmark, the United Kingdom, the United States, Aus
tralia, Germany, Finland, and Sweden. It is the 
largest privately owned Danish software development
 company and one of the few European companies 
that has reached and sustained a CMMI level 5 certi
fication (Pries-Heje et al., 2008). Some government
 
customers require a high maturity level. Its later 
addition of the Agile method Scrum in 2006 supposed
ly 
reduced every category of work (defects, rework, to
tal work required, and process overhead) by almost 
50 
percent (Sutherland et al., 2008a). 

Systematic initially outsourced development activit
ies offshore for some years, primarily with a cost 
reduction focus, with varying degrees of success. I
n 2010, it initiated cooperation with the offshorin
g 
provider Conscensia. Conscensia is a Danish company
, established in 2006, that sells the facilitation 
of 
software development offshoring to Ukraine (cities 
of Lviv and Kiev). In autumn 2012, Systematic bough
t 
25 percent of Conscensia. This decision follows the
 evolutionary framework for establishing and 
progressing client-vendor relationships in offshore
 software development that result in ownership to r
etain 
control (Clear, Raza, & MacDonell, 2013; Mirani, 20
06). This part ownership blurs the clear distinctio
n 
between offshore insourcing and outsourcing (−mite 
et al., 2014), which is why we name this case 
offshoring. Conscensia markets its service as nears
horing; however, the −mite et al. (2014) taxonomy 
suggests that this case is farshoring because more 
than 2 hours flying time are involved. Nearshoring 
involves a flying time less than 2 hours, which mak
es it possible to travel back and forth in a day an
d still 
have time for a 3-4 hour meeting (−mite et al., 201
4). However, the time difference is small with 4 ho
urs or 
less, which allows at least half of a normal workda
y to be overlapping. 
The case study followed one of the divisions of Sys
tematic that develop a main product line of mission
-critical software. At the time our study, the divis
ion had more than 100 software engineers in seven 
groups, all divided into one or more teams. Each te
am was staffed by both Danish and Ukrainian 
developers. We focus on two teams: Team F (20 perso
ns, seven in Ukraine) and Team H (35 persons, 10 
in Ukraine). The Ukrainian software engineers resid
ed in facilities belonging to Conscensia. Conscensi
a 
provided offices including infrastructure and recru
its competences matching clients™ needs in relation
 to 
both technical and interpersonal skills. Other huma
n resource services for software engineers included
 local facilitation by coaching, cultural training, 
career advice, and assistance with communication be
tween 
the teams across countries. In Lviv, Conscensia had
 two delivery managers (A and B) that answer to the
 
vice president (VP) of global delivery and a chief 
operating officer (COO) with reference to the chief
 
executive officer (CEO). The CEO and VP were locate
d in Denmark. A local IT department manager, a 
recruitment manager, and a career advisor support t
he COO. In all, more than 100 developers were 
located at the Lviv premises. 

The two Systematic teams, supported by delivery man
ager A, developed mission-critical software based 
primarily on .Net and Java. Both teams applied Scru
m in their development process and sat in their own
 
open plan offices at each location. The teams used 
Intelli/IDEA as the integrated development 
environment (IDE), rational team concert (RTC) to m
anage source code, and concurrent version system 
(CVS) to manage documentation. Lync facilitated the
 majority of communication, such as live calls and 
shared screens. Scrum meetings were held daily in t
he morning for 15 minutes in dedicated rooms using 
 10 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Development Offshor
ing: A CMMI Level 5 Case
  Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 large screens and laptops showing each other™s envi
ronments. A project manager, a product manager, 
and a Scrum master for each sub-team were central t
o the team™s organization. 
4.2
 Data Collection 
We collected data including document studies and in
dividual semi-structured interviews with team 
members and management from both Systematic and Con
scensia (Table 2). We initiated the case study 
through informal meetings with managers in Systemat
ic (in Denmark) and Conscensia (in Ukraine) in 
spring 2012. To obtain an overview of the overall o
rganization, we carried out exploratory interviews 
with 
managers and developers in early summer 2012 in Lvi
v. We developed an interview guide based on this 
explorative phase focused on their offshoring chall
enges and mitigation strategies (all guides are ava
ilable 
in Appendix A). This guide supported our semi-struc
tured interviews in Lviv and Aarhus in autumn 2012 
and spring 2013. After the pilot interviews conduct
ed with managers of Conscensia and two software 
engineers, we made several changes to the interview
 guide, such as framing and focusing questions for 
software professionals. These interviews furthermor
e helped explain the environment and challenges the
 
organizations faced. In addition, they helped ident
ify additional candidates for interviewing. In gene
ral, we 
followed Myers and Newman™s (2007) recommendations 
for qualitative interviewing by situating ourselves
 
as actors, minimizing social dissonance, representi
ng various voices, using inclusive interpretation, 
mirroring questions and answers, using flexibility,
 and ensuring the confidentiality of disclosures. 
The interview protocols developed over time. Protoc
ol 1 was explorative but used the terminology from 
Lacity et al. (2009). Protocols 2 and 3 focused on 
cross-site projects and cooperation, whereas protoc
ol 4 
was informed by our observations of work practices 
and tools seen during earlier interviews. 
We interviewed four members of each team with diffe
rent roles and nationalities and managers from 
Conscensia and Systematic. After interviewing the D
anish side of the case, we interviewed the Ukrainia
n 
side once more to qualify the observations and chal
lenge the provisional findings (Table 2). Each 
interview lasted from 40 to 60 minutes, was recorde
d, and was fully transcribed verbatim. To ensure 
correct information regarding, for example, the use
 of technology and to maintain good relations with 
interviewees, we verified the transcriptions with t
he interviewees. In all, we conducted 19 interviews
 
combined with informal meetings. In addition to the
 interviews, we took pictures of the premises (offi
ces 
and facilities for Scrum meetings) and collected su
pporting documents such as organograms, workplace 
sketches, presentations, and product descriptions. 
Table
 2.
 List of I
nterviewees (Man: Management)
 Role 
 Pilot
 Team
 Location
 Autumn ‚12
 Spring ‚13
 Winter 13/14
 Project manager / Scrum master
  H DK
 X   Software engineer / Scrum master
  H DK
 X   Software engineer /Scrum master
  H UA
 X X  Software engineer
  H UA
 X X  Senior project manager
  F DK
 X   Senior software engineer
  F DK
 X   Software engineer
 X F UA
 X X  Software engineer
  F UA
 X X  Software engineer
 X - UA
    Chief Operating officer (Conscensia)
 X Man
 UA
    Delivery manager (Conscensia)
  Man
 UA
 X X X Vice president (Conscensia)
  Man
 UA/DK
   X Deputy vice president (Systematic)
  Man
 DK
  X  Senior project manager (Systematic)
  Man
 DK
  X X To ensure we had alternative interpretations and qu
estioning of the findings (Klein & Myers, 1999; Mye
rs 
& Newman, 2007), the two researchers interviewed in
dividually to take advantage of their different 
backgrounds and experiences. Both researchers are D
anish computer scientists and professors in 
information systems (first author specialized in sy
stems development, second author in management and 
 Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation 
11
 Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 implementation). In addition, the second researcher
 is an honorary professor at a leading Ukrainian 
Business School and has established a reasonable in
sight into the Ukrainian context through years of 
close contact. 
4.3
 Data Analysis 
We analyzed the interview transcripts and documents
 to uncover the involved participants™ attention to
 or 
mitigation of risks related to offshoring. We searc
hed for deviations from established theory by 
approaching the analysis as a critical dialog betwe
en the theoretical frameworks presented in the 
background section and our empirical work (Alvesson
 & Kärreman, 2007). The inference mechanism that 
guides this kind of theory development is labeled a
bduction. 
To identify incidents, mitigations, or perceptions 
related to offshoring risks, we searched and coded 
the 
transcripts in NVivo (Bazeley, 2007). We coded stat
ements pertaining to offshoring risks and grouped 
them to reveal patterns or other findings. This cod
ing did not emphasize explicit statements of someth
ing 
being a risk but rather what the different stakehol
ders considered to be necessary to the success of 
managerial practice (Corvellec, 2010). We compared 
these value positions to the generic risk areas for
 
distributing software development (Persson et al., 
2009) presented in Table 1. When we classified the 
statements, we went back to the transcription and r
e-read the contexts in which the statement and rela
ted 
statements were given. Based on this, taking potent
ial conflicting observations into consideration, we
 
formulated the risk taking and risk mitigation appr
oach in the case. In this way, our analysis was not
 an 
attempt to formulate new risk areas or make a compr
ehensive risk mapping but rather to explore and 
explain managerial practice (Corvellec, 2010) relat
ed to some generic risk areas (Persson et al., 2009
). 
For further triangulation, managers in Systematic a
nd Conscensia reviewed the analyses at a meeting 
attended by the vice president, delivery managers, 
and interviewed software developers. This review 
provided some more alternative interpretations and 
questioning of the findings (Klein & Myers, 1999). 
For 
example, how the roles of Conscensia employees in f
inding and recruiting competences that match 
clients™ needs in relation to both technical and in
terpersonal skills support the dynamics of the offs
horing 
setup and the inherent task distribution capability
. The review also resulted in revisions regarding t
he 
history of the cooperation. In Section 5, we presen
t our findings related to the eight risk areas (Tab
le 1) for 
software development offshoring. 
5 Findings 
In this section, we present managers™ perceptions a
nd mitigations of risks in the Systematic / Conscen
sia 
case. Managers were notably consistent in their acc
ounts of managerial practices across the two 
organizations and at the different levels. Thus, ou
r analysis focuses on discrepancies with the resear
ch 
literature rather than among the managers (Alvesson
 & Kärreman, 2007). For each of the eight risk area
s 
in Table 1, we identified the level of risk accordi
ng to the framework and the associated perspective 
in the 
case (Table 3) from the interviews with management.
 Furthermore, we present the two main risk 
mitigation initiatives for each risk area in Table 
3. 
Three risk areas (task distribution, knowledge mana
gement, and stakeholder relations in Table 3) call 
for 
special interest since the managerial practice repr
esents a high level of risk according to the framew
ork 
(Persson et al., 2009), yet the managers did not pe
rceive it as such. Below, we analyze these three ri
sk 
areas in more detail. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  12 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Development Offshor
ing: A CMMI Level 5 Case
  Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 Table
 3. Risk Attention and M
itigation in the Syst
ematic / Conscensia Offshoring C
ase
  Risk area
 Risk according to 
the 
framework
 Risk mitigation 
 Task 
Task 
distribution 
 High risk
 by: 
High 
task equivocality with very limited 
specification that gives high task 
uncertainty at the vendor site combined 
with high coupling requiring extensive 
cross-site coordination 
 Daily Scrum meetings based on video-
conferencing and extensive code 

reviewing 
 Well-
defined processes and division of 
responsibilities 
Knowledge 
management 
Medium risk
 by: 
Knowledge creation and capture is mainly 
on 
the client side with only some 
knowledge integration across sites 
 Partial ownership of Conscensia and 
focus on staff retention 
 Training by client domain experts 

carried out on the vendor side
 Structure 
Geographical 
distribution 
Low risk
 by: 
Low distribution with limited time zone 
differences across only two yet distanced 
sites that share major goals 
 Developers in Ukraine participate in 
only one team 
 Site selection and recruitment that 

lower distribution
 Collaboration 
structure 
Low risk
 by: 
Recruiting collaborative team members 
and establishing shared coordination 
mechanisms and processes across sites 
 Danish team lead recruitment 
 Support by the delivery manager at 

Conscensia and imposed structure
 Actors 
Cultural 
distribution 
Low risk
 by: 
Harmonizing the work culture with English 
as a shared language and low cultural bias 
to address the 
fundamental differences 
across sites 
 Screening and training in the cultural 
awareness of staff by Conscensia 
 Teambuilding during frequent visits 

across sites
 Stakeholder 
relations 
Low/medium risk
 by: 
Recruiting committed participants with a 
team and client-
oriented identity that trust 
the organization and manage 
the 
integration of new members, while still 
maintaining some differences between 
sites 
 Surveys twice a week of employee 
satisfaction and opinions on local 

budgets for team socialization activities
  Sharing customer and product stories
 Technology
 Communication 
infrastructure 
Low risk
 by:  
Strong communication support in terms of 
interaction media and teleconference 
management but only some social and 
personal communication 
 Standard use of setup across all teams 
with optional collaborative tools 
 Video-conferencing of daily Scrum 

meetings and encouragement for 

additional contact across sites
 Technology 
setup 
Low risk
 by: 
Setting up reliable network capabilities, 
compatible tools, and 
configuration 
management 
 Well-defined and stable local 
infrastructure provided by Conscensia 
 Software development tools (IDE, RTC, 

and CVS) and highly integrated 

processes across sites
 5.1
 Task Distribution 
Systematic™s managerial practice of intentionally p
roviding very limited specification of development 
tasks 
for the Ukrainian site is, according to the framewo
rk (Persson et al., 2009), a high-risk strategy for
 the task 
distribution risk area. Limited specification requi
res extensive cross-site coordination for carrying 
out 
development tasks, which managers should avoid acco
rding to Persson et al.™s (2009) framework. The 
sourcing manager at Systematic stated: 
When talking about outsourcing, you tend to forget 
what the task is about. It is about a team that 
produces software together. Then, they may sit in d
ifferent places and talk different languages, 
but that does not change the basic task of collabor
ating on making software. We would never 
write a large requirements specification and throw 
it after someone internally. We would never 
ask a customer for a large requirements specificati
on and then ask them to stay away. Why 
should you do that just because it™s outsourcing.
  Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation 
13
 Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 In Systematic, the managers argued that the limited
 specification of the tasks that the Ukrainian 
developers would perform was beneficial for the pro
cess since it promoted local understanding and 
engagement and forced cross-site team integration t
hrough dialogue: ﬁtheir contribution is simply larg
erﬂ 
(Systematic department manager) and ﬁthere shall no
t be more Ukrainians than Danes, all should be 
integrated into teams, able to fulfill all tasksﬂ (
Systematic project manager). This attitude towards 
task 
distribution led to more engaged Ukrainian software
 engineers and a more productive environment: ﬁthey
 
appreciate getting more responsibilities–and I belie
ve that in the future they will be more engaged in 
training new colleaguesﬂ (Systematic project manage
r). 
Daily Scrum meetings by video-conferencing appeared
 to support the management of high task 
uncertainty. This support was combined with well-de
fined processes and the division of responsibilitie
s as 
imposed by Systematic™s CMMI level 5 structure. Thu
s, the cross-site teams managed high task 
uncertainty and equivocality by establishing a high
 certainty for working with these tasks. Furthermor
e, 
they coped with high task coupling by establishing 
high coordination and collaboration capabilities, w
hich 
is reflected in the pursuit of low risk for the ris
k area related to this (see the collaboration struc
ture in Table 
3) and supported by the Conscensia delivery manager
 A, who constantly monitored and coached the 
working processes. 
5.2
 Knowledge Management 
Following Persson et al. (2009), the managerial pra
ctice in Systematic represents a medium risk by mai
nly 
creating and capturing knowledge on the client side
 as opposed to all sites contributing equally as 
Persson et al. (2009) suggests. The sourcing manage
r at Systematic stated: ﬁWe must get our domain 
experts to visit Ukraine; the more Ukrainian team m
embers know, the better–.it matters in the daily sm
all 
decisions how things works in the larger contextﬂ. 
Furthermore, a Systematic project manager argued th
at 
the limited knowledge integration should be reduced
 as ﬁit would be nice to have more local domain 
knowledge–we must improve thatﬂ. The limited creati
on of knowledge on the Ukrainian side exposed 
Systematic to further risk of losing Ukrainian staf
f due to their desire to learn more: ﬁa small issue
 related 
to their career development, they can™t get to know
 everything–the best of them (can) be lost at the 
top–.we have decided to accept that riskﬂ (Systemati
c department manager). Thus, managers at 
Systematic were less coherent in their understandin
g of the knowledge management risk area and its 
need for mitigation. Our analysis also suggests tha
t managers pursued the medium-risk exposure on 
knowledge management less intentionally compared wi
th task distribution. 
Systematic approached the knowledge management risk
 area in several ways. Managers sent domain 
experts to Ukraine to train the local staff. Howeve
r, Systematic also benefitted from partially owning
 Conscensia. This ownership assures that knowledge (
e.g., about processes) will not be lost and can be 
influenced indirectly at the board level. At the sa
me time, Conscensia assists in staff retention by p
roviding 
alternative employment and career paths for Systema
tic team members when needed. This reduces the 
risk of losing knowledgeable staff. Thus, the Syste
matic / Conscensia setup mitigates the risks in 
managing the creation and integration of domain kno
wledge by strong management and the structuring of 
process knowledge. 
5.3
 Stakeholder Relations 
The managerial practice of maintaining some differe
nces between sites and the attitude of staff toward
s 
colleagues from other sites, even though they recru
ited team-oriented staff, represents a low/medium r
isk 
in the framework. This difference is especially vis
ible in two areas. First, trust was not directly mi
rrored: ﬁit 
seems that in Denmark trust has a swift nature, whe
reas in Ukraine–.trust must be earnedﬂ (Systematic 
sourcing manager). Second, there was a difference i
n how fast Danish and Ukrainian software engineers 
were up to speed and in the sub-teams™ own understa
nding of how effective they were. Managers in 
Systematic perceived Ukrainian developers as cheap 
but also slower compared with the more expensive 
engineers in Denmark. Conscensia assisted Systemati
c by providing local cultural training and mediatio
n. 
To monitor and be able to react to any decreasing l
evels of trust and satisfaction, Systematic perform
ed 
biweekly online surveys among staff (both Ukrainian
s and Danes). One of the issues identified during 
these surveys and related performance talks was to 
remember to share customer and product stories with
 
the Ukrainian side as done in the Danish offices. T
hus, Systematic managers mitigated the offshoring r
isk 
area of stakeholder relations by treating Ukrainian
 and Danish developers as equals, while still 
maintaining differences in trust, identity, and int
egration. 
 14 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Development Offshor
ing: A CMMI Level 5 Case
  Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 5.4
 Integration of Risk Areas 
We identified three risk areas where Systematic™s m
anagerial practice represents a medium or high risk
 
that involved a different risk perception and mitig
ation to that proposed in the literature (Persson e
t al., 
2009). What emerged from our analysis of managerial
 practice in the Systematic / Conscensia offshoring
 
case was a strong integration among the risk areas 
and their associated mitigation. Thus, instead of 
associating the managerial practices for mitigation
 with individual risk areas as in Table 3, we propo
se 
using the relations between the four socio-technica
l components (namely, task, structure, actors, and 
technology (Leavitt, 1964)) that underlie the eight
 risk areas in the framework (Persson et al., 2009)
. In the 
Systematic / Conscensia offshoring case, the manage
rial perception of the task-related risk areas invo
lved 
task uncertainty, equivocality, and coupling as mit
igation rather than risk taking. This perception wa
s, 
however, associated with managerial practices that 
integrate the task with the structure, actors, and 
technology-related risk areas. Figure 1 shows how t
he managerial practices integrated the risk area 
components using the risk mitigation practices pres
ented in Table 3. 
 Figure 
1. Integration of Managerial Practices 
in the Systematic / Conscensia Offshoring C
ase
 The managerial practices shaping the perception and
 mitigation of tasks integrated the task not only w
ith 
the three other socio-technical components but also
 among them (Figure 1). Each of the managerial 
practices that integrates the four components can i
ndividually explain the managerial perception and 
mitigation of task-related risk areas. However, tog
ether they formed a socio-technical system that pro
vides 
a much more comprehensive explanation of what these
 managers considered to be necessary to the 
success of their managerial practice. Thus, manager
s do not perceive the risk area for task distributi
on as 
involving certainty and de-coupling as a valuable p
rerequisite for their socio-technical system of 
 Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation 
15
 Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 managerial practices. In Section 6, we discuss how 
the managerial practice and its attention shaping o
f 
common offshoring risks contributes to previous res
earch, as presented in the theoretical background 
section. 
6 Discussion 
In this section, we answer the research question an
d discuss how the answer contributes to previous 
research in the contributions section. We also disc
uss the 1) implications for research and practice i
n 
software development offshoring, 2) our study™s lim
itations, and 3) directions for future research. 
6.1
 Contributions 
We review our analysis of the Systematic / Conscens
ia offshoring case in relation to the theoretical 
background section and our research question: How d
o managers perceive and mitigate the risk areas in 
software development offshoring from a mature (CMMI
 level 5) software company? 
The investigated case shows that the managers perce
ived and mitigated most risk areas in accordance 
with previous research on software development offs
horing risks (Persson et al., 2009). Task distribut
ion, 
however, was a notable exception because Systematic
 intentionally and successfully pursued high-task 
uncertainty, equivocality, and coupling. Persson et
 al. (2009) argue for the task distribution risk ar
ea 
based on research suggesting reducing uncertainty (
Herbsleb & Mockus, 2003; Sakthivel, 2005), 
equivocality (Bell & Kozlowski, 2002; Xue, Sankar, 
& Mbarika, 2004) and coupling (Carmel & Agarwal, 
2001; Herbsleb & Grinter, 1999). This finding is in
 line with research on task distribution that argue
s that 
ﬁto avoid problems between sites, the main tactic i
s minimization of collaboration needed between site
s, 
since this minimizes the negative impact of communi
cation and coordination problems. This can be 
achieved by minimizing coupling, i.e., the dependen
cies between tasks assigned to different sitesﬂ 
(Lamersdorf, Munch, & Rombach, 2008). This line of 
research develops frameworks and decision making 
models for task distribution in software developmen
t offshoring (Lamersdorf et al., 2012; Narendra, 
Ponnalagu, Zhou, & Gifford, 2012; Ruano-Mayoral, Co
lomo-Palacios, Fernández-González, & Garcia-
Crespo, 2011). However, the findings from our case 
study of a mature offshoring client (CMMI 5 certifi
ed 
since 2005) give reason to question the assumed nee
d for de-coupled and well-defined tasks for 
successfully offshoring software development. The m
aturity level of the offshoring client suggests tha
t 
managers do not base their view of task distributio
n on a lacking capability of achieving such task 
distribution. Those at various organizational level
s in the Systematic / Conscensia case perceived the
 risk 
factors of task distribution more in terms of risk 
mitigation rather than risk taking. This finding re
flects how 
the conception of risks derives from what these man
agers consider to be valuable, both in and for the 
success of their managerial practice (Corvellec, 20
10). 
We explain the managerial practice in the Systemati
c / Conscensia case by using Leavitt™s (1964) socio
-technical model of organizational change, a model u
sed by previous research to explain how a risk 
management approach shapes managers™ attention to s
oftware development (Lyytinen et al.. 1998) that 
forms the underlying structure of the eight risk ar
eas (Persson et al.. 2009) investigated in this cas
e study. 
We use the model in Figure 1 to illustrate how the 
managers™ attention to the risk areas related to 
structure, actors, and technology shaped the percep
tion of task distribution. Figure 1 explains a 
managerial practice that allows high task uncertain
ty, equivocality, and coupling but that also uses t
hese 
three risk factors of task distribution as supporti
ng characteristics of the managerial practice to su
pport 
and align the structure, actors, and technology. Th
is finding is an important contribution to understa
nding 
the risk areas for offshoring software development 
(Persson et al., 2009) in a mature managerial pract
ice. 
Persson et al.™s (2009) framework integrates risks 
related to software development offshoring in 
accordance with CMMI (Persson & Mathiassen, 2010) a
nd socio-technical terms (Leavitt, 1964; Lyytinen 
et al., 1998). However, the findings from our case 
study show the framework™s limited attention to a 
different framing of task distribution in a mature 
managerial practice involving Agile methods. Our ca
se 
study shows how integrated managerial practices can
 be very important for understanding risk perceptio
n 
and mitigation, which one can see with the risk are
a for task distribution. This study finally complem
ents 
Lyytinen et al.™s (1998) use of Leavitt™s (1964) so
cio-technical model to show how risk areas may be 
mitigated indirectly by not only addressing the oth
er three components in the model but also recognizi
ng 
the perception of a risk area in a specific compone
nt. 
 16 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Development Offshor
ing: A CMMI Level 5 Case
  Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 6.2
 Implications 
This case study™s findings have implications for bo
th research and practice in software development 
offshoring. Managers of software development offsho
ring should consider the potential of task uncertai
nty, 
equivocality, and coupling as a risk-mitigation str
ategy rather than only risk taking. Our findings fr
om a 
mature software development organization as the off
shoring client suggest this can be a viable risk 
mitigation strategy. However, adopting such a strat
egy requires a strong emphasis on mitigating the ri
sk 
areas associated with structure, actors, and techno
logy. 
Our finding that managers can perceive task distrib
ution as risk mitigation rather than risk taking su
ggests 
that researchers should question the widespread ass
umption of the opposite (Herbsleb & Mockus, 2003; 
Persson et al., 2009; Sakthivel, 2005). We propose 
understanding task distribution in software 
development offshoring through the integration of s
ocio-technical components: structure, actors, and 
technology (Leavitt, 1964; Lyytinen et al., 1998). 
Researchers studying software development offshorin
g 
should consider how task distribution derives from 
what managers consider to be valuable, both in and 
for 
the success of their managerial practice (Corvellec
, 2010). This insight needs to be accounted for in 
research on offshoring risk management and associat
ed managerial practices in general. Our finding als
o 
confirms previous research that argues for the impo
rtance of process facilitation on the client side w
hen 
working with software requirements (Yadav, Adya, Sr
idhar, & Nath, 2013). 
6.3
 Limitations 
This case study™s limitations and findings need car
eful consideration from managers considering adopti
ng 
Systematic™s approach to offshoring or from researc
hers interested in testing and generalizing our 
findings. The Systematic / Conscensia offshoring ca
se is not representative of software development 
offshoring in general. We chose the case because of
 its uniqueness in having a mature (certified CMMI 
level 5) software company as the offshoring client.
 Thus, while we strongly encourage practitioners an
d 
researchers to take our findings into other setting
s, the results may not be similar to those in the 
Systematic / Conscensia offshoring case. Our case s
tudy investigated risk perception and mitigation as
 
embedded in their managerial practices with an inte
rpretive approach. While we report a rich descripti
on 
of the case and our analysis, important insights co
ncerning the managers and our role as researchers 
remain tacit. Finally, we focused on a limited rang
e of stakeholders in investigating risk areas and d
id not 
specifically attend to the ethical risks inherent i
n software development projects (Gotterbarn & Roger
son, 
2005; Gotterbarn, Clear, & Kwan, 2008). 
6.4
 Future Research 
We need future research on managers™ perceptions an
d mitigations of risk areas in offshoring to furthe
r 
understand the integration of practices that derive
s from what they consider to be of value both in an
d for 
the success of their managerial practice. Our study
 provides an in-depth interpretive study of a case 
with a 
mature software development organization as the off
shoring client. However, we need investigations of 
representative offshoring cases through alternative
 approaches for descriptive and proactive research.
 
Design science-oriented research on task distributi
on strategies and decision making (Lamersdorf et al
., 
2008; Lamersdorf et al., 2012; Narendra et al., 201
2; Ruano-Mayoral et al., 2011) may use our findings
 to 
develop tools, models, and frameworks that build on
 an alternative to minimizing coupling and 
collaboration across sites. Our findings also illus
trate the importance of future research on managing
 relationships between risk components (El-Masri & R
ivard, 2012; El-Masri, 2013). While our findings sh
ow 
how managerial practices shape the risk perception 
of task distribution, we still need additional rese
arch 
on the relationships between different risk compone
nts, on the underlying software ecology, and on how
 
trust influences the processes. 
Acknowledgments 
The research received support from the Center for I
T Project Management and Innovation at Aarhus 
University. We also thank Conscensia and Systematic
 for their helpfulness and participation. Ternopil 
National Economic University provided a living disc
ursive atmosphere and highly appreciated logistical
 
support during stays in Ukraine.  
 Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation 
17
 Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 References 
Alvesson, M., & Kärreman, D. (2007). Constructing m
ystery: Empirical matters in theory development. 
Academy of Management Review,
 32
(4), 1265-1281.  
Bannerman, P. L., Hossain, E., & Jeffery, R. (2012)
. Scrum practice mitigation of global software 
development coordination challenges: A distinctive 
advantage? In 
Proceedings of the 45th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences
 (pp. 5309-5318).  
Bazeley, P. (2007). 
Qualitative data analysis with NVivo
. London: Sage. 
Bell, B. S., & Kozlowski, S. W. (2002). A typology 
of virtual teams implications for effective leaders
hip. 
Group & Organization Management,
 27
(1), 14-49.  
Boehm, B. W. (1991). Software risk management: Prin
ciples and practices. 
IEEE Software
, 
8(1), 32-41.  
Boholm, Å., & Corvellec, H. (2011). A relational th
eory of risk. 
Journal of Risk Research,
 14
(2), 175-190.  
Carmel, E., & Agarwal, R. (2001). Tactical approach
es for alleviating distance in global software 
development. 
IEEE Software
, 
18
(2), 22-29.  
Cavaye, A. L. M. (1996). Case study research: A mul
ti-faceted research approach for IS. 
Information 
Systems Journal
, 
6(3), 227-242.  
Clear, T., & MacDonell, S. G. (2011). Understanding
 technology use in global virtual teams: Research 
methodologies and methods. 
Information and Software Technology
, 
53
(9), 994-1011.  
Clear, T., Raza, B., & MacDonell, S. G. (2013). A c
ritical evaluation of failure in a nearshore outsou
rcing 
project: What dilemma analysis can tell us. In 
Proceedings of the 8th IEEE International Conferenc
e 
on Global Software Engineering
 (pp. 178-187).  
CMMI Product Team. (2010). 
CMMI® for development, version 1.3, Improving proce
sses for developing 
better products and services.
 Software Engineering Institute.  
Corvellec, H. (2010). Organizational risk as it der
ives from what managers value: A practice
based 
approach to risk assessment. 
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management
, 
18
(3), 145-154.  
El-Masri, M. (2013). 
A decision support system for software project risk
 management: A three-essay 
dissertation (
Doctoral dissertation). HEC Montréal.  
El-Masri, M., & Rivard, S. (2012). Towards a design
 theory for software project risk management system
s. 
In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Info
rmation Systems
.  
Gordon, S. R., Blake, R. H., & Shankaranarayanan, G
. (2013). Case-based research in information 
systems: Gaps and trends. 
Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation
, 
14
(2), 47-68.  
Gotterbarn, D., Clear, T., & Kwan, C. (2008). A pra
ctical mechanism for ethical risk assessmentŠA SoDI
S 
inspection. In K. E. Himma & H. T. Tavani (Eds.), 
The handbook of information and computer ethics
 (pp. 429-471). Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & So
ns. 
Gotterbarn, D., & Rogerson, S. (2005). Responsible 
risk assessment with software development: Creating
 
the software development impact statement. 
Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems
, 
15
, 730-750.  
Hansson, S. O. (2010). Risk: Objective or subjectiv
e, facts or values. 
Journal of Risk Research
, 
13
(2), 
231-238.  
Herbsleb, J. D., & Mockus, A. (2003). An empirical 
study of speed and communication in globally 
distributed software development. 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, 
29
(6), 481-494.  
Herbsleb, J. D., & Grinter, R. E. (1999). Architect
ures, coordination, and distance: Conway's Law and 
beyond. 
IEEE Software
, 
16
(5), 63-70.  
Holmstrom, H., Conchúir, E. Ó., Agerfalk, P. J., & 
Fitzgerald, B. (2006). Global software development 
challenges: A case study on temporal, geographical 
and socio-cultural distance. In 
Proceedings of 
the 2006 International Conference on Global Softwar
e Engineering 
(pp. 3-11).  
 18 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Development Offshor
ing: A CMMI Level 5 Case
  Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 Iacovou, C. L., & Nakatsu, R. (2008). A risk profil
e of offshore-outsourced development projects. 
Communications of the ACM,
 51
(6), 89-94.  
Jakobsen, C. R., & Sutherland, J. (2009). Scrum and
 CMMI going from good to great. In 
Proceedings of 
the
 AGILE '09 Conference
 (pp. 333-337).  
Jalali, S., & Wohlin, C. (2012). Global software en
gineering and agile practices: A systematic review.
 Journal of Software: Evolution and Process,
 24
(6), 643-659.  
Kautz, K., Johansen, T. H., & Uldahl, A. (2014). Cr
eating business value through agile project 
management and information systems development: The
 perceived impact of Scrum. In B. 
Bergvall-Kåreborn & P. A. Nielsen (Eds.), 
Creating value for all through IT
 (pp. 150Œ165). New 
York: Springer. 
Keshlaf, A., & Riddle, S. (2011). Web and distribut
ed software development risks management: WeDRisk 
approach. 
International Journal on Advances in Software
, 
3(3-4), 447-460.  
Klein, H. K., & Myers, M. D. (1999). A set of princ
iples for conducting and evaluating interpretive fi
eld 
studies in information systems. 
MIS Quarterly
, 
23
(1), 67-93.  
Lacity, M. C., Khan, S. A., & Willcocks, L. P. (200
9). A review of the IT outsourcing literature: Insi
ghts for 
practice. 
The Journal of Strategic Information Systems
, 
18
(3), 130-146.  
Lamersdorf, A., Münch, J., & Rombach, D. (2008). To
wards a multi-criteria development distribution 
model: An analysis of existing task distribution ap
proaches. In 
Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE 
International Conference on Global Software Enginee
ring
 (pp. 109-118). Washington, DC: IEEE 
Computer Society. 
Lamersdorf, A., Münch, J., Viso Torre, A. F., Sánch
ez, C. R., Heinz, M., & Rombach, D. (2012). A 
rule
based model for customized risk identification and 
evaluation of task assignment alternatives in 
distributed software development projects. 
Journal of Software: Evolution and Process
, 
24
(6), 661-
675.  
Leavitt, H. J. (1964). Applied organization change 
in industry: Structural, technical and human 
approaches. In W. W. Cooper, H. J. Leavitt, & M. W.
 Shelley (Eds.), 
New perspectives in 
organizational research
 (pp. 55-71). New York: Wiley. 
Lyytinen, K., Mathiassen, L., & Ropponen, J. (1998)
. Attention shaping and software riskŠa categorical
 
analysis of four classical risk management approach
es. 
Information Systems Research
, 
9(3), 233-
255.  
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. (1987). Managerial pers
pectives on risk and risk taking. 
Management Science,
 33
(11), 1404-1418.  
Matloff, N. (2005). Offshoring: What can go wrong?"
 
IT Professional,
 7(4), 39-45.  
Mirani, R. (2006). Client-vendor relationships in o
ffshore applications development: An evolutionary 
framework. 
Information Resources Management Journal
, 
19
(4), 72-86.  
Myers, M. D., & Newman, M. (2007). The qualitative 
interview in IS research: Examining the craft. 
Information and Organization,
 17
(1), 2-26.  
Nakatsu, R. T., & Iacovou, C. L. (2009). A comparat
ive study of important risk factors involved in off
shore 
and domestic outsourcing of software development pr
ojects: A two-panel Delphi study. 
Information 
& Management
, 
46
(1), 57-68.  
Narendra, N. C., Ponnalagu, K., Zhou, N., & Gifford
, W. M. (2012). Towards a formal model for optimal 
task-site allocation and effort estimation in globa
l software development. In 
Proceedings of the 2012 
Service Research and Innovation Institute Global Co
nference
 (pp. 470-477). California: IEEE. 
Persson, J. S. (2013). The cross-cultural knowledge
 sharing challenge: An investigation of the co-loca
tion 
strategy in software development offshoring. In 
Proceedings of IFIP WG 8.6 International Working 
Conference on Transfer and Diffusion of IT
 (pp. 310-325).  
Persson, J. S. (2010). 
Managing distributed software projects
 (Doctoral dissertation). Aalborg University.  
 Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation 
19
 Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 Persson, J. S., & Mathiassen, L. (2010). A process 
for managing risks in distributed teams. 
IEEE 
Software
, 
27
(1), 20-29.  
Persson, J. S., Mathiassen, L., & Aaen, I. (2012). 
Agile distributed software development: Enacting co
ntrol 
through media and context. 
Information Systems Journal
, 
22
(6), 411-433.  
Persson, J. S., Mathiassen, L., Boeg, J., Madsen, T
. S., & Steinson, F. (2009). Managing risks in 
distributed software projects: An integrative frame
work. 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management
, 
56
(3), 508-532.  
Pries-Heje, J., Nørbjerg, J., Aaen, I., & Elisberg,
 T. (2008). The road to high maturity: How the firs
t Danish 
company reached CMMI level 5 in 100 months. In P. A
. Nielsen & K. Kautz (Eds.), 
Software 
processes & knowledge: Beyond conventional software
 process improvement
 (pp. 163-192). 
Aalborg: Software Innovation. 
Rottman, J. W., & Lacity, M. C. (2006). Proven prac
tices for effectively offshoring IT work. 
MIT Sloan 
Management Review
, 
47
(3), 56-63.  
Ruano-Mayoral, M., Colomo-Palacios, R., Fernández-G
onzález, J. M., & García-Crespo, Á. (2011). 
Towards a framework for work package allocation for
 GSD. In Meersman, R., Dillon, T., & Herrero, 
P. (Eds.), 
On the move to meaningful internet systems: OTM 201
1 workshops
 (pp. 200-207). 
Springer. 
Sakthivel, S. (2005). Virtual workgroups in offshor
e systems development. 
Information and Software 
Technology
, 
47
(5), 305-318.  
Santana, C., Gusmão, C., Soares, L., Pinheiro, C., 
Maciel, T., Vasconcelos, A., & Rouiller, A. (2009).
 
Agile software development and CMMI: What we do not
 know about dancing with elephants. In 
Proceedings of the 10th XP 2009 International Confe
rence
 (pp. 124-129).  
Siebdrat, F., Hoegl, M., & Ernst, H. (2009). How to
 manage virtual teams. 
MIT Sloan Management 
Review
, 
50
(4), 63-68.  
Singh, A., & Nigam, A. R. K. (2012). Risks identifi
cation in an offshore-onshore model based it 
engagement. 
International Journal of Computer Applications
, 
48
(14), 31-41.  
−mite, D., Wohlin, C., Gorschek, T., & Feldt, R. (2
010). Empirical evidence in global software enginee
ring: 
A systematic review. 
Empirical Software Engineering
, 
15
(1), 91-118.  
−mite, D., Wohlin, C., Galvi
a, Z., & Prikladnicki, R. (2014). An empirically ba
sed terminology and 
taxonomy for global software engineering. 
Empirical Software Engineering
, 
19
(1), 105-153.  
Søderberg, A., Krishna, S., & Bjørn, P. (2013). Glo
bal software development: Commitment, trust and 
cultural sensitivity in strategic partnerships. 
Journal of International Management
, 
19
(4), 347-361.  
Stephan, M., & Silvia, M. (2008). A dynamic perspec
tive on next-generation offshoring: The global 
sourcing of science and engineering talent. 
The Academy of Management Perspectives
, 
22
(3), 35-
54.  
Sutherland, J., Ruseng Jakobsen, C., & Johnson, K. 
(2008a). Scrum and CMMI level 5: The magic potion 
for code warriors. In 
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Hawaii International
 Conference on System 
Sciences
 (pp. 466Œ474). 
Sutherland, J., Schoonheim, G., Rustenburg, E., & R
ijk, M. (2008b). Fully distributed Scrum: The secre
t 
sauce for hyperproductive offshored development tea
ms. In 
Proceedings of the AGILE 2008 
Conference
 (pp. 339-344).  
Turner, R., & Jain, A. (2002). Agile meets CMMI: Cu
lture clash or common cause? 
Extreme Programming 
and Agile Methods Š XP/Agile Universe 2002
. In D. Wells & L. Williams (Eds.), 
Lecture Notes on 
Computer Science Volume 2418
 (pp. 153-165).  
Verner, J., Brereton, O., Kitchenham, B., Turner, M
., & Niazi, M. (2014). Risks and risk mitigation in
 global 
software development: A tertiary study. 
Information and Software Technology,
 56
(1), 54-78.  
Walsham, G. (2006). Doing interpretive research. 
European Journal of Information Systems,
 15
(3), 320-
330.  
 20 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Development Offshor
ing: A CMMI Level 5 Case
  Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 Walsham, G. (1995). Interpretive case studies in IS
 research: Nature and method. 
European Journal of 
Information Systems
, 
4(2), 74-81.  
Xue, Y., Sankar, C. S., & Mbarika, V. W. (2004). In
formation technology outsourcing and virtual team. 
Journal of Computer Information Systems,
 45
(2), 9-16.  
Yadav, V., Adya, M., Sridhar, V., & Nath, D. (2013)
. Control, process facilitation, and requirements c
hange 
in offshore requirements analysis: Indian IT provid
er perspective. 
Journal of Information Technology 
Theory and Application
, 
14
(3), 30-47. 
 Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation 
21
 Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 Appendix A: Interview Protocols 
Interview 01: 

Interviewee: Manager 

1) General background information 
 Presentation and purpose of the interview 
 Your background (experience, education) 
2) Structure of Conscensia 
a. Your role 

b. How is the company structured? 
3) Who are the customers and why do they chose Cons
censia? 
4) The employees 
a. What the principles of remuneration? 

b. Who are they? 

c. How do they differ for e.g. Danish employees? 

d. How do you attract and select staff? 
5) Why is it attractive for foreign companies to ou
tsource to Ukraine? 
a. Macro-economic issues 

b. Educational issues 

c. Competencies 

d. Do you have any opinion on the outsourcing/near-
sourcing debate? 
6) How do you manage cooperation across borders and
 cultures? 
a. Any specific differences in work style and appro
ach? 
 
Interview 02: 

Interviewee: Managers 

1) General background information 
a. Presentation and purpose of the interview 

b. Your background (experience, education) 
2) Your role 
a. What is your role here in Conscensia/Systematic?
 3) The projects 
a. Please describe a typical project 
i. Content 

ii. Size 
b. What do you think is special about being a progr
ammer in cross-border projects? 
c. How do projects differ between UA and DK? 

d. What are the major obstacles or problems? 
4) The staff 
a. How do DK and UA staff differ? 

b. Do you receive any specific training at Conscens
ia? 
5) How do you manage cooperation across borders and
 cultures? 
a. Any specific differences in work style and appro
ach? 
 
Interview 03: 

Interviewee: Programmer, Conscensia, Ukraine 

1) General background information 
a. Presentation and purpose of the interview 

b. Your background (experience, education) 
2) Your role 
a. What is your role here in Conscensia? 
3) The projects 
a. Please describe a typical project 
i. Content 

ii. Size 
b. What do you think is special about being a proje
ct manager in cross-border projects? 
c. How does PM differ between UA and DK? 
 22 
Managing Risk Areas in Software Development Offshor
ing: A CMMI Level 5 Case
  Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 d. What are the major obstacles or problems? 
4) The staff 
a. How do DK and UA staff differ? 
5) How do you cooperate across borders and cultures
? 
a. Any specific differences in work style and appro
ach?  
 
Interview 04: Follow-up 

This interview has several (distinct) purposes: 

1) To confirm factual observations from the last in
terview 
a. Composition of teams, roles etc. 

b. Usage of tools 
2) To dig into issues and observations regarding co
operation in co-located teams 
 
1) Conformational part 
a. Can we please draw a picture / organogram of you
r team, roles, and physical settings? 
i. HQ 
ii. Frontline 
iii. Management 
b. Can we sketch how tools are used? 
i. By whom and for what purpose? (Technical / Manag
ement) 
ii. How are they related? 
iii. Who decides these things? 
2) Organizational issues 
a.  In what circumstances do you use the different 
tools? 
b.  Please sketch the ongoing working schedule for 
a week / cycle 
c.  How do you feel or observe the balance of power
 between the two development sites? 
d.  Please explain the communication patterns 

e.  How do you act / take action when you are conce
rned, mad, angry, or disappointed with colleges 
from Denmark? 
i.  How is this related to the use of (software) to
ols? 
ii.  What aspects of the tools and routines lead to
 a successful project? 
f. How will you characterize an SW product on balan
ce, a project deemed to be a success?  
g. Who takes the lead? 

h. Why do we not have any Ukrainian (or do we?) 
i. Product managers 

ii. Project managers 

iii. Team leaders 

iv. Scrum masters 

v. Feature leads? 
 Journal of Information Technology Theory and Applic
ation 
23
 Volume 16 Issue 1 Paper 2 
 About the Authors 
John Stouby Persson
 is Associate Professor at the Center for Informati
on Systems Management at 
Aalborg University, Denmark. He holds a MSc in Info
rmatics and a PhD in Information Systems from 
Aalborg University. His research focuses on improvi
ng the practices for managing the realization of IT
 
benefits and global software development through en
gaged scholarship. His research has been published 
in journals such as 
Information Systems Journal
, 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
, 
IEEE 
Software
, and 
Communications of the AIS
. He is a member of the Executive Board for the Sca
ndinavian 
Chapter of the Association for Information Systems.
 Bjarne Rerup Schlichter
 is Associate Professor at the Department of Busine
ss Administration at Aarhus 
University, Denmark. He holds an MSc in Computer Sc
ience, a Graduate Diploma in Business 
Administration (Organization), and a PhD in Informa
tion Systems from Aarhus University, Denmark. His 
research focuses on project management, the impleme
ntation of information systems with special 
emphasis on the realization of benefits and trust. 
His research has been published in journals such as
 
Information Systems Journal
, 
European Journal of Information Systems
, 
Government Information 
Quarterly
, and 
Journal of Enterprise Information Management
. He became a professor after a career in 
industry (i.e., as a Government Industry Leader of 
PwC in Denmark). He serves as an Expert Witness and
 
Assessor (Information Systems) in District and High
 Courts in Denmark and in Danish Arbitrage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2015 by the Association for Information
 Systems. Permission to make digital or hard copies
 of 
all or part of this work for personal or classroom 
use is granted without fee provided that copies are
 not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advant
age and that copies bear this notice and full citat
ion on 
the first page. Copyright for components of this wo
rk owned by others than the Association for Informa
tion 
Systems must be honored. Abstracting with credit is
 permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to pos
t on 
servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior
 specific permission and/or fee. Request permission
 to 
publish from: AIS Administrative Office, P.O. Box 2
712 Atlanta, GA, 30301-2712 Attn: Reprints or via e
-mail from 
publications@aisnet.org
. 
 