  Info Systems J 
 (2004)  14 , 93Ð109
 © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 93 Blackwell Science, LtdOxford, UKISJInformation Systems Journal1365-2575Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2004
 2004 14 293109 Original Article
 Agent-based agile manufacturing cellsJ Yu & K K Krishnan
 A conceptual framework for agent-based agile manufacturing cells Jianming Yu & Krishna K. Krishnan
 Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, Wichita State University, Wichita, 
KS 67260-0035, USA, email: krishna.krishnan@wichita.edu
 Abstract. 
 Agile manufacturing techniques are perceived as the manufacturing
systems of the future. Agile manufacturing cells are dynamic and reconÞgurable

and the modelling of the manufacturing cells and its interaction mechanism is crit-

ical to its successful use. This paper deals with the architecture and cooperation

mechanism of web-based agile manufacturing cells. Based on an analysis of struc-

ture and organization requirements of agile manufacturing cells and a comparison

of three basic architectures of manufacturing systems, the quasi-heterarchical

architecture is used for the agile manufacturing cell. Functional layers are deÞned

in this architecture to make the cellÕs control system reconÞgurable and reusable.

Agent technology is adopted for implementation of each layerÕs functions to estab-

lish an agent-based model of agile manufacturing cells. Four types of agents

including cooperation agent, job management agent, resource broker agent, and

resource control agent are deÞned, and their functions discussed. Finally, a real
time interaction mechanism of the agents is presented by considering the activities

during the agentsÕ cooperation in an agile manufacturing cell.
Keywords:
  agent-based system, agile manufacturing cell, interaction mechanism,
quasi-heterarchical architecture 
 INTRODUCTION Agile manufacturing emphasizes high customization production, and is viewed as a break-
through of traditional mass production (Booth, 1996). Agility is deÞned as the ability to thrive in

an environment of continuous and unpredictable change and proÞt from rapidly changing, glo-

bal markets for customized customer-driven products and services (Nagel & Dove, 1991). An

agile corporation is adaptable, and capable of rapid reconÞguration to satisfy quickly changing
market demands. Agile manufacturing crosses company borders. Core competencies of orga-

nizations can be pooled to satisfy various customer demands and reduce the time to market

(Gunasekaran, 1998). One way to establish an agile manufacturing system is to employ agile

manufacturing cells as building blocks to take advantage of cellular manufacturingÕs (CM) quick

response and ability to accommodate changes in product mix (Zhang 
 et al ., 1999). Cellular  J Yu & K K Krishnan
 © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 94manufacturing can produce medium-volume/medium-variety part types more economically
than other types of manufacturing systems and surveys (Wemmerlov & John, 1997) afÞrm that

many beneÞts have been gained from CM implementation including shorter manufacturing

lead time and customer response time. This makes CM a logical choice for Þrms whose strat-

egy is time-based competitive manufacturing. Each agile manufacturing cell in the agile man-

ufacturing system is capable of manufacturing a part family, and is connected via the internet

with other agile cells from different enterprises to seek temporary market opportunities and

accomplish manufacturing tasks cooperatively. Manufacturing can take place across organi-

zational and geographic boundaries to exploit distributed resources from different partners in

dynamic teams that can be formed quickly in response to rapidly changing market demands.
Internet technology is a key to enable distributed agile cells to cooperate with each other by

extending traditional information systems and eliminating barriers to integration.
An agile manufacturing cell should have the ability to adapt to unpredictable changing man-
ufacturing demands by updating its manufacturing capacity as well as functionality promptly.

Efforts have been dedicated to the cellÕs rapid reconÞguration to enable it to accommodate fast

changing market demands and high customization in a dynamic manufacturing environment.
The reconÞguration activities consist of swapping existing machines between cells, adding new

machines to cells, removing existing machines from cells, replacing existing machines in cells

(Shewchuk, 1998), and rapid hardware changeover with modular function unit (Hollis & Quaid,

1995; Garcia  et al ., 1996; Quinn  et al ., 1997). However, for the manufacturing cell to work prop-
erly, the cell control system should also be reconÞgurable in order to be adaptive to those cell

reconÞguration activities. This paper focuses on the control system modelling of agile manu-

facturing cells considering their reconÞgurability, responsiveness, and reusability.
 RELATED   WORK   AND   DISCUSSION Some efforts have been made in the research of agile cell control system modelling. Chan &
Zhang (2000) propose an agile manufacturing model with the Object and Knowledge-based

Interval Timed Petri-Net (OKITPN) which possesses the characteristics of both object-oriented

methodology and Petri-Nets. The attributes and behaviours of agile manufacturing cell can be

clearly described with this model. A general Interval Timed Petri-Net (ITPN) device model is
established from which speciÞc ITPN model of different types of devices could be derived. By

deÞning the transitions between ITPN models, the control logic of the agile manufacturing cell

can be determined. The cellÕs quick reconÞguration and reuse are achieved by connecting the

ITPN models of different devices. However, the cell control system and the manufacturing

resources are tightly coupled and the control system still needs to be updated for every change

in the manufacturing resources. Zhang 
 et al . (1999) propose another method of modelling agile
manufacturing cells also based on object-oriented methodology. Three basic types of objects

are deÞned as the building blocks of agile manufacturing cells; they are physical manufacturing

entity object (PMEO), control manufacturing entity object (CMEO), and information manufac-

turing entity object (IMEO). The PMEOs pertain to material ßow, the IMEOs to information ßow,
  Agent-based agile manufacturing cells © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 95and the CMEO to decision-making such as routing, scheduling, etc. To accommodate the
objectsÕ interaction, each kind of object is divided into two parts: a shell for interfacing other

objects and a core for processing execution. Object interoperability is guaranteed by hiding the

objectÕs non-standard natures, which is facilitated by the shellÐcore structure. Three functional

components of the objects are deÞned including supervisor, functionor and executor, based on

which the object interaction mechanism is derived. Kim 
 et al . (1997) adopt object-oriented meth-odology to develop control software for agile manufacturing cell aiming to achieve rapid product

changeover, rapid new product introduction, and unattended operation. The design goals are
design for changes, lower complexity, and reusability. Agents are designed to implement the

identiÞed objects in the control software. Sources of workcell changes are encapsulated within

classes to facilitate reconÞguration. Design patterns can be customized to solve speciÞc design
problems. A hierarchical framework is developed for error handling. However, they do not discuss

the communication and cooperation issues, key issues in a distributed system. Rabelo 
 et al .(1999) recognize two capabilities of an agile scheduling system: dynamic reaction to unsched-

uled events and global consideration of production resources beyond traditional physical bound-

aries. He proposes a multi-agent approach to model an agile scheduling system. Four types of

generic functional agents including scheduling supervisor, enterprise activity agents, local dis-
tribution centres, and consortium, are deÞned based on which real scheduling systems can be

customized. The consortium represents a logical and temporary clustering of distributed man-

ufacturing resources (it is also called a virtual cell in some other researches) and is alive only

if its corresponding tasks have not been completed. The information integration, communication

and coordination in the community of the proposed agents are discussed. The system structure

is designed to be open, and modular for easy reconÞguration.
Several issues that are essential for agile manufacturing cells still remain open. Those that
have not been well addressed from the system modelling prospective by exiting research are

summarized as below:
 ¥ ReconÞgurability. Manufacturing resources may join or leave the cell at any time. The plug-
and-play of devices should be realized so that the cellÕs manufacturing capacity and/or func-

tionality can be enhanced to satisfy the quickly changing market demands while minimizing the

downtime in its service due to these changes.
 ¥ Responsiveness. The agile cell should respond quickly and effectively to external events
(e.g. rush orders, order changes) and internal events (e.g. machine breakdowns).
 ¥ Reusability. By changing the knowledge and data of the agile manufacturing cell, it can be
used by different users that have different types of manufacturing resources.
Based on the analysis of cell modelling requirements in a constantly changing manufacturing
environment, an architecture of agile manufacturing cell model is introduced in this paper to

better address the cellÕs reconÞgurability, responsiveness, and reusability. The key aspects of

this approach are as follows:
 ¥ By comparing three different types of system architectures, the quasi-heterarchical archi-
tecture with its advantages of robustness, responsiveness and overall performance optimiza-

tion is selected for modelling the agile manufacturing cell.
  J Yu & K K Krishnan
 © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 96 ¥ Based on the function analysis of the agile manufacturing cell, four functional layers are
deÞned in the quasi-heterarchical architecture of the agile manufacturing cell model including

cooperation layer, job management layer, resource model layer and resource control layer.
 ¥ Agent technology is utilized to implement the cell model. Four types of agents are deÞned to
implement the functions of each functional layer of the quasi-heterarchical architecture. They

are cooperation agent, job management agent, resource broker agent, and resource control

agent. ¥ The interaction mechanism of agents is modelled with Petri-net. The interaction procedure is
classiÞed into four phases: communication phase, negotiation phase, execution phase and
evaluation phase. The agent interaction activities at each phase are deÞned.
The detailed approach is discussed in the following sections.
 SYSTEM   ARCHITECTURE Architecture analysis
 Agility means to be adaptable, robust, and responsive. The cell architecture is one of the key
issues of its realization. Currently the most commonly used system architecture in manufac-

turing systems is hierarchical architecture. As shown in Figure 1(A), the node in the upper level

is responsible for the job management and gives the nodes in the lower level strict schedules

to follow. The nodes in the lower level perform the tasks speciÞed in the schedules. Any vari-

ance will be sensed and processed by the upper node. The hierarchical architecture has the

advantages of system stability and performance optimization, but slow response and low

robustness. Because it is a Þxed structure established beforehand, it lacks system extensibility

and reconÞgurability. Therefore, it is difÞcult to incorporate unforeseen changes into the system

(Dilts  et al ., 1991).Another architecture that has received much attention is heterarchical architecture
(Figure 1B) in which there is no central controller. The nodes in this structure are autonomous

and selÞsh. They take actions independently to earn maximum proÞts for themselves. The rela-

tionships between nodes are both cooperative and competitive. Nodes compete for tasks and

decompose them into sub-tasks by negotiating with each other. It offers the advantage of
 Figure 1.
 System architectures of
manufacturing systems.
A   
                           B                                  C Intelligent nodeNon-intelligent node  Agent-based agile manufacturing cells © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 97robustness (DufÞe & Prabhu, 1994). Failure of nodes does not impact the system performance,
because both knowledge and control algorithm are distributed. But its disadvantages are: the

results are unpredictable and the global system performance optimization is very difÞcult to

achieve (Bongaerts 
 et al ., 2000).The third architecture can be viewed as a compromise of the other two. To improve overall
system performance, one or more layers can be added to the single layer heterarchical archi-

tecture. This assigns hierarchy to the system to enhance its efÞciency and effectiveness on a

global basis while maintaining some advantages of the heterarchical architecture. These addi-

tional layers are for the purpose of improving the intelligent nodesÕ global awareness. This

architecture is called quasi-heterarchical architecture. As shown in Figure 1(C), the nodes in

the lower level are also intelligent and have some degree of autonomy. The relationship

between the upper level and lower level nodes is not a masterÐslave relationship, but a nego-

tiation-based, cooperative, ßexible, and dynamic one. The upper level node can delegate tasks

to capable lower level nodes and control them indirectly via a certain protocol (e.g. Contract

Net Protocol) to optimize the global results. The lower level node takes the responsibility of

scheduling its own tasks. It can join or leave the system without inßuencing the system per-

formance because nodes are loosely coupled. Also, overall system performance optimization
is possible in this architecture, because the upper level node has a global view of the lower

level nodes. Another important feature of this architecture is that it is quite responsive because

its nodes are autonomous, which means decisions can be made locally without much time-

consuming inter-node communication. Some researchers have used the quasi-heterarchical

architecture for modelling agents with multiple layer architectures (Gou 
 et al ., 1998). But they
only applied it to the architecture of a single agent not to the architecture of a multi-agent sys-

tem (MAS). This agile manufacturing cell model adopts this quasi-heterarchical architecture to

satisfy the agile manufacturing cellÕs requirements of extensibility, reusability, responsiveness,

robustness, and also the global performance optimization.
 The layered structure of agile manufacturing cell
 Earlier discussion reveals that quasi-heterarchical architecture is used for agile cell modelling.
The next question is what the layers are. To identify the layers, a function requirement analysis

of the agile manufacturing cell should be carried out Þrst. Generally, the functions of an agile

manufacturing cell can be classiÞed into three levels: order level, job level, and operation level.
 ¥ Order level functions. As a basic unit of agile manufacturing systems, an agile manufacturing
cell can utilize distributed manufacturing resources. This is realized by order delegation among

cells, which requires that cells should have the capability of cooperation with each other over

computer networks. Also, the cell should be able to evaluate incoming orders to determine if it

can fulÞll the tasks. For accepted orders, the cell functions in this level can also keep track of

their status.
 ¥ Job level functions. An accepted order might contain one or more manufacturing jobs. The
responsibilities of job level functions are to decompose every job into a sequence of operations,
  J Yu & K K Krishnan
 © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 98identify the resource requirements of each operation, Þnd the appropriate resources to do it,
and monitor and report the job status.
 ¥ Operation level functions. Each job follows a sequence of operations. Each operation is del-
egated to a speciÞc resource (e.g. a machine). The responsibilities of operation-level functions

are to obtain tasks from the job management layer, dispatch operations to the resource by

scheduling, monitor and report the resource and operation status.
Based on the function analysis, a layered structure of agile manufacturing cell is presented
as shown in Figure 2. Each agile manufacturing cell has its speciÞc functionality, i.e. the capa-

bility of manufacturing a family of similar parts, and is a functional node on the agile manu-

facturing network with the capability of communication with other cells distributed across shop

ßoors or enterprises over computer networks to accomplish manufacturing tasks cooperatively.

In each cell, each level of functions discussed above is represented by a functional layer in the

cell model: order management layer for order level functions, job management layer for job

level functions, and resource control layer for operation level functions. Note that a layer called

resource model layer is inserted between the job management layer and the resource control

layer, the purpose of which is to make the cell extensible and reusable. This layer maintains a

cell resource model that describes the types of manufacturing capabilities of the cell. Generally,

the devices in a manufacturing cell can be classiÞed into Þve types: machining device, assem-

bling device, measuring device, material handling device, and storage device. Each type of

device can be classiÞed further according to its detailed capabilities. For example, machining

devices include lathe, grinding machine, drilling machine, etc. The resource model is estab-

lished with all these classiÞed types. Figure 3 is an example illustrating the structure of the

model.Each classiÞed device type in the resource model is modelled as an intelligent node. Devices
in real cells are classiÞed accordingly and registered with corresponding nodes. The intelligent

nodes can broadcast tasks assigned by the job management layer to its underlying resources.

The resource model can be updated if new types of resources with new capabilities need to be
 Figure 2.
 The layered structure of an agile manufacturing cell.
Agile manufacturing cell 
(AMC) 
Agile manufacturing 
network 
(Internet)
 Order management layer 
Job management layer 
Resource model layer 
Resource control laye
r AMC AMC   Agent-based agile manufacturing cells © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 99added. It provides a framework for easy cell reconÞguration by separating process planning
from resource allocation.
The advantage of the layered structure discussed in this section is that, with standard-
ized interfaces between layers, changes of one layer do not inßuence the performance of

others, which can greatly facilitate the system reconÞguration. For example, the communi-

cation protocols on the network used by the cooperation layer can be changed without

impacting other layersÕ performance. In the resource model layer, the model can be updated

to a more detailed one if the job management layer can provide more detailed resource

requirements of jobs for faster dispatching. In the resource control layer, resources can join

or leave it without impacting the systemÕs functions. Moreover, given new task planning

knowledge and/or new resource models, the cell can be reused in different shop ßoors or

enterprises.
 The multi-agent model of agile manufacturing cell
 Agent technology has already received much attention from both academic and industrial soci-
eties. Although researchers have done much work in this area, a uniform deÞnition of agents

still does not exist. Generally, an agent is an autonomous system of software, hardware or

other intelligent objects. It can make decisions and control its behaviours independently to

achieve its goal based on the information it acquires from the environment via interaction. It has

the following four properties (Nwana, 1996):
 ¥ Autonomy. The agent can perform its tasks by controlling its internal status and planning its
behaviour without any interference from outside.
 ¥ Sociability. With communication languages, agents can interact and cooperate with other
agents in an efÞcient way to accomplish tasks.
 ¥ Responsiveness. Agents can sense their environment and quickly respond to the environ-
mental changes.
 Figure 3.
 The agile manufacturing resource model.
Material handling device 
Machining device Assembling device 
Measuring device 
Storage device Agile devices Drilling machine 
Grinding machine 
Lathe   J Yu & K K Krishnan
 © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 100 ¥ Proactivity. Agents are not only reactive, but also have goal-driven behaviours. They actively
acquire useful information and take appropriate actions accordingly to earn as much proÞts as

possible.
Multi-agent system is a complex system consisting of a set of agents. Agents are indepen-
dent and loosely coupled, and have both cooperative and competitive relationships. These

attributes make MAS ideal to be applied to distributed system control. The MAS has the fol-
lowing properties (Nwana, 1996):
 ¥ Distribution of knowledge and data. In MAS, each agent has its own speciÞc knowledge
and local information. Agents accomplish tasks cooperatively by making local decisions and

exchanging information. Data and knowledge can be shared by different agents, or can be
acquired by submitting service requirements.
 ¥ Concurrent processing. Tasks are performed by agents independently and concurrently.
Thus, the processing efÞciency of the system can be greatly improved.
 ¥ Robustness. Agents have autonomy and loosely coupled relationships. If one of the agents
cannot function well, other agents and the entire system can still work normally.
 ¥ Extensibility. By conÞguring appropriate communication protocol and control logic, as well as
relevant knowledge and necessary data, a new agent can join the system without changing the

systemÕs architecture.
Agent technology has been applied to jobshop control and scheduling by many researchers
(Sousa & Ramos, 1998; Rabelo 
 et al ., 1999; Akbulut & Kamarthi, 2000; Usher & Wang, 2000).
Its advantages mentioned above are compatible with the modelling requirements of agile man-

ufacturing cells. The functions of each layer can be implemented by one or more agents. The

MAS model structure of an agile manufacturing cell is shown in Figure 4. Four types of agents

including cooperation agent, job management agent, resource broker agent, and resource con-

trol agent are deÞned for each functional layer.
 Cooperation agent
 A cell can cooperate with other cells over networks through the cooperation agent that has
three functional modules shown in Figure 5. The cooperation and coordination module hides

all the details of communication to delegate and/or acquire orders on the agile manufacturing

network. It announces incoming orders to the order evaluation module. The order evaluation

module is responsible for evaluating announced orders with respect to the capacities and man-

ufacturing capabilities required, and return the evaluation results (i.e. the order is feasible or

not) to the cooperation and coordination module which will try to acquire feasible orders by bid-

ding for them. If the bidding is successful, the cooperation and coordination module will notify

the order management module which will then decompose accepted orders into jobs and

assign them to job management agents in the following format:
(Order ID, Job ID, Job description, Due date)

The order management module maintains the statuses of all accepted orders by referring to
their corresponding job status. It will notify the cooperation and coordination module of any late
  Agent-based agile manufacturing cells © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 101 Figure 4.
 The multi-agent system model of agile manufacturing cell. CA, cooperation agent; JA, job management agent;
BA, resource broker agent; RA, resource control agent.
Job ma
nagement layer 
Order management layer 
Resource control layer 
Service requests / responses Announcements / responses 
Job assignments / reports CA JA 1 
JA 
n BA n 
BA 1 
RA n RA 2 RA 1 Resource model layer 
  Broadcasting /   bidding  Figure 5.
 The IDEF0 graph of the cooperation agent.
Orders Orders 
Cell model 
& statusAccepted orders Cooperation & Coordination Order evaluation Order management
 Evaluation results 
Manufacturing jobs  Job status  Orderstatu
sBids 
Bid requests
   J Yu & K K Krishnan
 © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 102orders. The cooperation and coordination module will then try to delegate the late orders to
other agents or negotiate with the customer to change the due date.
 Job management agent The job management agent has the knowledge of job analysis and resource planning. Its archi-
tecture is shown in Figure 6. It decomposes the job assigned by the cooperation agent into a

sequence of operations and announces the operations to appropriate resource broker agents,

respectively, according to each operationÕs manufacturing requirements. The announcement is

as follows:
(Order ID, Job ID, Operation ID, Operation description, Starting time)

After receiving the bids of capable candidates for each operation from resource control
agents, the job management agent evaluates all possible routings and delegates each operation
to one candidate with the aim of minimizing overall job tardiness. The scheduling approach is

not discussed in detail because it needs the system model established in this paper as its com-

puting platform for implementation, thus the next step of this research. The number of job man-

agement agents can be dynamic, depending on factors such as the number of human experts
of process planning or the number of jobs that are being processed. Job management agents

can be added into or removed from the system based on needs of system scalability. The coop-

eration agent assigns jobs to job management agents by considering their load balancing.
 Resource broker agent
 The main function of the broker agent is to Þnd capable service suppliers for customers. As
shown in Figure 7, each resource broker agent represents one node of the cellÕs resource
 Figure 6.
 The IDEF0 graph of the job management agent.
Job ma
nager Process planner Communicat
orOperation status 
Operation announcements
Job status Job reports Cell status Assigned jobs 
Manufacturing operations 
Job assignments   Agent-based agile manufacturing cells © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 103model. The resource broker agent is responsible for the management of the underlying
resources (represented by resource control agents) involving resource registration or cancel-

lation. Resources can be from different cells or even different shop ßoors. The resource broker

agent broadcasts incoming tasks with respect to their manufacturing requirements to its under-
lying resources, and sends back the bids from all candidates to the corresponding job man-

agement agent. The manufacturing resources of agile manufacturing cells tend to be
reconÞgured frequently to satisfy constantly changing demands. In the brokering model, job

management agents do not need to memorize the information regarding all available

resources and update it along with the changes of the resources, which are the responsibilities

of the resource broker agent. This makes agile cells much easier to be reconÞgured by sep-

arating task planning from resource allocation. Also, the brokering model facilitates distributed

resources utilization, which is one of the key points of agile manufacturing.
 Resource control agent
 The resource control agent is responsible for the scheduling/rescheduling, monitoring and sta-
tus reporting of its resource, namely the device. Resource control agents can be from distrib-

uted sites. They register with one or more of the resource broker agents to bid for operations.

After receiving the information of the operation broadcasted by resource broker agents, the

resource control agent evaluates its machineÕs status and capacity to judge if the machine can

do the operation. If it can, the agent will Þnd a time slot for this operation by considering all the

operations it holds, and submit a bid that has the following format:
(Order ID, Job ID, operation ID, earliest beginning time, latest beginning time, estimated
Þnishing time)The resource agentÕs working procedure is shown in Figure 8. If the bid is accepted by the
job management agent, the resource control agent will dispatch the operation to its device.
Summarizing the functions of the four types of agents discussed in the section ÔThe multi-
agent model of agile manufacturing cellÕ, Figure 9 gives a global view of the cooperation mech-
anism among them. Orders are acquired from the agile manufacturing network, and then trans-
 Figure 7.
 The brokering model.
Resource broker 
agent Job management 
agent 1 Resource control agent 1 Job management 
agent 2 Resource control agent 2 Resource control agent 3   J Yu & K K Krishnan
 © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 104ferred downwards in the system as jobs and operations. Various levels of system information
including machine and operation information, job status and cell status are transferred

upwards to corresponding agents who need it for decision-making or prompt reaction. During

the cooperation, various agent activities may occur which may lead to unpredictable system

results. In order for the agents to cooperate more efÞciently, in the next section, we propose an

agent interaction activity model that can reduce unnecessary interagent communication and
facilitate the system implementation.
 Figure 8.
 The resource control agentÕs working procedure.
Waiting jobs and jobs in process  
Sufficient capacity 
Abnormalstatus
Confirmation from Job management agent 
Results Announced tasks 
 Device status analysis
  Device capacity analysis 
 Scheduling Insufficient capacity
 Negotiation Manufacturing operations  Figure 9.
 The IDEF0 graph of the cooperation among agents.
Bids CA 
Responses from  
machines  or operators Broadcasted  

operations 
 Operation  announcements JA 
Machine & operation status Bid req
uests OrdersCellmodel&status
Jobst
atus  Job assignments 
Dispatched operations
 BA 
RA   Agent-based agile manufacturing cells © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 105 INTERACTION   MECHANISM Agent interaction is a very important aspect in multi-agent-based systems because it deter-
mines the cooperation efÞciency and effectiveness. In the proposed cell model, the interaction

activities of agents are driven by outside bid requests or inside order/job/operation-related

events (e.g. rush orders, order changes, machine breakdowns), which may happen at any time
during the cellÕs service. A real time interaction mechanism should be built into the system to

let the information of those events or disturbances to be delivered to the agents who are

responsible for handling them and to those that are affected by them so that these agents can

take actions promptly. The responsiveness of the whole system is improved in this way. Given

the quasi-heterarchical system architecture, it is convenient to model the agent interaction with

a top-down method. From a global point of view, the interaction activities are classiÞed into four

phases: communication phase, negotiation phase, execution phase, and evaluation phase. In

the communication phase, the agent at the upper layer tries to contact appropriate agents of

the lower layer. Information such as job assignments, operation broadcasts are transmitted

across layers; in the negotiation phase, the job management agent negotiates with resource

control agents that are found by the broker agent, and makes a decision to delegate the oper-

ation to one of them; in the execution phase, the operations are being processed by the
resource control agent. Any changes to the operation may lead the interaction back to the pre-

vious two phases. If the operation is Þnished on time, the interaction gets to the Þnal evaluation

phase in which the operation results and the resource control agentÕs performance is evaluated

by the job management agent.
Each phase of the interaction contains several agent behaviours that are prerequisites of the
interaction or the results of it. To visualize the interaction mechanism, the interaction activity

model of the agents (cooperation agent, job management agent, resource broker agent, and

resource control agent), for accomplishing manufacturing jobs cooperatively is modelled on

Petri-Net as shown in Figure 10. The model gives a complete description of the interaction pro-
cedure by considering all possible interaction activities of the agentsÕ cooperation. But it does

not impact the agentsÕ autonomies by interfering with the agentsÕ decision-making procedures.

It only speciÞes the necessary requests and responses as each agent cooperates with other

agents. This facilitates the system integration in heterogeneous industrial environments, and
keeps the interagent communication lean.
In Figure 10, T1
 a , T2 b , T3 c , and T4 are transitions that are triggered by agentsÕ corresponding
behaviours in the communication phase, the negotiation phase, the execution phase, and the

evaluation phase of the interaction, respectively. Interaction relationships are dynamically
established. Possible agent behaviours at the four phases are all modelled as transition con-

ditions. The places, P1
 i , P2 j , P3 k , and P4, where decisions may have to be made by agents,
represent system situations of the four phases.
The description of the places are listed below:
P1 0 :CA assigns jobs to JA by considering load balancing.
P1 1 :JA generates an operation list and contacts corresponding BA for each operation.
  J Yu & K K Krishnan
 © 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 14 , 93Ð109
 106P1 2 :BA tries to Þnd appropriate RAs registered with it to broadcast the operations.
P1 3 :BA cannot Þnd any appropriate RA. It notiÞes JA which then notiÞes CA.
P1 4 :CA tries to delegate the jobs to other cells or negotiate with the customer about the due
dates.

P2 0 :Operations are announced to RAs.
P2 1 :RAs return their bids to the JA who will then make a choice.
P3 0 :Operations have been released to the selected RA and are in progress.
P3 1 :JA gives the detailed changes and negotiates with the related RA.
P 4 :Finished operations have been submitted to the JA who will give awards or penalties to
the corresponding RA by comparing the original operation requirements with the actual

results.
The interaction between agents is message-based. The basic interaction operations are
 send  and  receive
 . Each agent is equipped with a messenger for interpreting incoming mes-
 Figure 10.
 The agent interaction model.
Transition             Place              Token 
RA accepts 
BA responds 
JA  responds          JA changes  
        the requests JA gives  
job details  P10 BA responds 
RA asks for changes RA refuses JA ag
rees 
RA responds JAre
fuses T30 RA submits the results
 BA 
can™t find  
any capable RA
 No RA accepts At least one RA accepts
 CA responds 
CA accepts Customer orders
  P11   T10   T11   T12  T13   T14   T15  T20  T21  T22  T31  T32  T33  T34   T4  P12  P13  P14  P20 P21 P30 P31  P4  Agent-based agile manufacturing cells© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
Information Systems Journal 
14, 93Ð109
107sages as well as formatting outgoing messages, a mailbox for temporarily storing the message
queue, and a directory that will be dynamically updated according to current transactions. With

the agent interaction activity model, the requirements and responsibilities of each agent are

clearly deÞned which facilitates the agentÕs implementation. The detailed interaction protocol
can then be derived based on the deÞned activities and their corresponding participants.

Because this work focuses on the system modelling methodology, the detailed protocol is not

discussed.SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION AND FEATURESA prototype of the proposed agile manufacturing cell is being developed in the automation lab

at Wichita State University. Visual Basic with DCOM technology is used to implement the cellÕs
agents and architecture. Active Server pages (ASP) based on Internet Information Server (IIS)
on a Windows 2000 platform is used to develop the interface to each cell to make it accessible

on the internet. In addition to the advantages of its layered structure, there are some system

performance related features of the prototype:
¥The system has an organization structure and a built-in interaction mechanism, which
enable it to respond quickly to disturbances. For example, if one of the resource control

agents Þnds that its resource entity has broken down and some of the operations cannot
be accomplished, it will contact the resource broker agent to delegate the affected opera-

tions to other resource agents. The resource broker agent will broadcast these operations

to all capable resources registered with it and return their bids to the resource control

agent who will then judge to which agent it will delegate its operations. This procedure
greatly reduces the communication load and time because the resource model provides a
clear view of the system and the resource broker agent knows whom it should broadcast
the affected operations. If the resource broker agent Þnds that there is no capable

resource agent available for those operations, it reports this to the job management agent

who will then notify the cooperation agent. The cooperation agent will delegate these jobs

to other cells or negotiate with the customer who placed the order to change the due

date.
¥Multiple job management agents improve the cellÕs efÞciency by facilitating parallel
processing.
¥Convenience for tracking job status, or changing the jobsÕ due dates or cancelling them
according to customerÕs demands. Via job management agents and the interaction mecha-

nism, corresponding resource control agents can be notiÞed of these changes promptly and

update their schedules accordingly in an agile way.
¥Manufacturing resources of exiting types that are already described in the resource model
can be added into or removed from cells in real time without interrupting the cellÕs services.

These cell reconÞguration activities are facilitated by resource broker agents, which can pro-

vide on line services of resource registration or cancellation.
 J Yu & K K Krishnan
© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
Information Systems Journal 
14, 93Ð109
108CONCLUSIONSThis paper described the Þrst step in the goal to develop a responsive, robust, and recon-
Þgurable agile manufacturing system. Agent-based agile manufacturing cells are used as

building blocks of such an agile manufacturing system to exploit the beneÞts of cellular man-
ufacturing and agent technology. For this purpose, an agent-based model of agile manufac-

turing cells is presented, which has a layered structure and consists of a set of intelligent

agents for intercell cooperation, job management, and resource control. With the aim to adapt
to quickly changing market demands, the layered structure of the proposed model enables the

cell to be reconÞgurable and reusable. However, to improve the performance of agile manu-

facturing cells, the model also needs to facilitate parallel job processing, efÞcient communica-

tion and coordination, and quick system response in a dynamic manufacturing environment.

These goals are achieved by employing different types of intelligent agents to implement the

four functional layers of the cell model with the agentsÕ functions and their interaction mech-
anism clearly deÞned.
The proposed agent-based cell model provides a computing platform for the implementation
of distributed scheduling techniques for agile manufacturing. A robust and high performance

scheduling approach for efÞciently utilizing the distributed resources of agile manufacturing

cells will be the focus of the future study.
REFERENCESAkbulut, M.B. & Kamarthi, S. (2000) An agent-based
scheduling system to achieve agility. 
Proceedings of
SPIE Ð the International Society for Optical Engineering
,4208, 19Ð30.Bongaerts, L., Monostori, L., McFarlane, D. & Kadar, B.
(2000) Hierarchical in distributed shop ßoor control.

Computers in Industry
, 43, 124Ð137.Booth, R. (1996) Agile manufacturing. Journal of Engineer-
ing Management, April, 105Ð112.Chan, T.S. & Zhang, J. (2000) Modeling for agile manu-
facturing systems. International Journal of Production
Research
, 39, 2313Ð2332.Dilts, D.M., Boyd, N.P. & Whorms, H.H. (1991) The evolution
of control architectures for automated manufacturing sys-

tems. Journal of Manufacturing Systems
, 10, 102Ð115.DufÞe, N.A. & Prabhu, V.V. (1994) Real time distributed
scheduling of heterarchical manufacturing. 
Journal of
Manufacturing Systems, 13, 94Ð107.Garcia, P., Woods, R., Rebeil, J., Jones, J. & Griesmeyer,
J. (1996) Agile manufacturing prototype system. Pro-
ceedings of the 5th Agile Manufacturing Enterprise

Forum Conference. 
Agile Manufacturing Enterprise
Forum, Boston, MA, pp. 395Ð416.
Gou, L., Luh, P.B. & Kyoya, Y. (1998) Holonic manufactur-
ing scheduling: architecture, cooperation mechanism,

and implementation. 
Computers in Industry
, 37, 213Ð231.Gunasekaran, A. (1998) Agile manufacturing enablers and
an implementation framework. 
International Journal of
Production Research
, 36, 1223Ð1247.Hollis, R. & Quaid, A. (1995) An architecture for agile
assembly. Proceedings of American Society of Precision
Engineering, 10th Annual Meeting
. Austin, TX, pp. 211Ð
225.Kim, Y., Jo, J., Velasco, V.B., Barendt, N.A., Podgurski, A.,
Ozsoyoglu, G. 
et al. (1997) A ßexible software architec-
ture for agile manufacturing. 
Proceedings of IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation
, April,
Albuquerque, NM, 
4, 3043Ð3047.Nagel, R. & Dove, R. (1991) 
21st Century Manufacturing
Enterprise Strategy
. Iacocca Institute. Lehigh University,
Pennsylvania, USA.Nwana, H.S. (1996) Software agent: an overview. 
Knowl-
edge Engineering Review
, 11, 205Ð244.Quinn, R., Causey, G.C., Merat, F.L., Sargent, D.M.,
Barendt, N.A., Newman, W. et al. (1997) An agile
 Agent-based agile manufacturing cells© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
Information Systems Journal 
14, 93Ð109
109manufacturing workcell design. 
IIE Transactions
, 29,901Ð909.Rabelo, R.J., Camarinha-Matos, L.M. & Afsarmanesh, H.
(1999) Multi-agent-based agile scheduling. 
Roboticsand Autonomous Systems
, 27, 15Ð28.Shewchuk, J. (1998) A framework for modeling and design
of agile discrete-part manufacturing facilities. 
Proceed-
ings of the 7th Industrial Engineering Research Confer-

ence. Alberta, Canada, pp. 198Ð216.
Sousa, P. & Ramos, C. (1998) A dynamic scheduling holon
for manufacturing orders. 
Journal of Intelligent Manufac-
turing, 9, 107Ð112.Usher, J.M. & Wang, Y.-C. (2000) Intelligent agents archi-
tectures for manufacturing control. 
Proceedings of 9th
Industrial Engineering Research Conference
, Cleveland,
OH, May 21Ð23, (CD-ROM).
Wemmerlov, U. & John, D. (1997) Cellular manufacturing
at 46 user plants: implementation experiences and per-
formance improvements. 
International Journal of Pro-
duction Research
, 35, 29Ð49.Zhang, J., Gu, J., Li, P. & Duan, Z. (1999) Object-orientedmodeling of control system for agile manufacturing cells.

International Journal of Production Economics
, 62, 145Ð153.Biographies
Jianming Yu
 is currently a PhD student at the Department
of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering of Wichita

State University, KS, USA. He obtained his bachelorÕs

degree in 1992 and masterÕs degree in 1997 in Mechanical

Engineering both from Shandong University in China. His

research interests include agile manufacturing systems,

agent-based jobshop scheduling, CAD, assembly model-
ling, internet technology and its application in manufactur-

ing industry.
Krishna K. Krishnan is an associate professor of Indus-
trial and Manufacturing Engineering at Wichita State Uni-

versity. He graduated from Virginia Tech in 1994 with a
PhD in Industrial and Systems Engineering. He has a BS

degree in Mechanical engineering and an MS in Industrial

and Systems Engineering. Dr Krishnan teaches courses

on Web-Based Automation, Computer Integrated Manu-

facturing and Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing.

Dr KrishnanÕs primary research interests are in Integrated

Manufacturing Systems, CAD/CAM, and Free-Form Sur-

face Manufacture.
All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate, letting you access and read them immediately.