 Journal of Information Technology Education 
Volume 9, 2010 Editor: Linda Knight 
A Novel Approach for  
Collaborative Pair Programming Sanjay Goel  Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida, India 
sanjay.goel@jiit.ac.in
 Vanshi Kathuria  Accenture Technology Solutions, Hartford, CT, USA 
vanshi.kathuria@accenture.com
 Executive Summary The majority of an engineer™s time in the softwa
re industry is spent working with other program-
mers. Agile methods of software developmen
t like eXtreme Programming strongly rely upon 
practices like daily meetings and pair programming.
 Hence, the need to learn the skill of working 
collaboratively is of primary importance for soft
ware developers. During 
computing education, 
this may be particularly important for the stronger students as they may be the ones who least de-
sire to work with other programmers. Further, 
programmers need to develop the ability to com-
prehend the programs developed by others and, 
also, to write programs that can be easily com-
prehended by other programmers
. Increasing dependence on large amounts of Free and Open 
Source Software (FOSS) makes this even more cr
ucial. Until a decade ago, one weakness in the 
typical undergraduate experience was the failure to
 train students to work with other program-

mers Œ in fact it was often considered a form of cheating. Over time, researchers have the need to 

find a way to allow students to work together within clearly defined boundaries that would be an 
acceptable practice.   
A traditional form of pair programming based on th
e driver-navigator model has been successful 
in many introductory computer science courses. It
s success is noticeable in better performance in 
computer science assignments, increased team work in and outside class, enhanced learning, and 
decreased frustration (Cliburn, 2003; Domino, 
Collins, & Hevner, 2007; McDowell, Werner, Bul-
lock, & Fernald, 2002; Nagappan et al., 2003;Sfetsos, Stamelos, Angelis, & Deligiannis, 2009; 
Thomas, Ratcliffe, & Robertson, 2003;
 VanDeGrift, 2004; Williams & 
Kessler, 2003; Williams, 
Yang, Wiebe, Ferzli, & Miller, 2002).  However, pair programming has its weaknesses too 
(Bevan, Werner, & McDowell, 2002, Cliburn, 2003;
 VanDeGrift, 2004). Most of the experiments 

have the shortcoming of not having been able to
 create a convincing need for collaboration. Such 
a situation results in students sitting together, 
sharing a machine, but not actually collaborating 
with each other  The objective of this paper is to propose a new 
framework for implementing pair programming in 
the classroom. Our model of collabora-
tive pair programming is based on Dil-

lenbourg™s set of four conditions to set up an active collaborative context.  We have transformed the traditional form of 

pair programming to suit this frame-

work.  Students in a pair first work in-

dependently and then work on a com-

bined task that brings together their in-
dividual tasks. The framework has been 
experimented within a real classroom 
Material published as part of this
 publication, either on-line or in print, is copyrighted by the Informing Science Institute. 
Permission to make digital or paper copy of part or all of these 
works for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage AND that 
copies 1) bear this notice 
in full and 2) give the full citation on the first page. It is per-
missible to abstract these works so
 long as credit is given. To 
copy in all other cases or to re
publish or to post on a server or 
to redistribute to lists requires specific permission and payment 
of a fee. Contact 0H
Publisher@InformingScience.org  to re-
quest redistributi
on permission.   A Novel Approach For Collaborative Pair Programming 
184 environment for the course ‚Introduction to Comput
er Programming™ offered to first year engi-
neering students. All the inexperienced programmers were 
allowed to form pairs, while all the 
experienced students worked as solo programmers
. This was done primarily to compare the per-
formance of experienced versus inexperienced pr
ogrammers at the end of the course. This com-
parison helped identify if such an implementa
tion of collaborative pair programming proved ad-
vantageous for students. 
The experiment was well monitored and regulated 
by four instructors and teaching assistants at 
any given time. Observations throughout the five months of the course and results from various 
examinations and feedback mechanisms showed 
that such a framework for collaborative pair 
programming enhanced problem solving skills, im
proved quality of work, and increased trust and 
teamwork. Final examination results for inexperi
enced programmers showed a marked increase in 
their performance when compared to results of 
experienced programmers. In conclusion, the new 
framework proved successful by helping inexperienced programmers perform at par with their 

experienced peers. Introduction Engineering education accreditation agencies of US, UK, Australia, Japan, and Singapore have 

transformed their accreditation process from the traditional resource-based approach to outcome-

based approach. Competencies su
ch as ability to apply knowledge
, design skills, problem solving 
skills, technical competence, ability to work in multidisciplinary teams, communication skills, 
sensitivity towards global, societal, and environm
ental issues, sensitivity towards ethical and pro-
fessional issues, and readiness for lifelong learni
ng have been identified as necessary (Goel 
2006a).  Goel (2006b) has classified core engin
eering and general professional competencies with 
reference to the requirements of Indian IT industr
y.  Problem solving ability has been rated as the 
pivotal skill.  Nine critical competencies incl
ude a mix of engineeri
ng and general professional 
skills. These are analysis/methodological skills, b
asic engineering proficiency, development 
know-how, teamwork skills, Englis
h language skills, presentation 
skills, practical engineering experience, leadership skills, and communication skills. Consequently, it is mandatory that all 

courses in engineering curricula should consciously
 and directly contribute towards the develop-
ment of these competencies. 
Today, organizations have offices in multiple lo
cations with teams interacting across various 
geographical sites, sometimes even in different time zones. Big software projects are divided 
across locations, and people across different sites 
are expected to combine their individual works 
to complete the project work. Further, programme
rs need to develop the ability to comprehend 
the programs developed by others and also to wr
ite programs that can be easily comprehended by 
other programmers
. Increasing dependence on large amounts of Free and Open Source Software 
(FOSS) makes it even more crucial.  However, 
a serious shortcoming of the typical undergraduate 
engineering education process is neglecting to tr
ain students to work with other programmers. 
Usually in a four-year engineering course, collaborative effort and teamwork is done only in the 

later years, i.e., in the third and fourth year.  Ev
en then the collaboration is driven more by divi-
sion of labor due to size rather than complexity
. Many a times, the assignment or project is de-
signed after forming the groups in the classroom, when the teacher knows the strength of a par-

ticular group. Such approaches do not necessarily 
develop teamwork skills.  Researchers have felt 
the need for a way to facilitate students to work together with clearly defined boundaries (Cli-

burn, 2003). 
Collaborative learning focuses on the role of peer work for educational success. Vygotsky in his 
seminal social development theory proposed that 
social interaction plays a fundamental role in 
the process of cognitive development (Goldfarb, 2001). One of key assumptions of Brunner™s 
model of constructivist learning is a social ente
rprise (Driscoll, 2004). Pask™s Conversation theory 
 Goel & Kathuria 185 is founded on the idea that learning occurs through
 conversations with instructors or peers (Ku-
tay, 2005). As per the social learning theory of
 Bandura, gaining insights into others™ practices 
can be a valuable experience (Ladyshewsky & Ry
an, 2002). Incorporating social learning theory 
into their experiment, these authors report that peer coaching provided the learners the benefits of 
enhanced knowledge, cognition, and metacognition.
  Lave and Wenger (1991) proposed situated 
learning theory on the central idea that learning involves a process of engagement in a 'commu-
nity of practice.' From the perspective of this
 theory, learning is not seen as the acquisition of 
knowledge by individuals, but as a process of social
 participation (Smith, 2007).  Dillenbourg 
(1999) elaborated on collaborative learning as follows: 
 ﬁ– a situation in which particular form
s of interaction among people are expected 
to occur, which would trigger learning m
echanisms, but there is no guarantee that 
the expected interactions will actually occu
r. Hence, a general concern is to de-velop ways to increase the probability that 
some types of interaction occur.ﬂ Learning in a collaborative environment is a pro
cess that could be subject of two different per-
spectives: individual effort and social sharing 
of knowledge (Dillenbourg, 
1999; Lipponen, 2002).  
However, sharing of knowledge is useful only if
 students are engaged in collaborative activities
. Engagement in collaborative activities causes individu
als to master something that they could not 
do before the collaboration (Lipponen, 2002).   
In our study, we offered structured opportunities for collaboration to students of ‚Introduction to 
Computer Programming™ offered to first year stude
nts. While designing the lab exercises for our 
course we had two main purposes in mind. Firstly,
 the task should not be solved collaboratively 
just because it is complex, but it should be desi
gned such that it demands 
collaboration. Secondly, 
we wanted to introduce teamwork in the early stag
es of engineering instead of the later semesters, 
as this not only helps in developing better tec
hnical skills but also helps in the development of 
numerous soft skills.
 Literature Review Group work has a very wide range of possible forms, ranging from simple task division between 
two members to intense community collaborations. At
 the simplest level, it may be in the form of 
coordination between members for handling simple
 situations with clear task boundaries requir-
ing minimum intra-group communication. Alternatively, it may take the form of cooperation for 

handling complicated situations with well defi
ned, but marginally overlapping subtask bounda-
ries, and mild intra-group communication. Group work in its most sophisticated form requires 

collaboration for handling complex situations with
 evolving subtask boundaries and intense intra-
group communication.  The group size, distance, and professional as well as cultural diversity are 

other important aspects that bring further variati
ons of these three forms of group work. Interest-
ingly, software development involves all these fo
rms of group work.  However, sometimes the 
word collaboration is used to mean all these forms of group activities. 
The nature of group work amongst software engi
neers is not limited to process-centred coordina-
tion.  Whitehead (2007) observes that software engineering projects require many software engi-
neers to collaboratively create a large number of 
artefacts incorporating code, requirement speci-
fications, architecture descriptions, design models, test
 plans, etc.  The distinctive feature of agile 
methods and culture is that they view and appr
oach software development as a social activity. 
Shared development environment, constant imme
rsion and engagement with the team, constant 
feedback, reviews, holistic awareness, continuous
 testing and integration, community of practi-
tioners are some of the hallmarks of all agile methods (Whitworth & Biddle, 2007).  Further, ag-
ile method like eXtreme Programming (XP) uses the practice of 
pairing not just for code devel-
opment, but also for design, refactoring, as well as testing (Sharp & Robinson, 2005).  Advocates 
 A Novel Approach For Collaborative Pair Programming 
186 of pair programming believe that due to continuo
us discussion and review, a pair is actually more 
productive than two separate developers.  It signi
ficantly reduces defect rate with which conse-
quent implications for reliability, cost, and maintenance. 
Brusilovsky, Kouchnirenko, Miller, and Tomek (
1994), in a review of approaches and tools for 
teaching programming, noted that programming cau
ses cognitive overload, and for this reason 
should be taught in small subsets. It is very essential to engage students in learning activities con-
cerning simple authentic problems that are close to
 their experience, and show the usefulness of 
the programming process beyond the specific course to
 arouse their curiosity make them curious 
(Gogoulou, Gouli, Grigoriadou, & Samarakou, 2003). 
A novel and well-appreciated approach in teachi
ng programming has been identified in collabora-
tive programming. A lot of research has been done 
over the past few years,
 and it has been seen 
that a pair or a group working together in so
lving a programming exercise minimizes the cogni-
tive load (Williams, Wiebe, Yang, Ferzli, & M
iller, 2003). Preston (2005) summarizes that col-
laborative learning research has already established two things: (1) the effectiveness of having 
students work together, and (2) the critical attributes common to successful collaborative learning 
approaches. One important attribute in the design of
 an exercise is that the solution should require 
co-authoring. Collaborative programming exposes c
ode to constant review. The group methodol-
ogy promises to facilitate colla
boration, promote mentorship, and also enhance collective owner-
ship of code. 
The most common and widely used form of colla
borative programming is pair programming. Pair 
programming is a situation in which two programme
rs work side-by-side, designing and coding, 
while working on the same algorithm. As Chaparro (2005) paraphrases (Cockburn & Williams, 
2001; Williams & Kessler, 2003), a relevant aspect of
 pair programming is that it transforms what 
used to be an individual activity into a coopera
tive effort. Remote pair programming, or virtual 
pair programming, is another variation of traditional pair programming, where the two program-
mers are in different locations, working via a real
-time editor or shared d
esktop.  Typically there 
are two roles in pair programming: the driver who controls both the computer keyboard and the 
mouse, and the navigator who examines the driver™s work, offering advice, suggestions and cor-

rections to both design and code.  Pair progra
mming improves the quality of the software design, 
reduces the deficiencies of the code, enhances technical skills, improves team communication, 
and is considered to be more enjoyable for the participants (VanDeGrift, 2004). Studies that com-

pared the performances of paired students and solo
 students showed that the former were more 
likely to hand in solutions for their assignments that were of higher quality.    
Indeed, in the design of tools for supporting ‚collaborative™ programming, less importance has 
been given to pair incompatibility and unequal 
contribution of participants (Chaparro, 2005). 
Also, in most of the experiments, less attention 
has been given to the nature and design of the ex-
ercises that students work upon. However, these pr
oblems have been a subject of study in the 
field of collaborative learning for a long time. As
 argued in Dillenbourg (1999), just putting peo-
ple together does not mean that they will collabor
ate. There should be an identified need for col-
laboration, which may take place at different stages.  The collaboration may be in the form of 

groups where the students act equivalently, or of 
role-playing where they act according to specific 
roles (e.g., pair programming).  
Various methods have been implemented for form
ing the groups. As Cliburn (2003) highlights in 
his paper, McDowell et al. (2002) allowed student
s to choose their own partners. Nagappan et al. 
(2003) used a software program to make random 
partner assignments. Thomas et al. (2003) had 
students rate themselves on a scale of 1 to 9 in terms of their programming ability, and then as-
signed partners based on these ratings. In some projects, students who rated themselves highly (7-
9) were paired with students who rated themselve
s poorly (1-3). In other projects, students were 
 Goel & Kathuria 187 paired with those who rated themselves similarl
y. Williams and Kessler (2003) also discussed 
forming pairs based on personalities (whether someone 
is an extrovert or introvert). In many stud-
ies (Nagappan et al., 2003; Thomas et al., 2003;
 Williams et al., 2002) programmers were as-
signed new partners throughout the semester. In ot
hers (McDowell et al., 2002), students kept the 
same partner throughout the term unless unforeseen 
circumstances occurred. Domino et al. (2007) 
reported better performance and satisfaction outcomes using face-to-face pair programming as 
compared to its virtual setting. They also found 
that limiting the extent of collaboration can be 
effective, especially when programmers are more experienced. 
Sfetsos et al. (2009) have shown 
better performance and collaboration-viability for pairs with heterogeneous personalities and 
temperaments.
 Case Studies In VanDeGrift™s (2004) study, the context was a ten week introductory programming course for 
teaching the Java programming language. To introduce the pair programming concept, students 

read the paper, ‚All I Really Need to Know about Pair Programming I Learned in Kindergarten™ 
(Williams & Kessler, 2000a). Additionally, the inst
ructors demonstrated pair programming, fol-
lowed by a briefing session about the roles of dr
ivers and navigators. Students completed three 
pair programming projects, with each project spanning two weeks. Each student wrote individual 
reports for each project. The survey results s
howed that students felt benefited from having a 
partner for programming projects, since partners
 helped answer questions, brought complemen-
tary sets of ideas and skills to the group, and 
helped with debugging and problem solving. Stu-
dents felt that finding time for meeting with their partners posed the biggest burden. 
Cliburn (2003) in his paper discusses the use of
 pair programming in an introductory program-
ming course. Survey results showed that a majority of the students liked working in pairs on the 
projects. Most students thought pair programming improved their grade. An overwhelming ma-

jority of students thought that pair programming 
made them better at working with others. For the 
most part, students did feel that peer evaluations made them accountable to their partner. 
McDowell et al. (2002) concluded that 
ﬁstudents who programmed in pairs produced better pro-
grams, completed the course at higher rates, and performed about as well on the final exam as 
students who programmed independently.ﬂ
 In their experiment, data was gathered from approxi-
mately six hundred students enrolled in four sec
tions of an introductory programming course at 
the University of California. One of the two 
sections required students to complete programming 
assignments in pairs, while the other required st
udents to write programs independently.  Among 
all students who completed the course, students in the pairing class scored significantly higher on 
the programming assignments than those in the non-pairing class.  
Further empirical evidence of the effectiveness of
 pair programming is provided by an experi-
mental study conducted by Williams and Kessler at the University of Ut
ah (Williams & Kessler, 
2000b). In this study, forty-one upper level stude
nts enrolled in a course on web design were ran-
domly assigned to complete four programming projects either independently or in pairs. During 

each programming cycle, the thirteen solo progra
mmers completed one program, while the four-
teen pairs completed two. Across all four cycles,
 on an average, the collaborators had 15% fewer 
defects in their programs than the solo progra
mmers. Furthermore, collaborators spent, on aver-
age, only 15% more time completing two project
s than the solo programmers spent completing 
one, suggesting that pair programming is 40-50% 
faster than programming alone. In addition to 
producing more bug free code, pair programming 
appears to enhance the programmers™ enjoy-

ment and confidence.  Students practicing collaborative programming, as well as professional pair programmers, were 
anonymously surveyed. Over 90% reported enjoying 
their jobs more when working in pairs, and 
 A Novel Approach For Collaborative Pair Programming 
188 95% reported feeling more confident in their 
solutions (William & Kessler, 2000b). Nagappan et 
al. (2003) reported an improvement in pair
s™ grades on exams over students who programmed 
individually.  Brereton, Turner, & Kaur (2009) report
 the results of a systematic literature review 
of ten empirical studies. They conclude that
 pair programming may im
prove undergraduate stu-dents™ pass and retention rates on programming modu
les and is likely to improve their confidence 
in their work and attitude towards programming.   
Limitations of Existing Work 
The pair programming method as defined and practi
ced in available literature has a few limita-
tions and weaknesses. In pair programming, the pa
ir sits on the same computer all the time and 
takes turns to write the code. This technique has 
a major disadvantage when one of the students in 
a pair is dominant or a very high scoring student 
as compared to the other student. In such cases, 
the other student tends to become dormant, some
times due to a complex, sometimes due to the 
fear of being wrong while writing code, and some
times just to avoid work because it is being 
completed easily, thus becoming a social loafer. The stronger student does most of the work, di-

minishing the learning experience for the weaker 
partner. Lui and Chan (2006) reported a soft-
ware process fusion (SPF) process in a real soft
ware production situation by alternating between 
the pair and solo programming. They found that the longer team members work alone, the more 

code patterns they develop for reuse later in pairs. According to Dillenbourg (1999), in order to maxi
mize the likelihood of the specific forms of 
interaction as he had mentioned in his definition 
of collaborative learning, there are four condi-
tions to accurately set a collaborative context:  
1. Set up the initial conditions: This involves ta
king decisions about group formation. It is 
difficult to set up initial conditions that guara
ntee effective collaborative work.  At this 
stage the faculty is required to take decisi
on about the size, heterogeneity, geographical, 
and temporal placement of peers, i.e., face to face co-location, side by side co-location,  
geographically dispersed locations, collaboration 
technology (if any), selecting peers, etc.  
2. Over-specify the collaboration contract with
 a scenario based on roles: The collaboration 
contract can be specified by setting up diffe
rences among learners either by triggering 
conflictual interactions or else because of peers™ complementary knowledge through role 
playing or limiting their access to certain part of information. 
3. Scaffold productive interactions by encomp
assing interaction in the medium: This en-
compasses specifying interaction rules in face 
to face or technology enabled collabora-
tion.  4. Monitor and regulate the interactions: The teacher may decide to directly facilitate, moni-

tor, and regulate the face-to-face or tech
nology-supported collaboration among learners. 
Alternatively, a mechanism or a tool may be
 developed for self regulation by peer learn-
ers.  Pair programming as reported so far does not comp
letely satisfy the a
bove-mentioned conditions. In many case studies pair programming was practiced outside the class where students were re-

quired to complete their assignments and project 
work with their partner in whatever time they 
could spare. Such a situation did not fulfill th
e fourth condition, as the collaboration was not 
monitored and led to a major disadvantage wher
e students complained that it was difficult for 
them to be free at the same time. In VanDeGrift
™s (2004) experiment, nearly half of the students 
who worked in pairs felt that it was extremely difficult to schedule time for meetings. At times, 

students have also complained of unreliable part
ners (Bevan et al., 2002) and the possibility of 
being paired with a parasite (Cliburn, 2003), suggesting that pair programming does not provide a 
 Goel & Kathuria 189 scenario based on well-defined roles. Although pa
ir programming does specify that one student 
should act as the driver and the other as navigator, it does not assign specific tasks to individual 
students, thus leaving the students on their own to choose their tasks. 
 Methodology After identifying limitations in the implementati
on of pair programming as it exists today, we 
transformed the concept of pair programming, in
 the light of Dillenbourg™s framework, to make 
sure that both the students in a pair necessarily 
do an equal amount of work.  Our research was 
aimed at investigating if our proposed model of
 collaborative pair programming can help inexpe-rienced programmers to learn fast and reach at par with their experienced peers. As an outcome of 

this intervention, we wanted to increase students™ motivation, give them the confidence of work-

ing individually and collaboratively, and also a
pply their knowledge to different situations. There-
fore, we tried to set up conditions that were mean
ingful to the students, which were related to a 
goal that was challenging, and gave students th
e opportunity to express their beliefs and opinions. 
Table 1 shows Dillenbourg™s four requirements 
for maximizing collaborative learning and how 
we implemented each in our study. 
Table 1.  Application of Dillenbourg™s Principles 
Dillenbourg's requirement Our implementation 
1. Set up the initial conditions. Pairs of two 
students without any programming experience were 
formed by faculty in the beginning of the semester.  
2. Over-specify the collaboration 
contract with a scenario based on 

roles  In each laboratory session, the members of pair were first required 

to individually complete two different programming tasks. On 

completion of both their individual tasks, they worked together to 
solve a more complex problem that was designed as an extension 
of both their individual problems (refer to Table 2). 
3.  Scaffold productive interactions 
by encompassing interaction in the 
medium 
The pair members were not allowed 
to interact for completing their 
individual tasks. However, if one of the  pair member completed 

his/her task much in advance, and 
the other member felt the need of 
peer™s support even for completing his/her  individual task, the 
laboratory instructor allowed them to do so by assigning a small 
penalty of marks to the second member. 
4. Monitor and regulate the interac-
tions  
For every group of thirty student
s, at least two faculty members 

and one teaching assistant were av
ailable for doubt clearance and 
monitoring. 
 Our adapted implementation of collaborative pa
ir programming was based on Dillenbourg™s four 
conditions of collaborative learning as discussed in 
the previous section. Each combined task was 
designed based on the individual tasks and in a way such that it demands collaboration of earlier work. Each exercise or problem was designed in tw
o parts. The first part required both students in 
a pair to work independently. Each of them was 
given a problem to solve that was of the same 
difficulty level and required the application of th
e same concepts. After solving their individual 
task, they were given a combined task. The difficulty of the combined task was higher compared 
to the individual tasks and was designed such th
at its solution required the students to combine 
the concepts, logic, and code of both the indivi
dual solutions.  Each exercise fulfilled the purpose 
of making the students work both individually and 
in a team. Table 2 shows a few sample exer-
cises.    A Novel Approach For Collaborative Pair Programming 
190 There were a total of one hundred and seventy ei
ght students enrolled in this course and they 
were divided into three batches for laboratory cl
asses.   The students were divided into two cate-
gories. The first category consisted of 66 st
udents having prior programming experience during 
their K-12 education.  This set of students was 
asked to work independently all throughout the 
semester. The other group consisted of 112 st
udents who had no prior experience in program-
ming. These students were asked to work in pairs. The students had the choice to choose their 
own permanent partner for the semester.   
Table 2: Sample Laboratory Assignment Individual task 1 
Individual task 2 
Combined task Write a program to make an 
n*n square using the ﬁ$ﬂ sign. 
Get the value of n from the 
user. Use an incrementing loop 

(i=0, i<n; i++). 
Write a program to make an n*n 

square using the ﬁ$ﬂ sign. Get the 
value of n from the user. Use a dec-
rementing loop (i=n;i>0;i--). 
Combine the programs in such
 a way that exactly half 
the design is made by incrementing the counter value ‚i™ 
while the other half of the design is made by decrement-
ing the counter ‚i™. 
Write a program to enter ten 

names and roll numbers and 
print them. 
Write a program to enter ten names 
and ages and print them. 
 Write a program combining the two codes such that the 
output shows the name, roll number and age for all the 
common names. 
Write a program to input two 

words and print the number of 
occurrences of each letter in 

each word.   Write a program to input two words 
and print all the common letters in 
both. Note that a letter will be com-

mon in both words if number of 
occurrences of that 
letter is same in 
both words. 
Write a program that inputs two strings of any length 

and checks whether they are 
anagrams or not. Anagram 
is a word or phrase made from another by rearranging 
its letters (Ex.:  
now won, dread  adder, riot 
 trio). Also if they are not anagrams report the number of 
letters that are not same. 
Write a function to count the 

number of characters in a given 

string. The string will be the 
input argument for the function. 
Answer has to be printed in the 

main function.  
Write a function to count the number 

of words in a given string. The string 

will be the input argument for the 
function. Answer has to be printed in 
the main function. 
Write a program such that for a given input string the 

main function calls the word_count function first and as 

soon as a word is identified it calls the char_count func-
tion with this word as input. In this way calculate the 
number of words and total number of characters in the 

given sentence. 
 Experienced programmers were required to solo-p
rogram the combined task directly. If at any 
point in time they found the problem difficult, they
 could first solve the two problems in the first 
part and then solve the combined task. Inexperienced students work
ing in pairs had to solve the 
two problems in the first part individually and separately. Each student had to provide the solu-
tion for his or her sub-problem. After this, they 
had to collaboratively solve the combined task in 
the second part by combining the concepts they applied in their independent work. 
The monitoring of this experiment was well regulated
, with at least four lab instructors in each of the three lab sections of approximately sixty students. Each section had two hours of lab instruc-

tion every week. Five final year 
undergraduate students also assisted
 the first year students during 
the lab hours. We particularly made sure that students work sincerely for the entire duration of the 

lab and most of the exercises are solved during 
the lab hours in the presence of the instructors.
 Results and Findings 
Evaluation and grades for this course were based
 upon two minor examinations, major examina-
tion, a lab exam, and lab work assessment. To ev
aluate our experiment, we have analyzed the 
marks for minor examinations, major examination, 
and the lab exam. Further, at the end of the 
semester, an optional questionnaire was administered amongst the students in which they had to 
rate six parameters on a scale of 0-3, 0 being 
never and 3 being always. This questionnaire is 
adapted from a much larger questionnaire used to
 assess the degree of deep learning by the Na-
tional Survey of Student Engagement (Kuh et al
., 2005). Fifty-seven students responded. Some of 
them could not understand the questions clearly 
and asked for clarification. Table 3 shows the 
 Goel & Kathuria 191 average of each point for experienced-solo as well as inexperienced-pair programmers. The aver-
ages are calculated from the responses of seventeen
 solo programmers and forty paired program-
mers.  The students were also involved in discussions and 
feedback interviews where they were asked to 
share their views on the benefits they achieved 
while using the new method for solving their labs. 
These discussions took place during, as well as, af
ter the course.  Some of the students™ com-
ments are quoted here: Student 1: ﬁI agree that when two people with no programming background work to-
gether they learning more easily.ﬂ 
Student 2: ﬁWorking with a partner helped me
. We could identify different ways of solv-
ing the same problem when we combined individual tasks.ﬂ 
Student 3: ﬁThis new method made us think deeply and shaped our views towards a good 
approach to problem solving. Both partners
 had a feeling that they had the support of 
each other, and this added to the motivation level.ﬂ 
Student 4: ﬁWorking with a partner really 
helped me. I had no programming background 
but I could ask my partners all doubts without
 any hesitation. Combining individual pro-
grams made us come across more mistakes.ﬂ 
Student 5: ﬁThe new method was a life saver for students with no programming back-
ground. They were able to grasp much mo
re. Two of my friends secured an ‚A™ even 
though they had no programming background.ﬂ 
Table 3: Survey Results: Comparison 
between paired and solo programmers. 
S.No How often did you have the opportu-
nity: 
A Average rating by 
inexperienced-paired 
programmers 
 (0-3)   
0: never; 3: always 
B Average rating by 
experienced-solo 
programmers 
(0-3) 
0: never; 3: always 
1 to work with classmates outside of class to prepare 
solutions to exercises 1.85 1.29 
2 to Analyze the basic elements of an idea, experience, 
or theory, such as examining a particular case or 
situation in depth and considering its components 
1.90 2.06 
3 to Synthesize and organize ideas, information, or 
experiences into new, more complex interpretations 

and relationships 
1.90 1.59 
4 to make judgments about the value of variables, ar-
guments, or methods, such as examining how others 

gathered and interpreted data and assessing the 
soundness of their conclusions 
1.90 2.06 
5 to work on assignments that took more than an hour 
to complete 
1.60 2.06 
6 to better understand someone else's views by imagin-
ing how an issue looks from his or her perspective 
1.80 1.59 
 For all the laboratory instructors and teaching assistants, the most common observations were to 
find paired programmers brainstorming far more than individual programmers, suggesting alter-

nate implementations during evaluations, approach
ing instructors for doubts less often than indi-
vidual programmers, and having mo
re details like null checks and memory checks in their pro-
 A Novel Approach For Collaborative Pair Programming 
192 grams. It led the students to check their thinki
ng and reason their decisions; they examined and 
discussed their ideas with others and evaluated other™s statements and solutions. They modified 
their own programs to fit in their code in the 
new but similar situation presented by the combined 
task question and, at the same time, also acted as 
evaluators for their partner™s programs. We be-
lieve that this experience trained them for readi
ng and building upon others™ code in future.  The 
instructors also felt that student pairing also he
lped in improving the effectiveness of teacher stu-
dent interaction in the labs. 
Based on the results shown in Table 3 and the responses and statements of the students and in-
structors, some of the evident advantages of collaborative programming that we could bring out 
effectively in our course were: 
1)  Efficiency: According to Bevan et al. (2002), pairs spend less time working on assign-
ments than individuals. In our experiment 
also inexperienced-pair programmers could 
produce code of the same quality in the same
 time as experienced-solo programmers. Al-
though paired programmers had to write more
 code, (individual and combined tasks), 
they seldom took more than an hour to comp
lete the task. This 
happened because when students attacked the combined task, the st
udents working in pairs could work out the 
logic much easily and in less time as they 
had already grasped the concept while working on the individual tasks.   2) Trust and Teamwork: Collaborative programmers got to know their teammate really well, 

which helped to build trust and improve team work. Discussions with students brought 
forward the fact that paired programmers were more comfortable in clearing their doubts 

with their partners. When they worked colla
boratively, they showed the confidence to 
state when something was right and the abilit
y to admit when something was wrong. An-
other advantage that was found in the studen
ts™ responses was that collaborative workers 
developed the tendency to work toge
ther even outside the class.   
3) Problem solving skills: ﬁ
Four eyeballs are certainly better than two
ﬂ (Williams, Kessler, 
Cunningham, & Jeffries 2000). Collaborative 
programmers talked, discussed, and argued 
more than the individual programmers. They
 had the additional and increased opportunity 
to learn by watching how their partners approach a task, how they use programming lan-

guage features, and how they use the development tools. They had the opportunity to bet-
ter understand someone else™s view by understa
nding how an issue looks from their part-
ner™s perspective. At such times, drawing 
from each person™s unique talents and experi-
ence, a process known as ‚pair brainstorming™ occurs resulting in highly effective prob-
lem solving. The simple act of explaining an i
ssue often leads to the solution faster.     4) Quality: Defects are prevented because knowledge
 is constantly shared between pairs 
(Jason, 2004). Though no specific measure were 
made about program defects, the lab in-
structors felt that compared to earlier batch
es when such a pairing was not tried out, the 
quality of the programs produced by novices improved significantly.  In our experiment, 
the defect errors were reduced while solving 
the difficult task because the students had al-
ready encountered more than half the errors while solving the easier but similar exercises.   
Along with the questionnaire, we also analyzed the marks of all the students enrolled in this 
course. Table 4 shows the average marks of e
xperienced-solo, as well as inexperienced-paired 
programmers, in the two minor written examinati
ons, lab examination, and the major written ex-
amination. In all the exams, the students were 
asked to write and analyze small programs. None 
of the examination questions was taken from the assignments or lab exercises.  It also shows the 
percentage difference in the performance of i
ndividual and collaborative 
programmers. It can be seen that all the exams were designed such that 
they were found to be quite challenging even by 
experienced programmers.  Goel & Kathuria 193 Table 4: Examination results: Comparison
 between paired and solo programmers. 
Evaluation 
Stage 
Examination 
Time of con-
duct of exam 
(after com-
mencement of 
course) A Average marks  
by inexperi-enced-paired 
programmers 
B Average marks by 
experienced-
solo pro-grammers 
Relative per-
formance gap 
 (B-A)/B 1. 
Minor I: 20 marks 6 weeks 6.81 
11.06 0.38 
2. 
Minor II: 20 marks 12 weeks 5.96 
9.65 
0.38 
3. 
Lab Exam: 40 marks 16 weeks 24.95 
28.58 0.13 
4 Major Exam: 50 
marks 
18 weeks 23.46 
26.03 0.10 
 The trend, as seen in Table 4, clearly indicates th
at as the semester progressed, the inexperienced-
paired programmers were coming at par with 
the experienced-solo programmers. The difference 
in the performance of students in the minor exams is
 due to the fact that in both the minor exams, 
a major portion of the paper was based on the topic last taught in class. Both the times, labs had 

not yet been conducted on those topics. Students with a programming background of K-12 days 

were already fluent in programming and, hence, 
managed to achieve a much better result. This 
also shows that for students having no progra
mming background, the maximum learning experi-

ence came from the lab work.  By the end of the semester, inexperienced-paired programmers 
reduced the relative performance gap from 40% to 
10% and performed at the same level as the 
experienced-solo programmers during the final examinations. 
The lab examinations were conducted towards the 
end of the semester. By then, the inexperienced 
programmers had improved significantly. After wo
rking collaboratively for about five months, 
students had become comfortable with lab exercises.
 When they were asked to individually solve 
difficult problems during the lab examinations, they analyzed the problem to manageable parts 
and synthesized an acceptable solution from these parts, just as they did while working in pairs. 

This accounted for the enhanced performan
ce of the inexperienced programmers.   Conclusions and Future Work
 We have used Dillenbourg™s four 
conditions of collaborative learning to define a novel approach 
of collaborative pair programming. In our framewo
rk, the students are first required to complete 
different sub-problems and later integrate their so
lutions to solve a more complex problem. We 
have tested our approach in an introductory programming course for first year engineering stu-

dents.  This approach has resulted in benefits such as enhancement of problem so
lving skills, efficiency, quality, trust, and teamwork skills. We have also
 observed that paired laboratory experience is 
especially advantageous to inexperienced progr
ammers. A hidden advantage that was evident 
from the students™ responses to the feedback sessi
ons was that paired programmers were moti-
vated to work collaboratively even outside the class, although this was not required as part of our 
experiment. Such results helped us to conclude
 that our aim of introducing collaborative work 
among programmers in the earliest stages of thei
r undergraduate studies had been successful. As our experiment was well monitored, none of the students got neglected or overshadowed by 

dominant partners. Also, as each paired programme
r had the chance to work individuall
y before 
working with their partner, it gave them the opp
ortunity to enhance their personal skills as well, 
 A Novel Approach For Collaborative Pair Programming 
194 leaving little scope for dormancy. However, this 
study may have some biases as we did not com-
pare the effect of collaborative pair progra
mming vs. solo programming within novice program-
mers. We also did not compare the effects of our
 model with the traditional form of pair pro-
gramming. This study also does not delv
e into detailed statistical analysis.  
With the support of some colleagues, the first aut
hor has also applied this model in another course 
Œ Object-Oriented Programming. In our department
, we now intend to apply the model to many 
other courses in future, especially the courses 
on Data Structures, Database Management, and 
Web Technology Laboratory. Some of the areas 
of improvement which would be addressed in 
these future studies are a quantifiable measure of code quality, are analysis of the statistical sig-
nificance levels of the survey results. Another va
riation to this implementation would to allow a 
few novices to work as individual programmers a
nd compare the growth of the paired novices 
with unpaired novices.  Similarly, we need to ex
tend the study to pairing amongst the experienced 
programmer. We plan to concentrate 
on these areas in our future studies.
 Acknowledgements:
 The authors are highly thankful to the cooperation and support extended by Prakash Kumar, Di-
vakar Yadav, Manish Thakur, Aarti Gupta, Uma 
Moorthy, Siddhartha Singh, Badal Vishal, and 
Deepak in conducting the laboratory classes. The firs
t author is indebted to Dr. Mukul K. Sinha 
for his insightful views and enriching discussions.  The encouragement provided by Prof. J. P. 

Gupta has been the source of strength for bringing innovative teaching practices at JIIT.  The in-
puts given by reviewers, editors, and Harkesh Singh Dagar also need a special mention
.   
References Bevan, J., Werner, L., & McDowell, C. (2002). Guide
lines for the use of pair programming in a freshman 
programming class. 
Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training
 (pp. 100-107). KY: 
IEEE Computer Society. 
Brereton, P., Turner, M., & Kaur, R. (2009). Pair programming as a teaching tool: A student review of em-
pirical studies. Proceedings of 22nd Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training
 (pp. 
240-247). IEEE. 
Brusilovsky, P., Kouchnirenko, A., Miller, P., & Tomek, I. (199
4). Teaching programming to novices: A 
review of approaches and tools. In T. Ottman & I. Tomek (Eds.), 
Proceedings of ED-MEDIA'94 - 
World Conference on Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia
 (pp. 103-110). Vancouver, BC.  
Chaparro, E. A. (2005). An intelligent cognitive tool 
to foster collaboration in distributed pair program-
ming.
 8th Human Centered Technology Postgraduate Workshop
, University of Sussex. Retrieved from 
http://hct.fcs.sussex.ac.uk/Submissions/22.pdf
 Cliburn, D. C. (2003). Experiences with pair programming at a small college. 
Journal of Computing Sci-
ences in Colleges
, 19(1), 20-29.  
Cockburn, A., & Williams, L. (2001). The cost and be
nefits of pair programming. In G. Succi & M. 
Marchesi (Eds.), 
Extreme programming examined 
(p. 223-243). Addison-Wesley Longman. Retrieved 
from 
http://collaboration.csc.ncsu.edu/laurie/Papers/XPSardinia.PDF
 Dillenbourg, P. (1999). What do you mean by co
llaborative learning? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), 
Collabora-
tive learning: Cognitive and computational approaches
 (pp. 1-19). Retrieved from 
http://tecfa.unige.ch/tecfa/publi
cat/dil-papers-2/Dil.7.1.14.pdf
. Domino, M. A., Collins, R. W., & Hevner, A. R. (2007)
. Controlled experimentation on adaptations of pair 
programming. 
Information Technology and Management,
 8(4), 297-312. 
Driscoll, M. P. (2004). 
Psychology of learning for instruction
 (pp. 227-245). Allyn & Bacon.   
 Goel & Kathuria 195 Goel, S. (2006a). Competency focuse
d engineering education with referen
ce to IT related disciplines: Is the 
Indian system ready for transformation? 
Journal of Information Technology Education, 5, 
27-52
. Re-trieved from 
http://www.jite.org/documents/Vol5/V5p027-052Goel88.pdf
   Goel, S. (2006b). Investigations on required core competencies for engineering graduates with reference to 
the Indian IT industry. 
European Journal of Engineering Education
, 31(5), 607-617. 
Gogoulou, A., Gouli, E., Grigoriadou, M., & Samarakou, M. (2003). Exploratory + collaborative learning 
in programming: A framework for the design of learning activities. 
Proceedings of the 3
rd IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies
, pp. 350-351. Retrieved from 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/iel5/8621/27318
/01215118.pdf Goldfarb, M. E. (2001). The educational theory of Lev Semenovich Vygotsky (1896 - 1934). Edward G. 
Rozycki & M. F. Goldfarb an
d Associates. Retrieved from 
http://www.newfoundations.c
om/GALLERY/Vygotsky.html
  Kuh, G. D. et al. (2005). 
Exploring different dimensions of stude
nt engagement: 2005 annual survey re-
sults
. National Survey of Student Engagement, Indiana University, USA. Retrieved from 
http://nsse.iub.edu/pdf/NSSE2005_annual_report.pdf
 Kutay, C. (2005). Implementation patterns for supportin
g learning and group interactions. PhD thesis, Uni-
versity of New South Wales, p. 19. Retrieved from 
http://www.library.unsw.edu.au/~thesis/adt-
NUN/uploads/approved/adt-NUN20060823.125823/public/02whole.pdf
  Jason, A. (2004). Technical and human perspectives on pair programming. 
ACM SIGSOFT Software Engi-
neering Notes, 25
(5), 1-14. 
Ladyshewsky, R. K. & Ryan, J. (2002)
. Reciprocal peer coaching as a st
rategy for the development of lead-
ership and management competency. 
Teaching and Learning Forum,
 Edith Cowan University, Austra-
lia. Retrieved from 
http://www.ecu.edu.au/
conferences/tlf/2002/pub/
docs/Ladyshewsky.pdf
   
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). 
Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation
. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press
. Lipponen, L. (2002). Exploring foundations of computer-supported collaborative learning
. Proceedings of 
the Computer-supported Collabor
ative Learning 2002 Conference.
 Retrieved from 
http://www.helsinki.fi/science/netwo
rkedlearning/texts/lipponen2002.pdf
 Lui, K. M., & Chan, K. C. C. (2006). Software 
process fusion: Uniting pair programming and solo pro-
gramming processes. In Q. Wang et al. (Eds.), 
Proceedings of SPW/ProSim 2006, LNCS 3966
. (pp. 
115 Œ 123). Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
McDowell, C., Werner, L., Bullock, H., & Fernald, J. (2002). The effects of pair programming on perform-
ance in an introductory programming course. 
Proceedings of the Thirty-Thi
rd Technical Symposium on 
Computer Science Education (SIGCSE 2002), 
pp. 38-42. ACM Press. 
Nagappan, N., Williams, L., Ferzli, M., Wiebe, E., Ya
ng, K., Miller, C., & Balik, S. (2003). Improving the 
CS1 experience with pair programming. 
Proceedings of the Thirty-F
ourth Technical Symposium on 
Computer Science Education (SIGCSE 2003),
 pp. 259-362. ACM Press. 
Preston, D. (2005). Pair programming as a model of
 collaborative learning: A 
review of the research. 
Con-
sortium for Computing Sciences in Colleges
, pp. 39-45. 
Sfetsos, P., Stamelos, I., An
gelis, L., & Deligiannis, I. (2009). An e
xperimental investigation of personality 
types impact on pair effectiveness in pair programming. 
Empirical Software Engineering
, 14(2), 187-
226.   
Sharp, H., & Robinson, H. (2005). Some social factors of software engineering: The maverick, community 
and technical practices. Proceedings of the 2005 workshop on Human and social factors of software 
engineering, International Conference on Software Engineering,
 pp.1-6. ACM.  
Smith, M. K. (2007). 
Learning theory
. Infed. Retrieved from 
http://www.infed.org/biblio/b-learn.htm
   A Novel Approach For Collaborative Pair Programming 
196 Thomas, L., Ratcliffe, M., & Robertson, A. (2003). Co
de warriors and code-a-phobes: A study in attitude 
and pair programming. 
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Technical Symposium on Computer Science 
Education (SIGCSE 2003), 
pp.
 363-367. ACM Press. 
VanDeGrift, T. (2004). Coupling pair programming and writing: Learning about students™ perceptions and 
processes. 
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Technical 
Symposium on Computer
 Science Education 
(SIGCSE 2004)
 pp. 2-6. ACM Press. 
Williams, L. A., & Kessler, R. R. (2000a). All I rea
lly need to know about pair programming I learned in 
kindergarten. 
Communications of the ACM, 43
(5), 108-114. 
Williams, L., & Kessler, R. (2000b). Experimenting with
 industry™s ‚pair programming™ model in the com-
puter science classroom. 
Journal on SW Engineering Education.
 Retrieved from 
http://collaboration.csc.ncsu
.edu/laurie/Papers/CSED.pdf
  Williams, L., & Kessler, R. (2003). 
Pair programming illustrated
. Boston, MA: Addison Wesley. 
Williams, L., Kessler, R.R., Cunningham, W., & Jeffries
, R. (2000). Strengthening the case for pair pro-
gramming. 
IEEE Software
, 17(4), 19-25. 
Williams L., Wiebe E., Yang K., Ferzli M., & Miller C. (2003). In support of pair programming in the in-
troductory computer science courses. 
Computer Science Education, 12
(3), 197 - 212. 
Williams, L., Yang, K., Wiebe, E., Ferzli, M., & Miller,
 C. (2002). Pair programming in an introductory 
computer science course: Initial results and recommendations. 
OOPSLA Educator™s Symposium
, Seat-tle, WA. Retrieved from 
http://collaboration.csc.ncsu.edu
/laurie/Papers/EdSym_PL_0318.pdf
  Whitehead, J. (2007). Collaboration in software engineering: A roadmap. 
Future of Software Engineering, 
(FOSE™07)
, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 214-225.  
Whitworth, E., & Biddle, R. (2007). Th
e social nature of agile teams. 
Agile 2007 Conference, IEEE Com-
puter Society,
 pp. 26-36. 
Biographies Sanjay Goel is Associate Professor and Head of the Department of 
Computer Science & Engineering/Information Technology at Jaypee 
Institute of Information Technology (JIIT), Noida, India. In this capac-ity, he has created and delivered many novel courses for computing 

students. He earned hisM.Tech. (Computer Technology) from IIT 

Delhi, and his B.E (Hons.) (Electrical and Electronics Engg.) and 
M.Sc. (Hons.) (Physics) from BITS, Pilani.  He has 24 years of mixed 
experience in teaching, software development, and interactive multi-

media content creation. Prior to joining JIIT in 2002, he was Director 

(Multimedia) at Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA). 
He has been a faculty member at Delhi University 
for more than a decade, 
and has also worked at 
National Informatics Centre, New Delhi. He enjo
ys inter-disciplinary work and his professional 
interests include Computing Education, Cultura
l Informatics, Multimedia Computing and Appli-
cations, and Software Design.  
Vanshi Kathuria is an Analyst Programmer with Accenture Technol-
ogy Solutions, USA. She earned her B.Tech. (Computer Science) from 

Jaypee Institute of Information Tec
hnology (JIIT), Noida, India. She 
has 4 years of experience in software development, application main-

tenance, and project delivery and management. She has worked for 

global clients in the Life Sciences & Healthcare and Consumer Goods 

domains and specializes in Java programming and Content Manage-

ment Systems. Her professional interests include Interface Designs, 

Web Services and Multi-tier System Architectures.
 