 Journal of Information Technology Education: 
Volume 11, 2012 Innovations in Practice
 Accelerating Software Development through Agile 
Practices - A Case Study of a Small-scale,  
Time-intensive Web Development Project at a 
College-level IT Competition Xuesong (Sonya) Zhang California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, CA, USA xszhang@csupomona.edu Bradley Dorn California State University, 
Fresno, CA, USA bdorn@csufresno.edu
 Executive Summary Agile development has received increasing interest 
both in industry and academia due to its bene-
fits in developing software quickly, meeting cust
omer needs, and keeping pace with the rapidly 
changing requirements. However, agile practices and 
scrum in particular have been mainly tested 
in mid- to large-size projects. In this paper, 
we present findings from a case study of agile prac-
tices in a small-scale, time-intensive web development project at a college-level IT competition. 
Based on the observation of the development process, the interview of the project team, and the 
study of relevant documents, we describe how agile
 practices, such as daily scrums, backlogs, and 
sprints, were successfully adopted to the project
 development. We also describe several support-
ing activities that the team employed, including cr
oss-leveling of knowledge, socialization, and 
multiple communication modes. Finally, we discuss the benefits and challenges of implementing 
agile practices in the case project reported, as 
well as contribution and limitation of our findings. 
Keywords: Agile, Scrum, Software development, 
Project management, Web application. 
Introduction Created to be a lightweight software development 
method by 17 software developers at a ski re-
sort a decade ago  (ﬁAgile Software Developm
ent,ﬂ 2011), agile development has received in-
creasing interest both in industry and academia due 
to its benefits in deve
loping software more 
quickly and at lower costs, meeting customer n
eeds, and keeping pace with the rapidly changing 
requirements. Agile development aims for customer satisfaction through early and continuous 

delivery of useful software components developed 
by an interactive process with the design point 
that uses minimum requirements.  Using agile me
thods helps refine feasibility and supports the 
process for getting rapid feedback as functionality 
is introduced. Developers can adjust as they 
better clarify unclear requirements. The 
rate of change in the business world has 
accelerated dramatically over the past 
decade. In order to remain competitive, 
companies developing software need a 

process that can help them to be more 
efficient and effective. Material published as part of this
 publication, either on-line or in print, is copyrighted by the Informing Science Institute. 
Permission to make digital or paper copy of part or all of these 
works for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage AND that 
copies 1) bear this notice 
in full and 2) give the full citation on the first page. It is per-
missible to abstract these works so
 long as credit is given. To 
copy in all other cases or to re
publish or to post on a server or 
to redistribute to lists requires specific permission and payment 
of a fee. Contact H
Publisher@InformingScience.orgH  to re-quest redistributi
on permissTraditional software development meth-
odology such as waterfall is inflexible, 

expensive, and requires extensive plan-ion.  Editor: Keith Willoughby 
 Accelerating Software Development 
ning and rigid adherence to the sequentially b
ased steps in the process (Boehm, 2002). In con-
trast, agile methods address the challenge of unpr
edictable and ever-changing needs and require-
ments in software development and deliver value to users as soon as possible (Nerur & 
Balijepally, 2007). Table 1 summarizes these differences. 
Table 1. Traditional and Agile Persp
ectives on Software Development  
(Nerur & Balijepally, 2007)
  Traditional view 
Agile perspective 
Design Process 
Deliberate and formal, linear 
sequence of steps, separate for-
mulation and implementation, 
rule-driven 
Emergent, iterative and exploratory, know-

ing and action inseparable, beyond formal 
rules Goal Optimization 
Adaptation, 
flexibility, 
responsiveness 
Problem-solving 

process Selection of the best means to 

accomplish a given end through 
well-planned, formalized activi-

ties Learning through experimentation and in-
trospection, constantly reframing the prob-
lem and its solution 
View of the envi-ronment 
Stable, predictable 
Turbulent, difficult to predict 
Type of learning 
Single-loop/adaptive 
Double-loop/generative 
Key characteristics 
Control and direction 
Avoids conflict 

Formalizes innovation 
Manager is controller 
Design precedes implementation 
Collaboration and communication; inte-
grates different worldviews 
Embraces conflict and dialectics 
Encourages exploration and creativity; op-
portunistic 
Manager is facilitator 
Design and implementation are inseparable 
and evolve iteratively 
Rationality 
Technical/functional 
Substantial 
Theoretical and/or 

philosophical roots 
Logical positivism, scientific 

method 
Action learning, John Dewey™s pragmatism, 

phenomenology 
 Primary agile practices include: 
• Rapid application development (RAD) methodology Œ RAD methodology emphasizes 
extensive user involvement in the rapid and 
evolutionary construction of working proto-
types of a system to accelerate 
the systems development process. 
• Extreme Programming (XP) methodology Œ XP methodology breaks down a project into 

small phases, and developers 
cannot continue on to the next phase until the first phase is 
complete. 
• Rational unified process (RUP) methodology Œ owned by IBM, RUP methodology pro-

vides a framework for breaking down the developm
ent of software into four gates: Incep-
tion, Elaboration, Construction, and Transition.
 Each gate consists of executable interac-
tions of the software in development. A project
 stays in a gate until the stakeholders are 
satisfied, and then moves to the next. 
26  Zhang & Dorn • Scrum methodology - Scrum methodology uses 
small, self-organizing teams to produce 
small pieces of deliverable software using spri
nts (usually 30-day intervals) to achieve an 
appointed goal, starting with planning and ending with a review. Features to be imple-

mented in the system are regi
stered in a backlog. Then, the product owner decides which 
backlog items should be developed in the following sprint. Team members coordinate 

their work in a daily stand-up meeting. One te
am member, the scrum master, is in charge 
of solving problems that stop the team from
 working effectively (Schwaber & Beedle, 
2001). Research Method: Case Study 
Case study research is appropriate to investigate 
a phenomenon in its real-life context and to an-
swer how and why questions (Yin, 2002). Case study method is widely used in Software Engi-

neering and Information Systems (IS) research since it studies contemporary phenomena in its 

natural context (Runeson & Höst, 2009). This case st
udy examines the value of agile practices in 
a group-based, small-scale, time-intensive web de
velopment project through discovering the fol-
lowing: 1. The particular agile practices adopted by the project team in a small-scale, time-intensive 
web development project, and the manner in which they were used; 
2. Additional supporting activities; 3. Benefits and challenges. Data were collected using a qualitative, interpre
tive approach, including observation, interview, 
and documentation. Team meetings and project 
development life cycle were observed. Meeting 
notes, Skype (daily scrum) messages, and project
 documentation were reviewed and analyzed. 
Informal interviews were conducted to collect rela
ted activities or tasks and further clarify issues. 
IT Competition Project Case and Rules The Information Technology Competition (ITC) hos
ted by the Management Information Systems 
Student Association (MISSA) at California State 
Polytechnic University, Pomona is an annual 
event where students from California universities a
nd colleges gather to demonstrate and compete 
their expertise in the Information Technology field. Teams of 3-5 students are given a real-life 

business project created by a company in the busin
ess industry to work on within a two-week 

time period. Their work is then analyzed, ju
dged, and critiqued by industry professionals. There 

are five case categories in the competition: 
Ł Business Systems Analysis 
Ł Computer Forensics 
Ł Computer Programming 
Ł Web Applications Development 
Ł Telecommunications 
This case study focuses on a web project in the 
Web Application Development category. Creating 
the next generation of high-impact, effective we
b systems requires technical expertise combined 
with artistic talent. This event encompasses elemen
ts of visual design, functionality, usability, creativity, and engineering. This category requir
es a combined knowledge and skills of both web 
design and application development. The project assignment is to develop a community oriented 
web site that allows registered users to submit 
source code for review by other registered users. 
The high-level system features and workflow for the web site is illustrated in Figure 1. 
 27  Accelerating Software Development 
   Figure 1. High-level System Features and Workflow 
Forming and Structuring Project Team  Team composition in an agile project is usually 
self-organizing and cross-functional. The project team is self-organizing in that the team leader does not decide which person will do which task or 
how a problem will be solved; the team as a w
hole makes such decision instead. The team is 
cross-functional so that everyone necessary to ta
ke a task from idea to implementation is in-
volved. The self-organizing and cross-functional 
characteristic of agile teams also makes the 
teams capable of great speed and agility and especially good at socialization and communication. 
The team is usually supported by two specific individuals or roles: a scrum master and a product 
owner. The scrum master can be thought of as a project manager for the team, maintaining the 
processes and helping team members use the scrum 
framework to perform at their highest level. 
The product owner represents the business and stak
eholders, such as customers or users, and 
guides the team toward building the right product. In this case study, four students from a Cali-
fornia State University majoring in Informati
on Systems volunteered, formed the project team, 
and represented the university in the competition.  
Traditional software development methodologies usua
lly have very specific, laid out develop-
ment plans. Because of the nature of the team a
nd limited project time frame in this case study, it 
was not practical for the project team to spend a great deal of time on project management details 
in advance, such as which team member would 
develop which aspect of 
the project; instead, the project team decided to adopt a more flexible appr
oach - agile practices. Scrum, in particular, was 
used because of its proficiency in developing in
 small, self-organizing, and cross-functional 
groups, as well as its best practices for rapid delivery of high-quality software. The formed ITC 
team self-structured and defined new roles for each member, including a Team Leader, a Data-

base Administrator, a Web Design Specialist, a
nd an Implementation Lead. While these roles are 
assigned based upon each team member™s assessed strength and expertise, it does not translate to 

exclusive responsibilities. For example, the team le
ader also participated in web design and cod-ing, and the database admin also participated in 
coding and testing, and both contributed to the 
interface design and documenting. Also, decision-making and task assignment were made via 

mutual agreement among the team members. The 
team leader acted as a scrum master, and the 
competition™s case document writer (an industry professional) served as the product owner. 
28  Zhang & Dorn Implementing Effective Scrum Practices Daily scrum (via Skype) 
Daily scrum meetings are typically held at the same time everyday. During a daily scrum meet-
ing, each team member answered the following questions: 
• What have you done today? 
• What are you planning to do tomorrow? 
• Do you have any problems preventi
ng you from accomplishing your goal? 
By focusing on what each member accomplished 
that day and will accomplish the next day the 
team gains an excellent understanding of what 
work has been done, what work remains, and 
makes commitments to each other. This makes it 
possible for all members of the team to effi-
ciently gain a perspective of how the system work
s and to quickly adapt to developing in an area 
where another team member left off. Traditiona
l methods usually do this
 using extensive docu-
mentation, planning, and rigid work distribution. 
The team chose Skype as the daily scrum media be
cause it allowed team members to meet online 
regardless of their physical location, to easily co
llaborate via instant messaging, voice, and video 
conference calls, and to share documents via file transfer - all free of charge. Every day at a spe-
cific time (usually 10:30pm) the team met online via Skype for a short period of time (15 - 30 
min) and discussed the project status (Figure 2).  
Team members usually stayed online after the da
ily scrum to extend discussion or solve problems 
together. The team also used Email to clarify 
questions and answers before and after the daily 
scrum meeting. In addition, the team held f
ace-to-face meetings once every few days to do in-
depth analysis and discussion. 
 Figure 2. Daily Scrum via Skype 
29  Accelerating Software Development 
Backlogs 
The scrum method uses two types of backlogs to k
eep a record of the list of work throughout the 
entire project life cycle. The Product backlog is a 
high-level, master list of all functionality de-
sired in the working product. Creating a product backlog usually involves the process of trans-
forming user centric specs to technical tasks. Th
e product backlog is allowed to grow and change 
as more is learned about the product and its customer
s. In this case study, while the content of the 
Product backlog and business value of each liste
d item were derived from the project case re-
quirement document provided by the ITC orga
nizer (written by the product owner) and main-
tained and updated by the team leader, the associ
ated development effort is set by the team as a 
whole. The Sprint Backlogs on the other hand prioriti
ze and expand each Product backlog item into one 
or more detailed tasks that the team can effectively share and commit to completing within the 
sprint iteration. In this case study, the project team leader (also the scrum master) maintained the 
backlog and updated it to reflect the task status and progress (e.g., complete, testing, or imple-

mented). The team added or removed tasks during the iteration when necessary. 
Sprints  
A sprint is a basic unit in the scrum developm
ent methodology and other agile development me-
thodologies. Sprints usually last between one week to one month and are restricted to a specific 
duration of a constant length. There are usually 
two types of sprint meetings. Sprint planning 
Figure 3. Project Management in a Microsoft Project Gantt chart 
30  Zhang & Dorn meetings are usually held at th
e beginning of each sprint to decide desired outcome (a commit-
ment to set of features to be developed) in the 
iteration. A sprint review meeting is usually held 
after each sprint, when newly developed functionality is presented/demonstrated and reviewed. 
Modifications are noted and added to the future Sprint backlog. 
In this case study, due to the 2-week time cons
traint for the entire project, each sprint had dura-
tion of only 3-5 days. Both sprint planning and re
view meetings are held via face-to-face meet-
ings. The team also tried to clarify as many issues as possible via Email before the meeting to 
keep it short and concise. 
The team used Microsoft Project as the project management tool to maintain the sprint backlogs 
and to facilitate sprint planning, monitoring, an
d reviewing. A common project management tool 
provided by Microsoft Project is the Gantt chart. 
A Gantt chart is a simple bar chart that depicts 
project tasks against a calendar. On a Gantt chart, 
tasks are listed vertically and the project™s time 
frame is listed horizontally. A Gantt chart works 
well for representing the project schedule. It also shows actual progress of tasks against the planned duration. Figure 3 shows the project manage-

ment using a Gantt chart. As shown in the Gantt chart in Figure 3, the team divided the project into 3 sprints:  

Analysis Sprint - In the analysis sprint, the team applied Use case (user centric specs in product 
backlog) to describe system behavior from an 
actor's point of view as scenario-driven threads 
through the functional requiremen
ts. Figure 4 shows an example of the Use case for the scenario 
where a user comments on a post. 
  Figure 4. Use Case for a User Comments on a Post 
Design Sprint - 
The design sprint includes database d
esign and web interface design. The data-base design (technical tasks in product backlog) in 
this sprint is mainly a conceptual design. The 
process includes creating the data requirement doc
ument (i.e., describe what data items will be 
stored in the database and how the various data items
 relate to one another), analysis (i.e., define 
detailed attributes of the data and constraints), and constructing ERD (conceptual data model) and 
31  Accelerating Software Development 
Data dictionary (logical schema). After the database was structured, the web interface was proto-
typed and designed to coordinate the functionalities a
nd tasks specified in the sprint backlog, also 
to be understandable, intuitive, and simple to
 users. Figure 5 shows the Entity-Relationship Dia-
gram for the project.
  Figure 5. Entity-Relationship Diagram 
Implementation Sprint - 
The implementation sprint includes database implementation and func-
tionality implementation. The database implemen
tation was accomplished using SQL statements. 

The process includes implementing the database (e.g., create database, set users and privileges, 

create tables, set constraints, etc.), populating each table with specific data (e.g., configuration 

and testing data), and optimizing the database st
ructure and performance (e.g., normalize, index, 
cache, monitor). After the database was implem
ented and populated w
ith data, functionalities shown in Figure 1 (High-level System Features 
and Workflow) were coded, tested, and imple-
mented. In this case study, the software product (calle
d ﬁJava Sniperﬂ because it provides community-
based review service for source codes written in
 Java) was developed using an open source LAMP (Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP) enviro
nment. The base user interface, dynamic page 
contents, and reusable functions of Java Snip
er were created using HTML, CSS, Javacript, 
AJAX, and PHP with Adobe Dreamweaver CS4 and Adobe Photoshop CS4. The data is stored in 
a MySQL database and accessed via embedded SQL within PHP pages. The working product is 

cross-platform Œ it can be hosted on various operating systems including Linux and Windows, it 

can also be implemented in various web servers
 including Apache and Microsoft IIS. Users can 
access the web site via various web browsers, in
cluding IE, Firefox, and Safari. Figure 6 shows 
the system architecture. 
32  Zhang & Dorn  Figure 6. System Architecture 
Supporting Activities In addition to the common scrum practices, the te
am also employed several supporting activities: 
Cross-leveling of knowledge  
As opposed to a traditional development team, a 
scrum team is by natu
re self-organizing and cross-functional. Although different roles are assigned based upon the team member™s strength 
and expertise, each member acts as a middle manage
r to bridge the difference between the theory 
(what ought to be) and the reality (what can be done
) to each other. They translate theory into 
practical requirements, which are then tested in
 the reality. Any contra
diction is communicated 
and resolved. In this case study, team member
s shared knowledge and skills in web design and 
development, database design and management, a
nd other relevant areas to help each other ac-
complish the tasks. 
Socialization  
The effects of socialization depend upon the team 
members™ interpersonal skills, trust, and inter-
action with each other. In this case study, all team members came from the same class, therefore 
they were somewhat familiar with each other be
fore the project began. However, none of the 
team members had any sort of social or prof
essional relationship with any of the other team 
members prior to the start of the course. The team members did not interact with one another spe-

cifically, though they were familiar with each 
other™s appearance and course work. These rela-
tionships are a good representative for team memb
ers that do not face significant cultural or 

communicative barriers but have not worked together before. 
Throughout the project, the team members got to know each other more and became friends. In 
addition to working on the project together, they 
also shared common values and interests as col-
lege students. The team commented that the est
ablishment of successful and satisfying relation-
ship during socialization helped improving collaboration and productivity. 
33  Accelerating Software Development 
Multiple communication modes In agile practices, usually several different kinds 
of communication are available that can also be 
applied in parallel, i.e., individual and conf
erence telephone, teleconference, videoconference, 
email, instant messaging, blog, wiki, and deskt
op sharing. In this case study, the team utilized 
multiple communication channels including face-
to-face meetings, Email, Skype-supported in-
stant messaging and teleconference, and file transfer.  
The team recognized the importance of the fact 
that each communication avenue provided a valu-
able way for the team to exchange informa
tion. Each communication avenue had its strong 
points, and weak points. For example, though face-to-face communication can convey many 
ideas quickly, it is ineffectiv
e when describing code, syntax, or sharing files. 
Specifically, the team pointed out that face-to-face
 meetings helped the team to focus on the dis-
cussion without other disruptions and also provid
ed more information in terms of body language, 

subtle personality and 
demeanor, and lively exchange of 
ideas or conversation; while online communications such as Skype meetings provided mo
re flexibility including meeting late night or 
geographically separated, looking up informati
on online, or sharing important files and docu-
ments while chatting. Email and chatting was the le
ast invasive and most flexible, but was usually 
not as effective as other methods. Therefore, both communication channels 
facilitated teamwork in various aspects. Discussion The project team successfully de
livered a working software product (i.e., Java Sniper) at the end 
of the 2-week time frame. The team demonstrated
 the final product to the judges (industry profes-
sionals) and won second place in the web development category. 
The team also compared the effi
ciency of Java Sniper with other popular code review systems on 
the market (e.g., Codestriker and Reviewboard) by conducting three different types of testing Œ 
installation, code submission, and code review t
ests. The installation test involved creating a da-
tabase, installing and configuring scripts, modules, and libraries, and getting the system up and 
running. The code submission test involved navi
gating to the submission page, loading the page, 
filling in the information required, and submitting 
four files containing Java source code designed 
to output the text "Hello World!" for review. 
The code review test involved accessing the submit-
ted files, reading through it (the files were all 
very small and reading time 
was almost negligible), 
and writing and submitting the review (time for 
writing review was recorded separately because 
writing time should be independent of all three syst
ems). The testing results (Table 2) show that 
Java Sniper is the most efficient of all three syst
ems in terms of installation, code submission, and 
code review. Table 2. Efficiency Testing 
Code Review 
Software Language Installation 
Test Code Submis-
sion Test 
Code Review 
Test (writing 
time excluded) Allow submitting 
multiple source 
files as one project 
Codestriker Python 
45 min 
12 min 20 sec 
5 min 32 sec  
No Reviewboard 
Perl 
20 min 
2 min 58 sec 
2 min 4 sec 
No Java Sniper 
PHP 15 min 
47 sec 
35 sec  
Yes  During both project presentation and interview, 
the team affirmed that the agile practices em-
ployed were a critical success factor for them 
to achieve the goal of 
developing a good quality 34  Zhang & Dorn software product that satisfied the case require
ments within limited time frame; the product 
would have been completed with fewer features or 
less quality otherwise. The team stated that the 
agile practices benefited the project in the following aspects: 
Increased quality of the deliverables Agile technologies feature more frequent delivery of 
smaller, valuable increments and build qual-
ity in rather than add it in at the end of the pr
oject. Because of the strict time and scope limit, 
quality is more easily monitored, managed, and ach
ieved by the end of the iteration. In this case 
study, team members often reminded each other dur
ing daily scrums and spri
nt meetings to stay 
on track, prioritize, and focus on the main features 
specified in the requirement document. As the 
result, the team was able to deliver a satisfy
ing software product within the limited time frame. 
Better change management A project™s requirements will change at some point of time. In scrum, change is embraced and 
new requirements will be evaluated against existing ones when planning the next sprint. The business and product owner are actively involved in 
this process, making sure the delivered fea-
tures are actually useful and valuable to end users and business. Even though in this case study, 

the project requirements were mostly defined in
 the case document in advance, during the analy-
sis sprint the team still found some issues that were unclear, such as the expectation of utilizing 

open source components and services and the weight 
of additional features that is not explicitly 
specified in the case document. After clarifying 
these issues with the case writer the team quickly 
changed the technical specs accordingly before moving into the design sprint.  
More efficient workflow 
By using short iterations (i.e., daily scrum and sp
rints), the team was able to calculate/estimate 
the time and resources needed and track the devel
opment progress for each task in a clearer and 

more accurate way. As the result, the team was ab
le to be more in control of the project schedule 
and status and work more efficiently. In this case 
study, the team used Microsoft Project to plan 
and manage the time and resources needed for each 
critical project task and made sure that the tasks were accomplished by the end of the assigned iteration. 
Increased innovation 
Whenever a new and innovative idea was discovere
d, the team could quickly share and commu-
nicate with the business and production owner and possibly build it straight into the next sprint. 

In this case study, when the team found out that open source components and services were en-

couraged in the analysis sprint, they decided 
to implement an open source tool called GeSHi (Ge-
neric Syntax Highlighter) to process each source c
ode file when it was submitted for review and 
then saved in the database to be displayed on the Source Code Viewing page later in different 

colors and fonts according to the programming synt
ax. This feature provides the reviewers with a 
consistent code formatting and/or syntax highlighting and 
helps them better recognize problem 
points in the code. And because the tool was open source, the team saved significant time and 
effort compared to developing it from scratch. 
Like any other agile practitioner, the team in this
 case study also encount
ered several challenges. Because the size of the team was fairly small and 
all the members were college students, the daily 
scrum or sprint meetings were informal and ofte
n involved a lot of socialization. Also because the 
team members were amateur in software development, they spent a lot of time collaborating and 
helping each other in cross-functional problem so
lving. These challenges may be less significant 
in the teams consisting of professional software 
engineers/developers; however, other challenges 

may present, such as recruitment of agile staff,
 training, motivation, performance evaluation, 
35  Accelerating Software Development 
communications, adapting agile for distributed t
eams (different culture, background, language, 
time zone, etc.) and large-scale enterprise projects (more complicated technical specs and rapidly 
changing requirements). 
Conclusion This paper presents findings from a case study on ag
ile practices in a small-scale, time-intensive 
web development project at a college-level IT competition. Based on the observation of the de-

velopment process, the interview of project team 
members, and the study of relevant documents, 
we describe how agile practices, such as daily scr
ums, backlogs, and sprints, were successfully 
applied to the project development. We also 
describe several supporting activities that the team employed, including cross leveling of knowledge
, socialization, and multiple communication 
modes. Finally, we discuss the benefits and challenges of implementing agile practices in the case 

project reported. Our study found that agile practices were a success in this case study, which 
confirms that agile methodology is suitable for 
voluntary, self-organized, cross-functional teams 
developing small-scale, time-intensi
ve software development projects.  
Case studies in software engineering and informati
on systems research often test theories and col-
lect data through observation of a project and 
other qualitative methods such as interview and 
documentation. Each team and project characteristics are unique to each case study; thus com-

parisons and generalizations of case study results 
are difficult and are subject to questions of ex-
ternal validity (Kitchenham, et al., 2002). The Java Sn
iper project described in this case study is a 
reasonable representative of a class of small-scale, time-intensive software development projects 

in computer science or software engineering 
courses (with similar number of developers, devel-
opers™ background and experience, time, and proj
ect scope). However, such group projects can 
still differ in terms of size (software requiremen
ts, the number of lines of code), design pattern, 
type of software developed, language used, etc. 
It would be interesting to analyze the degree to 
which agile practices in projects that differ along these dimensions resemble the findings of this 
case study. References Agile Software Development. (2011). 
Wikipedia.
 Retrieved August 26, 2011, from Wikipedia: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agile_software_development
  Boehm, B. (2002). Get Ready for Agile Methods, with Care. 
Journal Computer
 , 35 (1), 64-69. 
Kitchenham, B. A., Pfleeger, S. L., Pickard, L. M., 
Jones, P. W., Hoaglin, D. C., Emam, K. E., et al. 
(2002). Preliminary Guidelines for Empiri
cal Research in Software Engineering. 
IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering
 , 28 (8), 721-734. 
Nerur, S., & Balijepally, V. (2007, March). Theoretical
 reflections on agile development methodologies. 
Communications of the ACM
 , 50 (3). 
Runeson, P., & Höst, M. (2009). Guidelines for conducting and reporting case study research in software 
engineering. 
Journal of Empirical Software Engineering
 , 14 (2), 131-164. 
Schwaber, K., & B
eedle, M. (2001). 
Agile Software Development with Scrum.
 Prentice Hall. 
Yin, R. K. (2002). 
Case study research, design and methods.
 Sage Publications. 
 36  Zhang & Dorn 37 Biographies Sonya Zhang
 is an Assistant Professor of Computer Information Sys-
tems at The College of Business Administration at Cal Poly Pomona. 
Sonya received a PhD in Information Systems and Technology from 

Claremont Graduate University, a Master of Science in Computer Sci-

ence and a Master of Business Administration from Illinois State Uni-

versity. Sonya was an Assistant Profess
or at Fresno State prior to join-
ing Cal Poly; she also worked as a so
ftware engineer in health infor-
matics and higher education. Sonya's research interests focus on social 

learning and web intelligence. She has published in leading IS journals 
and conferences including Journal of Information Technology Education, Journal of Information 

Systems Education, International Journal of E-Learning, HICSS, AMCIS and ACM SIGMIS. 
 Bradley Dorn is a MBA student at California State University, Fresno 
(i.e., Fresno State). Bradley received a Bachelors of Science in Busi-

ness Information Systems (major) and Mathematics (minor) from 

Fresno State. Bradley also worked as a teaching associate and student 

assistant there. Bradley's primary resear
ch interests pertain to Internet applications, their design and development, and development process. 
 