 Effort Prediction in Iterative Software Development Processes – Incremental 
Versus Global Prediction Models 
Pekka Abrahamsson
A, Raimund Moser
B, Witold Pedrycz
C, Alberto Sillitti
B, Giancarlo Succi
BAVTT Electronics, Oulu, 
Finland 
T P.O. Box 1100 
FIN-90571 Oulu, Finland 
+358 40 541 5929 
BCenter for Applied Software 
Engineering, Free University 
of Bolzano-Bozen, Italy 
Piazza Domenicani 3 
I-39100 Bolzano, Italy 
+39 0471 016130 
CDepartment of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering, 
University of Alberta, Canada
Civil/Electrical Engineering 
Building, 238, Edmonton, 
Canada 
+1-7804923332 
pekka.abrahamsson@vtt.fi, rmoser@unibz.it, pedrycz@ee.ualberta.ca, asillitti@unibz.it, 
gsucci@unibz.it 
Abstract 
Estimation of development effort without imposing 
overhead on the project and the development team is of 
paramount importance for any software company. This 
study proposes a new effort estimation methodology 
aimed at agile and iterative development environments 
not suitable for description by traditional prediction 
methods. We propose a detailed development 
methodology, discuss a number of architectures of 
such models (including a wealth of augmented 
regression models and neural networks) and include a 
thorough case study of Extreme Programming (XP) in 

two semi-industrial projects. The results of this 

research evidence that in the XP environment under 

study the proposed incremental model outperforms 

traditional estimation techniques most notably in early 

phases of development. Moreover, when dealing with 

new projects, the incremental model can be developed 

from scratch without resorting itself to historic data. 
1. Introduction 
Given its importance and practical relevance, effort 
estimation has been for a long time a major focus of 

research in software engineering. Since the pioneering 
work by Putnam (1978), Boehm (1981) and Albrecht 
(1983), there have been many attempts to construct 

prediction models of software cost determination. An 

overview of past and current effort estimation 

techniques, their application in industry, and their 
drawbacks regarding accuracy and applicability can be 
found for example in [14], [6], [8], [19]. Nowadays 
there exist a few theories and pertinent models that 

help quantify effort prediction. The most prominent 

one comes in the form of the so-called COCOMO 

family of cost models [5]. While capturing the essence 

of project cost estimation in many instances, they are 

not the most suitable when we are faced with more 

recent technologies and processes of software 

development such as agile approaches. Moreover, 

models such as COCOMO II depend quite heavily on 

many project-specific settings and adjustments, whose 

impact is difficult to assess, collect, and quantify. What 
makes the situation even worse, is the fact that in agile 
processes an effective collection of such metrics and 
the ensuing tedious calibration of the models could be 

quite unrealistic. 
As far as we know, no specific models have been 
developed for agile and iterative development 

processes. Only a few studies deal with the idea of 

refining prediction models during project execution 

and enhancing them with effort information of 

previous phases. Closest to our work is a recent study 

by Trendowicz 
et al.
 [27] who incorporate into a 
hybrid cost estimation model feedback cycles and 
possibility for iterative refinement. MacDonell and 

Shepperd [15] use project effort of previous phases of 

development as predictor for a regression model and 
show that it yields better results than expert opinion. 
However, both studies do not address the peculiarities 
of agile processes, use a different approach for model 
building and do not provide any comparative studies 
First International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement0-7695-2886-4/07 $20.00 © 2007 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2007.16344First International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement0-7695-2886-4/07 $20.00 © 2007 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2007.16344 with traditional models. Finally, Alshayeb and Li [1] 
investigate correlation between object-oriented design 

metrics and effort in agile projects, but do not consider 

iterative model building or refining. 
In general, traditional effort estimation models work 
as follows. Some predictor variables are collected or 
estimated at the beginning of a project and fed into a 
model. The model, which is usually built upon historic 
data using similar projects, predicts the total 

development effort. While this approach is reasonable 

for traditional, waterfall-like development processes 

where common predictors such as function or feature 
points, software size, formal design specifications, 
design documents, etc. are known at the beginning of a 
project and typically do not change too much 
throughout the overall project this is not the case for 

agile development processes. In agile development, a 

project is realized in iterations and requirements 
usually change from one iteration to the next. At the 
end of each iteration developers release the software to 
the customer who will eventually require new features, 

change or removal of already implemented 

functionalities. At the beginning of a new iteration 

developers will negotiate with the customer about 

requirements and develop a plan (design document) for 

the next iteration (in XP this process is referred to as 

planning game [3]). Therefore, standard predictors 

proposed in the literature, in particular the ones derived 
from design documents, are only known at the 
beginning of the next development iteration and not a 
priori for the whole project. 
Being cognizant of the existing challenges as 
outlined above, the key objectives of our study can be 

outlined as follows: 
We consider a proposal for a new, incremental 
effort prediction model for iterative software 

development processes. 

We carry out a thorough experimental validation of the 
incremental model and offer a comparative analysis 
with the existing monolithic (global
1) prediction 
models. 
Overall, the underlying research hypothesis is 
formed as follows: When using iterative software 
development processes, incremental effort prediction 
models are more efficient than global models. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
elaborates on the concept of global and incremental 

prediction models. Section 3 discusses the models we 
use to realize effort prediction. In Section 4, we present 

a case study and in Section 5 we provide the results of 

the case study. Section 6 addresses limitations of the 
                                                       
1 To emphasize their operation mode we call traditional 
effort estimation models “global” models. 
study and identifies future research needs; and finally, 
in Section 7 we draw the conclusions. 
2. Global versus incremental prediction 
models 
In this Section we explain the essence of global and 
incremental prediction models. Realizations of both 
types of approaches with concrete mathematical 
models are presented in Section 3. 
2.1. Global prediction models 
Let us highlight the essence of traditional, global 
prediction models in software engineering [8], [14], 
[6], [21]. At the beginning of a software development 
project, we identify several meaningful predictor 

variables and collect or estimate their values. A list of 

predictor variables could involve software size, design 

metrics, qualitative and quantitative human and 

technology factors (including type of development 

environment, application domain, experience of 

developers, organizational structure, development 

process, etc.). Models are derived from historic data 

and used to predict development effort for similar 

projects.  There are crucial model development and 
utilization issues that have to be clearly underlined: 
(a) The choice of the predictor variables. This task 
is highly demanding as at the beginning of the project 

we may not know which variables of the project could 

have a high impact on the assessment of the 

development effort. While we might be tempted to 

collect a lot of variables (in anticipation of a proper 

compensation for the shortcoming identified so far), 

the process could be time consuming, costly, and at the 

end lead to overly complicated models whose 

estimation could be quite complex and inefficient. 
(b) In the construction of global models we rely on 
historic data or/and expert opinion. This requires that 
first one has to gain experience and collect data for at 

least one project and afterwards construct the model 

and apply it to similar projects. This is not only a long-

term process, but comes with some risk that given the 

unstable and highly non-stationary environment of 

software development, it may lead to models whose 

predictive capabilities are questionable. Moreover, 

software industry is moving into a direction where 

projects continuously evolve with new updates and 

deliveries in response to market demand. In such 
scenario it is not obvious when to freeze the project for 
model building purposes. 
Agile software development introduces new 
challenges to effort estimation. Predictor variables 

usually are not known at the beginning of a project, but 
345345 become available at the beginning of each iteration as 
requirements change often and fast. Under these 

circumstances a long-term model of effort estimation 

that naturally relies on information available at the 

beginning of a project seems to be of limited 

applicability. However, one could still contemplate the 
use of the long-term, global cost estimation model and 
use it for reference purposes. 
Figure 1. Global model of iterative effort 
prediction. 
The essence of the global model (Figure 1) can be 
highlighted as follows: 
Model building:
 The global model is constructed 
after project completion. It uses predictor variables 

collected at beginning of the project. The model 

predicts the total development effort.  
Iterative effort prediction:
 Such model is used for 
predicting the development effort of a new, future 
project of similar characteristics to those already 
realized. Usually at the start of the project predictor 

values are collected (or estimated) and fed into the 

model, which in turn predicts the total development 
effort. However, in agile development it may happen 
that predictors are only known at the beginning of each 
iteration. In such cases we have to use the global model 

in an iterative way. A straightforward approach is as 

follows: At the beginning of iteration 
N predictor 
values are collected, fed into the global model and an 
estimate of the total development effort for iteration 
1to 
N+1 
is obtained. 
Following the rationale outlined above, we can 
identify three major reasons that may suggest 
limitations of the construction and use of global 
models when dealing with agile, iterative development 
environments: 
First
, the model building process takes a long time 
(the completion of one or more projects) and in the 
meantime technology, developers, processes, and other 

factors may change. Thus, it is unlikely that the 

extracted model will work very well for new projects. 

Mohanty [19] pointed out that effort estimation models 

are calibrated and developed using data collected in 
unique environments. Therefore, the prediction of such 

models will be based on underlying assumptions, 
which are not present in the data. This can have a 
dramatic impact on the accuracy of such models in 

different environments. 
Second
, in agile development, requirements change 
frequently and fast when moving from one iteration to 

another; this may imply, that also the design of the 
system, technology, or other factors have to be 
changed to meet requirements and implementation 

effort may vary significantly for different iterations. A 

global model captures only the overall contribution of 

predictor variables to development effort and is 

unaware of their changes within single iterations. 
Last
, if a company does not have historic data it 
cannot build or calibrate any “customized” global 

prediction model, and thus it has to rely on subjective 

estimates or models published by other companies or 

being available in the literature. 
Being prompted by these limitations, we assume a 
different development position by focusing on the 
incremental mode of model development. 
2.2. Incremental prediction models 
The main idea of an incremental prediction model is 
that it is 
built after each iteration
 instead of at the end 
of a project to estimate effort for the next iteration. 
Thus, it is able to accommodate to any changes during 
development in a much smoother way than a global 
model. Moreover, we endow the incremental model 
with a dynamic character by using effort of previous 
iterations that is treated as an additional input. In this 
way, effort prediction does not only depend on the 

usual predictor variables but also on the past effort 

distribution itself, which may make a significant 

contribution for explaining future effort variation. The 
incremental model operates only for iterative effort 
prediction as it cannot be used to predict total 

development effort at the beginning of a project. 
Figure 2 explains in some schematic way the 
operating mode of an incremental effort prediction 

model. The essence of the incremental model (Figure 

2) can be highlighted as follows: 
Model building:
 At the end of each iteration a new 
model is built using as input the predictor values 
estimated for that iteration and development effort of 
previous iterations. Thus, the main difference to the 

global model is that this model is dynamic in the sense 

that it depends on the phase of development it is built 

and past effort distribution. 
Iterative effort prediction: 
At the beginning of a 
new iteration predictor variables are collected and fed 
together with past effort into the newly built 

incremental model. The output of the model is an 

estimation of the total development effort for the next 

iteration. 
346346 Figure 2. Incremental model of iterative effort 
prediction. 
When comparing incremental models versus global 
ones, we stress the following essential differences: 
•An incremental model is constantly adjusted during 
development and evolves with the project; therefore, 

it can much better accommodate to any changes in 

technology, requirements, personnel, or other 

occurring during project evolution. 
•The relative impact of different predictor variables 
on development effort is likely to change during 

project evolution. An incremental model can select 

the best features for each single iteration; hence, it 

should give more accurate and reliable estimations. 
•The incremental model is useful and applicable right 
from second iteration of development. There is no 
need for historic data and also no risk that the model 

is outdated. In particular, this is very valuable in 

highly volatile domains where it is difficult to find 

stable and general models.  
•Medium and small companies usually get 
development projects for very different business 
environments. They often face the problem to have 

no expertise in the project’s problems or solution 
domains. An incremental effort estimation model 

can help produce more reliable estimates and raise 
confidence in their personal judgments after only a 
few development iterations. 
A comparison of the properties of the incremental 
and global models is presented in Table 1. It is clear 

that the incremental model requires more data for 

model building; in particular it needs reliable effort 

data for all development iterations. This may be seen 

as limitation to its practical applicability. However, in 

Section 4 we show how to overcome these 

shortcomings by using appropriate measurement tools 

that enable automatic and non-invasive data collection. 
Another weakness of incremental models is their 
inability to help people answer questions up front 

about how much time and money a proposed software 
project will take. This may be an important issue for a 

company for deciding whether or not to take on a given 
software project. However, in agile development 
companies negotiate with customers which and how 

many features have to be developed within a short 

period of time (one development iteration). In such 
scenarios an incremental model may help a software 

firm to get a reliable estimate of the number of features 
that can be implemented within that period. A realistic 
estimate is important for a strong marketing strategy 

and for being at the same time competitive and keeping 

business terms. 
Table 1. Comparison between incremental and 
global models. 
Feature 
Global 
model 
Incremental 
model 
Continuous model 

evolution and refinement 
—Historic data is needed 
for model building 
—Automatic adaptation to 
new business 
environments 
—Estimation of total project 
effort 
—Estimation of effort for 
single development 
iterations 
3. Models of effort prediction  
Given the two fundamental modes of incremental 
and global modeling, we contemplate several detailed 
architectures of the models considering various 
predictor variables and forms of mapping from these 

variables to the predicted development effort.  
In software engineering we can encounter many 
forms of effort prediction models. We can recall here 
empirical models based on subjective judgment [2],  
[23], regression models [17], regression trees, neural 

networks [26], theory based models such as COCOMO 
II [5], so-called hybrid models [27], Bayesian nets 
[20], and many more. 
In this research, we consider only algorithmic 
models that can be effectively constructed (without 

human interaction) from quantitative data. Considering 

the constraints imposed by data collection in agile 

environments we restrict our analysis to two different 

families of prediction models, which are representative 

for common types of approaches in software 

engineering and require a limited amount of resources 

for both model building and operation: 
347347 •Regression models that are easy to understand and 
develop; we can use them as a reference model to 

compare with other, more advanced models. Most 

effort estimation methods considered in the past are 

based on regression models [14]. 
•The use of neural networks. 
At present there is no agreement of what kind of 
models are most accurate and powerful for effort 
prediction [18]. The simplest model, ordinary least 
squares regression, seems to perform just as well as 
many other proposed prediction models [8]. Therefore, 
we use it as a benchmark in this study. 
A far more challenging problem in software 
engineering concerns scarcity of data, which implicates 

all kind of problems for model validation and 

generalization. Given the very limited size of 
experimental data available in the problem, we 
consider the use of a so-called leave-one-out (LOOV) 

cross validation procedure [4]. It works as follows: All 

but one data points are used for building the model, 

which in turn is used to predict the left out point. This 

is done for each single data point in the set and the 

average mean squared error for all left-out points 

(LOOV-RMSE) is used as a performance index for the 

efficiency (generalizability) of the model. 
3.1. Regression models 
While regression models are often encountered in 
software engineering, we have to be aware that they 

could exhibit several shortcomings: 
•They are not capable of capturing non-linear 
relationships between input and output variables. 
•Software engineering data are often messy due to 
cost and inherent difficulties of gathering data; 
therefore, in general we cannot expect that all 

standard assumptions encountered in regression 
analysis are fully satisfied. 
In this study, we endorse a holistic view at the 
modeling pursuits by considering a suite of refined 

regression models (Table 2). 
Table 2
. Selected classes of regression 
models.  
Type of 
regression 
Advantages over simple regression 
Stepwise Removes in part collinearity 
between input features 
Robust Lessens the influence of outliers on 
regression coefficients 
Quadratic Takes into account higher order 
components 
Furthermore, we consider some combinations of the 
methods shown above; for example, stepwise and 

robust regression to limit both the influence of outliers 

and at the same time to cope with the problem of 

collinearity. 
3.2. Neural networks 
Neural networks can potentially offer several 
advantages in analysis of software data given the fact 
that they do not rely on assumptions of linear 
regression models and come with interesting learning 
capabilities. There have been a number of studies along 
these lines [24], [26], [16], [7]. We consider two 
different types of neural networks: a classical feed-
forward Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Radial Basis 
Functions (RBF) neural networks [4].  
The performance of both types depends highly on 
the chosen network architecture (number of layers, 

number of neurons, activation function, number of 
receptive fields, spread, etc.). While there is no general 
theory behind the structural optimization of the 

topology of the networks, they are developed as a 

result of some trial and error: For each set of 
parameters that specify the model completely we 
compute the cross validation error. We keep the set 
that produces the lowest error and this topology of the 
network is deemed optimal. For the MLP we start with 
2 neurons in the hidden layer and keep adding one 

neuron at a time until the leave-one-out cross 

validation error (LOOV-RMSE) stops decreasing.  Its 

minimum value determines the optimum number of 

neurons to choose for the hidden layer. For RBF we do 

exactly the same: We start with one receptive field and 

add one at a time until the cross-validation error stops 

decreasing. We repeat this procedure for a range of 

spread parameters and keep the spread and number of 

receptive fields that return the absolute smallest cross-
validation error. 
For comparing and evaluating the predictive 
performance of the various models we use common 

criteria for evaluation of cost estimation models in 

software engineering: the Magnitude of  Relative Error 

(MRE), the prediction at level k (PRED(k)), the 

Magnitude of Error Relative to the estimate (MER), 

and the usual standard deviation SD  [10], [13]. 
4. Case study 
In this Section, we present two case studies 
conducted in a semi-industrial environment. Semi-

industrial environment refers to a development 

endeavor where a mix of professionals and students are 

developing real software product in a controlled 
348348 development setting. Such type of a research setting is 
depicted in detail in [22]. First, we describe the 

characteristics of the projects under scrutiny 

(environment, development process etc.); then, we 

discuss the data collection process and the choice of 

the input and output variables we use for model 
building. Finally, we provide a descriptive statistic of 
the data sets used for analysis. 
4.1. Characteristics of the projects 
The study concerns two commercial software 
projects – we refer to them as project A and project B - 

developed at VTT Technical Research Centre of 

Finland in Oulu, Finland. The programming languages 
used in both projects were Java and the IDE was 
Eclipse 3.x (www.eclipse.org). Project A delivered a 
production monitoring application for mobile, Java 
enabled devices. The software is a client-server 
solution using J2ME and Oracle database. Project B 

delivered a project management tool for agile projects. 

The software is programmed with Java and Flash and 

is a standard web application for desktop computers. 
For both projects the development process followed 
a tailored version of the Extreme Programming 

practices: in project A two pairs of programmers (four 

people) and in project B three pairs of programmers 
(six people) have worked for a total of eight weeks. 
The projects were divided into five iterations, starting 
with a 1-week iteration, which was followed by three 

2-week iterations, with the project concluding in a final 

1-week iteration. The working time for the dedicated 
project was 6 hours per day, 4 days a week. Beside the 

mentioned XP practices (pair programming, small 

releases, continuous integration, and planning game) 

also the practices of refactoring and in part test-driven 
development have been adopted. 
Throughout the project mentoring was provided on 
XP and other programming issues according to the XP 
approach. For project A three of the four developers 
had an education equivalent to a BSc and limited 

industrial experience. The fourth developer was an 

experienced industrial software engineer. The team 

worked in a collocated environment. Since it was 
exposed for the first time to the XP process a brief 
training of the XP practices, in particular of the test-
first method was provided prior to the beginning of the 

project. For project B four developers were 5 - 6th year 

university students and the two remaining employees 

of VTT and as such experienced industrial software 
engineers. 
Both projects were completed successfully. At the 
end of project A the team not only released on time the 

software with the required functionalities but it 
exceeded the original requirements so far that the 
customer ran out of requirements to be done. 
4.2. Selection of predictor and output variables  
Many different metrics have been proposed as effort 
predictors: The most common one is for sure software 
size (lines of code, function or feature points, number 
of requirement documents, etc.). 

COCOMO/COCOMO II, one of the most popular cost 

estimation models uses in addition to size a wide range 
of so called cost drivers (mostly technology and human 

factors). In this study we use the Chidamber and 
Kemerer (CK) set of object-oriented design metrics [9] 
for effort prediction.  
The CK metrics have some nice properties, which 
make them in particular attractive for the kind of 

prediction model we propose: 
•They are widely known by practitioners and in the 
research community and have been validated by 

several other researchers.  
•For the purpose of model building the CK metrics 
can be extracted automatically from source code. 
•In agile development documentation, requirements 
elicitation or design plans are minimalist and only 
produced as far as they are really needed. Therefore, 
we cannot expect to collect a lot of data before 

starting an iteration that could be used for effort 

prediction. However, even in the most extreme case 

of agile development, XP, at the beginning of a new 

iteration there are some planning activities that 

produce at least some sort of design documents (for 
example CRC cards). These documents can be used 
to estimate fairly well the CK design metrics for the 
new iteration, which will be used – for incremental 
models together with past effort - as input values for 
effort prediction. 
We do not use all 6 CK metrics as predictors but 
exclude the NOC (number of children) and LCOM 

(lack of cohesion of methods) metrics. We exclude 

NOC because in both projects it is almost 0 for all 

classes and hence does not contribute significantly to 

development effort. As for LCOM several researchers 

have questioned its meaning and the way it is defined 

by Chidamber and Kemerer [11]; the impact of LCOM 

on development effort and other metrics such as 
maintainability is little understood by today and 
therefore we decide to exclude it from this analysis. 
As output variable we use the total coding effort per 
class in hoursfrom project start at any point in time, 

i.e. for example at the end of the project for the global 

model or at the end of each iteration for the 

incremental model. 
349349 4.3. Data collection process and description 
For both case studies we use our in-house 
developed tool PROM [25] for automatic and non-
invasive data collection. To collect the product and 
process metrics used for effort estimation with the 
PROM tool we adopt the following data collection 
procedure: 
•Each night at midnight various source code metrics 
(among them are the CK metrics) are extracted from 

a CVS repository. 
•A plug-in for Eclipse (the IDE used by developers) 
collects automatically the time spent for coding on 

individual classes and methods. 
These measures are integrated and stored in a data 
warehouse. An analysis tool can extract them easily 
from the data warehouse and use for model building 
and statistical analysis.  
For project A the total coding effort recorded by the 
PROM tool is about 305 hours. Project A has 1776 

lines of code (counted as Java statements in the source 

code) divided in 30 classes. 
Project B has 3426 lines of code (Java statements in 
source code) and 52 classes. The total coding effort for 
project B is about 664 h. 
Due to space constraints we show neither 
descriptive statistics nor box plots of the data sets. An 

inspection of them reveals that almost all metrics 

exhibit a skewed data distribution and several outliers. 

Outliers may bias significantly regression coefficients 

when using standard least square regression methods. 

We avoid this problem to some extent by using robust 

regression techniques. 
5. Results 
First, we construct a global model using CK metrics 
extracted from the final release of the software as input 
and the total coding effort as output variable. Table 3 
reports the LOOV-RMSE error for the training and test 
data set of the most successful models. The 4
th column 
reports the input variables used by the model, in 
particular the ones selected by the stepwise regression 
procedure, and the architecture of the neural networks 
used. 
For computing confidence intervals for regression 
coefficients and as p-value for a predictor to be 
recommended for adding to the model in the stepwise 
regression procedure we use 
 = 0.05. Among all 
different regression models stepwise robust regression 
for project A and ordinary stepwise regression for 

project B give the lowest LOOV-RMSE error. 
Moreover, both models select WMC as input feature 
suggesting that it is a good effort predictor. 
It is interesting to observe that any neural network 
per se is not better for prediction than simple 

regression. The MLP network for example performs 

worse than most regression models. However, the RBF 
network, which is able to capture better local properties 
of single data points works best for both projects. 

Thus, we confirm the findings of [24] and agree that 

RBF networks are a promising approach for modeling 

software engineering data. Based on these findings we 

choose stepwise regression and RBF networks for 
building corresponding incremental models. 
Table 3. Regression and neural networks for 
the global approach. 
Model 
RMSE 
training 
LOOV-
RMSE 

test 
Input variables 
Best regression model for project A 
S-R 3.26 
±0.29 
1.62 
±2.92 
CBO, WMC 
Best regression model for project B 
S-L 
3.27 
±0.06 
2.58 
±2.57 
WMC, RFC 
Best neural networks for project A 
RBF 
0.74 
±0.03 
1.26 
±1.10 
All, spread=10, 
12 neurons 
Best neural network for project B 
RBF 
1.12 
±0.03 
1.77 
±2.53 
All, spread=1.8, 
17 neurons 
Legend: S-L - stepwise, multi-linear regression, S-R 
– stepwise, robust regression, RBF - radial basis 
functions network. 
As next step we perform iterative effort prediction 
using the incremental and global approach for both 
regression and RBF models. For global models we use 
– as in a real-world scenario – models fitted on data 

collected in project A for predicting effort in project B 

and vice versa. In practice global models aim at 

predicting effort for “similar” (similar to the ones used 

for model building) projects: This is the case for the 

two projects under scrutiny as they are similar in size, 

development environment and methodology, 

programming language/technology and tools used. The 

prediction errors for estimation of total coding effort 

per iteration (obtained as sum over the effort predicted 
per class) are presented in Table 4. We report only 
MRE values as they are reported in many studies and 
thus are useful for comparison; the other performance 

criteria we compute confirm unanimously MRE values. 
350350 Comparing the relative performance of global and 
incremental approach we find clear evidence of the 

superiority of the incremental model. Due to space 

constraints we only report relative errors for the total 

development effort per iteration; a closer look reveals 

that effort prediction at a class level is very unreliable 
and – if at all – works only in the incremental mode 
and using RBF models (but only few estimates have 
relative errors lower than 25%). We explain this by the 

fact that data under scrutiny have outliers and skewed 

distributions and models - in particular global models - 

are not able to adapt to single data points but only to 
approximate average values. The results in Table 4 
emphasize that an incremental model makes (a) more 
accurate effort predictions (moreover, the accuracy of 
global models is unsatisfactory) and (b) can be used in 

a meaningful and reliable way much earlier in 

development than the global model. 
Table 
4. Relative prediction error per iteration 
using incremental and global models. Values 
less than 25% are in boldface.  
Iteration MRE  
SR-A 
MRE 
RBF-A 
MRE 
SR-B 
MRE 
RBF-B 
3 (G) 154% 412% 84% 63% 
3 (I) 51 % 71% 57% 37% 
4 (G) 34% 
12% 
105% 32% 4 (I) 32% 33% 
25% 19% 
5 (G) 57% 90% 47% 
17% 
5 (I) 11 % 6% 16% 21% 
SR – stepwise linear regression, RBF Radial Basis 
Functions network, (I) – incremental model, (G) global 
model. 
For example for iteration 3 a global model gives a 
relative error of 154% in project A and 63% in project 
B, while an incremental model reduces the relative 

errors to 51% respective 37%. Moreover, for project B 
from iteration 4 onwards (for project A only for 
iteration 5) the relative error for incremental effort 

prediction falls under 25%, which is considered a good 

result in software effort estimation [10]. Since these 

results are confirmed both by regression models and 

neural networks we strongly believe that they are 

model independent. Furthermore, incremental models 

reduce the relative error from one iteration to the next 

indicating that they stabilize and adjust to project 

characteristics as more data become available and are 

used for model construction. It is interesting to note 

that predictions are more accurate for project B than 
for project A. This could be explained by the fact that 
project B has more data points (its effort distribution is 

smoother than the one for project A) which enables 

better training and model adaptation. In general we 
expect the performance of incremental models to 
improve as project size grows and more development 

iterations have been concluded. In both cases sample 

size increases, which leads to better model training and 
generalization. 
Altogether we can state that: 
•In general, incremental models outperform global 
ones for iterative effort prediction (this is even more 
manifest in early iterations of development). 
•Unlike global, incremental models improve 
continuously prediction accuracy during project 
evolution reaching a satisfactory level (less than 
25% MRE) and providing more confidence to 
stakeholders (developers, managers, customers) due 

to their convergent nature. 
6. Limitations of this work 
This work is a first step towards understanding how 
to develop and use effort prediction models in iterative, 

agile environments. It is needless to say that in order to 

consolidate the findings of this study and transform 

them into actual “knowledge” and recommendations to 
developers and managers several replications are 
needed. We use a novel approach for data collection, 

which does not require an active involvement of 

developers, and thus is well suited for agile 

environments. This approach is able to provide a high 

granularity and a large amount of effort data but a 

quantification of the improvement compared to 

manually collected data has to be carried out in a future 

experiment. All models for effort prediction proposed 

and validated in this research have been built using two 

software projects in a particular XP environment and 

all possible threats to external and internal validity 
have to be considered carefully. In particular, we are 
faced with the following threats: 
The participants of the case studies are in part 
master students; it is questionable whether or not they 
represent the average software developer in industry. 

Thus, further investigation with a randomized sample 
of developers is needed to analyze to which degree our 

findings are biased by the selection of the subjects. 
Most of the participants of the study have been 
exposed to XP for the first time. We do not control the 

impact of a learning curve on the results. It is referred 
to a future study if experienced XP developers would 
have performed in the same way. 
We develop regression models and neural networks 
for comparing global with incremental approaches. 

However, there are other promising modeling 

techniques for effort estimation such as Bayesian 

networks, classification and regression trees or hybrid 
351351 models. In the future we plan to investigate whether 
different modeling choices sustain our results or limit 

the validity of the findings to the subset of analyzed 

models. 
The choice of CK design metrics as predictor 
variables may also impact the findings of this research. 
Other choices could favor global models. Moreover, 
CK metrics are extracted from source code, but in 
practice they have to be estimated from design 

documents. Further analysis is needed to investigate 

the impact of variability in the estimation of CK 

metrics on performance of incremental models. 
Finally, to do justice to global models we have to 
note that we use only one project for model building 
and use such model for effort prediction on a second 
project. In real life a software company would possibly 

use and combine several past projects for the purpose 

of model building. Probably such model is more 
reliable and stable as it averages data from several 
projects and becomes less influenced by characteristics 
of one particular data set. Shepperd and Schofield 

argue that in order to calibrate and stabilize properly an 

estimation model they need at least 20 projects [23]. It 

remains to future experiments to determine whether a 

global model derived from a bunch of historic projects 

would be competitive to the proposed incremental 

approach. 
7. Conclusions 
In this study we propose a new approach to iterative 
effort prediction. We have identified a number of 
reasons for which the suitability of the monolithic 
prediction models is limited when dealing with agile 
software development: 
•Most companies using agile development are rather 
small (94% of software companies in US have less 

than 20 people [12]). Thus, it is very likely that they 

may not have historic data to build traditional effort 

prediction models. 
•Agile projects change rapidly and it is difficult to 
anticipate that a model constructed with the use of 

data for one project would be valid for another 

project. 
•In general, predictor variables may not be known at 
the start of the project but become available at the 
beginning of each iteration. Therefore, early 
estimation of total development effort is impossible 

and should be replaced by an iterative estimation of 

development effort for the next future iteration. 
Considering these arguments we develop an 
incremental, iteration-based prediction model. It has 

the following advantages over a monolithic model: 
•There is no need for historic data. 
•It fits naturally into iterative development cycles, as 
it evolves and accommodates to changes from one 
iteration to the next.  
•There is no risk that the model is outdated; this is in 
particular important for companies that accept 
projects in new application domains or dealing with 
new technologies. In such cases models based on 

historic data may completely fall short.  
•An incremental model gives early and more frequent 
feedback to developers and managers. A short 

feedback cycle is important to detect early 

aberrations from preset targets. In such cases a 
company may investigate why predicted effort goals 
are not met or eventually re-calibrate the prediction 
model. 
We apply the incremental approach to two agile, 
semi-industrial development projects and find evidence 
that it is superior to a global, monolithic prediction 
model. Incremental models are stable and convergent 

in the sense that their prediction error decreases from 

iteration to iteration. They can be used right from the 
start of development and improve their accuracy 
throughout project evolution due to their iterative 
nature. Intelligent data collection and analysis tools 
allow easy automation of the model construction 

process. At the beginning of a development iteration 
they could be integrated in a planning game where 

customers, developers, and managers develop a first 

objective cost estimation based on current project data. 
8. References 
[1] M. Alshayeb, W. Li, “An Empirical Validation of Object-
Oriented Metrics in Two Different Iterative Software 

Processes”, 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
,November2003,
 29
(11): 1043-1048. 
[2] L. Angelis, I. Stamelos, M. Morisio, “Building A 
Software Cost Estimation Model Based On Categorical 

Data”, 
Proceedings of the 7
th International Symposium on 
Software Metrics
,London, 2001. 
[3] K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change, 
Addison-Wesley, 1999. 
[4] C.M. Bishop, 
Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition
,Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1994. 
[5] B.W. Boehm, B. Clark, E. Horowitz, R. Madachy, R. 

Shelby, C. Westland, “Cost Models for Future Software Life 

Cycle Processes: COCOMO 2.0”, 
Annals of Software 
Engineering
, 1995. 
352352 [6] B.W. Boehm, C. Abts, S. Chulani, “Software 
development cost estimation approaches - A survey”, 
Ann. 
Software Eng.
, 2000, 10: 177-205. 
[7] G. Boetticher, “Using Machine Learning to Predict 
Project Effort: Empirical Case Studies in Data-Starved 
Domains”, 
Model Based Requirements Workshop
, San 
Diego, 2001, pp. 17 – 24. 

[8] L.C. Briand, I. Wieczorek, “Resource Estimation in 

Software Engineering”, 
ISERN-00-05 Technical Report
,Fraunhofer Institute for Experimental Software Engineering, 

Germany, 2000. 

[9] S. Chidamber, C.F. Kemerer, “A metrics suite for object-
oriented design”, 
IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering
,June1994
, 20
(6): 476-493. 
[10] S. Conte, D.H.E. Dunsmore, V.Y. Shen, 
Software 
Engineering Metrics and Models, 
Benjamin/Cummings 
Publishing Company, Inc., 1986. 

[11] S. Counsell, S. Swift, J. Crampton, “The interpretation 

and utility of three cohesion metrics for object-oriented 

design”, 
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
, 2006, 
15(2): 
123-149. 
[12] M. E. Fayad, M. Laitinen, and R. P. Ward, “Software 
Engineering in the Small”, 
Communications of the ACM
,March 2000, vol. 43, no. 3. 

[13] T. Foss, E. Stensrud, B. Kitchenham, and I. Myrtveit, 

“A Simulation Study of the Model Evaluation Criterion 
MMRE”, 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, 2003,  
29(11): 985-995. 
[14] M. Jørgensen, and M. Shepperd, “A Systematic Review 
of Software Development Cost Estimation Studies Document 
Actions”, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2006, 

33(1): 33-53. 
[15] S. MacDonell, M.J. Shepperd, “Using Prior-Phase Effort 
Records for Re-estimation During Software Projects”, 

Proceedings of the Ninth International Software Metrics 

Symposium (METRICS’03)
, Sydney, Australia, 2003. 
[16] C. Mair, G. Kadoda, M. Lefley, K. Phalp, C. Schofield, 

M. Shepperd, S. Webster, “An Investigation of Machine 
Learning Based Prediction Systems”, 
Journal of Systems and 
Software
, 53, 2000, pp. 23-29. 
[17] Y. Miyazaki, M. Terakado, K. Ozaki, and H. Nozaki, 

“Robust regression for developing software estimation 

models”, 
Journal of Systems and Software
, 1994, 
27(1): 3-
16. 
[18] I. Myrtveit, E. Stensrud, and M. Shepperd, “Reliability 

and Validity in Comparative Studies of Software Prediction 
Models”, 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, 2005, 
31(5): 380-391. 
[19] S. Mohanty, “Software cost estimation: Present and 

future”, 
Software-Practice and Experience
,1981
,vol. 11, pp. 
103-121. 
[20] C. P. C. Pendharkar, G. H. Subramanian, J. A. Rodger, 

“A Probabilistic Model for Predicting Software Development 

Effort”, 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, July 
2005, 
7(31): 615-624. 
[21] L.H.A. Putnam, “A general empirical solution to the 
macro software sizing and estimation problem”, 
IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering
, 1978, 
4(4): 345-381. 
[22] O. Salo and P. Abrahamsson, “Empirical Evaluation of 

Agile Software Development: The Controlled Case Study 
Approach”, 
PROFES 2004
, Keihanna-Plaza, Kansai Science 
City in Kyoto-Nara area, Japan, 2004. 

[23] M.C. Shepperd, and C. Schofield, “Estimating software 

project effort using analogies”, 
IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering
, 1997, 
23(11): 736-743. 
[24] M. Shin and A.L. Goel, “Empirical Data Modeling in 
Software Engineering Using Radial Basis Functions”, 
IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering
, Jun. 2000, 
26(6): 
567-576. 
[25] A. Sillitti, A. Janes, G. Succi, T. Vernazza, “Collecting, 

Integrating and Analyzing Software Metrics and Personal 
Software Process Data”, 
Proceedings of the EUROMICRO 
2003, Cyprus, 2003. 
[26] K. Srinivasan, D. Fisher, “Machine Learning 
Approaches to Estimating Software Development Effort”, 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, Feb. 1995, 
21(2): 126-137. 
[27] A. Trendowicz, J. Heidrich, J. Münch, Y. Ishigai, K. 

Yokoyama, N. Kikuchi, “Development of a hybrid cost 

estimation model in an iterative manner”, 
Proceeding of the 
28th International Conference on Software Engineering
,China, 2006. 
353353