 Common Agile Practices in Software Processes
José Fortuna Abrantes, Guilherme Horta Travassos
COPPE/Systems Engineering and Computer Science Program
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
{jfa, ght}@cos.ufrj.br
Abstract
—Objective: to investigate studies about software 
processes looking for practices which can be used to obtain
agility in software processes. Method:A systematic review
including seven search engines was executed inFeb/2010.  To 
apply the defined criteria to select papers and extract 
information regarding working practices bringing agility to 
software processes. Results: from 6696 retrieved papers, 441 
were selected to support the identification of 236 occurrences 
of 51 distinct practices associated with the concept of agility. 
Their descriptions were deeply analyzed and consolidated. 
After discarding those which appeared in the technical 
literature in a small amount of papers, 17 agile practices were 
identified.Conclusion: although further studies are necessary 
to evaluate the efficacy of these 17 agile practices, 12 of them 
have been more commonly approached in the software projects
and could be primarily considered: test driven development, 
continuous integration, pair programming, planning game, on-
site customer, collective code ownership, small releases, 
metaphor, refactoring, sustainable pace, simple design and 
coding standards.
Keywords-agile practices, agile software processes, agile 
methods, systematic review, ev
idence based software engineering.
I.I
NTRODUCTION
Nowadays, software development practices adopted by 
organizations are strongly challenged by the evolving 
business environments. In a volatile business context, 
software organizations come across a new reality and have to 
deal with uncertainties and quick changes in business 
environments, by re-engineering their methods. Many 
sources of change are frequently unpredictable. Slowness or 
delays to accommodate uncertainty and rapid changes 
inevitably leads to the obsolescence of software and 
customer dissatisfaction [1].It has been demonstrated that 
values, principles and agile practices bring benefits to many 
organizations [2]. Values bring purpose to practices. 
Practices are evidence of values, which are universal and 
expressed at a higher level. Practices are clearer and more 
specific. Bridging the gap between values and practices are 
principles, which are domain-specific guidelines. Just as 
values bring purpose to practices, practices bring 
accountability to values [3]. Practices are activities that 
implement the principles governing the processes or 
methods. These in turn are ideas, understandings or goals 
that are behind the practices [4]. 
In the last 16 years, an interesting changingin the
software development processes was the introduction of the 
“agile” perspective. However, software development teams 
need support to choose the right combination of agile 
practices based on their needs [5]. The aim of this study is to 
investigate software practices recommended into the context 
of agile approaches for software development. A research 
protocol has been formalized to conduct a systematic
literature review. The searches were conducted in February 
2010. The data were analyzed and the initial results 
summarized in this short paper.
II.R
ESEARCH 
M
ETHOD
The objective of this secondary studyis to identify the
software practices usually used into the context of agile 
approaches forthe development of software. The formulated 
question was: what are the software practices that can be 
considered agile into the context of approaches to develop 
software? The problem is finding and identifying agile 
practices for software development. The application of the 
results is intended to serve as a basis to support researches 
involving software practices that can be used as alternatives
to embed agility into software processes. The population is 
the set of software development projects. The intervention is 
the agile software development processes. There is no 
comparison. The outcome is a set of agile practices. Three 
papers were used as control: [6, 7, 8]. The sources are 
collected from the following digital databases, including the 
conferences, journals and technical reports indexed by 
Compendex EI, IeeeXplore, Inspec, Web of Science, Scopus, 
Science Direct, and ACM digital library.  
The keywords for population are "software projects", 
"software systems", "software development", "software 
engineering". The keywords for intervention are "agile 
approaches", "agile processes", "agile methods", "agile 
methodologies", "agile development", "agile software 
development", "agile projects". The keywords for outcome 
are "practices", "software practices", "agile practices", "sub 
practices", "agile techniques", "techniques".
The inclusion and exclusion criteria are: the documents 
should be available on the web; the documents should 
include agile software practices into the context of agile 
approaches for software development; the documents should 
provide a description of the agile practices they behold. In 
order to select studies, a researcher will apply the search
strategy for identification of potential documents. The 
documents identified by the researcher will be selected 
through reading and verification of the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. Subsequently, the documents excluded 
from the list will be evaluated by a second researcher. In case 
of conflict, the document will be included. Finally, the 
2011 International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement978-0-7695-4604-9/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2011.47355 documents will be read by researchers to extract information 
about software practices into the context of agile software 
development approaches. It is assumed the sources of the 
documents are reliable, and the texts have undergone 
external reviews that serve as a filter so that they present 
enough quality to contribute to this secondary study.
The following information will be extracted from each 
paper selected after running the selection process: document 
title, author (s), source, year of publication and name and 
description of the agile software practices. The results will be 
tabulated. Analysis will be carried out to identify similarities 
and most relevant or most significant practices for software 
processes into the context of agile software development. 
The frequency in which each practice has been reported by 
different authors will be considered. If authors write more 
than one paper, repeated counts will be avoided. The search 
string taken as the basis for all search engines, structured 
according to Pai et al. [9] was: ("software projects" or 
"software systems" or "software development" or "software 
engineering" ) AND ("agile approaches" or "agile processes" 
or "agile methods" or "agile methodologies" or "agile 
development" or "agile software development" or "agile 
projects") AND ("practices" or "software practices" or "agile 
practices" or "subpractices" or "agile techniques" or 
"techniques"). 
III.R
ESULTS AND 
D
ISCUSSION 
The searches execution with the aforementioned engines 
returned 6696 references, published between 1998 and 2010. 
Repetitions were eliminated, keeping the remaining paper 
counted for the digital library with the largest number of 
items recovered. All the controls were retrieved. From 5093 
references without repetitions, titles and summaries were 
assessed for each retrieved reference, and references that 
clearly did not address issues concerned with the research 
were excluded. After the removal of such items, 441 
references were selected for the study.
Following the criteria established in the research 
protocol,236 occurrences of practices were extracted from 
24 papers published between 2001 and 2009 [6, 7, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 
28, 29, 30, 31] and tabulated accordingly. In order to avoid 
bias, technical papers concerning with performance studies 
or specific issues of a particular practice were not 
considered. From these, some practices are associated to one 
or more commercial agile methods while others are not 
associated with any method. Other papers approached agile 
practices, but did not present an adequate description of its 
meaning. In order to identify repetitions, names and 
descriptions of the 236 occurrences of agile practices 
collected were analyzed and grouped, leading to 51 different 
agile practices. One can observe significant increase of 
technical papers published in 2009 meeting the research 
protocol criteria, as well as the growing interest by the 
scientific community on agile approaches, considering the 
results of other secondary studyregarding agility 
characteristics previously undertaken by the authors of this 
study.
From the 51 different agile practices identified, 17 of 
them were approached in the technical papers more than 
once and they were selected to be further analyzed. The 
descriptions for each practice from different papers were 
consolidated as follows: 
Whole Team
-Refers to the practice 
of including
 all necessary skills and perspectives on the team 
for it to succeed, emphasizing the sense of team and all team 
members sharing the purpose and supporting each other. 
Customers, end-users and other business stakeholders should 
have direct involvement on the project, in order to 
understand the system’s behavior early in the lifecycle.
Project Visibility
-Agile projects strive to provide immediate 
status 
and feedback to the teams. One can create project 
dashboards on the web that hosts, at any point in time, all 
status and measurements regarding the progress of the 
project. Advancement of the project in relation to the user 
stories that the teams have committed to deliver at the end of 
the iterations should be included. Models should be made 
accessible for the entire teams.
Continuous integration
-The members of a team should 
frequen
tly integrate their work, every time new changes or a 
task is completed, to reveal integration problems and to 
detect system failures as soon as possible. Usually each 
person integrates at least daily. All tests must still pass after 
integration or the new code should be discarded.
Test Driven Development
-Every programmer writes test 
cases 
before they write their production code. Developers 
write unit tests before coding and encourage customers to
write acceptance test cases. Upon initial execution of such a 
test case, it will fail as there is no corresponding code that 
implements the particular feature or condition being tested. 
Then the developer compose just enough code for the test to 
pass or to satisfy the current goal,  followed by refactoring in 
order to improve readability and remove duplications.
Refactoring
-This is a practice for restructuring an existing 
body of code, or constantly improving its understandability 
and maintainability, as well as its design, altering its internal 
structure without changing its external behavior nor the 
system functionality. The different forms of refactoring 
involve simplifying complex statements, abstracting 
common solutions into reusable code, and the removal of 
duplicate code. When code is refactored, it must still pass all 
the unit test cases in the code base.
Pair programming
-All source code producedmust be
written 
by two people working at the same time in the same 
machine. The programmers alternate the roles of driver and 
navigator throughout the day. The driver has control of the 
keyboard and mouse; s/he implements the code, explaining it 
to the navigator. The driver’s major responsibilities are 
development tests and algorithm construction, whereas the 
obligations of the navigator are to watch for both syntax and 
semantic defects, deciding if this is the best way to 
implement the functionality.
Planning Game
-Together, the developers and the customers 
play
 the “Planning Game" in which the customer chooses 
those User Stories that comprise the most important content 
for a short, incremental deliverable. Each short 
implementation increment is accepted and tried by the 
customer. Then, the remaining User Stories are re-examined 
356 for possible requirement and/or priority changes and the 
Planning Game is re-played for the next implementation 
increment. Planning is continuous and progressive.
Small releases
-Release working software frequently. This 
practice shortens release cycle to speed the feedback from 
the customer. Given that requirements often change, one 
keeps release cycles short and ensures that each release 
produces a useful software system that generates business 
value for the customer. An initial version of the system is put 
into production quickly, after little iteration. At the end of 
each release, the customer reviews the interim product; 
identify defects and adjusting future requirements.
Metaphor
-This practice presents a simple shared story 
which 
explains the essence of how the system works to give 
both developers and customers a common understanding of 
the project. In a sense, the metaphor serves as the high-level 
software architecture. While thinking about an appropriate 
metaphor, developers must expand their perspective and 
analysis of the developed application.
Simple design
-The emphasis of this practice is on designing 
the simplest possible solution that is implementable at that
moment. Unnecessary complexity and extra code shall be
immediately removed. One should not add additional 
featuresto your artifacts unless they are justifiable. 
Programmers should not try to predict future needs. The 
most cost-effective development approach should focus on 
solving today’s problems rather than designing for future 
changes.
Collective Code Ownership
-The code repository should be 
freely
 accessible to all programmers, who are encouraged to 
make changes in all the code, anywhere and at anytime they 
feel necessary, without asking ‘permission’ from anyone. 
Any programmers’ pair whom sees an opportunity to add 
value to any portion of the code can do so any time. As the 
code is accessible to more minds, programmers must 
examine code that is written by others.
On-site customer
-This practice indicates that customer 
should be a m
ember of the development team. To clarify and 
validate the requirements and set priorities, an on-site 
customer representative works with the team. Thus a 
customer works close together with the developers all the 
time, to answer the questions, resolve disputes, set small 
scale priorities, perform acceptance tests, and ensure that 
development is progressing as expected.
Sustainable Pace
-This practice emphasizes working “only 
as many hours 
as you can be productive and only as many as 
you can sustain”.  Work no more than 40 hours a week as a 
rule, no more than eight hours every day, without working 
overtime a second week in a row. During crunch periods 
when overtime is worked, the artifacts that are produced are 
poor in quality. Requirements should be selected for each 
iteration, such that developers do not need to put in overtime.
Open workspace
-Developers work in a common workspace; 
a 
large room with small cubicles is preferred. Pair 
programmers should be placed in the center of the space. 
Workplace layouts should have common areas that facilitate 
open communication. An alternative set with individual 
workstations around the periphery and common development 
machines in the center could be appropriate.
Coding standards
-Because developers code different system 
parts 
with various team members, coding standards are a 
must. A coding standard makes the code easier to 
understand, increase readability and improves consistency 
among team members. The standard should be easy to follow 
and to be voluntarily adopted. It is agreed upon by the team 
to ensure that communication is made through code and let 
developers to easily understand each other’s code.
Product Backlog
-This practice includes the tasks for 
creating 
the Product Backlog list, and controlling it 
consistently during the process by adding, removing, 
specifying, updating, and prioritizing items. Product Backlog 
defines everything that is needed in the final product based 
on current knowledge.  It comprises a prioritized and 
constantly updated list of business and technical 
requirements for the system being built or enhanced.
Stand-up meetings
-they are quick meetings (approximately 
15 
minutes) organized to keep track of the project progress, 
to highlight issues and to organize the daily activities. Each 
team member briefly states what he or she has been working 
on and what progress has been made. The standing 
component of the meeting tended to ensure that everyone be 
alert and attentive, besides intending not to go beyond the 15 
minutes, encouraging the participants to conclude it quickly.
From these, 12 practices have been addressed by 
technical papers published in at least 6 different years in the 
time interval of the selected publications: 
test driven 
develo
pment, continuous integration, pair programming, 
planning game, on-site customer, collective code ownership, 
small releases, metaphor, refactoring, sustainable pace, 
simple design and coding standards
. Other 5 practices,
completi
ng 17 which were approached in the papers more 
than once were:
whole team, project visibility, stand-up 
meeting
s, open workspace and product backlog
.
IV.T
HREATS TO 
V
ALIDITY
The threats to validity of this study are associated with 
the criteria that governed the construction of the search 
string. The goal was to avoid the loss of relevant documents. 
Therefore, due to the choice of terms to form the search 
strings, there is a risk that relevant studies have been omitted. 
This study identified a set of agile practices based on 
findings in the technical literature. One can not be sure that 
the same set of practices would be found if the identification 
were based on findings in real agile software projects, which 
possibly could lead to different results. So, may be there are 
other agile practices that could be considered if a more 
industrial view is used in this study.
V.C
ONCLUSIONS AND 
F
UTURE 
W
ORKS
The performance of all practices, in terms of agility, 
depends on the environment in which it is applied, the 
project context, the way chosen to implement it in the 
process and the intensity with which it is applied and upheld 
by the team. Among the 51 distinct practices identified in 
this secondary study, several of them were targets of interest 
to researchers only occasionally, the vast majority before 
2004. The proposal now is to continue this research work, 
considering the aforementioned 17 agile practices. The 
357 intention is to run a primary study to evaluate them. The 
primary study will be structured to capture and consider any 
additional practices that any of its participants want to add, 
since they present descriptions of the meaning of the 
practices they suggest.
A
CKNOWLDGMENTS
This work is into the context of 
eSEE
 (
e
xperimental 
S
oftware 
E
ngineering 
E
nvironment) research project 
suppor
ted by CNPq – Brazilian Research Council, FAPERJ 
and COPPETEC Foundation.
R
EFERENCES
[1]Ktata, Oualid.  Lévesque, Ghislain.: Agile development: Issues and 
avenues requiring a substantial enhancement of the business 
perspective in large projects, C3S2E-09, May 19-21, Montreal [QC, 
CANADA] Editor: B C. DESAI  (2009).  
[2]Glazer, Hillel.: Love and Marriage: CMMI and Agile Need Each 
Other, CrossTalk: The Journal of Defense Software Engineering. 
Volume 23, No. 1, Jan/Feb. (2010).
[3]Beck, K. Andres, Cynthia.: Extreme Programming Explained: 
Embrace Change, Second Edition, Addison Wesley Professional 
(2004).
[4]Jiang, Li. Eberlein, Armin.: An Analysis of the History of Classical 
Software Development and Agile Development, In: IEEE 
International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics San 
Antonio, TX, USA – October (2009).
[5]Abbas, Noura. Gravell, Andrew M. Wills, Gary B.: Using Factor 
Analysis to Generate Clusters of Agile Practices, In: AGILE 
Conference, August 9 - 13, Orlando, Florida (2010).
[6]Abrahamsson, P.  Salo, O. Ronkainen, J. Warsta, J.:  Agile Software 
Development Methods. Review and Analysis,   Espoo. VTT 
Publications 478 (2002).
[7]Cohen, D. Lindvall, M. Costa, P.: An Introduction to Agile Methods, 
in: M.V. Zelkowitz (Ed.),  Advances in Computers, Advances in
Software Engineering, vol. 62, Elsevier, Amsterdam (2004).
[8]Meso, Peter. Jain, Radhika.: Contemporary practices in systems 
development. Agile Software Development: adaptive systems 
principles and best practices, Information Systems Management, 
summer (2006).
[9]Pai, M. McCulloch, M. Gorman, J.D. et al. : Systematic Reviews and 
meta-analyses: An illustrated, step-by-step guide, The National 
Medical Journal of India, vol. 17, n.2 (2004).
[10]Koehnemann, Harry. Coats, Mark. (2009), "Experiences Applying 
Agile Practices to Large Systems", In: 2009 Agile Conference.
[11]Fruhling, Ann. De Vreede, Gert-Jan. (2006) "Field Experiences with 
eXtreme Programming: Developing an Emergency Response 
System", Journal of Management Information Systems / Spring  Vol. 
22, No. 4. pp. 39-68.
[12]Paige, Richard F. Brooke, Phillip J. (2005) “Agile Formal Method 
Engineering”, J. Romijn, G. Smith, and J. van de Pol (Eds.): IFM 
2005, LNCS 3771, pp. 109–128.
[13]Jureczko, Marian. (2008) "The Level of Agility in Testing Process in 
a Large Scale Financial Software Project", In: Software engineering 
techniques in progress, Oficyna Wydawnicza Politechniki 
Wroc?awskiej, 139-152.
[14]Xu, Bin. (2009) "Towards High Quality Software Development with 
Extreme Programming Methodology: Practices from Real Software 
Projects", College. of Computer Science & Information Engineering, 
Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou China.
[15]Stolberg,  Sean. (2009) "Enabling Agile Testing Through Continuous 
Integration", 2009 Agile Conference.
[16]9- Martin, Angela. Biddle,  Robert. Noble, James. (2009) "XP 
Customer Practices: A Grounded Theory",  2009 Agile Conference. 
[17]10- Zhou, Yinghua. (2009) "UniX Process, Merging Unified Process 
and Extreme Programming to Benefit Software Development 
Practice",  2009 First International Workshop on Education 
Technology and Computer Science.
[18]Cannizzo, Fabrizio. Marcionetti, Gabriela. Moser, Paul. (2008) "The 
Toolbox Of A Successful Software Craftsman",  15th Annual IEEE 
International Conference and Workshop on the Engineering of 
Computer Based Systems.
[19]Huo, Ming. Verner, June. Zhu, Liming. Ali Babar, Muhammad. 
(2004) "Software Quality and Agile Methods", Proceedings of the 
28th Annual International Computer Software and Applications 
Conference (COMPSAC'04).
[20]Maurer, Frank. Martel, Sebastien. (2002) "Extreme Programming 
Rapid Development for Web-Based Applications", IEEE Internet 
Computing, January - February.
[21]Paulk, Mark C. (2001) "Extreme Programming from a CMM 
Perspective", IEEE Software,  November/December.
[22]Vejandla,  Pavan K. Sherrell, Linda B. (2009) "Why an AI Research 
Team Adopted XP Practices", Proceedings of the 47th Annual 
Southeast Regional Conference, ACM-SE 47, March 19-21, 
Clemson, SC, USA.
[23]Concas,  Giulio. Francesco, Marco Di. Marchesi, Michele. 
Quaresima, Roberta. Pinna, Sandro. (2008) "Study of the Evolution of 
an Agile Project Featuring a Web Application Using Software 
Metrics", A. Jedlitschka and O. Salo (Eds.): PROFES 2008, LNCS 
5089, pp. 386-399
[24]Hazzan, Orit. Tomayko, Jim. (2003) "The Reflective Practitioner 
Perspective in eXtreme Programming", Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 2753, 51-61.
[25]Xiaohua?Wang. Zhi,  Wu. Ming, Zhao. (2008) "The Relationship 
between Developers and Customers in Agile Methodology", 2008 
IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering.
[26]Aiello, G. Alessi, M. Bruccoleri, M. D'Onofrio C. Vella, G. (2007) 
"An Agile methodology for Manufacturing Control Systems 
development", Engisud S.p.a., Palermo, Italy.
[27]Svensson, Harald. H¨ost, Martin. (2005) "Introducing an Agile 
Process in a Software Maintenance and Evolution Organization", 
Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Software 
Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR'05).
[28]Mills, David. Sherrell, Linda. Boydstun, Jeff. Wei, Guoqing. (2005) 
"Experiences Using Agile Software Development for a Marketing 
Simulation", Dept. of Comput. Sci., Memphis Univ., TN USA.
[29]McKinney,  Dawn. Denton,  Leo F. (2005) "Affective Assessment of 
Team Skills in Agile CS1 Labs: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly", 
SIGCSE '05, February 23-27, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
[30]Ramachandran, Vinay. Shukla, Anuja. (2002) "Circle of Life, Spiral 
of Death: Are XP Teams Following the Essential Practices?", Dept. of 
Comput. Sci., North Carolina State Univ., Raleigh NC USA
[31]Williams, Laurie. Upchurch, Richard. (2001) "Extreme Programming 
for Software Engineering Education?", 31st ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in 
Education Conference, October 10 - 13, 2001 Reno, NV.
358