 Agile Security Issues: An Empirical Study  Ahmed Alnatheer ECS, University of Southampton Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK  aaa1v09@ecs.soton.ac.uk Andrew M. Gravell ECS, University of Southampton  Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK  amg@ecs.soton.ac.uk David Argles ECS, University of Southampton  Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK  da@ecs.soton.ac.uk  Abstract In this poster we introduce an ongoing empirical study on the 
effects of using predominant security issues along with agile 
methodologies. As part of this empirical study, current security 
issues related to and applicable
 to agile methodologies such as Scrum, XP, and FDD and their effects are discussed. The purpose 
of this poster is to present an introduction to this ongoing effort and to present our analysis of 
the issues which are important 

factors in our forthcoming results which underscores the gap in 
the literature. The analysis will include experiments, semi-

structured interviews, and surveys that seek to gather relevant 

objective and subjective information about projects and 

experiments in order to arrive at a consensus on which issues need 

to be included or emphasized as part of agile to provide adequate 

security assurance. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors K.6.5 [Management of Computing and Information Systems
]: 
Security and protection. D.2.4 [
Software Engineering
]: Soft-
ware/program verification. K.6.3 [Software Engineering
]: 
Software management Œ software process. General Terms Measurement, Design, Reliability, Experimentation, Security, 
Human Factors, Verification. 1. Research Questions 1. Is there a way to seamlessly 
combine security and agility, or 
more importantly, how can we eval
uate the suitability of security 
mechanisms for use in agile? 
2. Is extending agile practices for better security a necessary step 
from the stakeholder point of view? 
3. Do most security issues stem from software vulnerabilities? 

4. Should the customer dictate the level of required security for a 
given project? 

5. What are the effects of knowledge diffusion on a given agile 
project in terms of security awareness of its members? 
6. How beneficial is dedicated security iteration through 
monitoring a set of metrics to gage its effectiveness? 
7. What is the best prioritizati
on mechanism to measure the level 
of risk for a given security requirement? 

8. Do the testing and verification tools used by agile teams 
provide adequate security assurance for the software in addition to 
quality assurance? 
9. Does the lack of documentation in agile projects contribute to 

less secure software? 
2. Related Work From the security engineering pers
pective, research suggests that 
there is a clash or disparity [1] between established security 

methodologies and the ideas and methodologies proposed by the 

agile advocates [2]. Security experts often criticize agile for 

having a fundamental lack of an inherent security mechanism to 

produce secure software but fail to acknowledge that their 

approach is heavily focused on documentation and practices 

which hinders the agile process in many ways if applied without 
modification. The current proponents of extending agile 
methodologies have not yet been able to prove why the current 

process cannot accommodate security practices as part of the 

established framework and why an
 amendment or extension is required in order for this to happen. There are a number of 

solutions proposed by both sides of the argument which suggest a 

set of compromises in order to 
bring the two methodologies closer to integration [2]. From this body
 of work, a set of ideas, issues, and hypotheses emerge that is the focus of this research to extract, 

analyze, and get empirical evidence for or against their adoption.  
3. Analysis and Future Work The data collection mechanism will 
be in the form of interviews, 
questionnaires, surveys, and e
xperiments to get appropriate qualitative and quantitative data for the issues that were discussed 
earlier. We have also developed a more sophisticated type of 

survey that optimizes the ques
tions based upon respondent™s role and their responses to earlier questions in the survey which is 
designed to get more accurate and specific information than was 

previously possible through using classical survey methods. Both 

objective and subjective data will be gathered in order to have a 

more appropriate set of measurements available for analysis. 

Comprehensive literature review 
and investigation on the topics of security and agile is alr
eady completed and a number of 
outstanding issues and hypotheses have been identified which will 
be presented later. These efforts are currently under way and 

more data still needs to be coll
ected and will be presented in follow-up papers on the same topic.  4. References [1] Viega, J., McGraw, G. 2001. Building secure software: 
how to avoid security probl
ems the right way, Addison-
Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, 2001 
 [2] Beznosov, K. and Kruchten, P. 2005. Towards agile 
security assurance. 
Proceedings of the 2004 workshop on New security paradigms - NSPW '04, (2005), 47. ESEM™10, September 16-17, 2010, Bolzano-
Bozen, Italy.
 Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0039-01/10/09–$10.00.
  