 Usage and Perceptions of Agile Software Development in an Industrial 
Context: An Exploratory Study 
Andrew Begel 
Microsoft Research 
One Microsoft Way 
Redmond, WA 98052 
andrew.begel@microsoft.com Nachiappan Nagappan 
Microsoft Research 
One Microsoft Way 
Redmond, WA 98052 
nachin@microsoft.com  Abstract 
Agile development methodologies have been 
gaining acceptance in the mainstream software 

development community. 
While there are numerous 
studies of Agile developm
ent in academic and 
educational settings, there has been little detailed 
reporting of the usage, penetration and success of 

Agile methodologies in trad
itional, professional 
software development organizations. We report on the 

results of an empirical study conducted at Microsoft to 

learn about Agile development and its perception by 
people in development, test
ing, and management. We 
found that one-third of the study respondents use Agile 

methodologies to varying degrees, and most view it 

favorably due to improve
d communication between 
team members, quick relea
ses and the increased 
flexibility of Agile designs. The 
Scrum variant of Agile 
methodologies is by far the most popular at Microsoft. 
Our findings also indicate th
at developers are most 
worried about scaling Agile to
 larger projects (greater 
than twenty members), atte
nding too many meetings 
and the coordinating Agile and non-Agile teams.   
1. Introduction 
 
Agile software development (ASD) methodologies 
[7] have been gaining acceptance among mainstream 

software developers since the late 1990s, when they 
were first postulated in the forms of Scrum [14], 
Crystal [8], Extreme Programming [4] and other 
methodologies. Today they are established to varying 

degrees in the academic, educational and professional 

software development communities.  
We would like to understand how ASD 
methodologies are used, what kind of acceptance and 
spread they have, and what kind of successes and 
failures occur in each of these communities. We 
believe strongly in using em
pirical methods to explore 
questions engendered by these research topics. While 
there is much to be learned from looking at the 
software artifacts created by developers and from 
measuring developer productivity and software failure 

proneness, we can gain great insights through direct 

interaction with software developers. We can learn 

about their development practices, their perceptions of 

development processes, and how the two interact. 
We conducted a web-based survey of Microsoft 
employees in development, testing and management 

roles who are directly involved in the production of 

software. Our questions we
re targeted to understand 


ASD practices, and their perceptions of why ASD 
works well or poorly on their software teams. We 
received a response rate of 17%; the nearly 500 
responses make it one of the largest respondent 
populations for a survey of software development at 

Microsoft. From these response
s, we gained a fairly 
clear picture of how ASD is used at Microsoft.  
Our findings indicate that around one-third of the 
respondents use ASD. Scrum is the most popular ASD 

methodology. ASD is a relatively new phenomenon to 

Microsoft; most projects have employed Agile for less 

than two years. ASD is used mostly by collocated 
teams who work on the same floor of the same 
building. Finally, ASD users have an overwhelmingly 

positive opinion about it. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2 we discuss our contributions and in Section 3 

review the related resear
ch. Section 4 describes the 
experimental methodology and illustrates the results. 
In Section 5, we discuss the benefits and problems of 

ASD as perceived at Microsoft. Section 6 concludes 

with a review of our most important findings and their 

implications for future research here at Microsoft and 

at other sites. 
  First International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement0-7695-2886-4/07 $20.00 © 2007 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2007.12255First International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement0-7695-2886-4/07 $20.00 © 2007 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2007.12255 2. Contributions  ASD methodologies are becoming more popular 
in industry and very little is understood about their 
penetration, benefits and pr
oblems [16]. We find the 
lack of such reported results surprising. Our main 

contributions to the current state of the art are: 
 Large scale industrial view of ASD:
 Our study 
is one of the first perf
ormed on a large scale 
(487 respondents) in an organization to assess 
the extent to which groups use ASD. 
 Dominant Agile practices and methodologies:
 We identify the most commonly used Agile 

practices, and indicate the practices that have 

not gained acceptance within our 

development community. In addition, we 
identify the commonly used ASD 
methodologies (Scrum, XP, Crystal, etc) 

within Microsoft. 
 Common benefits and problems associated 
with ASD
: We report on issues related to 
Agile adoption and practice observed by the 
software engineers at Microsoft.  
In general, though our results are specific to 
Microsoft, the results provide valuable insight into 

how software organizations are adopting and adapting 

ASD. We hope to identify
 collaborators in other 
software organizations and people in academia to 
replicate this study in different contexts to write a 

comprehensive report on the penetration of ASD in the 

software engineering community. 
 3. Related Work 
 ASD is the topic of much debate at several 
software development organizations. Unfortunately 

there is little or no evidence
 as to the extent to which 
ASD is used in large commercial software 

development organizations, nor the practices that are 

practices, etc. Our paper aims to address these 

limitations to some degree by assessing the current 

state of the practice at Microsoft on the usage, 

penetration and success of ASD. 
Abrahamsson et al. [1] demonstrated how to 
collect metrics to measure productivity, quality and 
schedule estimation for an ASD project using XP. 
Williams et al. [17] investigated the usage of a subset 

of XP [5] practices at a group in IBM. The product 

developed at IBM using XP was found to have 

significantly better pre-release and post-release quality 
compared to an older release. The teams using XP 
reported an improvement in productivity and morale. 
In addition, customers were more satisfied with the 
product developed using XP because the teams 
delivered more than what the customers had originally 
asked for. Similar results were obtained for a case 
study conducted at Sabre airline systems [10]. Maurer 
et al. [11] studied the development of a web based 

system by nine full time employees in a small 

company that used XP and observed substantial 

productivity gains compared to their pre-XP 

timeframe.  
Our work is closely related to the work by Melnik 
and Maurer [13]. They investigated the perception of 

students towards ASD by collecting qualitative and 

quantitative data over three academic years. Overall, 

the students were positive towards using XP. A serious 

limitation to their experiment was the relative naiveté 
of student perceptions of XP. For example, students 
indicated that their productivity increased using XP. 
But they might have used a beginning programming 

course (CS1) as a yardstick 
for comparison which can 
skew the results in favor of XP. Students are similarly 


study also reports several weak correlations to draw 
relationships between several survey parameters 

(correlation less than +
 0.5). Carver et al. [6] discuss 
using students as subjects in empirical studies. 

Academic case studies do provide a meaningful ground 
for researchers to try out id
eas before replicating them 
in industry. From an industry perspective there has 

been limited empirical evidence on the 

usage/perception towards ASD practices. Sharp and 

Robinson present an overall ethnographic picture of 
XP practices in a small company [15], but other work 
has only addressed individual practices such as pair 
programming [2] and test-driven development [12]. 

 4. Experimental methodology  
 
Our research was conducted using a anonymous 
web-based survey offered over a period of two weeks 
in October 2006. An invitation was sent by email to 
2,821 recipients, randomly se
lected from a much larger 
pool of around 28,000 software developers, test 

developers, and managers (a 10% sample was 

selected). We received 492 
responses, of which 4 were 
invalid (for technical reasons), for an overall response 
rate of 17%. Response rate 
for developers was 18%, 
testers were 18%, and managers were 10%. 
Respondents could identify themselves (separate from 

their survey responses) to enter a drawing for a $250 

reward.  
Respondents were asked a total of 46 questions 
divided into three sections: demographics, Agile 

development, and pair programming. We will report on 
the results of the first two sections, illustrating what we 
discovered about Agile development (only 6% of 
256256 respondents reported using pair programming on their 
current team). In the Agile development section, we 
asked whether the respondent had ever used Agile, 
whether they used it in their current team at Microsoft, 
and which forms of Agile they used. We also asked 

which of the common ASD practices they used (or 

might use in the future) in their team. Responses for 

this question were Yes, Sometimes, No, Planning To, 

and Never. We then asked a 
series of questions to find 
out their overall impressions of Agile development, 
whether they liked it, and whether it was better than 

any previous method they had used for collaboration, 

coordination and morale. We then asked all survey 

respondents whether they liked Agile and what they 

thought its top three benefits and problems were, 
regardless if they had used or did not use ASD. This 
section of the survey was free-response. We ended by 
asking if anyone had used Agile in the past but did not 

now, and why they stopped using it. 
All of the free response answers were printed out 
on a few thousand note cards.
 We organized the cards 
using a card sort designed 
to categorize the responses 
by thematic similarity (as illustrated in 

earlier survey at Microsoft [9]). The themes that 

emerged during the sort were not chosen beforehand. 

Respondents reported 687 Agile benefits, for which 
there were 44 common themes. 565 problems were 
reported, and grouped into 58 themes.  
 5. Experimental results  In this section, we report on the findings from the 
survey demographics and the free response perceptions 
of ASD.  
 5.1 Demographics 
 
Respondents had an average of 9.20 years 
experience in the softwa
re profession (standard 
deviation was 7.06; minimum 0 years; maximum 35 

years). They worked on their current team for an 

average of 2.4 ye
ars (standard deviation 2.5). The 
respondents were spread across different geographical 
locations in North America, Asia and Europe. Of all 

our respondents, 72.6% were individual contributors, 

16.5% were managers and 
7.2% were managers of 
managers.  
Our demographics indicate that our survey 
respondents were fairly experienced and had spent 
more than two years on their current team. They 

understood their development practices well enough to 

provide a relative assessment. Also the distribution of 

our respondents across North America, Asia and 
Europe increases the diversity of our responses by 
providing a global perspective.  
 5.2 Extent of adoption 
 From an adoption standpoint we observed that 156 
out of the 487 people said that their team used ASD. 

This is significantly higher than what was believed to 

have been known / perceived at Microsoft about the 
penetration of ASD practices. Table 1 provides the raw 
data. Further, we observe that among teams 59.6% of 

the people who use Agile methodologies work on 

legacy products, i.e. not a version 1 product. This is 

contrary to popular opinion that ASD is not used in 
legacy systems.   
Table 1: Adoption of ASD 
Does your team use Agile Methodology? 
  No Yes Total 
Is this Version 1 of 
your product? 
n/a 
45 7 52 
No 
204 
93 
297 
Yes 
72 55 127 
Total 
322 
156 
478 
 5.3 ASD methodologies  
 There are several ASD methodologies available 


indicated they used the Scrum [14] ASD methodology. 

Figure 1 shows the extent of adoption of different ASD 
methodologies.  The respondents who answered 
other (22) were asked to specify the ASD process they used. 
Most mention a variant of Scrum or a practice loosely 

based on Scrum. 

  Figure 1: Different ASD Methodologies 
 257257  Figure 2: Percentage of Usage for Agile Practices 
5.4 Agile practices used 
 We asked survey respondents to tell us the extent 
of their usage of various Agile practices. Figure 2 
represents the responses sorted in order of greatest use 

(Yes + Sometimes + Planning to) among the practices. 
The top Agile practices that teams followed were team 
coding standards and cont
inuous integration of code. 
The least followed practices were pair programming 

and test driven development (TDD). All the practices 

except pair programming 
had at least greater than 60% 
(current and planned) adoption. 
 5.5 Time of adoption 
 
We analyzed how long ASD has been used at 
Microsoft in order to identify how recent a trend is 

ASD at Microsoft. Figure 3 shows the distribution of 
the number of months ASD has been practiced in the 

the length 
of time is skewed heavily towards zero. More than 
90% of the projects have used Agile for less than 24 
months (2 years). The average time extent is 8.3 

months (standard deviation is 8.9).  

      Figure 3: Length of Time of ASD Usage 
    258258 5.6 Are Agile teams collocated? 
 In Microsoft a fair amount of development takes 
place in multiple locations (both physical and 

geographical). An important question for software 

development organizations is the location of teams 

adopting ASD methodologies. From Table 2 we 
observe that among the teams practicing Agile 
software development, collocated teams (same office, 

hallway, floor, or building) account for more than 

83.9% (shown in bold) of the respondents. Very few 

teams distributed across cities and countries use ASD 
methodologies. The demographics for the teams that 
do not use ASD is also shown in Table 2 for 

comparison. An interesting point to note is that teams 

are collocated regardless of which software 
methodology they use (83.4% - shown in italics)).  
Table 2: ASD Collocation Data 
 Use Agile? 
Collocated dynamics 
Yes No 
Not-collocated 12 29 
Same country 4 10 
Same city 1 2 
Same campus 8 12 
Same building 
24 
35 
Same floor 
68 
138 
Same hallway 
25 
76 
Same office 
14 
18 
Total 156 321 
 5.7 Individual attitudes towards ASD 
 We then asked participants whether they liked 
ASD. Figure 4 shows the results. Among people who 

currently use Agile (left side
 of the graph), 89.7% like 
or are neutral to ASD. A more important point is that 
among groups that do not use ASD, 92.8% said they 
liked or were neutral to ASD, indicating that a vast 

majority of developers are open to trying ASD in the 

future. From an analysis perspective we correlated the 

age of the respondents to their inclination to 
like/dislike ASD. There was no correlation between 
the factors, indicating that age was not related to 



obtained correlating the collocation information with 
the inclination of developers to like or dislike ASD.  
 5.8 Team attitudes and morale factors 
 Figure 4 also shows team attitudes and morale 
concerning ASD. Around 60% of the respondents 

agree that ASD is working well for them and their 

team. Less than 40% however, agree that ASD is 

working well for the larger group. We discuss some 
reasons why  in Section 7. Less than 20% of the 
respondents say that their team morale has decreased 

due to ASD, and only 10% mention that ASD has 

affected communication (negatively) between the 

development and test teams. 
   Figure 4: Team Attitudes an
d Morale Factors Concerning ASD 
259259 5.9 ASD Benefits  
 We asked the survey participants what they 
thought were the top three benefits and problems with 

Agile Development. Comments from the respondents 

are presented in italicized form to add more contextual 

information as appropriate for our discussion. Table 3 
presents the top 10 problems of ASD as perceived by 
the respondents and the number who cited it as a 

benefit. 
Table 3: Benefits to
 Agile Development 
Methodologies 
1. Improved Communication and 
Coordination 
121 
2. Quick Releases 101 
3. Flexibility of Design 
 Quicker 
Response to Changes 
86 
4. More Reasonable Process 65 
5. Increased Quality 62 
6. Better Customer Focus 50 
7. Improved Focus -- Better 
Prioritization 
28 
8. Increased Productivity 26 
9. Better Morale 23 
10. Testing First 22 
The top benefit was improved communication and 
coordination among team members. Specifically, the 
daily scrums were seen as instrumental, and were 
especially useful to bring testers and developers 


activities was another benefit. One respondent said 

Team members are aware of w
hat each of the others 
is working on

earlier discovery and handling of development issues: 

ter overall communication (quicker discovery of 

 The second most cited benefit was Quick 
Releases. This was a consequence of Continuous 

Integration, a feature of Extreme Programming. 
Developers create demo-able releases every few weeks 
instead of every few months or years. This makes it 

easier to keep track of progress and monitor software 

Software functionality 
progress can be checked an
d monitored much more 
frequently rather than at end of long milestones
.
makes it easier to evaluate th
e value of features and the 
product, provides feedback to improve the product, and 

improves turnaround time for fixing bad bugs. A tester 


When you integrate 
early and often, the 
product can be tested 
early and often, too
 In third place is Flexibility of Design. Developers 
noted that short sprints combined with more emphasis 
on customer feedback led to better agility and 
efficiency in responding to changing requirements, 
internal processes, reorganizations or politics, and 



to commit prematurely (for example, to design 

decisions)

anticipates changes to 
requirements so that they do not destroy a schedule
Flexibility was not solely based on the product, but the 

Ability to change 
directions quickly i.e. cancel a sprint and start 

another.
quick results lead to iteration 
which helps us to fail ch
eaply instead of in an 
expensive way (if we fail).

Agile embraces change, 
which is a fact and part of
 software development
 The fourth most popular benefit of ASD is a More 
Reasonable Process. Many developers complained 

about rigid development processes that were relaxed in 

an Agile environment. Developers wasted less time on 


large specs 
that are out of date b
efore they are finished

this perception may be a reaction to earlier more 

waterfall-like processes used at Microsoft, but some 

may come from the haphazard adoption of Agile 

methodologies by various groups, very few of which 
would characterize themselves as Agile experts. 
Documentation and planning are viewed as just-in-

time and just-enough for the next sprint. One developer 


process improvement 
is built into the 
process

process is more manageable and less bureaucratic than 

real-time 
tracking of progress and ability to adjust future 

forecasts based on real data

more dynamic and incur less overhead. One manager 

said the Agile process costs less.  
Not far behind was Improved Quality. The quality 
of the software is a strong concern of developers. The 
effects were manifested as fewer bugs, and a more 

stable set of features. Test-driven development and test 

automation were seen as factors that contributed to 

higher code quality. All aspects of software are 
improved, from design and architecture to performance 
of the products of each sprint.  Improved 

communication leads to faster turnaround time for 

ongoing 
refactoring leads to high
er code reuse and better 
quality. Rounding out the top ten benefits of Agile 
development were better fo
cus on customers, better 
prioritization of development and focus on the product, 

improved productivity, increased morale (often tied to 

continuous integration with deliverables at the end of 
each sprint), and more reliance on test-driven 
260260 development. The Appendix at the end of the paper 
lists the other perceived benefits of ASD from a 
completeness perspective.  
 5.10 ASD Problems  
 Many developers perceived problems with Agile 
development processes. Table 4 highlights the top 10 
problems with ASD as perceived by the respondents 

and the number who cited it as a problem. 
Table 4: Problems with Agile Development 
Methodologies 
1. Does not scale to larger projects 52 
2. Too many meetings 44 
3. Management  Buy-in 37 
4. Unfamiliar with Agile 36 
5. Coordination with other teams 29 
6. Lose sight of big picture 29 
7. Culture 27 
8. No up-front design, bad design 23 
9. Lack of schedule 19 
10. Dev/Test Integration is Difficult 19 
 The top concern of developers at Microsoft with 
Agile development is whether these methods scale to 
larger software teams. We did not gather data on team 
size of those who said they used Agile development, 
but our data does show that most Agile teams are on 

the same hallway or floor of a building, limiting group 

size to 30 people or so. Several people on the survey 

expressed concern about scaling to group sizes of 
several hundred or even hi
gher. One developer said 

works for small co-located teams, but not 
for complex large projects

larger teams to be as flex
ible as smaller teams with 
respect to design and arch
itectural changes. Scrum 
meetings were sometimes considered inefficient, 
especially when the team was inexperienced with 
Agile, or it was large (over 8-10 people).  

Apprehensions concerning scaling to products with 

long release cycles or large le
gacy codebases were also 
mentioned. 
The second concern was about the Scrum. Scrum 
meetings involve all members of a team and often 

occur daily. Many respondents complained about the 

inefficiency of these meetings, especially when they 

were poorly run by a Scrum Master who was not 

disciplined and focused en
ough to run the meeting 
quickly. We did not correlate whether respondents who 
said that Scrums take too long also said whether they 
get anything positive from the Scrum. Meetings were 
also viewed as ways for managers to micromanage 

what have you done in the last 24 
hours?


Personally for me, the daily 
standup scrum meetings were more distracting than 

helpful. The pressure to dai
ly report percentage of 
progress was uncomfortable, especially when I had to 


actually testing in 
integrated fashion
 Management buy-in was the third concern. Many 
program managers were worried that upper-level 

management would ask for progress reports and 

productivity metrics that would be hard to gather in an 

Agile work environment. Management ignorance of 
Agile methodologies was also a worry. Will Agile 
advantages be able to overcome the well-known 
existing problems in so
ftware development? 
Management sometimes worries that not all 

development teams are cut out for Agile development. 

The flexibility in scheduling afforded by sprints is 
unfamiliar to managers used to hearing about feature 
milestones planned at the beginning of a project. In 

addition, because it is easy to move features to later 

sprints as work piles up, it is not easy to predict when a 


Upper 
management still tries to 
get specific dates for specific 
deliverables
with problems estimating the cost of a project before it 

starts. Sometimes management tries to covertly switch 


want to use an Agile 
devel
engineering process or 
are extremely date-driven 

-
 The fourth concern was an apprehension about 
learning Agile development. Some developers wished 

they had formal training to do Agile, noting that there 

were few training options available to them. Many who 
commented on training appeared to have the idea that 
if they did not do Agile 
perfectly
 then the product or 
process would suffer. Ther
e was also some concern 
that some developers are 
not cut out for Agile: Agile 
requires some interpersonal skills which may not be 
abundant in the IT sector.

role here as social cliques may form and become the 

dominant means of communication between group 
members. Those not in the clique may miss out on 


is simple, but requires a lot of
 discipline from the team

Cultural issues also play into adoption of Agile 

We are not patient enough to make a 
plan, do the design work, then make a schedule, and 

then execute

change in mindset that developers may not be eager to 
undertake. Several developers also note that unless 
261261 there is full adoption by 
the team, Agile methodologies 
do not work very well.   
The fifth concern is about coordinating with other 
teams. This is especially worrisome in larger projects 
where only a few groups are Agile and the rest are 

using a typical Waterfall model. Problems arise in the 

scheduling of deliverables between dependent projects. 

Non-

fully coded and tested, and these milestones are few 
and far between. Agile groups often schedule features 
to be complete during each sprint and may race ahead 

of their non-Agile peers. There is a perception that 

non-Agile groups do not u
nderstand the scheduling 
requirements that Agile groups use and those that they 


Interaction with non-

you can guarantee that all the sprint items will be 
completed because the prio
ritization meeting involves 
very loose time estimates.

modules in the project grows larger, respondents noted 

more difficulty, cost, and time integrating modules into 
the whole.   
Losing sight of the big picture rounds out the top 
six concerns with Agile development. This is because 





than what the 
feature team is trying to achieve.

development items that require more time than a single 

sprint or never rise to high priority can get completely 

forgotten. One developer would like to see a kind of 

forcing function for envisi
oning process beyond one 
or two sprints

concentrate on the design properly; instead of getting it 
right in the first place, teams rely on design 

improvements as they go.  
The rest of the top ten problems include culture 
clashes during Agile adoption, lack of a precise and 

overarching design before the 
project starts, the lack of 
a fixed and predictable schedule, and a perceived 
difficulty integrating developers and testers. The 

Appendix at the end of th
e paper lists the other 
perceived problems of ASD that had a lower frequency 

of occurrence in the problems list.  
 5.11 ASD Attrition  
 Analyzing people who no longer use ASD, 53 
developers had used ASD in the past but no longer use 
it on their current project. They provided a variety of 

reasons. Table 5 lists these 
reasons and the count of the 
respondents who cited them. 
   Table 5: If you used Agile in the past, but do not 
now, why? 
1. 
 23 
2. Not coding anymore 3 
3. Management in the way 3 
4. Practice something similar to Agile 3 
5. Tried to introduce Agile, but failed 3 
6. Hard to coordinate with non-Agile teams 2 
7. Agile projects suffer from poor design 2 
8. Used Agile in school but not anymore 2 
The most common reason was that they had 
switched jobs and their current team no longer used 

Agile. Some were no longer programming, thus Agile 

did not make sense. A couple had used Agile 
development in school, bu
t did not join an Agile 
development group. A few used practices that were 
similar to Agile, such as buddy reviews instead of pair 
programming and unit testing instead of TDD. Several 

tried to introduce Agile development to their team, but 

failed either in management buy-in or in the actual 

implementation of Agile, so it was abandoned. Some 
others expressed concerns similar to those reported 
above about the problems with Agile development. 

These included the difficulty coordinating with other 

non-Agile teams, and the lack of good design for Agile 

projects. Other lesser-reported reasons were difficulties 

starting Agile due to workload, too much legacy code, 
too much documentation to write or to not finding 
enough people who could adapt to Agile.  
 6. Threats to Validity 
From an internal validity point of view the study 
was conducted by two 
researchers at Microsoft 
Research. Microsoft Researc
h is a parallel organization 
when compared to the Microsoft product groups. 
Neither of the two authors, nor any of the respondents 
shares any common management nor are they part of 

the same management chain. The survey was 

conducted anonymously, and there was no necessity 

for the respondents to answer for/against ASD. The 

benefits and problems were self-reported in free-form 
to remove any bias that could have been introduced by 
the authors asking the respondents to pick the benefits 

and problems of ASD from a list. Furthermore, the 
authors have no influence on the use or perception of 
ASD in the product groups. Another threat to internal 

validity would be that people practicing ASD would 
have been more likely to respond to a survey on ASD. 
Two other threats to internal validity are on 
statistics for number of people using ASD on legacy 

systems. It is possible that this might be a reflection of 
the organizational layout of Microsoft/any other large 
software company.   Additionally we do not have 
262262 
be a flexible and not necessarily reflected by the 
management hierarchy. We plan to address these 
issues in our future work. 
From an external validity point of view, this study 
is based on only one large organization. But within that 

organization, our respondents are from various groups 

that are involved all the way from designing operating 

systems to games to web service applications.  
Drawing general conclusions from empirical studies in 
software engineering is difficult because any process 

depends to a large degree 
on a potentially large number 
of relevant context variables.  For this reason, we 

cannot assume a priori that the results of our study 

generalize beyond the specific environment in which it 
was conducted [3].  Researchers become more 
confident in a theory when similar findings emerge in 
different contexts [3]. Towards this end we intend that 

our case study will be replicated in different software 

organizations. The future work section discusses this 

aspect in more detail. 
 7. Conclusions and future work  
 To summarize our main findings, around one-
third of respondents are using ASD methodologies in 

some form. The Scrum methodology is by far the most 

popular, with 65% of respondents using it on their 

software teams. Our respondents were fairly 

experienced with a mean work experience in the 
software profession of 9.2 years.
 Team working on 
legacy systems were used ASD. Out of 14 ASD 
practices, 60% of respondents used 12 or more of 

them. The two least used practices are test-driven 

development and pair programming.   
Respondents also told us what they liked and 
disliked about ASD methodologies. Most view ASD 
favorably due to improved communication between 

team members, quick releases and the flexibility of 

designs in the Agile process. On the other hand, 

developers worry about scal
ing Agile to larger projects 
(greater than 20-30 members), attending too many 
meetings which contribute to
 excessive overhead, and 
experiencing difficulty getting management to buy into 

ASD methods. Some respondents no longer use ASD, 

but have in the past. Usually this was due to switching 
jobs to a group that did not practice ASD, but was also 
due to difficulties 

Agile. Some tried it and failed to make it work, some 

had trouble with gaining management buy-in and 

others adapted Agile beyond recognition until they felt 



not specifically Agile. In
 general, there was an 
impression by developers that there was a one true way 
to practice ASD and if they were not following this 
way to the letter, that they were somehow doing it 
wrong and would engender unforeseen consequences. 
This is somewhat ironic since Agile methods are above 
all supposed to be ad
aptive to the needs of the project.  
The results of our study contribute to our 
understanding of how ASD methodologies are being 

implemented in the workp
lace. Our research goals are 
to understand first the state 
of the practice at Microsoft 
and delve into the details fr
om there. The follow up 
work for our analysis is outlined below:  
 Scaling: In prior reported results on the use of 
ASD, teams have typically between 2-20 
members. Teams at Microsoft and other 

companies can be much larger, between 500-

5000. We would like to investigate how Agile 
can be adapted to work for these large teams.  
 Coordination:
 In large companies Agile is 
not adopted simultaneously by all teams. We 
plan to study how Agile teams coordinate 

dependencies and deliverable with non-Agile 

teams.  
 Empirical body of knowledge:
 Collaborate 
with people in the empirical community to 
replicate these studies in industry and 

academia to build an empirical body of 

knowledge about the various facets of ASD. 
 Product and process measurement:
 Measuring product measures (LOC, 
complexity, failures etc.) and process 
measures (productivity, requirement volatility 
etc.) for ASD projects to compare against 
non-ASD projects. This would enable us to 

identify the proper contexts in which ASD 
should be used. 
 Tools and resources:
 Identify areas to 
develop tools for ASD to improve 

communication, quality and scheduling and 

estimation. 
 Ethnographic studies:
 Now that we know 
what methodologies are used, we can conduct 
interviews and study groups using 

ethnographic techniques to learn how to 

identify and alleviate some of the more 
specific problems they face deploying ASD. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank the anonymous respondents at 
Microsoft for the feedback that made this paper 

possible. We would also like to thank Rob DeLine, 

Gina Venolia and Tom Ball for their support and 
feedback on this work.  
  263263 Contact 
Researchers interested in replicating this study should 
contact the authors:  an
drew.begel@microsoft.com, 
nachin@microsoft.com to obtain an editable/reusable 
copy of the survey.  
References 
[1] P. Abrahamsson, Koskela, J., "Extreme 
Programming: A Survey of Empirical Data from a 
Controlled Case Study",  Proceedings  of 

International Symposium on Empirical Software 

Engineering, pp. 73-82, 2004. 
[2] E. Arisholm, Gallis, H.E., Dybå, T., Sjøberg, D., 
"Evaluating Pair Programming with Respect to 
System Complexity and Programmer Expertise", 
IEEE Transactions in 
Software Engineering
,  33(2), pp. 65-86, 2007. 
[3] V. Basili, Shull, F.,
Lanubile, F., "Building 
Knowledge through Families of Experiments", 
IEEE Transactions on Sof
tware Engineering
,  25(4), pp. 456-473, 1999. 
[4] K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained:  
Embrace Change
, Second ed. Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley, 2005. 
[5] K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained:  
Embrace Change
. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley, 2000. 
[6] J. Carver, Jaccheri, L
., Morasca, S., and Shull, F., 
"Issues Using Students in Empirical Studies in 

Software Engineering Education ",  Proceedings  
of IEEE Metrics, pp. 239-249, 2003. 
[7] A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development
. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison Wesley 

Longman, 2001. 
[8] A. Cockburn, 
Crystal Clear: A Human-Powered 
Methodology for Small Teams
: Addison Wesley, 
2004. 
[9] T. D. LaToza, Venolia, G., DeLine, R., 
"Maintaining mental models: a study of developer 
work habits",  Proceedings  of International 
Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 492-
501, 2006. 
[10] L. Layman, L. Williams, and L. Cunningham, 
"Motivations and Measurem
ents in an Agile Case 
Study",  Proceedings  of ACM SIGSOFT 

Foundation in Software Engineering Workshop 
Quantitative Techniques for Software Agile 
Processes (QTE-SWAP), Newport Beach, CA, 

2004. 
[11] F. Maurer and S. Martel, "Extreme Programming:  
Rapid Development for Web-Based Applications", 

IEEE Internet Computing,  6(1), pp. 86-91, 
Jan/Feb 2002. 
[12] E. M. Maximilien and L. Williams, "Assessing 
Test-driven Development at IBM",  Proceedings  

of International Conference of Software 

Engineering, Portland, OR, pp. 564-569, 2003. 
[13] G. Melnik, Maurer, F., "A Cross-Program 
Investigation of Students' Perceptions of Agile 
Methods",  Proceedings  of International 

Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 481-

488, 2005. 
[14] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, 
Agile Software 
Development with SCRUM
: Prentice-Hall, 2002. 
[15] H. Sharp, Robinson, H., "An Ethnographic Study 
of XP Practice", 
Empirical Software Engineering
,  9(4), pp. 353-375, 2004. 
[16] M. Stephens, Rosenberg, D., 
Extreme 
Programming Refactored: The Case Against XP
: Apress, 2003. 
[17] L. Williams, W. Krebs, L. Layman, A. Antón, and 
P. Abrahamsson, "Toward a Framework for 

Evaluating Extreme Programming",  Proceedings  

of Empirical Assessment in Software Eng. 

(EASE) 2004, Edinburgh, Scot., pp. 11-20, 2004. 
  264264