 Strength of Evidence in Systematic Reviews in Software Engineering  Tore Dybå SINTEF ICT NO-7465 Trondheim, Norway Tel. +47 73 59 29 47 tore.dyba@sintef.no Torgeir Dingsøyr SINTEF ICT NO-7465 Trondheim, Norway Tel. +47 73 59 70 72 torgeir.dingsoyr@sintef.no  ABSTRACT Systematic reviews are only as
 good as the evidence they are 
based on. It is important, theref
ore, that users of systematic 
reviews know how much confidence they can place in the 

conclusions and recommendations ar
ising from such reviews. In 
this paper we present an overview of some of the most influential 

systems for assessing the quality of individual primary studies and 

for grading the overall strength of a body of evidence. We also 

present an example of the use of such systems based on a 

systematic review of empirical studies of agile software 

development.  Our findings suggest 
that the systems used in other 
disciplines for grading the strength of evidence for and reporting 

of systematic reviews, especia
lly those that take account of 
qualitative and observational studies are of particular relevance 

for software engineering. Categories and Subject Descriptors D.3 [Software Engineering
] General Terms Management, Measurement, Experimentation, Theory. 
Keywords
 Systematic Review, Quality Asse
ssment, Strength of Evidence. 
1. INTRODUCTION Systematic reviews are currently
 gaining popularity in software 
engineering, with reviews recen
tly published on diverse topics 
including requirement elicitation [
11], web engineering [40], cost 
estimation [27], and agile software
 development [15], as well as 
various aspects related to software
 engineering experiments, such 
as statistical power [17], theory use [22], effect size [28], and 

quasi-experimentation [29], Such 
reviews are important, as the 
volume of research that needs to be considered by software engi-

neering (SE) practitioners and re
searchers is constantly expand-
ing.  In many areas it has become almost impossible for the individual 
to read, critically evaluate, and synthesize the state of current 

knowledge, let alone keep updating this on a regular basis. As a 
result, reviews have become esse
ntial tools for anyone who wants 
to keep up with the new evidence that is accumulating in his or 

her fields of interest. Reviews are also required to identify areas 

where the available evidence is insufficient and further studies are 

required. However, because of the often poor quality of traditional 

narrative reviews, there has recently been an increasing focus on 

formal methods of systematically
 reviewing studies [9], [23], 
[30], [32], [43], [45]. 
Systematic reviews (SRs) evaluate and interpret the available 
research relevant to a particular research question, topic area, or 

phenomenon of interest [4], [32]. Th
is is useful, in evidence-based software engineering (EBSE), wh
ich aims to improve decision 
making related to software devel
opment and maintenance by inte-
grating current best evidence from research with practical experi-

ence and human values [18], [34]. 
This is an ambitious aim, par-
ticularly because the gap between research and practice can be 

wide. EBSE seeks to close this gap by encouraging a stronger 

emphasis on methodological rigor wh
ile focusing on relevance for 
practice.  SRs are a key tool for enabling evidence-based practice as they 
bring together, and combine, the findings from multiple studies.  

The quality of the primary studies in software engineering, 

however, is often poor [35], [47]. A central issue is then how 

much confidence we can place in the conclusions and 

recommendations arising from systematic reviews. 
In this paper we present an overview of some of the most influen-
tial systems for assessing the quality of individual primary studies 

and for grading the overall strength of a body of evidence. We 

present an example of the use of such systems based on a system-

atic review of empirical studies
 of agile software development 
[15]. The remainder of this paper 
is organized as follows: Section 
2 described systematic reviews in 
more detail, Section 3 presents 
methods to assess the quality of primary studies, Section 4 con-

cerns grading the strength of a body of evidence, and Section 

5.presents measures to assess th
e quality of systematic reviews. 
Finally, Section 6 concludes w
ith recommendations for carrying 
out systematic reviews in
 software engineering. 2. WHAT ARE SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS A systematic review is a concise summary of the best available 
evidence that uses explicit and 
rigorous methods to identify, 
critically appraise, and synthesize 
relevant studies on a particular 
topic. These methods are defined 
in advance and documented in a 
protocol so that others can critically appraise and replicate the 

review.  Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 

otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ESEM™08
, October 9Œ10, 2008, Kaiserslautern, Germany. 
Copyright 2008 ACM  978-1-59593-971-5/08/10...$5.00  Table 1. Stages of the SR process [32] 1. Planning the review 
a. Identification of the need for a review 

b. Development of a review protocol 
2. Conducting the review 
a. Identification of research 

b. Selection of primary studies 

c. Study quality assessment 

d. Data extraction 

e. Data synthesis 
3. Reporting the review 
 The strength of the SR methods lies in their explicit attempt to 

minimize the chances of drawing wrong or misleading 

conclusions as a result of biases 
in primary studies or from biases 
arising from the review process itsel
f [19], [43], [45]. This is the 
key feature that distinguishes SRs from traditional narrative 

reviews. SRs of multiple studies help esta
blish whether scientific findings 
are consistent and can be gene
ralized across populations, settings, 
and treatment variations, or whet
her findings vary by particular 
subsets. SRs can also identify cruc
ial questions that have not been 
adequately addressed with past empirical research. 
Kitchenham and Charters [32] de
scribe a systematic review 
process in three stages as in Table 1. We give a brief overview of 

the first two steps, and relate the steps to experience reports from 

research groups who have carried out systematic reviews. 
Planning the review includes de
fining explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria, which specify the types of study designs, 

interventions, populations, and outcomes that will be included in 

the review. A systematic search strategy [12] specifies the 

keyword strings and sources used
 to find relevant studies in 
bibliographic databases and ot
her electronic sources. Several 
databases must usually be sear
ched in order to assure good 
coverage on the topic [2]. It may 
also be necessary to search key 
journals and conference proceedings by hand to identify relevant 

studies that are not fully indexed. The search may be bounded by 

dates, journals, databa
ses, and so forth, as long as the search 
procedures are transparent and replicable. 
Staples and Niazi [49] discuss th
eir use of an earlier version of 
Kitchenham and Charter™s guidelines
 [32] for systematic review, 
and recommend using clear and narrow research questions when 

carrying out reviews. Brereton 
et al
. [6] discuss problems 
encountered when doing systematic
 reviews, and in particular 
found problems with the quality of the software engineering 

indexing databases. In the second stage, when conducting the review, decisions about 
full text retrieval, study eligibility, and coding are most often 

made by two independent reviewers to increase reliability. 

Similarly, data from primary outcome studies are extracted by 

independent reviewers onto paper or
 electronic forms. These data 
typically include characteristics of the study design, interventions, 

sample, outcome measures, and findings. Dybå 
et al
. [16] discussed challe
nges with assessing and 
synthesizing qualitative studies, us
ing Noblit and Hare™s [44] 
seven-step process for meta-et
hnography. Noblit and Hare further 
distinguish between integrative and interpretive reviews. Integrative reviews are concerned with combining or 
summarizing data for the purpose of
 creating generalizations [10]. 
It involves techniques, such as me
ta-analysis, that are concerned 
with assembling and pooling well sp
ecified data, or less formal 
techniques, such as providing a descriptive account of the data. Interpretive reviews, on the othe
r hand, achieve synthesis through 
subsuming the concepts identified 
in the primary studies into a 
higher-order theoretical structure (meta-ethnography). The 

primary concern is with the devel
opment of concepts and theories 
that integrate those concepts. 
An interpretive synthesis will 
therefore avoid specifying concepts in advance of the synthesis, 

but rather ground concepts in the data reported in the primary 

studies [14]. 
Noblit and Hare suggest that integrative reviews are primarily 
suitable for synthesizing quantitative studies, while interpretive 

reviews are more suitable for synthesizing qualitative studies [44]. 

Still, whilst most forms of synthesis can be characterized as being 

either primarily interpretive or
 primarily integrative, every 
integrative synthesis will include 
elements of interpretation, and 
every interpretive synthesis will include elements of aggregation 

of data. The nature of the prim
ary studies will affect how the 
quality of the primary studies is evaluated, and also how the 

overall strength of the body of evidence is graded. 
3. ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF PRIMARY STUDIES Quality assessment of primary studies is necessary to limit bias in 
conducting the systematic review, to gain insight into potential 

comparisons, and to guide interpretation of findings [23], [32]. 
Assessing the quality of a study is not straightforward, however, 
as there is no general, agreed 
upon definition of ﬁquality.ﬂ There 
are also common problems in appraising the quality of published 

research as journal articles and, in particular, conference papers 

rarely provide enough detail of the methods used due to space 

limitations in journal volumes and conference proceedings. There 

is therefore a danger that what is being assessed is the quality of 

reporting rather than the quality of research. 
In general, the ﬁqualityﬂ of a study is closely linked to the 
research methods used and the validity of the findings generated 

by the study. In this sense, quality 
refers to the extent to which the design, conduct, and analysis of 
the primary studies are likely to 
prevent systematic errors or bias [23]. Since biased primary 

studies are more likely to provide misleading results, they are also 

likely to generate misleading systematic reviews. Therefore, it is 

important that reviewers critically appraise the methods of all 

primary studies. 
3.1 Issues of Validity and Bias In the context of a systematic review, the validity of a study is the 
extent to which its design and conduct are likely to prevent 

systematic errors, or bias [23]. The validity of a study may be 

considered to have two dimensions
. The first is whether the study 
is asking an appropriate research 
question. This is often described 
as ﬁexternal validityﬂ, and its 
assessment depends on the purpose 
for which the study is to be us
ed. External validity is closely 
connected with the generalizability or applicability of a study™s 

findings. The second dimension of a study™s validity relates to 

whether it answers its research question in a manner free from 
 bias. This is often described as 
ﬁinternal validityﬂ, and it is this 
aspect of validity that is particularly relevant for assessing the 

quality of primary studies. 
A bias is a systematic error, or deviation from the ﬁtruthﬂ, in 
results or inferences. Biases can 
vary in magnitude and direction: 
Some are small and trivial, others are substantial; some lead to 

underestimation while others lead 
to overestimation of the true 
intervention effect. There is also 
evidence that particular flaws in 
the design, conduct and analysis of 
empirical studies lead to bias 
[23]. There are particularly three methodological features that 

have been shown to influence 
the results of primary studies: 
randomization, blinding, and loss to follow-up [25], [29].  
The aim of randomization is to 
avoid selection bias by making 
sure that each subject in the study has an equal chance of getting 

into each treatment group. In addition, steps must be taken to 

conceal the treatment sequence in order to preventing fore-

knowledge of the forthcoming allocations. We concur with Laitenberger and Rombach [37] who claim that 
quasi-experiments (in which study units are assigned to 
experimental groups non-random
ly) represent a promising 
approach to increasing the amount 
of empirical studies in the SE 
industry. We also concur with 
Kitchenham [31] who suggests that 
researchers in SE need to become more familiar with the variety 

of quasi-experimental designs, b
ecause they offer opportunities to 
improve the rigor of large-scale industrial studies. However, a recent systematic review of quasi-experiments in SE 
emphasizes the importance of payi
ng attention to selection bias, 
and showed that quasi-experiment
s might lead to results other 
than those of randomized experime
nts [29]. It is important, there-
fore, that quasi-experimental 
studies are well designed and 
analyzed to control for selection bias. 
Blinding of study participants and personnel may reduce the risk 
that knowledge of which treatment was received, rather than the 

treatment itself, affects outcomes and outcome measurements 

[25]. Blinding can be especially important for assessment of 

subjective outcomes, and can also ensure that treatment groups 

receive a similar amount of attention. Blinding may also be 

important in studies in which en
thusiasm for participation or 
follow-up may be influenced by group allocation [23]. 
However, adequate blinding, in 
order to reduce experimenter and 
subject bias, is generally impossi
ble in SE studies that rely on 
subjects performing human-intensive tasks [34]. Still, we can use 

blinding in a number of ways to reduce the opportunity for bias 

by reducing the direct interaction between subjects and 

experimenters during the course of
 an experiment. Techniques to 
consider include blind allocation 
of material, blind marking, and 
blind data collection and analysis [34], [35]. 
Missing outcome data, due to a
ttrition (withdrawal and dropout) 
during the study or exclusions from the analysis, raise the 

possibility that the observed effect 
estimate is biased. However, if 
outcome data are missing in all treatment groups, but reasons for 

these are both reported and balanced across groups, then 

important bias would not be e
xpected unless the reasons have 
different implications in the compared groups [23]. 
There are other sources of bias that are relevant only in certain 
circumstances. Some can be found only in particular research 

designs; some can be found across a broad spectrum of designs, 
but only for specific circumstances; and there may be sources of 
bias that are only found in a particular industrial setting.  
Lee [38] and Klein and Myers [36]
, for example, discuss issues 
related to the quality of case studies and interpretative case 

studies. Tactics to reduce bias in such studies include: 
 Multiple data sources and triangulation.  Natural controls by using what
 is happening in the case to check rival theories. 
 Member checking by presenting 
results to informants to 
reveal misunderstandings by the researchers. 
 Use of alternative theories to explain the data from the case. 
A final concern is biased rep
lications. Although we encourage 
replications of important SE st
udies, such replications should 
preferably be conducted by others than those conducting the 

original study in order to avoid bias. An example of the 

importance of such independent re
plications is the 15 differential 
replications of controlled experime
nts in SE identified by Sjøberg 
et al
. [48]. Among these replications, 
seven of eight replications 
carried out by the same authors confirmed the results of the 

original experiments, while only one
 of seven replications carried 
out by other researchers confirmed the original results. This 

finding might be explained by studies that evaluate the ability to 

learn from experience, which have demonstrated biases that 

prevent people from using the information provided by such 

experience. Such biases include preferences for confirmatory 

evidence, assumptions about causality, and a disregard of 

negative information [5]. 
For all potential sources of bias 
it is important to consider the 
likely magnitude and direction of 
the bias. A useful classification 
of bias is into selection bias
, performance bias, attrition bias, 
detection bias, and reporting bias (
Error! Reference source not 
found.). 3.2 Assessment Tools and Checklists There are a multitude of guidelines, 
tools, and checklists that can 
be used in assessing the quality of primary studies. Some of these 

build on the main threats to validity in experimental and quasi-

experimental designs identified 
by Campbell and colleagues [7], 
[8], [46] while others focuses on the methodological characteris-

tics of the study, e.g., [21] and [32]. 
One of the most well-known and widely used scales for assessing 
randomized controlled trials is 
the scale developed by Jadad 
et al
. [25]. This scale reflects the main biases mentioned in the previous 

section and consists of only 
three, but important, items: 
Table 2. Types of bias [23] 
Selection bias: Systematic differences between the groups that 
are compared. Performance bias: Systematic differences between groups or in 
exposure to factors other than the treatment. Attrition bias
: Systematic differences between groups in 
withdrawals from a study. 
Detection bias: Systematic differences between groups in how 
outcomes are determined. Reporting bias: Systematic differences between reported and 
unreported findings.   Was the study described as randomized? 
 Was the study described as double blind? 
 Was there a description of withdrawals and dropouts? 
Another widely used tool in the medical community is the 
CONSORT statement
1 for improving the quality of reports of 
parallel-group randomized trials 
[41]. The CONSORT statement 
consists of 22 checklist items pert
aining to the content of the title, 
abstract, introduction, methods, resu
lts, and discussion sections of 
a paper. The statement also includes a flow diagram that depicts 

information from four stages of a trial: enrollment, intervention 

allocation, follow-up, and analysis.  
In addition to a tool for assessi
ng randomized controlled trials, the 
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP)
2, at the Public 
Health Resource Unit in Oxford, has developed a set of tools to 

help with the process of critically appraising articles of the 

following types of research: Systematic Reviews, Qualitative 

Research, Economic Evaluation 
Studies, Cohort Studies, Case Control Studies, and Diagnostic Test Studies.  Sjøberg et al
. [47] discuss measures to increase the quality of 
empirical studies in SE in
 general, while Kitchenham 
et al
. [35] 
have proposed a set of more conc
rete guidelines. These guidelines 
are intended to assist researchers, reviewers, and meta-analysts in 

designing, conducting, and evalua
ting empirical studies, and are 
based on a review of research 
guidelines developed for medical 
researchers and the authors™ own experience in doing and 

reviewing SE research.  
Based on a survey of guidelines from other disciplines, 
Jedlitschka and Pfahl [26] proposed a set of reporting guidelines 

for controlled experiments in SE. Recently, Kitchenham 
et al
. [33] evaluated these guidelines and concluded that the current 

guidelines need to be revised and then subjected to further 

theoretical and empirical validati
on. Höst and Runeson [24] have 
suggested a checklist to use in cas
e studies in SE, while the recent 
special issue of 
Information and Software Technology on 
qualitative SE research [13] provides several useful examples of 

approaches for study designs, data collection, and analysis that 

should be relevant for increasing the quality of qualitative studies. 
3.3 Example of Quality Assessment of SE Studies An example of the use of quality assessment of primary studies in 
SE is our systematic review of em
pirical studies of agile software 
development [15]. As part of that
 systematic review, both authors 
independently assessed the quality of the primary studies accord-

ing to eleven criteria (Table 3). These criteria were informed by 

CASP and by principles of good practice for conducting empirical 

research in SE proposed by Kitchenham 
et al
. [35]. The eleven 
criteria used to assess the quality of the studies covered four main 

issues: 
 Reporting: Three criteria (1-3) were related to the quality of 
the reporting of a study™s rationale, aims, and context. 
 Rigor: Five criteria (4-8) were related to the rigor of the 
research methods employed to 
establish the validity of data 
                                                                
 1 http://www.consort-statement.org 
2 http://www.phru.nhs.uk/Pages/PHD/CASP.htm 
collection tools and the analysis methods, and hence the 
trustworthiness of the findings.  Credibility: Two criteria (9-10) were related to the 
assessment of the credibility of the study methods for 

ensuring that the findings were valid and meaningful.  Relevance: The final criterion (11) was related to the 
assessment of the relevance of the study for the software 

industry at large and th
e research community. 
Taken together, these criteria provided a measure of the extent to 
which we could be confident that
 a particular study™s findings 
could make a valuable contribu
tion to the review. A general 
observation was that we frequently
 found that methods were not 
well described; issues of bias, 
validity, and reliability were not 
always addressed; and methods of
 data collection and analysis 
were often not explained well. The grading of each of the eleven criteria was done on a dichoto-
mous scale with ﬁ1ﬂ awarded to 
a study when a question could be 
answered as ﬁyesﬂ and ﬁ0ﬂ when the answer was ﬁnoﬂ. The 

overall results of the quality assessment for the 33 studies 

included in the SR are shown in the parentheses in Table 3. As we 

only included research papers in th
e review, all studies were rated 
as OK on the first screening criterion. However, two of the 

included studies still did not have a clear statement of the aims of 

the research. All studies had some 
form of description of the con-
text in which the research was carried out. For three of the 

studies, the chosen research desi
gn did not seem appropriate to 
the aims of the research. As ma
ny as 25 out of the 33 primary 
studies did not have a recru
itment strategy that seemed 
appropriate for the aims stated for the research. Ten of the studies 

included one or more groups with which to compare agile 

methods. Seven and eight studies, re
spectively, did not adequately 
describe their data collection and data analysis procedures. In 

only one study was the recognition of any possibility of 

researcher bias mentioned. 
Table 3. Quality assessment of 33 SE studies [15] 
1. Is the paper based on research 
(or is it merely a ﬁlessons 
learnedﬂ report based on expert opinion)? (33) 2. Is there a clear statement of 
the aims of the research? (31) 3. Is there an adequate description of the context in which the 
research was carried out? (33) 
4. Was the research design appropriate to address the aims of 
the research? (30) 5. Was the recruitment strategy appropriate to the aims of the 
research? (8) 6. Was there a control group with which to compare 
treatments? (10) 7. Was the data collected in a way that addressed the research 
issue? (26) 8. Was the data analysis sufficiently rigorous? (25) 

9. Has the relationship between researcher and participants 
been adequately considered? (1) 
10. Is there a clear statement of findings? (33) 

11. Is the study of value for research or practice? (33) 
  4. GRADING THE STRENGTH OF A BODY OF EVIDENCE Several systems exist for making 
judgments about the strength of 
evidence in systematic reviews (see [20] for an overview). Most 

of these systems suggest that the strength of evidence can be 

based on a hierarchy with evidence from systematic reviews and 

randomized experiments at the top of the hierarchy and evidence 

from observational studies and expe
rt opinion at the bottom of the 
hierarchy [36]. The inherent w
eakness with evidence hierarchies 
is that randomized experiments are not always feasible and that, 

in some instances, observationa
l studies may provide better 
evidence. 4.1 The GRADE Approach To cope with the weaknesses of 
evidence hierarchies, the Grades 
of Recommendation Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) Working Group has developed a system for grading the 
quality of evidence and strength of recommendations [20]. 

Several organizations, including the World Health Organization 
(WHO), have adopted the GRADE system, either in its original 

format or with minor modifications. The British Medical Journal 

(BMJ) encourages their authors to use the GRADE system and, 

recently, the Cochrane Collaboration has adopted the principles of 

the GRADE system for evaluating the quality of evidence for 

outcomes reported in systematic reviews [23]. 
The GRADE approach defines the quality of a body of evidence 
as the extent to which one can be confident that an estimate of 

effect or association is correct. Judgments about the quality of 

evidence involve considerations of
 the validity of the results of 
individual primary studies.  
The GRADE approach specifies four grades of evidence (Table 
4). The highest quality evidence comes from one or more well-

designed and well-executed randomi
zed controlled trials (RCTs) 
yielding consistent and directly 
applicable results. However, RCT 
evidence can be ﬁdowngradedﬂ to moderate, low, or even very 

low quality evidence, depending on the seriousness of the 

limitations of the study. If there are very severe problems, RCT 

evidence may fall by more than one level. Evidence from sound 

observational studies will generally be graded as low quality. If, 

however, such studies yield large effects and there is no obvious 

bias explaining those effects, 
review authors may rate the 
evidence as moderate or even Œ if
 the effect is large enough Œ high quality.  
The very low quality category includes poorly controlled 
observational studies and unsystema
tic clinical observations (e.g. 
case series or case reports). The system also clarifies that expert 

opinion is not a category of eviden
ce, but rather represents an 
interpretation of evidence. 4.2 Factors that Decrease the Strength of Evidence According to GRADE, the following factors may decrease the 
strength of a body of evidence (Table 5): 
1. Limitations to study quality
. Our confidence in an 
estimate of effect decreases if the studies have major 

deficiencies that are likely to result in a biased assessment 

of the treatment effect. For controlled experiments, these 
methodological limitations include
 lack of randomization, 
lack of allocation concealment, lack of blinding with 

subjective outcomes highly susceptible to bias, or large loss 

to follow-up. 2. Inconsistency of results
. When studies yield important 
unexplained inconsistency in th
e results, our confidence in 
the estimate of effect for that outcome decreases. Such 

inconsistencies include differences in the direction of effect, 

the size of the differences in effect, and the significance of 

the differences. 3. Uncertainty about directness
. Directness refers to the 
extent to which the subjects, settings, treatments, and 

outcome measures are similar to those of interest. 

Uncertainty about directness arises, e.g., when the subjects 

of interest are experienced professionals in industry while 

those in the studies are novices or students at universities. 

Indirectness may also apply to
 the treatments and outcomes 
when, e.g., small artificial tasks are used in the studies, 

while the systems of interest are large-scale industrial 

systems, or when defect counts are used as a surrogate for 

product quality. 
4. Imprecise or sparse data
. Data are considered sparse if the 
results include just a few subjects or observations. Data are 

imprecise if the confidence intervals are sufficiently wide 

that an estimate is consistent
 with either important net 
benefits or harms and thus 
consistent with divergent 
recommendations.  Table 4. Strength of evidence in the GRADE system [20] 
High Further research is very unlikely to change our 
confidence in the estimate of effect. Moderate Further research is likely to have an important 
impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect 
and may change the estimate. 
Low Further research is very likely to have an 
important impact on our confidence in the 
estimate of effect and is likely to change the 

estimate. Very low Any estimate of effect is very uncertain. 
Table 5. Factors that may decrease or increase the strength of 
evidence [20] 
Factors that may decrease the strength of evidence: 
 Serious (Œ1) or very serious (Œ2) limitations to study quality 
 Important inconsistency (Œ1) 
 Some (Œ1) or major (Œ2) uncertainty about directness 
 Imprecise or sparse data (Œ1) 
 High probability of reporting bias (Œ1) 
Factors that may increase the strength of evidence: 
 Strong evidence of association (RR > 2 or RR < 0.5) based on 
consistent evidence from two 
or more observational studies, with no plausible confounders (+1) 
 Very strong evidence of association (RR > 5 or RR < 0.2) 
based on direct evidence with no major threats to validity (+2) 
 Evidence of a dose re
sponse gradient (+1)  All plausible confounders would have reduced the effect (+1) 
RR = relative risk 
 5. Reporting bias
. The strength of evidence may be reduced if 
researchers fail to report studies or outcomes on the basis of 

result. Reporting bias also in
cludes selected reporting of 
subgroup analyses or adjusted analyses. A prototypical 

situation that may elicit suspicion of reporting bias is when 

published evidence includes a number of small studies, all 
of which are industry funded [3]. 
These factors act cumulatively, e.g., if randomized experiments 
have both serious limitations and 
there is uncertainty about the 
directness of the evidence, the grade of evidence would drop from 

high to low. 4.3 Factors that Increase the Strength of Evidence Although observational studies will generally yield low-quality 
evidence, the presence of certain factors could ‚upgrade™ such 

evidence as moderate or even high quality (Table 5): 
1. Strong or very strong evidence of association
. When 
methodologically strong observational studies yield large or 

very large, consistent and precise estimates of the 

magnitude of a treatment effect, one may be particularly 

confident in the results. The magn
itude of the effect in these 
studies may move the assigned grade of evidence from low 

to moderate if the effect is large in the absence of other 

methodological limitations, or grade the quality as high if 

the effect is very large in the absence of other 

methodological limitations. 2. Presence of a dose-response gradient
. The presence of a 
dose-response gradient may also
 increase our confidence in 
the findings of observational 
studies and thereby increase 
the strength of evidence. 
3. Underestimation of effect
. On occasions, all plausible 
biases from observational studi
es or experiments may be 
working to underestimate an apparent treatment effect. For 

example, if only novice developers receive an experimental 

treatment, yet they still fare better, it is likely that the actual 

treatment effect is larger than the data suggest. For instance, 

in a large quasi-experiment 
of pair programming conducted 
by Arisholm 
et al
. [1] it is possible that the benefits of pair 
programming will exceed the results obtained in this 

experiment for larger, more co
mplex tasks and if the pair 
programmers have a chance to work together over a longer 

period of time. 4.4 Application of the GRADE System in SE To the best of our knowledge, there is only one example, so far, 
on the use of the GRADE system to grade the strength of a body 

of evidence in SE. In the systematic review of empirical studies of 

agile software development [15], 
we applied GRADE to rate the 
overall strength of evidence. We combined the four basic 

components of study design, st
udy quality, consistency, and 
directness to grade the strength of the evidence regarding the 

benefits and limitations of ag
ile methods, and for decisions 
related to their adoption. Regarding study design, there were
 only three experiments in the 
review (two randomized trials), 
while the remaining studies were 
observational. Consequently, our initial categorization of the total 
evidence in the review based on study design was low.  
With respect to the quality of the studies, methods were not, in 
general, described well; issues 
of bias, validity, and reliability 
were not always addressed; and 
methods of data collection and 
analysis were often not explained 
well. As many as 25 out of the 
33 primary studies did not have a recruitment strategy that 

seemed appropriate for the aims stated for the research and 23 of 

the studies did not use other groups or baselines with which to 

compare their findings. Furthermore, in only one study was the 

possibility of researcher bias men
tioned. Using these findings as a 
basis, we concluded that there 
were serious limitations to the 
quality of the studies that inevitabl
y increases the risk of bias or 
confounding and that we must be 
circumspect about the studies™ 
reliability. 
With respect to consistency, i.e
., the similarity of estimates of 
effect across studies, we found differences in both the direction of 

effects and the size of the differences in effects, i.e., we found no 

consistent evidence of association from two or more studies with 

no plausible confounders nor did we find direct evidence from 

studies with no major threats to
 validity. These inconsistencies 
might have been due to imprecise
 or sparse data, and reporting 
bias. With respect to directness, i.e., the extent to which the people, 
interventions, and outcome measur
es are similar to those of 
interest, we found that most studies
 were concerned with XP. This 
left us with an uncertainty about the directness of evidence for 

other agile methods. However, sin
ce most of the studies regarding 
XP were performed with student
 subjects or professionals who 
had little or no experience in agile development, this also raised 

an issue regarding the directness of evidence for XP. In addition, 

very few studies provided direct comparisons of interventions; 

hence, we had to make compar
isons across studies. However, 
such indirect comparisons leave greater uncertainty than direct 

comparisons because of all the other differences between studies 

that can affect the results. Our j
udgment was thus that there were 
major uncertainties about the directness of the included studies. Combining the four components of study design, study quality, 
consistency, and directness, we
 found that the strength of the 
evidence in the review regarding 
the benefits and limitations of 
agile methods, and for decisions 
related to their adoption, was 
very low. This means that any estimate of effect that is based on 

evidence of agile software development from current research is 

very uncertain. This is also cons
istent with criticisms that have 
been raised regarding the sparse scientific support for many of the 

claims made by the agile community [39]. 
5. ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF SRs As with any research, the quality 
of systematic reviews is likely 
to be variable depending on how rigorously the authors have 

conducted the review. Several publications have described the 
science of reviewing resear
ch, differences among narrative 
reviews, systematic reviews, and 
meta-analyses, and how to carry 
out, critically appraise, and apply such secondary research in 

practice (see [32] and [47] for an overview). 
In addition to CASP, two tools 
are particularly relevant for 
assessing the quality of SRs: the QUOROM statement [42] and 

the MOOSE statement [50]. The QUOROM (Quality Of 
 Reporting Of Meta-analyses) statement sets out to achieve the 
same improvement in the quality of reporting of meta-analyses as 

the CONSORT statement is attemp
ting to do for clinical trials. 
Many health-related journals
 have adopted the QUOROM 
guidelines and require reporti
ng of SRs and meta-analyses 
according to the QUOROM checklist and also that a detailed 

flowchart is included, which illustrates the inclusion and 

exclusion of studies from the review. The checklist describes a way to present the abstract, 
introduction, methods, results, and 
discussion sections of a report 
of a meta-analysis. It is organized into 21 headings and 

subheadings regarding searches, 
selection, validity assessment, 
data abstraction, study characteristics, and quantitative data 

synthesis, and in the results
 with ﬁtrial flowﬂ, study 
characteristics, and quantitative data
 synthesis. The flow-diagram 
provides information about both the 
numbers of trials identified, 
included, and excluded and the reasons for exclusion of trials. QUOROM is primarily aimed at 
systematic reviews and meta-
analyses of randomized controlled trials. However, in many 

situations randomized controlled de
signs are not feasible and only 
data from observational studies are 
available; in other situations, 
observational studies may provide
 better evidence. Systematic 
reviews of observational studies
 and mixed methods studies 
present particular challenges because of inherent biases and 

differences in study designs; yet, they may provide a tool for 

helping to understand and quantify s
ources of variability in results 
across studies. 
Methodological and interpretational concerns make it clear that 
thorough reporting of systematic re
views of observational studies 
is absolutely essential. This 
is exactly the aim of the MOOSE 
statement, which is a checklist of items for reporting that builds 

on similar activities for randomized controlled trials, but is 

intended for use by authors, reviewers, editors, and readers of 

systematic reviews of observational studies (Table 6).  
The MOOSE guidelines do not require
 the use of a flow-diagram 
like the QUOROM statement does,
 but we would nevertheless 
recommend the use of a flow-dia
gram because studies will be 
excluded at different stages in 
the review for different reasons, 
and because we believe that visualizing the inclusion and 

exclusion criteria at each stage will help readers better understand 

the process (see Figure 1 for en example). 
 Stage 1
n= 1,996
Identify
 relevant studies 
Œsearchdatabases and 
conferenceproceedings
Stage 2
n= 821
Excludestudies on
 thebasis
of titles
Stage 3
n= 270
Excludestudies on
 thebasis
of abstracts
Stage 4
n= 36Obtainprimarypapers
 and
critically
 appraisestudies
Stage 1
nIdentify
 relevant studies 
Œsearchdatabases and 
conferenceproceedings
Stage 2
nExcludestudies on
 thebasis
of titles
Stage 3
nExcludestudies on
 thebasis
of abstracts
Stage 4
nObtainprimarypapers
 and
critically
 appraisestudies
 Figure 1. Flow-diagram of study selection process [15] 
Table 6. MOOSE checklist [50] 
Reporting of background should include:  Problem definition 
 Hypothesis statement 
 Description of study outcome(s) 
 Type of exposure or intervention used 
 Type of study designs used 
 Study population 
Reporting of search strategy should include: 
 Qualifications of searchers (e
.g., librarians and investigators)  Search strategy, including time period included in the 
synthesis and keywords 
 Effort to include all availabl
e studies, including contact with 
authors  Databases and regi
stries searched  Search software used, name and version, including special 
features used (e.g., explosion)  Use of hand searching (e.g., 
reference lists of obtained articles)  List of citations located and those excluded, including 
justification  Method of addressing articles published in languages other 
than English  Method of handling abstracts and unpublished studies 
 Description of any contact with authors 
Reporting of methods should include:  Description of relevance or appropriateness of studies 
assembled for assessing the hypothesis to be tested 
 Rationale for the selection and coding of data (e.g., sound 
clinical principles or convenience)  Documentation of how data were classified and coded (e.g., 
multiple raters, blinding, and inter-rater reliability) 
 Assessment of confounding (e.g., comparability of cases and 
controls in studies where appropriate) 
 Assessment of study quality, including blinding of quality 
assessors; stratification or r
egression on possible predictors of study results 
 Assessment of heterogeneity 
 Description of statistical met
hods (e.g., complete description of fixed or random effects models, justification of whether the 

chosen models account for predictors of study results, dose-

response models, or cumulative meta-analysis) in sufficient 
detail to be replicated  Provision of appropriate tables and graphics 
Reporting of results should include:  Graphic summarizing individual 
study estimates and overall 
estimate  Table giving descriptive information for each study included 
 Results of sensitivity testing (e.g., subgroup analysis) 
 Indication of statistical uncertainty of findings 
Reporting of discussion should include:  Quantitative assessment of bias (e.g., publication bias) 
 Justification for exclusion 
(e.g., exclusion of nonŒEnglish-language citations)  Assessment of quality of included studies 
Reporting of conclusions should include:  Consideration of alternat
ive explanations for observed results 
 Generalization of the conclu
sions (i.e., appropriate for the data presented and within the domain of the review) 
 Guidelines for future research 
 Disclosure of funding source 
  The study selection process of the systematic review, used as an 
example in this paper, consisted of 
four distinct stages as depicted 
in the flow-diagram in Figure 1. The search strategy applied at 

stage 1 of the review resulted in a total of 2,946 ﬁhitsﬂ that 

included 1,996 unduplicated citations. At stage 2, both authors 

went through the titles of the studies from stage 1 and, based on 

these, excluded 1,175 studies, leav
ing 821 for the next stage. At 
stage 3, we made independent re
views of all 821 abstracts and as 
a result of this process; we ex
cluded another 551 articles leaving 270 for a detailed quality assessment.
 At stage 4, we applied the 
quality assessment described in S
ection 3.3, and excluded another 
234 lessons-learned or single-practice articles, leaving 33 primary 

and 3 secondary studies for da
ta extraction and synthesis. 
Regarding the quality of the SR that we have used as an example 
in this paper, it is associated w
ith (at least) two limitations, which 
we believe are common to several ot
her SRs too, i.e., bias in the 
selection of publications and inaccuracy in data extraction. Even 

though we identified keywords and search terms that would 

enable us to identify the releva
nt literature, it is important to 
recognize that SE keywords are not standardized and that they can 

be both discipline- and language-sp
ecific. Therefore, due to our 
choice of keywords and search strings
, there is a risk that relevant 
studies were omitted. To try to 
avoid selection bias, we piloted 
every part of the review process, and in particular, the search 

strategy and citation ma
nagement procedure, in order to clarify 
weaknesses and refine the selec
tion process. Furthermore, we 
tried to ensure an unbiased selection of articles by utilizing a 

multistage process that involved three researchers who 

documented the reasons for inclusi
on and exclusion at every step, 
as suggested by Kitchenham and Charters [32]. So, even though 

we tried to limit the amount of se
lection bias, we cannot eliminate 
it. When we piloted the data extraction process, we found that 
several articles lacked sufficien
t details about the design and 
findings of a study and that, due to this, we differed too much in 

what we actually extracted. As a consequence, all data from all 

the 33 primary studies were extracted by the two authors in 

consensus meetings according to a predefined extraction form. 

However, we often found that th
e extraction process was hindered 
by the way some of the primar
y studies were reported. Many 
articles lacked sufficient information for us to be able to 

document them satisfactorily in the extraction form. More 

specifically, we frequently found th
at methods were not described 
adequately, that issues of bias and validity were not always 

addressed, that methods of data 
collection and analysis were often 
not explained well, and that samp
les and study settings were often 
not described well. There is therefore a possibility that the 

extraction process may have resulted in some inaccuracy in the 

data. 6. CONCLUSION Both traditional narrative reviews and systematic reviews are 
retrospective, observational studies
 and are therefore subject to 
systematic and random error. The quality and worth of a review, 

thus, depends on the extent to wh
ich scientific review methods 
have been used to minimize error 
and bias. It is important, there-
fore, that users of systematic reviews know how much confidence 

they can place in the conclusions and recommendations arising 

from such reviews. Since a large portion of empirical SE studies is qualitative and 
observational in nature, we expect a large portion of systematic 

reviews in SE to be interpretive rather than integrative. As both 

the GRADE system and MOOSE acknowledge the challenges of 

grading the overall strength of evidence for and reporting of 

systematic reviews of observationa
l studies, we find these systems 
to be of particular relevance for systematic reviews in SE. 
Three issues have been identified in this paper, which are 
essential to help author provide 
more rigorous systematic reviews 
as well as to help users of syst
ematic reviews to make judgments 
regarding the utility of a specific review: (1) explicit assessment 

of the quality of the primary studies, (2) grading the strength of 

the total body of evidence, and (3) explicit discussion of the 

limitations of the systematic review
 itself. None of these issues 
are trivial. And further research 
is needed to identify alternative 
ways of dealing with these issues in systematic reviews in 

software engineering. As we see it, there are specific challenges 

related to interpretive reviews that
 should be given attention. We 
hope that this paper can serve as a starting point for discussing 

these issues, as we believe that such discussions are crucial for the 

development of a more evidence-based approach to software 

engineering. 7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work in this paper was supported by the Research Council of 
Norway through the project Evidence-Based Software 

Engineering (181685/I30). 8. REFERENCES [1] Arisholm, E., Gallis, H., Dybå, T., and Sjøberg, D. (2007) 
Evaluating Pair Programming with Respect to System 

Complexity and Programmer Expertise, 
IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering, 33(2): 65Œ86 [2] Bailey, J., Zhang, C., Budget,
 D., and Turner, M., ﬁSearch Engine Overlaps: Do They Agree or Disagree?,ﬂ 
Second International Workshop on Realising Evidence-Based 
Software Engineering (REBSE'07)
, 2007. [3] Bhandari, M., Busse, J.W., Jackowski, D., Montori, V.M., 
Schünemann, H., Sprague, S., Mears, D., Schemitsch, E.H., Heels-Ansdell, D., and Devereaux, P.J. (2004) Association between Industry Funding and Statistically Significant Pro-

Industry Findings in Medical and Surgical Randomized 

Trials, CMAJ, 170: 477Œ480 [4] Biolchini, J., Mian, P.G., Natali, A.C.C., and Travassos, 
G.H. (2005) Systematic Review in Software Engineering
, Univ. Rio de Janeiro, TR, ES 679/05. [5] Brehmer, B. (1989) In One Word: Not from Experience, Acta Psychologica, 45(1-3): 223Œ241. [6] Brereton, P., Kitchenham, B. A., Budgen, D., Turner, M., and Khalil, M., ﬁLessons from Applying the Systematic 

Literature Review Process within the Software Engineering Domain,ﬂ 
Journal of Systems and Software, no. 4, vol. 80, pp. 571Œ583, 2007. [7] Campbell, D.T. and Stanley, J.C. (1963) 
Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Designs for Research
, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company 
 [8] Cook, T.D. and Campbell, D.T. (1979) Quasi-Experimentation: Design & A
nalysis Issues for Field 
Settings, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company 
[9] Cooper, H. (1998) Synthesizing Research (3rd Ed.), Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. [10] Cooper, H. and Hedges, L.V. (Eds.) (1994) Handbook of Research Synthesis, New York: Russell Sage Foundation. [11] Davies, A., Dieste, O., Hickey, A., Juristo, N., and Moreno, 
A.M. (2006) Effectiveness of Requirements Elicitation Techniques: Empirical Results Derived from a Systematic 
Review, Proceedings 14th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE™06)
, IEEE Computer Society, 
pp. 179Œ188.   [12] Dieste, O. and Padua, A.G. (2007) Developing Search Strategies for Detecting Relevant Experiments for Systematic Reviews, 
Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and 
Measurement (ESEM™07)
, Madrid, Spain, 20-21 Sept., IEEE 
Computer Society, pp. 215Œ224. 
[13] Dittrich, Y., John, M., Singer, J., and Tessem, B. (2007) For 
the Special issue on Qualitative Software Engineering 
Research, 
Information and Software Technology, 6(49): 531Œ539. [14] Dixon-Woods, M., Agarwal, S., Jones, D., Young, B., and Sutton, A. (2005) Synthesising Qualitative and Quantitative 

Evidence: A Review of Possible Methods, J. of Health Services Research & Policy
, 10(1): 45Œ53. [15] Dybå, T. and Dingsøyr, T. (2008) Empirical Studies of Agile 
Software Development: A Systematic Review, 
Information and Software Technology, 50(9-10): 833Œ859. [16] Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T., and Ha
nssen, G.K. (2007) Applying 
Systematic Reviews to Divers
e Study Types: An Experience 
Report, Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM'07)
, Madrid, Spain, 20-21 Sept., IEEE Computer 
Society, pp. 225Œ234.  
[17] Dybå, T., Kampenes, V.B. a
nd Sjøberg, D.I.K. (2006) A Systematic Review of Statistical Power in Software 

Engineering Experiments, Information and Software Technology, 48(8):745Œ755. [18] Dybå, T., Kitchenham, B.A., 
and Jørgensen, M. (2005) Evidence-Based Software Engineering for Practitioners, 
IEEE Software, 22(1): 58Œ65. [19] Egger, M., Smith, G.D., and Altman, D.G. (2001) Systematic Reviews in Health Care: Meta-analysis in Context (2nd Ed.), London: BMJ Publishing Group. [20] GRADE Working Group (2004) Grading Quality of 
Evidence and Strength of Recommendations,ﬂ BMJ, 328: 1490. [21] Greenhalgh, T. (2006) How to Read a Paper: The Basics of Evidence-Based Medicine
 (3rd Ed.), London: BMJ Publishing Group. [22] Hannay, J., Sjøberg, D.I.K., and Dybå, T. (2007) A 
Systematic Review of Theory
 Use in SE Experiments, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 33(2): 87Œ107. [23] Higgins J.P.T. and Green, S. (Eds.) (2008), Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions, Version 5.0.0 (updated February 2008), The Cochrane Collaboration, 
available from www.cochrane-handbook.org. [24] Höst, M. and Runeson, P. (2007) Checklists for Software Engineering Case Study Research, 
Proceedings of the First 
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM™07)
, Madrid, Spain, 20-21 Sept., IEEE Computer Society, pp. 479Œ481 
[25] Jadad, A.R., Moore, R.A., Carroll, D., Jenkinson, C., 
Reynolds, D.J., Gavaghan, D.
J., and McQuay, H.J. (1996) 
Assessing the Quality of Reports of Randomized Clinical 

Trials: Is Blinding Necessary?, 
Controlled Clinical Trials, 17(1): 1Œ12.  [26] Jedlitschka, A. and Pfahl, D. (2005) Reporting Guidelines for Controlled Experiments in Software Engineering, Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on 
Empirical Software Engineering (ISESE™05)
, Noosa Heads, 
Australia, 17-18 Nov, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 95Œ104. 
[27] Jørgensen, M. and Shepperd, M. (2007) A Systematic 
Review of Software Development Cost Estimation Studies, 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, 33(1): 33Œ53. [28] Kampenes, V.B., Dybå, T., Hannay, J.E., and Sjøberg, D.I.K. 
(2007) A Systematic Review of Effect Size in Software 

Engineering Experiments, Information and Software Technology, 49(11-12): 1073Œ1086. [29] Kampenes, V.B., Dybå, T., Hannay, J.E., and Sjøberg, D.I.K. 
(In Press) A Systematic Revi
ew of Quasi-Experiments in Software Engineering, Accepted to 
Information and Software Technology. [30] Khan, K.S. ter Riet, G., Glanville, J., Sowden, A.J., and Kleijnen, J. (Eds.) (2001) Undertaking Systematic Review of Research on Effectiveness, CRD™s Guidance for those 

Carrying Out or Commissioning Reviews, CRD Report Number 4 (2nd Ed.), NHS Centre for Reviews and 
Dissemination, University of York. 
[31] Kitchenham, B.A. (2007) Empirical Paradigm Œ The  Role of Experiments, in V.R. Basili 
et al. (Eds.), 
Empirical Software Engineering Issues: Critical Assessment and Future 
Directions, Proceedings from Int. Workshop, Dagstuhl 
Castle, June 26-30, 2006, Lecture Notes in Compute Science 4336, Springer, pp. 25Œ32. [32] Kitchenham, B.A. and Charters, S. (2007) Guidelines for performing Systematic Literature Reviews in Software 
Engineering, Version 2.3, Keele University, EBSE Technical 
Report, EBSE-2007-01. [33] Kitchenham, B.A., Al-Khilidar, 
H., Babar, M.A., Berry, M., 
Cox, K., Keung, J., Kurniawati, F., Staples, M., Zhang, H., and Zhu, L. (2008) Evaluating Guidelines for Reporting 
Empirical Software Engineering Studies, Empirical Software Engineering, 13(1): 97Œ121. [34] Kitchenham, B.A., Dybå, T., 
and Jørgensen, M. (2004) Evidence-Based Software Engineering, Proceedings of the 
26th International Conference on Software Engineering 
(ICSE 2004)
, IEEE CS Press, pp. 273Œ281. [35] Kitchenham, B.A., Pfleeger, S.L., Pickard, L.M., Jones, 
P.W., Hoaglin, D.C., El Emam, K., and Rosenberg, J. (2002) Preliminary Guidelines for Empirical Research in Software 
 Engineering, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, 28(8): 721Œ734. [36] Klein, H.K. and Myers, M.D. 
(1999) A Set of Principles for Conducting and Evaluating Interpretive Field Studies in 
Information Systems, 
MIS Quarterly, 23(1): 67Œ93. [37] Laitenberger, O. and Rombach, D. (2003) (Quasi-) Experimental Studies in Industr
ial Settings, in N. Juristo and A.M. Moreno (Eds.), Lecture Notes on Empirical Software Engineering, Singapore: World Scientific (Series on Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering 12), pp. 167Œ227. [38] Lee, A.S. (1989) A Scientific Methodology for MIS Case 
Studies, MIS Quarterly, 13(1): 33Œ50. [39] Mcbreen, P. (2003) Questioning Extreme Programming, Boston, MA, USA: Pearson Education. [40] Mendes, E. (2005) A Syst
ematic Review of Web Engineering Research, 
Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering (ISESE™05)
, Noosa Heads, Australia, 17-18 Nov, IEEE Computer 

Society, pp. 481Œ490. 
[41] Moher D, Schultz KF, Altman D (2001) The CONSORT Statement: Revised Recommendations for Improving the 
Quality of Reports of Parallel-Group Randomized Trials, 

Lancet
, 357:1191Œ1194, April 14. [42] Moher D., Cook, D.J., Eastwood, S., Olkin, I., Rennie, D., and Stroup, D.F. (1999) Improving the Quality of Reports of 

Meta-Analyses of Randomised Controlled Trials: The 

QUOROM Statement, 
Lancet
, 354: 1896Œ1900. [43] Mulrow, C. and Cook, D. (Eds.) (1998) Systematic Reviews: 
Synthesis of Best Evidence for Health Care Decisions
, Philadelphia: Am. College of Physicians.  
[44] Noblit, G.W. and Hare, R.D. (1988) Meta-Ethnography: Synthesizing Qualitative Studies, Thousand Oaks: Sage. [45] Petticrew, M. and Roberts, H. (2006) Systematic Reviews in 
the Social Sciences: A Practical Guide, Oxford, UK: 
Blackwell. [46] Shadish, W.R., Cook, T.D. and Campbell, D.T. (2002), Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Designs for Generalized Causal Inference, Boston: Houghton Mifflin. [47] Sjøberg, D.I.K., Dybå, T., and Jørgensen, M. (2007) The 
Future of Empirical Methods in Software Engineering 
Research, 
29th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE™07)
, Future of Software Engineering (FOSE™07)
, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, 20-26 May, 
IEEE Computer Society Press IEEE Computer Society, pp. 

358Œ378. [48] Sjøberg, D.I.K., Hannay, J.E., Hansen, O., Kampenes, V.B., 
Karahasanovi, A., Liborg, N.-K., and Rekdal, A.C. (2005) A Survey of Controlled Experiments in Software 

Engineering, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, 31(9):733Œ753, [49] Staples, M. and Niazi, M. (2007) Experiences Using Systematic Review Guidelines, 
Journal of Systems and Software, 80(9): 1425Œ1437. [50] Stroup, D.F., Berlin, J.A., Morton, S.C., Olkin, I., Williamson, G.D., Rennie, D., M
oher, D., Becker, B.J., Sipe, T.A., and Thacker, S.B. (2000) Meta-analysis of 

Observational Studies in Epidemiology: A Proposal for 

Reporting, JAMA, 283(15): 2008Œ2012. 