 Problems in Agile Trenches Mira Kajko-Mattsson Department of Computer and Systems Sciences Stockholm University +46-8-16 16 70 mira@dsv.su.se  
 ABSTRACT Some agile voices have been raised against extensive 
documentation. They advocate its sparse use and production.  In 

this paper, we report from ag
ile evolution and maintenance 
trenches on the lifecycle problems related to system and process 

documentation. Our report gives 
an indication of the problems 
that have been encountered within 18 agile organizations.  Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.7 [Distribution, Maintenance and Enhancement
]: 
Corrections, Documentation, Enhancement General Terms Management, Documentation. Keywords
 Documentation, oral communica
tion, product related problems, 
process related problems, comm
unication owner, communication 
complexity. 
1. INTRODUCTION Some ﬁagileﬂ voices have been raised against extensive 
documentation. They advocate its sparse use and production.  

Their motto is 
ﬁworking products over comprehensive 
documentationﬂ, implying that one should focus more on quick 
code production rather than its documentation. [2, 3]   
According to the agilists, documen
tation should be brief, however 
precise enough to be useful within
 software production. It should 
be limited to the core parts of the system. In its extreme case, it 

should encompass only source code and a set of user stories [2]. 

The remaining system structure may be communicated 

informally, mainly orally. There may be no requirement 

specifications nor design documents, or if there are any, then for 

the purpose of supporting the coding activity.  
The agilists do not claim that system documentation is not 
unimportant. It is just less important than working product 

versions. Documentation is s
econdary; however, it should cover 
enough information for supporting the communication. The 
agilists claim that the quality of th
e system is not mainly achieved 
via documentation but via the ite
rative development, continuous 
integration, systematic testing 
and refactoring. Regarding the 
process documentation, no voices have been raised whatsoever, 

despite the fact that process documentation is just as important as 

system documentation.  
Agile development may be effective from a short-term 
perspective. By reducing the 
amount of documentation, one 
increases productivity and decreas
es the production cost. From 
the long-term perspective, how
ever, it may involve certain 
problems.  This paper reports on problems that have been encountered in 
agile evolution and maintenance tr
enches.  It studies 18 software 
organizations practicing some form
 of an agile method. Using a 
list of well-known problems within traditional evolution and 

maintenance, it investigates wh
ether these problems have been 
encountered in agile evolution and maintenance trenches.  The remainder of this paper is 
structured as follows. Section 2 
describes the research method take
n to make our investigation. 
Section 3 provides background to the documentation domain. 

Section 4 lists and describes probl
ems that have been encountered 
in traditional evolution and mainte
nance. Section 5 presents the 
status and problems that have been encountered in 18 agile 

organizations. Finally, Sections 
6 and 7 make c
oncluding remarks and suggestions for future research.  2. RESEARCH METHOD In this section, we present the research method taken during our 
study. In Section 2.1, we list a
nd describe the study phases. In 
Section 2.2, we discuss the validity of our results.   
 2.1 Study Phases The state of documentation has for many years been a favorite 
subject. Different types of studies have revealed that 

documentation has been one of th
e largest problems within the 
software industry [7, 10, 13, 
19]. Many problems have been 
identified due to unsatisfactory documentation in traditional 

software environments. Hence, as a first step, we have compiled a 

list of these problems. Using this 
list, we created a questionnaire. 
We then used students on a master level to interview agile 

organizations. The interviews we
re mainly conducted on a tête-à-
tête basis. In some cases, however, they were made over the 

phone. The interview answers were recorded and written down by  
  Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 

otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ESEM™08
, October 9Œ10, 2008, Kaiserslautern, Germany. 
Copyright 2008 ACM  978-1-59593-971-5/08/10...$5.00.   Table 1. Our questionnaire 
  the students. Finally, we studied 
and compiled the results of our 
interviews to be presented in this paper.  As can be seen in Table 1, our
 questionnaire was open-ended and 
semi-structured. The purpose was 
to give freedom to respondents 
to answer in their own terms [20]. Such type of interviewing has a 
positive effect in a sense that while interviewing one may elicit 

more knowledge about the studied domain. Its drawback however 

is the fact that the interviewer must possess good understanding of 

the domain studied, in order to react to irrelevant answers.  
  Table 2. List of the organizations studied 
  Due to the fact that we used stude
nts in our investigation, we had 
to be clear about our objectives. To avoid any type of 

misunderstanding and to allow a comparative study, we created 

four safeguards against irrelevant answers.  As a first safeguard, we listed a
nd described problems related to documentation in traditional evol
ution and maintenance. Each 
problem was thoroughly described, 
motivated, and explained. As 
a second safeguard, we made a specification of the expected 

answers to be provided for each question. We also specified the 

types of answers that we wished to avoid. Unclear and fuzzy 

answers would not be accepted and the interviews would have to 

be repeated. As a third safeguard, each interviewee was asked to 

provide his name, his role within
 agile development and contact 
details to allow the author to contact them with follow-up 

questions.  Finally, we analyzed the results. We grouped the data collected 
by the students. To enable the collective analysis of the status for 
each of the questions, we created a list of answers to each 
question. It is this list that we present in this paper.  2.2 Sampling and Validity The data sampling method was 
convenience sampling. This 
means that we did not control the choice of the organizations 

involved in our study. It was stude
nts who did it. Due to the fact 
that it is difficult to make or
ganizations show willing for an 
interview, the students were 
allowed to choose just any 
organization (large/medium/small and/or private/state) in any 

country. The only requirement was 
that the organization studied 
should use some agile method.  Many of our students, coming fro
m international master program 
in Sweden, chose organizations in
 their own countries. Hence, the 
countries represented in this 
report are Sweden, Spain, United 
States, Macedonia, Austria, Po
rtugal, and Romania. These 
organizations are listed in Table 2. As can be seen there, they 

practice various forms of agile methods ranging from 
eXtreme 
 Programming to 
SCRUM. Due to the sensitivity of the material 
presented herein, we do not name these organizations.  The small sample size, the type of the organizations studied and 
the convenience sampling method should not allow us to 

generalize our results. However,
 we believe that our paper 
provides a valuable indication of the problems that have already 

been encountered in the agile environments.  3. DOCUMENTATION PERSPECTIVE IN  TRADITIONAL EVOLUTION AND  
MAINTENANCE Documentation, if correct, comp
lete and consistent, has been 
regarded as a powerful tool for software engineers to gain 

success. Its purpose is to describe software systems and processes. 
Good system documentation thor
oughly describes a software 
system, its components and relationships. It facilitates the 

understanding and communication of 
the software system, eases 
the learning and relearning process, makes software systems more 
maintainable, and consequently improves the engineer™s 
productivity and work quality [4, 5, 6, 8, 15, 18, 19].   
Poor system documentation, on the 
other hand, is regarded to be 
the primary reason for quick software system quality degradation 

and aging [15, 17, 19]. It is a major contributor to the high cost of 

software evolution and maintena
nce and to the distaste for 
software maintenance work [14]. Outdated documentation of a 

software system misleads the engineer in her work thus leading to 

confusion in the already very complex evolution and maintenance 

task. The purpose of documentation however
, is not only to describe a 
software system but also to record a process.  Process 

documentation is extremely impor
tant for achieving (1) insight 
and visibility into the processes, (2) meaningful process 

measurement and thereby (3) high 
process maturity. It should be 
pervasive in and through all of the types of lifecycle chores. 

Proper control and management of
 development, evolution and 
maintenance can only be achieved if we have obtained sufficient 

visibility into the process, its stages and tasks, executing roles, 

their decisions and motivations, and the results of individual 

process tasks.  
Irrespective of whether documentation supports systems or 
processes, it constitutes a collective knowledge of the 

organization. It supports co
mmunication and collaboration amongst various groups within the 
organization such as project 
managers, quality managers, product managers, support 

technicians, testers, developers, 
and other roles [1]. It enhances 
knowledge transfer, preserves hist
orical information, assists 
ongoing product evolution and maintenance, and fulfills 

regulatory and legal requirements. 
It provides an efficient vehicle 
for communication serving a variety of needs. We distinguish 
between two types of documentation:  
 Self to self
: Software professionals 
make personal notes. The 
goal is to remember what they have done, plan for future 

actions and analyze the results of their own personal 

processes.  
 Software professional to software professional
: Different roles communicate with one anothe
r, such as developers to 
developers, developers to tester
s, developers to maintainers, 
developers and/or maintainer
s to management
, management to developers and/or main
tainers, developer and/or 
maintainer to support personnel, 
and the like. The goal is to 
provide feedback to one another.   4. PROBLEMS ELICITED WITHIN  TRADITIONAL EVOLUTION AND  
MAINTENANCE In this section, we describe 
the problems common in traditional 
evolution and maintenance envir
onments. We divide them into 
product and process problems.   4.1 Product Related Problems  System documentation is regarded to be an intrinsic part of any 
system.  Its purpose is not only to
 communicate on the internals of 
a software system to be shared
 among various stakeholders, but 
also to provide basis for various audits and decisions. In the 

literature, we have identified the following problems resulting in 

lack of correct and consistent system documentation. They are (1) 

developers™ system knowledge, (2) sudden loss of critical 

knowledge in cases of team volatility, (3) training of new hires, 

(4) support technicians™ knowledge, and (5) customer knowledge. 4.1.1 Developers' System Knowledge 
Software system documentation is
 a key component in software 
quality. Empirical studies have shown that poor or missing 

documentation is a major cause of defects introduced during 

evolution and maintenance. Soft
ware evolution and maintenance 
costs tend to be less for well-documented systems than for 

systems supplied with poor and/or
 incomplete documentation. [6, 
8, 16] Well-documented systems do 
not namely age in the same 
tact as the undocumented ones.  Software engineers need to po
ssess good knowledge of the system 
to be able to continue to evolve it. In an agile environment, there 

is a risk that most of the documentation is either in the heads of 

the developers or on temporar
y posters on the wall. Without 
proper documentation, there is a high risk that the organizational 

knowledge of the system can be forgotten, misunderstood or even 

lost. This in turn may lead to unc
onsciously inserted faults due to 
incorrect understanding. Using 
Question 11, we investigate 
whether the organizations studied have noticed whether their 

engineers have started loosing track and knowledge of the 

systems they are evolving.  
4.1.2 Sudden Loss of Critical Knowledge in Cases of Team Volatility High personal turnover can also lead to a significant loss of 
system knowledge if a skilled team member leaves and his 

knowledge and experience is not 
recorded. System documentation 
is regarded to reduce this loss. This
 is in particular an issue when 
software needs be evolved and ma
intained in the long run. Using 
Question 13, we investigate whether and what problems the 
organizations encounter in cases
 when key software engineers 
quit the organization.    4.1.3 Training of New Hires It is always difficult to train new hires, especially when the only 
system documentation is c
ode. If there is no system 
documentation, then the new hi
res will have to bother her 
workmates with many questions 
and thereby distract them from 
their ordinary work. Using 
Question 14, we investigate how the 
new hires learn the system, how soon they are allowed to code, 

and if there are any problems with respect to training of new hires 

in an agile environment.  
4.1.4 Support Technicians™ Knowledge Support technicians need to have good system knowledge for 
being able to support customers in their daily operation. They 

may acquire this knowledge either via thorough system 

documentation, user documentation, 
or other means. Lack of or 
inconsistent system documenta
tion and/or user manuals may 
substantially obstruct their work. Using 
Question 15, we 
investigate whether the support technicians (on 
Support Line 1
 and 2) have started loosing track 
and knowledge of the systems 
they support [11].  
4.1.5 Customer System Knowledge One of the major problems in traditional evolution and 
maintenance is customers™ pr
oduct knowledge [9, 12]. Customers 
do not possess the required knowledge of the products they are 

using. They may use them incorr
ectly, get incorrect results, lose 
data, or think that the products they are using are not working 

correctly. They may report on software problems, which later 

may show to be operational mistak
es. This, in turn, requires extra 
support effort spent on explaining to the customers that the 

reported problem was due to their lack of knowledge and 

experience. Using 
Question 17, we investigate whether the 
organizations studied have enc
ountered any problems related to 
the customer system knowledge.  
4.2 Process Related Problems  Process documentation enables pro
cess monitoring and control. It 
is essential for many roles involve
d in it. For instance, managers 
must have insight into the progress made within the current 

development process. They must al
so have insight into the past 
projects, to be able to make 
different types of analyses and 
predictions for future projects.  Using literature, we have identified the following process 
problems in the traditional evolution and maintenance: (1) 

inability to monitor and control the process, (2) inability to 

analyze the process, (3) inability to follow the progress of 

software engineers, (4) communication complexity, (5) limited 

ability to make changes, (6) inability to scale up software 

production, and (7) inability to thoroughly test.  
4.2.1 Inability to Monitor and Control the Process It is regarded that proper cont
rol and management of a process 
can only be achieved if we have obtained sufficient visibility into 

the development, evolution and 
maintenance processes, their 
stages and tasks, executing roles, their decisions and motivations, 

and the results of each individual process task. Process visibility 

is claimed to be the main prerequisite for achieving mature 

processes.  
To enable this visibility, processes should be thoroughly 
documented. Their documentation 
provides an efficient vehicle 
for communication serving a variety of needs amongst various 

groups within the organization su
ch as project managers, quality 
managers, product managers, support technicians, testers, and 
other roles [1].  
Continuous update of the progress 
made during the process helps 
in tracking the process. It simplifies reporting of the progress to 

various roles involved and helps manage system releases [1].  
By documenting the process, the roles involved in it, their 
workload, effort, and status, we can monitor and control the 

overall process and effort and estimate the delivery time [1]. This 

aids in making sure that the plans are followed and that the 

product will be delivered on time. Using 
Questions 24-28,
 we 
investigate whether the organizations document their processes 
and whether they have sufficient insight into their processes.  
4.2.2 Inability to Analyze the Process By having a documented process, one may easily evaluate the 
process, identify its shortcomings
 and make suggestions for its 
improvement. Documenting of 
what was implemented or 
changed, how, why, when, and by who are essential ingredients in 

audit trails and quality analyses. If we do not document the 

process, we cannot evaluate it,
 identify its shortcomings, and 
make suggestions for its improvement [1]. Using 
Question 29-32, we investigate whether the organizations studied have the ability 

to analyze their processes.   
4.2.3 Inability to Follow the Progress of Individual Software Engineers Both software engineers and th
eir managers should follow their 
work progress to be able to assess their effectiveness. Lack of 

process documentation makes this information invisible, 
especially to the management. 
Managers are very reliant on 
information reporting on the progre
ss of its employees for various 
reasons. They need it for being able to make plans and various 

types of estimations, such as cost and effort required for 

implementing a requirement, and to 
make sure that the process is 
being followed by individual engineers. Using 
Question 33, we 
study whether manage
ment may easily follow the progress of 
each individual engineer.  4.2.4 Communication Complexity The agilists have traded off 
explicit knowledge captured in 
documentation for oral communi
cation and temporary visual 
control in form of information radiators [2]. Thanks to this, they 

have achieved more speed within
 development and evolution. 
However, the fact that most of the communication is oral may 

introduce complexity to the communication within the 

organization and the process management. Also, through oral 
communication, a lot of knowledge may be forgotten or 

misunderstood. Using 
Questions 20-23
, we investigate (1) 
whether lack of or insufficient 
system and process documentation 
has led to more oral communication, (2) how big is the 

communication burden, and (3) what problems are encountered in 

the context of oral communication.  4.2.5 Limited Ability to Make System Changes Documentation is regarded to 
be very important when making 
changes to software systems.
 One must not only have good 
knowledge of the system, but also
 remember the decisions made 
behind many changes. Hence, main
taining a product that is in use 
for several years requires both sy
stem and process documentation. 
Using Question 37, we investigate whether the organizations 
studied have encountered probl
ems related to making system 
changes.   4.2.6 Inability to Scale up Software Production Agile methods may be effectiv
e in developing, evolving and 
maintaining software in sma
ll organizations. However, as 
products become larger and more complex and small 

organizations expand, their softwa
re production scales up as well. 
The organizations may scale up fro
m having one team to several 
teams. Communication among 
those teams may become 
awkward, and communication is n
eeded for various purposes such 
as, for instance, to agr
ee upon the interfaces. Using 
Questions 38-
40, we investigate whether the organizations studied have 
encountered any problems when scaling up their software 

systems, organizations, and produc
tion, and how they have tried 
to remedy these problems.  
4.2.7 Inability to Thoroughly Test In traditional evolution and maintenance, it is a known problem 
that testers do not manage to thoroughly test the system. The 

reason is often time and effort required for achieving sufficient 

system testing coverage. We susp
ect that this problem stays in 
agile environment as well, especially when several teams are 

involved and a separate testing 
team is created. Due to short 
releases, the testers may not have any opportunity to properly 

prepare the test plans and to thoroughly test the software. Also, 

lack of system documentation may also mean that they have to 

base their testing work on 
oral communication. Using 
Question 41, we investigate whether the organizations have noticed any 
problems with respect to their ability to test their systems.  
5. INTERVIEW RESULTS In this section, we describe the 
results of our interviews. We first 
provide a general description of
 the organizations studied in 
Section 5.1. We then present the 
status in Sections 5.2 and 5.3, 
respectively.  
5.1 Presentation of Organizations Studied 
We have studied 18 software orga
nizations practicing some form 
of an agile method. As illustrated 
in Table 2, twelve organizations 
are small enterprises. The remaining ones are big. The systems 

they produce vary from games, 
to various administrative, 
telephony, business and web-base
d systems. Their size ranges 
from 1000 Œ 700 000 LOC. The agile methods used are SCRUM, 

Lean, XP, TDD, Crystal Clear, 
ASD, and various home-made 
agile methods.  The roles involved in our interviews were 

developers, team leaders, project 
managers, client representatives, 
IT managers, senior consultants, chief architects, and executive 

managers. Most of the organizations studi
ed have some experience of 
traditional evolution and maintenance processes. The models used 
by them before were mainly RU
P and various kinds of Waterfall-
based models. Five out of 18 orga
nizations studied did not have 
experience of heavyweight plan-driven processes.  
5.2 Product Related  Problems 5.2.1 System Knowledge Fifty percent (nine out of 18) of the organizations studied claim 
that their software engineers st
art loosing track and knowledge of 
the system(s) they are evolving. It shows in different ways: (1) 

code becomes complex, (2) architecture deteriorates, (3) 

engineers are not certain of what changes to make and where, (4) 

they ask questions revealing lack of knowledge, and (5) they 

repeat many of the former mistakes.  
Two of these organizations claim that the deteriorated architecture 
was the most serious problem. Why it deteriorates is the fact that 

engineers make changes that do not fit the 
ﬁgrand architectural visionﬂ. Hence, it is important to find a means to effectively share 
the system architecture. These two organizations claim that one 

way of achieving it is to have good documentation of system 

architecture. In addition, the othe
r of these two organizations, has 
assigned an architect working 50% on assuring the architectural 

quality.  
Regarding the remaining organizations (the remaining 50%), they 
have not noticed that their engin
eers have started loosing system 
knowledge. The reasons to this
 are the following: (1) the 
companies are too young, they have only existed for a few years, 

(2) the companies are very small; they have only 1-3 engineers 

who have developed, 
evolved and maintained the system from the 
very beginning, or (3) the comp
anies continuously update system 
knowledge via Scrum meetings.   5.2.2 Sudden Loss of Critical Knowledge in Cases of Team Volatility Most of the organizations studied claim that they are too young. 
Hence, they have not managed to experience the team volatility 

problem. However, twelve out of 18 organizations are of the 

opinion that a sudden loss of key 
engineers would be a serious 
problem. It would result in (1) 
lack of substantial system 
knowledge, (2) initial pain of making changes to the system, (3) 

big challenge to find replacements, (4) productivity decrease, and 

(4) increased production cost.  The remaining organizations have 
guarded themselves against this 
problem. They use different safeguards. Three organizations 

follow the principle of common system ownership. By frequently 

rotating engineers, the organizati
ons have become less vulnerable 
to this problem. Two other or
ganizations set aside time for 
knowledge transfer, either in an oral or written form 

(documentation). 5.2.3 Training New Hires In most of the organizations studied, the newcomers are allowed 
to code soon after they are hired. The time span varies, from 

immediately on the very first day to
 more than three months. This 
is of course strongly related to the complexity of the systems 

maintained. In three organiza
tions, the motto followed is 
ﬁstart practicing instead of noticingﬂ
. Here, the new hires start coding immediately. They pair-program together with their mentors.  
 In twelve organizations, the new 
employees are allowed to code 
between two to four weeks after 
they got hired. They learn the 
system by (1) reviewing the code, (2) reading the documentation 

in the companies having the documentation, (3) testing, (4) 

intensive oral communication, and (5) mentorship via pair 

programming. In the remaining thr
ee organizations, it may take at 
least three and at most one year to fully use newcomers in 

programming activities. This is due to the complexity of their 

systems.  
5.2.4 Support Technicians™ Knowledge Only in three out of 18 organizations studied, support technicians 
have experienced difficulties when supporting their customers on 

a daily basis. They do not always manage to learn the system they 

support. In six other organizati
ons, it is the developers who 
conduct support. Hence, this probl
em is not relevant for them. 
Two other organizations, having separate support, do not 
experience this problem at all. Finally, the remaining seven 

organizations have not provided us 
with clear answers. Hence, we 
cannot make any conclusions re
garding their support status.  5.2.5 Customer System Knowledge Six out of 18 organizations expe
rience some problems related to 
their customers™ system knowle
dge. The reason is lack of 
sufficiently documented user ma
nuals. Many times, the problem 
concerns the knowledge of secondary functionalities. The 

organizations try to resolve this
 problem via additional support or 
various demonstrations.  The remaining organizations have 
not experienced this problem at 
all. The reasons are (1) continuous
 contact with the customer, (2) 
user-friendly self-doc
umenting systems.  
5.3 Process Related Problems 5.3.1 Inability to Monitor and Control the Process Six out of 18 organizations do not
 document their evolution and 
maintenance processes at all. These are mainly small 

organizations. Three of these six organizations claim that they 

have good insight into the process via frequent meetings.  Four out of 18 organizations have partial visibility into the 
process. This is because they do not fully document their 

processes. The process steps that
 mainly get documented concern 
release management, and project management. Finally, the 
remaining eight organizations docum
ent most of the steps within 
their processes. Hence, they claim that they are able to monitor 

and control them.  5.3.2 Inability to Analyze the Process Five out of 18 organizations studi
ed did not provide us with any 
answer whether they may analyze their evolution and 

maintenance processes. One of 
the remaining 13 organizations does not analyze their processes at
 all. Regarding the remaining 
twelve organizations, they do pro
cess analysis on a periodic basis, 
either via retrospective meetings, or
 some other form of weekly or 
monthly meetings.  
5.3.3 Inability to Follow the Progress of Individual Software Engineers Four out of 18 organizations studied cannot follow the progress of 
each individual engineer. In the 14 remaining organizations, one 

may do it partially. Out of these 
14 organizations, three of them 
follow the individual engineer progress via meetings. In the 

remaining eleven organizations, 
one does it via a tool supporting 
the organizational process.  5.3.4 Communication Complexity Fifty percent of the organizations studied claim that insufficient 
documentation has lead to an oral communication burden. The 

communication takes time, ofte
n steeling it from other work 
assignments. To add zest to it, it may even be time consuming to 

find a person having the right answ
ers. Regarding the remaining 
organizations, they claim that communication overhead has 

increased. However, they do treat it as part of their job. In two 

organizations, they have even 
defined roles responsible for 
communicating, the so-called 
Communication Owners.  Seven of the organizations studied
 have difficulties in estimating 
the communication burden. Six ot
her organizations spend about 
10-20% of total time on communica
ting. Regarding the remaining 
six organizations studied, the 
communication burden ranges from 
25% to 50%.  Thirteen out of 18 organizations studied claim that they have 
encountered various problems directly related to oral 

communication. These problems are: (1) engineers forget as time 

passes; they do not remember how
 they have solved various 
problems, (2) lack of system
 understanding, (3) undocumented 
decisions and process activities create problems, (4) many product 

or process issues get misunders
tood, (5) people do not remember 
what they said, what they were told, or asked for, (6) difficulties 

to find a person knowing the answer, (7) engineers get too much 

distracted when having to communicate.   
5.3.5 Limited Ability to Make System Changes Thirteen out of 18 organizations studied encounter problems when 
making changes to software systems. They claim that it has 

become more difficult to evolve and maintain their systems. The 

reasons are (1) it is difficult to ch
ange code that was originally 
developed by someone else, (2) it 
is difficult to remember which 
changes have already been made, and (3) knowledge of the 

system or its parts required for ma
king a change is spread in the 
heads of various engineers. 
Regarding the remaining five organizations, they are either too small or too young to have 

experienced this as a problem.    
5.3.6 Inability to Scale up Software Production Seven out of 18 organizations studi
ed have grown with respect to 
their product size and organization.
 The remaining organizations 
have not grown much. Hence, this issue is not applicable for 

them.  
Regarding the first seven organizations, they have noticed that (1) 
the system has become more di
fficult to understand and change, 
(2) teams have become more diffi
cult to coordinate, (3) engineers 
encountered communication problems when there were more than 

ten people involved, and (4) engin
eers were loosing track of the 
company™s vision.  
 For four of these seven organizations, the growth was not a 
problem. They found that many ag
ile practices were scalable. 
They have remedied the scalability problems by strengthening the 

process with (1) system ownership by splitting the teams and 

assigning them clear ownership of 
system parts, (2) evolution and 
maintenance coordinators dedicat
ed to coordinating work in 
teams and with other teams, (3
) follow-up meetings, (4) better process documentation, and (5) better system documentation.  
5.3.7 Inability to Thoroughly Test In twelve out of 18 organizations
 studied, testers do not encounter 
any problems related to testing the system in agile environment. 

In four of these twelve organizati
ons, developers play the role of 
testers as well. In the remaining eight of these twelve 

organizations, one does not experience this problem due to the 

following reasons: (1) one has good systems documentation 

including use cases (2) testers are integrated with developers, and 

(3) the organizations use support of daily build process.  
Six organizations experience probl
ems with testing. They state 
that testing takes too long time. Due 
to the fact that information is 
orally conveyed, testers often 
misunderstand the functionality to 
be tested.  
6. FINAL REMARKS In this paper, we have studi
ed 18 software organizations 
practicing agile methods. Using 
a list of well-known problems in 
traditional evolution and maintenance, we investigated whether 
similar problems have been encountered in agile trenches.  Although our study covers a substa
ntial amount of organizations, 
it does not allow us to generalize our results. This is because we 

used a convenience sampling method, and most of the 

organizations studied and their systems are still young. Hence, it 

is too early to identify the lifecy
cle impact of agile methods in 
these organizations. However, we 
believe that our results provide 
an indication of problems that may be encountered in evolution 

and maintenance trenches.  These problems are:  
 Oral communication takes time.   Oral communication distracts too much and steals valuable 
time.  
 It is difficult to find a person who has the right answer.  Oral communication is the reason why engineers forget the 
system and the decisions made
. Engineers do not remember 
what they said, what they were told, or asked for. 
 Engineers are not certain of what changes to make and where. 
 Engineers do not remember wh
at changes they made and 
why. 
 Engineers ask questions revealing lack of system knowledge. 
 Engineers repeat many of the former mistakes. 
 Organizations may suddenly l
oose valuable knowledge in 
cases when key engineers quit. 
 Organizations may undergo major initial pain in their change 
process after key engineers quit. 
The pain is defined in terms 
of loss of time and profit.  Engineers do not know the whole system. Knowledge of the 
system is spread in the heads of several engineers. 
 Architecture deteriorates substantially. 
 Many product and process i
ssues get misunderstood.  When scaling up, teams have become more difficult to 
coordinate, systems have beco
me more difficult to understand 
and change, and engineers have started loosing track of the 

company™s vision.  
 Testers do not manage to thoroughly test the system. 
 Due to oral communication, testers misunderstand the 
functionality to be tested.  
Other problems as recognized by 
the organizations studied were 
(1) challenge to move from plan
-driven method to the agile one, 
(2) unit testing does not get enough attention.  When asking the organizations for advice on how to improve 
system and process knowledge, tw
elve out of 18 organizations 
studied stated that one should st
rive to have better system and 
process documentation. Some of the interviewees claimed that the 

main problem with agile processes was the fact that engineers did 

not pay enough attention to documentation. According to the 

majority of our interviewees, doc
umentation is a prerequisite for 
sustainable organization.  Some of the organizations studied
 have undertaken measures to 
remedy some of the above-menti
oned problems. These measures 
are:   To remedy the architectural ad hoc expansion, the 
organizations have created an 
Architect
 role assuring the 
architectural quality. This measure is nothing new and is 

commonly practiced in tr
aditional environments.   To remedy the communication problem, the organizations 
have created a 
Communication Owner role, a role responsible for 
communicating the overall system 
and process information. The 
existence of this role however does not guarantee that the 

valuable information gets documen
ted. This measure is new with 
respect to traditional environment.  
 To remedy the scalability problems, the organizations have 
utilized the practices from traditional evolution and maintenance 

by creating system/component owne
rship role. They have also 
improved their system and process documentation.  

 7. EPILOGUE Even if it is still too early to 
draw conclusions on the lifecycle 
impact of agile methods, this study has provided us with some 

indications of the problems that may be encountered in agile 

environments. More studies however
 need to be made not only to 
confirm the results presented herein
 but also to find some kind of 
a compromise that facilitates development, evolution and 

maintenance, and that does not burden the engineers with the 

recording effort. Maybe, an introduction of a 
Communication Owner would be a good compromise. His task would be to 
communicate the system and the process both orally and in 

written.  Introducing the role of a 
Communication Owner however does 
not solve the problem of determining the extent and scope of 

required documentation.  Still, the software community is 

confused on issues such as (1) what should we document, (2) how 

much, (3) when, and (4) for what purpose? Today, we do not have 

any concrete answers. We only 
claim that we should document 
just enough information for supporting the communication. But, 

how much enough is enough?  
 So far, very little research ha
s been done on documentation. To 
our knowledge, there are only a few publications reporting on this 

subject [10, 21-26]. Hence, we cl
aim that this domain is strongly 
under-explored. We believe that s
ubstantial research is required 
for agreeing upon the scope and extent of documentation so that 

both short-term and long-term benefits may be gained.  
8. REFERENCES [1]  Arthur, L. J. 1995. Softwa
re Evolution: The Software Maintenance Challenge. John Wiley & Sons.  
[2] Beck K., 2004. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change. 2nd Edition. Upper Sadle River, NJ, Addison-
Wesley.  
[3] Cohn M., 2006. Agile Estima
ting and Planning. Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ. [4]  Bauer, B. J., and Parnas, D. L. 1995. Applying 
mathematical software documentation: An experience 

report, proceedings. Proc. 10th Annual Conference on 
Computer Assurance. 273Œ 284. [5]  Briand, L. C. 2003. Softwa
re documentation: How much is enough? Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Maint. Reeng. 13Œ 

15.  [6]  Card, D., McGarry, F., and Page, G. 1987. Evaluating 
software engineering technologies. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 13(7): 845 Œ851. [7] Chapin, N. 1985. Software ma
intenance: A different view. AFIPS Proc. Natl. Comput. C
onf. AFIPS Press, Reston, Virginia, 54, pp. 508 Œ 513.  [8]  Conwell, C. L. 2000. Capability maturity models support of 
modeling and simulation verification, validation, and accreditation. Proceedings, IEEE Winter Simulation 

Conference. 819Œ 828.  [9]  Holt, P. O. 1993. System 
documentation and system design: 
A good reason for designing the manual first. Proc. IEEE 

Colloquium on Issues in Computer Support for 
Documentation and Manuals. 1/1 Œ 1/3. [10]  Kajko-Mattsson, M. 2005.
 A Survey of Documentation 
Practice within Corrective Maintenance, Empirical Software 

Engineering Journal, Kluwer, Volume 10, Issue 1, January, 

pp. 31 Œ 55. [11]  Kajko-Mattsson, M. 2007. Ma
turity Status within Front-End 
Support Organisations, International Conference on 
Software Engineering, IEEE,  Computer Society Press: Los 

Alamitos, CA. 
[12]  Kantner, L., et al. 2002. Structured heuristic evaluation of 
online documentation. Proc. IEEE Int. Prof. Commun. Conf. 

331Œ 342.  [13]  Lientz, B. P., and Swanson, E. B. 1980. Software 
Maintenance Management, A study of the Maintenance of  
Computer Application Software in 487 Data Processing Organizations. Addison-Wesley. 
[14]  Martin, J., and McClure, 
C. 1983. Software Maintenance, The Problem and Its Solutions. Englewood Cliffs,  New 
Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. 07632. 
[15]  Parnas, D. L. 2000. Re
quirements documentation: Why a 
formal basis is essential. Proc. IEEE 4th International 

Conference  Requirements Engineering, pp. 81Œ 82.  [16]  Pigoski, T. M. 1997. Practi
cal Software Maintenance. John Wiley & Sons. 
[17]  Sousa, M., and Mendes Moreira, H. 1998. A survey of the 
software maintenance process. In Proceedings, IEEE 

International Conference on  Software Maintenance, pp. 
265Œ 272.  [18]  Visaggio, G. 2001. Aging of 
a data-intensive legacy system: 
Symptoms and remedies. Journa
l of Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and Practice. Wiley & Sons, 13(5): 
281 Œ 308.  [19]  Visconti, M., and Cook, C. R. 2002. An overview of 
industrial software documentation practice. Proc. 12th IEEE 

International Conference of the Chilean Computer Science 

Society, pp. 179Œ 186.  
[20]  Walker, R. (ed.) 1985. Applied Qualitative Research. 
Gower Publishing Company Ltd. 
[21]  Clark PG,, Lobsitz RM, Shields JD,. 1989. Documenting the 
Evolution of an Information System, In Proceedings, IEEE 

National Aerospace and Electronic Conference, pp. 1819-
1826.  [22] Lepasaar M, Varkoi T, Jaakkola H,. 2001. Documentation 
as a Software Process Capability Indicator, In Proceedings, 

International Conference on Management of Engineering 
and Technology, IEEE, Vol. 1, p. 436.  
[23] Norman RL, Holloran RW. 1991.  How to simplify the 
structure of administrative procedures to make them easier 

to write, review, produce, and use, In Proceedings, 

International Conference on Professional Communication, Vol.2 pp. 447 Œ 450. [24] Parnas D L. 2000. Requi
rements documentation: why a 
formal basis is essential, In Proceedings, 4
th International Conference on Requirements Engineering, IEEE, pp. 81-82. 
[25] van Schouwen AJ, Parnas DL, Madey J. 1993. 
Documentation of Requirements for Computer Systems, In 
Proceedings, IEEE International Symposium on 

Requirements Engineering, pp. 198-207.  [26] Visconti, M., Cook, CR. 2000. An Overview of Industrial 
Software Documentation Practices, Technical Report 00-60-
06, Computer Science Department, Oregon State 
University.  
  
  