 The impact of agile principles and practices on large-
scale software development projects 
A multiple-case study of two projects at Ericsson 
 
Lina Lagerberg, Tor Skude, Pär Emanuelsson and 
Kristian Sandahl (corresponding author)  
Department of Computer and Information Science 
 Linköping University 
SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden 
linalagerberg@gmail.com
, 
tor@skude.se
, 
{par.emanuelsson, kristian.sandahl}@liu.se
 
Daniel  Ståhl 
Ericsson AB 
Datalinjen 3 
SE-581 12 Linköping, Sweden 
daniel.stahl@ericsson.com
 
 
 
Abstract
— BACKGROUND: Agile software development 
methods have a number of reported benefits on productivity, 
project visibility, software quality and other areas. There are also 
negative effects reported. However, the base of empirical 
evidence to the claimed effects needs more empirical studies. 
AIM:
 The purpose of the research was to contribute with 
empirical evidence on the impact of using agile principles and 
practices in large-scale, industrial software development. 
Research was focused on impacts within seven areas: Internal 
software documentation, Knowledge sharing, Project visib
ility, 
Pressure and stress, Coordination effectiveness, and Productivity. 
METHOD: Research was carried out as a multiple-case study on 
two contemporary, large-scale software development projects 
with different levels of agile adoption at Ericsson. Empirical data 
was collected through a survey of project members. RESULTS 
AND CONCLUSIONS: Intentional implementation of agile 
principles and practices were found to: correlate with a more 
balanced use of internal software documentation, contribute to 
knowledge sharing, correlate with increased project visibility and 
coordination effectiveness, reduce the need for other types of 
coordination mechanisms, and possibly increase productivity. No 
correlation with increase in pressure and stress were found.
 
Keywords—agile software development, large-scale software 
development, multiple-case study, survey, empirical software 
engineering 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Agile software development (ASD) methods are often 
advertised as a contrast to the traditional, plan-driven approach 
to software development [1] and the reported and argued 
benefits are numerous. ASD methods are claimed to increase 
software quality [2], improve communication [3] as well as 
coordination [4] and increase productivity [5], to name just a 
few. However, the lesser emphasis on documentation could 
lead to inferior knowledge management in the long term [6] 
and the focus on constant delivery of results could increase the 
pressure on the software professionals [4] [7]. More empirical 
studies on the effects of ASD methods are asked for by several 
researchers, especially on which effects could be expected in a 
large-scale, industrial setting [1] [8].
 
The contribution of this research is empirical evidence on 
the impact of using agile methods in large-scale software 
development at Ericsson. The design of study comprises two 
projects. The first project, named Project A, is a mature project 
using a classical waterfall method [9], which has been 
improved over many years, now also including a few agile 
practices. The second project, named Project B, is recently 
started with the clear intention of being an agile project. The 
projects are particularly interesting for comparison since 
Product B is planned to replace Product A in future. To the best 
of our knowledge this study is the only one that compares two 
simultaneously running projects. 
Project A and Project B are large commercial projects with 
420 and 120 members respectively. The projects have a large 
number of teams (15 and 14 respectively). The developers are 
mature, with 56% and 37% having more than one year ASD 
experience, respectively. Dybå and Dingsøyr [1] made a 
systematic review of experience based agile project studies. 
From 1996 studies they filtered out 36 studies that were 
experience based, out of which only four were investigating 
projects with mature developers (more than one year 
experience of ASD). 
The data collection was made through a survey of project 
members with a web-based questionnaire focusing on effects 
from ASD found in a systematic literature review [10]: 
1)
 
Less and insufficient documentation. 
2)
 
Facilitated knowledge sharing. 
3)
 
Increased project visibility. 
4)
 
Increased pressure and stress. 
5)
 
Effective coordination. 
6)
 
Increased productivity. 
 
This article is organized as follows: Section II gives the 
definition of agile principles and practices used in the study, 
Section III describes the st
udy context and methodology, 
Section IV presents the results, which are related to earlier 
studies in Section V. In Section VI the results are summarized 
and discussed. Section VII concludes the article. 
2013 ACM / IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement978-0-7695-5056-5/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2013.533482013 ACM / IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement978-0-7695-5056-5/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2013.53348 II.
 
A
GILE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
 
The Agile Manifesto [11], created in 2001, lists a set of 
values upon which ASD relies. Along with these values, there 
is also a set of principles. Principles are “
domain-specific 
guidelines for life
” [12, p. 15], showing how the values can be 
applied in different areas. Thirdly there are practices, which are 
even more concrete, specific applications of the values and 
principles. This research was focused on the effects of agile 
practices. 
A.
 
Defintion of studied agile practices 
We studied the agile practices in use in the two projects, 
where effects were reported in earlier research [10]. The 
studied practices were defined as follows:  
Daily meetings
 - 
Agile development teams should have 
daily, short meetings to keep everyone up to date with the 
current progress and what others are doing [13]. 
Demo
 - 
At the end of an iteration, a working product 
incorporating the completed work should be demonstrated to 
the Product Owner and other stakeholders [14]. 
Empowerment 
– 
refers to agile development teams being 
autonomous, self-organizing and self-managing [14]. 
 
Information radiators
 – 
are highly visible physical displays 
of updated information about the software development project 
[13]. A Scrum task board is an example of an information 
radiator. 
Iteration planning 
– 
is done to decide what should be done 
in the coming iteration. Often includes preparing a sprint 
backlog, breaking down requirements to smaller work items, 
estimation of effort, as well as planning of what features should 
be included in coming releases [14]. 
Iterative and incremental development
 – 
is when software 
development is done in iterations, often called sprints. In each 
iteration, visible functionality – increments - is added to a 
working piece of software [13].  
Open office space
 – 
is when development teams are located 
together in an open environment that enables face-to-face 
communication [15]. 
Retrospectives
 – 
are meetings held at the end of an iteration 
to reflect on what went well and what could be improved for 
the next iteration [13]. 
Sign up
 –
 the practice of sign up means that teams members 
sign themselves up for tasks, instead of being assigned [13].
 
Task board
 – 
is a place where the progresses of tasks are 
visualized [13]. 
Whole team
 – 
means that an ASD team consists of people 
with a broad variety of skills, including analysts, developers 
and testers [15]. 
III.
 
R
ESEARCH DESIGN
 
To investigate what impact the use of agile principles and 
practices have in Project A and Project B, we chose to regard 
each project as a separate case and conduct a holistic multiple-
case study [16]. This methodology was chosen since it gives 
the opportunity to collect both quantitative and qualitative data 
[16] and gain a complex, detailed understanding of how agile 
principles and practices work in a natural large-scale, industrial 
setting [17], as opposed to e.g. an experiment where the issue 
under study is separated from its context [17]. The two studied 
projects were chosen to show different perspectives of a 
development process: one plan-based and one agile approach 
with different amounts of implemented agile practices.  The 
study was performed during the fall and winter of 2
012 and 
2013. 
The study is an explorative study in the sense that there is 
no predefined hypothesis to be tested; rather the goal is to 
contribute as much knowledge as possible within the selected 
areas of study. This has to be balanced against the time we can 
expect the informants to spend on the survey.  
A.
 
Research context 
1)
 
Company 
Ericsson is a global telecommunications company that 
develops, produces and sells telecommunications equipment, 
services and software. Software revenue accounted for 24% of 
the total revenue in 2011, making Ericsson the world’s fifth 
largest software company [18].
 
2)
 
The studied projects: 
a)
 
Project A – the plan-based project 
Project A is responsible for designing, developing and 
maintaining new versions of Product A – a product that 
supports telecommunication networks and have been in 
development for more than ten years. It has a hierarchical 
project organization and runs on a biannual release schedule, 
following a traditional waterfall model [9], with clearly defined 
and separate roles for separate departments. Extensive, 
document-intense handovers are necessary between the 
departments. That being said, steps have been taken to address 
perceived challenges in integration, dependency management 
and flexibility, caused by said model by implementing certain 
agile practices (see Table II). For instance, several teams have 
T
ABLE 
I  C
HARACTERISTICS OF 
P
ROJECT 
A
 AND 
P
ROJECT 
B 
Project A Project B 
Product age 
More than 10 years 1 year 
#People
 
420 (+ 480 external 
consultants) 
120 
#Teams
 
15 14 
#People/#Teams
 
28,0 8,57 
Development 
organization
 
Separate subprojects for 
System Analysis, 
Design and Integration 
& Verification 
Cross-functional 
teams. Separate 
supporting teams. 
Development 
team’s 
res
p
onsibilit
y
 
Horizontal: architecture 
layers 
Vertical: features 
Process model
 
Plan-based, waterfall Scrum 
Iteration length
 
1 month 3 weeks 
Product release 
fre
q
uenc
y
 
9 months 3 weeks (potentially) 
Integration 
fre
q
uenc
y
 
Once per month Continuously 
Architecture
 
Component-based Service-oriented 
349349 begun working iteratively, some use Scrum, and continuous 
integration and test automation have been implemented in parts 
of the project. However, these efforts are typically partial; 
leading us to consider Project A to be a traditional, plan-based 
software development project. 
b)
 
Project B – the agile project 
The purpose of Project B is to design, develop and deploy a 
product, Product B, which in the long run can replace Product 
A. The project was launched in the beginning of 2012 and has 
not yet released any product to customers. Project B uses an 
agile project management method inspired by Scrum, 
consisting of a flat organization where everyone reports to the 
same agile manager. The development process is inspired by 
feature driven development (FDD) and the entire project is 
executed in iterations. Cross-functional teams are responsible 
for all phases in the development process, but supporting teams 
handle the project management, continuous analysis, 
Continuous Integration (CI) framework execution etc.
 
Every cross-functional team includes system analysts, 
designers and testers, as well as a Scrum Master and a Product 
Owner. The teams in Project B are responsible for features, 
compared to product/architecture layers in Project A. To enable 
the team to deliver business value at the end of each sprint, 
each team requires vertical competence across all layers of the 
system architecture and also across the design, implementation 
and testing areas. This requires a competence shift compared 
with the specialized functional departments traditionally used 
within Ericsson. Project B has implemented a large number of 
agile practices (see Table II) and we consider it an agile 
software development project.
 
In parallel with the new product, Project B designs and 
implements an extensive end-to-end CI framework. The idea is 
that the integration should be done automatically upon code 
commit, the tests should be automatically executed and 
feedback on build and test results should be given quickly to 
the developers. If the tests on all levels pass, the deployment 
should be made automatically. 
We consider that Project A and Project B differ sufficiently 
in their ways of working and are sufficiently similar in other 
aspects that the impact of using agile principles and practices 
can be studied by comparing the two projects. Regarding 
similarities, they both operate in the same corporate context 
and the people working in them don’t differ appreciably in 
education level or experience. Additionally they develop a 
product with the same functional requirements, which is to be 
sold to similar customers. Finally, the two projects have the 
same technical preconditions. They are both large-scale 
projects with hundreds of software professionals and more than 
ten different teams. 
B.
 
Research methodology 
1)
 
Literature review 
The first steps of a systematic literature review [19] was 
performed in order to collect propositions to what impact the 
use of agile principles and practices could have in Project A 
and Project B [10]. The search phrase 
“agile software 
development” AND (effect* OR impact*)
 was used in the 
Inspec database. Results were limited to articles written in 
English, Swedish and Spanish and published between 2005 and 
2012. The initial result set included 281 hits. After removing 
duplicates, 229 hits were left.  The title and abstract of these 
229 hits were investigated and 77 articles were selected for 
further investigation. After reading first the conclusions and 
then the full articles, any articles that were not based on 
empirical studies in an industrial setting were culled. This 
resulted in 17 articles. Finally 5 articles referenced in the 17 
selected articles were included, which yielded a set of 22 
articles used for data extraction. The results of the literature 
review were synthesized in a conceptual framework, consisting 
of possible effects of agile principles and practices within six 
different areas in Project A and Project B. We chose to focus 
on reported effects of concrete practices, to enable for 
transferability and comparability between different projects. 
The 14 articles most relevant to the results presented in this 
article are presented in Table IX. 
2)
 
Data collection 
Empirical data were collected through a survey of project 
members; the 1
st
, 2
nd
, and 5
th
 authors had further full access to 
internal documents concerning the two projects. 
The survey invitations were distributed via e-mail to a 
sample of 120 members of Project A and all 120 members of 
Project B, on two separate occasions during fall 2012. The 
surveys were open for one week (Project A) and two weeks 
(Project B) and hosted on a paid version of SurveyMonkey. 
The survey of Project A was responded by 34 persons, this is a 
response rate of 28%, which corresponds to 8.1% of the project 
members. The survey of Project B was responded by 52 project 
members, which corresponds to 43% of the total project 
members. 
The survey questionnaire included 30 questions in seven 
different sections: Background questions and experience of 
software development, Experiences of ASD in Project A/B, 
Knowledge sharing in Project A/B, Software documentation in 
T
ABLE 
II  A
DOPTION OF AGILE PRACTICES IN 
P
ROJECT 
A
 AND 
P
ROJECT 
B. 
Pro
j
ect A Pro
j
ect B 
Product backlog
 
Partial
 
Full
 
Collective ownership
 
Partial
 
Partial
 
Continuous integration
 
Partial
 
Full
 
Daily meetings
 
Partial
 
Full
 
Demos
 
Partial
 
Full
 
Empowerment
 
Not in use
 
Full
 
Iteration planning
 
Partial
 
Full
 
Iterative and  incremental development Partial
 
Full
 
On-site customer
 
Not in use
 
Not in use
 
Open office space
 
Full
 
Full
 
Pair programming
 
Not in use
 
Not in use
 
Refactoring
 
Not in use
 
Full
 
Retrospectives
 
Partial
 
Full
 
Sign up
 
Partial
 
Full
 
Simple design
 
Not in use
 
Not in use
 
Task board
 
Partial
 
Full
 
Whole team
 
Not in use
 
Full
 
350350 Project A/B, Project visibility in Project A/B, Work 
environment (Pressure and stress) in Project A/B and 
Coordination in Project A/B. The questionnaire also included 
an open-ended question that gave the possibility to comment 
on the ways of working in Project A/B. Participation in the 
survey was voluntary and the responses were collected 
anonymously. The full survey and a summary of the results are 
available in the appendix of [10] for free at: 
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se
:liu:diva-89658 
3)
 
Data analysis 
The data from all sources were combined and analyzed 
using the pattern-matching logic [16], where the theoretical 
patterns synthesized in the conceptual framework were 
matched with the patterns visible in the gathered data. The 
survey was analyzed with help of the software IBM SPSS 20. 
The presence of the expected effects of ASD in Project A and 
Project B was investigated by studying the mean [µ] and 
standard deviation [] of the questions that corresponded to an 
effect. The interval scale [20] used for these questions ranged 
between one and seven, where the endpoints represented 
‘extreme values’. Accordingly a mean value above four was 
considered an indication that the investigated effect was 
present in the project. To investigate differences between the 
two projects, the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test for 
independent samples was used, since the majority of the 
variables couldn’t be considered normally distributed in a 
Shapiro-Wilk test. The Mann-Whitney null hypothesis of equal 
means was rejected for an asymptotic significance (p) smaller 

difference in means between the two projects. 
C.
 
Validity of the study 
A low response rate can threaten the validity of a survey 
[21]. We can note that even though participation in our survey 
was voluntary, it yielded an acceptable response rate, 
especially in Project B. The respondents also represented 
different functional roles and levels of experience in a 
satisfactory manner. Another possible threat to the validity is 
that the survey questions don’t capture the real perceptions of 
the survey respondents [20]. To mitigate this risk we let 
persons with domain knowledge, including the project 
management of Project B, review the questions and the 
methodology and also piloted the questionnaire beforehand.  
To improve the validity, the study results was presented to 
Project A and Project B for validation and they were given the 
opportunity to present their views not only on the data, but also 
on our analysis. 
IV.
 
R
ESULTS
 
In this section we present the survey results of agile 
principles and practices found in Project A and Project B 
within the six studied areas. In each area we also formulate the 
findings and discuss possible explanations. We believe that 
readability is increased by focusing on one practice at the time, 
rather than splitting the content in one survey result and one 
discussion section. 
A.
 
Internal software documentation 
The members from both Project A and Project B perceived 
the “overall amount of internal software documentation” in 
their project as just right (see Table III). There was however, a 
significant difference between the two projects regarding 
several software documentation items. The internal software 
documentation items in Project B were on average perceived as 
very close to just right, while they in Project A were perceived 
as slightly too much. We can therefore see in Project B has a 
better, more balanced use of internal software documentation, 
rather than an insufficient use, as reported by [6]. There could 
be several explanations why we didn’t find the same pattern as 
[6]. A first one is that the findings of [6] simply aren’t valid for 
all agile projects, or for large-scale agile projects. It’s also 
possible that Project B isn’t fully following agile principles and 
practices in this regard. Assumable general Ericsson policies 
and directives affect the software documentation produced in 
Project B. 
The survey respondents from Project B didn’t perceive 
internal documentation as significantly more important, nor 
believe that it can be replaced with face-to-face conversation to 
a larger extent than the survey respondents from Project A. We 
therefore believe that internal software documentation is 
important, no matter the ways of working.
 
Surprisingly enough the survey respondents from Project A 
spent less time on documentation than the respondents from 
Project B. In Project A, 58.3% of the respondents spent 15 
minutes or less daily on producing internal software 
documentation, which is line with agile projects [6]. However, 
only 43.5% spent 15 minutes or less in Project B. Again, this 
may be explained by the large scale of both projects and 
general company documentation policies. It can also be a 
question of attitude. Members of Project B are working with 
the intention of being agile, which is generally conceived as a 
positive, more modern way working. Thus they might be less 
apt to complain. 
T
ABLE 
III  S
URVEY RESULTS ON THE AMOUNT OF INTERNAL 
SOFTWARE DOCUMENTATION
.
 
R
ANGE OF VALUES
1-7.
 
(S
IGNIFICANT 
DIFFERENCES IN ITALLICS
) 
Pro
j
ect A Pro
j
ect B 
µ

µ

Overall amount 
3.95 
1.40 
3.78 
1.10 
Importance of internal documents 
4.92 1.64 5.60 1.18 
Change requests 
4.46 1.29 3.88 0.90 
Code comments 
3.25 1.81 4.00 1.03 
Design specifications 
3.67 1.68 3.66 0.97 
Process documentation 
4.64 
1.71 
3.79 
1.08 
Requirement specifications 
4.59 1.47 3.37 1.30 
Technical documentation of code 
3.16 1.57 4.22 0.89 
Trouble reports 
4.87 1.49 4.00 0.65 
Work packages 
4.30 1.52 3.86 0.89 
351351 B.
 
Knowledge sharing 
The abstract concept of knowledge sharing was measured 
from three aspects: to what extent the project members help 
each other with their project work, to what extent they feel that 
their project members can help them and how much they have 
learned about other functional areas from team members. The 
survey results on knowledge sharing are found in Table IV.
 
There was no statistically significant difference in how 
much the project members got help or to what extent they felt 
that their team member have the necessary capabilities to help 
them. It was clear that knowledge was shared within both 
projects. There was however, a statistically significant 
difference between the two projects in the extent agile practices 
contribute to knowledge sharing, which supports the findings 
of [4] [22] [23] [24].  The members of Project B felt that the 
iteration planning meetings give insights about the project to a 
higher extent than the members of Project A. The members of 
Project B also felt that they get insights from the retrospective 
meetings and the demos to a much higher extent. 
In Project B there was further a significantly larger 
knowledge sharing between different functional roles, 
compared to Project A. The members from Project B had 
gained more insights from other functional areas than the 
members from Project A and had also performed a greater 
number of activities from different functional areas. We can 
interpret this that the practice of whole team is more widely 
spread in Project B, compared to Project A, and that this has 
had positive effects on the knowledge sharing. This would be 
in line with the findings of [4] and [24], who reported that the 
practice of whole team widens the developer’s knowledge and 
make team members able to perform each other’s activities.  
C.
 
Project visibility 
Based on the survey data (presented in Table V), there is a 
considerable difference of the perceived project visibility 
between the two projects. The members of Project A don’t 
consider themselves aware of the statuses of the other project 
teams, while the members of Project B do. The same 
statistically significant difference was present for the entire 
project’s status; Project A members didn’t consider themselves 
aware, while the Project B members did. This supports the 
findings of [2], [3] and [25]. The shorter development cycles 
and the constant delivery of value are believed to have 
facilitated for the project members to grasp the status of the 
project.  
When the survey respondents were asked outright what 
practices they considered important for their awareness of the 
project’s status, continuous integration and iteration planning 
received the highest scores, while open office space, demos 
and task boards received lower scores, although st
ill considered 
important in both projects. Both projects also considered 
themselves aware of the status of their own project team. Our 
results thereby confirm the findings of [3], that project 
visibility is increased by several agile practices. They also 
confirm the findings of [25], that it is possible to achieve 
increased project visibility in large-scale projects. 
D.
 
Pressure and stress 
The average levels of negative stress and pressure stated by 
the survey respondents from Project B are all slightly higher 
than the average levels stated by members from Project A (see 
Table VI). However, the difference was not statistically 
significant. The survey respondents from both projects felt 
moderately stressed and pressured by their project work. The 
negative stress caused by 
demos
 and 
sign-up
, as reported by [4] 
and [23], was present to a moderate extent inside both projects. 
Especially the 
demos 
are causing negative stress for the 
members of Project B. The negative stress caused by a pressure 
to report progress on the 
daily meetings
, reported by [7], does 
not seem to be present to a large extent neither in Project A nor 
in Project B. 
In summary, Project B with more agile principles and 
practices doesn’t increase the overall level of stress and 
pressure to a large extent, but some agile practices are 
perceived as stressful. Also, stress is something very individual 
and there was a high dispersion in the answers that these effects 
vary from person to person.  
 
T
ABLE 
VI  S
URVEY RESULTS ON PRESSURE AND STRESS
.
 
R
ANGE OF VALUES
1-7.
 
(S
IGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IT
ALLICS
) 
Pro
j
ect A Pro
j
ect B 
Level of stress caused b
y
 
µ

µ

Project work in general 3.59 
1.62 
3.93 
1.72 
Demos 
3.82 1.91 3.93 1.84 
Sign-up 
3.19 1.42 3.89 1.79 
Daily meetings 
2.94 1.95 3.32 1.99 
TABLE
 
IV S
URVEY RESULTS ON KNOWLEDGE SHARING 
R
ANGE 
OF VALUES
1-7.
 
(S
IGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IT
ALLICS
) 
Pro
j
ect A Pro
j
ect B 
 
µ
 

 
µ
 

 
Get help
 
4.77
 
1.45
 
4.98
 
1.27
 
Team members possess necessary 
capabilities
 
5.38
 
1.42
 
5.53
 
1.47
 
Number of activities performed
 
1.67
 
1.30
 
2.44
 
1.62
 
I have gained insights from other functional 
areas than my own
 
4.27
 
1.86
 
5.46
 
1.68
 
The sprint planning meetings give me 
insights about the project I wouldn't get 
otherwise 
4,33 
1,65 
5,40 
1,40 
The retrospective meetings give me insights 
about the project I wouldn't get otherwise 
3,70 
1,69 
5,32 
1,67 
The demos give me insights about the project 
I wouldn't get otherwise 
4,32 
1,84 
5,22 
1,64 
T
ABLE 
V  S
URVEY RESULTS ON PROJECT VISIBILITY
.
 
R
ANGE 
OF VALUES
1-7.
 
(S
IGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IT
ALLICS
) 
Pro
j
ect A Pro
j
ect B 
Awareness of
 
µ
 

 
µ
 

 
Team status
 
5.60
 
1.29
 
6.04
 
1.21
 
Other teams' status
 
3.32
 
1.70
 
4.27
 
1.94
 
Project status
 
3.64
 
1.87
 
4.98
 
1.64
 
352352 E.
 
Coordination effectiveness 
The level of coordination effectiveness in the two projects 
was asked for explicitly in the survey and calculated from a set 
of survey questions, constructed from the model of 
coordination effectiveness proposed by [26]. The survey results 
on coordination effectiveness are shown in Table VII. From the 
survey it was clear the level of coordination effectiveness in 
both projects was high. Finally we saw that the members from 
Project B felt more aware of the other teams, than the members 
from Project A. We consequently conclude that Project B has 
achieved a higher both inter-team and intra-team coordination 
effectiveness than Project A with less overhead. This supports 
the findings of [4].  
We believe that the most important contributor to the 
higher coordination effectiveness is the use of whole teams in 
Project B and the fact that these teams are responsible for 
features instead of architecture layers, as this has considerably 
reduced both the handovers between functional departments 
and within them, compared to Project A. The design of the 
open office space in Project B does also increase coordination 
effectiveness. While the members in both projects sit together 
in an open office space, the cross-functional teams sit together 
in Project B, and as such every team member is in the 
proximity of most persons he or she needs to coordinate with. 
This is in line with the concept of proximity that [4] described 
as an important coordination mechanism. Additionally it can be 
seen that the daily meetings form an important coordination 
mechanism in both projects, as proposed by [4] and [22]. 
Regarding information radiators, or more exactly task boards, 
they seem to be increasing coordination effectiveness inside the 
team, but not between teams. No significant difference in this 
was found between the projects and neither in Project B, where 
task boards are more consistently used by all teams did the 
project members feel that it helped them to know what the 
other teams are doing to a large extent. 
 
F.
 
Productivity 
Respondents from both projects mentioned productivity in 
the open-ended survey question. They thought that “time is lost 
on planning” when working in an agile way. It is true that the 
recurrent meetings associated with agile ways of working, e.g. 
daily meetings, retrospectives and iteration planning meetings 
take quite a lot of time. However, if the meetings were 
decreased, the many positive effects of the meetings we found 
both in earlier research and in our own study, among them 
improved project visibility and knowledge sharing, might be 
lost. More research on the effects of meetings is needed to 
investigate this argumentation. 
  
G.
 
Additional results 
A positive impact of several agile principles and practices 
was reported by the participants of the survey in Project A. 
This indicates that a partial implementation can give positive 
results. However, we see that the full implementation of the 
agile practices across the entire project in Project B gives 
stronger results. In summary, the way agile principles and 
practices are implemented in Project A, but especially in 
Project B, was found to have many positive effects according 
to our informants’ perceptions. We believe this provides 
evidence that agile ways of working can be beneficial in large-
scale implementations. 
T
ABLE 
VII S
URVEY RESULTS ON COORDINATION
.
 
R
ANGE OF 
VALUES
1-7.
 EFFECTIVENESS
.
 
(S
IGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN ITALLICS
) 
Pro
j
ect A Pro
j
ect B 
Coordination effectiveness 
 µ  
Perceived 4.80 
1.73 
5.14 
1.71 
Calculated 4.15 
1.63 
5.25 
1.03 
Daily meeting help in knowing what  team 
members are doing 
6.17 1.10 5.64 1.42 
Team task board help in knowing what 
team members are doing 
5.33 
1.80 
5.17 
1.76 
Other teams’ task boards help in knowing 
what they are doing 
3.93 
1.79 
4.18 
2.09 
353353 V.
 
R
ELATED WORK
 
The number of studies on ASD conducted in a large-scale 
industrial setting is limited [1] [8]. We therefore chose to 
include also studies conducted in small projects in our 
theoretical basis and the set of the related work [10]. In Table 
IX we show the earlier studies included in the theoretical basis 
most closely related to the results presented in previous section. 
Table VIII compares our findings with the findings of the 
earlier studies within the six studied areas, as well as within 
three study characteristics. In general, our findings confirm the 
effects observed in other industrial studies. However, we can 
note deviations within some areas. S2 and S4 reported that 
agile projects may produce an insufficient amount of internal 
software documentation, while we observed that the agile ways 
of working in Project B correlated to a more balanced use of 
internal software documentation. S3, S5 and S7 all reported on 
an increased level of pressure and stress when working in an 
agile way, but we saw no increase in the level of pressure and 
stress when comparing Project A and Project B. S8 and S9 are 
similar to our study conducted in a large-scale, industrial 
setting. S8 is conducted at Ericsson, but found no increase in 
productivity when changing from a plan-driven to an agile way 
of working. 
VI.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
A.
 
Summary of findings 
This study investigated the impact of using agile principles 
and practices in two large-scale software development projects 
at Ericsson – the largely plan-based project Project A and the 
entirely agile project Project B – within six different areas: 
T
ABLE 
VIII  O
UR FINDINGS IN RELATION TO RELATED WORK
. 
ID 
Documen-
tation 
Knowledge 
sharin
g
 
Project 
visibilit
y
 
Coordination 
effectiveness Productivit
y
 Stress 
Major 
method 
Major  
data source 
Population / 
team size 
Our 
work 
Balanced Facilitated Increased Increased. 
Possibly 
Increased 
Not 
increased 
Multiple-
case study. 
Survey. 86 
respondents 
Ericsson. Metrics 
420+120 
S1 
 
Facilitated Increased 
   
Single-case 
study 
12 semi-structured 
interviews. 1344 
defect reports. 
6 
S2 
Insufficient. Insufficient. Increased 
   
Multiple-
case study. 
Semi-structured 
and group 
interviews F-
secure. 
6+6 
S3 
 
Facilitated 
 
Increased. 
 
Increased. 
Multiple-
case study. 
11 semi-structured 
interviews. 3 
companies. 
6+10+5 
S4 
Reduced. 
Insufficient 
Insufficient 
    
Survey. 
Survey. 79 
respondents, 8 
teams, 13 
countries. 
Unkown 
S5 
     
Increased 
Single-case 
study. 
20 semi-structured 
interviews. 
Unknown 
S6 
Facilitated. Increased. 
Case 
study. 
Observations. 
U
nknown 
S7 
Reduced. Facilitated 
   
Increased 
Multiple-
case study. 
25 interviews. 10+9+8 
S8 
Reduced. Increased 
 
Insufficient No increase 
 
Singl- case 
study 
33 interviews 
Ericsson 
43+53+17 
S9   
Increased 
   
Survey. 
500 respondents 
Nokia. 
> 1000 
S10   
  
 
 
Survey. 129 respondents. Unknown 
S11 
    
Increased 
 
Experiment/ 
case study. 
eXPERT metrics. 
Rila Solutions. 
4+4 
S12 
 
Facilitated. 
  
Increaseed 
 
Single-case 
study 
XP metrics (Defect 
reports, LOC). 
Interviews. Sabre 
Airlines Solutions. 
6+10 
S13 
  
Increased. 
 
Increased 
 
Multi-
method: field 
interviews, 
survey, case 
study 
36 semi-structured 
interviews. 565 
survey respondents. 
Metrics (on-time 
and on-budget 
completion,  
software 
functionality). 
Survey: 
1750. 
S14   
  
Increased. 
 
Experience 
report. 
Internal surveys. 150 teams 
354354 Internal software documentation, Knowledge sharing, Project 
visibility, Pressure and stress, Coordination effectiveness, and 
Productivity.
 
The found effects in the studied projects were: 
1)
 
Balanced use of internal software documentation. 
2)
 
Facilitated knowledge sharing. 
3)
 
Increased visibility of the 
status of other teams and 
the entire project. 
4)
 
Effective coordination, with less overhead. 
5)
 
Possibly increased productivity. 
 
It was further found that: (i) Internal software 
documentation is important also in agile software development 
projects, and cannot fully be replaced with face-to-face 
communication. (ii) It’s possible to make a partial 
implementation of agile principles and practices, and still 
receive a positive impact. (iii) It’s feasible to implement agile 
principles and practices in large-scale software development 
projects.
 
Agile principles and practices were not found to 
increase negative pressure and stress within the studied 
projects, although some agile practices were perceived as 
stressful.
 
B.
 
Contributions to industry and research 
Our study provides more empirical evidence on the impact 
of ASD in large-scale, industrial software development 
projects, as asked for by e.g. [1] [8]. We had access to two 
large-scale, industrial software development projects during 
half a year and have been able to show that the use of agile 
principles and practices has had a positive impact in both of 
them. This could serve as a positive case for other industrial 
organizations planning to implement the same ways of 
working. We have also shown that a survey is a good source of 
data in a case study. 
C.
 
Limitations of the study 
We studied what impact the ways of working, namely an 
agile way of working, have within a software development 
project. It is unknown, but possible that other factors may have 
the same impact. The agile teams in Project A and all teams in 
Project B have implemented a wide range of agile practices. It 
was not always possible to separate which agile 
practice/practices have contributed to a certain effect. In many 
cases it is considered that the important contributor is the entire 
combination of agile practices. 
As for all case studies, transferability of the results be
yond 
the borders of the case is troublesome. In [16], Yin argues that 
transferability s
hould be discussed from the theoretical 
foundations upon which the study was constructed. We 
gathered suggested effects from other industrial studies and 
believe that when we confirmed the same effects, other 
industrial organizations with similar conditions should be able 
to achieve the same effects. Nevertheless all expected effects 
weren’t visible in the projects we studied and more industrial 
case studies in similar and different contexts are needed to fully 
understand how ASD works in large-scale, industrial software 
development projects. 
VII.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS
 
We have been able to perform a multiple-case study of two 
large-scale software development projects with a web-based 
survey responded by experienced informants as the major 
source of data. Since many factors were similar between the 
projects a comparative analysis was possible. The study at hand 
is one of few studies in a large-scale agile software 
development context.  
  
T
ABLE 
IX  T
HE MOST STRONGLY CONT
RIBUTING STUDIES 
INCLUDED IN  THE THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
 
ID Study reference 
S1 Transition from a Plan-Driven Process to Scrum - A longitudinal 
Case Study on Software Quality. Li, Jingyue, Moe, Nils B and 
Dybå, Tore. Bolzano-Bozen, Italy 
: u.n., 2010. International 
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and 
Measurement. 
S2 The impact of agile practices on communication in software 
development. Pikkarainen, Minna, o.a., o.a. 3, 2008, Empirical 
Software Engineerging, Vol. 13, ss. 303-337. 
S3 Coordination in co-located agile software development projects. 
Strode, Diane E, o.a., o.a. 6, 2012, The Journal of Systems and 
Software, Vol. 85, ss. 1222-1238. 
S4 Necessary and Neglected? An Empirical Study of Internal 
Documentation in Agile Software Development Teams. Stettina, 
Christoph Johann and Hijstek, Werner. Pisa, Italy : u.n., 2011. 
Special Interest Group on Design of Communication. 
S5 Escalation of Committ: A Longitudinal Case Study of Daily 
Meetings. Stray, Viktoria Gulliksen, Moe, Nils Brede and Dybå, 
Tore. 2012, Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, 
Vol. 111, ss. 153-167. 
S6 Workspace Environment for Collaboration in Small Software 
Development Organization. Mishra, Deepti and Mishra, Alok. 
2008, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 5220, ss. 196-
203. 
S7 Agile Practices: The Impact on Trust in Software Project Teams. 
McHugh, Orla, Conboy, Kieran and Lang, Michael. 3, 2012, 
IEEE Software, Vol. 29, ss. 71-76. 
S8 The effect of moving from a plan-driven to an incremental 
software development approach with agile practices. Petersen, 
Kai and Wohlin, Claes. 6, 2010, Empirical Software Engineering, 
Vol. 15, ss. 654-693. 
S9 Agile methods rapidly replacing traditional methods at Nokia: A 
survey of opinions on agile transformation. Laanti, Maarit, Salo, 
Outi and 
Abrahamsson, Pekka. 2011, Information and Software 
Technology, Vol. 53, ss. 276-290. 
S10 The Impact of Organization, Project and Governance Variables 
on Software Quality and Project Sucess. Abbas, Noura, Gravell, 
Andrew M and Wills, Gary B. 
2010b. Agile Conference. 
S11 Analyses of an agile methodology implementation. Ilieva, Sylvia, 
Ivanov, Penko and Stefanova, Eliza. 2004. Euromicro 
Conference. 
S12 Exploring extreme programming in context: an industrial case 
study. Layman, Lucas, Williams, Laurie and Cunningham, L
ynn. 
Salt Lake City : u.n., 2004. Agile Development Conference, 2004. 
S13 Toward Agile: An Integrated Analysis of Quantitative and 
Qualitative Field Data on Software Development Agility. Lee, 
Gwanhoo and 
Xia, Weidong. 1, 2010, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 34, ss. 
87-114. 
S14 Rolling out Agile in a Large Enterprise. Benefield, Gabrielle. 
2008. Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 
355355 VIII.
 
R
EFERENCES
 
 
[1]  T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, "Empirical studies of agile software 
development: A systematic review," 
Information and software 
technology, 
vol. 50, pp. 833-859, 2008.  
[2]  J. Li, N. B. Moe and T. Dybå, "Transition from a Plan-Driven Process to 
Scrum - A longitudinal Case Study on Software Quality," in 
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and 
Measurement
, Bolzano-Bozen, Italy, 2010.  
[3]  M. Pikkarainen, J. Haikara, O. Salo, P. Abrahamsson and J. Still, "The 
impact of agile practices on communication in software development," 
Empirical Software Engineerging, 
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 303-337, 2008. 
[4]  D. E. Strode, S. L. Huff, B. Hope and S. Link, "Coordination in co-
located agile software development projects," 
The Journal of Systems 
and Software, 
vol. 85, no. 6, pp. 1222-1238, 2012.  
[5]  J. Sutherland, C. Ruseng Jakobsen and K. Johnson, "Scrum and CMMI 
Level 5: The Magic Potion for Code Warriors," in 
Proceedings of the 
41st Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
, 
Waikoloa, 2008.  
[6]  C. J. Stettina and W. Hijstek, "Necessary and Neglected? An Empirical 
Study of Internal Documentation in Agile Software Development 
Teams," in 
Special Interest Group on Design of Communication
, Pisa, 
Italy, 2011.  
[7]  V. G. Stray, N. B. Moe and T. Dybå, "Escalation of Commitment: A 
Longitudinal Case Study of Daily Meetings," 
Lecture Notes in Business 
Information Processing, 
vol. 111, pp. 153-167, 2012.  
[8]  P. H. Breivold, D. Sundmark, P. Wallin and S. Larsson, "What Does 
Research Say About Agile and Architecture?," in 
Fifth International 
Conference on Software Engineering Advances
, 2010.  
[9]  S. L. Pfleeger and J. M. Atlee, Software Engineering Theory and 
Practice, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Education Inc., 2006. 
[10] L. Lagerberg and T. Skude, "The impact of agile principles and practices 
in large-scale software development projects - a multiple-case study of 
two software development projects at Ericsson," Linköping University, 
Linköping, 2013. 
[11] "The Agile Manifesto," 2001. [Online]. Available: 
http://agilemanifesto.org/. [Accessed 25 September 
2012]. 
[12] K. Beck and C. Andres, Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change, 2nd ed., Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2005.  
[13] "Guide to Agile Practices," Agile Alliance, 
2011. [Online]. Available: 
http://guide.agilealliance.org/. [Accessed 25 September 
2012]. 
[14] K. Schwaber, Agile Project Management with Scrum, Redmond, 
Washington: Microsoft Press, 2004.  
[15] F. J. Abrantes and H. G. Travassos, "Common Agile Practices in 
Software Processes," in 
International Symposium on Empirical Software 
Engineering and Measurement
, 2011.  
[16] R. K. Yin, Case Study Research, vol. 5, Thousand Oaks: Sage 
Publications, Inc., 2009, pp. 3-5, 18, 132-133. 
[17] J. W. Creswell, Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design, Thousand Oaks, 
California: Sage Publications Inc, 2007, pp. 40, 73-74. 
[18] M. van Kooten, "Global Software Top 100 - Edition 2011," 23 August 
2011. [Online]. Available: http
://www.softwaret
op100.org/global-
software-top-100-edition-2011. [Accessed 19 December 2012]. 
[19] B. Kitchenham, "Guidelines for performing Systematic Literature 
Reviews in Software Engineering," 2007. 
[20] P. Lekvall and C. Wahlbin, Information för marknadsföringsbeslut, 
Göteborg: IHM Publishing, 2001.  
[21] A. N. Manzo and J. M. Burke, "Increasing Response Rates in Web-
based/Internet Surveys," in 
Handbook of Survey Methodology for the 
Social Sciences
, New York, Springer Science+Business Media, 2012. 
[22] D. Mishra and A. Mishra, "Workspace Environment for Collaboration in 
Small Software Development Organization," 
Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 
vol. 5220, pp. 196-203, 2008.  
[23] O. McHugh, K. Conboy and M. Lang, "Agile Practices: The Impact on 
Trust in Software Project Teams," 
IEEE Software, 
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 71-
76, 2012.  
[24] K. Petersen and C. Wohlin, "The effect of moving from a plan-driven to 
an incremental software development approach with agile practices," 
Empirical Software Engineering, 
vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 654-693, 2010. 
[25] M. Laanti, O. Salo and P. Abrahamsson, "Agile methods rapidly 
replacing traditional methods at Nokia: A survey of opinions on agile 
transformation," 
Information and Software Technology, 
vol. 53, pp. 276-
290, 2011.  
[26] D. E. Strode, B. Hope, S. Huff and S. Link, "Coordination Effectiveness 
In An Agile Software Development Context," in 
Pacific Asia Conference 
on Information Systems 2011 Proceedings
, 2011.  
[27] G. Lee and W. Xia, "Toward Agile: An Integrated Analysis of 
Quantitative and Qualitative Field Data on Software Development 
A
gility," 
MIS Quarterly, 
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 87-114, 2010.  
[28] L. Layman, L. Williams and L. Cunningham, "Exploring extreme 
programming in context: an industrial case study," in 
Agile Development 
Conference, 2004
, Salt Lake City, 2004.  
[29] S. Ilieva, P. Ivanov and E. Stefanova, "Analyses of an agile methodology 
implementation," in 
Euromicro Conference
, 2004.  
[30] N. Abbas, A. M. Gravell and G. B. Wills, "Using Factor Analysis to 
Generate Clusters of Agile Practices," in 
Agile Conference
, 2010a.  
[31] N. Abbas, A. M. Gravell and G. B. Wills, "The Impact of Organization, 
Project and Governance Variables on Software Quality and Project 
Sucess," in 
Agile Conference
, 2010b.  
[32] G. Benefield, "Rolling out Agile in a Large Enterprise," in 
Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences
, 2008.  
 
 
356356