   Transition from a Plan-Driven Process to Scrum Œ A Longitudinal Case Study on Software Quality    Jingyue Li Norwegian University of Science and Technology  NO-7491, Trondheim, Norway jingyue@idi.ntnu.no  Nils B. Moe SINTEF NO-7465 Trondheim, Norway nils.b.moe@sintef.no  Tore Dybå SINTEF NO-7465 Trondheim, Norway tore.dyba@sintef.no   ABSTRACT Although Scrum is an important topic in software engineering and information systems, few longit
udinal industrial studies have investigated the effects of Scrum on software quality, in terms of 
defects and defect density, and the quality assurance process. In 

this paper we report on a longitudinal study in which we have 
followed a project over a three-year period. We compared 

software quality assurance processe
s and software defects of the 

project between a 17-month phase with a plan-driven process, 
followed by a 20-month phase with Scrum. The results of the 

study did not show a significant 
reduction of defect densities or changes of defect profiles after Scrum was used. However, the 
iterative nature of Scrum resu
lted in constant system and 

acceptance testing and related defect fixing, which made the 

development process more efficient in terms of fewer surprises 
and better control of software quality and release date. In 

addition, software quality and know
ledge sharing got more focus 
when using Scrum. However, Scrum put more stress and time 

pressure on the developers, and made them reluctant to perform 
certain tasks for later maintenance, such as refactoring. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.9 [Management]: Software quality assurance and Software 
process models General Terms Management and Measurement Keywords
 Empirical Software Engineering,
 Agile Software Development, 
Software Quality 
1. INTRODUCTION Traditional plan-driven development approaches emphasize 
predictability and stability in a project [6]. Agile software 

development [10] represents a new approach for planning and 
managing software projects. Agile development puts less emphasis on up-front plans and strict plan-based control and more 
emphasis on mechanisms for cha
nge management [23]. Agile 
development relies on people and their creativity rather than on 

formalized processes [8]. Leadership and collaboration, informal 

communication and a flexible and participative organizational 

form, and encouraging cooperative social action are other 

characteristics of agile software development [24].  
Both plan-driven and agile pro
cesses have context-dependent advantages and shortcomings [6].
 Huo et al. [16] compared the 
software quality assurance ac
tivities in waterfall and agile 
processes and argued that agile
 processes would offer better software quality and shorter time-to-market than waterfall 
processes. Results of  some studies [17, 20, 31] supported the 
argument of [16] and showed that agile processes helped to 

reduce defect densities. On the c
ontrary, a study by Abrahamsson 
[1] did not find a reduced defect density from using XP. Although 

some studies [1, 17, 20, 30] reported improved software 

development productivity after using agile methods, Harry Sneed 

warned in a panel [18] that lower development costs in agile 

projects might lead to higher maintenance costs later. However, 
few studies have examined whether agile processes actually 

facilitate software maintenance activities, such as defect fixing, 

system enhancement and adaption. Although Ilieva et al. [17] 

investigated the defect fixing efficiency of agile methods, no 

conclusion was drawn with respect to the impact of agile 

methodology on defect fixing efficiency. 
As more and more software companies are changing from plan-
driven processes to agile ones [4], it is important to perform more 

empirical studies in industry to va
lidate the conclusions of studies 

[1, 17, 20, 31]. We also need to
 find out whether agile processes offer better software quality, and most importantly, which 

practices of an agile process impact software quality and why.  
Our objective in this paper is to provide a better understanding of 
how agile processes affect software quality. To meet this 

objective, we have conducted a longitudinal case study on how 
the transition from a plan-driven to an agile process, i.e. Scrum, 

may affect software quality. More specifically, we sought to 

answer the following research question: 
How does the transition from a plan-driven process to Scrum 

affect software quality, in terms of defects and defect density, 

and the quality assurance process? In Scrum each sprint should produce potential shippable code. We 

therefore assume that defects should be discovered and be solved 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ESEM™10, September 16-17, 2010, Bolzano-Bozen, Italy. 

Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0039-01/10/09–$10.00. 
    faster than in a plan-driven pr
ocess. In addition, in a Scrum project, there should be more feedback and cooperation between the developers and between the developers and the product 

owner. Thus, we assume Scrum should make it easier to implement the ﬁrightﬂ functionality from the start. Motivated by 

these assumptions and previous studies we decided to investigate 
the research question by examining the following changes when a 

project was transited from a plan-driven process to Scrum:  The change in the quality assurance process. 
 The change in number and type of defects.  
 The change in efficiency of fixing defects. 
The rest of the paper is organized
 as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of agile software development and the process of transitioning from plan-driven to agile development. Section 3 presents the study design. Sec
tion 4 presents the results, and Section 5 discusses our findings and possible limitations of the 
study. Section 6 concludes. 
2. BACKGROUND The prevalent software developmen
t processes can be divided into plan-driven and agile [6]. Although practitioners and researchers 

are arguing on the benefits, s
hortcomings, and application contexts of plan-driven and agile processes [6], more and more 

software companies are introducing agile software development. A survey by Begel and Nagappan [4], for example, found that, by 

October 2006, 32% of their investigated teams had already used 

agile methods.  2.1 Agile Software Development and Scrum 
Agile software development comprises a number of practices and 
methods [12]. Among the most know
n and adopted agile methods are Extreme Programming (XP) [3] and Scrum [28]. XP focuses 

primarily on the implementation of software, while Scrum focuses 

on agile project management [28].  
Scrum has not only reinforced the 
interests in software project management, but also challenged the conventional ideas about such management. Scrum focuses on project management in 
situations where it is difficult to 
plan ahead, with mechanisms for 
ﬁempirical process controlﬂ; where feedback loops constitute the 
core element [28]. Compared with traditional command-and-

control oriented management, Scrum represents a radically new 
approach for planning and managing software projects, because it 

brings decision-making authority to the level of operational 

problems and uncertainties.  In Scrum, software is developed by a self-managing team in 
increments, called ﬁsprintsﬂ, st
arting with planning and ending with a review. A sprint typically lasts from one to four weeks. 
Features to be implemented in the system are registered in a 

backlog. Then, the product owner decides which backlog items 
should be developed in the following sprint. Team members 
coordinate their work in a daily stand-up meeting. One team 

member, the Scrum master, is in charge of solving problems that 

stop the team from working effectively. There are few empirical 

studies of Scrum in the research literature [10]. Most of the 

studies are lessons-learned or experience reports, such as [26], 
with little scientific backing of claims. Case studies of Scrum 

include examining the combination of XP and Scrum [13], the 
overtime amongst developers and customer satisfaction in Scrum 
[21],  experience with Scrum in a cross-organizational 

development project [9], and understanding the barriers of 

introducing self-managing teams in Scrum [22].  
2.2 Transition from Plan-driven Process to Agile Process Software practitioners and research
ers have investigated the gains and the possible issues of moving from a plan-driven process to 
an agile one in terms of softwa
re defect density and project 
productivity. 
Layman et al. [20] compared defect density (measured by number 
of defects/lines-of-code) before and after a project introduced XP, 
and observed that XP led to 65% lower pre-release defect density 

and 35% lower post-release defect density. Williams et al. [31] 

found a 40% reduction of defect density after introducing XP in 

an IBM project. Ilieva et al. [17] observed 13% fewer number of 

defects after introducing agile 
methods. However, Abrahamsson [1] did not find a reduced defect density from using XP. Thus, the 

conclusion of the impact of agile process on software defect 

density is still inconsistent.  
Regarding the relationship between project productivity and 
Scrum, Sutherland et al. [29] found that the use of Scrum in a 

company with CMMI level 5 almost doubled the productivity 

compared with projects using trad
itional processes. Furthermore, Benefield [5] claimed that Yahoo had experienced 39% 

productivity gains after the introduction of Scrum in more than 

150 teams worldwide. Richard et al. [25] concluded that much of 

the perceived increase in productivity from using Scrum at 3M 

came from the focus on delivering functional software.  With respect to the relationship between project productivity and 
other agile methods, Ilieva et al. [17] reported 42% productivity 

gain and Layman et al. [20] reported 50% productivity gains by 

using agile methods. Wellington et al. [30] reported 44% 

productivity gains by using XP. 
However, experience from Apple illustrated that improper uses of agile practices could be counter-

productive [19]. Rundle and Dewar [27] also indicated that an 

agile process might not lead to better Return On Investment (ROI) 
than a plan-driven process. Most previous studies focused on the 

productivity to produce code by measuring the line-of-code 

developed. Although Ilieva et al. [17] tried to measure the effort 

spent on defect fixing, no data and conclusion were presented. 3. RESEARCH DESIGN To answer our research question and to investigate the impact of 

agile processes on software quality assurance process and the 
defects of developed software, we used a longitudinal single-case 
holistic study [32]. When programmers change from the plan-

driven process to Scrum, they usually need time to learn Scrum 

and to be familiar with it. We chose to perform a longitudinal case 

study, because we believed that such a study was helpful to avoid 

the biased comparisons between an established plan-driven 

process and an immature Scrum pr
ocess. In addition, we believed that such a study could give us better opportunities to collect 

qualitative and quantitative data to examine how the change in 

software development processes impacted software defect density 
and defect profiles.    3.1 Investigated Company and Project The context information of the investigated company and project 
is as follows:   Company: The study was carried out within a large Norwegian 
company. One large and important part of their operation is their 
software development with approximately 150 employees in three 
organizational units. The company produces specialized software 

for the engineering domain. The company sells mass-market 

software and also writes customer specific software on a contract-

basis. All developers of the project investigated are located at the 

company™s headquarter in Oslo, Norway. The company also 

conducts software development in its offices in China, Eastern 
Europe, and UK.  Product and market: The aim of the project was to develop a 
software system for asset inte
grity management of off-shore 
installations. The size of the system built by this project had more 
than 300 Non-commented Kilo-Lines-of-Code. The project was a 

fixed price, one customer project. The customer got high 
confidence in the team, letting them take several of the decisions, 

such as reprioritizing releases, without being involved too much. 

This trust made the team strive
 for delivering code with no post-
release defects. So far, the customer reported only one defect after 

system deployment. 
Practice, Tools, Techniques: The software was developed on 
.NET framework in Visual Studio using C#.  
People: The investigated project consisted of one project manager 
and five developers allocated 100% on the project. Two of these 
developers were external consultants. Some temporary 
employees, who contributed in less 
than 10% of the total effort, also worked on the project to substitute developers occasionally, 
due to the developers™ vacations, sick-leave, or increased 

workload in certain periods. Most of the developers had more 

than 10-years software development experience.  
Processes
: The first three phases of the project used a traditional 
plan-driven process. This study examined the third phase of the 

project, which lasted from 1st January 2006 to 31st May 2007. 

This third phase is called pre-Scrum phase in this paper. In the 

fourth phase of the project, Scrum was introduced. The project 

team participated in a two-day introduction course on Scrum. One 

of the developers worked as a Scrum-master, and the former 

project manager was the product owner. The product owner was 
also doing the system and acceptance testing, and handling 

traditional project management task
s. The Scrum-master of this 
project got the Scrum-master certif
ication after 6 months of using Scrum.  
Introducing Scrum involved iterative development, empirical process control, and continuous system testing, and so on. An overview of the changes from the pre-Scrum phase to the Scrum 
phase is shown in Table 1.  
The first sprint lasted four weeks, but they changed this to 14 
days after a couple of sprints. Each sprint ends with a review 

meeting and starts with a 30 
minutes retrospective meeting followed by a 1-2 hours planning 
meeting. During the planning meeting, tasks are assigned to people on the basis of competence. 
The team was initially highly specialized, but they also had a 

focus on letting people try out new areas to reduce their 

vulnerability and to constantly challenge the developers.  The 
project manager said: ﬁI need happy people, and therefore I need 

to think beyond the sprintﬂ.  
Table 1. Differences between Scrum and pre-Scrum phases 
Process/practice Scrum 
phase 
Pre-Scrum 
phase 
Iterations and Increments 
X  
On-Site Customer (*) X X 
Continuously system and acceptance 
testing and defect fixing  X  Detailed planning up front  X 
Adaptive planning  X  
Effort estimation up front  X 
Empirical process control X  
Self-managing teams 
X  
Retrospective X  
Daily meetings 
X  
Frequent integration X  
Refactoring X  * The project owner represents the customer in our investigated project
 In the pre-Scrum phase, the proj
ect manager did all system and 
acceptances testing after all functionalities were implemented. 

This last period, including system and acceptance testing, and 

related defect fixing, lasted 6 
months. After introducing Scrum, system and acceptance testing were done every 14 days. The 

system and acceptance testing were still performed manually by 

the product owner, but defects 
were now found continuously and 
not only at the end of a release. When a critical defect was found, 

it was usually fixed inside the sprint. However, if the defect 

required too much work and was 
not critical, it was added to the list of work to be done in the next sprint or in the final sprint.  To illustrate the status and flow of tasks, the project members 
created a Scrum ﬁwallﬂ (shown in Figure 1). By using the ﬁwallﬂ, 

every task is visible, and categor
ized into ﬁTo Doﬂ, ﬁIn Progressﬂ, 
ﬁTestingﬂ, ﬁPostponed (next sprint
)ﬂ, and ﬁFinishedﬂ. When the developers complete a feature, it 
is moved to ﬁTestingﬂ. Then the product owner will test it before moving it to ﬁFinishedﬂ.  
 Figure 1. The Scrum wall 
3.2 Data Collection and Analyses To answer the research question, we collected qualitative and 
quantitative data, including interviews and defect reports.     3.2.1 Qualitative data  We participated in and observed the introduction and tailoring of 

Scrum to the project. We discussed 
with the project participants to understand how Scrum changed their working processes.  Eight months after Scrum was introduced, the second author 

interviewed all project members. Another round of interview with 
all project members was performed 20
 months after Scrum was 
introduced. The product owner was interviewed four times. Each interview lasted from 20 to 50 minutes. The interviews were 

semi-structured to understand how Scrum was applied and how 
the introduction of Scrum affected and changed their development and testing process. We focuse
d on understanding testing, work coordination, internal team co
mmunication, feedback-sessions, planning and estimation, and decision making.  In addition to the interviews we arranged feedback session after the interview and after the analysis
 of the defect reports of the project. This was done to make 
the project members explain and comment on the results of our defect report analyses.   
The interviews were transcribed and then imported together with 
the notes from discussions, feedback sessions and the introduction 

of Scrum, into a tool (called NVivo) for analyzing qualitative 

data. In the analysis, we emphasized on how the quality assurance 

processes had changed, and how 
different participants in the project interpreted this changes. Material to describe these processes were taken across all sources and synthesized. 
3.2.2 Quantitative data  To collect quantitative data, we collected defect reports from the 

project during the pre-Scrum phase. We also collected data of 

defects reported from 1st June 2007 to 29th January 2009 during 
the Scrum phase.   We collected 449 defects reporte
d during the pre-Scrum phase and 895 defects reported during the Scrum phase. For defect 
analyses, we included only defects that could be reproduced and 

had been closed.  For defects reported in the pre-Scrum phase, 32 of them in the 
status ﬁopenﬂ or ﬁcancelledﬂ were excluded, because these defects 

were either not fixed, or were
 wrongly reported as defects. For 

defects reported in the Scrum phase, 69 were excluded for the 
same reasons. For the remaining 
417 defects in pre-Scrum phase, we excluded 59 defects, either because they could not be 

reproduced, or because they were not confirmed as defects and 

were therefore rejected by developers, or because they were 

duplications of other defects. Similarly, 130 defects reported in 
the Scrum phase were excluded. 
At the end, 358 defects from the pre-Scrum phase and 696 defect
s from the Scrum phase were regarded as valid and used for our defect report analysis. 
The collected defect reports included all defects discovered by the 

system and acceptance tester. When a defect was detected during 

such testing, a defect report was written and stored in an in-house 

built tool. Each defect report contained the following items: an 

ID, a headline to briefly describe the defect, status (indicating 

whether the defect has been fixed or not), subsystem location (e.g. 
one or several components of the system), responsible person to 
fix the defect, details of the de
fect, and developers™ comments on the defect (typically also including information about how the 

defect was fixed), the name of the tester (usually the product 
owner), and priority (indicating the urgency of fixing the defect) 

assigned by the testers. Four prio
rity levels were defined by the 
company: 
 Critical - defects that are very
 serious and must be fixed quickly in order to meet the deployment requirements. 
 High - defects that are serious and must be fixed.  Medium - defects that are not critical, and there exists a 

work-around. An evaluation is undertaken to review 

whether a fix is required or not.  Low - defects representing a weakness in the code that 

may cause the inconvenience of using the system or a 

failure of the system. It is subject to reviews and may 

result in a correction request.  We classified defects of both pre-Scrum and the Scrum phases 
into different defect types, by using the Orthogonal Defect 
Classification (ODC) [7]. ODC focuses on tracing each defect 

back to a specific stage of development. Another popular 

classification scheme is the one from HP [15] aiming at initiating 

a process improvement activity to prevent the defect early. 

Although there are disagreements about the repeatability of ODC 

[11], we selected ODC, because our research goal was to link 

defects back to the development practices of a project. To 

successfully use a defect classification scheme, it is recommended 

to tailor the scheme based on the company and system [14]. We 

used the defect 
type and qualifier attributes of the ODC and 
slightly adjusted the values of these two attributes according to 

our investigated system. The defect 
type and qualifier attributes we use and their values are shown in Table 2.  Table 2. Values of the defect type and qualifier attributes  
Attributes 
Values and definition 
Functionality: The function of the system is not 
satisfactory  
Algorithm: Logic and computation problems that can be fixed by (re)implementing an algorithm of a 

class or component Relationship: Problems related to interaction or 
synchronization between components 
Data: Problems related to structure, content, or declaration of data or files GUI: Layout problem of the GUI 
Checking
: Problems related to validation of 

parameters or data in conditional statements. 
Defect type 
Message: Problems related to message presented to the user of the system 
Missing
: The defect was to due to an omission Better: The current implementation is function but is not satisfactory 
Qualifier Wrong: The defect was to due to a commission   
4. RESULTS In what follows, we will use the data we collected to present our findings on the impact of Scrum on software quality assurance 

process, software defects, and defect fixing efficiency.   
4.1 Software Quality Assurance Process 
As mentioned in Section 3.1, the project did not perform any 
system or acceptances testing during the first 11 months of the 
   pre-Scrum phase, and consequently did not report or close any 
defects in this period. In the Scrum phase, there were four releases 
(the release dates were 29th November 2007, 1st February 2008, 
2nd July 2008, and 29
th January 2009). System and acceptance 
testing and related defect fixing were performed in every sprint of 
a release. Each release ended by a release sprint consisting of 

final system and acceptance testing and related defect fixing, and 

to prepare a handover to the customer. We analyzed the reporting and closing date of defects and 
calculated the number of defects reported and closed at a certain 

date, in pre-Scrum and Scrum phases. The results are shown in 
Figure 2 and Figure 3 respectively. Figure 3 confirms that system 

and acceptance testing and rela
ted defect fixing were done continuously in the Scrum phase. We found the percentages of 

defects fixed before the release sprint to be 69%, 60%, 54%, and 

46% respectively for releases 1 to 4. The reason for leaving 

defects unsolved until the release sprint was motivated by the 

need of keeping the pace up. Usually all critical defects were 

solved while sprinting.    Figure 2. Numbers of defects both reported and closed in the 
17 months of the pre-Scrum phase  
The new process of finding and solving defects was a big change to the company. The interesting 
question is then: what is the 
effect of this change? The answer can be found in the interview 

data. During the interviews, the product owner commented that the 
focus on software quality had increased after introducing Scrum, 

because of continuous feedback in the daily meetings, short 
sprints, and sprint retrospectives. She said: Now [as opposed to the pre-Scrum phase] the project is 

measured every sprint, and we are focusing on how good this 

sprint was. Did we deliver w
hat was promised? Was there few or many defects? Did we correct all the defects? There is an 

increased focus in the whole project about these issues.   Figure 3. Numbers of defects both reported and closed during 
the first 20 months after Scrum was introduced  
The project owner also felt she got a better overview of the 

software quality, because critical defects where found and 

corrected every 14 days. She continued:  
There was an enormous list of defects and errors in the last 
phase of pre-Scrum phase. It was not easy to have a good 

overview of this list regarding required work to fix them. Also when correcting one defect, anot
her was found. This resulted in new defects being found late in the process. The team experienced that applying Scrum ensured that defects 

were dealt with within a reasonable timeframe. As a result, they 
knew that the amount of remaining defects before deployment 

was much more manageable compared with the plan-driven 

process. They also experienced, when using the plan-driven 

process, they lacked a good understanding of remaining work 

since, system and acceptance testing was done in the end, and as a 

result the team had difficulties meeting agreed deadlines. One 

developer said:  Now, the sum of unexpected "happenings" in the last phase 

has decreased significantly. 4.2 Defect Profiles The project owner did not believe that defects introduced by 

developers were reduced, because of using Scrum. She said: 
   From my perspective I do not believe that a software 
development project run with the use of Scrum in itself reduces 

the defect density much. People are people and errors will be 

made irrespective of process applied. The developers, on the other hand, 
felt that the Scrum process was 
helpful to reduce the defect density. One developer said: 
We felt encouragement to deliver executable and high quality 

code during each sprint. We were also motivated to do more unit tests on our code before these codes are delivered to the 

project owner for system or acceptance testing.  
 Another developer menti
oned that Scrum increased 
communication and overall understanding of the code, and this 
would reduce the number of defects. She said:  I believe it should be fewer defects after introducing Scrum 
because we are now communicating more frequently about 
what we were doing before. Especially the short meetings 
every morning improve the team communication, and in these 
meetings we clarify problems and resolve uncertainties regarding the tasks we are solving. If you are stuck you get 
help.  To examine whether the number of defects was actually reduced 

due to the Scrum practices, we compared the defect densities of 

the pre-Scrum phase and the Scrum phase. One option is to use 

the size of the newly built code divided by the number of defects 

to measure the defect density. 
However, we found this measure 
was problematic to use. Both the pre-Scrum phase and Scrum 
phase covered a combination 
of improvements on previous delivered functionalities and deve
lopment of new functionalities. 
It was therefore difficult to distinguish newly built code and to 

measure its size. The team also integrated some third-party 

components into the system and made it even more difficult to 

calculate the newly developed code. In addition, the team did 

some refactoring in a few releases. Code refactoring is the process 

of changing the source code w
ithout modifying its external 
functional behavior in order to improve some of the nonfunctional attributes of the software. After the refactoring the number of 

lines-of-code is usually reduced. Th
erefore we used the number of 
defects divided by the develope
rs™ effort (measured by person-
hours) to calculate the defect densities of the pre-Scrum phase and 

the Scrum phase. The total effort developers spent on the pre-Scrum phase was 
10,768 person-hours. The total effort developers spent in the four 
releases of the Scrum phase was 16,720 person-hours. Thus, the defect density of the pre-Scrum 
phase was 33.4 (i.e. 358/10.8) per 
thousand person-hours, while the defect density of the Scrum 

phase was 41.7 (i.e. 696/16.7) per thousand person-hours.  Although it looks that the pre-Scrum phase has 25% lower defect 

densities than the Scrum phase, it does not show the whole story. 

After we examined the effort developers spent on the last 6 

months of the pre-Scrum phase, we found that they used 3,869 

person-hours on the fixing the defects found by system and 

acceptance testing. This was 36 % of all the effort developers 

spent in the pre-Scrum phase. The team used a lot more hours 

than expected in this phase. We 
also believe that the density of 
defect introduced during defect fixing is lower than the density of 

defect introduced during new development. Therefore, we 

probably included too many pe
rson-hours, which might have introduced defects, than actual in
 the pre-Scrum, and therefore 
made defect density of the pre-Scrum phase look lower than the 

Scrum phase. Ideally, we should have used the defect introduced 

during development to divide effort spent on development only to 

calculate the defect density. However, the dilemma was that we 

could not distinguish the effort the developers spent on the 

development and defect fixing during the Scrum phase, because 

development and defect fixing were
 done constantly in a sprint, 
and the effort were not distinguished in the company™s effort 

tracking system.  
In addition to defect densities, we also examined whether the 
defect type profiles of the pre-
Scrum phase were different with those from the Scrum phase. After the defects were type-
classified, we compared their distributions. First, we just used the 

type attribute without using the 
qualifier attributes. Results are shown in Figure 4 and illustrate that there is no significant 

difference of the distributions of different types of defects 
between pre-Scrum phase and Scrum phase.   Figure 4. Comparison of distributions of different types of 
defects between pre-Scrum phase and Scrum phase 
Then, we classified defects by using both
 type and qualifier. The results are shown in Figure 5. As 
the results show that the Scrum 
phase has a slightly higher share of defects with type ﬁwrong 

functionalityﬂ than the pre-Scrum phase, we asked the product 

owner to explain the phenomenon, because we had expected a 

lower number in the Scrum phase. 
She explained that this was because the two consultants were replaced when introducing 

Scrum. The new hired consulta
nts had limited domain knowledge, and as a result, they found it was difficult to understand the 

requirements unless specifically stat
ed or explained. This resulted 
in more defects being reported as ﬁwrong functionalityﬂ.   
To examine whether there were differences between a mature and 
immature Scrum, we also compared the defect type-profiles in the 

four releases of the Scrum phase. The results are presented in 

Figure 6. Again, we cannot see significant difference of the 

distributions of different types of
 defects between releases of the 
Scrum phase, except a slightly higher ﬁbetter GUIﬂ share in the 

third release. The project manager explained that the higher 

ﬁbetter GUIﬂ was due to the extra money they got in this release 

to improve the GUI.    
    Figure 5. Comparison of distributions of different types of 
defects with qualifiers between pre-Scrum phase and Scrum 
phase 
 Figure 6. Comparison of distributions of different types of 
defects with qualifiers between releases of the Scrum phase 
In addition, we analyzed the 
priority of defects in the pre-Scrum 
phase and the Scrum phase. The results show that 47% of defects 
in the Scrum phase were given the priority value ﬁcriticalﬂ, while 
only 10% of defects in the pre-Sc
rum phase were classified as 
ﬁcriticalﬂ. The product owner explained: The differences of the priority values of the defects do not 

mean that defects discovered in the Scrum phase are more 

critical than those discovered in
 the pre-Scrum phase. In the pre-Scum phase, the priority value of a defect was assigned 
when the defect was detected. The priority was never changed 

afterwards. However, in the Scrum phase, defects were given a 
priority value when it was disco
vered. The defects classified as ﬁcriticalﬂ were usually fixed while sprinting. Defects not 

classified as ﬁcriticalﬂ could be postponed to later sprints for 
fixing. Before we entered the last sprint of a release, I went through all the defects once more and updated their priorities. 

The remaining defects were recl
assified from ﬁhighﬂ or ﬁlowﬂ to ﬁcriticalﬂ. That is why a lot of defects in the Scrum phase 

were classified as ﬁcriticalﬂ.  4.3 Defect Fixing Efficiency To verify whether developers us
ed less time fixing defects in the 
Scrum phase than in the pre-Scrum phase, we need to know the 

developers™ effort spent on fixing defects. As mentioned in 

Section 4.2, in the pre-Scrum phase, 3,869 person-hours were 
spent by developers to fix def
ects, which was 36% of the total effort developers spent in the pre-Scrum phase. As explained in Section 4.2, in the Scrum phase the team did not distinguish hours 
used on development with hours spent on defect fixing, because 

development and defect fixing were interwove. However, the 
team members reported in the interviews that they experienced a 

much better defect fixing performance. The product owner said:   We believe the decreased effort to fix defects is the main 

benefit of using Scrum. During pre-Scrum phase, the system 
testing and defect fixing happened at the very late stage of the 

project. When a defect was discovered, it took a long time to 

discuss if it was a defect. In addition, it took the developer a 

lot of time to remember the code they were working on several 

months ago and to recall which part of the code was possibly 
related to the defect.  Another said:  We remember very well what we have programmed recently. It 

is much easier to figure out th
e reasons for the defect and to correct the defect than before. Another advantage of Scrum is 
that we [the developers] discuss issues during the daily sprint 

meeting and get feedbacks or s
uggestions from others. That 
also helps in fixing the defects quickly.  Additionally, with Scrum, 
when someone was missing 
competence or got stuck solving a task, this would be reported in 

the daily meetings and constantly
 during the working day. A team 
member, who had problems with implementing some code in the 
system, would immediately ask for help, and then sit together 

with others to solve the problem. The product owner said:  No one is allowed to waste hi
s working hours by being stuck. You are allowed to use 10 minutes
 trying to solve the problem, 
but if you are still stuck you should get up and then ask: do 

anyone know this? And it is likel
y that someone else can help you. You lose face if you do not ask for help.  
Furthermore, a developer said: We felt that the team was more protected in the Scrum phase 

than before. We did not need to jump from one project to 

another and jump back frequently, as what had happened in 

pre-Scrum phase. In addition, we felt that the quick feedback 

and knowledge sharing from the daily sprint meeting have 

helped us to understand the system better and to learn from 

mistakes early. 
In the pre-Scrum phase, the team lost resources to other projects, 
as the product owner explained:  It was impossible to protect the team. When other projects ask 

for resources and they know you are going to deliver in 12 
   months, it is difficult to deny helping other projects. Now, 
when using Scrum, we deliver every sprint, and then it is much 

easier to say no.
 However, one developer repor
ted that introducing Scrum increased the pressure because of continuous delivery of running 

software and defect fixing. He said:  It is like having a pistol against your neck. It™s good and bad. 
You fix things now and not later. But there are also tasks you 

should have done like code refactoring. I think we do not use 

enough time on refactoring, because you need to deliver what 

you promised, and what the team promised.  5. DISCUSSION The results of our studies give insights to both industrial 

practitioners and researchers. For industrial Scrum users, our 
results show that different Scrum 
practices contributed differently 
to improve the software quality. For researchers, our studies show 

that combing quantitative and qualitative methods was helpful to 

make a credible industrial empirical study.  
5.1 Implication for Industry Our results showed that 
iterative development and early testing of Scrum contributed to manage soft
ware defects better. Sutherland et al.™s study [29] showed that early testing of the agile process 

reduced the amount of remaining code
 defects in the final test by 
42%. Our study showed that around half of the defects, especially 

the critical ones, were fixed before the last two weeks of the 

system deployment. This practice made it is possible for the 

project to avoid big repairs at the end of a release and to be able 

to deliver the product on schedule.  Surveys made by Benefield [5] 
showed that 68% of respondents believed that Scrum helped to reduce the amount of time wasted. 
However, the study did not investigate the reasons for such an 

improvement. Several studies [17, 20, 29-30] have found an 

increase in the number of lin
es of code produced when introducing Scrum. In our study, th
is measure did not make sense 
because developers copied and pasted code, refactored code, and 

used third-party components. Therefore, we focused on the 

productivity of defect fixing. Although we could not precisely 

quantify the defect fixing efficiency, the results of our interviews 

still illustrated that iterative development and early testing in Scrum helped to improved the efficiency of defect fixing 

compared to the plan-driven process, because it was easier for 

developers™ to remember code made a few weeks ago than code 
made several months ago. 
Knowledge sharing, retrospective and daily meetings also helped to improve defect fixing efficiency, 
since it was easy to report problems and to get help when solving 

a problem. These results are c
onsistent with findings from Richard et al. [25].  
The empirical process control of Scrum made it easier to keep a 
high focus on software quality than the plan-driven process. The 
late testing in the plan-driven process resulted in late discovery of 

defects, corresponding budget and schedule overrun, and little control over software quality before very late in the process.  
Although other studies [17, 20, 31] concluded that agile methods 
helped to reduce defect densities, our results did not support this 
observation. However, as we could not measure the new developed lines-of-code because of problems related to copy and 
paste, third party components, a
nd refactoring, our results were 
not directly comparable with these studies. We found a lower 

defect density in the pre-Scrum phase than in the Scrum phase. 

However this was explained by
 how the defect density was 
measured. The amount of extra hours needed to do the final defect 
fixing in the pre-Scrum phase resulted in lower density as 

measured by the number of defects per hour.  
Our study investigated a commercial company for more than three 
years. During such a long time, 
it was unavoidable to have sick leave of personnel and changes 
of developers. These changes might have affected the results, like the previously stated increase 

in ﬁwrong functionalityﬂ defects (see Fig. 5). Baskerville et al. [2] 

argued that an agile process was probably worse to deal with team 

members changes than a plan-dri
ven development process. That can partially explain why the project owner felt that the overall 

defect density of the project wa
s not changed after using Scrum. Khramov  [19] observed that there was no positive correlation 

between code quality and software 
project success. Khramov  [19] 
stated that how well the project could deal with volatile of 

requirements, how efficient the defect fixing was, and some other factors, would in practice decide the project success more than the 

code quality itself. Therefore, we would argue that the Scrum 

process helped to improve the chance of project success due to the 

early defect discovering and impr
oved defect fixing efficiency 
compared with the plan-driven 
process, even if the defect 
densities were not reduced much. 
5.2 Implication for Research Although several previous studies have concluded that agile process improve software quality and productivity, most studies, 

such as [5, 17], relied solely on quantitative data. Therefore, they 

could not figure out which Scru
m practices impact software 
quality and productivity to guide industrial practitioners to adapt 

such practices effectively. We found it was necessary to 

supplement quantitative data with qualitative studies to better 

understand which practices of the Scrum process impacted 

software defects and defect fixi
ng efficiency in what way and 
why. Relying on only quantitative data in our study would not get 

the right conclusions. We also found it is problematic to use either 
number of lines-of-code or effort to measure the defect density.  
Additionally, we found that quantitative data are valuable to 

validate observations and claims from qualitative studies. For 

example, our interviews with deve
lopers showed that they were 
confident that Scrum reduced defect densities, while the product 

owner had a different opinion. Our quantitative analysis of the 

defect type profiles supported the product owners™ observations 

and showed no differences with resp
ect to software defect profiles 
between the pre-Scrum and Scrum 
phases. By showing the results 
to the project members and by asking them, we figured out that 

several factors, such as personnel changes and insufficient domain 
knowledge, also influenced the overall software quality of a large 

and long-term system. Without quantitative analysis, it would be 

difficult for us to decide whose claim on software quality that best 

reflected the situation. 
   5.3 Possible Limitations of the Study The main limitations of our study were caused by the nature of 
the industrial data and by our data analyses. Our study was a 

longitudinal single-case holistic study. Although we could decide 

which data we wanted to collect and analyze, we could not force 

developers to collect the data
 for our own research purpose, because it might influence the productivity of the project 

negatively. Thus, we could not ask 
developers to divide the defect fixing effort with development e
ffort in the Scrum phase for our research purpose, because this functionality did not exist in the 
effort-tracking system of the company. Although the developers 

of the project felt that the defect fixing efficiency had been 

greatly improved after using Scrum, 
we did not have solid data to support such a claim. We also excluded some registered defects with ﬁopenﬂ status that might sli
ghtly have changed the results of 
our research question.  One possible threat to the trustworthiness of our data analysis is 
that some defects discovered during the pre-Scrum phase may 
have been introduced by development in prior phases. Some 
defects introduced during the Scrum phase may similarly be 
discovered after this phase. As the customer of the system 

reported only one defect after the system was deployed by the 

first three phases of the project, we generally believe that the 

system and acceptance testing were solid and few defects had 

escaped from one phase to the next phase.  Another possible threat to the trustworthy of our data analysis is 
that the functionalities and complexity of the system may have 
changed over time. According to the project manager, the 

complexities of the system implemented in the pre-Scrum and the 

Scrum phase were not significantly different.  
6. CONCLUSION This aim of this study was to
 provide a better understanding of 
how agile processes affect soft
ware quality process, software 
defects, and defect fixing efficiency. The results show that Scrum 

may not lead to a lower defect density than a plan-driven process. 

However, the Scrum process helped to increase the success 

opportunity of the project, because:  
 The short sprints mitigate the risk of not resolving 

issues promptly. Defects are discovered and corrected 

much earlier by using Scrum than by using the plan-

driven process, which gives the team better control over 

the project and improved defect fixing efficiency. 
 Daily Scrum meetings facilitate the knowledge sharing 

between project members. The quick feedbacks help 

developers to understand the system better and to learn 
from mistakes early, which is also helpful to improve 

the defect fixing efficiency.  
However, Scrum makes 
developers feel more stress to deliver functionalities on time and budget than the plan-driven process. 

This may make developers reluctant to perform certain tasks to 

ease later maintenance. So, future
 studies should investigate how to balance the high pressure of delivering functionalities with the 

need to perform supplementary tasks.  
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was supported by the Research Council of Norway 

through the project EVISOFT (174390/I40). We would like to 

thank all project members that participated in this study.  
8. REFERENCES [1] Abrahamsson, P. Extreme Programming: First Results from a 
Controlled Case Study. In Proceedings of the 29th 

Conference on EUROMICRO (B
elek-Antalya, Turkey, 
Sept., 2003). IEEE Computer Society, 259. doi= 

http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ISESE.2004.133

4895 [2] Baskerville, R., Ramesh, B., Levine, L., Pries-Heje, J. and 

Slaughter, S. Is Internet-Speed Software Development 
Different? IEEE Software, 20, 6 (Nov. 2003), 70-77. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MS.2003.1241369 [3] Beck, K. and Andres, C. Extreme Programming Explained: 
Embrace Change (2nd Edition). Addison-Wesley, 2004. 
[4] Begel, A. and Nagappan, N. Usage and Perceptions of Agile Software Development in an Industrial Context: An 
Exploratory Study. In Proceedings of the First International 

Symposium on Empirical So
ftware Engineering and Measurement (Madrid, Spain, Sept., 2007). IEEE Computer 

Society, 255-264. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ESEM.2007.85 [5] Benefield, G. Rolling Out Agile in a Large Enterprise. In 
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Scien
ces (Waikoloa, Big Island, Hawaii, Jan., 2008). IEEE Computer Society, 461. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2008.382 [6] Boehm, B. and Turner, R. Using Risk to Balance Agile and 
Plan-Driven Methods. IEEE Computer, 36, 6 (June 2003), 

57-66. doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MC.2003.1204376 [7] Chillarege, R., Bhandari, I. S., Chaar, J. K., Halliday, M. J., 

Moebus, D. S., Ray, B. K. and Wong, M.-Y. Orthogonal 

Defect Classification-A Concept for In-Process 
Measurements. IEEE Tr
ansactions on Software Engineering, 
18, 11 (Nov. 1992), 943-956. 
doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/32.177364 [8] Cockburn, A. and Highsmith, J. Agile Software Development: The People Factor. IEEE Computer, 34, 11 

(Nov. 2001), 131-133. 
doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/2.963450 [9] Dingsøyr, T., Hanssen, G. K., Dybå, T., Anker, G. and 

Nygaard, J. O. Developing Soft
ware with Scrum in a Small 
Cross-Organizational Project. In Proceedings of the 13th 

European Conference on Software Process Improvement 
(Joensuu, Finland, Oct, 2006). Springer Verlag, 5-15. doi=10.1007/11908562_2 [10] Dybå, T. and Dingsøyr, T. Empirical Studies of Agile 

Software Development: A Syst
ematic Review. Information and Software Technology, 50, 9-10 (Aug. 2008), 833-859. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2008.01.006 [11] Emam, K. E. and Wieczorek, I. The Repeatability of Code 

Defect Classifications. In Proceedings of the 9th 

International Symposium on Software Reliability 
   Engineering (Paderborn, Germany, Nov., 1998). IEEE 
Computer Society. 

doi=http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ISSRE.1998.

730897 [12] Erickson, J., Lyytinen, K. and Siau, K. Agile Modeling, 

Agile Software Development, and Extreme Programming: The State of Research. Journal of Database Management, 16, 
4 (Dec. 2005), 88-99.  [13] Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G. and Conboy, K. Customising 
Agile Methods to Software Practices at Intel Shannon. 
European Journal of Information System, 15, 2 (Apr. 2006), 

200-213. 
doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000605 [14] Freimut, B., Denger, C. and Ketterer, M. An Industrial Case Study of Implementing and Valid
ating Defect Classification 
for Process Improvement and Quality Management. In 

Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Software Metrics 

Symposium (Como, Italy, Sept., 2005). IEEE Computer 

Society, 19. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/METRICS.2005.10 [15] Grady, R. B. Practical Software Metrics For Project 

Management And Process Improvement. Prentice Hall, 1992. [16] Huo, M., Verner, J., Zhu, L. and Babar, M. A. Software 

Quality and Agile Methods. In Proceedings of the 28th 

Annual International Computer Software and Applications Conference - Volume 01 (Hong Kong, China, Sept., 2004). 
IEEE Computer Society, 520-525. 

doi=http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CMPSAC.2

004.1342889 [17] Ilieva, S., Ivanov, P. and Stefanova, E. Analyses of an Agile 

Methodology Implementation. In Proceedings of the 30th 

EUROMICRO Conference (Rennes, France, Aug., 2004). IEEE Computer Society, 326-333. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/EUROMICRO.2004.14 [18] Kajko-Mattsson, M., Lewis, G. A., Siracusa, D., Nelson, T., 

Chapin, N., Heydt, M., Nocks,
 J. and Snee, H. Long-term Life Cycle Impact of Agile Methodologies. In Proceedings 

of the 22nd IEEE International Conference on Software 
Maintenance (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, Sept., 
2006). IEEE Computer Society, 422-425. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSM.2006.34 [19] Khramov, Y. The Cost of Code Quality. In Proceedings of 

the AGILE 2006 (Minneapolis, Minnesota, July, 2006). 

IEEE Computer Society, 119-125. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AGILE.2006.52 [20] Layman, L., Williams, L. and Cunningham, L. Exploring 

Extreme Programming in Context: An Industrial Case Study. 

In Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (Salt 

Lake City, Utah, USA, June, 2004). IEEE Computer Society, 

32-41. 
doi=http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ADEVC.200

4.15 [21] Mann, C. and Maurer, F. A Case Study on the Impact of 

Scrum on Overtime and Customer Satisfaction. In Proceedings of the Proc. of the Agile Development 

Conference (Denver, USA, July 2005, 2005). IEEE 

Computer Society, 70-79. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ADC.2005.1 [22] Moe, N. B., Dingsoyr, T. a
nd Dybå, T. Overcoming Barriers 
to Self-Management in Software Teams. IEEE Software, 26, 

6 (Nov. 2009), 20-26. 
doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MS.2009.182 [23] Nerur, S. and Balijepally, V. Theoretical Reflections on 

Agile Development Methodologies. Communication of the 
ACM, 50, 3 (March 2007), 79-83. 
doi=http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1226736.1226739 [24] Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R. and Mangalaraj, G. Challenges of Migrating to Agile Methodologies. Communication of the 
ACM, 48, 5 (May 2005), 72-78. 

doi=http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1060710.1060712 [25] Richard, M., Kelly, R., James, G. and Brian, H. Scrum at a 

Fortune 500 Manufacturing Company. In Proceedings of the 

AGILE 2007 (Washington, DC, Aug., 2007). IEEE 

Computer Society, 175-180. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AGILE.2007.53 [26] Rising, L. and Janoff, N. S. The Scrum Software 

Development Process for Small Teams. IEEE Software, 17, 

4 (July 2000), 26-32. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/52.854065 [27] Rundle, P. J. and Dewar, R. G. Using Return on Investment to Compare Agile and Plan-driven Practices in 

Undergraduate Group Projects. In Proceedings of the 28th 
international conference on Software engineering (Shanghai, China, May, 2006). ACM, 649-654. 

doi=http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1134285.1134383 [28] Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. 
Agile Software Development with SCRUM. Prentice Hall, 2001. [29] Sutherland, J., Jakobsen, C. R. and Johnson, K. Scrum and CMMI Level 5: The Magic Potion for Code Warriors. In 
Proceedings of the AGILE 2007 (Washington, DC, Aug., 2007). IEEE Computer Society, 272-278. 

doi=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AGILE.2007.52 [30] Wellington, C. A., Briggs, T. and Girard, C. D. Comparison of Student Experiences with Plan-driven and Agile 
Methodologies. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual 
Conference on Frontiers in Education (Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, Oct., 2005), T3G-18.  [31] Williams, L., Krebs, W., Layman, L., Antón1, A. I. and 

Abrahamsson, P. Toward a Framework for Evaluating 
Extreme Programming. In Proceedings of the 8th Internation 

Conference on Empirical Assessment in Software 

Engineering (Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, May, 2004), 11-20.  
[32] Yin, R. K. Case Study Res
earch: Design and Methods (4th Edition). Sage Publications, 2008.   