 A Comparison of Software Cost, Duration, and Quality for Waterfall vs. 
Iterative and Incremental Development: A Systematic Review 
  Susan M. Mitchell and Carolyn B. Seaman 
Information Systems Department, University of Maryland, Baltimore County 
smitchel@csee.umbc.edu, cseaman@umbc.edu 
  Abstract 
 The objective of this study is to present a body of 
evidence that will assist software project managers to 
make informed choices about software development 

approaches for their projects. In particular, two 
broadly defined competing approaches, the 
traditional ﬁwaterfallﬂ approach and iterative and 

incremental development (IID
), are compared with 
regards to development cost and duration, and 

resulting product quality. The method used for this 
comparison is a systematic literature review. The 
small set of studies we located did not demonstrate 

any identifiable cost, duration, or quality trends, 

although there was some evidence suggesting the 

superiority of IID (in particular XP). The results of 

this review indicate that further empirical studies, 
both quantitative and qualitative, on this topic need 
to be undertaken. In order to effectively compare 

study results, the research community needs to reach 

a consensus on a set of comparable parameters that 

best assess cost, duration, and quality. 
  1. Introduction  
   The purpose of this systematic review is to gather 

and synthesize empirical evidence to provide 

convincing and illuminating support for software 

project managers who need to make informed choices 
about software development approaches for their 
projects. We have specifically examined evidence 

from empirical studies that compare waterfall 

(traditional) and IID processes with respect to 

development cost and duration, and resulting product 
quality. IID, for the purposes of this work, refers to a 
set of practices for building software in which the 

overall lifecycle is composed of several iterations, 

each of which grows the resulting system 

incrementally. Each iteration is composed of 

activities such as requirements analysis, design, 
programming and testing [1]. We, therefore, include 

evolutionary, incremental, and agile processes in the 

IID category. In contrast, our working definition of 

the waterfall approach refers to processes that are 

sequential in nature, without planned iteration among 
phases. 
   We have intentionally kept the definitions of 

development cost, development duration, and 

resulting product quality broad for the purposes of 

our work. Accordingly, we define development cost 
as any expense incurred to develop or maintain a 
piece of software, usually related to the labor 

expended. Duration is the calendar time required to 

develop a software product, from development 

commitment to deployment. Resulting product 

quality is the combination of internal product quality 
(e.g. code structure, defects, maintainability) and 
external product quality (e.g. functionality, usability, 

reliability, documentation).  

   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 

Section 2 explains the methodology that we used. 

Section 3 provides the review results and their 
implications. Lastly, we present our conclusions.  
 2. Method 
 
   The objective of our systematic review was the 

summation and synthesis of existing studies 

concerning the application of waterfall (traditional) 
and IID software development processes. In 
particular, we wished to locate empirical studies that 

have compared these two process types with respect 

to development cost and duration, and resulting 

product quality. The methodology that we followed is 
that established by Kitchenham [2]. 
   We conducted the systematic review between June 

2007 and February 2008, inclusive. The studies 

search portion of the review concluded in September 

2007. Therefore, any studies published after that date 

are not included. Our search was guided by the 
following research questions. 
  • What is the 
development cost
 of software 
produced using waterfall or its variations versus 
using IID? 
• What is the 
development duration 
for software 
produced using waterfall or its variations versus 
using IID? 
• What is the 
quality
 of software produced using 
waterfall or its variations versus using IID? 
 
Studies comparing portions of processes (e.g. a 

particular phase) were not considered suitable 

comparisons. Studies that made comparisons within 

like processes (e.g. two or more IID processes) were 
also not considered suitable. 
   The electronic databases that we searched were the 

ACM Digital Library, the ACM Guide to Computing 

Literature, IEEE Xplore, Computer Science Index, 

Computer Source, Elsevier, Inspec, ProQuest Digital 

Dissertations and Theses, Science Direct, Wiley 
InterScience, and World Scientific. The proceedings 
that were searched (other than those included in the 

databases listed above) were those for the Evaluation 

and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE) 

(formerly Empirical Assessment in Software 

Engineering) conference and the International 
Conference on Software Engineering and Knowledge 
Engineering (SEKE). In addition, the Google Scholar 

search engine was used. Search results were kept in 

an electronic log and the EndNote 

(http:\\www.endnote.com) bibliographic software 

package was used to store any potentially relevant 
studies that were located. 
 3. Findings and Implications 
    The results of our search for individual studies are 

given in Table 1. Using all resources, we located 30 
potentially relevant documents in total, nine pairs of 
which were revealed to be duplicates, leaving us with 

21 unique documents. We next applied a set of study 

selection criteria. The major criteria were that the 

study is written in English, it is a primary study, it 

has been peer-reviewed, it reports empirical results, it 
compares waterfall and IID processes, and it presents 
results concerning development cost and/or 

development duration and/or resulting product 

quality. Application of these criteria reduced the set 
of potentially relevant studies by ten. Lastly, we 

applied study quality assessment criteria. The major 

criteria were that the study is clearly and adequately 
described, its design is appropriate to its objectives, 
appropriate and rigorous data collection methods 

were used, appropriate and rigorous data analysis was 

performed, and the study conclusions are supported 

by its design, data collection methods, and data 

analysis.  Six studies did not pass the quality 
assessment stage. Of the six, two were earlier 
versions of other documents in our list, one™s 

waterfall process included elements of iteration, and 

the remaining three did not pass the actual quality 

assessment criteria. Our systematic review, therefore, 

resulted in five relevant studies. 
 Table 1. Search Results 
 Step 
# of 
Studies
 Total Documents  
30 
Total Unique Documents 
21 
Excluded by Selection Criteria (10) 
Excluded by Quality Assessment (6) 
Final Total 
5 
 
   Table 2 summarizes the five papers that constitute 

the final results of our systematic review. Meta-

analysis of study results is not feasible, as widely 

different parameters were used in the measurement of 

the dependent variables of cost, duration, and quality. 
A general synopsis of results is as follows. 
   Development cost was investigated by four of the 

five studies (Studies 1, 3, 4, and 5 in Table 2). Two 

studies (1 and 5) made effort comparisons using 

person hours by activity (e.g. requirements 
specification, coding) and total person hours. Study 1 
found no difference in total person hours between 

development models (waterfall, evolutionary, 

incremental, and XP), whereas Study 5 found that XP 

requires more total person hours than waterfall. 

Regarding individual activities, Study 1 found that 
XP generally spends less time in requirements 
specification than other models and Study 5 found 

that XP spends more time in testing than waterfall. 

   Two studies (Studies 1 and 4) made productivity 

comparisons as indicators of cost. Both studies 

demonstrated that XP produces code at a faster rate 
than waterfall. Study 3 investigated effort estimation
 Table 2. Summary of Systematic Review Results 
Study 
Objective 
Dependent Variables 
Summary of Results 
1 (Benediktsson, 
Dalcher et al. 
2006) 
 Controlled 
experiment 
 To investigate the impact of 
software development 
approach on the resulting 

product and its attributes by 
comparing V-model (VM), 
evolutionary model (EM), 

incremental model (IM), and 
extreme programming (XP) 
Cost
: effort, productivity 
Quality
: functionality, 
  reliability, usability,  
  efficiency, maintainability, 
  defects 
Cost
 Effort: XP groups spent significantly less time in 
requirements specification than V-model  and 

evolutionary model  groups. No differences in total 
person hours. 
Productivity: 1) XP produced significantly more 

Java LOC, 2) XP produced significantly more LOC 
in general than all other methodologies, 3) No 
differences between Java LOC per class between 

methodologies, 4) Significance not reported, but 
VM produced considerably fewer classes per 
project month (PM) than all other methodologies, 5) 

XP produced significantly more LOC per PM than 
VM, 6)  XP produced significantly lower number of 
pages per PM than all other methodologies, XP 

produced significantly higher pages per PM than 
VM, no differences in total pages per PM between 
methodologies 

Quality
: No reliable results 
2 (Lindberg, Hsia et 
al. 1988) 
 Controlled 
experiment 
To determine if the 
maintenance costs of an 
incrementally delivered 

system are different from 
those of a conventional system  
  Quality
: maintenance effort Quality
: 1) Person hours was mostly a function of 
the programmer™s ability than a function of the 
design method, 2) No considerable differences in 

total LOC changed (including comments) between 
design methodologies, 3) No considerable 
differences in total LOC changed (excluding 
comments) between design methodologies, 4) 
Number of modules changed consistently higher for 

incremental model, 5) No considerable difference in 
change in program size between design 
methodologies 
3 (Moløkken-
Østvold and 
Jørgensen 2005) 
 Interviews and 
analysis of project 
data 
To determine if there are 

differences in the occurrence 
of effort and schedule 
overruns between projects 

following flexible and 
sequential development 
models 
Cost
: estimation accuracy 
Duration
: estimation accuracy 
Cost
: 20% of sequential projects had accurate 
estimates versus 50% of flexible projects 
Duration
: Results inconclusive 
4 (Layman, 
Williams et al. 
2004) 
 Case study 
To evaluate the effects of the 
use of the XP methodology vs. 

previous use of waterfall with 
some XP practices for the 
same product 

 Cost
: productivity 
Quality
: pre-release quality,  post-
release quality 
Other
: team morale 
Cost
: 50% increase in code productivity using XP 
Quality
: 65% improvement in pre-release quality 
and 35% improvement in post-release quality using 

XP Other
: No inferences can be drawn 
5 (Macias 2004) 
 Controlled 
experiment 
To compare XP and traditional 
software development 
approaches in terms of quality 

and size of the product and the 
time required to produce the 
product 
Cost
: person hours by  activity 
Quality
: external quality,  internal 
quality  

Other
: size (number of functional 
requirements, non-functional 

requirements, test cases, size of 
code, percent of comments)
 Cost
: Total time spent by teams using XP was 
higher than teams using traditional. Testing time 
spent by teams using XP was higher than teams 

using traditional. 
Quality
: No statistically significant difference for 
either external or internal quality 

Other
: No statistically significant differences 
 accuracy in relation to development model. Results 

showed that effort estimations for flexible (non- 

sequential) projects are more likely to be accurate than 

those for sequential (waterfall-like) projects. 
   Quality was investigated by four of the studies 
(Studies 1, 2, 4, and 5). Study 1 had no reliable results. 

Study 5 demonstrated no statistically significant 

difference in quality between the XP and waterfall 

models. Study 4 indicated higher pre-release and post-

release product quality for XP as compared to 
waterfall. Lastly, Study 2 investigated product quality 
in terms of product maintenance effort. It found that, in 
general, there is no considerable difference in 

maintenance effort between products developed using 

a waterfall model and those developed using an 
incremental model. The authors also stated that the 
person hours required to make a product change is 

mostly a function of the programmer™s ability rather 

than that of the product design method that was used. 

   Only one study, Study 3, explored duration in 

relation to development model. The particular aspect 
 examined was schedule estimation accuracy. The 
authors stated that the results were inconclusive. 

   In summary, it can certainly be said that there is very 
little evidence supporting the superiority of either 
waterfall-based or IID models. Much of the work 

attempting to generate such evidence has been 

inconclusive, but there are a few results that support 

further investigation of the following propositions: 

 • XP projects require more effort than waterfall-
based projects. 
• XP projects require less effort in requirements but 

more in testing than waterfall-based projects. 
• Programmers are more productive when practicing 
XP than when following a waterfall process.  
• Effort estimation is more likely to be accurate for 
non-sequential processes than for sequential 

processes. 
• XP results in higher quality products than 

waterfall-based processes. 
 4. Discussion and Conclusions 
 
   Formal software development models have existed 

for decades. As waterfall is the oldest, and is still 

widely practiced, it tends to be the standard against 

which other development approaches are compared. 
However, claims of its relative superiority or 
inferiority are overwhelmingly expressed as experience 

reports, anecdotes, and opinions. Indeed, in general, 

minimal empirical evidence exists to support the 

advantages of any one model over any other regarding 
cost, duration, or quality.  
   Our systematic review uncovered only five empirical 

studies that have compared waterfall models to IID 

models with regards to cost, duration, and/or quality. 

Four studies made cost comparisons, four made quality 

comparisons, and only one made duration 
comparisons. The parameters used for each type of 
comparison differed widely from study to study, 

eliminating the ability to effectively compare study 

results. For example, product quality parameters varied 

from subjective measures, such as usability and error 

handling, to objective measures, such as the number of 
code defects and defect density. In order to compile a 
preponderance of evidence supporting a model™s cost, 

duration, and quality benefits, the research community 

needs to reach a consensus as to the parameters that 

best assess each of these aspects. 

   Of the five studies we located, three were controlled 
experiments (Studies 1, 2, and 5 in Table 2). Two used 
teams of undergraduate computer science students and 

one used what were referred to only as ﬁwell-educatedﬂ 

individual programmers. The use of students in 
academic research is a frequent practice and its 

shortcomings are commonly acknowledged [8]. The 

ability to generalize conclusions drawn from 
experiments using student programmers suffers from 
two principal realities. The first is that students are far 

inferior in skill level and experience to professional 

programmers. The second is that the products that 

students are able to create with their limited abilities 

and restricted time frames are significantly smaller, far 
less technologically complex, and of a much narrower 
domain than those developed in industry. Clearly, 

experiments with professionals provide richer and 

more generalizible results. However, we recognize the 

difficulties associated with conducting experiments 

involving professional developers. Therefore, student 
studies remain, out of necessity, a common source of 
evidence, and a valuable tool for working out the 

details of study design (including metrics definitions) 

before applying it in industrial settings. 

   Two of the studies (Studies 3 and 4) took advantage 

of historical project data. Study 3 used historical data 
to compare cost and duration estimation accuracy for 
waterfall-like and flexible (non-sequential) models. 

Study 4 used historical defect data to contrast the 

quality of a past project that used a waterfall model 

with a recent XP project. We see the use of historical 
data as a viable option for obtaining industrial, rather 
than student, data, although limitations exist. 

Additionally, open source projects may provide both 

past and current/ongoing cost, duration, and quality 

data, although categorizing the development 

methodologies used and obtaining the demographics of 
the developers may be tricky, if not unfeasible. 
   Another observation we have made is the almost 

complete lack of the collection of qualitative data. 

Study 3 was the only study that gathered qualitative 

data, using it to explore the reasons behind the 

difference in the quantitative results when comparing 
project costs. We believe that the use of qualitative 
methods would not only provide insight into 

quantitative results, but is a practical and necessary 

avenue to defining meaningful and consistent metrics 

for cost, duration, and quality comparisons. 
Additionally, qualitative investigation could provide 
the context and background needed to compare results 

from different studies even when different measures 

are used [9]. 

   Although waterfall is the oldest software 

development model, it is interesting to note that only 
one of the five studies was from an appreciably long 
time ago (1988). The other four studies are relatively 

recent, ranging from 2004 to 2006. This appears to be 

because of researchers™ desire to contrast waterfall-like 

models with more recent agile methodologies. Indeed, 

the remaining four studies use agile models either 
 solely or in combination with other non-sequential 
models as their comparisons to waterfall. We 

acknowledge the contributions of these studies and 
support their continuance. However, we speculate that 
the comparison of models that do not diverge so 

extensively from waterfall may be more revealing as to 

waterfall™s effectiveness. For example, using a process 

that delivers in increments, yet does not differ much 

otherwise from waterfall would likely deliver more 
convincing results because of the reduction in 
confounding factors. 

   Empirical research in the area of software 

development process comparison is minimal. Software 

organizations and project managers in particular must, 

therefore, rely on other (often less reliable) sources 
when addressing the complex, multifaceted task of 
selecting or modifying processes to meet their specific 

circumstances. There is a dire need for a credible body 

of empirical evidence back
ed by solid scientific 
methodology to support project managers in making 

optimal choices.   
 5. References 
 [1]
 C. Larman, Agile and Iterative Development: A 
Manager™s Guide, Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2004. 
[2]
 B. Kitchenham, Procedures for Performing Systematic 
Reviews, Keele University Technical Report TR/SE-
0401, 2004. 
[3]
 O. Benediktsson, D. Dalcher, and H. Thorbergsson, 
ﬁComparison of Software Development Life Cycles: A 

Multiproject Experiment,ﬂ IEE Proceedings Œ Software, 
vol 153, 2006, pp. 87-101. 
[4]
 M. Lindberg, P. Hsia, and R. Bond, ﬁA Study of 
Requirements Change Effects on Incrementally 

Delivered Systems,ﬂ Proc. of the Conference on 
Software Maintenance, 1988. 
[5]
 K. Moløkken-Østvold and M. Jørgensen, ﬁA 
Comparison of Software Project Overruns-Flexible 

versus Sequential Developm
ent Models,ﬂ IEEE Trans. 
on Software Engineering, vol. 31, 2005, pp. 754-766. 
[6]
 L. Layman, L. Williams, and L. Cunningham, 

ﬁExploring Extreme Programming in Context: An 

Industrial Case Study,ﬂ Proc. Agile Development 
Conference, 2004. 
[7]
 F. Macias, ﬁEmpirical Assessment of Extreme 
Programming,ﬂ PhD thesis, Department of Computer 
Science, University of Sheffield, 2004. 
[8]
 D. Sjøberg et al., ﬁConducting Realistic Experiments in 
Software Engineering,ﬂ Proc. International Symposium 

on Empirical Software Engineering (ISESE™02), IEEE 
Press, 2002. 
[9]
 C. Seaman, ﬁQualitative Methods in Empirical Studies 
of Software Engineering,ﬂ IEEE Trans. on Software 
Engineering, vol. 25, 1999, pp. 557-572. 
   