 Networking in a Large-Scale Distributed Agile Project 
Nils Brede Moe 
SINTEF | Blekinge Institute of Technology
  Norway | Sweden 
nils.b.moe@sintef.no 
Darja 
−mite Blekinge Institute of Technology 
Sweden 
darja.smite@bth.se 
Aivars −blis 
Blekinge Institute of Technology 
Sweden 
aivars.sablis@gmail.com 
 Anne-Lie Börjesson 
Ericsson AB 
Sweden 
anne-lie.borjesson@ericsson.com 
Pia Andréasson Ericsson AB 
Sweden 
pia.andreasson@ericsson.com 
 ABSTRACT Context: In large-scale distributed software projects the expertise 
may be scattered across multiple locations. 
Goal: We describe and discuss a large-scale distributed agile 
project at Ericsson, a multinational telecommunications company 
headquartered in Sweden. The project is distributed across four development locations (one in Sweden, one in Korea and two in China) and employs 17 teams. In such a large scale environment 
the challenge is to have as few dependences between teams as 

possible, which is one reason why Ericsson introduced cross-
functional feature teams Œ teams that are capable of taking the full 
responsibility for implementing one entire feature. To support 

such teams when solving problems, ensure knowledge sharing within the project and safeguard the quality Ericsson introduced a 
new role Œ Technical Area Responsible (TAR).  Method: We conducted extensive fieldwork for 9 months 
at two Ericsson sites in Sweden and China.
 We interviewed 
representatives from different roles in the organization, in addition 
to focus groups and a survey with seven teams.  Results: We describe the TAR role, and how the TARs 
communicate, coordinate and support the teams. Also architects 
support the teams, however not as closely as the TARs. We found 
that the TAR is usually a senior developer working halftime or 
fulltime in the role. We also present measures of the actual 

knowledge network of three Chinese and three Swedish teams and 
the TARs position in it.  Conclusions: TARs are central in the knowledge network and act as the boundary spanners between the teams and between the sites. We learned that availability of the TARs across sites is 
lower than that with local TARs. We also found that the size of a 
team™s knowledge network depends on how long the team members have been working in the company. Finally we discuss 
the advantages and the challenges of introducing experts in key 
roles in large scale distributed agile development.  Categories and Subject Descriptors K.6.1 [Management of computing and information systems
]: Project and People Management Œ 
Staffing, Systems development  
K.6.3 [Management of computing and information systems
]: Software Management Œ 
Software development, Software process General Terms Management, Measurement, Human Factors 
Keywords Boundary spanners, global software development, offshoring, 
insourcing, social network analysis, distributed agile, large-scale 
agile, technical area responsibility. 
 1. INTRODUCTION Modern software organizations working on large-scale evolvable 
systems in a distributed context are exposed to a rapid increase in complexity related to a growing 
number of customers, increasing complexity of software products, and increasing size of the 
distributed development organization. Ericsson is such an organization, and this paper reports empirical evidence from 
organizing the development process of a project that is part of a 
product consisting of 10-12 million lines of code, 30 subsystems 

partly developed in Sweden and China.  Existing research suggests that continuous software evolution requires access to an enormous amount of knowledge and skills 
[3-5]. The term "access" refers to receiving a valuable piece of 

knowledge and knowing how to use it. A software developer and 
a software team need to rely on knowledge resources embedded 
within, available through, and derived from a network of 
relationships, also known as social capital. Social capital is both 
the network and the assets that may be mobilized through that network [1]. In other words, ﬁwho you knowﬂ affects ﬁwhat you knowﬂ.  The importance of social networks grows when a single developer or even a development team in a large evolving system 
development project does not possess the expertise needed in their 
daily work. The expertise needed in complex systems 
development includes technical skills (programming languages, 

and methodologies), domain knowledge (how are the customers 

using the product and the features), and also the knowledge of the  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ESEM™14, September 18Œ19, 2014, Torino, Italy.  Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2774-9/14/09...$15.00 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2652524.265258
4 product being developed or maintained (its source code structure and architecture). Expertise that software developers and teams 
accumulate grows significantly and becomes even more critical as 

the products evolve [4]. When changes occur on the 

organizational level (e.g. introducing new team members, adding new teams, assigning new tasks), or on more technical level (adding new dependencies, components, or performing major 
refactoring) effective access to people™s knowledge and 
information becomes crucial. In distributed development 
environment the needed expertise may be scattered across 
multiple locations, which adds to the complexity of the network of 

relationships.  For Ericsson to succeed in a large-scale distributed setup high-performing teams are crucial. One step towards performance increase was transition to feature teams. Since such teams are working in all parts of the code, they often need to have access to 

the knowledge outside of their own team. To understand the role of the knowledge networks at Ericsson we will investigate the 
social networks of the teams in the distributed large-scale project, 

the position of experts in these networks and the impact of 
distribution.   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present the background. In Section 3 the project under study is 
described in more detail. In Section 4 we briefly introduce the 
methodology of the study. Section 5 contains our findings, while Section 6 concludes the paper.   2. BACKGROUND  2.1 Introducing Cross-Functional Feature Teams at Ericsson Ericsson is a large international company headquartered in 
Sweden. The company relies on agile methods (Scrum), and 
develops a wide range of products and solutions, including 
generic software products offered to an open market and complex 
compound systems with customised versions. Due to the growing 
complexity of their software products more resources were 
needed. However it was problematic to get access to enough 
resources in Sweden. At the same time there was a need for 
reducing development cost and to be closer to important markets, 
therefore Ericsson has distributed development of a number of 
software products across its sites in different locations. In this 

paper we describe experiences from two sites of Ericsson, one in 
Sweden and one in China. In 2007 the Swedish site of Ericsson realized they had too little competence in certain areas of the product reported in this paper, 
and experienced problems implementing new features in the large-scale system. The strategy then was to move from competence-based teams only developing part of a feature, to cross-functional feature-based teams. As one manager explained: 
ﬁTeams should broaden their competence so they can work on all necessary subsystemsﬂ. 
The organization then invested in building 
teams that could implement a whole feature.
 Earlier Ericsson had node architects responsible for entire 
subsystems. However, after growing the number of teams and introducing cross-functional feature teams working in all parts of the code, the need for access to expertise about certain type of 
functionality supported from several subsystems emerged. In 

response to this, the role of a Technical Area Responsible (TAR) 
was introduced.  
2.2 Introducing the TAR role at Ericsson  The TAR is responsible for supporting teams and answering technical questions about their subsystems. They help the teams to get the right design and code structure. A TAR should also act as a mentor for teams that need to do changes in the TAR's area when the teams have little experience in that area. Additionally 

TARs are responsible for reviewing and prioritizing trouble 
reports. TARs are essential for the cross-functional teams to 

operate, ensure the quality and evolvability of the system. 

Notably, TARs are not architects. This role is assigned to the most 
skilled and senior developers. More details about the TARs can be 

found in the next section.  The subsystem reported in this paper is developed both in Sweden 
and in China. In the beginning all senior developers that could be 
assigned responsibility for a technical area were located in 
Sweden, because the Chinese site was yet immature. This caused 

problems. One manager said: ﬁThe load got so heavy on those four TARs, we had to appoint persons in China to be co-TARs... they started to learn more about the subsystem and could take responsibility of reviewing–ﬂ
 In 2011, TARs were introduced in the Chinese site.  
3. PROJECT AND PROCESS OVERVIEW The investigated subsystem is distributed across 4 sites Œ Sweden, 
China (Ericsson site) and China (consultant site), and Korea.  
Teams. The number of developers working on the subsystem grew from 8 developers in 2007 to 30 developers in 2009, and scaled up to around 60 developers by 2013. In early 2014 the 
subsystem was developed by 5 teams in Sweden, 8 in-house teams 
in China, 2 Chinese homeshore consultant teams and 2 Korean 
teams. Ericsson relies on cross-functional teams (XFT), which are 

teams that have all core competences needed for the development and release of a feature. At Ericsson the XFT includes roles like 
system manager, system designer, function tester, system tester, 

and sometimes a TAR working parttime in the team. In addition, 

each XFT has a scrum master, and collaborates with an Operative 
Product Owner (OPO). Other roles, such as architects, system 
owners, design owners, product owners, configuration 
management personnel, integration leaders, line managers, agile 
coaches, etc. support the teams. Each
 of these XFTs consists of 5-9 team members. Team members might have several roles in their team, and some team members are associated with several units in 
different roles. The teams are usually situated in an open plan 
office. The focus of our investigation is on the cooperation 
between the teams at the two Ericsson sites in Sweden and China 

that develop one specific subsystem. 
Features. 
Different feature assignments have different domain specificity. This puts certain demands on the knowledge in the team or accessible for the team. While technical knowledge is said 
to be easy to learn, it takes years to learn the domain. Teams are assigned features that can require implementation of changes in 
different parts of the system. Although teams are working on 
features that can require changes in the same code, the 
dependencies on both subsystem and task levels are minimized by 
implementing plans that depict dependencies. The features are allocated to teams based on competence and previous experience. 
Noteworthy, very large features may be assigned to several teams. In that case, physical proximity between the teams is also taken into consideration. Besides new feature development, teams are involved in fixing bug reports.  
  TAR. 
The Technical Area Responsible (TAR)is the contact 
person for technical discussions fr
om teams to protect teams from intrerrupts. The TAR usually work
s 50% in a team and 50% as a 
TAR. He or she support the teams with design proposals, code 
and design reviews. In particular, the TARs support teams in early phases if needed, and mentor teams when they are working in a new area. The TARs also give input to OPOs regarding product 
improvements, and help OPOs to make early investigations of 
possible work packages for teams. TARs at Ericsson have the 
following mandates: Ł Prioritization of trouble reports;  Ł Responsibility for guidelines (coding, quality assurance, 
trouble reports, deliveries);  Ł Responsibility for internal interfaces towards other 
subsystems; Ł Mandate to reject insufficient design proposals; 
Ł Deciding mandate if conflicting opinions regarding the code 

structure emerge after code reviews; Ł Responsibility for code reviews; Ł Responsibility for raising quality issues/improvements to the 
OPOs and providing suggestions on actions.  
Sprint zero. The teams have end-to-end responsibility for a feature. Sprint zero is a phase, in which the team develops a 
common understanding of the feature requirement and proposes a 
concrete solution, which is further reviewed by the stakeholders. 
This is the stage where the team really commits to develop the 

feature. Therefore all team members are needed with their various 
viewpoints. From the system level to the subsystem level. 
Since the system grew over time and accounts tens of subsystems, the product 
ownership and governance became more hierarchical as well. 
System Owner (SO) is one person who has the overall 
responsibility for the system and its quality. This person overlooks 
all subsystems in the product and guides the system™s evolution. The system owner is tightly integrated in the development 

network and uses the expertise from the senior developers and 
technically skilled personnel when taking critical decisions for the 
product. The system architects (SA), are responsible for the 
system architecture. Further the product ownership is divided 
upon the areas. There is an Area Product Owner (APO) per 
subsystem. The APO works closely together with the OPOs (Operative Product Owners), forming a hierarchy. APOs are responsible for defining what to implement in overview 
perspective, while OPOs are an essential part of the teams™ social 

networks. It is worth mentioning that there are other roles 
supporting the teams in continuous integration and different levels 
of testing. However, these are not a part of this paper, since our 
focus is on the task allocation and development. 
 Notably, distance matters when it comes to coordination. The studied system™s owner confessed ﬁThere is always difficulty with distributed sites when it comes to feedback. In many cases it is 

always easier to go and talk to people here in the same time 
zone.ﬂ Because of cross-site coordination challenges, a few other roles were implemented in close proximity to the teams in each location (discussed in the next section, see also Fig. 1). 

   A. Knowledge network of a Swedish teamB. Knowledge network of a Chinese teamPG Œ program managerLM Œ line managerAC Œ agile coachDO Œ design ownerSO Œ system ownerAPO Œ area product ownerOPO Œ operative product ownerIL Œ integration leader
SA Œ system architect
TAR Œ technical area responsible
AbbreviationsSwedenDEVELOPMENT  
SUPPORT 
PRODUCT  
PLANNING DEVELOPMENT 
MANAGEMENT 
 CROSS-TEAM  COLLABORATION 
LOCAL  
DEVELOPMENT 
MANAGEMENT 
CROSS-TEAM  COLLABORATION 
PRODUCT  
PLANNING DEVELOPMENT  
SUPPORT 
SwedenChina  Fig. 1 
Œ Swedish and Chinese teams™ connections to different roles  4. BASIS FOR THE OBSERVATIONS 4.1 Data Collection Our investigation started with a set of initial interviews that aimed 
at a better understanding of the implementation of the distributed 
cross-functional feature teams and the TAR role. We interviewed 

representatives from different roles at both Ericsson sites in 
Sweden and China. After initial interviews we organized focus groups with development teams from both sites. The sampling strategy was 
guided by the Ericsson representatives (fourth and fifth authors of 

the paper) and included selecting new as well as mature teams in 
both sites. During the focus group we acquired about the presence 
of the skills needed for solving team™s tasks, teamwork practices, 

interaction with other teams, roles and communities; usefulness of 
the externalized knowledge; teams™ reliance on different types of knowledge and skills in their daily work; and team™s perception of 
their performance.  
We also conducted a survey with the seven teams participating in 
the focus groups. The survey was web-based for the Swedish site 
and paper printouts handed out by the first and second author at 
the Chinese site. We asked respondents to identify in ﬁfree-recallﬂ 

format project-related knowledge contacts that the respondents 
pull the knowledge from or transfer to. Respondents where also asked to describe the knowledge received and transferred, as well as evaluate the frequency of knowledge-sharing and accessibility 
of their contacts (using a 5-point Likert scale). Our survey is a 
partial replication of a survey conducted by Manteli et al. [2]. 

However, we extend it by obtaining a directed knowledge network 
and acquiring detailed information about each knowledge-sharing 
relation. In contrast to Manteli et al., who applied the survey on 

the project and unit level, we trace our observations to the team level.  In total, 40 people from 7 teams completed the questionnaire. However, one of the teams was removed from the analysis due to 
a very low response rate (33%). The response rate for the 
remaining 6 teams in total was 90% and for individual teams did 
not fall below 71%. The final sample consisted of 35 project 

members and 336 dyadic ties in the social network.  
After the survey, we asked the respective team responsible managers (two in China and one in Sweden) to evaluate each team 
and it´s performance.  4.2 Data Analysis The interview and focus group data was used to profile each of the teams and the role of TARs, and later to find explanations from 
the observations based on the social networks. The survey data was analyzed using basic statistics and visualized with the help of 
open-source social network visualization software called Gephi (https://gephi.github.io).  In this paper, we first visualize detailed social networks of three 

different teams, and connect our observations with the 
characteristics of the teams. Next we explore the role of TARs by 
visualizing the focused inter-team network that includes the TARs 

and excludes other roles. The same network is used to explore the 
inter-team collaboration. Finally, TAR availability is calculated 
based on the values provided by the respondents and 
supplemented by our findings from the interviews and focus 
groups. 5. RESULTS In this section we present our results that focus on the role of the 
social capital of the teams and knowledge networks in the globally distributed organization.  5.1 The social network of teams  When analyzing the social network we tried to gain an 
understanding why certain teams are performing better than the 

others. This is why our analysis focused on comparing the 
differences between high-performing and low-performing teams and between newly formed teams and highly experienced teams. In the following we exemplify our findings using two high-
performing teams (one from Sweden and one from China) and one team from China that has performance challenges.  
 
The Swedish team S3 in Fig. 2 is classified as a high-performing 
team. The team is constantly given new types of features to solve, 
features that require the team to work in several subsystems at the 

same time. The figure illustrates how the team members (colored 
nodes) are connected with other roles (grey nodes). Closeness of each of these connections outside the team indicates the frequency 
of collaboration. Those that collaborate daily are the closest. 

Working on high complex tasks involving many subsystems is 

probably the main reason for why this team reports using input 
from a lot of people outside of their team.  
 
Additionally, we noted a few other characteristics that seemed to be important. This team has been stable for 2-3 years and consists of team members that have on average around 10 years of 
experience in Ericsson. Being in Ericsson for a long while they 

probably know whom to get input from.    Fig. 2 
Œ Social network of a S3, a well-performing Swedish team  
 
Fig. 3 illustrates a well-performing Chinese team. In contrast to 

the Swedish team (in Fig. 2), the 
Chinese team™s social network is 
smaller. They have knowledge exchange with less people outside 

their team and the contact is less frequent. When comparing the 

team characteristics, we notice that although the team is working 
together for about 3 years, in contrast to the Swedish team, the 
team members have lower experience and affiliation with 

Ericsson. From this we hypothesize that the differences in 
knowledge connections outside the team could be explained by 
the experience gathered by individuals in an organization. The 
social network of an individual developer grows over the years, 
and is used irrespective of the affiliation with a specific team.  
 Another plausible explanation of the difference between the two 
teams could be connected to the distribution of the project. The 
Swedish teams are collocated with a lot of experts, as illustrated in 

Fig. 1, while the number of supporting roles present in the 

Chinese site is considerably lower.   One final explanation could be related to the differences in the 
types of tasks and culture. It could be that the types of tasks 
solved by the Chinese team requires less interaction with others, 
or that the culture in the Chinese site encourages less interaction 
(e.g. asking for help can be related to loosing face or it might be 
seen as disturbing others). However, we have not collected any data that supports these hypotheses.   During the focus group we learned, the Chinese team seems to put 
a lot of effort into strengthening the team internal network. They 
constantly try to improve teamwork, each day they go out and eat 
lunch together and every month they engage in team-building 
activities out of their personal budget. Notably, the Swedish teams 

did not report on such activities.  
   Fig. 3 
Œ Social network of C3, a well-performing Chinese team  
To contrast our results we have also looked at a network of a newly formed Chinese team (see Fig. 4), which at the moment of investigation naturally is not performing very well. Notably, 
social network analysis illustrates a completely different picture. 

The team has fewer connections and consequently interacts with fewer experts. Since they have a lot of newcomers they naturally have a smaller network. Also they are given easier tasks because 
they have been newly formed.  
 
This example is illustrative to highlight the problem of newly 

formed teams. They have less experience and fewer contacts and 

thus knowledge connections outside the team. Which again affects 

their performance. In other words, team members need to be 
connected with those who possess the knowledge. Obviously, if not formally managed such connections take a considerable 
amount of time to develop. This means that the roles such as of 
TARs could be especially important for new teams. In fact, in Fig. 5 we see that the team C1 interacts closely with the TARs 
especially with the local TAR in China but also with one of the 

Swedish TARs, which suggests that the formal knowledge-sharing 

mechanism established at Ericsson through TARs is being exploited.      Fig. 4 
Œ Social network of C1, a newly established Chinese team     
 ChinaSwedenTeam C1
Team C2
Team C3
Team S1
Team S2
Team S3
TAR C-A
TAR S-A
TAR S-B
TAR S-C
Fig. 5 
Œ TARs in the social network of the six teams   5.2 TARs in the Social Network When we integrate all the teams and the TARs in the same social 
network (see Fig. 5), we can see that the TARs occupy a very central role by having connections to all teams. First we notice 
that the sites are distinctly clustered. We then see that the four 

TARs (three in Sweden and one in China) are positioned in the 

center. However their position is different. We found that the 

Swedish teams connect only to the Swedish TARs, while Chinese 
teams interact primarily with the local TAR and one of the 

Swedish TARs, who unexpectedly appears in the Chinese site™s cluster, meaning that this person collaborates mostly with people 
at the remote site. These two TARs have an overlapping technical 
area responsibility, i.e. domain.  

Which TAR the team collaborates with also depends on the nature 

of feature tasks received by the teams in the two locations. Certain 

tasks require interaction with specific TARs, and not other TARs 
who are responsible for other areas.  

 We continue our analysis by exploring the role of each individual 
TAR in the social network, and highlight the three teams discussed in Section 5.1 (see Table 1). We see that the Chinese 

teams have more connections to the TARs than the Swedish teams 

(22 over 15 connections for all six teams). The level of experience 
in the Chinese teams can explain the higher number of 
connections. The difference in the number of connections is also 

visible when comparing the number of connections to TARs from the teams (S3 Œ a well-performi
ng Swedish team, C3 Œ a well-performing Chinese team, and C1 Œ a newly formed Chinese team). The newly formed team with performance challenges has the highest number of connections to TARs. 
 Table 1: TARs in the social network TARs Total connections*  Team S3 Team C3 Team C1 With six teams Locally Remotely 
C-A 10 10 0 0 3 3 
S-A 6 5 1 2 0 1 
S-B 10 8 2 2 1 0 
S-C 11 2 9 1 2 3 
Total: 37 22 with Chinese teams 15 with Swedish teams 5 6 7 
* We have excluded connections between the TARs from the statistics.  5.3 Availability of TARs  We further explore the availability of TARs as perceived by the 
survey respondents. In this analysis we are especially interested in 
understanding the cross-site connections. We asked our 

respondents to state whether they agree that a TAR is available 
and received the scores on the 5-point Likert scale (1 Œ strongly disagree, 2 Œ disagree, 3 Œ neutral, 4 Œ agree, 5 Œ strongly agree).   
From Table 2 we can clearly see that the Swedish TARs are 
perceived as less accessible to the Chinese team compared to the 
local Chinese TAR. One explanation that we have heard during the focus groups is related to the time difference and language 
barriers. The Swedish TARs are available only a few hours every 
day, and thus communication abilities are limited. The questions 
asked by the Chinese teams might get delayed, especially if further clarifications are needed. 
 Another explanation is that the Swedish TARs are only partially 

working as TARs, being allocated to a team as developers 50%, 

while the Chinese TAR at the moment of our investigation was 
dedicated to work as a TAR 100%. This could explain the lowest 
total availability score of the TAR S-C, who has the highest 
number of connections, most of which being remote (as seen in 
Table 1).   Table 2: TAR availability scores in the social network 
TARs Perceived by  all six teams 
Perceived by  local teams 
Perceived by  remote teams C-A 4.1 4.1 Œ 
S-A 4.3 4.8 2 
S-B 4.2 4.5 3 
S-C 3.2 4.5 2.9 
* We have excluded connections between the TARs from the statistics.
  5.4 Inter-team collaboration When comparing the inter-team collaboration (see Fig. 5) it is 

evident that the Swedish teams are more integrated with each 

other than the Chinese teams. By integrated we mean that the 
team members are connected with team members from other 
teams. In fact, the social network shows that the Chinese teams 

are distinctly clustered, while the boundaries of the Swedish team clusters are positioned closely and partially overlap (see S1 and 
S2 teams). This means that the Swedish teams get input from each other, while there is less interaction between the teams in China. 

One possible explanation for this could be related to the TAR role 

implementation in each site. TARs ar
e a part of a team in Sweden. 
However, there is a number of connections beyond those among 
and with the TARs. When we removed the TAR connections and 

visualize the resulting networks, it was evident that the remaining 
Swedish team members communicated a lot.  
 
Another possible explanation is related to the affiliation with the 

company. The Swedish developers, as discussed in Section 5.1 
have a longer history of working at Ericsson and with each other 
(most of them stayed at Ericsson for about 10 years). Team constellations change and we assume that some of the developers 

keep their previous team members close in the social network. In contrast, the Chinese teams employ developers relatively new to the company, which might be the reason for a low number of 
connections among the teams.  

 
Another interesting finding emerges from comparing the sites. 
The highest ranked Chinese team, C3, operates more isolated than 
the other teams, while team S3 
(a well performing Swedish team) seems to be more integrated with the other teams. We assume that 

it could be explained by the nature of assigned tasks. Team S3 is constantly challenged. New tasks outside of the area of expertise of the team require getting input from other teams and experts 
when solving tasks and coordinating work. At the same time, C3 
is a well performing team with a relatively stable task profile, thus 

the team gains less from interacting with other, perhaps, even less 

performing teams. However, one would expect that the less 
performing teams should have a greater need to cooperate with 
well performing teams, which is not seen from the emerging network.    
During the focus groups we also learned that both Swedish and 

Chinese teams have similar types of forums (such as communities 
 of practice), including a testing forum, an integration forum, a developers™ forum, and a scrum masters™ forum. However, the 
Chinese teams confessed that they seldom had the time to join the 

forums. Lack of networking through these forums also results in not knowing who knows what in other teams. This could be another explanation for why there is less interaction between the Chinese teams compared to the Swedish teams.  6. LESSONS LEARNED From studying the role of the TAR, the teams and their social 
networks at Ericsson we found that there is a difference in the 
social networks and the role of the TAR between the sites and the 

teams. We believe that these differences can be the result of the 

culture, the number of years of experience in the organization, the nature of the tasks assigned to a team, and the geographic and 
time differences between the sites that influence remote 
collaboration. Our lessons learned are thus summarized in the following:
 Ł Large-scale software development projects are often associated with inability for everybody to know everything. When the knowledge is not present in the team, connections 

become evidently important. ﬁWho you knowﬂ affects 

ﬁwhat you knowﬂ or in other words the amount of 
knowledge available for solving the tasks. The need for 
establishing knowledge retrieval ties is also important for 
newly employed individuals, newly formed teams and teams 
working with tasks outside of the current area of expertise.  Ł Formal mechanisms for knowledge access are helpful. This is especially true when the tasks demand diverse knowledge that is not always present in the team. The importance of 
formal mechanisms emerges especially in the sites with high 
employee turnover rates or relatively new sites, such as the Chinese site in our case. Accumulating the social capital and establishing connections takes considerable time. Therefore 
newly employed team members can only rely on the experts 
in formally assigned roles. Another formal mechanism is documentation, i.e. organizational capital. However, all 
teams reported that documentation was less important than 
the social network, partly because the documentation was 
not always updated and was often scattered across multiple 
databases.  Ł Alternatively, the newly formed teams could be assigned less challenging work that does not require combination of knowledge from different domains or areas of expertise. As 
such, the teams might not need to interact with too many 
experts. A practical implication of this is that organizations need to consider gradually increasing the complexity of the tasks assigned to teams formed from recently employed developers. Ł Despite many beliefs that experts are emergent, formally assigned TARs in Ericsson appeared to occupy the central position in the network of a large-scale distributed agile project. This might be because the TAR role is assigned to 
the most experienced and well-respected developers. Due to 
their central position we also see them as the bridges for 
cross-team and cross-site knowledge and information 
exchange, while the feature teams themselves work in 

relative isolation from each other. This is especially 
important for establishing joint quality standards, and 
coordinating the common ways of working across a large-scale organization. 
Ł Implementing the TAR role is evidently not an easy task. 
Availability scores suggest that some TARs might be 
overloaded. Chinese and Swedish sites address this situation 
differently. The Chinese site has chosen to create a fulltime 

position for a TAR, while the Swedish site allocates the 

TARs halftime to development in a team, and halftime as 

the TAR. This is done because the TARs are usually the most senior developers, and their contribution is important in the development too. And also because the involvement 
in the actual development might have a positive impact on 
maintaining the high level of expertise.  
Ł Communities of practice and different disciplined forums 
encourage networking among members of different teams and thus create opportunities for learning who knows what. 
At Ericsson networking is commonly organized within one site. We learned that Swedish teams network more often 

than the Chinese teams, who claimed not having enough 
time for attending the forums. We thus emphasize that 

implementing communities of practice requires management 
support and organizational culture that supports networking.  
7. CONCLUSIONS In this paper we described practical experiences from a large-scale distributed agile project at Ericsson that employs feature teams in Sweden and China. Such teams require a lot of diverse knowledge that often takes years to accumulate. This is why Ericsson has 
implemented a formal knowledge sharing mechanism Œ the role of 
a Technical Area Responsible (TAR), in addition to the System 

Architects (SA), a System Owner (SO), a Product Owner (PO) and general System Managers. Notably, TARs are not architects. 
This role is commonly assigned to the most experienced senior developers who are well-respected in the network.  

 
To understand the TAR role at Ericsson we investigated a social 
network of six teams in two locations. We have found that TARs 

are central in the teams™ network and often act as the boundary 
spanners both between the teams and more importantly between 
the sites. This is interesting, since the common belief suggests that central experts are emergent and not formally assigned. We also 

learned that the availability of TARs across sites is lower than that 

with local TARs. We also found that the size of a team™s 

knowledge network depends on how long the team members have 
been working in the company. This is why when scaling, forming 
new teams, as well as in the new sites or sites with high employee 

turnover, as often are the offshore sites, the role of a TAR is 
crucial. Finally, we believe that the TAR role could be found useful in similar large-scale projects employing cross-functional 
feature teams outside Ericsson in general and in other projects at 
Ericsson in particular (the TAR role is not a widely used practice). 
 
As the future work we plan to perform detailed data analysis. We 

will first add other subsystem TARs in the network, and explore 

their importance, frequency of communication and availability. 

We will also add the remaining teams into the detailed analysis. 
We plan to calculate measures related to network clusters and 
cores, and performing analysis of the knowledge flows by 
studying each incoming (knowledge retrieval) and outgoing 
(knowledge transfer) connections between the dyads in the 
network. We hope to gain a better understanding of what 

knowledge is required from outside of the teams, and connect this 
to the factors that already emerged from our preliminary analysis 
Œ levels of experience and affiliation with the company.   
 8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is supported by Ericsson AB and the Swedish Knowledge Foundation under the KK-Hög grant 2012/0200, and by the Smiglo project and the Research Council of Norway under 
the grant 235359/O30. 9. REFERENCES  [1] Bourdieu, P. The forms of capital, Handbook of Theory and Research for the Sociology of Education, Richardson, J., Ed. 
New York: Greenwood, 1986. 
[2] Manteli, C., van den Hooff, B., and van Vliet, H. The Effect 

of Governance on Global Software Development: An Empirical Research in Transactive Memory Systems. 
Information and Software Technology, available online, 2014 
[3] Parnas, D.L. Software aging, in 
Proceedings of the 16th international conference on Software engineering. Sorrento, Italy: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1994, pp. 279-287. [4] Rajlich V.T., Bennett, K.H. A staged model for the software 
life cycle, Computer, 2000, pp. 66-71. [5] van de Laar, P., Douglas, A.U., America, P. Researching Evolvability, Views on Evolvability of Embedded Systems: 
Springer Verlag, 2010, pp. 1. 
 