 Adding Planned Design to XP Might Help Novices™ Productivity (or Might Not): Two Controlled Experiments René Noël, Gonzalo Valdes, Marcello Visconti, Hernán Astudillo Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María Av. España 1680, Valparaíso, Chile  {rnoel, gvaldes, visconti, hernan}@inf.utfsm.cl  ABSTRACT Extreme Programming (XP) suggests using Evolutionary design, 
always implementing the simplest solution that satisfies the 

current iteration™s requirements, instead of Planned (or 
Traditional) up-front design. Some
 developers have questioned the usefulness of Evolutionary approach™s enabling practices 

(e.g., refactoring, test-driven development) arguing for the 

naturalness of, and need for, 
Planned design. Two controlled experiments were conducted to compare both approaches 

regarding product quality and programmer productivity. Results 

from both studies show that (1) there is no significant difference 

in the product quality, independently of experience, but (2) 

novices are more productive using the Planned approach. Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.4 [Software Engineering
]: Software/Program Verification Œ
Statistical Methods. General Terms Design, Experimentation. Keywords
 Extreme Programming, Evolutionary Software Design, Planned 

Software Design, Experimental Studies. 1. INTRODUCTION Extreme Programming (XP) proposes an iterative process and an 
Evolutionary design approach th
at encourages implementing the 
simplest solution for the requirements considered in the current 

iteration, without worrying about
 next iterations™ requirements and their design complexity [1]. This approach allows embracing 
change by avoiding big up-front
 design activities and tackles overall software structural complexity only when needed, as 

opposed to Planned (or Traditional) design [6]. In this study 
Design is understood as a set of
 low-level software design activities (e.g., class models de
sign) and does not comprehend 
any architectural design issues.
 There are documented cases of development teams that resist to 
this approach (academic environment in 
[3] and [4], and practitioners environment in 
[2] and [7]), questioning XP design practices and their naturalness; 
also, a big up-front design can be an instance for identifying reusable structures (such as design 

patterns) that might help improving productivity and product 

internal quality.  
This paper presents the results of two controlled experiments 
conducted to evaluate the impact of these two design approaches on the resulting product design qua
lity and development process 

productivity (both in academic environments). Section 2 defines 

the experimental study, section 3 
describes the first experiment and its results, section 4 describes the second experiment, and 
section 5 states the main conclusions. 2. DEFINING THE EXPERIMENTAL STUDY 2.1 Experimental Activity Design The software development activity that subjects must tackle 

consisted of designing, coding and testing software for a given 
problem using either design approach (XP/Evolutionary or 

Planned). The solution should be
 implemented under the Object Oriented Paradigm (using the Java language) during two 
development iterations; trials could not take more than four hours. When applying each design approach all XP practices that 

provide an instance to think about design must be considered, thus 

two development methods were defined: one based on the XP original definition [1] (called Method 1); the other as a variation 
of the original XP process (called 
Method 2), which incarnates the Planned design approach by in
corporating a planned design 
session at the start of each iteration. 
2.2 Hypotheses, Variables and Metrics  High level null hypotheses are: 
H0™: The use of a planned design approach produces software 

with an equal design quality than evolutionary design approach. H0™™: The use of an evolutionary design approach is as 
productive as a planned design approach in an XP project.  Independent variables that can affect quality and productivity are: 

the Design Approach, which is the factor under study, with two 
levels (XP and Planned); the Problem to Solve, which is the experimental object, i.e. the pr
ogramming problem that subjects had to solve applying the design approaches; and two undesirable 

factors of influence, Participants™ XP Knowledge
 and Participants™ Design Experience. Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ESEM™08
, October 9Œ10, 2008, Kaiserslautern, Germany. 
Copyright 2008 ACM  978-1-59593-971-5/08/10–$5.00. 
  The quality concept applied in this study is that a good design 
should keep low levels of algorithm™s complexity, measured with 
the metrics: Decision Count (DC), Maximum McCabe Cyclomatic Complexity (MCC), and Number of Code Statements 

(NSTMNT). For analyzing variations in productivity, three 

metrics were chosen to capture different views of the effort put 
into the design, namely: Numb
er of Classes/hour (PTNOC)
, LOC/minute (PTLOC), and Number of Methods/minute 
(PTNOM). 3. THE FIRST EXPERIMENT 3.1 Experimental Design The first experiment has a random blocked design, with one 
factor, the Design Approach. Participants were undergraduate 

computer science students that had previously approved an Object 

Oriented Analysis and Design c
ourse and had backgrounds in OO programming, Software Engineering and Software Design Patterns. Subjects were 31 development teams, each one being 

comprised by a pair of partic
ipants with equivalent design 
experience (determinate through a survey). Subjects were divided 
in two blocks: subjects with 
design experience and subjects without design experience (marked with two different grey tones 
in Table 1).  Table 1. First Experimental Design. 
Subject 
Method 1 
Method 2 
1 X  2  X ...   30 X  31  X  The Problem to solve presents a business logic that forces subjects 

to decide where to place the complexity: on the classes design or 

on the algorithms within classes™ methods. The Problem™s 

requirements were packed into two sets, the sets conformation 

was design so the second set induced refactoring opportunities to 

the code that was implemented for satisfying the first set.  
3.2 Results Table 2 shows the resulting p-values of a two-sided t-Test of difference between means for design experienced subjects (DE) 

and for non-experienced subject
s (NDE). The PTNOC metric with NDE subjects was the most significant result (p ~ 0.05), so a 

one-sided t-Test to check if Method 2 is more productive than 

Method 1 is applied, PTLOC resulting p-value is p = 0.0260 (p < 

0.05). This means that the Planned approach helped non-
experienced subjects to produced more classes, an interpretation 

is that they made an effort for placing the design complexity into 

the classes structure rather than mere placing it into the methods™ 

classes algorithms (if this would be the case then only the PTLOC 

metric would show significant diffe
rences); unfortunately none of 
the metrics used for software design quality showed significant 

differences, so we can not state that quality was actually 

improved with the Planned approach. The difference between experience blocks leads us to try to 

mitigate the influence of this factor instead of blocking it, in order 

to isolate the method effect from the experience effect. Thus we 

conducted a second experiment with a different experimental 
design, which is described in the next section. Table 2. First Experiment, p-value for each metric. 
 Productivity 
Quality  PTNOCPTLOCPTNOM DC NSTMNTMCC NDE0.0520 0.0804 0.1503 0.3726 0.4424 0.5843DE 0.8078 0.1481 0.6047 0.2281 0.2645 0.4859 4. THE SECOND EXPERIMENT 4.1 Experimental Design We used a 2x2 factorial design with repeated measures; factors 
are the Design Approach and the Problem to Solve. Participants 

were 22 senior-level computer science students, with Object 
Oriented Design knowledge and low levels of professional 

practice (in average they were two years older than the first 

experiment participants and were following the same academic 

program). Each subject is comprised by two participants (same as 

first experiment, but without 
worrying about matching their 
experience level).  Table 3 presents the second experime
ntal design. In this design subjects were asked to participate twice (instead of once, which 

was the case for the first experime
nt). Subjects were divided in two groups randomly, during the first execution half of Group 1 

applied Method 1 on Problem 1 and 
the other half applied Method 2 on Problem 2, methods and probl
ems were inverted during the second execution; similar strategy was applied for Group 2 (see 
Table 3). The problems to solve are equivalents with the problem from the first experiment.  Table 3. Second Experimental Design. 
 Group 1 
Group 2 
Training Training Method 1 
Problem 1 Problem 2 Training Training Method 2 
Problem 2 Problem 1  4.2 Results The data was analyzed applying an Analysis of Variance of the 

2x2 factorial design with repeated measures. Looking at method™s 

effect (design™s approach effect) in 
Table 4, we can see that the 
null hypotheses can not be rejected; thus no differences in quality 

and productivity between Evolu
tionary and Planned design 

approaches can be demonstrated by the influence of the Method 
factor.  A less formal analysis can be
 made looking at the methods™ 
estimated marginal means for each metric; a summary is 

presented in Table 5. Marginal means suggest that (although not 
statistically significant) the Planned Approach (Method 2) was 
 more productive than the XP Approach (Method 1) for every 
metric of productivity, i.e., the XP Approach produced less LOC, 

classes and methods. Table 4. Second Experiment, ANOVA Test Results for the 
Method™s Effect. 
Factor Metric Degrees 
of freedom 
Sum of squares 
Mean 
square 
F-valuep-valueMethod 
PTNOC 1 0.316 0.316 0.781 0.403  PTLOC 1 0.108 0.108 2.754 0.136  PTNOM 1 0.001 0.001 0.122 0.736  DC 1 2.78 2.78 0.426 0.532  NSTMNT 1 177.78 177.78 1.171 0.311  MCC 1 11.11 11.11 1.413 0.269  Product design quality metrics are favorable to XP Design 

Approach for Number of Statements and Maximum Cyclomatic 

Complexity, Decision Count metric
 suggests that more control flow statements were coded when
 using XP Approach than using the Planned Approach, i.e., XP Approach produced better code in 

two (out of 3) metrics. This might mean that the XP approach produced less but better 

code. Unfortunately none of these conjectures could be formally 

demonstrated, because results were not statistically significant. 
Table 5. Estimated Marginal Means for the Method™s Effect. 
Metric Method 
Mean 
Standard Error
PTNOC 1 1.106 0.162  2 1,294 0.133 PTLOC 1 0.458 0.053  2 0.568 0.080 PTNOM 1 0.079 0.020  2 0.090 0.025 DC 1 3.611 0.740  2 3.056 0.868 NSTMNT 1 22.167 2.26  2 26.611 3.76 MCC 1 3.333 0.717  2 4.444 0.966  More detail about the results and the instrumentation can be found 
in the studies lab package 
[5]. 5. CONCLUSIONS During the first experiment the results showed significant 

differences for NDE subjects with one productivity metric, i.e., 

NDE subjects using the Planned approach produced more classes. This might lead to better quality code (placing design complexity 

in the classes structure rather than in the methods™ algorithms), 

but unfortunately none of the quality metrics showed statistically 

significant differences. All results for DE subjects were non-significant. During the second experiment we sought to mitigate the design 

experience factor by changing th
e experimental design, we no longer divided them into experience groups. The results did not 

indicate any significant differences
, and we could only make the 
following less formal conjectures: marginal means suggest that the XP approach produced less code that the Planned approach, 

and two (out of 3) quality metrics showed that the XP approach 

produce better quality code. This might mean that XP approach 

produced less but better code (again this is only a conjecture). 
Results from both studies lead us to believe that if there are 

significant differences in productivity and quality, then they 

should manifest themselves more strongly in non-experienced 
developers, to whom a Planned approach would help more than it would help experience developers. Some threats to this conjecture 
are that the problems given to subjects to apply the design 

approaches were too small and were insufficient to elucidate 

significant differences, and that the subjects grouping 
(experienced and not experienced) that we made were not 
rigorous enough. Also, using other criteria to separate them could alter the results. A main conclusion is that, when facing the design activity, we 

should evaluate the trade-offs
 between increasing process productivity through a Planned design approach, and empowering 

the process capability for embracing change through XP original 

design approach, without premed
itatedly affecting product design 
quality. 
6. REFERENCES [1] Beck, K. 1999. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 

Change. Addison-Wesley. 
[2] Harrison, N. 2003.  A Study of Extreme Programming in a 

Large Company. Avaya Labs. http:// 

www.agilealliance.org/system/a
rticle/file/1292/file.pdf  [3] Keefe, K. and Dick, M. 2004. Using Extreme Programming 
in a Capstone Project. Proc. 6th Australasian Computing Education Conf. (Dunedin, New Zealand, 2004), 151-160. [4] Müller, M. and Tichy, W. 2001. Case Study: Extreme 

Programming in a University Environment. Proc. 23
rd Int™l Conf. on Software Eng. (Toronto, Canada, 2001), 537-544. [5] Nöel, R., Visconti, M., Valdes, G. and Astudillo, H. 2007. 
Lab. Package for the Investigation about the Impact of 

Software Design Approaches on XP. http://www. 

labada.inf.utfsm.cl/~amigosisw/xpdesign_package [6] Pressman, R. 2004. Software 
Engineering: A Practitioner™s Approach. McGraw-Hill, 6th edition. [7] Rasmusson, J. 2003. Introducing XP into Greenfield 
Projects: Lessons Learned. IEEE Software, vol. 33, no. 7, 

21-28.   