 Challenges of Applying Ethnography to Study  Software Practices Carol Passos 
Department of Computer  
Science (DCC) - UFBA 
40.170-110, Salvador-BA, Brazil 
mcarolpassos@dcc.ufba.br  
Daniela S. Cruzes Department of Computer and 
Information Science (IDI) - NTNU 
NO-7491, Trondheim, Norway  
dcruzes@idi.ntnu.no Tore Dybå SINTEF NO-7465, Trondheim, Norway 
tore.dyba@sintef.no  Manoel Mendonça Department of Computer  
Science (DCC) - UFBA 
40.170-110, Salvador-BA, Brazil 
mgmendonca@dcc.ufba.br  ABSTRACT
 Ethnography is about the adoption 
of a cultural lens to observe 
and interpret events, actions, and behaviors, ensuring that they are 
placed in a relevant and meaningful context. Using this approach, 
it is possible to capture and analyze software development 
practices. Our aims are to illustrate the use of an ethnographic 
approach in a case study of agil
e software development adoption, 
to discuss the methodological challenges involved, and to provide 

support to others who conduct ethnographic studies of software 
practice. An ethnographic case st
udy was conducted, employing 
participant observation, interv
iews, and document analysis. 
Difficulties and decisions were recorded and compared with those 
encountered in the literature
. Finally, key challenges and 
guidelines to tackle them were
 discussed and documented. We 
identified five key challenges of applying ethnography to the 
study of software practices: (a) working in collaboration with and 
having something to offer to the participating company; (b) the 
insider/outsider dynamic of pa
rticipant observation; (c) the 
balance between participant listening and participant observation; 

(d) the researcher's relationship w
ith the participants; and (e) the 
rigor in qualitative work that involves the dilemma of the 

contextualization to be sufficiently broad and detailed. This study 
shows that ethnographic methods are indispensible when trying to 
understand software practice, and that the fundamental challenge 
for the researcher is to balance the role of participant observer 

with rigorous fieldwork.   
Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2 [Software Engineering
]  General Terms Management, Measurement, Expe
rimentation, Human Factors. 
Keywords
 Qualitative Methods; Collaborative Ethnographic Research; 

Participant Observation. 
1. INTRODUCTION Ethnography is about telling a cr
edible, rigorous, and authentic 
story, giving voice to people in th
eir local context. This story is 
told through the eyes of people as they pursue their daily lives in 

their own communities [7]. Typically, the ethnographic story 
relies on verbatim quotations and de
scriptions of scenarios that 
allow an inside
 perspective of the context of the people under 
observation. Ethnography derives from traditional anthropology 
where time in the field is needed to get a comprehensive 
description and understanding of a setting, group, or culture under 
study [7]. 
Ethnographic research methods have played a substantial role in 
sociological research during the last half-century and are now 
used in many disciplines, especial
ly those that involve social and 
human factors [3]. They have become widely used in the study of 

information systems and can be 
a highly useful methodology for 
addressing a range of research questions related to SE practices 

[2][10][15][17][21][22]. 
In particular, ethnographic methods are helpful in generating rich 
and detailed accounts of
 software project team
s, their interactions 
with project stakeholders, and 
their approaches for delivering 
products, as well as in-depth accounts of their experiences. 
Ethnography is a way of getting cl
ose to the reality of a social 
phenomenon, of a software team's
 interactions, communications, 
and relationships. Additionally, since it aims to generate holistic 
social accounts, ethnographic resear
ch can identify, explore, and 
link social phenomena, which on th
e surface, seem to have little 
connection with each other. 
However, applying an ethnographic approach to SE can be both 
challenging and demanding. The probl
ems and objects of study in 
SE, by their very specific nature, require empirical methods suited 

to specific contexts. Certain phenomena, for example, require a 
specialist understanding of the concepts under study and extensive 
data collection that lasts for mont
hs and years, rather than days 
and weeks. Also, the ethnographic researcher needs to be aware of 

the effects on the behavior of the people being studied [12]. 
The aim of this paper is to present the methodological challenges 
of applying ethnography to a case study aimed at characterizing 
an agile project team's belief system and its origins, sources, and 
impacts on the team's software 
development practices [15]. In 
particular, we focus on the social interactions, communications, 

and relationships that arise as an intrinsic part of adopting agile 
Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ESEM™12
, September 19Œ20, 2012, Lund, Sweden. 
Copyright 2012 ACM  978-1-4503-1
056-7/12/09...$15.00. 
 software development practices. For that, we applied an 
ethnographic approach, employin
g participant observation, 
interviews, and document analysis. 
The main idea of our approach involved performing ethnography with
 its holistic a
nd contextual 
vision, including some characteristics of action research, such as 
its collaborative and reflexive approach; used to recommend how 
to improve the studied practices to the company. 
In particular, we address: (a) the advantages and challenges 
associated with working in colla
boration with, and having results 
to offer to, the participating company (b) the insider/outsider 

dynamic of participant observation; (c) the balance between 
participant listening and participant observation; (d) the 
researcher's relationship with the 
participants; and (e) the rigor in 
qualitative work that involves the dilemma of the 

contextualization to be sufficientl
y broad and detailed. We relate 
our findings to relevant ethnographic theory, e.g., [3][7] 

[8][11][12][14][24][25] to contribute to a better understanding on 
how to apply ethnography to
 study software practices. 
The rest of the paper is organize
d as follows: Section 2 introduces 
ethnography as a research method.
 Section 3 describes how we 
conducted the ethnographic case study. Section 4 discusses the 

challenges of applying ethnography
 as a research approach, 
implications for research 
and practice, and limitations. 
Conclusions and opportunities for further work are presented in 
Section 5. 
2. BACKGROUND Social anthropologists, to aid in the understanding of different 

cultures and environments, originally founded ethnographic 
research methods. Ethnography is
 about living in and immersing 
in the culture of the researched group for an extended period of 

time. It is about participating in social relations, seeking to 
understand actions within the context of an observed setting, and 
how people act and make sense of their environment. A key 
purpose of ethnography is to pr
ovide a detailed, in-depth 
description of everyday life and practice [8]. 
Ethnographic methods seek to 
understand practice in its own 
terms, while trying to minimize the impact of the researchers™ 
backgrounds, prejudices, and assump
tions. Ethnographers adopt a 
cultural lens to interpret observe
d events, actions, and behaviors, 
ensuring that they are placed in a culturally relevant and 
meaningful context. It is also important to participate in social 
relations and interactions to gather data by an active attitude in an 
observed setting.  
Fieldwork is the most characteri
stic element of the ethnographic 
method. Typically, and concurre
ntly with data collection, 
ethnographers devote a large amount of their fieldwork time to 
formally analyze and reanalyze their data [7]. While still in the 
field, interim reports, which are the beginnings of the 
ethnographically informed final re
port, are produced to enable 
feedback on the data-gathering cycl
e. Narratives can be made and revised to take into account the ethnographer's evolving 
knowledge. In this context, the primary research technique is 
participant 
observation
 [6], which involves direct
 observation, participation 
in the life of the observed group, and collective discussions 
through an intensive involvement with people in their natural environment, usually over an ex
tended period of time. It is a 
three-stage process in which the researcher first, gains access to a 
particular community. Second, lives and/or works among the 

people under study in order to grasp their world views and ways 
of life, and third, returns to make sense of the collected data 
through writing up an account of the community's culture [3]. The 
process of immersion may be uns
ystematic in the beginning, 
being somewhat uncontrolled and 
casual. However, even in the 
early stages of fieldwork, 
the ethnographer searches out 
experiences and events as they come to his/her attention. Thus, the 

participant observation technique 
becomes more refined, as the 
researcher understands more about the culture.  
The acquisition of knowledge in
 ethnographic research is a 
cyclical process. It begins 
with a panoramic view of the 
community, closes in to a fine
 focus on details, and then goes back to the larger picture again, but this time with detailed 
information. The focus narrows a
nd widens repeatedly during the 
process, because only by both deep diving and swimming on the 

surface can the ethnographer portray the cultural landscape in 
detail rich enough for others to comprehend and appreciate [7]. 
The traditional principles of participant observation and 
ethnographic fieldwork require a full immersion of the researcher 
in the chosen field of study, learning the day-to-day and 
extraordinary essence of social and cultural life by 
being there [18]. Ideally, the researcher does not disturb or change the natural 

setting. 
For most anthropologists, ethnography involves actually living in 
the communities of the studied people, participating in their 
activities, interviewing them, draw
ing maps of the context, and 
collecting artifacts [9]. Critics of the approach are concerned 

about researchers getting over-involved with the people and 
environment under study, perhaps disturbing and changing the 
natural setting [18]. By contrast
, some sociological ethnographers 
do not actually live with the peop
le they study or spend most of 
their time with them. Instead, they focus on what happens in a 
particular institution when in operation; their participant 
observation is part-time, but sufficient to complete the research. In 
any case, ethnography must have a holistic view of the culture or 

group under study. 
One can build a blueprint or roadmap to help the ethnographer 
conceptualize the steps to bu
ild knowledge and understanding. 
The goal is to find an effective 
problem-solving sequence [6]. The 
fieldwork approach shapes the design of all ethnographic work. 
The ethnographer typically begins w
ith a survey period to learn 
the basics: language, history, structure, and function of the culture 

under study. After that it is possible to draw social and conceptual 
boundaries to identify or confirm 
themes, subjects, problems, and 
questions of interest to compose the research design. The next 
step is to start the fieldwork to observe, interview, read, ask 
insightful questions, and to write down what is seen and heard. 
Life histories of articulate 
individuals can be especially 
illuminating. The ethnographer must then crosscheck, compare, 

and triangulate the findings [3]. 
Proper organization from the very beginning of the work is a good 
practice. Keeping data organi
zed and at hand allows the 
ethnographer to make interim reports and anticipate testing 

hypothesis throughout the investigation. Analysis and report 
writing are more efficient when the data is structured during 
fieldwork. During the analysis, it is possible to examine 
hypothesis and perceptions to cons
truct or refine a conceptual framework about the studied group or culture [7].  
 Table 1. Ethnography vs. Action Research 
  ETHNOGRAPHY ACTION RESEARCH 
Goal Go Native 
In-Depth Understanding of 
Culture 
Generate Rich and 
Detailed Social Account  Process Improving 

Knowledge Advancing 
Problem-Solving 
Focus Culture and Values  Process and Practices 
Main Technique Participant Observation No specific technique  
Fieldwork Holistic  
Comparative 

Contextual 
Essentially Collaborative Reflexive  

Problem-Solving Driven 
Final Product In-Depth Description of 
Group's Life 
Improved practice 

New knowledge  Some ethnographers spend as much
 time formally analyzing and 
reanalyzing their data and writi
ng their ethnographies as they do 
conducting fieldwork. The final stage of analysis is the most 
creative step of ethnographic res
earch, because the synthesis of 
ideas and field information often 
lead to useful insights through 
allowing the mind to wander and consider unusual combinations 
of thoughts. However, the research
er must always check whether 
the data will support the findings or invalidate them. 
Research proposals, field notes
, memos, web sites, interim 
reports, final reports, articles, 
and books are the tangible products 
of ethnography. The written work can be shared with participants, 
to verify its accuracy, and with colleagues for review and 
consideration.  If the ethnographe
r is a collaborative researcher, 
he or she might share documents with community members, who 

can edit and co-write the ethnographic findings.   
The decision of leaving the field should be based on more than 
one reason [6]. The best reason is
 the belief that
 enough data has 
been gathered to say something si
gnificant about it, but sometimes 
the proximity of a deadline is the determining reason. Different 
researchers require different levels of confidence about research 
findings and conclusions, but when
 the general picture reaffirms 
itself over and over again, it is probably time to leave the field and 

continue the job from outside.    
After leaving the field, the ethnographic work continues with the 
final stages of analysis in wh
ich field notes, interim reports, 
papers, and so on are used to draw an overall picture of how the 

practice system works and which 
data will sustain or break the 
findings. Thus, ethnography is both a research method and a 

product, typically in the 
form of a written text. 
Nowadays, a more collaborative perspective to ethnography is 

commonly required in organizational contexts. In contrast to 
traditional ethnography, contem
porary collaborative ethnographic 
research has applied strategies, such as participatory action 
research [2][6][11][20][23], that aim not only to analyze but also 
to improve work practices. Dittrich et al., for example, adopted an ethnographically inspired acti
on research approach, which 
combines qualitative social science fieldwork, with problem-
oriented method, technique, 
and process improvement [5]. 
However, it is noteworthy that 
ethnography and action research are two different approaches (as showed in Table1). Ethnography 
focuses on the culture and values of a target group with the aim of 
generating rich and detailed accounts to produce an in-depth 
description of the group's life, while action research focuses on 
processes and practices and how 
to improve them in a problem-solving paradigm [11]. 
3. CONDUCTING AN ETHNOGRAPHIC 
CASE STUDY We have being running a long-ter
m case study, involving software 
development projects, which has gone through a main cycle of 18 
months. This study is now undergoing another cycle, lasting 
approximately 12 months, with the aim of characterizing an agile 
project team's belief system and to 
investigate its origins, sources, 
and impacts on the team's software
 development practices [15]. In 
particular, we have been focu
sing on the social interactions, 
communications, and relati
onships that arise as an intrinsic part of 
adopting agile software development practices. To do this, we 
have been applying an ethnographic approach, immersing 
ourselves in the day-to-day project activities to delve deeper into 
the complexity of team's belief system and uncover meanings of 
behaviors, actions and events. 
The case study was set in a medium sized software company
1 in 
Brazil, in which projects were applying, for the first time, agile 
methods based on Scrum2. The company provides software 
development and evolution servi
ces as well as information 
technology infrastructure manage
ment services for customers of 
both the public and private sectors. 
We adopted an approach that 
aimed explicitly to help the 
company to improve the work practices under study, getting some 
characteristics of action resear
ch, but mainly based on more 
modern approaches of ethnography [2][8][11][12]. In our context, 

this participatory approach 
was required, so we worked 
collaboratively to support their 
process improvement initiative. 
The first author of the pape
r performed the interviews, 
observations, and document analysis 
according to [13][18][19]. It 
is important to note that the first author is an employee of the 
company in leave for PhD study. Therefore, there was a pre-
existent common language between the interviewer and the 
participants of the study. 
The particular project studied involved a system for electrical 
energy management and lasted 
for one year. The project team 
followed a well-defined process for software development and 
used a project management application for stories and bug tracking. They also kept detailed
 records of the project status 
reports and the backlog of stories and changes to the software. 
Other important documents, includi
ng quantitative measures, were 
used for project tracking and monitoring (Table 2). 
Table 2. Project Profile 
Attribute PGE 
Project 
Team Size 
5 
Team Members 
2 full time developers, 
2 part time developers, 
1 scrum master, 
1 product owner + project manager 
Language JAVA 
Tool Usage Open Source Software 
Development Methodology SCRUM + PMI Approaches 
Non-Functional Requirements 
Reliability, Performance, 

Continuity, Availability Reuse High Stability Requirements Medium stability 
Staff Turn-over 
Considered high by the project manager 
Interviews 
2 with product owner + project manager
2 with scrum master 
                                                                 
1 SOLUTIS Tecnologias. http://www.solutis.com.br/ 
2 Scrum approach. http://www.Scrum.org/  
 3.1 Interviews 
After a literature review and evaluation of research objectives and 
questions, we opted for an in
terview-based qualitative data 
collection approach called War Story [13]. War Story 

questionnaires usually have warm
-up, past experience, lessons 
learned, and reaction questions. We used an iterative approach in 

which we defined a questionnaire (see Appendix A), used it for a 
set of interviews, analyzed the data, and improved the process for 
the next round of interviews.  
Warm-up questions aimed to put the interviewees in the right 
mindset, to focus them on the interview subject. Our version of 
the questionnaire had two warm-up 
questions that asked about the 
participants™ background and experi
ence, and the main challenges 

of the current software project. 
Past experience questions
 intended to investigate how living 
experiences could influence the participants™ current behavior, 
trying to cover the main aspects of a software project reality. Our 
questionnaire had four of these 
questions. These questions are 
about the respondents™ past e
xperiences, involving software 
process, communication plan, software engineering technical 
practices, and project monitoring. 
Lessons learned questions
 tried to capture the beliefs that emerged 
or evolved from the project 
experiences. To keep the 
questionnaire simple and balanced for the research kick-off, we 
had three war story questions about
 lessons learned. They aimed 
to understand the basis of how th
e beliefs, personal values, and 
the paradigms of the participants
 came to be and also how they 
determined the participants™ 
choices and actions during the 
project. Reaction questions
 asked about the participants™ reactions and 
personal opinions on the impacts of the use of technologies, 
methods, and process on the software project. The questionnaire 
had two reaction questions
 that directly asked about the impacts of 
new technologies and unexpec
ted effects of known and new 
technologies on projects. 
Besides the typical war story ques
tions, we added a few questions to identify beliefs related to practices that affected project 
productivity, quality
, time,
 and 
cost
. Those attribut
es are usually 
quantitatively measured in software
 organizations, so they helped 
to link quantitative and 
qualitative findings (
Metric-based Questions). We had four of them in the questionnaire. 
The first author asked the respondent
s to retell and revive specific 
and directed stories that illustrated the experiences we were trying 

to capture. The resulting data cont
ained a considerable amount of 
contextual information, whic
h enabled connections between 
different, but rela
ted, stories. 
3.2 Observation and Document Analysis Field notes and recordings of rele
vant interviews on completion of 
observations in meetings provide
d rich insight into social 
relations, events, and practices. We established specific goals for 
our observation task and some guided questions to drive the 
researchers' work (Appendix B). During observations, we 
immersed ourselves in the setti
ng, using an informal approach, 
which allowed us to probe emerging issues about unusual events 

in a naturalistic manner.  
Additionally, we collected organi
zational documents and attended 
team meetings. We compared our field notes from interviews and 
observations with the practices and processes laid down in 
documents and information about tasks. We also used document 
analysis to map the company and project contexts (see Appendix 
C). By triangulating our data sources and our instruments, we 
addressed issues of validity a
nd obtained comprehensive insights 
into the application of ethnographic methods. 
3.3 Study Analysis and Results The first author conducted four interviews with two people in the 

front lines of the project that introduced agile programming 
recently. Each person was interviewed twice, once at the 
beginning and once at the end of th
e project, six months later. 
These four interviews were complemented by meeting 

observations and documen
t analysis. The first author attended and 
recorded 40 meetings involving the interviewed participants and 

all the team members. 
All field notes, including transcript
s and recordings of meetings 
and interviews, were categorized, tabulated, and then analyzed via 
cycles of pattern coding, whic
h labeled keywords, phrases, and 
paragraphs to group and summarize 
segments of text into classes of findings. We analyzed the relevant events of past and current projects that 
might influence team beliefs or
 practices, including the SCRUM 
methodology training. Considering these scenarios, we captured 
and classified the beliefs fo
und and described their main 
attributes: origin, context, meaning, impact, participant, and 

frequency. 
We represented our main findings 
in a mind map [15], which is a 
diagram used to represent concepts, ideas, beliefs, or other items 
linked to, and arranged around, a central key phrase or idea [1][4]. 
These mind maps were useful to visualize, structure, and classify 
the beliefs and to organize rela
ted information. We guided a 
validation of the findings with the participants of the study in a 

focus group discussion. The group's responses and perceptions 
were analyzed both indivi
dually and in aggregate. 
An important part of the mind map showed the 
common beliefs shared by the Product Owner and Scrum Master [15]. For 
example, both of them agreed that a good automated software 

testing approach is essential to 
the success of any project. The 
origin of this belief of the Product Owner was the experience in 

the current project.  But, for the Scrum Master, the origin was in 
his past experiences in another company. They also cited some 
negative impacts on the project practices due to the absence of the 
automated software testing approach. Thus, the resulting mind 
map contains classes to represent the related elements: belief, 
meaning, origin and impact. 
The study showed that the beliefs originated from two main 
sources: past and current project experience. Some beliefs 
triggered the adoption of new technologies, but the decision of 
which technology to adopt was 
mostly based on expert opinion 
and the current software engineering community buzz around it. 

We found conflicting beliefs
 between the Product Owner and the Scrum Master, which hindered the adoption of practices. 
Some 
conflicting beliefs
 were subtle. For example, the 
interviewees agreed that current effort estimation practice was 
limited, but digging further, we
 found that they disagreed on 
which practice should substitute it. 
An even more subtle problem 
was when the interviewees had a 
common belief, but did not act 
upon it. We named those semi-beliefs
. An example was the 
applicability of software testing automation for the organization; 
both Product Owner and Scrum Mast
er seemed to believe in 
testing automation, but th
ey were not adopting it. 
 Lastly, there were cases of common 
strong beliefs. This was the 
case of component reuse. Both, the Product Owner and Scrum 
Master actively acted on the dire
ction of implementing good reuse 
practices from the very beginning of the project. This type of 

common strong beliefs
 were strengthened and 
transferred to other 
people involved in the project. 
4. CHALLENGES OF APPLYING 
ETHNOGRAPHY During the case study we identified five key challenges of using 
ethnographic methods to study software practices. Some of these 
challenges have also been discussed in the social science literature 
[8][11][12][14] and in SE literature [2][10][17][22]. We related 
our findings to relevant ethnographic theory, [3][7] [8][11][12][14] 
[24][25] to contribute to an improved understanding on how to 
apply ethnography to study software practices. 
4.1 Collaborative Ethnography A more cooperative and participatory perspective to ethnography 

is commonly required in organizational contexts. The challenge is 
to redirect and reinvent ethnography along such lines as 
collaborative ethnography 
 the collaboration of researchers and 
subjects in the production of ethnographic results, involving a 

side-by-side work of all parties in a mutually beneficial research 
program. In Software Engineering is intrinsic in order to not only analyze, 
but also improve work practices. When doing ethnography 
through participant observation, the researcher must assume an 
attitude toward 
being there enough to experience the environment 
and nuanced aspects of socio-cultural life. This, at first, does not 

allow a collaborative approach to the research. Therefore, a 
researcher aiming to conduct eth
nography faces the challenge of 
not influencing the practices in its natural setting.  
In our case, at first we were only going to interview and observe 
the team members about their beliefs
, but we noticed that we also 
needed to give feedback to 
the team about their common and 
conflicting beliefs, so that they 
could act as a unit and resolve the conflicts that hindered the adopti
on of some practices. We then ran a focus group together with a feedback meeting on the results 
of the study. As a result of this meeting, the team was able to 
prioritize action to solve the problems in the team. When 
confronting with conflicting team's beliefs and trying to find 
solutions for the conflicts, it was important that the team members 
knew that we were impartial toward
s the beliefs of how they were 
impacting the team pr
actices. Considering our ethnographer role 
and required skill for the study, we sought to communicate well 
and openly, also being honest, tr
usting, realistic, 
and objective on 
our research. 
Engaging in a shared process with the practitioners freed access to 
some more subtle dynamics of 
the team processes and practices. 
As participant observers and interviewers we realized, for 
example, that the Scrum Master and Product Owner were 
concerned about story and task estim
ation. At that time, the stories 
were estimated by hours and the Product Owner was responsible 

for this task.  The Scrum master clearly disagreed with this 
strategy. He believed that the t
eam should be more autonomous to 
estimate task and stories using th
e story points technique. The task 
estimation practice was, therefore, not working well for the 
project, so together we listed so
me actions to be done to improve 
it. 
We dealt with this challenge in a similar manner as reported in 
social science literature. We have adapted our approach to 
ethnography grounded in collaborative research practice and we 
have engaged in mutual knowledge exchange with the 
participants, based on Lassister [
11] and Lewis and Russell's [12]. 
A resembling approach was adopted in some other SE studies. 
Boden et al.'s study [2] introduced the concept of Business 
Ethnography and illustrated their experiences of adapting and
 implementing a collaborative appr
oach using a typical action 
research cycle: research, analys
is, and feedback workshops with 
the aim of finding better ways 
of cooperating across temporal, spatial and organizational barriers
. Robinson et al. [17] used the 
findings to uncover and understand problems and thereby 

delineate their solution spaces. Their study revealed potential 
solutions to some problems related to knowledge sharing, using 
the interview responses to provide a context in which the 

problems could be elucidated a
nd possible solutions could be 
discussed.   4.2 Insider/Outsider Dynamic The participant observation technique also requires the 
ethnographer to have both, an 
insider
 and outsider
 posture [12]. 
The challenge is to combine participation with observation, 

seeking to understand the social 
reality and also trying to see 
familiar settings with a professional distance that allows adequate 

observation and recording of data [7]. There is a need for a 
balance in the researcher's participation in the team.  
In our context, we were able to identify some common and 
conflicting beliefs in the team. Some conflicting beliefs were 
subtle and our approach of being inside their world at one moment 
and offering an outsider™s perspective in another moment 
definitely helped to identify and point out those conflicts between 

the involved stakeholders. For ex
ample, during the observation of 
the Scrum meetings, we could perceive that some issues related to 

Scrum, such as self-management team, generated conflicting 
beliefs between team members 
and the Product Owner. We had the opportunity to confirm this during a subsequent interview. 
This finding was only possible because we assumed an insider 
position, so we were able to see 
the interactions and relationships 
between the people under observation 
with an inside perspective 
of context. Sometimes the researcher can assume the role of being only an 
insider and this attitude may hi
nder some important discoveries. 
In the initial interviews we did not explore some possibilities 

related to participants' responses because we thought we already 
knew the answer for them. Later, we realized that this was a 
mistake, because we had not pr
operly obtained the participants' 
point of view. In an attempt to mitigate this, we performed 
complementary interviews to ask 
more details about origins and 
impacts of beliefs related to some practices.  
On the opposite end, when the researcher is only an outsider, 
some mistaken interpretations can arise because the researcher 
does not manage to take an appropriate insider posture. The 
drawbacks of this situation also
 involve difficulties to overcome 
data access barriers. In our case study, we had full access to 

recordings of the project meetings because the participants were 
comfortable to give us confiden
tial material. As insiders, they 
knew we were able to handle it and 
to interpret the data properly.  
In some previous studies [2][12][17], as well as in our study, the 
ethnographers needed to know how
 to stand in-between their 
research subjects, contexts, 
and demands, and the ethnographic 
 product. In our opinion, researchers must evolve their participant 
observation skills to accommodate an embedded analytic vision. 
In Boden et al [2], the researchers actively looked for a plurality 
of views to analyze the findings and their implications for the 
studied projects, taking into account their own roles in the 
projects, and constantly reflec
ting on them during the research, 
even in times when it was only possible to conduct remote 
interviews with team members of different sites. Lewis and 
Russell [12] identified and discu
ssed the insider/outsider dynamic 
of participant observation as one 
of the key elements of embedded 
research practice. They conducted the research as some kind of 
team member and, even when they were not allowed to engage as 
a participant in clinical practice, for example, they did not stop to 
work alongside their co-workers in the community. Finally, 
Robinson et al [17] discussed 
their experiences and put the 
observations in the context of the study in order to maintain their 
perspective of strangeness and reduce the possibility of 
introducing bias.  
4.3 Observation and Listening 
Participant observation traditionally involves direct observation as 

the method of data collection. Ot
her appropriate methods involve 
informal interviews, participa
tion in the life of the group, 
collective discussions, analysis 
of personal documents produced within the group, self-analysis, results from activities undertaken 
off or online, and life stories.  
Participant listening is an important technique employed by 
ethnographers, particularly among those who live in an interview 
society, where interviewing has became common practice. It is an 
appropriate way of participating and getting involved in software 
development contexts. The interviews allowed a deeper 
understanding of the obtained data through our observations [8]. 
In our context, beliefs are intangible. They are in the head of the 
team members. Usually beliefs are not externalized as part of their 
daily activities. It was very ch
allenging to only observe the team 
members and try to understand what each person's beliefs were. 
We employed an interview-based qualitative data collection 
technique called 
storytelling,
 which adopts a specific story form, 
the war story
 [13]. Our war story questionnaire went beyond 
asking questions that allowed the team members to retell and 
revive specific and directed stories that illustrated the experiences 
we were trying to capture. So, 
it was possible to
 obtain personal 
opinions on the impacts of belief
s on agile team practices. Once 
we had identified the beliefs, we
 could observe their actions upon 
them. 
For example, despite the fact that the Scrum Master and Product 
Owner shared the same belief of 
using tools for test automation, they did not adopt these tools in the project. We could observe 
that the Scrum Master and Product Owner did not seem to act 
according to their beliefs and, consequently, there were some 
negative impacts on project practices such as: no time left in 
sprint for bug correction; poor coverage and low effectiveness of 

the test and inspection practice; 
and greater effort to perform 
regression testing. In the interviews with the Scrum Master and 

Product Owner we identified that they did not really believe that 
tools for test automation were the appropriate solution for their 
test problems. Thus, the data collected in these interviews enabled 
connections between the participan
ts' stories and our observations. 
Thus, we strongly recommend that SE researchers be both a 

participant listener and observer, because the data captured in the 
field can reflect more of what is heard than what is seen; casual 
conversations and formal interviews
 can be construed as part of 
what is observed in the field. 
The same approach is advocated by several authors who argue 
that the practice of participant lis
tening should sit alongside with   
participant observation as an equally valid way of gaining 

ethnographic knowledge [2][8][16][17]. In order to get a complete 
picture, the researchers deploying Business Ethnography [2] relied 
on intensive, individual interviews
 with all participants involved 
in the project alongside other 
ethnographic methods like on-site 
observation to complement the interviews, which helped them to 
get a rich understanding of the project context that is related to the 
different perspectives, intentions, and expectations of the 
participants. Forsey's hypothesis [8], that ethnography is at least 
as much about conversation as it is about observation, was 
confirmed when his thesis a
nd subsequent monograph was not 

devoid of observational description, but the data presented 
reflected more of what he heard in the field than what he saw. In 
Reeves et al.'s research [16], ethnographers routinely used 
informal or conversational inte
rviews during their observations, 
which allowed them to discuss, 
probe emerging issues, or ask 
questions about unusual events 
in a naturalistic manner. To 
answer the first research question of the study related to influence 

of social factors, Robinson et al [17] collected data from 
organisations using a combination of semi-structured interviews 
and ethnographic-based observation.   
4.4 Relationship with the Participants 
The relationship between researchers and participants in an 
ethnographical work is a core elemen
t for successful research.  As 
the researcher immerses in the organizational context, this 

relationship tends to grow and impr
ove gradually, as people get to 
know each other and become closer, or they gradually deteriorate. 

People in a relationship tend to in
fluence each other, share their 
thoughts, beliefs and feelings, and engage in activities together.  
In an ethnographic study, the researcher becomes a member of the 
community under study, since the researcher has an active role in 

the target projects. In this contex
t, he or she could reasonably be 
described as a practitioner and as a research scientist at the same 

time. But being a member of the community under study has both 
challenges and advantages for the researchers. The main 
advantage is that researchers and practitioners share the same 
organizational culture and so researchers are accepted and have 
common vocabulary with the participants, therefore the 
participants can relax and focus on working in their natural way. 
The challenge lies in
 the tension involved in moving between two 
roles (researcher and practitioner), and maintaining a non-

judgmental orientation and a pers
pective of strangeness. At the same time, ethnographers have 
to be flexible, patient, and 
persistent in their work to overcome data access barriers. 
In our study, we had to be non-j
udgmental in order to avoid bias 
in collecting and interpreting data. For example, during the focus 
group meeting two project team members discussed some points 
related to conflicting beliefs. For the Scrum Master the team 
should avoid direct contact with the customer, but for the Product 
Owner this direct contact between the team and the customer 
could impact positively the team™s
 commitment to the quality of 
the product delivered and sense of 
business value. We had to keep 
a neutral position throughout this discussion. We also sought to 
minimize our effect on the behavior of the subjects under study, 
trying not to get over-involved with the people and environment 
to not disturb the natural setting. 
 In Boden et al.'s study, the researchers were subjected to similar 
challenges as the practitioners [2]. Known problems of conducting 
research on global software development teams included getting 
access to the research field in the first place as well as dealing 
with constraints such as organi
zational hierarchies and conflicting 
interests that might hinder a deeper immersion of the researchers 

in the environment [2].
 Reeves et al.'s research described the 
relationship between researcher 
and the participants and the 
ethical issues, related to informed consent agreements, which 
arose from this close relation [16]. In Robinson et al.'s study, the 
relationship between the researchers and the participants was 
particularly significant because ethical issues concerning formal 
contracts or informed consent agreements were problematic in 
their experience [17].  
4.5 Rigor and Contextualization In the context of ethnographic work
, the researcher is the main 
instrument of the ethnographic study. It is more of a general style 
rather than following specific prescriptions in a procedure [18]. 
Rigorousness in data collection and 
analysis is essential in order 
to avoid bias. 
One aspect of the rigorous approach is that all findings must be 
grounded in the data and it is important to look for disconfirming 
instances, seeking behavioral c
onfirmation, not just what people say but what they actually do. One challenge is to deal with a 

substantial amount of data deri
ved from the ethnographic process. 
We used tools to deal with the collected data, which helped to 

work on the data in several iterations. We attended and recorded 
40 meetings involving the intervie
wed participants and all the 
team members. For each hour of recorded interviews, we spent an 

average of five hours transcripting with an average of 13 pages, 
and one hour of pattern coding to tag key words, phrases, and 
paragraphs. The data collected wa
s then analyzed via cycles of 
pattern coding which grouped segm
ents of data into 26 themes. 
In terms of validity of the results, we checked the answers from 
the interviews with our observati
ons during the project. When the conclusions were reached, we discussed them with the team 
members in a focus group meeti
ng. With this practice we 
prevented inappropriate assumptions or interpretations. 
For us, theory and ethnography should be conjoined to produce a 
concrete sense of the social, 
so we conducted our ethnographic 
study with an underlying theory, building a conceptual framework 

to represent graphically the beliefs, their origins, sources, and 
relationships with team practices. This theoretical research 
approach helped to define the problem and to limit the research 
scope and effort, establishing a baseline to begin observations and 
the research over time. 
In pursuing rigor in the research also involves the dilemma of 
sufficiently broad and detailed c
ontextualization. Contextualizing 
data involves placing observations 
and interviews into a larger 
perspective. Each scene exis
ts within a multilayered and 
interrelated context [7]. Contextualization helps to provide a more 

accurate characterization of the software practices and helps to 
prevent misunderstandings that can happen especially when a 
setting is familiar. One example is that sufficient description and 

quotations were included in our reports to allow readers to 
understand our research context. However, no study can capture an 
entire culture or group context; even a comprehensive report has 
to omit a great deal.   
In our case study, the participation of the first author in the Scrum 
meetings of the project helped us to realize that there were 
common strong beliefs, like com
ponent reuse, for example, in 
which both the Product Owner and 
Scrum master, actively acted 
on the direction of implementi
ng good reuse practices from the 
very beginning of the project, even with several unfavourable 
conditions. Only with the contextual information about the origins 
and sources of their beliefs and the project environment was it 
possible to capture and understand 
how strong these beliefs really 
were. In Robinson et al.'s study [17]
, rigorousness in data collection 
takes the form of three main principles: triangulation, seeking 
disconfirmation, and iterative development of understanding. The 
researchers employed triangulati
on by using data from different 
sources, for example, from inte
rviews with different people 
having similar or different ro
les, from the artefacts, from 
observations of different roles 
and from informal conversations. 
They also focused on behavioural confirmation and searched for 
disconfirming instances during analysis and used both formal and 
informal feedback, presenting tentative findings to the 
participants.   
5. DISCUSSION 
This study highlights the methodological challenges involved in 

applying ethnography to study software practices. Here we 
discuss these challenges all together in order to support others 
who wish to conduct this type of study. Also in this section, 
limitations and implications for research will be presented. 
5.1 Implications for Research in SE 
Considering challenges 4.1 and 4.2, we highlight that it is not easy 

to immerse in a company with a dual objective of improving 
organizational problems and gene
rating scientific knowledge. It 
demands an additional set of knowledge items and skills on the 

researcher in order to well conduct the process and provide 
relevant results. The researcher needs to formulate theories and 
ideas, prepare theoretical explanations, and establish collaboration 
with the people and the organization.  In this scenario, it is 

important not to lose focus on the research goals and make 
constant reviews of the study plan 
and protocol.  This is a product 
of the insider/outsider dynamic of participant observation, which 

requires the ethnographer to have
 both, an insider view as a 
practitioner and the ability of having 
an outsider™s perspective as a 
researcher.   
The study also shows a clear need for a particular way to deal 
with ethnographic research i
nvolving software development 
practices. SE contexts require a new approach that aims not only 

to analyze but also to improve work practices, engaging in a 
shared process with the practitioners. The researcher needs to 
demonstrate an ability to collab
orate with the setting, understand 
the social reality and, at the same time, offer an outsider™s 

perspective.  Our study also highli
ghts that it is important for the 
researchers to minimize their effects on the behavior of the people 

being studied. They should assume a collaborative posture and 
have something to offer to the participating company, but must 
avoid getting over-involved with its environment. 
During the study, we made use of techniques that showed to be 
feasible, like a combination of 
interviews, observations, and 
document analysis. No doubt, the us
e of an interview technique 
contributed to meet challenge 
4.3 through the balance of the 
practices of participant listening and participant observation, and 

the provision of a better perception of the participants' stories and 
their connection to the observati
ons. The evidence suggests that 
researchers should consider the possibility of placing engaged 
 listening on a similar footing to participant observation. After 
some casual conversations and formal interviews, the big picture 
can be construed as part of what was observed in the field, so it is 
relevant to say that the data captured in the field can reflect more 
of what is heard than what is seen. 
In ethnographic studies the resear
ch instrument (the ethnographer) 
needs to be properly calibrated to ensure the validity of the 
findings. The premise of going native cannot result in 
discontinuation of the study or moving from the role of researcher 

to the role of advocate. However, some conflicting interpretations 
among the participants and research
ers can emerge. To avoid this 
situation and overcome challenges
 4.4 and 4.5, we adopted the 
practice of discussing and validating field notes with the 
participants. The participant's perceptions were analyzed both 
individually and on an aggregated 
basis in order to build the big 
picture of the findings and th
eir relative importance. As 
mentioned before, this practice
 contributes to rigor and can 
mitigate inappropriate interpretations. 
Considering the ethnographer role and required skill for this type 
of research, we recommend that the ethnographers seek to 
communicate well and openly, participate fully, work together 
with the participants, and be honest, trusting, realistic, and 
objective. Also, fieldworkers have
 to be flexible, patient, and 
persistent in their work to overcome the inherent barriers and 
difficulties of data collection and analysis. 
Our findings indicate that resear
chers should balance the role of 
participant observer with rigorous 
fieldwork. Rigorousness in data 
collection and analysis is essential in order to avoid bias. It is also 
important to look for disconf
irming instances. Methodological triangulation is a well-suited appro
ach for this purpose as it can be 

used to perform a cross-examination. By combining multiple 
observations, theories, intervie
ws, and empirical materials, 
researchers can overcome the weaknesses and intrinsic biases, 

address issues of validity and problems that occur during 
ethnographic studies, and obtain comprehensive insights into the 
application of ethnographic methods. 
The final product of the ethnographic study will depend directly 
on the decisions of the researcher. These decisions are crucial to 
allow the production of relevant scientific findings, but also to 
reconcile them with the organi
zation™s business needs and meet 
challenge 4.1. Here, again, careful planning and execution has to 

be considered. In spite of that, it 
is still important to be flexible 
and adapt to occurrences of the daily project activities. 
5.2 Limitations 
The general critics of a met
hodological study based on a single 
case study also apply to an ethnographic study, among them one 

may list: uniqueness, difficulty 
to generalize the results, and 
introduction of bias by researchers.  
In our study, we transformed the findings from empirical 
statements to theoretical statements, which involve generalizing 
data from observations and percep
tions by discussing them in 
accordance with the ethnographic literature. In this respect, we 

related our findings to relevant 
examples of ethnographic research 
within the SE literature and compared them with the related 
ethnography theory. 
Another limitation is that we were
 working with the findings of 
one particular project within one particular organization. The 
participants were professiona
ls using typical development 
technologies in a typical worki
ng environment, e.g., the natural 
setting demanded by ethnographic 
approach. Nonetheless, the 
case study™s environment is quite context specific, since the 
participants belong to the same company. 
In addition, the study shows that running ethnographic research in 
SE has some specific limitations. It is not easy to get involved in a 
software company with a dual objective of solving organizational 

problems and generating scientific knowledge. In a competitive 
industry like SE, to get information on projects, processes, and 

practices is not an easy task, because of confidentiality issues and 
the fact that empirical research is not a high priority for this 
industry. Hence, in order to achieve a successful research project, 
a combination of ethnography with 
other strategies, such as action 
research, can provide relevant results and overcome some intrinsic 

limitations. 
We should say that we do not have 
a complete list of challenges, 
thus, further studies should be performed to point to other 
challenges of applying ethnography in
 SE contexts.  Also, there is 
a risk that our findings could be in
fluenced by factors that escaped 
our attention. One common view is
 that it is a good practice to discuss and validate findings with
 other researchers and with the 
participants to seek the complete
ness of the conclusions. We have done this partially am
ong the researchers involved in this paper. 
6. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
Applying an ethnographic approach can be both challenging and 
demanding, it requires a long time 
to collect data, sometimes years. Hence, it becomes necessary to take into account the 

influence of the researchers' presence and their effects, regarding 
the aim to support and collabor
ate with the participating 
companies, rather than just studying them. 
In this study we identified five categories of challenges of 
applying ethnography in a case st
udy involving an agile software 
project. Each challenge was described in terms of the current state 

of the practice and how we concei
ved the goals for future works. 
Several ways of addressing the challenges were outlined. 

Together, the challenges suggest that there is a particular way to 

deal with software development practices, which requires 
approaches that aim explicitly to construct a cooperative 

workspace, encompassing the researchers and the project team. 
It is important to emphasize the different types of observer roles 
and the degree of participation in 
order to, in some moments, be 
an outsider and, in others, an
 insider. Besides that, we 
recommended to use methodological 
triangulation to avoid bias 
due the close relationship with the participants. 
Our next step is to conduct new ethnographic studies with other 
software projects. Through the sy
nthesis of the evidence, we 
intend to contribute to provide rich narrative accounts of the 

ethnographic research activity, a
nd elucidate more questions and 
issues that arise from the use of
 ethnographic methods to study the 
practice of software development. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was partially supporte
d by the scholarship from the 
CAPES Foundation, process nu
mber 5744-11-3 and by the 
National Institute of Science and Technology for Software 

Engineering (INES), funded by CNPq, grant 573964/2008-4. 
The authors are grateful to all involved in this study, specially the 
interviewees for their insights and cooperation and to the 
SOLUTIS organization for supporting this work. 
 8. REFERENCES 
[1] Attride-Stirling, J., ﬁThematic 
networks: an analytical tool 
for qualitative research,ﬂ Qu
alitative Res
earch 1(3): 385Œ
405,  December 2001. 
[2] Boden, A., Müller, C., Ne
tt, B.ﬁConducting a business 
ethnography in global software development projects of 
small German enterprisesﬂ.  IST-53(9): 1012-1021, 2011. 
[3] Crang M. and Cook I. ﬁDoing ethnographiesﬂ, UK: Sage, 

2007. [4] Cruzes, D., Dybå, T. ﬁRecommended steps for thematic 
synthesis in software engine
eringﬂ. Proc. of ESEM™11, 
Banff-Alberta, Canada, September, 2011. 
[5] Dittrich Y., Rönkkö, K., Erikss
on, J. ﬁCooperative method 
development: Combining qualita
tive empirical research with 
method, technique and process 
improvementﬂ.  EMSE 13(3): 
231Œ260, 2008. 
[6] Fægri T.E., Dybå T., M. Dingsøyr, T. ﬁIntroducing 

knowledge redundancy practice 
in software development: 
Experiences with job rotation in support workﬂ. IST 52(10):
 1118Œ1132, 2010. 
[7] Fetterman D. ﬁEthnography: step-by-stepﬂ, 3rd ed. USA: 
Sage, 2010. 
[8] Fotsey M.G.ﬁ Ethnography as participant listeningﬂ.  

Ethnography - 11(4): 558Œ572, 2010. 
[9] Hammersley, M. "Ethnography: problems and prospects", 

Ethnography and Education, 1(1):3-14, 2006. 
[10] Karn, J.S., Cowling, A.J.ﬁ Using ethnographic methods to 
carry out human factors research in software engineeringﬂ.  

Behavior Research Methods Journal. BRM-38(3), 495-503, 
2006. [11] Lassiter, L. "Collaborativ
e Ethnography and Public 
Anthropology". Current Anthropology - 46(1):83-106, 2005. 
[12] Lewis S.J., Russel, A.J. ﬁB
eing embedded: A way forward 
for ethnographic researchﬂ.  Ethnography - 12(3): 398-416, 

2011. [13] Lutters, W.G., Seaman, C.B. ﬁRevealing actual 
documentation usage in softwa
re maintenance through war 
storiesﬂ. IST 1(49):576Œ587, 2007. 
[14] Ortner, S.B.ﬁAccess: Refl
ections on studying up in 
Hollywoodﬂ.  Ethnography - 11(2): 211Œ233, 2010. 
[15] Passos, C., Braun, P., Cruzes
, D., Mendonça, M. ﬁAnalyzing 
the impact of beliefs in software project practicesﬂ. Proc. of  
ESEM™11, Banff-Alberta, 
Canada, September, 2011. 
[16] Reeves, S., Kuper, A., Hodges.
 B. "Qualitative research 
methodologies: ethnography". BMJ, 337(10), 1336-1020, 

2008. [17] Robinson, H., Segal, J., Sharp, H. ﬁEthnographically-
informed empirical studies of 
software practiceﬂ.  IST-1(49): 
540Œ551, 2007. 
[18] Robson, C. "Real world research : a resource for users of 
social research methods in appl
ied settings",  3rd ed. USA: 
Wiley, 2011. 
[19] Runeson P., Host M. ﬁGuidelines for conducting and 
reporting case study research 
in software engineeringﬂ. 
Empirical Software Engineering, 2008, 2(14):131Œ164. 
[20] Santos, P. S. M. ; Travassos, G. H. . "Action Research Can 

Swing the Balance in Experimental Software Engineering". 
Advances in Computers, v. 83, p. 205-276, 2011. 
[21] Sharp, H.,Souza, C., Dittrich, Y. ﬁUsing Ethnographic 
Methods in Software Engineering Researchﬂ. Proc. of 

ICSE'10, Cape Town, South Africa, May, 2010. 
[22] Sigfridsson A., Sheehan, A.. 
ﬁOn qualitative methodologies and dispersed communities: Reflections on the process of 
investigating an open source communityﬂ.  IST- 53(9): 981Œ

993, 2001. 
[23] Sjøberg D.I.K., Dybå T., M. Jø
rgensen M. ﬁThe future of 
empirical methods in software engineering researchﬂ. In 
Future of Software Engineering, IEEE Press,  pp.358Œ378, 
2007. [24] Willis, P., Trondman , M. ﬁMan
ifesto for Ethnographyﬂ.  
Ethnography - 1(1): 5Œ16, 2000. 
[25] Wilson, W.J., Chaddha , A. ﬁThe role of theory in 
ethnography approachﬂ.  Ethnography - 10(4): 549Œ564, 
2009. APPENDIX A:  
INTERVIEW QUESTIONNAIRE
 Warm-up questions:  
1. What methodologies, software architectures, technologies, 
application domain, and types of
 client and size of projects 
have you worked with? 
2. What are the main challenges of your current project? 
 Past experience questions:
 3. Could you cite a past experience where the absence or 
presence of well-defined work 
process impacted (positively or 
negatively) the project's progress?  
4. Could you cite a past experience where the absence or 

presence of risk and communication plans impacted (positively 

or negatively) the project's progress? 
5. Could you cite a past experience where failures in software 

engineering practices impacted the project's progress? 
6. Could you cite a past experience where the absence or 

presence of project monitoring process by metrics impacted 
(positively or negatively) the project's progress? 
 Lessons learned questions:
 7. Could you tell me different an
d similar practices adopted in past projects and in the current project? 
8. What best practices related to your expertise and experience 
were useful to apply to your current project? Could you tell me 

about their application? 
9. What situation or risk have you tried to prevent or mitigate in 

the current project on account of experiences already lived? 

Cite and comment.  Reaction questions: 
10. In what aspects is the software development methodology of 
the company impacting your project? 
11. Have any unexpected effect or impact happened after your 

current project started to use this methodology? Cite and 

explain.  Metric-based questions: 
12. What affects, positively and negatively, the productivity of 
your project? Cite and explain. 
13. What affects, positively and negatively, the quality of your 

project? Cite and explain. 
14. What affects, positively and negatively, the time schedule of 

your project? Cite and explain. 
15. What affects, positively and negatively, the cost of your 

project? Cite and explain. 
 APPENDIX B:  
OBSERVATION INSTRUMENT 
Specific Goals to Record:  
 personal values, paradigms, and folktales of the project 
team members.  
 interactions between project team members.  
 activities actually performed by the project team. 
 practices adopted by members of the project team. 
 impact of the practices of team members on the project. 
 arguments for and against a particular practice.  
 influence of a practice on another practice in the project. 
 events that happened during the work of project team. 
 exceptions during the work of project team.  
 tools used by the project team members.  
 time spent on activities performed by project team. 
 metrics that show the practices adopted by the team.  
 other phenomena relevant to the research.
  Guided questions:  
1. What activities are actually performed by the project team? 
2. What practices are actually adopted by the project team? 
3. How often these practices are adopted by the project team? 
4. Are these practices being adopted properly by the project 
team? 
5. Which profile adopts certain practices within the project? 
6. How to understand the folklore behind the practices in the 

project team? 
7. How to understand the meaning of folklore for the team? 
8. How to understand the origin of folklore in the team? 
9. How to perceive the impact 
of folklore on the project? 10. How to understand the influence of folklore on other 

folklore within the project? 
11. How to characterize the folklore behind the practices in the 

project team? 
12. How to track the impact of folklore on the project? 

(history, timeline, context, etc.) 
13. How to measure the impact of folklore on the project? 
APPENDIX C:  
CONTEXT INSTRUMENT 
 Company Context:
 ID:  
Company Name:  
Background:  
Creation:  

Location:  

Segment:  
Services Offer:  
Annual Revenue:  

Number of Employees:  

Certifications: 
Standard Process:
 Project Context:
 ID:  
Project Name:  
Main Goal:  
Domain  

Customer : 

Origin:  
Customer Type: 
Customer Segment: 

Start Date:   

Size (PF):  
Productivity(H/PF): 
Time:  
Technology Platform: 

Methodology:  
Tools:  
Metrics: 
 Project Team Context: 
Member Name: 
Role:  
Role Description:  
Seniority: 
Experience Time: 
Competences: 
Mini-CV:
  