 A Conceptual Model of Client-driven Agile Requirements Prioritization:  Results of a Case StudyZornitza Racheva, Maya Daneva 
University of Twente 
Netherlands Tel.: + 31 53 489 4344/  +31 53 489 2889 
{z.racheva, m.daneva}@utwente.nl 
Andrea Herrmann 
University of Braunschweig  
Germany Tel.: +49 531 391 2275 
andrea.herrmann@tu-braunschweig.de 
 ABSTRACT
 Requirements (re)prioritization is an essential 
mechanism of agile development approaches to maximize the 
value for the clients and to accommodate changing 
requirements. Yet, in the agil
e Requirements Engineering (RE) 
literature, very little is known a
bout how agile (re)prioritization 
happens in practice. 
Conceptual models about this process are 
missing, which, in turn, makes it difficult for both practitioners 

and researchers to reason about 
requirements decision-making at 
inter-iteration time. We did a multiple case study on agile 
requirements prioritization methods to yield a conceptual model 
for understanding the inter-itera
tion prioritization process. The 
model is derived by using interview data from practitioners in 8 

development organizations. Such
 a model makes explicit the 
concepts that are used tacitly in the agile requirements 

prioritization practice and can be used for structuring future 
empirical investigations about th
is topic, and for analyzing, 
supporting, and improving the process in real-life projects. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.1 Requirements/Specifications Œ 
Methodologies, agile
 General Terms Management , Keywords
 - Agile development, requi
rements prioritization, 
inter-iteration decision-making process, case study 
1. INTRODUCTION Regular and value-driven requirements reprioritization from 
customer™s perspective is key to the successful execution of 
agile software projects. A comparative study [4] of this process 
and the prioritization practices in ﬁtraditional REﬂ indicates that, 

with respect to requirements (re)prioritization, agile 

requirements engineering (RE)
 is unique in two ways:  
(1)  (re)prioritization happens at inter-iteration time, and (2) 
(re)prioritization is based mostly on business value, that is, the 
highest priority features (i.e. re
quirements in agile terminology) 
get implemented early so that most business value gets realized, 

while exposing the project to as low a risk as possible. 

Surprisingly, researchers [3,9] in agile RE case studies found 

that the creation of software product value through requirements 

prioritization decision-making 
is only partly understood. 
This paper sets out to answ
er the following research 
question (RQ): What are the key concepts that are considered 

when prioritizing requirements, according to agile project 

practitioners? We answer it by carrying out an exploratory 

multiple case study. This research
 represents a further step to 
contribute to the understandi
ng of agile requirements 
reprioritization at inter-iteration time. The result of our effort is 

a conceptual model that is independent from any particular 
prioritization method, and which 
describes on an abstract level 
the agile prioritization process.
 The model provides a generic 
framework for describing the cl
ient™s decision-making situation 
while prioritizing the requiremen
ts. As per Alenljung and Person 
[1], a decision-making situation is 
ﬁa contextual whole of related 
aspects that concerns a decision-ma
kerﬂ, that is Œ in our case, the 
client in an agile project.
  The paper is structured as follows: Sect. 2 presents our 
motivation, Sect. 3 introduces the research method and Sect. 4 
describes the results of its applic
ation. Sect. 5 discusses validity 
threats. Sect.6 concludes the pa
per. We want to make the note 
that interested readers can find a more detailed description of the 

case study context, related work a
nd threats to validity in [10]. 
2. MOTIVATION 
Our motivation for creating a 
model of agile requirements 
prioritization (RP) from a client perspective rests on the fact that 

the practices of regular requirements reprioritization, with strong 

client participation, are a relatively recent phenomenon and, in 

turn, are only partially understood.
 The agile literature provides 
rather coarse-grained descriptions of the agile reprioritization 

process [11] only. We expected that by performing an 

exploratory study we could bett
er capture and explicate what 
happens in reality. As the agile literature indicates, e.g. in [2], 
never before in the software engineering history, the client has 
been that actively and constan
tly involved in the requirements 
reprioritization as he/she is in agile. When the client is expected 

to actively participate in the process by  performing, among 

other task, the key task of priori
tizing requirements, s/he must be 
aware of the facets of his/her role and thus would profit from a 

clear model of the prioritization process available to him/her. 
We think that a conceptual model can help the client in at least 
three ways: (i) to navigate through the agile process of 

delivering business value; (ii) to make explicit the tacit 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ESEM™10, September 16-17, 2010, Bolzano-Bozen, Italy. 
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0039-01/10/09–$10.00. 
 assumptions  in different RP 
methods; (iii) to identify those 
possible pieces/sources of information important to the outcome 
of the prioritization and, conseque
ntly, to the project. We also 
think that our model would help those RE researchers who are 
interested in carrying out case studies to investigate how agile 
requirements decision-ma
king happens in practice, to structure 
research questions 
and empirical data. 
3. THE RESEARCH
 METHOD We conducted an explorative multiple-case study, applying the 
Yin™s guidelines [14] and usi
ng semi-structured open-end in-
depth interviews with practitioners from 8 agile software 
development organizations. 
3.1  The case study process and participants Our case study is performed in the following steps: (1) 
Compose a questionnaire; (2) Va
lidate the questionnaire through 
an experienced researcher; (3) Implement changes in the 
questionnaire based on the feedback; (4) Do a pilot interview to 
check the applicability of the que
stionnaire to real-life context; 
(5) Carry out semi-structured  interviews with practitioners 
according to the finalized questionnaire; (6) Sample and follow-
up with those participants that possess deeper knowledge or a 

specific perspective.  
The case companies characterized themselves as 
organizations that follow agile methodologies. Some of them did 
strictly follow Scrum principles such as daily standŒup meetings 
and release retrospective. Most of them, though, applied a 

combination of agile practices without sticking precisely to a 

specific agile software devel
opment or project management 
approach.  Each interview lasted 60 to 90 minutes. Each interviewee 
was provided beforehand with information on the research 
purpose and the research process. At the interview meeting, the 
researcher and the interviewee walked through the questionnaire 
which served to guide the interviews. The study included 11 

practitioners who described a total of ten projects (two practitioners worked on the same project holding different roles). 

The application domains for which these practitioners developed 

software solutions represent a rich mix of fields including 

banking, health care management, automotive industry, content 
management, online municipality 
services, and ERP for small 
businesses. The information about
 the participating companies 
and specialists is summarized below:  
 1 middle size company in the Netherlands (2 cases, 3 
participants) 
 2 small companies in the Netherlands (3 cases, 3 
participants) 
 1 small company in Bulgaria (1 participant) 
 1 middle size company in Bulgaria (1 participant) 
 1 German university (1 student project) 
 1 large consultancy in Italy (1 participant) 
 1 IT department in a large governmental organization in 
Turkey (1 participant) 
Table 1 explains the primary role the case-study participants had 

in the studied projects. 
 TABLE 1.Participants in the Interviews. 
Interviewee™s primary role Number of interviewees 
Project Manager 
5 Developer 3 Product Owner 1 Client 1 Scrum Master 
1 Total Number of Interviewees 
11 3.2 The data analysis strategy In our case study, the data analysis was guided by the Grounded 
Theory (GT) method according to Kathy Charmaz [5],  which is 

a qualitative approach applied br
oadly in social sciences to 
construct general propositions (called a ﬁtheoryﬂ in this approach) 

from verbal data. GT is explorat
ory and well suited for situations 

where the researcher does not have pre-conceived ideas, and 
instead is driven by the desire to 
capture all facets of the collected 
data and to allow the theory to emerge from the data. In essence, 
this was a process of making analyt
ic sense of the interview data 
by means of coding and constant comparison of pieces of data 

that were collected in the case study. Constant comparison means 

that the data from an interview is constantly compared to the data 

already collected from previously 
held interviews, until a point of 
saturation is reached, i.e., where ne
w sources of data don™t lead to 
a change in the emerging theory (or conceptual model).  
We first read the interview transcripts and attached a coding 
word to a portion of the text Œ a phrase or a paragraph. The 

‚codes™ were selected to reflect the meaning of the respective 

portion of the interview text to a specific part of the RQ. This 

could be a concept (e.g. ‚value™, ‚method™), or an activity (e.g. 

‚estimation™). We clustered all pieces of text that relate to the 
same code in order to analyze it
 in a consistent and systematic 
way. The results of the data analysis are presented in Fig. 1 and 
discussed in Section 4.   4. RESULTS The multiple iterations of coding, constant comparing of 
information from the interviews, and conceptual modeling in our 
GT process yielded the model presented in Fig 1. Its purpose is to 
explicate and bring insights into the decision-making, which is 

the core of the RP process. Th
e model takes the perspective of 
the client, unlike other RP authors [2,8,13] who adopt the 

perspective of the developers. Th
is model is to help clients 
‚zoom-in™ into the prioritization process and see those concepts 

which are important to consider in RP at inter-iteration time, 
including context. It describes what happens in all those RP 
processes about which we learnt fro
m the participants in the case 
study. In the model we take a generi
c perspective of RP, that is, it 
abstracts from the use of a specific RP approach. 
Our case study results suggest that there is a consensus 
among the practitioners that there are five aspects that the clients 

consider when making decisions on requirements priorities: 
Business Value
, Effort Estimation/ Size Measurement,
 Learning Experience
, Input from the developers and External Change. Iteration planning additionally considers 
Project Constraints.  Below we explain each of these conceptual categories, that are 
reflected in the model, and their impact on the RP process.  
1. During the case study, we observed that the prioritization 
process itself varies significantly in terms of participants 
involved, prioritization criteria 
applied, purpose and frequency of 
the prioritization. The interview pa
rticipants shared that, in their 
view, the variation depends to large extent on the context of the 
project. We represented this variability in the model by the 
concept ‚Project Context™
. It includes those project settings such 
as ‚size of the project™ or ‚size of
 the client™s organization™, and is used to explicate the impact of 
these settings on the prioritization 
 process. In the projects of our practitioners, the concrete 
instantiations of the prioritization processes were deemed to be 

linked with these contextual settings. For example, our 

interviewees observed that in projects with similar contexts, the 
instantiated prioritization processes are similar in respect to who 

are the decision-makers and the 
amount of participation of the 
different parties in the process.  
2. All interviewees agreed on  that the 
project context has a significant impact on the ‚
Prioritization criteria™. We observed that the case study participants converge on that the 
Business Value is the dominating RP criterion, whereby 
Business Value
 is estimated by the customer alone. In some projects we observed 

one recurring question being asked at requirements 

reprioritization time: ﬁIs a require
ment absolutely necessary to 

support the main usage scenario
?ﬂ This question implies a notion of ‚damage to the client™ or ‚negative value to the client™ in the 

case the requirement is not implemented. We termed this 

criterion ‚negative value
™. One study participant said: ﬁAll 
features that belong to the main usage scenario were considered 
mandatory and needed to be included in the product. This drove 
the decision-making process.ﬁ In addition to Business Value, the client in some projects 
considers the 
Risk caused by a requirement™s implementation.  
3. In the experience of the interviewees, the client considers 
Estimated Size based on functional size when making decisions 
on priorities. The estimation of 
Size/ Effort impacts the value 
estimation as well. For example, a participant mentioned ﬁIf we 

give a high estimation for certain
 requirement (in terms of time /cost), it happens that the client starts considering this requirement as less important as previously thought.ﬂ We make 
the note that size, effort, cost and risk are estimated by the 

developers and provided to the cl
ients for their decision-making. From the client™s perspective, si
ze is a given Œ though potentially 
uncertain Œ input.  4. Another ‚building block™ in the RP process appeared to be
 the developer™s perspective
 (box ‚Input from the Develope
r™ in 
Fig. 1). While the literature [11] deems the role of the developers 

for the RP process secondary, the case study revealed a different 

situation. In the majority of th
e cases the developers were the 
more influential party, providing 
advice and alternative solutions, 
but also taking into considerat
ions the interests of their own 
organization  (such as ‚possibl
e reuse of the requirement™, ‚importance of the project for the organization™, ‚available 

resources at the moment™).  
5. The conceptual category 
‚External Change
™ stands for those events that happen duri
ng the project and impact the 
company, the business environment or the product under 

development. Such changes can impact the value of 
requirements. The interviewees deemed the external changes be 
one of the reasons for clients™ requirements change requests. 
6. The category
 ‚Learning experiences™ 
represents
 new insights acquired by both the clie
nts and the developers during 
the project, such as new knowledge about technical solutions, or 
new insights about the desired 
functionality of the product under 
development. They impact the value estimation, the prioritization 

decisions and the size estimation. For example, while working in 
a project that we investigated, 
the developer learned about the 
exact functionality of open-source 
software that he intended to 
use. This new insight triggered changes in the initial estimations 
and thus in the priorities of the requirements. 
  Figure 1.  The conceptual model 
Learning is an in-built principle in agile development. 
Harris and Cohn [8] advise ﬁIncor
porate new learning often, in 
order to decide what to do nextﬂ.  
7. The ‚Project Constraints™
 such as 
duration, release 
date, budget, velocity and 
available
 resources, 
impact both the prioritization decisions and the iteration planning.  
8. The Project Backlog
 means the list with requirements 
for the projects. 
Prioritized Project Backlog
 is the ordered list of requirements, and a sub-set of it (called sprint backlog) is to 
be implemented in the next iteration. 
‚Prioritized™
 means to 
assign a requirement a priority, which during 
iteration planning translates into an order of implementation: i.e. 

starting with the requirements with the highest priority, so 

many requirements are chosen for the sprint backlog as can be 

implemented within the next iter
ation and project constraints.  
The iteration planning and th
e resulting sprint (i.e. 
iteration) backlog, is out of the scope of this paper and is 
shown on the model for sa
ke of completeness.  As indicated earlier, the resulting model is compatible with 
any RP technique. It does not 
prescribe any process or propose 
a new method, but instead just 
describes what we found in the 
case study.
 This means that a client could use this conceptual 
model as a framework for reasoning about his/her RP process 
independently of his/
her concrete context. Clearly, not all of 
the elements in the model are necessarily present in each RP 

process Œ i.e. some of them depend on the project context. For 

example, one can use the concep
ts of the model to depict a 
specific client™s RP situation in a specific project, in a specific 

organization and, thus, take in
to account the topics important 
for clients to consider in RP at inter-iteration time. The 

model™s completeness still should be validated empirically, e.g. 

by new case studies.  
5. THREATS TO VALIDITY We make the note that in this paper we propose conceptual 
model only. 
This model, as suggested by GT methodologists 
[5,6], is not supposed to be vali
dated against the data that has been used for the development 
of the model. According to 
GT methodologists [7,12], we can 
only evaluate the resulting 
model against the three evaluation criteria of GT: (i) adequacy, 

(ii) fitness (or relevance) and (iii) modifiability. We ensured 

adequacy of the result of the GT process by applying the set of 

techniques and analytical procedur
es in the GT. We adhered as 
closely as possible to the GT
 processes, coded the data independently by each researcher before re-coding them in 

joint work discussions. To ensu
re that the conceptual model 
makes sense to both researchers and practitioners, we searched 

and included the so-called ‚in-vi
vo™ codes, as recommended in 
[5]. These are special terms from the world of the practitioners 

in the studied context, which are assumed that everyone 

ﬁknows and sharesﬂ them. In our case, examples of in-vivo 

codes, associated to clients in agile RE, are ﬁnegative valueﬂ 

(meaning the damage in case the requirement is not 
implemented), ﬁproject backlogﬂ, ﬁiteration backlogﬂ.  
Last, the modifiability of an emerging theory is ensured by 
the level of granularity that we chose for the model. We made 
a conscious effort to maintain a balance between keeping the 

concepts abstract enough - so that the theory can serve as a 
general explanation, and making 
sure the concepts do not get too abstract as to lose their sensitizing characteristics. 
  6. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK This paper investigated the concepts that are important to 
consider when reprioritizing agile requirements from clients™ 
perspective at inter-iteration time. We used GT to derive from 

case study data a conceptual model that explicates the RP in 

agile projects. This model fills a gap in the current agile RE 

literature, which lacks comprehensive studies on how agile RP 

happens in real life. The model presents the state of the 

practice described by concepts that we discerned from 
interviews with 11 practitioners
. Our conceptual model is a 
first proposal only. It is descrip
tive, not prescriptive. However, 
we think that in its current state the model can be of value in at 
least two ways: (1) to help researchers and practitioners to 

identify and classify best practices and distill some guidelines 

for practice, and (2) to serve as
 a roadmap for further empirical 
research to investigate the fitness of different RP approaches to 
different contexts.  This study accesses fine-grained information that described 
the RP processes in companies. We found our fine-grained 
pieces of information about RP did not always agree with 

course-grained descriptions of the RP process in the literature. 
When we made practitioners™ knowledge explicit in this case 

study, we found that there are variations in the meanings of 

important RP concept, for exam
ple, ‚Priority Criterion™ and 
‚Business value™, and that certain variations are seemingly 
related to project context charact
eristics. This motivates us to 
do follow-up case studies in order to make the tacit 
practitioner™s knowledge explicit. 7. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been funded by the Netherlands NWO 
under the QUADREAD project.  
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Alenljung, B., A. Person, Portraying the Practice of 
Decision-making in Requi
rements Engineering: a 
Case Study of large Scale Bespoke Development, 

Requirements Engineering Journal, 2008, 13, pp. 
257-279. [2] Augustine, S., Managing Agile Projects, Prentice-

Hall, 2005. [3] Barney S., Aurum A., C. Wohlin, A Product 
Management Chal
lenge: Creating Software Product 

Value through Requirements Selection, Journal of 
Software Architecture, 54 (2008), pp. 576-593. 
[4] Cao, L, Ramesh B., Agile Requirements 
Engineering Practices: An 
Empirical Study, IEEE 
Software, Jan/Feb, 2008 pp. 60-67. 
[5] Charmaz, K. Constructing Grounded Theory: a 

Practical Guide through Qualitative Research, 
Thousand Oaks CA, Sage, 2007. 
[6] Clarke, A. Situational Analysis: Grounded Theory 
after the Postmodern Turn, Thousand Oaks, CA, 
Sage, 2005. 
[7] Glaser, B. G., Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis: 
Emergence vs Forcing, Sociology Press Mill Valley, 
1992. [8]  Harris, R. S., M. Cohn, Incorporating Learning and 
Expected Cost of Change in Prioritizing Features on 
Agile Projects. XP 2006: pp. 175-180 
[9] Petersen K., C. Wohlin, A Comparison of Issues 
and Advantages in Agile and Incremental 

development between State of the Art and an 

Industrial Case, Journal of
 Systems and  Software, 
82 (2009), pp. 1479-1490. 
[10] Racheva, Z., Daneva, M., 
Sikkel, A. Herrmann, R. Wieringa, Do we Know Enough about 
Requirements Prioritization in Agile Projects: 

Insights from a Case Study, in the Proceedings of  
Requirements Engeneering 2010,  Australia, in print 
[11] Racheva., Z., M. Daneva, A. Herrmann, R. 
Wieringa, ﬁA conceptual model and process for 

client-driven agile require
ments prioritizationﬂ, in 
the Proc. of 4th International Conference on 

Research challenges in Information Science (RCIS), 
Nice, France, May 2010, IEEE 
[12] Strauss, A.L., J.M. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative 
Research - Grounded Theory Procedures and 
Techniques, Sage, Newbury Park, 1991. 
[13] Wiegers, K., First Things First: Prioritizing 

Requirements, Software Development, 7(9) 1999.  
[14] Yin, R.K.,  Case Study Research: Design and 

Methods (1984)  
 