 Building Empirical Support for Automated Code Smell Detection Jan Schumacher
1, Nico Zazworka
2, Forrest Shull
2,  Carolyn Seaman2,3
, Michele Shaw2 1University of 
Applied Sciences 
Mannheim Germany +49 621 2926224 
jan@schuma.eu 
 2Fraunhofer Center 
College Park MD, USA +1 240 487 2904 
{nzazworka, fshull, mshaw}@fc-
md.umd.edu 
 3UMBC Baltimore MD, USA +1 410 455 3937 
cseaman@umbc.edu 
  ABSTRACT
 Identifying refactoring opportunities in software systems is an 
important activity in today™s ag
ile development environments. 
The concept of code smells has been proposed to characterize 

different types of design shortcomings in code. Additionally, 
metric-based detection algorithms claim to identify the ﬁsmellyﬂ 
components automatically. This pa
per presents results for an empirical study performed in 
a commercial environment. The 
study investigates the way professi
onal software developers detect 
god class code smells, then compar
es these results to automatic classification. The results show that, even though the subjects 
perceive detecting god 
classes as an easy task, the agreement for 
the classification is low. Misplaced methods are a strong driver 
for letting subjects identify god 
classes as such. Earlier proposed 
metric-based detection approaches performed well compared to 

the human classification. These results lead to the conclusion that 
an automated metric-based pre-selection decreases the effort spent 
on manual code inspections. Automatic detection accompanied by 
a manual review increases the overall confidence in the results of 
metric-based classifiers. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.8 [Software Engineering
]: Metrics
 General Terms Measurement, Design, Empiri
cal Study, Verification. 
Keywords
 Code Smells, God Class, Code Inspection, Maintainability 
1. INTRODUCTION Code smells (first introduced by 
Fowler and Beck [3]) are an 
established concept to classify shortcomings in software that 
follows object-oriented design. Each
 ﬁsmellﬂ is an indicator that 
points to the violation of object-oriented design principles such as 
data abstraction, encapsulation,
 modularity, and hierarchy. 
One of the code smells introduced 
by Fowler and Beck is the large 
class or god class smell. God classes do too much, often have more than one responsibility, and only delegate minor tasks to 
other classes [3] [6]. To ensure that object-oriented software 
remains easy to understand and maintainable over time, Fowler 
and Beck argued that these cla
sses should therefore be split up 
into multiple classes, or else su
b-classes should be extracted from 
the god class. 
Our study aims to improve the understanding how humans utilize 
the concept ofcode smells in 
improving software quality. We 
investigate how expert develope
rs detectgod classes and whether 
it is a repeatable process (e.g.,
 whether there is agreement among 
multiple judges). Based on observati
ons of real developers and real systems, we can begin to formulate the symptoms that let 
humans identify agod class as such. 
We use these results to investig
ate the feasibility of tools for 
supporting this process. Fowler's and Beck's intention was that the 
detection ofcode smells would 
be based on human judgment and 
intuition. However, researchers 
(e.g., Marinescu[11]) have also 
proposed a metric-based approach for the detection of code 
smells.  
Furthermore, we investigate whether there are measurable effects 
(e.g., greater change frequency
) ofgod classes in the software 
system that would corroborate Fowl
er and Beck™s contention that 
correcting these symptoms will lead to improvements in software 
maintainability. 
2. CONTEXT AND RELATED WORK 
The term Code Smell was first introduced by Kent Beck and 

gained popularity through Fowler's and Beck's book on 

refactoring [3]. They describe refactoring as "Improving the 
design (of software) after it has been written". This can become 
necessary since deadline pressu
re, strong focus on functionality, 
and inexperienced developers ca
n have a negative influence on 
the design of a software system. 
Ward Cunningham notes that these fa
ctors, often present in hasty software development, may lead to
 the build-up of what he refers 
to as technical-debt [1]. On the one hand it can be tolerable to 
build up such debt in order to progress more rapidly in the 
development of a product. On the other hand, the debt may reach 
a level where the interest paid in the form of code that becomes 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ESEM™10, September 16-17, 2010, Bolzano-Bozen, Italy. 

Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0039-01/10/09–$10.00. 
   hard to understand, and deviatio
ns from the design, will outweigh 
these short-term benefits. Refactoring can be used to transition the 
design of a system that suffers fromtechnical debt into a more 
favorable one. 
However, there are situations, wh
en it is less obvious where and 
what kind of refactoring woul
d improve a certain part of a 
software system. Fowler and Beck use the concept of code smells 
to help developers identify design flaws in their software [3]. 
Each code smell has a set of refactoring techniques associated 
with it. Strategies for using an
d evaluating Code Smells can be 
grouped into automated, and manual approaches. 
2.1 Automatic Detection of Code Smells  The detection of code smells ha
s been described by Fowler and 
Beck as a human discipline base
d on intuition and experience [3]. 
Lanza and Marinescu argue [6] that
 the manual detection of code 
smells is time consuming, non-repeatable and 
does not scale. In 
conclusion, they propose detection strategies; a metric-based 

approach to detectc
ode smells automatica
lly. In [11]Marinescu 
conducts a case study to assess the performance of detection 

strategies. He tries to find 10 differentcode smells in a medium 
size business application. The suspects that were found using 
detection strategies are examined again by humans. Based on their 
opinion, the precision of the automatic detection is reported to be 
70%. Recall is not calculated. Recent work by Olbrich et al. [14] 

also useMarinescu's detection strategies to investigate the 
relationship between certaincode smells and an increased 
maintainability effort. They report increased maintainability effort 

forgod classes. Munro et al. [13] refine Marine
scu's method by suggesting a more 
systematic approach. This includes providing empirical evidence 
for choosing the software metrics used for the automatic 
detection. They also propose new metrics based on the 
characteristics and design heuristics associated with thecode 
smell. By automatically detecting the lazy class and temporary 
field smell in two academic applications (1500LOC and 16000 

LOC) Munro et al. determine the performance of their model. For 
the smaller of the two software systemscode smells were also 
detected manually. Due to the low number of false-positives (high 
precision) they conclude their 
model performed effectively. 
Other work by van Emden [2] uses
 the extracted meta-model of a 
software system to detect code smells. She automatically 
detectscode smells in software that does automatic facial 
recognition as part of a case study. She reports the developers' 
feedback to be  ﬁgenerally posi
tiveﬂ. The developers also found 
the additional visualizations the 
tool provided ﬁwere useful for 
conformance checking and refactoring support.ﬂ 
Mohaet. al[12] designed a comprehensive framework for the 
automatic detection ofcode smel
ls. It includes a component for 
formally describing acode smell 
using adomain specific language. 
This description is not limited to metrics and is later on used to 
automatically generate detection algorithms for thecode smell. 
The authors validate their mode
l using the Java framework 
Xerces. In addition, to automatic detection, the system was 

evaluated by three students on graduate level and two independent 
software engineers for the existence of certaincode smells. Based 
on these two assessments, Moha et al. report 100% recall and an 
average precision above 40%. 
In addition, to metric-based de
tection, Kreimer [4] proposes an 
adaptive detection technique that
 uses manual classification by 
developers to train automatic detection algorithms through 
machine learning. By doing this 
he tries to ﬁovercome problems caused by different perceptions of CS (code smells) by different 

developers.ﬂ Using a relatively small training set (20 instances), 
the accuracy of the model is 
reported to be between 95% and 
100% for the long method and large class smell. Running the 

same detection algorithm on 20 sa
mple program locations that were also evaluated by a human for the existence of the two 

smells, Kreimer reports precision to be between 80% and 90%. 
2.2 Human Detection of Code Smells  Compared to the approaches for the automatic detection of code 

smells, the way they are detected by humans has not been 
thoroughly explored. To date, Mäntylä et al. have done the most 

comprehensive investigation on human performance of the 
classification of code smells. In
 two publications [9][10], they 
investigate the subjective evaluation of code smells using an 

empirical study. The study is run in a small software development 
company. Mäntylä et al. analyze the effect of demographic 
factors, such as experience and capabilities, on the manual 
detection ofcode smells. They c
onclude that demographics, to 
some extent, may be used to e
xplain fluctuations in the smell 
evaluation. In addition, they inve
stigate if there is agreement on 
the existence of code smells in
 the reviewed software modules 
among the judges. Here they report
 that the conflicting perception 
ofcode smells among the developers caused a lack of uniformity in the smell evaluations. Lastly they try to find correlations 
between code smells identified by the subjects and software 
metrics. However, no signifi
cant correlations were found. 
Mäntylä ran two more studies [7][8]using students to review a 
purposely poorly programmed sm
all application (1000 NLOC
1) In the first publication [8], Mäntylä et al. examined the inter-rater 

agreement for the existence of th
ree method level code smells and 
the question if subjects would re
factor the method. Agreement 
was high for simple code smells like Long Method and Long 
Parameter List. For the more complicated Feature Envy code 
smell and the refactoring decision
, there was significantly lower 
agreement. In addition, they tried to find explaining factors for the 

above results using a metric-based regression model and 
demographic information on the 
subjects of the study. The 
regression model explained about 70% of the code smell 
detections. Only 40% of the re
factoring decisions could be 
explained based on the model. 
Mäntylä et al. concluded that metrics and demographics are not 
ideal predictors for refactoring decisions. In the second study [7], 
they investigated the human rationale behind the refactoring 
decisions. They accomplished this by coding the answers they 

received and assigning them to 
different categories. Again, a 
regression model was used to de
termine how well these drivers 
explain the refactoring decision. The inter-rater agreement for the 
different categories wa
s reported as poor. So the subjects did not 
have a uniform opinion as to what kind of issues existed in the 

examined methods. The regression 
model showed that qualitative 
data was a valuable explaining fact
or for the refactoring decision. 
Method Length in particular turned out to be the best predictor for 
the subjects refactoring decision. 
                                                                
 1 Non-commented lines of code 
 2.3 Summary of Related Work 
The work presented above shows that automatic code smell 
detection yields reasonable results.
 Yet, except for Moha, none of 
the publications present numbers for the recall rate of their 
approach when compared to manual detection. This means that 
true-positives, so classes that a human might have considered god 
classes, might be missed by the automatic detection. In the 
publications covered so far, manua
l detection ofcode smells plays 
a secondary role and was used to assess the performance of an 

automatic detection technique.
 The information on how the detection was performed by humans 
is relatively sparse. Only one 
author (Mäntylä) reports on this topic. 
3. RESEARCH QUESTIONS We believe the work done by Mänt
ylä et al., especially their 
evaluation of drivers behind refactoring decisions, yields 

interesting results. Consequently
, we decided to conduct a similar 
study where the refactoring decisions made by humans were not 

directly evaluated but one of the most prominent reasons for 
refactoring identified by Fowler
 and Beck:large classes orgod 
classes. The authors describegod classes as ﬁprime breeding 

ground for duplicate code, chaos, and deathﬂ [3]. According to 
Lanza and Marinescu, a god class is
 ﬁan aggregation of different 
abstractions and (mis)use other cl
asses (often mere data holders) 
to perform its functionalityﬂ [6]. 
This leads to the common belief that god classes have a negative 
effect on the understandability 
and evolvability of a software 
system. Due to their expansive impact on a software system, god 

classes represent a code smell 
worth examining. Tool supported 
detection of god classes has b
een covered in some of the 
publications presented above ([11][13]), there has been no 
research on the human perception and performance of detecting 
god classes. Our study builds on and extends Mäntylä's work. It is run in a 
professional environment, and the subjects are the actual 

developers of the software under review. This is an important 
component to the work, since the subjects are familiar with the 
software they are reviewing. They know the design decisions that 
were made for the software and are aware of the constraints that 
existed during the development phase. 
3.1 Evaluation of Human Performance  Our research questions focus on evaluating the human 

performance and perception of the process of detecting classes 
infected by thegod classcode smel
l in a professional environment. 
Answering these questions will help to understand how much 

effort is required when using a code review to identify such 
smells. Also, it will be shown 
how high agreement between the 
human evaluators can be expected using reviews. In addition, the 
characteristics and code issues (expressed by the reviewers) in a 
class that are associated with a specific code smell are collected. 
R1: How difficult is it for humans to identify god classes and how 
much effort does it take? 
R2: How well do humans agree on identifying god classes? 
R3: What issues in code make humans identify a god class as 
such? 
3.2 Evaluation of Automated Classifiers  In addition, we evaluate if any of 
the issues that were used by the 
subjects to identify god classes can be linked to metrics used by 
automated classifiers. We investigate if we can optimize the 
metrics and thresholds used by 
automatic classifiers based on the 
findings from the first set of research questions. 
R4: How well do the previously proposed metric based classifiers 
perform in terms of precision and recall when compared to human 
classification? 
R5: How are the identified code issues related to the metric based 
classification approach? 

R6: Is it possible to improve ex
isting metric based approaches? 
3.3 Effects of God Classes on Maintainability 
The last research question aims at finding evidence that classes 
identified with thegod class smell demand an increased level of 
maintainability effort. Such findings would corroborate Fowler 
and Beck™s contention that correcting these symptoms can lead to 

improvements in the software's maintainability. 
R7: Do god classes require a higher maintainability effort than 
non-god classes? 
4. STUDY DESIGN 
4.1 Setting  The study was conducted in a professional environment at a 
midsized software development company located in Washington 
D.C. Most of the company™s projects are web applications written 

in the C# programming language 
and are based on Microsoft's 
ASP.NET framework. Two of the company™songoing projects 
(project A and B) were selected as candidates for the study. The 
two projects are database-driven we
b applications that enable the 
user to manipulate data through a browser. Both projects are 
based on a common architecture that is developed across all the 
projects in the company. Moreover, the projects have undergone a 
full product lifecycle (elicitation, design, implementation) and 
have booth been maintained by the company for more than a year. 
Additional characteristi
cs of projects A and B can be found in Table 1. 
 4.2 Evaluation of Human Performance The design of the study was done in an iterative fashion. Three 
pilot studies were conducted with computer science students at 
graduate (1 student) and undergra
duate level (2 students). These 
studies helped to identify flaws in the procedure and allowed for a 
step-wise refinement of the inspection process used. 
A total time of 90 minutes was allotted for the study for each 
participant, where the inspection 
of classes should not take longer 
than 75 minutes. The second class and third class were inspected 

for project A and project B respectively. This selection 
strategywas chosen to assure a widespread of classes over all 
Table 1: Project characteri
stics of the two systems 
 Project A Project B # Classes  154  
105  Lines of Code*  11264  
5676 Avg. LOC / Class  73  
55  # Developers  2  
2  Project History in 

SVN 10 months: 
1268 revisions 4 months: 
645 revisions * based on the total size of me
thods in a class, including 
blank lines and comments [6]. 
 namespaces of the software system. Additionally, this strategy 
ensured an un-biased selection of classes. This means, large 
classes were not given preference in order to not automatically 
exclude small god classes that might
 have been detected by the 
human subjects. 
4.2.1 Description of Subjects 
Subject A1 from study A has the 
role of a programmer and has been programming using object-oriented languages for more than 
three years. Subject A2 is the technical lead of the project and has 
been programming for more than 7 years using object-oriented 
languages. Both subjects had ne
ver heard the termscode smell 
orgod class before. Their current 
refactoring practice included an 

ad-hoc process (whenever it becomes necessary) discussed as a 
team. 
Subject B1 from study B is the technical lead of the project and 
has been programming for more than three years in an object-
oriented language. The subject had heard aboutgod classes before. 
Subject B2 has been programming in object-oriented languages 
for less than a year. The terms c
ode smells and god classes were 
new to her. The subjects describe 
their refactoring approach to be 
ad-hoc as well as planned. They decide on refactoring using 
software reviews either done by
 one person or in a team. 
4.2.2 Study Procedure During the study, subjects were first asked to fill out a pre-study 

questionnaire. The questionnaire 
helped to collect background 
information such as their role within the company, their 

programming experience, their familiarity with code smells and 
god classes and their current refactoring approach. Next, the 
subjects were introduced to the god classcode smell using a short 
presentation
2.This was done in such a way that any mention of 
software metrics was strictly avoided (e.g., concepts such as 
                                                                
 2 The presentation slides can be found in the online lab package. 
complexity, cohesion, coupling, et
c.). Instead, the introduction 
focused on the refactoring techniques used to eliminate such a 
problem. A list of questions was 
compiled to help the subjects 
identify god classes: 
 Does the class have more 
than one responsibility? 
 Does the class have functiona
lity that would fit better 
into other classes? 
o By looking at the methods, one could ask: ﬁIs 

this the class™ job?ﬂ 
 Do you have problems summarizing the class™ 

responsibility in one sentence? 
 Would splitting up the class improve the overall design? 
For the inspection of classes, a 
mini-process was designed. This 
ensures that all subjects perform the inspection of classes in a 
similar fashion.The process consists of the following steps for 
each class: 
1) Subjects confirm they are familiar with the class. The 
pilot studies showed, that
 subjects have problems 
identifying God Classes whenever they had not seen the 

code before (when it was written by a different 
developer for example). One pilot study subject 
indicated that, "I might have 
tended to classify it as a 
God Class when somebody else wrote it, because I 

could not fully understand 
all the design decisions." 
2) Classes are opened in an editor for examination. In one 

of the pilot studies a subject did not review each class 
by looking at the code (becau
se we did not explicitly instruct them to do so). In that case the classification 
was solely based on memory. 
This step was added to 
avoid such a scenario. 
3) Classes are reviewed with the questions presented above in mind. 4) Subjects rate the class on the following scale: 
(1) It is not a God Class 
Figure 1: Classes (made anonymous) in project B in the Core.Controllers name space visualized by CodeVizard. The life lines of 
each class (starting at creation and ending
 at deletion time) are plotte
d over time (x-axis). Light coloring indicates that a c
lass is 
nota GodClass, dark red that it is a God Class. Grey bars in the lifeline show when the class was modified.The bars in the time ru
ler 
on top show the commit activity by visualizing how many classe
s were changed per commit (weekly work intervals are visible). 
 (2) It might be a God Class 
(3) It is a God Class 
The scale is based on the findings from the pilot studies where 
Likert scales with four and five 
different values were used. It was 
hard for subjects to decide on values that were not on the extreme 

ends of the scale. 
During the entire process, subjects were encouraged to "think-
aloud", thus sharing their thoughts and rationales with the 
facilitators of the study. This was also recorded as audio. In 
addition, the subjects were asked if the concept of god classes 
made sense to them and if they would consider such classes 
harmful. 4.2.3 Evaluation of Qualitative Data  
Coding was used to categorize the comments collected during the 
think-aloud phase from the subjects
. To do this, first the audio 
recordings were transcribed. For each class that was examined, 

the subject's comments were collected in a spreadsheet. Next, the 
researchers reviewed the transcripts and created a number of 
codes that reflect the issues that
 were expressed by the subjects 
during the study using the methodology described in [16]: 
 Class is not used anymore 
 Class is highly complex 
 Class is misplaced 
 Class is special (e.g. a necessary framework class) 
 Method is wrongly named 
 Method is highly complex 
 Method is misplaced 
 Attribute is not used 
 Method/Class lacks comments 
In a second step two researchers assigned the codes independently 

to the transcribed data on a class-by-class basis. For each class, 
each researcher decided which of 
the above issues, if any, were 
mentioned by a subject during thethink-aloud review of that 

particular class. Inter-rater agre
ement between the two researchers 
was calculated using Cohen's Kappa. Kappa is a chance corrected 

measure of agreement that is used when two raters judge items on 
a binary scale. For the first r
ound of coding Kappa was calculated 
to be 85%. According to Landis and Koch [5] this indicates 
almost perfect agreement between the judges. Those items the 
researchers could not agree on (a total of 12 out of 1664 ratings) 
were discussed. This resulted in an agreement of 100%. 
4.3 Instrumentation for Evaluation of Automated Classifiers We used the results of our human subjects as a way to evaluate a 
metrics based approach to god cla
ss detection. We encoded this 
approach into a software tool (CodeVizard Œ see Figure 1) 

developed by our research group.T
he tool can automatically mine 
data from source code repositories (i.e. Subversion) and visualize it in various ways. The tool also includes a component that 

calculates software metrics for Java programs that was used in 
earlier studies [14].The capabilities of this component were 
extended to parse C# programs 
and calculate code metrics for 
them. The metrics are based on the definitions presented by Lanza 

andMarinescuin [6]. In addition 
the tool implements Marinescu's 
detection strategies [11]for the au
tomatic detection of code smells 
(including god classes). 
4.3.1 The God Class Detection Strategy 
A detection strategy is a logica
l composition of appropriate code 
metrics and corresponding thresholds
 that automatically detects 
design flaws in an application. 
Lanza and Marinescudefine them 
as "the quantifiable expressi
on of a rule by which design 

fragments that conform to that rule can be detected in the source 
code"[6]. 
Marinescudefined god classes 
exhibiting the following 
characteristics: (1) high comple
xity, (2) low cohesion and (3) 
extensive access to the data of fo
reign classes. In conclusion he uses the following code metrics to capture theses characteristics: 
(1) weighted method count (WMC), (2) tight class cohesion 
(TCC),and (3) access to foreign data (ATFD). Figure 2illustrates 
the structure of the detection stra
tegy for god classes. More details 
on the metrics and thresholds can be found in Lanza™s 

andMarinescu'sbook on object oriented metrics [6]. 
4.4 Effects of God Classes on Maintainability 
To evaluate if god classes require an increased maintenance effort 
and to answer RQ 7, an analys
is of the change likelihood for god classes and non-god classes from th
e two studies was conducted. For this, CodeVizard identifies god 
classes not only for the latest 
revision of a class in a repository but also over the complete 
history (e.g., all revisi
ons) of that class. It is important to take a 
class™ history into account in this
 context. It would be wrong to 
conclude that if a class is a god 
class in the latest revision it has 
been one for all its existence.
 Figure 1 (a screenshot from CodeVizard) illustrates the evoluti
on of god classes in project B. 
A second issue that needs to be considered for this analysis is the 
fact that god classes are usually
 among the larger classes in a software system. This is due to their nature of accumulating large 
parts of the software's functionality. From a statistical point of 
view, a change to the software will more likely manifest itself in a 
large class instead of a small class, assuming that changes are 
uniformly distributed over all line
s of code in the software. To 
account for this circumstance one should normalize the change 
likelihood by the lines of code (LOC) of a class. In earlier work 
by Olbrich et al. [14], it was shown that, without normalizing by 
LOC, god classes are changed four to five times as often as non-
god classes. The change likelihood is computed as follows. For each revision 
the number of changed god and non-god classes is determined. 
Then, both numbers are divided by the total number of god and 
non-god classes existing in the syst
em. Table 2 shows an extract of the revisions from project A. For example, in revision 1415 one 
Table 2: Example change Likelihood for God Classes and 
non-God Classes 
Revision 1407 1415 1416 1421 1424 Likeli-hood GC 0/6 1/6 2/6 0/6 0/6 0.100 
N-GC 2/218 2/220 9/219 2/219 2/218 0.015 
 Figure 2: Detection Strategy for God Classes 
 out of six (16.6%) god classes wa
s changed and two out of 220 
(0.9\%) non god classes were changed. 
The change likelihood is then calc
ulated as the average of the 
change ratios over all revisions forgod and non-god classes. In 
other words, this is the likelihood of one particular god or non-god 
class to be changed during one revision. The hypothesis is thatgod 
classes have significant higher change likelihood than non-god 
classes. Two things need to be ta
ken into consideration: (1) if a 
revision does not have any changes to source files (e.g. only 
documentation stored in the repository was changed) then the 
revision is ignored, and (2) if a system at a revision does not 
contain any god classes (e.g. in the beginning of the project) then 
this revision is ignored in the average for the god classes.  
Normalization by lines of code is
 done by dividing the values in 
Table 2 by the average lines of code of all changed God/non-God 
Classes for that revision. 
5. RESULTS In the following section the collected and observed results for the 
research questions stated above are presented. 
5.1 Evaluation of Human Performance R1:How difficult is it for humans to identify God Classes and how 
much effortdoes it take?
 All subjects were able to identify classes they felt weregod 

classes. In the follow-up interview to the study, subjects were 
directly asked if it was hard fo
r them to detect god classes. 
Subject A1 from project A said that, due to her familiarity with 

the project under investigation, it was easy. The same subject said 
that the classification process became easier after a while. She 
explained that the mini-process and its accompanying set of 
questions ﬁhelp you to organize your mind.ﬂ Also the fact that she 
could follow a plan and the repetitive nature of the classification 
process made the review easier after a while. 
Subject B2 from project B said that, based on the introduction, she 
had no problem understanding what makes a class agod class. The 
subject also agreed that classification became easier after a while 
and said that ﬁmost of the times when I was unsure, was when it 
was a class I was unfamiliar with.ﬂ 
Subject B1 of project B also said 
that detecting god classes did not 
present a difficult task for him. He said in the post-study interview 
that, ﬁGoing through the classes method by method – there is not 
really a way somebody could not do it.ﬂ 
Concerning the effort required to review a number of classes for 
the existence of God Classes we 
made the findings presented in 
Table 3. 
R2:How well do humans agree on identifying God Classes?
 Table 4and Table 5show the iden
tified god classes for the two 
projects. In addition to the subject's classification, the table 
contains a column that indicates which namespace the class 
belongs to and a classification 
based on Marinescu's detection 
strategy. Classes that were identi
fied as god classes by either the 
subjects or the detection strategy
 are highlighted in the tables. 
For the analysis and presentation of results, the two cases, ﬁmight 
be a god classﬂ and ﬁis a god cla
ssﬂ, from the classification scale 
were combined into ﬁevidence for god class foundﬂ. This is 

necessary due to the sparseness 
of the ﬁis a god classﬂ case. 
The first observation that can be drawn from the data is that god 
classes were rather rare in the set of inspected classes. In project 
A each of the subjects identified only one class as ﬁmaybe a god 
classﬂ out of 52 inspected classes. Both subjects identified a 
different class. Using Cohen's 
Kappa, an agreement of -2% was 
calculated between the two s
ubjects. Based on Landis's and 
Koch's[5] interpretation of Kappa, this indicates no agreement 
between the two judges. In proj
ect B, one subject (subject C) 
identified one class as ﬁis a god classﬂ and the second subject 

(subject D) identified the same class as ﬁmaybe a god classﬂ. 
Table 3: Classification
 Performance of Subjects 
subject # classes time 
taken  classes / hour 
Subject A  34  73 min  ca. 28  
Subject B  52  85 min  ca. 37  
Subject C  53  78 min  ca. 40  
Subject D  49  65 min  ca. 45  
Table 4: God Class results fo
r investigated classes from 
Project A. God Classes are highlighted 
Class Namespace 
 Subj. A 
 Subj. B 
Mar. A1, –, A5  Core.Controller no no no 
A6  Core.Controller
 no maybe 
yes A7, –, A9  Core.Controller no no no 
A10  Core.Controller
 maybe
 no yes A11, ..., A19  Core.Models no no no 
A20, ..., A30  Web  
no no no 
A31  Web  no no yes A32, –, A33  Web  
no no no 
A35  Web  no no yes A36, –, A52 Web  
skipped no no 
 Table 5: God Class results fo
r investigated classes from 
Project B. God Classes are highlighted 
Class  Namespace 
 Subj. C 
 Subj. D
Mar. B1, ..., B4  Core.Controllers no no no 
B5  Core.Controllers
 yes maybe
 yes B6, –, B18  Core.Controllers no no no 
B19, –, B35  Core.Models no no no 
B36  Core.Properties no 
skipped no B37, B38  Core.Utils no no no 
B39, B40  Web  
no no no 
B41  Web  maybe
 no yes B42  Web  no maybe
 yes B43, –, B45  Web  
no no no 
B46, B47  Web  
no skipped no B48, –, B51  Web  
no no no 
  Further, each of the subjects marked an additional class as ﬁmaybe 
a god classﬂ. As in the first project these two classes did not 
match. The calculated Kappa is 
48% in this case. This number 

suggests moderate agreement betw
een the two judges. Due to the 
apparent low agreement between the subjects, it is important to 

identify the reasoning behind the subjects' classification of god 
classes. 
R3:What issues in code makes humans identify a God Class as 
such? 
To answer this question the data obtained through the think-aloud 
transcripts from the two studies was used. Table 6 shows the 
combined coding results of both studies. The column headings 
represent the issues identified through the coding process. In the 
rows a distinction is made between god classes and non-god 
classes identified by the subjects
 and by Marinescu's detection 
strategy. The numbers in the cells are to be interpreted as follows. 

The ﬁspecial/frameworkﬂ category includes classes that are 
required by the underlying architecture or frameworks that were 
used. For god classes, ﬁX/Yﬂ means out of Y times that someone 
identified a god class, X subjects i
ndicated the issue in the same 
column to be present. The same
 applies for non-god classes. For 
example, out of six reviews where subjects classified a class as 
god class, twice they 
indicated the class ha
d high complexity. 
The row with totals shows that misplaced methods and classes 

that are not used anymore are 
among the most prominent issues 
identified by the subjects. 
Those classes that were identified as god classes by the subjects 
are only linked to a limited number 
of issues. These are methods 
that are misplaced, have the wrong name, or exhibit a high level 

of complexity. Among these issues
, misplaced method is the most 
prominent one. Every time a subj
ect identified agod class, the 
subject also indicated that the cl
ass contained a misplaced method. 
For the remaining 182 times, the subjects classified a class as a 

non-god class, they only determined
 in two cases that the class 
contained a misplaced method. 
In addition, the agreement on the identified issues between the 
subjects for the two studies was ca
lculated using Cohen's Kappa. 
Kappa for project A is 37% and 39% for project B. This indicates 

ﬂfair agreementﬂ between the subjects [5]. The agreement for 
individual issues was calculated as well.  For misplaced methods, 
the agreement is 46% for project A and 47% for project B. This 
results in ``moderate agreement'' between the subjects for the 
misplaced method issue.  
5.2 Evaluation of Automated Classifiers  R4:How well do the previously proposed
 metric based classifiers 
do compared to human classification?
 Table 4 and Table 5 show that all classes that were identified as 

god classes by the human subjects, were also detected by 
Marinescu's detection strategy. 
Assuming the classification done 
by the human subjects to be th
e ground-truth, this results in a 
recall of 100% for the automatic 
detection (all god classes were found). The precision of the detect
ion strategy for god classes is 
also successful - Only two additi
onal classes were detected that 
were not identified by the humans. This results in a precision 

of71%.  R5:How are the identified code issues related to the metric based 
classification approach?
 In section 4.3.1 it was shown how 
Marinescu's detection strategy 
uses metrics to detect high
 complexity, low cohesion and 
extensive access to the data of foreign classes to automatically 
determine whether or not a class 
is a god class. Only ﬂmethods 
that do not belong into a classﬂ could be identified as a strong 
driver that let humans classify 
a class as a god class. This finding 
will be further investigated in the discussion section for this 

research question. 
R6:Is it possible to improve existing metric based approaches 
based on the previous findings?
 Marinescu's detection strategy detects two additional classes as 
god classes that were not identified by the subjects as such. An 
improvement in the context of th
e two studies would be if the detection strategy would not de
tect those extra two classes. 
When comparing the values for ATFD, TCC and WMC of these 

two classes to those of the othe
r god classes the values for ATFD 
are relatively low (8, 9) and close to the Detection Strategy™s 

minimum threshold for ATFD of 
5. For allother god classes the 
values for ATFD are higher (14, 
55, 29, 38, 28). Increasing the 
god class detection strategy's th
reshold for ATFD to 10 would result in a precision of 100% for automatic detection. 
5.3 Effects of God Classes on Maintainability 
R7:Do God Classes require a highe
r maintainability effort than 
non-God Classes? Table 7 and Table 8 show the re
sults of the change likelihood 
analysis, once without and once with normalizing by lines of 
code. In Table 7 one can see that in project A there were 421 
changes to the software where god 
classes were present at that 
Table 6: Coding for all classes."X/Y" mean
s that out of Y decisions (review of one 
class by one subject) X times subjects indic
ated that the issue in the same column was present. 
Class  
Method  
Attribute Method/Class 
 not used  high 
complexity  
misplaced 
special/ 
framework  
wrong 

name  
high 
complexity  
misplaced not used  
lack of 

comments  
God Classes 
 0/6 2/6 0/6 0/6 2/6 1/6 6/6 0/6 0/6 
Non-God Classes 6/182 4/182 1/182 9/182 1/182 2/182 2/182 1/182 1/182 
Total  6/188 6/188 1/188 9/188 3/188 3/188 
8/188 1/188 1/188 
 time. The likelihood of a god class being part of a change was 
about 9%. In other words, if a cl
ass is a god class then it is 
changed in almost every 10th revision. 
On the contrary, the chance of a non-god class being part of a 
change is only 1.7%. For project 
B the likelihood is about 19% for 
god classes and 2% for non-god classes. To test the results for 

statistical significance a Shapiro-Francia test for normality [17] 
was first performed (p<0.001) on 
all datasets. Afterwards a two 
tailed, two sample t-test was applied similar to Olbrich's approach 

in [14]. Both results are significant when tested with the t-test 
(p<0.05). The p-values are given in the last row of the table. 
In Table 8 the same numbers are presented after normalizing by 
lines of code. One can see that the difference between the 
likelihood for project A is sma
ll (0.029% for god classes vs. 
0.022% for non-god classes}. For project B the likelihood of a 

line of code being changed in a god 
class is almost twice as high 
as in a non-god class (0.042% vs. 0.027%). However, both results 
are not significant when tested with a two sample t-test (p<0.05). 
Therefore, the hypothesis that the likelihood of a change of a line 
of code in agod class is significantly higher than in a non-god 
class has to be rejected. 
6. DISCUSSION 
In this section we present answer
s to our research questions and 
compare our findings to the re
lated work mentioned earlier. 
6.1 Evaluation of Human Performance  R1:How difficult is it for humans to identify God Classes and how 
much effortdoes it take?
 The results show that the subjects
 in the two studies did not find 
the task of identifying god classes to be challenging. We believe 

that this is in large part due to 
the way subjects were introduced to 
god classes. The introduction, itself,
 and the identification process 
were purposely designed in a way related to the decisions 
developers would typically make 
on their code. For example, the 
subjects were not told how god cl
asses violate the paradigm of 
high cohesion and loose coupling. 
Instead, the set of questions 
that accompanies the process wa
s designed to relate to their 
refactoring activities. 
One subject told us after the study that he really liked the 
problem-oriented nature of the 
experiment that focused on a 
certain flaw. He said, "I have never done an exercise like this, 
where I looked at the [B5] cla
sswith god classes in mind I could see, how this could definitely be
 broken up. And I see the benefit of splitting that up into multiple classes. I have never really 
thought about that before, but it is
 easy to see, once you look at it 
in that way." 
Another subject told us that he could definitely see how god 
classes are harmful. He considered our introduction and the 
focused review approach to be very helpful. He said, ﬁIt was 
good. I think it was a good learning experience.ﬂ  
R2:How well do humans agree on identifying God Classes?
 The results show that the agreement on the identification of god 
classes was low among the subjec
ts in the studies. The low 
agreement may be due to differing perception of code issues by 

different developers. This will be investigated in the discussion of 
research question RQ3. 
Mäntylä et al. [8] state similar results. They report high agreement 
among the subjects for simple code smells like Long Method and 
Long Parameter List. For more 
complicated ones like Feature 
Envy they observed low agreement among the judges. When 

comparing god classes to these three code smells they clearly fall 
into the category with the more complicated ones. Unlike long 
method and long parameter list, god classes cannot be identified 
by simply counting certain size characteristics. 
R3:What issues in code makes humans identify a God Class as 
such? Thesubjects linked the following issues to god classes they 
identified: misplaced methods, 
methods with the wrong name, methods with high complexity, a
nd classes with high complexity. 
Misplaced methods can clearly be identified as the strongest 

driver for letting the subjects classify a class as a god class. 
Based on this observation it is worthwhile to investigate what 
effects a misplaced method can have on a class. If a method is 
misplaced, there has to be another class that would serve as a 
better container for that method. The most obvious reason for why 
a method would better fit into a
nother class is when the method 
actually processes data from foreign classes rather than the class 

that contains it. The transcripts from the study show examples 
where subjects identified such behavior: 
"It would make more sense for me to define [this method] in the 
ABC class so I am not sure why it is in here. ... I think it would 
make more sense for that to go in with the rest of the retrieving 
ABC information." Another subject identified the exact same 
issue: "In here we have retrie
vedABC, now this actually should 
not be here, this should be in the ABC" 
The combination of these observations indicates that the presence 
of methods in a class that do not belong there are an indicator for 
a lack of cohesion.Mäntylä et al.report in [7]poor inter-rater 
agreement for the refactoring drivers that were identified by their 
subjects. Based on[5] we determin
ed "fair agreement" between the 
subjects. These results might not be directly comparable, since 

Mäntylä does not give deta
ils on how the agreement was 
calculated. 
Table 7: Change likelihood for God and non-God Classes 
in both projects. N represents the number of changes 












Table 8: LOC Normalized change likelihood for God and 
non-God Classes for both projects N is the # of changes 













 6.2 Evaluation of Automated Classifier  R4:How well do the previously proposed
 metric based classifiers 
do compared to human classification?
 The results show that Marinescu's detection strategy is effective at 
detecting god classes in this case.
 Using the classification of the 
subjects as a reference, recall was 100% and precision 71%. 

Related work from Marinescu [
11] (70% precision), Moha[12], 
(40% precision, 100% recall) and Kreimer[4], (90% precision) 

show similar results. A reason for Moha's relatively low precision 
might be the fact that her™s is actually the only publication, except 
for this study, that also reports recall. The other two studies may 
have easily missed some
 of the code smells that would have been 
identified by humans. 
Table 4 shows the two classes (A31, A35) that were identified by 
the detection strategy but not by the subjects both reside in the 
Web namespace of the application. These classes contain the logic 
behind the web pages in the application. Each class is directly 
associated with one page of the web interface. Usually the 
developers placed all the logic that is required by a web page in its 
accompanying class.  
As a consequence, several of the classes in the Web namespace 
have multiple responsibilities and contain a collection of 
functionality required by the we
b page.  However, a subject 
explained that all functionality fo
r a given web page must go in 
the same class. He identified this as a disadvantage of the 
underlying architecture used by bot
h applications examined in the 
studies. In conclusion, he suggest
s that the applications ﬁwould 
definitely benefit from having a
nother layer to go in between 
these models and the controllers that handles your business 
objects and does preprocessing be
fore you display data on the 
pages.ﬂ This example shows how
 the underlying architecture 

influences the design in a negative way. 
R5:How are the identified code issues related to the metric based 
classification approach?
 The results show how a lack of cohesion and complexity are 
identified as issues that let the human subjects identify a class as a 
god class. This corresponds with th
e use of the weighted method 
count metric (WMC) and tight class cohesion metric (TCC) used 
by Marinescu to express complexity
 and cohesion in his detection 
strategy for god classes. 
In addition to these two metrics, the detection strategy also uses 
the access to foreign data metric (ATFD) to express the classes' 
degree of coupling to other cla
sses in terms of data usage. 
Nevertheless, no issues could be
 identified during the coding 
process that can be associated with this metric or coupling 
directly. This might be due to the 
fact that coupling is difficult to 
evaluate in a software review that inspects classes in a file-by-file 

fashion. Without a diagram (e.g., a UML class diagram) that 
reveals the connections between 
the components of the software, 
the degree of coupling might be hard to assess by human 
reviewers. 
R6:Is it possible to improve ex
isting metric based approaches?
 The results show how increasing the detection strategy's threshold 
for the metric access to foreign data (ATFD) to 10 results in a 
precision of 100% for the automatic detection of god classes. 
Nevertheless, one has to keep in mind that such an adjustment 
may result in over-fitting the mode
l to these particular software 
systems. 
Another finding in this context is the fact that the detection 

strategy could be reduced to an evaluation of the class' complexity 
(WMC) only. As a reaction to the previous findings ATFD was 
removed from the detection strategy. For the remaining metrics 
the thresholds were kept the same
. For both software projects, the 
same god classes were detected. The dete
ction strategy was 
further simplified by leaving out the TCC metric. It was still 
possible to detect the exact same
 god classes as before by only 
marking the classes with a WMC higher than 47. 
6.3 Effects of God Classes on Maintainability 
R7:Are God Classes correlated with higher maintainability 
effort? God Classes are indeed, in both syst
ems, changed five to ten times 
more often than their counterparts. However, after taking the 
increased size of a God Class into account no significant 
difference can be found.  
7. THREATS TO VALIDITY The most obvious threats to external validity are the sample size 
and scope. The experiment was only run in one company and with 
two projects. For each project, onl
y two developers participated 
(both projects were 2-person projects). Therefore, it cannot be 
concluded that the results will hold in general. Additionally, only 
six god classes were found using automatic detection and human 
judgment combined. Consequently, th
is may affect the validity of 
the conclusions drawn. 
As a threat to internal validity, the instructional material and the 
god class classification process might contain potential for biasing 
the subjects. However, this thr
ead was minimized by avoiding the 
mention of metrics, focusing on concrete refactoring techniques 
and using previously presented 
definitions for god classes.  
8. CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this thesis was to find empirical support for the 
detection of code smells. To do this the approach was divided into 
three phases.  
First, the human performance of detecting god classes was 
investigated. The findings show that the task of finding god 
classes in a software system was perceived as not challenging by 
the subjects. We conclude that, if provided with a suitable 
process, humans can detect code smells in an effective fashion. 
Nevertheless, the calculatio
n of Cohen™s Kappa for the 
classification by the subjects shows that agreement was low. 

Other studies report similar results. The fact that a class contains a 
method that would fit better into 
another class was identified as a 
strong driver for whether or not the subjects identified the class as 

a god class. Misplaced methods ar
e interpreted as a lack of 
cohesion. Secondly, the performance of auto
mated classifiers was compared to the human results. Marinescu™s detection strategy for god 
classes [11] was run on the same classes that were reviewed by 
the subjects. With a recall of 10
0% and a precision of 71%, the detection strategy proved effective in this context. Complexity 

and cohesion related issues iden
tified by the subjects could be 
related to metrics used in Ma
rinescu™s detection strategy. 
Adjusting the thresholds of metrics used in the detection strategy 
allowed to increase its precision to 100%. 
Thirdly, an investigation of the effects of god classes on 
maintainability effort did not show
 in all cases that they require 
proportional more maintenance effort. 
 By conducting our studies in a professional environment, 
conclusions can be drawn for real-life software development 
projects. Based on the results and observations, a god class centric review process can be recommende
d. The results and discussion 
on research question RQ1 show how such an issue-focused 
perspective helps the developers 
conduct a software review in an effective and goal-oriented fashion. 
Furthermore, the results for the automatic detection of god classes 
show how Marinescu™s detection st
rategies recall successfully for 
the two projects. A computer assisted strategy in which 

automatically detected god cl
asses undergo a second human 
review can reduce the required effort. The results of the study 
increase the overall confidence in the results of automatic code 
smell detection.  
9. EXPERIMENTAL REPLICATION AND 
FUTURE WORK To facilitate the replication of the study we have created a lab 

package available online at www.codevizard.net. The package 
includes the questionnaires, intro
ductory material, questions from 
the post-study interview,and protocols for the presented studies. 
From our point of view, the fo
llowing variations of the study 
would be most interesting to 
conduct: (a) a variation of the 
application type inspected (not 
web) and (b) a variation of the 
kind(s) of Code Smell(s) under investigation. 
10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Kathleen
 Mullen, Rick Flagg, and our 
subjectsfor their valuable feedback. 
This research was supported by NSF grant CCF 0916699, 
ﬁMeasuring and Monitoring Technical Debt ﬁ to the University of 
Maryland, Baltimore County. 
11. REFERENCES 
[1] Cunningham, W. 1993. The WyCa
sh portfolio management system. 
SIGPLAN OOPS Mess. 4, 2 (Apr. 1993),  29-30. 
[2] E. Van Emden, L. Moonen 2002, 
Java Quality Assurance by 
Detecting Code Smells. Ninth Working Conference on 

Reverse Engineering (2002). 
[3] Fowler, M., Beck, K. 1999. 
Refactoring: improving the 
design of existing code. Addison Wesley. 
[4] Kreimer, J. 2005.  Adaptive Detection of Design Flaws, 
Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science. Volume 
141, Issue 4, Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on 
Language Descriptions, Tools, and Applications (12 
December 2005),  117-136. 
[5] Landis, J. R., Koch, G. G.
 1977. The measurement of 
observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics , 33, 

159-74. [6] Lanza, M., Marinescu, R. 2006
. Object-oriented metrics in 
practice. Springer 
[7] Mäntylä, M. V. and Lassenius, 
C. 2006. Drivers for software 
refactoring decisions. In 
Proceedings of the 2006 ACM/IEEE 
international Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
 (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Sept
ember 21 - 22, 2006). ISESE '06. 
ACM, New York, NY, 297-306. 
[8] Mäntylä, M. (2005). An  experiment  on  subjective  
evolvability  evaluation  of object-oriented software: 
Explaining factors and interrater agreement. In: Proceedings 
of the 4th International Sym
posium on Empirical Software Engineering (ISESE 2005). Noosa Heads, Queensland, 

Australia. 17-18 November 2005, 10 pages. 
[9] Mäntylä, M., Vanhanen, J.,  La
ssenius, C. (2004, Sep). Bad 
smells - humans as code critics. Software Maintenance, 

2004. Proceedings. 20th IEEE In
ternational Conference on , 
399-408. [10] Mäntylä, M., Lassenius, C. (
2006). Subjective evaluation of 
software evolvability using code smells: An empirical study. 
Empirical Software Engineering, Volume 11, Issue 3, 395-
431. [11] Marinescu, R. 2004. Detecti
on Strategies: Metrics-Based 
Rules for Detecting Design Flaws. In 
Proceedings of the 20th 
IEEE international Confer
ence on Software Maintenance
 (September 11 - 14, 2004). ICSM
. IEEE Computer Society, 
Washington, DC, 350-359. 
[12] Moha, N., Gueheneuc, Y.-G., Duchien, L., Meur, A.-F. L. 
(2010). DECOR: A Method for the Specification and 
Detection of Code and Design Sm
ells. Software Engineering, 
IEEE Transactions on , 36, 20 -- 36. 
[13] Munro, M. J. 2005. Product Metrics for Automatic 
Identification of "Bad Smell" Design Problems in Java 
Source-Code. In Proceedings of the 11th IEEE international 
Software Metrics Symposium
 (September 19 - 22, 2005). 
METRICS. IEEE Computer So
ciety, Washington, DC, 15. 
[14] Olbrich, S., Cruzes, D., Basili
, V., Zazworka, N. (2009). The 
evolution and impact of code
 smells: A case study of two 
open source systems. Empirica
l Software Engineering and 
Measurement, 2009.
 ESEM 2009. 3rd International 

Symposium on , 390-400. 
[15] Parnin, C., Görg, C., and Nnadi, O. 2008. A catalogue of 
lightweight visualizations to 
support code smell inspection. 
In Proceedings of the 4th ACM Symposium on Software 
Visualization (Ammersee, Germany, September 16 - 17, 
2008). SoftVis '08. ACM, New York, NY, 77-86. 
[16] Seaman, C., "Qualitative Methods,
" in Shull, F., Singer, J., 
and Sjøberg, D. I. K., (eds.) 
Guide to Advanced Empirical 
Software Engineering, London: Springer, pp. 35-62, 2007. 
[17] Thode Jr., H.C.: Testing for No
rmality. Marcel Dekker, New 

York,2002   