 Obstacles to Efficient Daily Meetings in Agile Development Projects: 
A Case Study 
 
Viktoria Gulliksen Stray, Yngve Lindsjørn and Dag I.K. Sjøberg 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1080 
 
 Blindern, NO-0315 Oslo, Norway 
{stray, ynglin, dagsj}@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract
—Context: 
Most of the software organizations that use agile 
methods organize daily team meetings. 
Aim:
 Our aim was to 
understand how daily meetings are conducted and identify obstacles 
that reduce their efficiency. 
Method: 
We observed 56 daily meetings 
and conducted 21 interviews in three different teams in two countries. 
We used the repertory grid technique in the interviews and to analyze 
the results.
 Results
: We identified thirteen obstacles. The four most 
prominent ones were: (1) The daily meetings lasted too long (on 
average, 22 minutes instead of the scheduled 15 minutes). (2) In the 
meetings that were not self-organi
zed, team members reported to the 
Scrum Master instead of sharing information among all team 
members. (3) The interruption caused by daily meetings required 
substantially more time than the actual meeting time due to overhead 
before and after the meetings. (4) Several team members had 
negative attitudes towards the daily meetings.
 
Conclusion: 
Organizers of daily meetings should evaluate whether the obstacles 
we have identified are present in their organization and consider our 
suggestions to remove or reduce these obstacles. 
Keywords—stand-up meetings; 
Daily Scrum; agile software 
development; collaboration; c
oordination; communication 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Communication and coordination 
are important but challenging 
success factors in software deve
lopment projects [1-4]. Regular 
communication has been found to be a good way to build trust 
in teams [5]. Communication delays and breakdowns have 
been identified as a reason for schedule and cost overruns in 
software projects [6]. The daily 
meeting is a means to achieve 
regular communication among team 
members in agile software 
development projects. In thes
e meetings, the team members 
inform each other, coordinate activities and discuss problems 
they face. The daily meeting is a mandatory practice in both 
Extreme Programming (XP) and Scrum. Daily meetings are 
also referred to as “Stand-up meetings” because people are 
recommended to stand in these meetings. In Scrum, daily 
meetings are often referred to as “Daily Scrum”. 
Even though general meeting activity in organizations continue 
to rise, few empirical studies 
on the effect of meetings are 
reported in the literature [7]. In
 particular, according to Bang et 
al. [8], there are few field studies of the association between 
actual meeting behavior and team effectiveness. The literature 
describes mostly approaches to and techniques for achieving 
effective meetings but w
ithout empirical support.   
We have identified a few studies on meeting behavior in the 
field of small group research. The 
topics of investigation were: 
team meeting interaction [9], 
cultural differences in meeting 
norms [10], team meeting attitudes [11], public meeting 
facilitation [12]  and how meetings are designed [13]. 
In the literature on agile development, several studies indicate 
that daily meetings are vita
l to project success [1, 14-16]. 
However, there is little evidence to support software companies 
on how to conduct daily meetings
. 
Given the increasing 
popularity of agile methods, the question of how to conduct 
such meetings in an 
effective way
 becomes even more 
pertinent. In one of our earlier studies, we found that the daily 
meetings were not efficien
tly performed because team 
members wasted time on defendi
ng decisions and convincing 
other team members that a gr
eat deal of work had been 
accomplished since the last mee
ting [17]. In another study, we 
found that most of the time w
as spent on elaborating problem 
issues and discussing possible so
lutions [18]. According to the 
agile literature [19], such discussions should be held after the 
daily meeting.  
In addition to our own earlier research, we found only one case 
study that investigated the perfo
rmance of daily meetings in 
agile projects [20]. That study
 found that many meetings did 
not start at the defined time and 
did not have a defined length. 
Some attendees were regularly late, and some were unfocused 
during the meetings. According to the developers, only the 
business team members benefitted from the meetings [20]. 
The purpose of the field study reported in this paper is to 
complement previous research by examining obstacles to 
efficient daily meetings. We interviewed 21 project members 
and observed 56 daily meetings over a period of 26 months. 
Obviously, there are positive aspects of conducting daily 
meetings, which were also revealed in collected data. However, 
given our focus on improving the ways daily meetings are 
conducted, an analysis of the positive aspects is beyond the 
scope of this paper. The remainder of this article is organized 
as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the research 
method used. Section 3 reports the obstacles that we identified 
and their consequences. Section 
4 discusses possible solutions 
to alleviate the obstacles. Section 5 describes potential 
limitations. Section 6 concludes. 
2013 ACM / IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement978-0-7695-5056-5/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2013.30952013 ACM / IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement978-0-7695-5056-5/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2013.3095 TABLE I. 
 
S
AMPLE OF 
T
EAMS
 
Team 
name 
No. of 
team 
members 
No. of 
interviewees 
Avg. age 
Avg. years in 
company 
Mars
 
8
 
6
 
41
 
11
 
Saturn
 
10
 
5
 
47
 
13
 
Jupiter
 
14
 
10
 
33
 
2.2
 
TABLE II. D
ATA 
C
OLLECTION
Technique Volume 
Description 
Interview 21 
We conducted semi-structured interviews 
with open ended questions. All of the 
interviews were transcribed. 
Observation of 
daily meetings 
56 
We made notes from all the daily meetings 
we observed. Fifteen meetings were 
audiotaped, thirteen of these were 
transcribed. 
Observation of 
other meetings   
More 
than 100 
We had informal conversations with 
project members, and observed other 
meetings, including planning and 
retros
p
ective meetin
g
s. 
TABLE III. 
 
L
ENGTH OF 
I
NTERVIEWS 
(M
INUTES
) 
Team name N Mean Median Stdev. Max Min 
Mars 6 
66 61 
21 
45 
96 
Saturn
54948113260
Jupiter 10 62 66 17 34 87 
All 
interviews 
216060173296
II.R
ESEARCH 
M
ETHOD
The research reported in this paper is a multiple case study [21] 
in which three teams in one software company were studied 
over a period of 26 months.  
A.
 
The Company 
For the purpose of anonymity, we do not reveal details about 
the company. It was selected 
because it used agile methods, 
conducted daily meetings on a regular basis, and allowed 
researchers (the authors) to obs
erve their way of working. We 
studied two teams located in No
rway (Teams Mars and Saturn) 
and one team located in Asia (Team Jupiter). All teams had 
used Scrum with all the recommended practices for more than 
two years. The sprint length in Saturn and Mars was three 
weeks; in Jupiter 
it was two weeks.  
B.
 
Data Collection 
Table 2 shows the techniques that we used for data collection. 
We collected data from multiple sources guided by a protocol 
developed according to the general recommendations of 
qualitative research, e.g., [21-24]. 
C.
 
Interviews 
The interviewees had a variety of roles, including developers, 
testers, product owners and 
project leaders. All the 21 
interviews were audiotaped and transcribed. The interviews 
were conducted by two or three researchers. One of them asked 
questions; the other one(s) took 
notes and asked questions at 
the end. Table 3 shows the number of interviews conducted in 
each team, and the length of the interviews.  
The first part of the interviews was semi-structured with a set 
of planned question about tea
mwork, including daily meetings. 
In the last part of the interviews we used the repertory grid 
technique [25] to obtain additi
onal information. This is a 
technique where the main objective 
is to elicit the interviewee’s 
perception of a topic.  Exampl
es or instances of the topic 
experienced by the interviewee are called elements. The 
elements are rated (usually on 
a five or seven point scale) 
according to certain criteria, which are called personal 
constructs or only constructs. 
The topic in our case was obstacles to efficient teamwork. We 
asked the interviewees about issues that they perceived 
hindered effective teamwork. Usi
ng a five point rating scale, 
they positioned each of the issues with respect to three 
constructs that we had define
d: “not serious vs. serious”, 
“seldom vs. often” and “easy vs. difficult to fix”. 
We found that the repertory grid technique made it easier for 
the interviewees to talk abou
t negative aspects of teamwork. 
The interviewees were encouraged to think aloud, which gave 
us valuable insight in the choices made by the interviewees. In 
three of the interviews, we did not find it necessary to apply the 
repertory grid technique because the interviewees already had 
said so much in the first part when they responded to the 
specific questions. 
D.
 
Observations of Daily Meetings 
Information recorded during th
e observations included, among 
others, attendee names and roles of attendees, type of 
discussions, leadership and facilitation of the meeting, number 
of participants present in each location and the atmosphere of 
the meeting. The length of th
e meeting was measured in 
minutes.  
The first author took notes either in the meeting or wrote down 
notes directly after the meeting. On many occasions, also the 
second author was present to check reliability of the 
information captured. 
 
 
Fig. 1.
 
Constructs and issues in the repertory grid 
9696 E.
 
Data Analysis 
The repertory grid sessions produced 131 issues. Fig. 1 shows 
an example of the result of a repertory grid session from one 
interview. The issues relevant 
to daily meetings that were 
identified by this interviewee were: (1) “Daily meetings 
(interruption of workflow)”, (2) “Conference phone (bad sound 
quality)”and (3) “You don't “see” your colleague when 
working distributed.” 
We also analyzed all the semi-structured interviews and 
observation notes from the daily 
meetings using Nvivo, which 
is a tool for qualitative analysis
 (www.qsrinterna
tional.com).  
We identified 13 obstacles from the interviews, repertory grid 
sessions and observations. Ten of the obstacles were identified 
from two or three of the data sources. Thus, data triangulation 
was achieved for most of the obstacles. 
The obstacles were categorized into the four dimensions 
temporal, physical, procedural and attendee as defined in [13]. 
Five obstacles were concerne
d with meeting characteristics 
identified in [13]: ending prom
ptness, starting promptness, 
temperature comfort, space arrangement and number of 
attendees. Seven obstacles were concerned with six other 
characteristics:  length of mee
ting, frequency, time of day, 
equipment, language, information flow and meeting attitudes. 
We identified consequences of the obstacles on the basis of all 
the three data sources. 
III.
 
I
DENTIFIED 
O
BSTACLES AND 
T
HEIR 
C
ONSEQUENCES
 
This section discusses the 13 obstacles and their consequences. 
Table IV gives an overview. 
A.
 
Temporal 
1)
 
Starting promptness 
We observed that people often arrived late in the daily 
meetings. For some months, team members in Mars were fined 
20 NOK (approximately € 2.50) for arriving more than one 
minute late. In Saturn, the Scrum Master or a team member 
often went out to gather missi
ng team members. Such search 
for people disturbed other pe
ople who should not attend the 
meeting and wasted time to t
hose who arrived on time. Not 
starting on time leads to people a
rriving late also the next time 
[26]. In Jupiter, everyone almost always met on time. 
2)
 
Ending promptness 
Many of the meetings lasted longer than the 15 minutes 
scheduled time slot. People often lost focus when this 
happened. For example, we 
observed that people doodled on 
their notepad and played with their cell phones. Sometimes the 
Scrum Master criticized a team member for not paying 
attention. Another aspect is that it was sometimes unclear when 
the meeting actually ended. Sometimes one Scrum Master 
stated that the meeting was “offi
cially over” after each of the 
team members had given their st
atus. The team members were 
then allowed to leave but still fe
lt obliged to stay. When more 
than two thirds of the team memb
ers stayed in the meeting, we 
included this additional time as part of the daily meeting.  
TABLE IV. 
 
O
BSTACLES OF 
D
AILY 
M
EETINGS
 
No 
Characteristic of 
meetin
g
 
Obstacle  
Perceived consequence 
Team 
Temporal
 
1 
Starting promptness Meetings did not start on time. 
Time was wasted for those who arrived on time, and 
search for attendees disturbed other 
p
eo
p
le. 
M, S 
2 
Ending promptness Meetings did not end on time.  After 
the scheduled time slot, team members lost focus. M, S 
3 
Length of meeting 
The duration of the meetings were perceived to be too 
lon
g
. 
The longer meetings were considered a waste of time (and 
mone
y)
.  
M, S, J  
4 
Frequency  
Team members perceived that the meetings were held too 
often. 
The attitudes towards the meetings became negative. M, S 
5 
Time of the day The meetings were held at an unsuitable time of
 the day. Time was wasted before and after the meetings. M, S 
Ph
y
sical
 
6 
Temperature 
comfort 
The temperature in some meetings became too high and 
the air quality poor.  
Meeting attendees lost focus and became tired. 
M, S, J 
7 Equipment Conference equipment that did not work properly. 
Distributed people had trouble hearing what was said in 
the meetin
g
, and the connection was fre
q
uentl
y
 lost.  
M, S 
8 
Space arrangement 
The Scrum Master was always sitting, while many team 
members had to stand. 
The meetings lasted longer. The team members who were 
standin
g
 became tired.  
M, S 
9 
Language Team members had to talk their second language. The quality of the communication was reduced. J 
Procedural
 
10 
Information flow 
The focus of meetings tended to be reporting from team 
members to the Scrum Master instead of sharing 
information among each other. 
Team members often perceived the information given in 
the meetings as irrelevant and saw the meetings as a waste 
of time. 
M, S 
11 
Information 
distribution 
Team members with certain roles received more attention 
in the meetin
g
s. 
Unbalance of team member contribution. M, S 
Attendee
 
12 
Number of 
attendees 
Too many attendees were present at the meetings. 
Team members perceived the information as irrelevant.  S, J 
13 
Meeting attitudes 
Some team members had negative attitudes towards the 
meetings. 
Difficult to observe a direct consequence, but the 
literature suggest that it effects time spent in meetings, 
team potency and perceptions of team meeting 
effectiveness.  
M, S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9797 3)
 
Length of meeting 
TABLE V. 
 
L
ENGTH OF 
M
EETINGS 
(M
INUTES
) 
Team name N Mean Median Stdev. Max Min 
Mars 24 25 24 10.5 45 10 
Saturn 18 20 19 4.8 30 15 
Ju
p
iter 14 18 15 9.0 40 7 
Team means 19 21 19 8.1 38 11 
All meetin
g
s 56 22 18 9.0 45  7 
 
We defined the start of the meeting as the point of time when 
the first person arrived the mee
ting room after scheduled start 
time. Table V shows that the obs
erved daily meetings lasted 
between 7 and 45 minutes with a 
mean of 22 minutes; that is, 
the cost in time of the meeting was 47% more than planned. 
Still, it may be the case that the meetings are so useful that 
longer duration than planned can be
 justified. However, in our 
study, many of the interviewees complained that the meetings 
lasted too long. One t
eam member expressed: 
“What doesn’t 
work with the meeting is that it often drifts into a technical 
discussion, and, consequently, it takes too long.” 
 
4)
 
Frequency 
The daily meeting was a mandatory practice. Many team 
members perceived the meeting as an interruption of their 
workflow and would prefer
 fewer meetings. One study 
suggests that people are affected by the number of meetings 
more than the length of the meetings [27]. What makes 
meetings interruptions demanding is not simply the change of 
activity, but also the fact that th
e thought processes are affected 
[27]. 
5)
 
Time of the Day 
Some articles report that people often use the daily meeting to 
start the working day and that team members tend not to work 
on backlog tasks until the meeting is held [28, 29]. All the 
teams we studied held their daily meetings in the morning; 
Mars and Jupiter at 10:00 a.m., Saturn at 10:30 a.m. We 
observed that team members who 
arrived at work close to the 
meeting start time, did not work on job tasks before the daily 
meeting. In Saturn, many of th
e team members often went to 
lunch almost directly after the 
meeting because they felt that 
there was too short time between the meeting and lunch to do 
anything useful. 
Due to rush hour, the team members appreciated flexibility 
regarding work hours. The daily meeting challenged this 
flexibility. Time difference is 
an additional challenge when 
deciding what time of day to conduct the meeting. Saturn and 
Jupiter worked on the same product, but decided to have 
separate daily meetings because
 both teams wanted the meeting 
to be held in the morning. 
B.
 
Physical 
6)
 
Temperature comfort 
Physical characteristics such as
 temperature and noise affect 
the functioning of a meeting and the attendees’ ability to focus 
on the meeting tasks without dist
raction [26, 30]. In Mars and 
Saturn, the meetings were held 
in small rooms with insufficient 
ventilation, which lead to a lack of fresh air. In Jupiter’s 
meeting room, the temperatur
e became often too high. The 
consequence was that the attendees became tired and stopped 
paying attention in the meeting.  
7)
 
Equipment 
One challenge in the distributed meetings was that the 
conference phone did not work 
satisfactory. People on the 
phone often dropped out, became quiet or unintentionally made 
noise due to technical problems 
with the equipment. Time was 
wasted for all the attendees 
when reestablishing the lost 
connection. 
Furthermore, the people on the phone often had difficulties 
hearing what was said in the meeting because many team 
members were standing too fa
r away from the microphone. It 
was generally easy to hear what the person on the phone said. 
The poor equipment negatively affected the meeting quality 
and the team members’ attention 
in the meeting. One developer 
said: 
“If I would point out a challenge of the daily meetings it 
would be the technical equipm
ent. I think the conference call 
system we have is the biggest source of frustration.” 
8)
 
Space arrangement 
On average, only half of the m
embers in Mars and Saturn were 
standing during the meetings. In 
these teams, the Scrum Master 
was always sitting, while many team members were standing. 
One consequence was that the m
eeting lasted longer since the 
Scrum Master did not get tired when sitting down. However, 
we observed that standing duri
ng the whole meeting was tiring 
for the standing team members.
 They groaned, crouched and 
looked exhausted, especially in the cases where the meeting 
lasted 30-40 minutes. One of 
team member expressed the 
imbalance: “
I think the standup-meetings are not that good 
because someone is sitting and someone is standing. My 
opinion is that either should everyone be allowed to sit or 
everyone should stand. Maybe one solution is to lift the table 
and use bar chairs. It will be 
more comfortable than standing, 
but more effective than sitti
ng down by a lower table.” 
 
In Jupiter, the participants were always standing. One team 
member expressed: 
“There is one thing we have never changed 
and that is that we really stand up. I think that is good.”
 
9)
 
Language 
In Jupiter, the team members had different native languages. 
Because of company policy, English was used as the formal 
language. Most of the team members had English as their 
second language, and, consequently, some of them had 
difficulties expressing their opini
ons and taking part in the 
discussions. Important inform
ation was often left out. 
Generally, the quality of the communication was somewhat 
reduced. The team members who were confident in their 
second language were slightly mo
re dominant in the meetings. 
On the other hand, the difficulty
 of expressing themselves also 
resulted in less small talk and thereby more focused and formal 
meetings than was the case in Mars and Saturn. This might be 
one reason for why the meetings we
re shorter in Jupiter than in 
Mars and Saturn. 
 
9898     
Fig. 2.
 
Conversation map 
 
C.
 
Procedural 
10)
 
Information flow  
In Saturn, and for some time in Mars, the Scrum Masters were 
also leaders, both formally and 
in practice. Consequently, they 
acted more as leaders than as facilitators in the meetings. It 
often seemed that the purpose of the meeting was not for the 
team members to communicate, but to report to the Scrum 
Master. Quoting one of the Scrum Masters may illustrate this 
point: 
“[Name of team member], you can start the meeting so I 
can see that you have done anything”
 
Some members of Mars and Saturn expressed that many daily 
meetings was a waste of time because they perceived that the 
information given was not relevant to them.   
In some daily meetings, we drew a map of the conversation 
flow. If one person talked to another person, the observer drew 
a line between those two persons. Fig. 2 shows a conversation 
map of a self-organizing team and of a team where they 
reported to the Scrum Master. We often perceived that the 
atmosphere and communication in the self-organized meetings 
were better than in the meetings chaired by the Scrum Masters.  
In Jupiter, after a while, the da
ily meetings were more about 
informing team members about wh
at was relevant for the whole 
team rather than reporting status to the Scrum Master, which 
was the case to begin with. One manager explained how they 
went from reporting to informing each other: “
The first day I 
came into the organization, I wa
s asked, "Can you show us how 
to do the Daily Scrum the right way?" So they were not sure. So 
even when you see that they were conducting Daily Scrums it 
was very robotic. They would do it just because the process 
says so. They didn’t really understand the essence of why it is 
important, why you do it. It is very different now. They discuss 
about problems, they don’t report to the PO they don’t report to 
the Scrum Master and they don’t care if the managers are 
there. They are just doing their own stuff. They have matured 
and started to understand the essence of Daily Scrum.” 
11)
 
Information distribution 
The meetings in Jupiter were more self-organized than the ones 
in Mars and Saturn. In Jupiter, it was consensus that the order 
of who was talking started in one
 corner, continuing clockwise. 
In Mars and Saturn, the Scrum Master decided in which order 
the team members were allowed to talk in the meeting. One 
consequence was that testers, documentation writers and 
support staff received less attention than others. This resulted in 
unbalance of team member contribution in the meetings. One 
team member explained: 
“The documentation writers are 
usually last. I think the Scrum Master chooses the person to talk 
based on the tasks that are impor
tant to the Scrum Master. The 
Scrum Master starts with the people working on that task, 
usually the developers.”  
D.
 
Attendee 
12)
 
Number of attendees 
Table VI shows the number of attendees in the daily meetings 
that were physically present or attended by phone. In Mars and 
Saturn, some of the team member
s often worked from home. In 
Saturn, one team member was located in another city. 
The team members perceived the information given in the daily 
meetings often as irrelevant. We believe that this was partly due 
to too many people attending the meetings. Some research 
suggests that five is the optim
um group size in meetings and 
that more than seven persons might lead to complicated group 
dynamics, unequal participation of attendees and lower 
commitment to tasks [31]. Furthermore, too many attendees 
may serve as a detraction, lead 
to additional inefficiencies, and 
in general create the feeling that time is not being used 
effectively [13]. 
9999 TABLE VI. 
 
N
UMBER OF 
A
TTENDEES
 
Team 
name 
Mean No. of 
meetin
g
s 
Mean Median Stdev. Max Min 
Mars Physical  5.8 6 1.7 9 2 
Phone  1.1 1 0.9 3 0 
Total 24 6.9 7 1.3 9 4 
Saturn Ph
y
sical  6.7 6.5 1.8 10 4 
Phone  1.9 1.5 1.5 4 0 
Total 18 8.6 8.5 2.2 14 5 
Jupiter Ph
y
sical  10.6 12 2.1 13 6 
Phone  0 0 0 0 0 
Total 14 10.6 12 2.1 13 6 
 
In Jupiter, if the team members were unable to attend the daily 
meeting, the Scrum Master comm
unicated their status to the 
team. Status was sent by e-mail to the Scrum Master in 
advance. In Mars and Saturn, status was rarely given from 
absent team members.  
13)
 
Meeting attitudes 
Several team members lost focus in the daily meetings and 
considered them as a waste of time, which in turn caused a 
negative attitude towards the m
eetings. One team member in 
Mars described the situation as follows: 
“No one in the team 
really wants to be at the status meeting. We are mostly 
programmers and testers, so our 
job is not administration. 
Most people think it is a little unnecessary use of time. I think 
three or even two days a week would be fine.”
 Developers’ 
perception of daily meetings as a waste of time with little value 
was also found in [20].  
It was difficult to observe a direct consequence of this 
obstacle, but another study found 
that team meeting attitudes 
had direct effects on time spent 
in team meetings, perceptions 
of team meeting effectivene
ss and team potency [12]. A 
negative attitude may also affect general job satisfaction [32, 
33]. 
The Scrum Masters in Mars and Saturn were the interviewees 
who were most positive towards the daily meetings. This is 
consistent with another study th
at found that individuals who 
considered themselves as meeting facilitators reported a 
significantly greater perceived 
meeting quality than those who 
did not [13]. 
IV.
 
A
LLEVIATING THE 
O
BSTACLES
 
In this section, we propose solutions to the thirteen identified 
obstacles; see also Fig. 3. Seve
ral solutions may alleviate the 
challenge that the meetings do 
not start on time. First, use an 
alarm to signal meeting start tim
e. Second, start the meeting 
regardless of who has arrived. Even if not everybody is present, 
it is important to consistently 
start on time to encourage future 
punctuality [26]. Third, schedule the daily meetings at an odd 
time. For example, deciding that th
e meeting starts at 9:07 a.m. 
emphasizes the importance of be
ing on time. Fourth hold the 
meetings in the open-plan offi
ce space, because it will then be 
visible to the team members that 
the meeting is about to start. 
Fifth, make lateness visible, fo
r example: (1) Give a fine for 
coming late, as they did for some
 time in Mars. (2) Place a glass 
for each person labeled with their names The ones who arrive 
on time place a green marble in their glass, the ones arriving 
after meeting start time has to pl
ace a red marble in the glass. 
(3) Write a line on the whiteboard when someone arrives late. 
Three lines by a persons name will have a consequence. Sixth, 
to avoid late start of meetings 
with distributed team members, 
establish the connection before the meeting starts. This was a 
successful practice in Saturn. 
Other possible solutions are 
shown in Fig. 3. 
One solution to overcome the obstacle that meetings do not end 
on time is to set a timer to count
 down the scheduled time. If it 
is generally perceived that longer meetings are useful, then one 
should agree on a longer time slot than 15 minutes.  
Some research indicates that st
and-up meetings are faster than 
meetings where the attendees are sitting without lowering the 
quality of the produced decisions in the meeting [30]. Our study 
supports this finding. We observed no difference in the quality 
of the discussions or decision 
making with respect to whether 
people were standing or sitting. 
We also observed that when 
one of the developers in Saturn became the Scrum Master, the 
team became more self-organized
, the content of the meetings 
more relevant and the meetings shorter (on average, from 25 to 
19 minutes). Therefore, another 
means to reduce the duration of 
the meeting may be to rotate the Scrum Master role. Yet 
another means is to reduce the number of attendees. We found a 
medium (non-significant) to 
large (significant) correlation 
between number of attendees in the meeting and duration 
(M
 

If team members perceive daily m
eetings to be held too often, 
the teams should simply consider
 whether it is worthwhile to 
meet every day. To suggest ha
ving meetings more seldom, for 
example, three times 
a week, is a drastic solution because we 
are questioning the whole concept of daily meetings.  
Overhead time is consumed before and after meetings. 
Therefore, one should consider carefully what time of the day 
one should conduct daily meetings to reduce this overhead. We 
believe that the teams that we
 studied would benefit from 
following the agile recommendation of scheduling the daily 
meetings in the morning.  
Daily meetings are often held in rooms that are easily accessible 
and need no booking. However, if the rooms are poor with 
respect to temperature and air quality, it may be valuable to 
hold the meetings in a larger r
oom even if this would require 
some extra overhead. For the many IT companies that have 
open-plan offices, a straightfo
rward solution is to hold the 
meetings there if one does not disturb other people. 
Daily meetings in teams with not every team member 
physically present require video 
or audio conference equipment 
of satisfactory quality. High quality conference equipment may 
be expensive, but we observed that Skype worked well. One 
may also consider whether it is strictly necessary that the 
distributed team members attend the meeting. 
People generally find it more comfortable to sit than stand. 
Holding the meeting in a room or 
part of a room without chairs 
will make people stand, also the Scrum Master. 
 
100100  
Fig. 3.
 
Suggested solutions to obstacles 
The problem that some people may have to talk a foreign 
language may be alleviated by using a physical board in the 
meeting or showing tasks from
 the backlog on a screen. The 
information given may become more understandable and 
relevant. The team members in Jupiter appreciated that tasks 
were made visible on the screen: 
“It requires some skills to 
carry out a good standup meeting. We have changed over time; 
we have used our retrospective meetings to improve the daily 
meetings. The content of what 
you say in the meeting is very 
important. We don’t want to know
 the details of what you did 
yesterday, but something that is useful for the whole team. We 
had to change the mindset and find out what to say in the 
meeting. We practiced a lot and improved. In the beginning we 
had a feeling that everyone just came in and talked and then 
everyone left and we didn’t see how that was related to the 
project. Now we bring up the backlog every day to actually 
relate it to each thing we talk about.” 
 
To reduce the tendency of reporting to the Scrum Master 
instead of sharing relevant 
information among all the team 
members, one should consider rotating the Scrum Master role. 
In Jupiter, they voted for the Scrum Master every tenth week 
among the ones that had not had the role yet. Many 
interviewees mentioned this practice as positive for the team, 
because, being a Scrum Master made them more responsible for 
the whole team and familiar with the project processes:
 “Being 
a Scrum Master helps you see the big picture.”  
Some team members consider
 their Scrum Master as a 
traditional manager to whom they need to report status. If the 
Scrum Master does not make eye contact with the person 
talking, this person will proba
bly find someone else on the team 
to make eye contact with, thus reducing the tendency to report 
to the Scrum Master. When the Scrum Master decides the order 
of people speaking, this reinforces the tendency of reporting. To 
help reduce the manager role of the Scrum Master, the order of 
people speaking may be decided by the team members 
themselves, for example, by passing 
a token (e.g. a soft ball) to 
the next person to speak. If the passing is performed in a 
randomized order, people may become more alert because they 
do not know who will be next.  
Both rotating the role of Scrum Master and passing a token to 
decide the speaking order may he
lp alleviate the obstacle that 
some team members receive more attention in the meetings 
than others. 
To tackle the challenge that there are too many people in the 
meetings, using visual aids, such
 as physical board and backlog 
on a screen, may help increasing the attention of the attendees. 
Of course, one may also consider reducing the number of 
attendees by not including team me
mbers to whom the topic of 
the meeting is irrelevant. In la
rge teams, one may divide the 
team and have separate meetings that discuss tasks that are 
relevant to the team members.  
To alleviate the challenge of a negative attitude towards daily 
meetings, one may reduce the frequency of meetings if they are 
considered a waste of time. Rotating the role of Scrum Master 
may involve more team member
s in the project processes. 
People who find the information 
discussed in the meetings 
irrelevant may be allowed to not attend some of the meetings. 
Finally, teams should agree on a purpose for the meeting 
because it positively affects the meeting [8]. In general, 
conducting more effective meetings will positively affect the 
attitude towards the meetings. 
V.
 
P
OTENTIAL 
L
IMITATIONS
 
We studied only three teams in one company. Other companies 
and teams may encounter other obs
tacles to the organization of 
efficient daily meetings; that is
, we do not claim our findings to 
be representative. Furthermore, 
the teams that we studied had 
used daily meetings for more than two years. Beginners may 
encounter more and other obstacles. 
The presence of researchers in the meetings may be intrusive, 
causing unnatural behaviour of the meeting attendees. This 
effect was only noticeable in the first meetings in each team.
 
Since we observed fourteen or more meetings in each team, we 
consider this effect to be minimal in our study. 
101101 When using observations and interviews as data collection 
techniques, there is a risk of researcher bias. To reduce the 
effect of such a bias we were several researchers during the 
observations and interviews.  
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
There is little evidence in the ag
ile literature on how to conduct 
daily meetings in an effective way. The results of this case 
study indicate that there are several challenges when 
conducting daily meetings in software projects. We identified 
thirteen obstacles for effec
tive meetings. Suggestions for 
overcoming these obstacles were 
given based on analyses of 
observation notes, interview transc
ripts and repertory grids.  
The identified obstacles should be evaluated by practitioners 
conducting daily meetings to identify which of the obstacles 
may be present in their organization. Subsequently, our 
suggested solutions to these obstacles should be considered to 
improve the efficiency of the m
eetings. Some of our obstacles 
and solutions may seem trivial. However, if people are not 
regularly evaluating their proce
sses, even simple improvements 
are not performed. We hope that our paper will help the 
software industry become more 
conscious about the way daily 
meetings are held. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
This work was supported by th
e Research Council of Norway 
through grant no. 193236/I40.  
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
M. Pikkarainen, J. Haikara, O. Salo, P. Abrahamsson, and J. Still, "The 
impact of agile practices on communication in software development," 
Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 13, pp. 303-337, 2008. 
[2]
 
F. P. Brooks, "No silver bullet: Essence and Accidents of Software 
Engineering," IEEE computer, vol. 20, pp. 10-19, 1987. 
[3]
 
S. D. Teasley, L. A. Covi, M. S. Krishnan, and J. S. Olson, "Rapid 
Software Development through Team Collocation," IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering, vol. 28,
 no. 7. pp. 671-683, July 2002. 
[4]
 
D. E. Strode, S. L. Huff, B. Hope, and S. Link, "Coordination in co-
located agile software development projects," Journal of Systems and 
Software, vol. 85, no. 6, pp. 1222-1238, 2012. 
[5]
 
K. Henttonen and K. Blomqvist, "Manag
ing distance in a global virtual 
team: the evolution of trust through technology-mediated relational 
communication," Strategic Change, vol. 14, pp. 107-119, 2005. 
[6]
 
C. Poile, A. Begel, N. Nagappan, and L. Layman, "Coordination in 
Large-Scale Software Development: Helpful and Unhelpful Behaviors," 
Technical Report MSR-TR-2009-135, Microsoft Research, Sept. 2009. 
[7]
 
S. G. Rogelberg, L. R. Shanock, and C. W. Scott, "Wasted Time and 
Money in Meetings," Small Group Research, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 236-245, 
2012. 
[8]
 
H. Bang, S. L. Fuglesang, M. 
R. Ovesen, and D. E. Eilertsen, 
"Effectiveness in top management group meetings: The role of goal 
clarity, focused communication, and 
learning behavior," Scandinavian 
Journal of Psychology, vol. 51, pp. 253-261, 2010. 
[9]
 
J. A. Allen, S. J. Sands, S. L. Mue
ller, K. A. Frear, M. Mudd, and S. G. 
Rogelberg, "Employees´ feelings about 
more meetings: An overt analysis 
and recommendations for improving meetings," Management Research 
Review, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 405-418, 2012. 
[10]
 
M. Hoegl and H. Gemuenden, "Teamwork Quality and the Success of 
Innovative Orojects: A theoretical Concept and Empirical Evidence," 
Organization Science, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 435-449, 2001. 
[11]
 
B. Jensen and A. Zilmer, "Cross-Continent Development Using Scrum 
and XP," Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in Software 
Engineering, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 146-153, 2003. 
[12]
 
T. A. O´Neill and N. J. Allen, "Team Meeting Attitudes: 
Conceptualization and Investigation of a New Construct," Small Group 
Research, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 186-210,  2012. 
[13]
 
M. A. Cohen, S. G. Rogelberg, J.
 A. Allen, and A. Luong, "Meeting 
Design Characteristics and Attendee Perceptions of Staff/Team Meeting 
Quality," Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, vol. 15, no. 
1, pp. 90-104, 2011. 
[14]
 
P. Middleton and D. Joyce, "Lean Software Management: BBC 
Worldwide Case Study," IEEE Tr
ansactions on Engineering 
Management, vol. 59, no.1, pp. 20-32, Feb. 2012. 
[15]
 
L. Pries-Heje and J. Pries-Heje
, "Why Scrum works: A case study from 
an agile distributed project in De
nmark and India," Agile Conference 
(AGILE´2011), IEEE, 2011. 
[16]
 
O. McHugh, K. Conboy, and M. La
ng, "Using Agile Practices to Build 
Trust in an Agile Team: A Case Study," in Information Systems 
Development, Springer, pp. 503-516, 2011. 
[17]
 
V. G. Stray, N. B. Moe, and T.
 Dybå, "Escalation of Commitment: A 
Longitudinal Case Study of Daily Meetings," in Agile Processes in 
Software Engineering and Extreme Programming, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 153-167, 2012. 
[18]
 
V. G. Stray, N. B. Moe, and A.
 Aurum, "Investigating Daily Team 
Meetings in Agile Software Pr
ojects," 38th EUROMICRO Conference 
on Software Engineering and Advanced
 Applications, pp. 274-281, 2012. 
[19]
 
K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, Agile software development with Scrum, 
Prentice Hall, 2002. 
[20]
 
N. Nikitina and M
. Kajko-Mattsson, "Historical Perspective of Two 
Process Transitions," Fourth International Conference on 
Software 
Engineering Advances, IEEE, pp. 289-298, 2009. 
[21]
 
R. K. Yin, Case Study Resear
ch: Design and Methods, SAGE 
Publications, 2009. 
[22]
 
M. B. Miles and A. M. Huberman, Qualitative Data Analysis: an 
Expanded Sourcebook, SAGE Publications, 1994. 
[23]
 
P. Runeson and M. Höst, "Guidelines for conducting and reporting case 
study research in software engineering," Empirical Software 
Engineering, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 131-164, 2009. 
[24]
 
A. Strauss and J. M. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded 
Theory Procedures and Techniques: SAGE Publications, 1990. 
[25]
 
F. Fransella, D. Bannister, and R. Bell, A Manual for Repertory Grid 
Technique, Wiley, 2004. 
[26]
 
D. J. Leach, S. G. Rogelberg, P. B. Warr, and J. L. Burnfield, "Perceived 
Meeting Effectiveness: The Role of Design Characteristics," Journal of 
Business and Psychology, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 65-76, 2009. 
[27]
 
S. G. Rogelberg, D. J. Leach, P. B. Warr, and J. L. Burnfield, ""Not 
Another Meeting!" Are Meeting Ti
me Demands Related to Employee 
Well-Being?," J. of Applied Psychology, vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 86-96, 2006. 
[28]
 
H. Robinson and H. Sharp, "XP Culture: Why the twelve practices both 
are and are not the most significant thing," in Proceedings of the Agile 
Development Conference (ADC´
2003), IEEE, pp. 12-21, 2003. 
[29]
 
J. Yip, "It's Not Just Standing Up: Patterns for Daily Stand-up Meetings", 
http://martinfowler.com/articles/itsN
otJustStandingUp.html, Aug. 2011. 
[30]
 
A. C. Bluedorn, D. B. Turban, and M.
 S. Love, "The Effects of Stand-Up 
and Sit-Down Meeting Formats on 
Meeting Outcomes," Journal of 
Applied Psychology, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 277-285, 1999. 
[31]
 
N. C. Romano Jr and J. F. Nunama
ker Jr, "Meeting Analysis: Findings 
from Research and Practice," Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE, 2001. 
[32]
 
S. G. Rogelberg, J. A. Allen, L. Shanock, C. Scott, and M. Shuffler, 
"Employee Satisfaction with Meetings: A Contemporary Facet of Job 
Satisfaction," Hum. Resour. Man., 
vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 149-172, 2010. 
[33]
 
S. G. Rogelberg, C. Scott, and J. Kello, "The Science and Fiction of 
Meetings," MIT Sloan Man. Review, 
vol. 48, no. 2,  pp. 18-21, 2007.  
102102