 A Pilot Study of Comparative Customer Comprehension between Extreme X-Machine and UML Models Christopher Thomson, Mike Holcombe, Tony Cowling, Tony Simons, George Michaelides University of Sheffield  Department of Computer Science Regent Court, 211 Portobello, Sheffield S1 4DP +44 114 222 1980 {c.thomson, m.holcombe, a.cowling, a.simons, g.michaelides}@dcs.shef.ac.uk  ABSTRACT Many design notations are used 
during software development to 
help the developers better 
understand the required system. 
However they are infrequently shown to clients, partly because 

developers believe that client
s don™t understand them. In this 
study we investigate the extent 
to which clients comprehend three 
types of diagram. Two popular UML diagrams (activity and use 

case) and Extreme X-Machines diagrams (a type of state diagram 

developed to support Extreme Programming) were shown to three 

clients for whom we had recently delivered the software that was 

represented. The clients were 
given some simple guidance on 
interpreting them and asked to 
evaluate how well they understood 
them. This pilot study found that 
all the diagrams studied seemed 
to be equally well understood, but 
further studies are required to 
evaluate their usefulness. Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.2 [Software Engineering
]: Design Tools and Techniques - 
Object-oriented design methods, State Diagrams. General Terms Measurement, Documentation, E
xperimentation, Human Factors. Keywords
 Extreme X-Machines, XXM, empirical, formal method, testing, customer, requirements elicitation. 1. INTRODUCTION It is typical in traditional software development processes that the 
customer provides a list of requireme
nts that the developers use to develop and return a functioning 
system, which may or may not 
then be found to fit with the cu
stomer™s vision [8]. The agile 
movement has begun to strengt
hen the relationship between developers and customers through 
practices such as the on site 
customer in Extreme Programming [1]. However this style of 
relationship is not applicable to 
all projects and may lead to poor 
documentation that can cause problems during maintenance [12].  
In traditional development diagramma
tic models are often used to 
document the system. However they
 are frequently not updated as 
the system changes due to tim
e constraints. Agile methods 
typically abandon such techniques due to this problem; however 

this has led to accusations of a hacker mentality [3].  
The agile manifesto encourages de
velopers to be more productive 
by casting aside those parts of a process which are not useful. 

Therefore any modeling technique us
ed in an agile process should be genuinely useful. Whilst this 
is a specific goal of the agile 
philosophy it is also a fundamental business axiom, which 

perhaps explains the recent rush to agile [7]. In other words any 

model produced should have a specific return on investment. A potential return on investment is
 achievable if documentation is 
quick and easy to construct and can be used to verify a technical 

requirement with a customer with little or no technical training. In 

this study we investigate the cu
stomers™ comprehension of three 
different diagrams. We have demonstrated previously that Extreme X-Machine 
(XXM) diagrams are beneficial to
 the development process [10, 
11]. XXMs belong to a class of state machines known as X-

Machines [5, 6]. In the context of XXM, X-Machines are partially 

defined and used to give a high level model of the system. They 

are suited to agile methods as they can be used to generate test 

sequences to give complete functional tests.  The use of design models with
 clients is not uncommon. A 
previous survey of UML practitioners by Dobing and Parsons 

showed that Use Case Narratives, Activity Diagrams and Use 

Case Diagrams were used by mo
re than 70% of the respondents 
to verify the design with their clients [4]. They also found that 

50% of respondents had use UML Statecharts with clients; 

Statecharts are similar in representation to XXM diagrams. 

Whilst this result suggests that such diagrams have some use 

when shown to the client (rated as being ﬁmoderately 

successfulﬂ[4]) it does not address how well they were 

understood by the clients. To explore this we posed our research 

question as: do clients understand software engineering 
diagrams? 
In this paper we present a pilo
t study that investigates this 
question with three customers who had just received delivery of a 

custom software application. The three models were XXM, UML 

use case diagrams and UML activity diagrams. 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 

otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ESEM™08,
 October 9Œ10, 2008, Kaiserslautern, Germany. 
Copyright 2008 ACM  978-1-59593-971-5/08/10...$5.00.  2. STUDY DESIGN The results reported here were 
obtained from a study where nine 
self-selected student teams with similar development experience 

worked on one of three customer supplied projects competitively. 

Each of the three industrial customers received three software 

systems that were intended to m
eet their requirements. Each of 
the software solutions was produced concurrently by a team of 3 

to 5 students, whilst one resear
cher produced the models and 
another verified them to ensure 
consistency. We asked the clients 
to identify faults pres
ent in the diagrams.  
Each student was directed to spend 180 hours on the project. 
Each of the three projects was provided by an industrial customer 

who later used the software in
 his/her business. Two projects 
were database driven webs
ites and one an e-learning 
environment. We assumed that 
the project characteristics cannot 
confound comparisons between solutions developed with the 

same customer, but that between customers there is such a 

possibility.  
The teams were instructed to use a modified form of Extreme 
Programming (XP) [1, 9]. To ensure that a high quality working 

solution was delivered 50% of the overall marks were awarded to 

the students by the customer for the delivered product and user 

documentation. The remaining 
marks were awarded by the 
academic staff for the process followed by the students. 
Prior to the delivery of the final system each of the teams 
demonstrated and explained their 
solution to the researcher, who 
used this information to cons
truct Use Case, Activity and XXM 
diagrams for each of the systems. To avoid problems due to 

presentation the diagrams were 
constructed with a common look 
and feel, level of detail (to represent the top level of the system), 

and accuracy. One diagram was made of each type for each 

system and none were larger th
an one sheet of A4 paper. 
Standardizing the diagrams in this way ensured a fair comparison 

that was not dependent on the qua
lity of software developed or 
the skills of the student developers. The diagrams were delivered to the customers after they had time 
to evaluate all three of the systems that they had each received. 

The customers were instructed to: ﬁ
read the section below that 
describes how to interpret each 
of the diagrams, having done so 
inspect the diagrams and attempt to identify how they relate to 

the constructed system
ﬂ before answering the questions. The 
customers were also supplied with
 a one paragraph description on 
the interpretation of the diagrams. These descriptions accurately 

covered those features used in the diagrams; therefore any 

omissions from the descriptions refl
ected features not used in the 
diagrams: XXM: ﬁThis type of diagram shows the order in which things can 
occur in a software system. In th
is diagram the bubbles represent 
screens in your system, but 
occasionally a bubble represents 
several screens with a similar purpose. The first screen is shown 

by a small (green) bubble, after 
which the movement between the 
screens is shown by arrows. Each of the arrows is named to 

denote a user action (e.g. ﬁclick()ﬂ)  or a system test (e.g. 

ﬁ[valid]ﬂ), if the action is made, or the test succeeds then the 

arrow may be followed. The arrow 
indicates that the system is 
doing something as described by the name.ﬂ Use case: 
ﬁThis type of diagram shows who can do what in a 
software system. The stick me
n on this diagram represent 
different types of user. The bubbl
es represent actions in the 
system. When bubbles are linked to 
a stick man this indicates that 
the action is available to that 
user. When a bubble is linked to 
another bubble this indicates that the action in the bubble uses 

the action in the other bubble. Line
s ending in a triangle indicate 
that the bubble or stick man on the other end of the line includes 

all of the functionality of item at the triangle end.ﬂ Activity: 
ﬁThis type of diagram shows the order in which things 
can occur in a software system. A solid spot indicates where the 

system starts; follow the arrows 
from this position to explore the 
activities available to you. Each bubble represents an activity in 

the system, in some cases this may be prefixed with 

ﬁ<<name>>ﬂ, this indicates t
hat this activity has a wider 
purpose as indicated. The diamond boxes indicate a choice 

between options, on the arrows fr
om a diamond are tests, if this 
test is fulfilled that path can be followed.ﬂ The customers were encouraged to comment on the diagrams and 
for each, answer the following questions using a five point Likert 

scale from ﬁNot at allﬂ (1) to ﬁCompletelyﬂ (5):  
1. How well do you understand this diagram? 
2. How well does it represent the system produced? 
3. How much did you like this diagram? 
4. How easy is it to locate faults in the system which are also in 
the diagram? 
5. How easy is it to locate faults in
 the diagram which are not in 
the system? 
3. RESULTS The customer responses to the ques
tions are presented in table 1. 
The Wilcoxon signed ranks test was computed with SPSS 13 to 

compare the responses to each que
stion and diagram to the same 
questions asked about the other diag
rams (as some of the sets are 
clearly not normal - i.e. for Use Case questions 4 and 5 all the 

results are 1). This revealed th
at none of the questions asked 
delivered significantly different responses. The most significant 

was between Q4 in XXMs and Use Cases with a significance of 

0.08. Additional data will be required to investigate this further. Table 1: The customers™ responses to the questions.  
          Question XXM Use Case Activity 
Customer  1 234 5 1 2 3 4 512345
A 2 211 1 3 2 3 1 132211
A 3 332 1 4 4 4 1 144411
A 2 222 1 3 3 3 1 133311
B 2 421 1 2 4 1 1 124211
B 2 321 1 2 3 1 1 124211
B 2 421 1 2 3 2 1 122211
C 4 332 2 2 3 3 1 123311
C 2 211 1 1 1 1 1 143322
C 3 331 1 2 2 1 1 123211
All of the diagrams scored similarly for the questions so this 
would suggest that none of them offered any more value to the 

customer than any other.  
Question 1 showed that the customers felt that they had a basic 
understanding of the diagrams 
presented (mean: 2.5). This 
supports the previous findings [4]. 
It is possible that this rating 
would be improved if the custom
er would see such diagrams 
throughout the project. We checked with an additional question to 

see whether any of the clients had previously encountered any of 

the diagrams, and we found that 
client A had seen state based 
 models similar to both XXM a
nd Activity diagrams, but not 
recently. A Wilcoxon signed ranks test confirmed that his 

answers were not significantly different to those of the other 

customers (A-B 0.09, A-C 0.22), 
however the mean was slightly 
higher. Of all the questions 4 and 5 scored the lowest on average (mean: 
1.1), indicating that the diagrams neither illustrated the faults of 

the system nor were easily comparable to the systems to locate 

faults in the diagrams. This is unexpected as the customers 

indicated that they had some unde
rstanding of the diagrams (Q1, 
mean: 2.5). There are two plausible explanations for this: their 

understanding is not enough to identify faults; or the types of 

faults detected were not those that mattered to the client. 

Furthermore it is possible to interp
ret the questions to mean that 
the customers had to identify a fault to score highly whereas the 

intention was to measure if they c
ould identify a fault if it existed, 
thus this should be corrected in the next study. 
Question 2 showed that the customers could see some 
relationship between the diagrams and the delivered systems 

(mean: 2.9).  Contrasting this to 
the responses to questions 4 and 
5 suggests that this understanding 
is in response to the major 
functionalities of the system or flow rather than specific details. 
Question 3™s results do not favor 
any diagram overall. We also 
asked the customers to select their preferred diagram overall. 

They each selected a different diagram. One customer (B) 

commented that ﬁ[XXMs] seem to have fewer states and links, so 

easier/quicker to get to grips 
with. [Use cases] has too much 
information presented in the same way - hard to see what is 

importantﬂ. Another customer (C) said ﬁI would probably still go 

for diagram type [Activity] overall as I think it would be 

generally easier for more complex applicationsﬂ, whereas the 

final customer (A) felt that ﬁ[Use cases] was the type of diagram I 

could best understandﬂ. These res
ponses suggest that the clients 
were looking for different desirable features in the diagrams.  Lastly customer B commented: ﬁAll three diagrams are hard to 
read intuitively - I feel they will be of more use to the design 

team than to me as the custom
erﬂ. Dobing and Parsons also found 
that many of the clients who worked with the practitioners 

surveyed had recived UML training [4]. This suggests that further 

work is needed to refine the pres
entation of the diagrams to better 
match customer knowledge. 4. DISCUSSION AND FUTHER WORK As we only considered a standardized quality of diagram we 
cannot assume that the results obt
ained are generalizable to other 
projects. Equally as only a single 
diagram was constructed at the 
end of the project we cannot calculate the potential return on 

investment on any particular diag
ram as we have no measure of 
the effort needed for each diagram. Thus the intention was purely 

to evaluate the clients™ subjectiv
e comprehension of the diagrams 
as presented. 
The data collected so far suggests that all three diagrams (XXM, 
UML Use Case and Activity) are equally understandable and 

useful for a customer. As XXMs are found to be as 

understandable as the UML diagra
ms it suggests that they are 
equally useful for use with client
s based on the previous literature 
[4]. Nevertheless it was disappoin
ting that none of the diagrams 
were identified by the customer to
 be useful in finding faults. To 
make full use of a diagram with a customer this remains an 
elusive and desirable attribute. The low scores collected for the questions regarding fault finding 
may have been due to the phrasi
ng of the questions. Therefore a 
follow on study to this one will repeat the evaluation but will 

revise these questions, and aim to
 collect enough data to achieve 
significant results. As an alterna
tive a task could be designed for 
the customer to complete, where they would be required to 

identify a seeded fault.  As one 
of the customers identified that 
the diagrams were hard to interp
ret further thought must be given 
to the presentation of all the di
agrams types, which could mean 
redefining the UML standard, so as to improve this. 
If we assume that the data will be found to be normal once more 
is gathered and the questions revi
sed then a power analysis can be 
used as a guide to the number of
 samples required. For a paired 
sample t-test with a hypothetical mean difference of .33 (
 of the 
comparisons have delta>=.33) and of a hypothetical SD=.5 (
 of 
the comparisons have an SD=<.5) then a sample of 20 is needed 

to achieve a significance level=0.05 and power=0.8 [2]. 
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by an EPSRC grant: EP/D031516 - the 
Sheffield Software Engineering Observatory.  
6. REFERENCES [1] Beck, K. and Andres, C. 2004 Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change. Addison-Wesley Professional. 
[2] Cohen, J. 1988 Statistical power analysis for the behavioral 
sciences. Erlbaum  
[3] Constantine, L.L. 2001. Management Forum. Software Development, 9 (6). 16-28. [4] Dobing, B. and Parsons, J. 2006. How UML is used. Commun. ACM, 
49 (5). 109-113. [5] Eilenberg, S. 1974 Automata, Languages and Machines. Academic press. 
[6] Holcombe, M. and Ipate, F. 1998 Correct Systems - building a 
business process solution. Springer-Verlag. [7] Krasteval, I. and Llieva, S. 2007. Rush into Agile - Analytical 
Framework for Agile Practices 
Applicability. In Proceedings 
of the Agile Manufacturing, 2007. ICAM 2007. IET 
International Conference on, 229-238. [8] Sommerville, I. 2007 Software Engineering. Addison-Wesley. 
[9] Thomson, C. 2007 Defining and Describing Change Events in Software Development Projects. Doctoral Thesis. Department 
of Computer Science, University of Sheffield. 
[10] Thomson, C. and Holcombe, W. 2003. Applying XP Ideas 
Formally: The Story Card and Extreme X-Machines. In 

Proceedings of the 1st South-East European Workshop on 

Formal Methods, South-East European Research Centre, 57-71. [11] Thomson, C. and Holcombe, W. 2005. Using a formal method to model software design in XP projects. In Proceedings of the 

2nd South-East European Workshop on Formal Methods, 
South-East European Research Centre. [12] Turk, D., France, R. and Rumpe, B. 2002. Limitations of Agile Software Processes. In Proceedings of the Third International 

Conference on eXtreme Programming and Agile Processes in 

Software Engineering (XP 2002). 