 Scrum + Engineering Practices:  Experiences of Three Microsoft Teams 
 
 
Laurie Williams 
North Carolina State University 
Raleigh, NC 27695, USA 
williams@csc.ncsu.edu
 
Gabe Brown, Adam Meltzer, Nachiappan Nagappan 
Microsoft Corporation 
Redmond, WA 98052, USA 
{gabeb, ameltzer, nachin}@microsoft.com
 
 
Abstract 
- The Scrum methodology is an agile software 
development process that works as a project management 
wrapper around existing engineering practices to iteratively 
and incrementally develop software. With Scrum, for a 
developer to receive credit for his or her work, he or she must 
demonstrate the new functionality provided by a feature at the 
end of each short iteration during an iteration review session.  
Such a short-term focus without the checks and balances of 
sound engineering practices may lead a team to neglect quality.   
In this paper we present the experiences of three teams at 
Microsoft using Scrum with an additional nine sound 
engineering practices. Our results indicate that these teams 
were able to improve quality, productivity, and estimation 
accuracy through the combination of Scrum and nine 
engineering practices.
  
Keywords - Agile software development, Scrum 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Scrum [16, 29] is the most often used [6, 30, 31] agile 
[10] software development methodology among teams that 
utilize an agile methodology.
  
A large-scale survey [31] 
deployed in the software engineering industry from 
June/July 2008 received 3061 respondents from 80 different 
countries. For the question “Which Agile methodology do 
to you closely follow” 49% of the respondents mentioned 
Scrum and an additional 29
% mentioned Scrum with 
Extreme Programming.  Additionally, a survey of 10% of 
all engineers at Microsoft, indicated that more than 60% of 
the engineers use Scrum (Figure 2) [6]. Scrum provides a 
project management structure to a team. However, the 
Scrum methodology does not prescribe the engineering 
practices a team should use, purportedly to give 
organizations as much flexibility as possible in choosing 
their engineering practices.  
With Scrum, gone are the days of a software developer 
reporting to the project manager that a new feature is 80% 
complete. Instead, in a Scrum e
nvironment, credit is “all or 
nothing” whereby a feature that is 99% done is considered 
“not done.”  For the developer to receive credit for his or her 
work, he or she must demonstrate the new functionality 
provided by a feature at the end of each short iteration 
during an iteration review session. Developers, testers, the 
project managers, the product owner/manager, and others 
attend this iteration review session.  The expectations for 
demonstrating all planned features at the end of each 
iteration are high as the team works to meet its iteration 
goal.   
This short-term focus of iterations coupled with a lack 
of prescribed engineering practices may lead to trouble.  
“Flaccid Scrum
1
” is a term coined by Martin Fowler to refer 
to teams that utilize only Scrum’s project management 
practices.  Progress eventually slows for Flaccid Scrum 
teams, according to Fowler, because the team has not paid 
enough attention to the quality of the code produced during 
each iteration.  In some cases, only the easiest scenario of a 
feature (often referred to as the “happy path”) is 
demonstrated at the end of the iteration.  This “happy path” 
may be formally specified as the acceptance criteria for the 
feature.  The feature can then be considered to be “done”, 
with the development team getting credit for the feature.   
Focus then turns to a new set of commitments to deliver 
features for the next iteration, even if only the “happy path” 
of prior features has been done.   
The Scrum methodology, however, may provide a solid 
project management framework for a team that also utilizes 
sound engineering practices.  In this paper, we share the 
experiences and quantitative productivity and quality results 
of three Microsoft teams who utilized a Scrum-based 
software development methodology augmented with nine 
engineering practices recommended by the Microsoft 
Engineering Excellence group that takes care of 
companywide process initiatives.       
Software engineering research can aid practitioners in 
their technology and/or process choices.  Practitioners who 
read this paper will gain an understanding of the need to add 
engineering practices to a Scrum process to prevent Flaccid 
Scrum.  
 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows.  We 
explain Scrum and provide background in Sections 2 and 3.  
We provide the motivation for our paper in Section 4.  In 
Section 5, we describe the practices adopted by the team.  
We then provide the results of the teams in Section 6 and 
limitations of our study in Section 7.     We summarize the 
study in Section 8. 
II. SCRUM 
The Scrum methodology is an agile software 
development process that works as a wrapper with existing 
engineering practices to iteratively and incrementally 
                                                                
 
1
 http://www.martinfowler.com/bliki/FlaccidScrum.html 
2011 International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement978-0-7695-4604-9/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ESEM.2011.65463 develop software. Scrum is composed of the following 
project management practices:   
•
 
The Product Owner creates the requirements, prioritizes 
them, and documents them in the Product Backlog 
during Release Planning.  In Scrum, requirements are 
called features.   
•
 
Scrum teams work in sh
ort iterations.  When Scrum 
was first defined [16, 29], iterations were 30-days long.  
More recently Scrum teams often use even shorter 
iterations, such as two-week iterations.  In Scrum, the 
current iteration is called the Sprint. 
•
 
A Sprint Planning Meeting is held with the 
development team, testers, management, the project 
manager, and the Product Owner.  In the Sprint 
Planning Meeting, this group chooses which features 
(which are most often user-visible, user valued, and 
able to be implemented within one iteration) from the 
product backlog are to be included in the next iteration, 
driven by highest business value and risk and the 
capacity of the team.      
•
 
Once the Sprint begins, features cannot be added to the 
Sprint.   
•
 
Short, 10-15 minute Daily Scrum meetings are held.  
While others (such as managers) may attend these 
meetings, only the developers and testers and the Scrum 
Master (the name given to the project manager in 
Scrum) can speak.  Each team member answers the 
following questions:    
o
 
What have you done since the last Daily Scrum? 
o
 
What will you do between now and the next Daily 
Scrum? 
o
 
What is getting in your way of doing work?   
•
 
At the end of a Sprint, a Sprint Review takes place to 
review progress and to demonstrate completed features 
to the Product Owner, management, users, and the team 
members.   
•
 
After the Sprint Review, the team conducts a 
Retrospective Meeting.  In the Retrospective Meeting, 
the team discusses what went well in the last Sprint and 
how they might improve their processes for the next 
Sprint. 
III. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
In this section, we provide related work on the Scrum 
agile software development methodology.  We also discuss 
case study research.    
A. Scrum Research 
A myriad of qualitative experience reports about the 
Scrum software development methodology have been 
published.  However, few studies have been conducted on 
the Scrum that report quantitative results, as ours does.  In 
this section, we summarize information available in the 
literature about the use of Scrum by industrial software 
development teams whereby the papers provided details 
beyond qualitative experience reports.   A pattern among the 
published studies is that the successful Scrum teams also 
utilized proven engineering practices. 
Tain, a Swedish gaming company, adopted Scrum and 
Extreme Programming (XP) engineering practices to 
develop an online poker game [21].  The team delivered a 
stable, scalable product on schedule.  During this time, the 
team also was reduced in size by half and those that 
remained worked less overtime to produce more business 
value than previously.  The engineering practices the team 
enumerated as critical to their success are the following:  
continuous integration, refactoring, and test-driven 
development. 
A development team for an Internet portal utilized the 
Scrum methodology [12].  Initially, the short term focus of 
Scrum caused this team to ignore the use of some best 
engineering practices, leading to “cumulative and often 
irreversible” problems.  Early in the development cycle, the 
team established source con
trol, coding standards, processes 
for code reviews and check-ins, and informal rules for 
design discussions and team meetings. However, the team 
did not initially establish an automated build system, a unit 
test framework, or a practice of creating automated quality 
assurance tests.  The eventual implementation of these 
practices aided the team in successfully implementing a 
higher quality product by a team with improved morale.  
Two teams at Systematic utilized a Scrum-based 
process [18].  Systematic is an independent software and 
systems company focused on complex and critical 
information technology solutions.  Systematic often 
produces products that are mission critical with high 
demands for reliability, safety, accuracy, and usability.  In 
2005, Systematic was rated a Capability Maturity Model – 
Integrated (CMM-I)
2
 Level 5 company, an indication of its 
use of engineering best practices. Through the use of Scrum, 
Systematic estimates that it doubled its productivity and cut 
defects by 40%.   
B. Case Study Research 
The experiences shared in this paper can be classified 
as case study research.  Case studies can be viewed as 
“research in the typical” [13, 19].  As opposed to formal 
experiments, which often have a narrow focus and an 
emphasis on controlling context variables, case studies in 
software engineering test theories and collect data through 
observation of a project in an unmodified setting [34].  
However, because the corporate, team, and project 
characteristics are unique to each case study, comparisons 
and generalizations of case study results are difficult and are 
subject to questions of internal validity [20].  Nonetheless, 
case studies are valuable because they involve factors that 
                                                                
 
2
 http://www.sei.cmu.edu/cmmi/ 
464 staged experiments generally do not exhibit, such as scale, 
complexity, unpredictability, and dynamism [27].  Case 
studies are particularly important for industrial evaluation of 
software engineering methods and tools [19].  Researchers 
become more confident in a theory when similar findings 
emerge in different contexts [19].  By recording the context 
variables of multiple case studies and/or experiments, 
researchers can build evidence through a family of 
experiments.  Replication of case studies addresses threats 
to experimental validity [2].  
IV. MICROSOFT TEAM AND PROCESS 
In this section we provide information on the three 
Microsoft teams included in our study that utilized a Scrum-
based software development methodology plus engineering 
practices.  We then discuss the software development 
process used by the teams. 
A. Research Methodology 
The second and third authors can be considered action 
researchers.  They have participated as software engineers 
on the three teams.  The first author obtained information 
about the teams’ experiences by interviewing the second 
author using pre-prepared questions, which were intertwined 
with opportunistic follow-on questions based upon his 
answers.  One interview was conducted on the phone and 
the second in person.  Both interviews were approximately 
one hour in duration.  The fourth author participated in the 
interviews.  He also had numerous informal conversations 
with the two software engineers on the teams.  The second 
and third authors provided quantitative data, which was 
interpreted and analyzed by the first and fourth authors. 
B. Team Demographics and Context 
Table I provides an overview of the context factors of 
the three teams.  The context factors were motivated based 
upon those specified in the Extreme Programming 
Evaluation Framework (XP-EF) [33].  We do not provide 
information about the exact Microsoft products the teams 
implemented to enable us to share more information about 
the team’s results.  The domain of the each of the products 
is provided in the table and ranges from infrastructure to test 
infrastructure to mobile web applications.  In all cases, the 
teams were working on the first release of their products in 
either C# or C++.  The teams produced between 9 and 31 
thousand lines of implementation code during a period of 
between 11 and 18 months long. 
Teams A and B were small teams of between three and 
five members.  Team C was larger with 19 members.  
Teams B was co-located teams while Teams A and C were 
distributed between the US and China, challenging the usual 
face-to-face communication advocated in the Agile 
Manifesto [5]. Other context factors presented in Table I 
will be discussed in Section 5. 
C. Scrum-based Process Used by Teams 
The three teams utilized a Scrum-based software 
development process and added nine additional engineering 
practices.  These nine practices are Microsoft Engineering 
Excellence Best Practices.  Microsoft Engineering 
Excellence is an organization responsible for supporting 
Microsoft's engineering community by providing the 
engineers with learning and development opportunities, and 
with discovering and propagating engineering best practices 
across the company and into the information technology 
(IT) ecosystem.  
This sub-section provides information on the software 
development methodology used by the teams.
  
1) Basic Scrum 
The teams utilized the basic practices of Scrum laid out 
in Section II.  All teams began with a four-week iteration.  
Team A then transitioned to a two-week iterations.  Team A 
team found estimating and planning for a two-week period 
easier than planning for a four week period.  They also 
found the move to a two-week iteration allowed them to 
respond faster to changing business requirements reduced 
risk because the team was able to address issues more 
rapidly through more frequent iterations.   
The teams performed “just-in-time” design of features 
before or during the iteration in which the feature was to be 
developed.  The form of the design was often class diagrams 
and annotations on interactions with other major 
components.  Team A team members in Shanghai 
sometimes created a prototype (called a “spike” among agile 
software developers) of larger features or those with 
significant unknowns before the feature was accepted into a 
Sprint.  The purpose of the prototype was to gain knowledge 
about the feature prior to accepting the feature into a Sprint.  
Only when enough knowledge was available for the feature 
would it be considered ready for a Sprint.  Such delaying of 
stories until adequate information is available was also done 
by the Systematic team discussed in Section III [18].     
The teams only held the Daily Scrum three times per week 
in Redmond, Washington, USA.  Subsequently, a Redmond 
team member would follow up with a call to their Chinese 
colleagues.  The teams conducted retrospective meetings at 
the end of every Sprint.   
2) Planning Poker 
The teams used Planning Poker to estimate the person-
hours required to complete functio
nality within an iteration.  
In recent years, some agile software development teams 
have estimated the effort needed to complete the 
requirements chosen to be implemented in an Sprint and/or 
in a release via a Wideband Delphi [8] practice commonly 
called Planning Poker [11, 14]. Several reports on the use of 
Planning Poker are found in the literature.  One Norwegian 
industrial team “immediately took a liking to the new 
estimation process” [15] of Planning Poker, and the 
technique was “very well received.” Another Norwegian  
465  
 
TABLE I:  MICROSOFT TEAM CONTEXT FACTORS 
 
Team A Team B Team C 
Project Management 
Type 
Scrum Scrum Scrum 
Team Size 
4 3 19 
Team Location 
Redmond + 
Shanghai Redmond Redmond + Beijing 
Experience > 10 years 
1 1 1 
Experience 6-10 years 
2 0 10 
Experience < 5 years 
1 2 8 
Domain Expertise 
Medium Medium Medium/High 
Language Expertise 
High Medium High 
Program Manager 
Expertise 
Low Low Medium/High 
Programming Lang. 
C# C# C++ 
Team Location 
Distributed Local Distributed 
Domain 
Infrastructure Test Infrastructure Mobile Web 
Version/Legacy 
1st Release 1st Release 1st Release 
Source LoC 
24,952 8,826 31,399 
Test LoC 
20,912 4,031 26,283 
Test LoC / Source LoC 
0.84 0.46 0.84 
% of Code Coverage 
(unit-tests) 
82% 53% N/A 
Development Time 
14 months 11 months 18 months 
Legacy Code 
no no no 
Test Run Frequency 
Every check-
in/daily 
Every check-
in/daily Every check-in/daily 
Actual Defects  
(Sev 1,2,3,4) 
14 P1, 56 P2 76 P1, 111 P2 8 P1, 141 P2 
Physical Layout 
Offices Offices Office/shared space 
Customer 
Communication 
Onsite, email, chat, 
phone 
Onsite, email, 
chat, phone 
partners, in person, 
email 
Customer Cardinality 
and Location 
On-Site, Remote On-Site N/A 
 
team [25] “decided to implement it for all tasks in the 
project’s future” because they felt it was an effective means 
of collaboratively producing unbiased estimates. 
Planning Poker is “played” by the team as a part of the 
Sprint Planning meeting.  A Planning Poker session begins 
by the customer or marketing representative explaining each 
requirement to the extended development team.  We use the 
term extended development team (often called the “whole 
team” [4] by agile software developers) to refer to all those 
involved in the development of a product, including product 
managers, project managers, software developers, testers, 
usability engineers, security engineers and others. In turn, 
the team discusses the work involved in fully implementing 
and testing a requirement until they believe that they have 
enough information to estimate the effort. Each team 
member then privately and independently estimates the 
effort.  The team members reveal their estimates 
simultaneously. Next, the team members with the lowest 
and highest estimate explain their estimates to the group.  
Discussion ensues until the group is ready to re-vote on their 
estimates.  More estimation rounds take place until the team 
can come to a consensus on an effort estimate for the 
requirement.  Most often, only one or two Planning Poker 
rounds are necessary on a particular requirement before 
consensus is reached.    
 Planning Poker provides a structured means for: 
466 •
 
obtaining a shared understanding; 
•
 
exposing hidden assumptions of the technical 
aspects of implementation and verification; 
•
 
discussing the implications throughout the 
system for implementing a requirement; 
•
 
surfacing and resolving ambiguities realized 
via divergent perspectives on the requirement; 
and 
•
 
exposing easy and hard alternatives for 
achieving desired goals. 
The Microsoft teams felt the use of Planning Poker 
enabled their team to have 
relatively low estimation error 
from the beginning of the project.  Figure 1 depicts the 
estimation error for Team A (the middle line) relative to the 
cone of uncertainty (the outer lines).  The cone of 
uncertainty is a concept introduced by Boehm [8] and made 
prominent more recently by McConnell [24] based upon the 
idea that uncertainty decreases significantly as one obtains 
new knowledge as the project progresses [22].   Team A’s 
estimation accuracy was relatively low starting from the 
first iteration.  The team attributes their accuracy to the use 
of the Planning Poker practice. 
 
 
Figure 1:  Cone of uncertainty 
The teams indicate that the use of the Planning Poker 
practice required more upfront work prior to each Planning 
Poker session at the start of each iteration.  This upfront 
work includes the product owner fully defining small user-
visible, user-valued feature requirements that could be 
completed in one iteration or less, high level architectural 
analysis or prototyping, and possibly preliminary user-
interface design.  However, this upfront work enables the 
team to complete features in one iteration as uncertainty 
about the expectations for a feature has been reduced.  The 
teams indicate that occasionally the Planning Poker voting 
results in a deadlock when no consensus can be reached.  In 
most cases, the deadlock in estimation is desirable.  The 
deadlock signals that the product owner has not fully 
described the work to be delivered or that a spike is 
necessary to investigate a significant unknown prior to the 
feature being accepted into a Sprint and that the feature 
needs to be put on the backlog until the investigation has 
been conducted. 
3) Continuous Integration 
The teams utilized the continuous integration practice. 
Continuous integration is a software development practice 
where members of a team integrate their work into the main 
build system frequently.   Usually each developer integrates 
at least daily.  Each integration is verified by an automated 
process that runs all automated tests that should detect 
integration errors as quickly as possible. 
As shown in Table I, the Microsoft teams checked in 
their new code at least once per day.  Each check-in initiated 
a build.  Each build entailed the running of automated unit 
tests and associated test coverage computation.  The team 
automatically received an email confirmation of the 
completion of the build providing test results.  All tests must 
pass for the build to be considered successful.  The used 
Microsoft Visual Studio Team Build Server to manage their 
check-ins, build process, and automated test runs.  
The Microsoft teams managed their build/continuous 
integration process themselves rather than getting help from 
a build support organization.  They indicated that the 
benefits from continuous integration’s ability to keep a 
constant focus on quality come with a cost.   Builds and test 
runs are not always successful, causing engineers to need to 
deal with issues such as bad merges, build system problems, 
and source control integration problems. 
4) Unit Test-Driven Development 
Unit test-driven development [3] is a practice that has 
been used sporadically for decades [7, 14]. With this 
practice, a software engineer cycles on a minute-by-minute 
basis between writing failing automated unit tests and 
writing implementation code to pass those tests.  
Case studies [7, 26, 28, 32] were conducted with four 
development teams at Microsoft (Windows, MSN, Visual 
Studio, and one unnamed application) developed in C++ 
and C# and one IBM device driver team that developed in 
Java.  All had transitioned from an ad hoc unit testing 
practice to the team-wide use of automated unit testing 
using the NUnit
3
 or JUnit
4
 frameworks.  The TDD teams 
realized a significant decrease in defects, from 20% to 91%.   
The main difference between the Windows, MSN, 
Visual Studio, and IBM teams versus the Microsoft 
application team was that the first four developed automated 
unit tests incrementally on a minute-by-minute basis.  
Developers took from 15% to 35% longer to achieve this 
quality gain.  However, the quality improvement due to 
reduced defects, leading to less
 debug and field support time 
makes up for this increase in development time.        
                                                                
 
3
 http://www.nunit.org/index.php 
4
 http://junit.org/ 
-100%
0%
100%
200%
300%
400%
500%
11.21.41.61.81.8.21.10
Estimation Error
Iteration
467 Teams A, B, and C did not write unit tests on an minu-
te-by-minute basis.  Instead, they backtracked to write 
automated unit tests after completing a major piece of 
functionality or completing a class.  They also estimate that 
writing test cases added approximately 20% to their 
development time.  As shown in Table I, the ratio of test 
lines of code (LOC) to source LOC ranged from .46 to .84.  
The test coverage ranged from 53% to 82%.  Team B had 
the lowest test LOC/source LOC ratio and the lowest 
coverage.  As will be discussed in Section VI, Team B also 
had the highest defect density. As indicated above, 
automated unit test runs were done as a part of the 
continuous integration build process.  All testing was done 
using Visual Studio’s test tools, such as the use of the NUnit 
test framework with the MSTest adapter. 
5) Quality Gates (a.k.a. “Done Criteria”) 
Rather than tracking what percentage of a new feature 
is complete for an engineer, most agile teams use a binary 
“all or nothing” means of feature completion tracking.  The 
feature is considered “not complete” until it is not only 
implemented but can pass all the quality “done criteria” that 
has been pre-established by the team.  Done criteria is 
essential for preventing Flaccid Scrum.   Sound ‘done’ 
criteria can prevent the team from rushing through the 
implementation of features such that a simple demonstration 
of a feature can be done in the Iteration Review meeting 
without the feature being robust enough to handle 
alternative flows and/or error handling.   
The Microsoft team calls their done criteria “quality 
gates.”   The quality gates established for these teams 
included the following:   
•
 
All unit tests must pass 
•
 
Unit test code coverage must be at least 80% (for 
all teams except Team B) 
•
 
All public methods must have documentation 
•
 
All non-unit test code must not have any static 
analysis errors or warnings (see Sub-Section 9 of 
this section) 
•
 
Build must compile with no errors or warnings on 
the highest level 
 
The team feels these quality gates provide concise and 
measurable exit criteria for their feature development, 
putting the focus on quality of features rather than quantity 
of features.  However, the use of quality gates do, however, 
impose overhead on their process due to the need for 
monitoring
.     
6) Source Control 
Source control is management of changes to 
documents, programs, and other information stored as 
computer files through a source control system.  The 
Microsoft teams used the Visual Studio Team Foundation 
Server Version Control tool.  Any contributor could check 
code into the development branch.  Only project 
administrators could integrate code into the main branch.  
Code was moved from the main branch to the release branch 
at the end of each Sprint.   
The teams felt that source control was beneficial for 
change tracking, branching, and merging.  Source control 
was also used to manage access control to code whereby 
some could read code and others could contribute to code.  
Source control also provided a central managed store for 
data.  Additionally, complicated use cases were challenging 
to manage since such use cases would involve a larger 
quantity of files that might be owned by other engineers.    
7) Code Coverage 
Engineers were required to manage their automated unit 
test coverage and monitored this coverage with each build.  
Two of the teams (A and C) followed the Microsoft 
Engineering Excellence recommendation of having 80% 
unit test coverage.  The team felt that managing coverage 
was helpful for finding dead code and areas that needed 
better testing.  Obtaining higher coverage was difficult due 
to the need to force tests 
to execute error conditions; 
coverage beyond the prescribed 80% might be considered to 
have diminishing returns.  The teams did not consider high 
coverage as an indication that the code is of high quality, 
only a measure of unit test effectiveness.  Unit tests may 
detect errors of commission, such as an incorrect 
computation or incorrect logic, 
but not errors of omission, 
such as missing functionality. 
8) Peer Review 
In each iteration, the teams conducted design reviews of 
architecture diagrams and of code when adding new 
features.  The built-in Visual Studio code review tool was 
used.  Senior developers conducted the reviews.  When code 
was checked in, the reviewer(s) names were entered into the 
tool.  The teams felt the reviews significantly improved the 
quality of the code by removing faults that may have 
escaped to the field. 
9) Static Analysis Tools 
The use of static analysis tools can identify common 
coding problems [17] or unusual code [1] early in the 
development process [9].  The teams utilized the FxCop 
static analysis tool built into Visual Studio.  They also had 
static compiler warnings set to the highest sensitivity.  
Engineers had to explain to a senior engineer when they 
suppressed warnings from the compiler or FxCop and 
document their justification in the source code.  They felt 
that the use of FxCop trained them to use better coding 
practices and was an effective learning tool.  They also felt 
that peer reviews were more effective because fixing FxCop 
and compiler warnings caused them to find and fix the small 
errors.  The teams felt that the use of static analysis tools 
can be difficult when not used from the beginning of a 
468 project because the engineers can become overwhelmed 
with warnings.   
10) XML Documentation 
The team used .NET-style inline XML generated 
documentation on all public classes, properties, and 
methods.  As a result the code was self-documenting.   
V. RESULTS 
The transition to the new Scrum process did 
temporarily reduce the productivity of the team.  However, 
the teams had recovered and improved productivity by the 
end of the fourth iteration.  Team A was able to achieve a 
250% improvement, (to sustain aggressive code addition all 
while able to meet stringent quality gates) in the number of 
lines of code produced in each sprint by the fourth sprint 
(Figure 2). This improved productivity directly translated 
into capacity the teams leve
raged to complete more user 
stories and Sprint tasks while meeting all of the quality 
gates. 
 
Figure 2:  Cumulative Lines of Code Produced 
Also in this paper we report on the various engineering 
practices that were followed during the course of software 
development using the Scrum development practice. To 
compare and contrast the quality of the software systems 
produced, we compare against prior published defect 
density rates [23] of a non-Scrum project at IBM. All three 
of the Microsoft projects were first releases so we could not 
use a prior Microsoft release as a baseline.  The same 
project could not be repeated using a non-Scrum team as is 
common with case study research.    hence and difference in 
comparison points.  Further we also compare, in Figure 3, 
against data extracted from the Bangalore benchmarking 
group
5
 where benchmarks were developed across 40 
projects from nine companies (Honeywell, HP, IMR, 
Logica, Motorola, Novell, Ph
ilips, Verifone,WiproTech). 
Predominantly C, C++, Java are the languages used in these 
40 projects. The average size of project was 43 KLOC (Min 
- 4 KLOC, Max - 300 KLOC). The average effort was 910 
                                                                
 
5
 
http://www.bspin.org/archeives11/BSIG-SPINtalk-2000.ppt
 
Staff/Person days (Min – 203 staff/person days,  Max – 
4664 Staff/person days). 
The results in Figure 3 indicate that the Scrum projects 
had lower defect density (defects per line of code) that the 
non-Scrum projects except in the case of Team B. Team B’s 
testing effort was relatively low (Source/test LOC ratio is 
0.53) indicating the lowest effort amongst all Scrum 
projects. These results further back up our assertion on the 
importance of the engineering practices followed with 
Scrum (in this case more extensive testing) rather than the 
Scrum process itself. 
 
Figure 3: Comparing defect density for Scrum and non-Scrum teams 
VI. LIMITATIONS 
As with all case study research, our results are only 
valid in the context of these three teams and the results may 
not generalize beyond these three teams.   The same teams 
could not repeat the projects in a non-Scrum environment.  
Therefore, our comparisons are not on the same projects.  
Additionally, all three Microsoft teams were relatively small 
teams so our research does not address scalability of Scrum 
to larger teams.    
Also we compare the productivity of the teams relative 
to their productivity prior to 
Scrum. There could have been 
factors regarding expertise in the code base, which could 
have also contributed to these results. But considering the 
magnitude of improvement 250%, there would still have to 
be an improvement associated with Scrum even after taking 
into account any improvement due to experience 
acquisition.   
The teams utilized all the basic Scrum practices as well 
as nine additional engineering practices.  We cannot 
distinguish which of these practices were the biggest drivers 
in the productivity and quality results observed. 
VII. LESSONS LEARNED 
In this paper, we present the engineering practices that 
were part of the Scrum development process at Microsoft. 
The three teams at Microsoft used the following nine 
practices with their Scrum framework. 
1.
 
Planning poker 
0
5
10
15
20
25
Defect Density
469 2.
 
Continuous integration 
3.
 
Unit Test-Driven development 
4.
 
Quality gates 
5.
 
Source control 
6.
 
Code coverage 
7.
 
Static analysis tools 
8.
 
Peer review 
9.
 
XML documentation 
The productivity of the teams as they transitioned to 
agile temporarily dropped for three iterations. The team 
attributed this drop to their unfamiliarity of Scrum and 
required a “gelling” period to st
art delivering value based on 
the development process. From their fourth sprint on they 
experienced a significant improvement in productivity 
without an increase in defects.  Teams transitioning to the 
use of an agile software development should plan for a 
similar temporary productivity decrease.   
Teams that used Scrum and sound engineering practices 
showed better quality in terms of defect density compared 
with similar non-Scrum teams including data benchmarked 
across 40 projects from nine companies. These results 
indicates that Scrum combined with sound engineering 
practices have the potential to yield a higher quality product.  
Team B that followed Scrum but the engineering practices 
to a lesser degree than Teams A and C had the highest 
defect density. 
Finally, our results indicate that estimation accuracy 
was enhanced by the use of the Planning Poker practice.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Funding for first author Laurie Williams was provided by 
the ScrumAlliance. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]
 
N. Ayewah, W. Pugh, J. D. Morgenthaler, J. Penix, and Y. Zhou, 
"Evaluating Static Analysis Defect Warnings On Production 
Software," in 7th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGSOFT Workshop on Program 
Analysis for Software Tools and Engineering, San Diego, CA, USA, 
2007, pp. 1-8. 
[2]
 
V. Basili, F. Shull, and F. Lanubile, "Building Knowledge Through 
Families of Experiments," IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 456 - 473, 1999. 
[3]
 
K. Beck, Test Driven Development -- by Example. Boston: Addison 
Wesley, 2003. 
[4]
 
K. Beck, Extreme Programming Explained:  Embrace Change, 
Second ed. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2005. 
[5]
 
K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. van Bennekum, A. Cockburn, W. 
Cunningham, M. Fowler, J. Grenning, J. Highsmith, A. Hunt, R. 
Jeffries, J. Kern, B. Marick, R. C. Martin, S. Mellor, K. Schwaber, J. 
Sutherland, and D. Thomas, "The Agile Manifesto,"  
http://www.agileAlliance.org, 2001. 
[6]
 
A. Begel and N. Nagappan, "Usage and Perceptions of Agile 
Software Development in an Industrial Context: An Exploratory 
Study," in Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement 
Conference (ESEM), Madrid, Spain, 2007, pp. 255-264. 
[7]
 
T. Bhat and N. Nagappan, "Evaluating the efficacy of test-driven 
development: industrial case studies," in ACM/IEEE international 
symposium on International symposium on empirical software 
engineering, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2006, pp. 356 - 363  
[8]
 
B. W. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1981. 
[9]
 
B. Chess and J. West, Secure Programming with Static Analysis, 1st 
ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley, 2007. 
[10]
 
A. Cockburn, Agile Software Development. Reading, Massachusetts: 
Addison Wesley Longman, 2002. 
[11]
 
M. Cohn, Agile Estimating and Planning. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2006. 
[12]
 
K. Dinakar, "Agile Development: Overcoming a Short-Term Focus in 
Implementing Best Practices," in Conference on Object Oriented 
Programming Systems Languages and Applications (OOPSLA) 2009, 
Orlando, FL, pp. 579-588. 
[13]
 
N. E. Fenton and S. L. Pfleeger, Software Metrics: A Rigorous and 
Practical Approach: Brooks/Cole, 1998. 
[14]
 
J. Grenning, "Planning Poker or How to avoid analysis paralysis 
while release planning," 2002, 
https://segueuserfiles.middlebury.edu/xp/PlanningPoker-v1.pdf. 
[15]
 
N. C. Haugen, "An empirical study of using planning poker for user 
story estimation," in Agile 2006, Minneapolis, MN, 2006, p. 9 pages 
(electronic proceedings). 
[16]
 
J. Highsmith, Agile Software Development Ecosystems. Boston, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
[17]
 
D. Hovemeyer and W. Pugh, "Finding Bugs is Easy," in 19th ACM 
Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, 
and Applications, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, 2004, pp. 
132-136. 
[18]
 
C. R. Jakobsen and J. Sutherland, "Scrum and CMMI – Going from 
Good to Great," in Agile 2009, Chicago, IL, 2009, pp. 333 - 337  
[19]
 
B. Kitchenham, L. Pickard, and S. L. Pfleeger, "Case Studies for 
Method and Tool Evaluation," IEEE Software, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 52-
62, July 1995. 
[20]
 
B. A. Kitchenham, S. L. Pfleeger, L. M. Pickard, P. W. Jones, D. C. 
Hoaglin, K. El Emam, and J. Rosenberg, "Preliminary Guidelines for 
Empirical Research in Software Engineering," IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 721-733, August 2002 2002. 
[21]
 
H. Kniberg and R. Farhang, "Bootstrapping Scrum and XP under 
crisis," in Agile 2008, Toronto, Canada, 2008, pp. 436 - 444. 
[22]
 
T. Little, "Schedule Estimation and Uncertainty Surrounding the 
Cone of Uncertainty," IEEE Software, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 48-54, 2006. 
[23]
 
E. M. Maximilien and L. W
illiams, "Assessing Test-driven 
Development at IBM," in International Conference of Software 
Engineering, Portland, OR, 2003, pp. 564-569. 
[24]
 
S. McConnell, Rapid Development:  Taming Wild Software 
Schedules: Microsoft Press, 1996. 
[25]
 
K. Moløkken-Østvold and N. C. Haugen, "Combining Estimates with 
Planning Poker – An Empirical Study," in Australian Software 
Engineering Conference (ASWEC'07), Melbourne, Australia, 2007, 
pp. 349-358. 
[26]
 
N. Nagappan, E. M. Maximilien, T. Bhat, and L. Williams, 
"Realizing Quality Improvement Through Test Driven Development: 
Results and Experiences of Four Industrial Teams," Empirical 
Software Engineering, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 289-302, June 2008. 
[27]
 
C. Potts, "Software Engineering Research Revisited," IEEE Software, 
no. pp. 19-28, September 1993. 
[28]
 
J. Sanchez, L. Williams, and M. Maximilien, "A Longitudinal Study 
of the Test-driven Development Practice in Industry," in Agile 2007, 
Washington, DC, pp. 5-14. 
[29]
 
K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, Agile Software Development with 
SCRUM. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2002. 
[30]
 
Version One, "Second Annual Survey 2007 The State of Agile 
Development," 2007, 
http://www.versionone.com/pdf/StateOfAgileDevelopmet2_FullData
Report.pdf. 
[31]
 
Version One, "Third Annual Survey 2008 The State of Agile 
Development," 2008 
470 http://www.versionone.com/pdf/3rdAnnualStateOfAgile_FullDataRe
port.pdf. 
[32]
 
L. Williams, G. Kudrjavets, and N. Nagappan, "On the Effectiveness 
of Unit Test Automation at Microsoft," in International Symposium 
on Software Reliability Engineering, Mysuru, India, 2009, pp. 81-89. 
[33]
 
L. Williams, L. Layman, and W. Krebs, "Extreme Programming 
Evaluation Framework for Object-Oriented Languages -- Version 
1.4," North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC Computer Science 
TR-2004-18  http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/research/tech/reports.php, 
2004. 
[34]
 
M. V. Zelkowitz and D. R. Wallace, "Experimental Models for 
Validating Technology," IEEE Computer, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 23-31, 
May 1998. 
 
 
 
 
 
471