 Are Developers Complying with the Process: An XP Study Nico Zazworka1,3
, Kai Stapel
2, Eric Knauss2, Forrest Shull3,1, Victor R. Basili1,3
, Kurt Schneider
2 1University of Maryland 
College Park Maryland, USA 
+1 301 405 2668 
{nico,basili}@cs.umd.edu 
 2Leibniz Universität  
Hannover 
Germany +49 511 762 19 666 
{kai.stapel,eric.knauss, 
kurt.schneider} @inf.uni-hannover.de 
 3Fraunhofer Center 
College Park Maryland, USA 
+1 240 487 2904  
fshull@fc-md.umd.edu   ABSTRACT
 Adapting new software processes and practices in
 organizational 
and academic environmen
ts requires training the developers and 
validating the applicability of the newly introduced activities. 
Investigating process conformance during training and 
understanding if programmers are able and willing to follow the 
specific steps are crucial to evaluating whether the  process 
improves various software  product 
quality factors. In this paper 
we present a process model independent approach to detect 
process nonconformance. Our approach is based on non-

intrusively collected data captured by a version control system 
and provides the project manager w
ith timely updates. Further, we 
provide evidence of the applicability of our approach by 

investigating process conformance 
in a five day training class on 
eXtreme Programming (XP) practices at the Leibniz Universität 

Hannover. Our results show that th
e approach enabled researchers 
to formulate minimal intrusive methods to check for conformance 

and that for the majority of the investigated XP practices 
violations could be detected. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.8 [Software Engineering
]: Metrics Œ 
process metrics.  
General Terms Management, Measurement, Human Factors, Verification. 
Keywords
 Process conformance, XP programming, process improvement 
1. INTRODUCTION Introducing new processes and practices in industrial 
environments is an essential 
component of improving workflow, 
reducing the cost of a project 
and accomplishing quality goals. 
Whenever a manager decides to introduce a new process, it raises 
questions of whether the developers can follow the specific steps 
and activities defined, and whether 
the process itself is applicable 
in the target environment. As a first step, the development team 

should be trained in the new process to guarantee a common 
understanding of the definition a
nd to equip personnel with the necessary skills. In some cases the training might be delivered by 
a theoretical lecture with an appli
cation of the process to the target 
project, in others cases the 
training might include practical 
exercises to strengthen the understa
nding. In either case it is worth 
investigating if developers are complying with the specifics of the 

process to validate that the process is indeed executed as 
expected. If a process focuses on improving the quality or cost of 
the final product then not confor
ming with its definition will most 
likely produce a different result.  
In order to uncover process confor
mance violations (i.e. situations 
not conforming to the process™ definition), methods are needed that fulfill a range of requirements.  
First, the methods should be gene
ral enough to investigate a wide 
range of processes, practices, me
thods, and techniques at different 
stages and levels of the soft
ware development lifecycle. A 
successful approach should be able to handle different definitions 
of process, ranging from informal one
s given as text to stricter and 
more formal ones expresse
d through a process modeling language. Further, most processes need to be tailored to the 
specific environment. Numerous project variables, such as team 
size, system size and type, implementation language and 
environment can influence how the steps are carried out and the 
expected process results of the process. The method for assessing process conformance should also be tailorable as well. 
Second, the cost and overhead of the data collection activities to 
investigate process conformance should be minimal and ideally 
should make use of data already collected by 
the development team. Examples for such data bases are version control systems 

that are primarily used to coordina
te development efforts. Further, 
bug and issue tracking systems can provide insight into process 

relevant activities. One reason to minimize additional data 
collection is to avoid any interference with the studied process. 
For example, if developers need to collect too much data 
manually, they might be distracted
 from carrying out the expected 
steps of the process. Or, if developers are actively watched they 

might follow the steps more precisely during the time of 
observation but not afterwards. This effect is known as the Hawthorne effect [1] in 
experimental studies.   Another requirement is that the 
method should give insights into the different levels of process execution. We consider two layers 
as important. A well-define
d process describes (a) 
what steps 
should be followed and in which order (syntactic layer) and (b) 

how these steps should be carried
 out qualitatively (semantic 
layer). For example, the first XP 
practice we investigated in our 
case study was 
Test-Driven-Development.
 The process requires 
developers to (a) implement one or more test cases prior to the 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ESEM™10
, September 16-17, 2010, Bolzano-Bozen, Italy. 
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0039-01/10/09–$10.00. 
  associated implementation class and (b) to engineer useful and 
complete test cases that test 
the implementation thoroughly. Both 
the syntactic and the semantic layer can be adhered to 

independently: developers mi
ght follow the steps but still 
implement poor or even useless test cases, and they might 
implement good test cases but in 
the wrong order (i.e. write their 
test cases after the implementati
on). A good approach will be able 
to detect non conformance on both layers. 
A last characteristic of a method to assess conformance is how 
timely the method is in reporting 
violations to the manager. 
Immediate feedback enables the recognition of risks to a 

successful process execution early, allowing the initiation of 

appropriate counter m
easures. As an example, developers might 
need to be reminded from time to time to follow certain steps, or a 

changing project environment (e.g. a close deadline) might affect the process execution quality. 
Our approach was designed with 
these goals in mind. Related 
work is described in Section 2 followed by a step by step 
description of our method in Section 3. A practical example 
demonstrating  the usefulness and 
limitations of our approach is 
presented in Section 4. The stud
y was part of a practical XP 
programming course and investigates the conformance to three 
popular XP practices. We found significant violations of the 

practices as taught. Section 5 di
scusses the results and Section 6 
offers concluding remarks.  
2. RELATED WORK 
The need to check for process conformance has been widely noted 
in the field of software pr
ocess improvement and quality 
management. Various ISO st
andards emphasize process conformance: ISO 9000 recommends we ﬁinitiate action to 
prevent the occurrence of any nonconformities relating to product, 
process and quality systemﬂ [2] 
and ISO 12207 on software life 
cycle processes states ﬁIt shall be assured that those life cycle 

processes (...) comply with the contract and adhere to the plansﬂ 
[3].  
There is further evidence that we cannot assume that processes are 
always executed the way they were intended to be. As one 
example, in an empirical study 
investigating reading techniques 
conducted by Lanubile and Vissagio [4] the researchers found that 

ﬁ (...) less than one third of Checklist reviewers could be trusted to 
have used the checklist and one fifth of the PBR reviewers could 
be trusted to have followed the assigned scenario.ﬂ They 
concluded that ﬁThis experiment provides evidence that process 
conformance issues play a critical role in the successful 
application of reading techniques
 and more generally, software 
process tools.ﬂ One approach for assessing conformance was proposed by Cook 
and Wolf [4,6]. They use an even
t based framework that expresses 
the expected process as a finite state machine (FSM). An event 

stream representing the observed process can then be compared to 
the FSM and deviations can be 
found. Several string distance 
metrics can then be used to express the difference between the 

observed event sequence and the expected model. The work 
focuses on the syntactic level of conformance. Building upon this 
is the work of Huo, Zhang, and Jeffrey [7] that further introduces 
the idea of an iterative process refinement. Other approaches [20] 
use temporal logic to detect deviations on the syntactic layer.  
A model that is able to give live feedback has been proposed by 
Thomson et al.[21]. Their work 
also uses conditions checked 
during process execution to detect violations. However, the 
approach presented here extends live conformance checking of a 

method for defining and evolving 
the process and rules to be 
checked. Further, this work provides evidence through a case 

study with real developers. 
An approach to detect nonconformance on the semantic layer of 
process execution has been previously proposed in [8]. The idea 
presented in this work is to define upfront an expected time 
measure and an appropriate quality measure for process 
execution. These measures can then be compared to the actual, 

observed ones and a deviation vector can express the distance 
between both of them.  
Our own work [9] has focused on applying our model to detect 
nonconformance in process execution in a large scale industrial 
project. Our approach places fewer restrictions on the formalism 

to define the expected process and,
 as we will show in this work, 
captures syntactic and semantic aspects of process execution. 
2.1 Agile Conformance Agile methods claim to have some
 distinguishing advantages over 
conventional software development methods [10,11], but little 
work exists about measuring conformance to agile practices. With 
risk management being the key motivation for using agile 
practices, measuring conformance 
is important for evaluating, 
whether these risks are really tackled.  
Schwaber and Beedle give process related metrics that can be 
used for measuring conformance to Scrum [11]. They focus on 
ﬁsprint signaturesﬂ in the shape of burndown charts. A burndown 
chart shows the remaining estimated workload. Nonconformance 
to agile practices can be deduced from these charts but it is not the 
primary focus and there is 
no support measurement.  Cohn 
discusses measuring the performance in agile environments [12]. 

The focus is on estima
ting, planning, and tracking, rather than 
process conformance. In [10] Kent
 Beck discusses collective code 
ownership in detail. He claims the following effects of collective 
ownership:  Complex code does not live very long, because people 
refactor code they cannot easi
ly understand. Often,  it does 
not even enter the system, because nobody would write 

complex code that could not be justified: Developers know 
that other team members will be reviewing their code in a 
very short amount of time.  
 Knowledge is spread around the team, because it is unlikely 

that there is any part of 
the system only two people know 
about. This reduces project ri
sk (which is the primary 
motivation for using XP in [10]). 
Beck does not give any support for these claims, apart from 

common sense arguments, and claims that all practices in XP 
should be ﬁturned to ten,ﬂ i.e. 
that conformance to the textbook 
practices should be achieved [10]. But he does not provide 
objective measures on how to find 
out whether a practice actually 
is at level ten or not. Krebs and Williams define the conformance 

to agile practices through a maturity measure [13]. In their work, 
the maturity levels are defined relatively (i.e. 10 is more agile than 
8). Resulting assessments of prac
tice conformance will always be 
very subjective, because the questionnaire is based on subjective 

questions.  3. APPROACH The approach presented in this paper follows the four step 
iterative model presented in Figure 1. In the following subsections 
we illuminate each step. We will explain the inputs and outputs of 
each step, and the roles that are involved. Primarily three different 
roles are important in our model: 
1. Process manager: the person(s) interested in studying 
the practice/process. 
2. Process enactors (developers): the person(s) performing 
the practice/process. 
3. Conformance analyst: the 
person(s) investigating 
process conformance. 
In small scale efforts the first and third role might be assigned to 

the same person. Ideally, to limit bias issues, the conformance 
analysis should be performed by
 a different person than the 
manager, or - even better - externally by a third party group.  
 3.1 Define Conformance Rule 
The initial step to be performed aims at creating a common 
understanding of the details of the 
expected, planned process. The 
process manager makes this knowledge explicit by filling in the 
appropriate fields in the process conformance template (Table 1). 
How the process is represented (e.g. through a formal or verbal 
representation) is up to the mana
ger. Therefore various formal 
process modeling languages, such as finite state machines or Petri 
Nets [18] are compatible with the template. Also, rather weakly 
formulated processes that include no specific steps can be 
expressed. As example, in a cu
rrent study with an industrial 
partner the manager formulated that ﬁ
All developers should write 
test cases!
ﬂ. The requirement to the definition is solely that it 
allows the conformance analyst to decide if certain patterns in the 
collected data represent a viola
tion of the process definition or 
not. Secondly, the conformance analyst and the manager will list 

all data and measures that are already implicitly collected in the 
project. Typical examples are code management systems, issue-, 

bug-, and effort tracking systems. The third step is to 
connect the data and the definition in order 
to formulate process violations. 
Both roles have to think and decide about ﬁ
Which (temporal) 
patterns in the collected data will
 violate the process definition?
ﬂ and ﬁWhich metric values are indi
cators of process violations?
ﬂ The first question aims at the syntactical aspects of the process 

(e.g. the process might be described as a partially ordered set of 
activities to be performed). The second question focuses on violations on the semantic level 
(i.e. how/with what quality the 
process is performed).  
The semantic definition of the pr
ocess might not be always clear 
from the beginning on. For example,
 the investigated XP practice 
Collective Code Ownership
 claims that knowledge about the code 
should be collectively 
owned and the loss of a few programmers 
should not lead to project failur
e. However, the practice does not 
define in detail how resistant the project should be to loss of 
personnel, i.e. how many programmers are expendable exactly, 
and how much code should be covered by the remaining 
programmers. In such cases, 
the manager and conformance 
analyst will have to choose a fi
rst guess for those parameters and 
iteratively refine them 
if necessary. A second strategy is to let the 
practice run for a short time and derive the parameters from the 
observed data. This can be understood as the derivation of the 
process from its execution. Of course, this only works under the 
assumption that the process is performed appropriately.  
If not enough process violations can be defined using the 
implicitly collected data then it is up to the manager to decide on 
additional data and metric collection activities, such as self-
reported data. These can be goal a
nd priority driven (e.g. by using 
a GQM approach [14]) by first listing the violations that one 

would be most interested in, and secondly defining the data and 
measures that have to be collec
ted to detect these violations. However, the collection activ
ities should have the goal of 
minimizing (or better, avoiding) an
y kind of interference with the 
studied process. 
3.2 Detect Conformance Violation After the violations have been
 defined automated tools and 

algorithms can be built to detect and extract them from the 
collected data. These tools might, for example, mine code 
repository data or self reported 
data (assuming it is available in 
electronic form). The algorithms can then be executed on a 

recurring basis. The frequency of execution might vary from one 
Table 1: Process Conformance Template 
Process Name 
A unique identifier. 
Process Focus Quality attributes that the process should 
improve: e.g. maintainability, correctness 
Process Description Formal or verbal description of the process.   
Collected Data List of implicitly, manually, and automatically 

collected data.  Process Violations 
Syntactic: Which temporal patterns in the data violate the 
steps of the process? 
Semantic: 
Which measures and thresholds derived from 
the collected data indicating low quality of 
process execution? 
 Figure 1: The nonconformance process at top level 
 process to another; in our case 
study we used daily intervals to 
generate a list of violations, since one day matched one XP 
development iteration.  
3.3 Gathering Supplemental Information Once the list of violations has been made available, the process 
conformance analyst should augmen
t the violations with more detail. This supplem
ental information can include related 
quantitative measures as well as data of a qualitative nature (e.g. 
through interviews with developers). The goal of the 
augmentation activity is to support the following rule and process 
improvement step. It is necessary for multiple reasons and 
purposes: (1) The violations identified can be
 false positives, e.g. if the 
conformance rules are not yet fully 
tailored to the environment, or 
if their definition is incomplete. For example, our first version of 
the Test-Driven Development dete
ction assumed that all Java 
compilation units should be accompa
nied by a unit test class. 
Investigating the violations more cl
osely, we realized that specific 
types of units, such as Interface classes, do not require test cases
1. These interfaces were therefore falsely identified as violations. 
This fact was included in the second version of the conformance 
rule. (2) Secondly, it is important to ge
t insight into the cause-effect 
relationships among violations. Only
 finding root causes can help 
us understand why a process is 
not being followed and what 
actions have to be taken to impr
ove the situation. Some of these 
causes might be found through further inspection of the collected 
data. Others might require interv
iewing the developers to reveal 
the reasons for not following the process under investigation. 
3.4 Improve Rule and Process The fourth and final step in the sc
heme is to make decisions about 
how to improve the agreement
 between the executed and expected 
practice. There are essentially three ways to reduce the number of 
violations for the next iteration: 
(1) In the case of false positives
, the conformance analyst will 
have to adjust the rules for detection in the process template (e.g. 
through modification of the algorithms in step 2 or changing the 
thresholds for metrics). 
(2) In settings that allow modification of the process itself the 
manager might decide to change or tailor the expected process so 
it better fits the executed one. 
(3) In settings that do not allow 
process modification the manager 
might put additional effort into 
the enforcement of the process. 
Process enforcement can either be done by reminding the subjects 
to execute the necessary activities or by the use of mechanisms 

that enforce the process (e.g. through tools).  
3.5 Knowledge Packaging and Transfer 
Once the conformance process has gone through multiple 

iterations, the rules should become more and more stable. These 
rules, in form of the template in Table 1, now represent 
transferable knowledge
. A new project inside the organization can 
benefit from using optimized rules from prior projects. In 

experimentation a study replica
tion can make use of the rules formulated in a prior experiment
. Therefore, it is necessary to 
                                                                
 1 Java interface classes solely de
fine function name
s, parameters, 
and return type, but implemen
t no testable functionality. 
store and package the final rules and, even better, all versions that 
led to the final rule, in an 
experience base
 [15]. The 
implementation of the experience base can vary from simply 

adding it to the appendix of an expe
rimental paper, to using more 
sophisticated electronic systems such as reports, data bases or web 
wikis.  3.6 Research Questions To test the feasibility and applicability of our method, we set up 
the following research questions: 
R1- Feasibility: 
Is the approach able to find nonconformance 
issues in process execution us
ing minimally intrusive methods? 
R2 - Correctness:
 Do these violations give useful insights and do they match the perceived conf
ormance of the developers? 
R3 - Steering:
  Can these violations be 
used to actively steer and 
improve process conformance? 
R4: Rule improvement: Can our initial rule set be iteratively 
refined and improved? 

R5: Quality Mapping:
 Does a lack of process conformance 
correlate with product quality? 

We conducted a case study to test
 our approach. The following 
section will give an overview of
 the study design, the collected 
data, and the results in relati
on to our research question.  
4. XP STUDY 
In order to show that the sugge
sted approach is feasible we 
conducted a case study. The study should help to answer the 
research questions given in S
ection 3, help in understanding where our process needs improveme
nt, and where its limits are. 
To address R1 (Feasibility) we chose to investigate three popular 
XP practices: 
1. Test-Driven Development 
2. Continuous Refactoring  
3. Collective Code Ownership 
Table 2: Process Conformance Template for Test-Driven-
Development (green/light grey font text are additions and 
modifications made to tailor the template) 
Pr. Name 
Test-Driven Development 
Pr. Focus 
Improved correctness. 
Process Description For each component (i.e. Java class) developers are 
supposed to create a JUnit test class (collection of test 

cases) prior to the development of the component.   
Collected 
Data Subversion code history. De
velopers are advised to 
use following file naming scheme for implementation 
and test classes: Implementation class:  
SomeName.java 
Test class:                    
SomeNameTest.java 
Process Violations 
Syntactic: (1) Implementation classes 
(but not interface classes)
 without test classes. 
Violation detection: Implementation class is checked into the Subversion 
repository before its according test class. 
 Semantic: 
(1) The line coverage of the test cases is below 70% 
(2) The branch coverage of the test cases is below 

70%  R2 (Correctness) was investigated by a comparison of the 
perceived conformance versus the measured one and R3 
(Steering) was evaluated using one instance where developers 
were actively advised to impr
ove conformance to a practice 
during project runtime. R4 and R5 were investigated internally by 
the team of conformance analysts
 during execution. Note that for 
none of the questions we are ab
le to produce statistically 
significant results due to the nature of the study.  
4.1 Study Design The case study took place as part of an XP class taught at the 
Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany (LUH). Conformance 
analysis was performed remotely 
at the University of Maryland, 
USA (UMD). In the first theoretical
 part of the course developers 
received lectures about agile de
velopment and XP basics. All but 
one of the XP practices were taught
 in this lecture on a theoretical 
level. The XP practice Test-D
riven Development was taught 
separately in a practical exercise. The second part of the course 

was a five day (eight hours per 
day) development project where 
the developers worked on building a software product in an - as 

close as possible - industrial envir
onment. On the first day the two 
customers introduced their visions, an initial technical spike was 

conducted, and the XP specific st
ory cards were created. The 
following 4 days were developm
ent iterations, each with a 
duration of one day. The 14 developers, 11 graduate students and 

3 undergraduate students without XP 
experience prior to the class, 
were split into two groups with seven developers each. Both 

groups developed a different product; in the following we will 
refer to them as team 
Zeit and team KlaRa in accordance with the 
names of the two products. The goal of 
Zeit
 was to build a time 
logging system. The system is current
ly in use in several software 
and research projects. 
KlaRa 
is a tool that helps coordinate room 
assignments during exam time at a university. The 
implementation language was Java 
in both cases. The course was not the first of its kind. It was already in its 5
th iteration. More 
details about the course design can be found in [16].  
Before the start of the programming project the researcher teams 
from LUH and UMD agreed to investigate the conformance of the 
three XP practices: Test-Driven Development, Collective Code 
Ownership, and Continuous Refactoring. Each of the three 
practices was translated into a process conformance template 
using the criteria specified in Table 1 (see Tables 2 to 4). Further, 
they agreed on the type of data to collect. Automatically and 
implicitly collected data was 
derived from the Subversion code 
repository that the subjects used to coordinate their work.  
Additionally, a small amount of 
manually collected data was 
captured. The researchers provided the developers with a special 
Subversion commit template that ha
d to be filled in every time 
they committed new code to the repository. As shown in Figure 2 

the following manually collected
 data was provided by the 
developers: 
 The names of the two programmers in a pair 
 The story card id that was implemented or changed by 

the commit 
 The type(s) of change(s) from the set {new feature, 
enhancement, refact
oring, bug-fix, test-fix, other}  
After each iteration of the XP project the researchers at UMD, 
who took the role of the conformance analysts in Figure 1, created a report with the results of steps 2 and 3 of the method presented 

in Section 3 (Figure 1).The report was sent to the researchers on 
site (process managers) before the start of the next iteration. 
There is a time difference of 6 hours between UMD and LUH. 

The researchers specifically planned to use this time to create the 
report and thus benefit from the global distribution of the two 
sites. From the German
 perspective, analysis
 was done overnight. 
The report included quantitative 
analysis describing how many 
violations occurred (Figure 1: step
 2), as well as visualizations to 
give better insight into which co
mponents are affected (e.g. Java 
classes not being developed according to the Test-Driven 

Development practice) and/or which developer violated the 
Table 4: Process Conformance Template for Collective 
Code Ownership  
Process Name 
Collective Code Ownership (Pair 
Programming + Pair Switching) 
Process Focus Code is collectively owned, high Truck Factor 
Process 
Description Pair Switching: subjects are supposed to 
switch their pair programming partner with 

each new story card and between iterations. 
Collected Data Manually: SVN commit template include 
name of programmers and story card number 
Process Violations 
Syntactic: (1) The same developer pair working together 
on two consecutive 
story cards  (2) The same developer pair working together 
on two consecutive 
iterations Semantic: 
(1) The project™s Truck 
Factor (explained later 
is low Figure 2: SVN commit template 
for additional data collection
Table 3: Process Conformance Template for Continuous 
Refactoring  Process Name 
Continuous Refactoring 
Process Focus  Improved maintainability
 (extendibility). Process Description Refactoring activities should be a continuous part 

of code development. 
Collected Data  Manually: SVN commit template includes 
change type (e.g. refactoring) 
 Implicitly: SVN data provides us with 
information about changes of architecture. 

Further Code Metrics /Code Smells can 
provide insight into decay of code.  
Process Violations 
Syntactic: (1) No refactoring activities in the commit 
template at all (during whole project) 
(2) Large refactoring only in a single stage (e.g. at 
the end of the project) 
Semantic: 
(3) Increasing amount of God Class code smells 
 practice (e.g. for Pair Switching). Further, the report included 
descriptions of how the violation detection rules were tailored over time (Figure 1: step 4). Optimizing the rules of the templates 
was done by a manual in depth an
alysis of false negatives and 
false positives (Figure 1: step 3). A typical example of a false 

positive was the Java Interface classes that were wrongly marked 
as violations in the first version of the Test-Driven Development 
template. 
It was up to the process managers at LUH how to use the reports 
to intervene with the ongoing projects. They discussed the 
violations that were found in
 the Test-Driven Development 
practice with the subject groups 
before the third iteration and 
advised them to better adhere to the practice. 
After the last iteration the devel
opers received an end of study 
questionnaire that asked how well they followed the different XP 
practices. To increase the chance 
of receiving the most honest 
answers developers had to provi
de neither their name nor the project they were working on. 
4.2 Study Results The following paragraphs summarize the data that was collected 
during the study, the violations that were found, and the self 
reported data the developers provided through the end of study 
questionnaire.  4.2.1 Test-Driven Development 
Table 5 shows the results for the two groups (
Zeit and KlaRa
). The conformance level (in the Table abbreviated with ﬁConf. 

Levelﬂ) for Test-Driven-Development was calculated as follows: 
for each of the four iterations the newly developed Java classes (in 
Table ﬁNew Classesﬂ) were considered and the analysts checked 
whether unit test classes were created according to the practice. 
The conformance level then describes in how many cases the 
developers followed the test first practice. As example, if the 
practice is followed all times 
the conformance level would be 
100%, if the practice is followed ha
lf of the time the level would 
be 50%, and so on. 
The data shows that the developers of project 
Zeit
 followed the 
practice in only 27.3% of the cases 
in the first iteration and scored 
even lower (14.3%) in the second 
iteration. The developers were 
made aware of their rather poor performance at the beginning of 
the third iteration, in a stand 
up meeting, and improved their 
conformance to 60% after iteration three, and 66% after the fourth 

and last iteration. The 
KlaRa
 team shows better and more stable conformance levels. They scored between 50% (iteration 3) and 

83% (iteration 4) conformance leve
l. Overall, both groups adhered 
in about 50% of the cases to the practice. 
The end of study questionnaire da
ta show a similar result. The 
developers were asked how often th
ey wrote a test case before the 
implementation. Subjects could answer on a scale from ﬁNeverﬂ, 
ﬁSometimesﬂ, ﬁMost of the timeﬂ,
 and ﬁAlwaysﬂ. Table 6 shows 
the results. No subject said the practice was followed all the time, 

and only 29% of all developers said that they followed it most of 
the time. The majority said they followed it sometimes (57%) or 
never (14%).  
4.2.2 Continuous Refactoring 
The second practice under investigation was continuous 
refactoring. In comparison to the 
other investigated practices the 
process violations were rather weakly formulated (see Table 3). 
The reason for this was that no good description could be found 
that describes how much or with what frequency refactoring 
should be done according to the 
XP practice. Developers are 
asked to refactor code whenever they feel it is necessary to adapt 

the design to new requirements or to improve maintainability. 
Therefore, we measured the number of times the developer teams 
indicated in the Subversion template that they refactored. The 
objective was to find out if subjects refactor at all and if there 
were differences in the amount of
 refactorings between the two 
groups. In addition to the self reported data the number of code 

smells was measured, in particular the God Class code smell. 
Inspection of God Classes can give
 insight if classes implement 
multiple responsibilities and grow too complex. We used the God 

Class identification strategies as defined by Marinescu and 
Lanza[22].  
The data in Table 7 shows that
 developers reported to have 
performed refactoring activities 
at a constant frequency. Both 
projects show about the same refactoring ratio: 19% (
Zeit
) and 24% (KlaRa) of all changes included the desired activity. Only 
two iterations did not include any 
refactoring activities (iteration 
three for team 
Zeit
, and iteration two for team 
KlaRa). In both projects the code smell analysis
 did not detect any God Classes 
during development. Therefore, 
violations of the practice as 
defined in Table 3 could not be detected. Even though the 
presented analysis could not find an
y violations, it helps to build a 
Table 7: Continuous Refactoring Results. 
 Zeit 
KlaRa 
Iterat. Commits 
Refac. Ratio Commits 
Refac. Ratio 1 11 4 36% 4 1 25% 2 7 2 29% 8 0 0% 
3 4 0 0% 
9 5 56% 4 15 1 7% 8 1 13% Totals 37 7 19% 
29 7 24% 
Table 5: Test-Driven Development Results. 
 Zeit 
KlaRa 
 Iteration New Classes Test First  Conf. Level (%)
 New Classes Test First  Conf. Level (%)
 1 11 3 27.3 
9 5 55.6 
2 7 1 14.3 
4 3 75.0 
3 5 3 60.0 
2 1 50.0 
4 3 2 66.7 
6 5 83.3 
Totals 26 9 34.6 
21 14 66.7 
Combined Conf. Level (%)
                                               48.9
 Table 6: End of study quest
ionnaire answers for Test-
Driven Development How often did you write the test case 
before the implementation? 
Instances Percentage Never 2 
14% Sometimes 8 
57% Most of the time 
4 29% Always 0 0%  stronger baseline: the refactoring ratios from this study can be 
used to detect non conformance wh
en used as thresholds in a 
future study. Further, the self-reported data can help give the 

numbers more meaning. From th
e post-study questionnaire (Table 
8) one can see that seven developers said that they either ﬁ
neverﬂ refactored or that they refactored only ﬁ
one timeﬂ. The other seven 
subjects indicated to have done refactorings ﬁfew timesﬂ or ﬂwith 
every new story card
ﬂ. The answers indicate that the practice was 
not followed by all developers (a
t least three s
ubjects did not refactor as often as the practice recommends); therefore the 
computed refactoring ratios of 19% and 24% might be still below 
an optimal, desired ratio.  
4.2.3 Collective Code Ownership 
The third XP practice under investigation was Collective Code 
Ownership. The goal of the practice is to ensure that all 
developers collectively own the code
 to be able to make changes 
and that a loss of a small set of programmers does not lead to 

project failure. The practice is not defined as a set of activities that 
have to be followed; it rather is a goal, i.e. a desirable state, which 

is reached through two other XP practices: Pair Programming and 
Pair Switching (particularly switching pairs regularly during 
iterations). 
To detect nonconformance in 
Collective Code Ownership two 
measures were investigated: 
1. Syntactic: Adherence to the activities defined by Pair 
Switching. 2. Semantic: Assessment of the project™s truck factor  
As for pair switching, we note th
at the process managers required 
that programming pairs were reshu
ffled at the beginning of each 
development day (i.e. each iteration). That means that they partly 

enforced the pair switching practice.  
1. Pair switching
 showed a significant amount of violations. 
Figure 3 visualizes the pairs working together on story cards for 
each of the four iterations in project KlaRa. A paired point in the 
figure represents a programmer 
pair working on one new story card. The points are ordered along the x axis by time and day. 

Points with a cross mark indicate that the same pair worked on 
more than one story card consecutiv
ely (i.e. a viola
tion against the 
process definition). From the s
econd iteration on, violations 
indicate that developers did not switch their teammates as they 
were supposed to between two st
ory cards. During the second, 
third and fourth iteration they ge
nerated nine violations against 
the practice. For example, Subj
ectK2 and SubjectK3 worked on 
two story cards in a row during the second iteration, and so did 

SubjectK4 and SubjectK6 during the same iteration. The graph for 
KlaRa further shows that the pairs 
never
 change during an 
iteration (i.e. one development 
day): the subjects only switched 
their partners at the beginning of each day (which was enforced 
by the process managers).  
For project Zeit
 (Figure 4) the pair switching was followed the 
first three iterations
 without violations. Developers did as 
instructed and switched with every new story card. Only during 
the last iteration, where they worked on a larger amount of story 
cards, five violations against the practice could be detected.  
Again, the reported conformanc
e from the questionnaire shows a similar result (Table 9). Only 
one developer agreed to have 
followed the practice all the time.  

2. The Truck Factor
 Analysis
 gives insight into how well the 
code is collectively owned at the 
end of the projects. For this we define (to our knowledge for the fi
rst time) an analysis technique 
that builds upon the data collected through the code repository to 
assess the 
Truck Factor
. In the box 
Truck Factor Metric
 we give details on how this analysis can 
be performed. As pointed out in Section 3.1 one might not have al
ways a clear understanding what 
the expected measures should look like in such cases (i.e. which 

truck factor the practice should produce when followed). 
Therefore, the data was analyzed with two objectives. The first 
objective was to compare the two projects to see if their truck 
factors differ. The second objective was to compare the numbers 
to three non-XP projects that do not specifically focus on 
introducing processes to improve
 Collective Code Ownership. Figure 5 shows the according truck factor characteristics for both 
XP projects. The worst case (i.e. Min), average case, and best case 
(i.e. Max) scenarios for Zeit and KlaRa are plotted. The graph 
shows that Zeit has better worst case performance than KlaRa: 
assuming a required code coverage of 80% Zeit can lose four out 
Table 8: Questionnaire answers for Continuous 
Refactoring How often did you refactor? Instances Percentage 
Never 3 
21% One time 
4 29% Few times 
6 43% With every new story card 
1 7% Table 9: Questionnaire results for Pair Switching 
How often did you switch pairs 
according to the pair switching 
practice? Instances Percentage 
Never 1 7% Sometimes 3 21% Often 9 65% Always 1 
7% Figure 4: Pair-Switching for team KlaRa.  
Figure 4: Pair-Switching for team Zeit 
 of seven programmers, where KlaRa can only lose three 
developers. The average case performance is almost equal with a 
slight advantage for Zeit. Figure 5 also shows the impact of pair 
programming: the loss of one prog
rammer can always be covered 
by the programmers she/he worked in a pair with. The code 

coverage for a truck number of one is in both projects 100% (in 
worst, average, and best case). 
The second question is how these 
graphs compare to conventional non-XP projects. The motivation 

for this analysis was the theory th
at if the goal of the XP practice 
is reached the collective owners
hip should be improved compared 
to projects not performing such 
processes. Our non-XP candidates were a large scale 2 year develo
pment project using the Waterfall 
lifecycle that we are describing in more detail in [9] and the 
development of two research tools developed at the two 
participating universities: CodeVi
zard and HeRa (a requirements 
editor mostly developed by on
e programmer [19]). HeRa was 
included to demonstrate what a lower bound Truck Factor could 
look like.  
Figure 6 shows the worst case scenario for all five projects and 
provides the first evidence that the three non-XP projects have 
significant lower (i.e. worse) truck factors: the loss of two 
developers leads in all three non-XP projects to a loss of at least 
40% (and up to 85%) of code knowledge whereas the XP projects 
would still preserve 85% (KlaRa
) and 92% (Zeit) of knowledge. 
In the end of study questionnai
re subjects were asked what percentage of the final system they feel to have worked on and if 

they think there are parts that they have worked on alone with 
their partner. The results are summarized in Table 10 and Table 
11.  4.3 Discussion of XP Conformance Results The results of the study show that there were many process 

conformance violations in the process execution in the studied 
environment. Developers especi
ally had problems following the 
Test-Driven Development practice and one group did perform 

poorly in following Pair Switching.  
The results from the end of study questionnaire show that subjects 
are aware of not following a particular practice. When they were 
asked later why they did not follow Test-Driven Development 
they answered that ﬁ
the implementation of new features to satisfy 
customer needs had a higher priority than following the steps of 

the processﬂ.  5. Addressing the Research Questions 
For the stated research questions of our approach we make 
following conclusions: 
R1 Feasibility:
  We were able to translate three XP practices into 
our scheme, to collect data non-i
ntrusively with minimal manual 
effort, and formulate and detect vi
olations against these. For most of the semantic violations thresholds and measures were found 
and tailored during the executi
on of the processes. Semantic violations seem to be harder to define upfront. The study 

produced a set of conformance rules (Tables 2-4) that might be adapted for other studies.  
R2 Correctness: 
The perceived conformance of the subjects fits 
the measured one to some extent. 
For two practices we could find 
a significant amount of violations and subjects admitted to have 

not followed the practice all times. 
R3 Steering: 
Subjects of team Zeit were advised to improve their 
conformance to Test-Driven Development one time before 
iteration 3. The impact is visible in the conformance level (Table 
5). The number of violations was 
lowered, but they still occurred 
after that.  
Table 10: End of study 
questionnaire answers for 
Collective Code Ownership: question 2 
Are there parts you have worked 

on alone (with your partner)? 
Instances Percentage 
Yes 6 43% No 8 57% Table 11: Questionnaire answers for Collective Code 
Ownership: question 1 
How much percent of the system 
have you been working on? 
Instances Percentage 
<25 % 1 7% 
25-50% 5 36% >50-75% 5 36% >75%, <100% 2 14% 
100% 1 7%  Figure 5: Truck Factor 
Chart for Zeit and KlaRa 
Figure 6: Worst case scenarios for 5 different projects 
including the two XP projects (Zeit, KlaRa). 
 R4 Rule Improvement:
 Our study shows that we could improve 
and adjust the rules to the environment and practices. For all the 
rules we did not have a good under
standing of the se
mantic levels before the study but were able to
 derive measures and thresholds during the execution. Further we were able to catch some special 
cases (i.e. Java interface classes) to improve the automated 
detection of violations. 
R5 Quality Mapping: 
So far we were unable 
to find relationships 
between the adherence to a process and the resulting quality 
attributes of the product. However,
 the truck factor analysis gave 
insight into how a practice can he
lp to reduce risks in a project. 
The KlaRa team violated the Pair Switching practice more often 

than Zeit and achieved a lower worst case Truck Factor. The 
major finding related to the truck factor risk is that the XP 
practices Pair Programming and Pair Switching seem indeed to be 
linked to a better truck factor when compared to conventional 
non-XP projects. Future investiga
tion is needed to understand if 
process nonconformance results in lower quality products.
 6. DISCUSSION OF VALIDITY 
The study presented has internal and external threats to validity. 

Since the work™s main contribution is considered the generic 
approach to detect conformance violations we will focus on 
discussing threats that are introduced by the approach itself (and 
not the threats related to drawing conclusions about the 
applicability of the inspected XP practices in other environments). 
The major internal threat is the correctness of the measured data, 
especially the manually collected 
data. Subjects might have not 
accurately reported having performed refactoring activities, or 

about having switched their pair 
programming partners. Evidence 
that this was not the case can be found in the post study 

questionnaire data: if developers w
ould have intentionally lied in 
order to improve conformance then it is likely that they would 
have done the same when filling in the questionnaire. Further the 
data extracted for Test-Driven 
Development from the repository 
has some limitation in time resolution. Since the detection can 
only check the test-first order at 
check in time, developers might 
have still developed test cases after the implementation but 
checked in both files together at 
the same time into the Subversion repository. Therefore, we might mi
ss violations in those cases (in 
other words: the conformance to the practice could be even lower). Considering external validity we
 used methods of automatic and 
manual data collection that are a
pplicable as well in industrial 
environments that use version 
control systems. Further the 
presented approach was shown to be capable of adapting three 
TRUCK FACTOR METRIC: 
The truck factor has been defined by 
the eXtreme Programming Community as: ﬁ
The number of people on your team that have to be hit with a tr
uck before the project is in serious trouble
ﬂ [17]. A high truck factor is
 desirable sinc
e it lowers 
the risk of project failure when losing personnel. Collective Code
 Ownership is the XP practice which helps in avoiding a low t
ruck factor [10], situations where a small set of pr
ogrammers owns a large part of the code base 
exclusively
. To our knowledge, this measure 
has been proposed informally only so far and we are the first to
 derive this number by using in
formation about code ownership f
rom a 
code repository. The key idea of our analysis
 is that a source component (e.g. a Java
 file) in the repository is collectively o
wned by the 
developers who worked on that component. Fo
r the purpose of simplicity one can assume th
at all developers who edited the file h
ave 
knowledge about it. More sophisticated methods to
 assign ownership have been proposed [23][24]. 
The table on the right side exemplifies a toy system with three 
developers (A,B,C) and three compone
nts (File 1, File 2, File 3). 
After extracting which develope
rs modified which components 
from the code repository data we can generate different scenarios 
where we assume that a certain subset of developers has been 
ﬁhit by a truckﬂ. For each component we can decide if the 
remaining developers have knowledge about it (light cells with 
ﬁ+ﬂ sign) or not (dark cells wi
th ﬁ-ﬁ sign). A coverage number 
covx(n) then describes the percentage of the components that 
would still be known by the remaining developers if n developers 

are absent. There are three types of coverage numbers: (1) the 
minimum (x = min), i.e. the 
worst case, is the remaining 
coverage when the set of developers with the most exclusive 

knowledge leaves, (2) the average (x = avg) coverage, and (3) 
maximum (x = max), i.e. the best case, is the coverage when the 
set of developers with the leas
t exclusive knowledge leaves. The 
three coverage curves can be plot
ted as shown in the lower figure 
on the right to visualize the 
truck factor characteristics
 of a project. To define the truck fa
ctor (i.e. a single number) the 
manager has to define a target 
threshold for code coverage. The 
truck factor can then be read from the chart by finding the 

intersection of the coverage numbe
r with one of the three curves. 
Typically, a project manager who wants to lower the risk of a 

project would be most interested in the worst case (i.e. x = min) 
curve since it shows the developers that are least dispensable. 
 Example analysis with 3 files and 3 developers 
 Truck factor characteristics: x-
axis shows the number of missing 
developers 
Therefore, we define the truck factor as:    
tfx, c  =  max {n | cov
x(n) 
 c} For example, the worst case 60% coverage 
truck factor of our example would be:   
tfmin, 60%
 = max {n | cov
min
(n) 
 60%} = 1 
 different XP practices (and with [9] two different non XP 
processes). Still the question rema
ins unanswered to how many it 
can be applied of the wide ra
nge of processes, practices, 
techniques, and methods already proposed in the software 
engineering literature.  
7. CONCLUSION  
In this paper we presented a step by step approach to investigate 

conformance issues in process execution. We tested the ideas in 
an XP classroom study and illustra
ted that it is possible to find 
conformance violations using 
minimally intrusive methods. 
Further, we provide evidence that 
this can be done remotely by an 
independent research group. Our findings suggest that 

nonconformance is indeed an issue present when teaching new 

processes to developers, and that
 it should be assessed to better 
understand applicability and effectiveness of such processes. As 

part of the presented approach, we provide a common template to 
facilitate knowledge transfer across 
software projects and studies.  
Last, we have learned useful lessons during the execution of our 

model. The biggest challenge was 
to find definitions for the XP practices that contained enough de
tail. In all cases, we had to 
define and iterate the semantic 
properties ourselves. Further, we 
had to define the truck factor
 as a measurable metric.  
We have started to work with an
 industrial partner to investigate 

nonconformance in a long term study. Future work will focus on 
actively tailoring our templates and the partner™s processes to 
improve conformance and investig
ate the relations
hips between 
conformance and product quality (R5).  
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
This research was supported by NSF grant CCF 0916699, 

ﬁMeasuring and Monitoring Technical Debt ﬁ. 
9. REFERENCES  
[1] Roethlisberger, Fritz J., and W.
 J. Dickson. Management and 
the Worker. Harvard University Press, 1939. 
[2] Quality systems - Model for qua
lity assuranc
e in design, 
development, production, in
stallation and servicing. 
International Organization fo
r Standardization, 1993. 
[3] Information Technology - Soft
ware life cycle processes. 
International Organization fo
r Standardization, 1995.  
[4] Lanubile, F. and Visa
ggio, G., ﬁEvaluating Defect Detection 
Techniques for Software Requirements Inspectionsﬂ, ISERN 
Report no. 00-08, 2000.  
[5] Cook, J. E. and Wolf, A. L.
 1998. Discovering models of 
software processes from event-based data. ACM Trans. 

Softw. Eng. Methodol. 7, 3 (Jul. 1998), 215-249.  
[6] Cook, J. E. and Wolf, A. L. 
Software process validation: 
quantitatively measuring the correspondence of a process to a 

model. ACM Trans. S. E. Meth.
 8, 2 (Apr. 1999), 147-176. 
[7] Huo, M., Zhang, H., and Jeffe
ry, R. 2006. An exploratory 
study of process enactment as input to software process 
improvement. In 
Proceedings of the 2006 international 
Workshop on Software Quality
 .WoSQ '06. ACM, New 
York, NY, 39-44. 
[8] S. Sørumgård. ﬁVerification of Process Conformance in 
Empirical Studies of Software Developmentﬂ. Ph.D. thesis, 
Norwegian University of Sc
ience and Technology, 1997. 
[9] Zazworka, N. Basili,V.R., a
nd Shull. F. ﬁTool Supported 
Detection and Judgment of Nonconformance in Process 
Executionﬂ  in Proceedings of ESEM 2009, 312-223, 
October 16-15, 2009  
[10] Kent Beck, Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 

Change, Addison Wesley 1999 
[11] Ken Schwaber and Mike Beedle, Agile Software 
Development with Scrum, Pearson Education 2001 
[12] Mike Cohn, Agile Estimation 
and Planning, Prentice Hall 
2007 [13] Krebs, William (2002): Turning the Knobs: A Coaching 
Pattern for XP through Agile Metrics.Springer, Lecture 

Notes on Computer Science 2418, 60-69 
[14] Basili, V. R. 1992 Software Modeling and Measurement: the 

Goal/Question/Metric Paradigm. Technical Report. 
University of Maryland at College Park.  
[15] Basili, V., Caldiera, G., and Rombach, D. Experience 
Factory. Encyclopedia of Software Engineering Volume 
1:469-476, Marciniak, J. ed
. John Wiley & Sons, 1994  
[16] Stapel, K., D. Lübke, and E. Knauss: Best Practices in 
eXtreme Programming Course Design. in Proceedings of 
30th International Conference 
on Software Engineering. 
2008. Leipzig, Germany,769-776. 
[17] Truck Factor Definition: 

http://www.agileadvice.com/archives/2005/05/truck_factor.h
tml, retrieved June 26
th, 2010 [18] Tadao Murata, ﬁPetri Nets: Properties, Analysis and 
Applicationsﬂ, in: Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 77, no. 4, 
April 1989 [19] Knauss, Eric.; Lübke, Daniel; 
Meyer, Sebastian, ﬁFeedback-
Driven Requirements Engi
neering: The Heuristic 
Requirements Assistantﬂ, ICSE'09, Formal Research 

Demonstrations Track, 2009, 587 - 590 
[20] Cugola, G., Di Nitto, E., Ghezzi, C., and Mantione, M. 1995. 
How to deal with deviations during process model 
enactment. In 
Proceedings of the 17th international 
Conference on Software Engineering
. ICSE '95. ACM, New 
York, NY, 265-273. 
[21] Sean Thompson, Torab Torabi, Purva Joshi, "A Framework 
to Detect Deviati
ons During Process Enactment," Computer 
and Information Science, ACIS 
International Conference on, 
pp. 1066-1073, 6th IEEE/ACIS International Conference on 

Computer and Information Science (ICIS 2007), 2007. 
[22] Marinescu, Radu; Lanza, Mich
elle (2006). Object-Oriented 
Metrics in Practice. Springer. 
[23] Anvik, J., Hiew, L., and Mu
rphy, G. C. 2006. Who should 
fix this bug?. In 
Proceedings of the 28th international 
Conference on Software Engineering
 (Shanghai, China, May 
20 - 28, 2006). ICSE '06. ACM, New York, NY, 361-370.  
[24] Hattori, L. and Lanza, M. 2009. Mining the history of 

synchronous changes to refine code ownership. In 
Proceedings of the 2009 6th IEEE international Working 
Conference on Mining Software Repositories
 (May 16 - 17, 
2009). MSR. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, 141-

150 