 Agile Method Tailoring in Distributed Enterprises: 
Product Owner Teams
Julian M. Bass
School of Computing Science and Digital Media
Robert Gordon University
Aberdeen,UK
j.m.bass@rgu.ac.uk
Abstract
Š
This paper explores practitioner descriptions of agile 
method tailoring in large-scale offshore or outsourced enterprise 
projects. Specifically, tailoring of the product owner role is 
discussed. The product owner identifies and prioritizes customer 
requirements. But in globalized projects, the product owner must 
reconcile large numbers competing business interests and generate 
prioritized requirements for many development teams. The study 
comprises 8 international companies in London, Bangalore and 
Delhi. Interviews with 46 practitioners were conducted between 
February 2010 and May 2012. A grounded theory approach was 
used to identify that product owner teams comprise nine roles: 
Groom, 
Prioritizer
, Release Master, Technical Architect, 
Governor, Communicator, Traveler, Intermediary and Risk 
Assessor. These product owner roles arbitrate between conflicting 
customer requirements, approve release schedules, make 
architectural design decisions, provide technical governance and 
disseminate information across teams. Understanding these roles 
will help agile coaches guide large scale agile teams. 
IndexTerms
Šagile software development,enterprise systems,
product owner.
I.I
NTRODUCTION
Problems with large scale software development projects 
can damage the reputation of well-known companies and 
challenge the ability of Governments to implement policy. In 
the UK for example, Santander UK plc had problems with an 
IT integration project during a take-over of a smaller bank  [1]. 
The adverse publicity this incident attracted, was not restricted 
to technology news outlets [2]. Further, Government decisions 
to change policies in relation to taxation or social security 
systems often imply large scale software implementations. The 
ability of Governments to implement large scale software 
projects has been questioned. In the UK, concern has been 
expressed regarding the Government's ability to implement a 
new social security payment system. For example, Liam Byrne 
MP during questions to the treasury said ﬁthe Universal Credit 
is late and over budget; there is widespread unease surrounding 
the implementation of the £2 billion [US $ 3.2 billion approx.] 
scheme™s IT systemﬂ [3]. Thus project teams on large scale 
projects are under considerable pressure to deliver successful 
outcomes. 
There is increasing practitioner interest in the adaptation of 
agile software methods to large, often geographically 
distributed, enterprise software development projects [4] [5] 
[6]. 
According to practitioners the three most important 
perceived agile principles are: (1) achievement of customer 
satisfaction through early and continuous delivery of valuable 
software, (2) business representative and development team 
members working together frequently throughout the project, 
and (3) face-to-face conversations are the most efficient way to 
convey information to, and within, the development team [7]. 
This is in broad agreement with proponents of Agile methods 
who argue that they improve team moral, resulting in enhanced 
productivity and improved responsiveness to customer needs, 
resulting in better software quality [8]. Empirical research 
suggests that while agile methods do improve job satisfaction, 
productivity and customer satisfaction there can be challenges 
with adoption for large and complex projects [9].
Efforts by the software engineering research community to
understand agile software engineering in practice has tended to 
conflate investigation of sm
aller companies and larger 
companies as if the pressures they face were the same, for 
example see [7] and [10]. The research presented here 
contributes to the literature on tailoring agile methods for use in 
large geographically distributed enterprise software projects, 
including five CMMI Level 5 certified offshore software 
development vendors. The overall research question for the 
study is ﬁhow do practitioners describe the tailoring of agile 
method roles and practices in large-scale geographically 
distributed enterprise software projects.ﬂ In particular, this 
paper focuses on the research question ﬁhow do practitioners 
describe enhancement and expansion of the product owner role 
to meet the needs of large-scale geographically distributed 
enterprise software projects.ﬂ
The paper is structured as follows. An overview of agile 
software development methods is provided, concentrating first 
on scrum, which was the most widely used technique in the 
surveyed companies, and then the product owner role. Next is a 
discussion of the research methods adopted, including the 
research sites, data collection and data analysis techniques 
used. The findings are provided showing how, in practice, 
2013 IEEE 8th International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-0-7695-5057-2/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2013.27154 companies scale agile methods to large enterprise projects. The 
findings address four aspects of agile method scaling: large 
team size, geographical distribution, technical complexity and 
domain complexity. Next, there is a discussion of the findings. 
Finally, conclusions and suggestions for future work are 
presented.
II.A
GILE 
M
ETHODS
There are a range of software development methods that 
can regarded as being agile including: Dynamic Systems 
Development Methods (DSDM) [11], Feature Driven Design 
[12], Crystal [13], Scrum [14], Extreme Programming (XP) 
[15] and more recently Lean Software Development [16].
XP has been associated with engineering practices such as 
test-driven development and pair programming [15]. Pair 
programming, where developers work together in a manner 
analogous to a pilot/co-pilot configuration, has been studied 
extensively [17] [18] [19]. 
In contrast with the engineering focus of XP, scrum has 
tended to focus on the orchestration and management of agile 
development [20]. Scrum, most commonly adopted by the 
company teams investigated in this study, is briefly outlined 
here. Scrum proposes short, focused periods of development 
called sprints.  Typically lasting between two and four weeks. 
Software requirements are captured, analyzed and prioritized in 
the form of brief textual, non-technical descriptions called user 
stories. The user stories are prioritized, before the start of each 
sprint, by a product owner who represents the strategic needs of 
the client. Stakeholders, including the development team 
members and the product owner, work together to create work 
estimates for each user story using a consensus-based scoring 
technique. The development team members decompose each 
user story into the constituent technical tasks necessary for 
implementation at the start of each sprint. Project team 
members communicate using a daily coordination meeting, the 
eponymous scrum. The scrum is traditionally conducted 
standing up, in a conscious effort to minimize the duration of 
the meeting. Team members are required to answer three 
questions: (1) ﬁwhat have you done since the last meeting?ﬂ, 
(2) ﬁwhat will you do between now and the next meeting?ﬂ and 
(3) ﬁwhat impediments that prevent your progress have you 
encountered or created for others?ﬂ 
Scrum teams are self-organizing, since team members 
collaborate to develop work estimates and can select user 
stories for implementation within the current sprint [21] [22]. 
Scrum emphasizes incremental software development using a 
ﬁfeatureﬂ team structure[14]. Feature team members tackle 
holistic development of end-to-end user story functionality 
[12]. This contrasts with traditional approaches that tend to 
hierarchically decompose systems into specialist architectural 
components such as user interface, business logic or 
persistence layer elements.  
An earlier study involving the author [23] focused on 
software development teams located in small and medium 
sized enterprises (companies with less than 250 employees and 
a turnove€50 m [24]). That study [23] convincingly 
illustrated a very different business context and market 
pressures from the large enterprise environment. Some agile 
proponents argue that agile methods must be holistically 
implemented in their entirety in order to achieve full benefits 
(for example [15] p. 149). However, the findings presented 
here suggest this is not always desirable in large projects.
A.Enterprise Agile
The challenges of scaling agile methods to large 
international projects have received attention from practitioners 
[4] [5] and [6]. A project case study suggests success is 
possible using scrum in a large-scale project setting [25]. A 
scrum of scrums approach has been advocated to scale to a 
large team size [4]. Several scrum teams are formed, each with 
a scrum master in the usual way. Here, each scrum team 
comprises 7-12 developers. Daily coordination meetings are 
held within each scrum team in
 the usual way. However, in 
addition the scrum masters attend a coordination meeting 
across the teams (the scrum of scrums). The scrum of scrums is 
used to tactically manage and coordinate the progress of 
iterations through the various scrum teams. During the scrum 
of scrums each scrum master will report: (1) ﬁwhat my team 
has done since the last meeting?ﬂ, (2) ﬁwhat my team will do 
between now and the next meeting?ﬂ and (3) ﬁwhat 
impediments that prevent your progress has my team 
encountered or created for others?ﬂ
In the related area of global software development, where 
geographical distribution is often -though not always an 
indicator of large scale -a meta study of research papers has 
been conducted [26]. The meta-study suggests the most 
researched agile practices are (1) continuous integration, (2) 
stand-up meetings, (3) pair programming, (4) retrospectives, 
(5) scrum of scrums,and (6) test-driven development [26].  To 
mitigate geographical distribution, multiple modes of 
communication support are available such as phone, web 
camera, teleconference, video conference, web conference, net 
meeting, email, shared mailing lists, instant messaging and 
short messaging service. A variety of collaboration techniques 
are available to scrum teams including: visits and periods of co-
located working, unofficial meetings, training activities and 
distributed documentation support tools to help alleviate 
sociocultural distance [27].   
B.Product Ownership
Scrum only defines three roles in its agile processes: the 
team, the scrum master and product owner [14]. The inclusion 
of product ownership in this short list indicates the central role 
product ownership plays in the overall software development 
processes. The product owner is central to the communication 
between customer and development teams [28]. The product 
owner is responsible for developing and maintaining the 
product backlog; the list of user stories that define the 
requirements for the project. In XP, the product ownership role 
is conducted by the on-site customer; a client representative 
that is available to the team on a full-time basis [15]. As agile 
155 methods scale to larger projects it becomes harder to image a 
senior executive being available to development teams full-
time.
III.M
ETHOD
This qualitative study of software engineering practice 
comprised 8 international companies and interviews with 46 
practitioners. 
A.Research  Sites 
The companies were selected from a population of large 
enterprises engaged in (typically both) on-shore and off-shore 
software development projects. The companies chosen had 
head office in Germany, India and USA. The turnover of the 
two largest companies are almost €8 billion and over US $1.5 
billion. The interviews were conducted in Bangalore, India 
(January 2010 and April 2011), London, UK (February 2010) 
and Delhi, India (May 2012). Altogether, there were 46 
practitioner interviews at 8 international companies, as shown 
in Table1. The companies investigated were involved in either 
off-shoring (companies B and F) or out-sourcing (companies 
A, C, D, E, G and H). Off-shoring is typically motivated by a 
desire to access and cultivate world-wide talent pools. Both off-
shoring and outsourcing offer lower cost resource pools. For 
example, Company B is a household name in the Internet 
business sector. Company B retains an in-house development 
capability in California but has built-up a large development 
team in India (aswell as other territories) to reduce costs while 
attracting a range of specialist skills. While Company F, with 
broad interests in the industrial products space has headquarters 
in Europe but also has research as well as development centers 
in India and elsewhere. Work is allocated according to the 
concentration of expertise into specialist groups within the 
enterprise (to avoid duplication of competencies throughout the 
organization). While the IT Services companies (companies A, 
C, D, G and H) are well-known vendors in the world-wide 
outsourcing sector. Selection of the companies and research 
study participants was through a snowball sampling technique 
([29]pg. 176; [30] Pg. 37). Initially, professional contacts 
provided access to the first study participants. Those 
participants then were able to enable access to other 
development teams and companies. Early phases of the study 
focused on participant breadth, at Companies A, B, C, F and G, 
getting access to a range of project teams and stakeholders with 
different perspectives. Participants ranged from Company C, 
one of whose defining characteristics is their adherence to agile 
TABLE I. P
ARTICIPATING 
C
OMPANIES
,I
NDUSTRY 
S
ECTORS AND 
I
NTERVIEWEE 
J
OB 
T
ITLES
Company
Sector
Interviewee Job Titles
Projects and Programs
Company A, Bangalore
IT Service Provider
Program Manager
Senior Project Manager
Team Member
Customer Relationship Management
Company B, Bangalore
Internet
Engineering Manager 
Product Manager (interviewed twice, Jan 
2010 and April 2011)
Web Mail
Web Calendar
Company C, Bangalore
Software Service ProviderDevelopment Manager
Rail Booking
Company D, Bangalore
(Offshore Provider to Company E)
Software Service ProviderProject Manager
Product Owner
Scrum Master (3)
QA Lead
Team Member
Marketing Campaign Management
Customer Relationship Management
Company E, London
Enterprise CRM
Program Manager
Project Manager
Director of Engineering
Banking
Marketing Campaign Management
Customer Relationship Management
Company F, Bangalore
IndustrialProducts
Scrum Master
Healthcare Instruments
Company G, Bangalore
IT Service Provider
Engagement Manager
Media Entertainment
Company H, Delhi
IT Service Provider
Chief Technology Officer
Corporate Lead Architect
General Manager Human Resources
Delivery/Program Manager (3)
Project/Senior Project Manager (3)
Scrum Master (2)
Technical Analyst/Consultant/Specialist 
(6)
Test Analyst (2)
Business Analyst
Software/Senior Software Engineer (7) 
Airline Customer Service
Flight Booking
156 Fig.  1Iterative analysis leading to grounded theory.
methods. On the other hand, agile skeptics with negative 
experiences to report were found at Companies E and G. The 
later phases ofthe study focused on depth by targeting 
participants with a range of stakeholder roles in the same 
company or project. Here the interviews at Company H, and 
Companies D and E provided developer, QA, project 
management and corporate-level perspectives. This in-depth 
phase of the study is an implementation of intensity sampling 
([29] pg. 171). Thus, selecting research participants that 
provide a wide range of perspectives using snowball sampling 
in an early phase and then using intensity sampling in a 
subsequent phase is a combination sampling approach which 
provides an element of methodological triangulation to the 
sample selection. Combination participant sampling provides 
insights into both the current status of the research problem and 
the motivation thatunderlies these practices. These motivations 
for the use of practices are difficult to obtain using large scale 
survey methods, for example.
B.Data Collection 
A range of documentary sources were used to inform the 
study. Commercially confidential corporateagile development 
method process guidelines were studied. These guidelines 
outline corporate agile practice roles, policies and 
recommendations. Some project documentation has also been 
investigated, such as design and architecture documents. 
Marketing materials such as publicly available and web hosted 
white papers, technical reports, case studies and descriptions of 
vendor capabilities designed to inform potential customers, 
were also reviewed.  
Site visits enabled observations of working areas and 
working practices. Secure development team work 
environments were visited. Coordination meetings (stand-up 
meetings) were observed in real-time for both co-located and 
distributed scrum teams. The work environment arrangements 
for distributed scrum coordination meetings using both video-
and audio-conferencing technologies were investigated. A 
range of informal, sometimes off-site, discussions with 
executives, project management and development team 
members were conducted. 
Face-to-face recorded interviews wereconducted with the 
46 practitioner interviewees. Recordings were transcribed. An 
open-ended interview guide approach was used to structure 
interviews, an example interview guide is included in 
Appendix 1. Respondents were given opportunities to raise any 
topics, issues and concerns of their choosing outside the scope 
of scripted interview questions. Interviews were typically 
conducted on company sites using small meeting rooms 
exclusively booked for interview purposes.  
C.Data Analysis
Both the audio interviews and associated written transcripts 
were initially carefully reviewed. The transcript text was 
imported into a qualitative data analysis software tool, in this 
case Nvivo V9  [31]. Initially key points were identified within 
the interview data. The keypoints were coded and compared 
within and between interviewees. An iterative data analysis 
approach was used refine coding categories,as shown in Figure 
1. Thus, Figure 1 illustrates howkey points were combined to 
create concepts which were then themselves coded, listed and
compared within and between interviewees. Concept 
categorization was used to organize the large volume of data 
into a taxonomy. The categorization forms the basis of the 
grounded theory [32] [33].
IV.F
INDINGS
Early proponents of agile methods advocated small, self-
organizing and co-located teams. However, in enterprise 
settings, large work volumes, short deadlines and entrenched 
organizational structures result in tailored agile approaches. 
The contribution of this paper is practitioner descriptions of 
product owner role tailoring. The research identifies the 
emergence of product owner teams to allow agile methods to 
scale-up to large international projects. Nine functions of the 
product owner role are identified.
First, let's consider the absence of a productowner. These 
issues can be illustrated by drawing on Company E which 
conducts (non-agile) customization projects on client sites and 
uses scrum with an out-sourced development partner for it's 
own product development. For example, ﬁthere are client 
representatives at [major international bank, UK] they are a 
little ill-defined what they are actually doing. But there isn't a 
stakeholder that comes and makes any real decisions on the 
projectﬂ (Project Manager, Company E, February 2010). This 
project manager continues ﬁthere's a lot more syndication that 
actually goes on in coming to a conclusionﬂ (Project Manager, 
Company E, February 2010). Here this project manager with 
30+ years of IT industry experience uses the word syndication 
as a euphemism for equivocation. This illustrates that, from a 
development team perspective, it is difficult to get decisions 
157 made about requirements and their priorities in the absence of a 
product owner. At the same bank 
ﬁtheir governance is actually done on [a] 
biweekly basis and then,  there's another level of 
governance which is done on a four-to six-week 
basis... they have traffic light system of reporting 
on a project, but they have a very peculiar set of 
rules to actually how those traffic lights can go to 
amber or, very rarely, can go to red, which is very 
surprising...  I would have all the projects at red at 
the moment but they're either green or possibly 
only just about going amberﬂ (Project Manager, 
Company E, February 2010).
So, from an enterprise perspective it is difficult to hold 
project teams to account in terms of scope, budgets and 
deadlines.
Enterprises tend to expand the number of job titles beyond 
the roles defined in standard agile literature. For example 
ﬁThere is a team in India of 20 people with a manager. There is 
a product manager as well as there is project manager and 
product owner and there is me overseeingﬂ (Engineering 
Director, Company E, February 2010). Product owner job 
functions need to be clarified because of the lack of 
standardization between job title
s and product owner activities. 
Thus, product owner functions may be conducted by staff 
members with various job titles.
What does a product owner actually do? From one 
perspective ﬁproduct [scope], the design, the requirements, the 
discussion with the business side from the customer, that is all 
done through product ownerﬂ (Engineering Director, Company 
E, February 2010). The nine roles identified in the research are  
described below.
A.Groom
Product grooming ﬁis a list of... requirements or features... 
So it is a product owner™s responsibility to make sure product 
backlog should be continuously evolving (Program Head, 
Company H, May 2012). Simply put, ﬁI™d be ready with my 
sprint backlog.  What are the things we are going to do?  
Maybe a few additional features and some backlog from the 
previous [sprint] where we have received feedback from the 
clientﬂ (Company G, Engagement Manager, April 2011). 
Product owners reconcil
e conflicting priorities 
ﬁthere is a product [management 
organization in California]. So different regions 
like APAC and Europe and North America 
come with some requirements, this is what they 
want to get done. And they come to the product 
manager... who keeps on collecting the 
requirements, prioritizes them. There™s a six-
monthly road map discussion... where they 
have a high-level look at the things we are 
trying to achieve this year. They act as a 
channel between the development team and the 
market so, for us, they are the customers.ﬂ 
(Engineering Manager, Company B, Jan. 
2010).
Theproduct owner needs to interact with customers to 
gather the requirements ﬁour Product Owner, luckily, is having 
a very rich experience of interaction with customersﬂ (Scrum 
Master, Company D, Jan. 2010). However, simply compiling a 
list of requirements is not sufficient.
B.Prioritizer
The product owner is also responsible for prioritizing 
requirements in the product or sprint backlogs. For example, 
ﬁwe keep re-triaging [the backlog] because we have too many 
mandatoriesﬂ (Engineering Director, Company E, February 
2010). And also ﬁif [requirements]... are not sequenced 
properly as for the priority, legality. So whatever we are 
delivering will not give that priority value to the end user or the 
business userﬂ  (Program Head, Company H, May 2012). Thus, 
it is the product owner's responsibility to identify and reconcile 
the needs of different parts of the client organization. Product 
owners become experienced in assessing and prioritizing 
contrasting the needs of different segments of the customer-
base. Thus, theymust have sufficient stature and seniority to 
perform that conflict resolution function. 
In some cases, such as enterprise products simultaneously 
aimed at a large number of end-user territories, project teams 
can be more directly involved in systematic recording of 
customer requirements ﬁwe call it a requirement template 
approach … so this particular template recognizes what is the 
basic requirement which all of [the client territories] will agree. 
[each client territory in turn] will say 'okay this is less priority 
for me' or there™ll be some variation. So against each 
[requirement template] there is some line item that can be done, 
okay we want this pieceﬂ (Practice Head, Company A, Jan. 
2010). This particular project involved a simultaneous product 
launch in 17 different countries. 
C.Release Master
A release master manages and approves release schedules. 
For example, ﬁa release plan is prepared. It is sent for approval 
to the product owner...  once it™s approved by the product 
owner then we stick to thatﬂ (Architect, Company D, Jan. 
2010). Backlog grooming, requirements prioritization and 
release planning are standard scrum practices. What other 
product owner activities have practitioners described? Six other 
product owner roles are identified, as follows.
D.Technical Architect
To design, implement and disseminate a reference 
architecture a technical role for the product owner is required. 
The product owner coordinates technical and architectural 
policies between the scrum teams. This will include sufficient
documentation and illustrative source code to ensure project 
teams can understand and follow the guidelines. The product 
owner must disseminate the reference architecture to teams. 
158 The project team may legitimately find anomalies and 
ambiguities that the product owner should provide guidance on.
A significant amount of up-front work should be done by 
the product owner prior to scrum teams working on increments. 
These architectural design decisions can often be performed 
using broad statements of functionalrequirements. However, 
non-functional requirements have more bearing on the 
development of a reference architecture. 
This is a technical thought leadership and coordination role. 
Architectural styles are developed and disseminated by the 
product owner incompliance with corporate architecture 
guidelines ﬁso we have a [corporate-wide] council, architecture 
councilﬂ (Architect, Company D, Jan. 2010). The absence of a 
product owner does not mean these decisions are not made. On 
the contrary, the decisions are made by teams in an 
uncoordinated manner. This results in divergent architectural 
styles in different parts of the program.
There are tensions between performing the architecture 
design within the self-organizing scrum teams or as a separate 
function. For example ﬁin ideal waterfall model, as I said 
earlier we have separate architects, separate designers, separate 
developers, then testing team™s separate. In a scrum team 
they™re all working together and there is no differentiationﬂ 
(Engagement Manager, Company G, April 2011). The problem 
is that ﬁI have observed that people who are working in 
waterfall model were not taking responsibility [for delivering a 
quality product on time]ﬂ (Engagement Manager, Company G, 
April 2011).
The self-organizing teams mustalso learn about the 
reference architecture ﬁthis requires every individual to put a 
lot of effort into understanding the R&D and understanding the 
architecture... this responsibility is shared to the team not just 
lying with only Product Owner and Scrum Masterﬂ (Scrum 
Master, Company D, Jan. 2010).
E.Governor
A large corporate e-Commerce website is a corporation's 
ﬁpublic face, in 26 languages, across the world, right? That 
website needs to have technical governance on how changes 
are made.ﬂ (Lead Architect, Company H, May 2012). To 
achieve that technical governance ﬁyou need technical product 
ownership, especially in large programs right? If you are, 
[working on] something like [MajorAirline.com], right?ﬂ (Lead 
Architect, Company H, May 2012).
The product owner provides a technical governance 
framework to project teams working on a program. The 
product owner will liaise with governance structures such a 
technical oversight committees and corporate architecture 
groups. The product owner will ensure selection of common 
tools and technologies for the project. This role will ensure 
projects within a program share an appropriate technology 
infrastructure.
Needless to say the product owner must be aware of 
corporate governance policies and strategic directions. Any
proposals made by the product owner should comply with these 
governance directives.
F.Communicator
Geographical distribution is not an attractive attribute for a 
project team, but is a feature of the globalized nature of 
enterprise software development. At a senior level there is a 
view in some quarters that geographical distribution itself is not 
the major problem to solve. ﬁI think we are now very mature. 
Initially we thought that our biggest challenge would be the 
geographical distance, some people here, some people there. So 
that is definitely a challenge but that is I would say the easiest 
to fixﬂ (Chief Architect, Company H, May 2012).
Geographical distribution within the scrum team 
membership is discouraged in the companies investigated. 
Company B avoids geographically distributed scrum teams 
ﬁmost of the scrums we are the only ones, so we do our own 
things here [offshore]. Product managers and UI designers, 
they dial in from there [onshore]ﬂ (Engineering Manager, 
Company B, Jan. 2010). 
A compromise ofadding a remotely located technical 
specialist to the co-located team is sometimes helpful ﬁWe had 
one engineer working from [California] join us, she used to 
directly dial in to our sprint planning meetings, retrospection, 
everythingﬂ (Engineering Manager, Company B, Jan. 2010). 
This is onerous to that individual where the time zone 
difference is large (since the remote technical specialist usually 
has to adopt working patterns to suite the rest of the co-located 
development team). Sometimes ﬁparticipation in the stand-up is 
extremely tough because you do it in a room with a speaker 
phone and five people talking about different things, it becomes 
very tough for a [remote] person to understand what™s going on 
and contribute … we found it was better to have one-on-one 
call with herﬂ (Engineering Manager, Company B, Jan. 2010).
Development team working patterns can be adapted to 
increase the overlap between office hours onshore and 
offshore. Where the time zone difference is not too great, 
offshore scrum teamscan work into the evening ﬁour normal 
shift is 11:00[am]-8:00[pm]ﬂ (Software Engineer, Company H, 
May 2012) and from a different project team ﬁwe are working 
1pm to 10pmﬂ (Project Manager, Company H, May 2012). 
This is an example where time zone differences between 
Europe and India are accommodated by shifting work patterns 
(in India) to increase the number of overlapping working hours. 
Offshore staff members can sometimes expect to receive some 
extra payments and free dinners when working this type of 
pattern. Transportation is often provided to staff what ever shift 
patterns are being worked. Working after 12 midnight is not 
popular with respondents because it disrupts weekend social 
and family life. Whereas early evening working can be 
accommodated without too much disruption of life outside 
work.
A more common arrangement is a co-located offshore 
scrum team working with a remote product owner ﬁI™ve got a 
product owner... based in New Zealandﬂ (Engineering Director, 
159 Company E, Jan. 2010). This reflects a classic onshore/offshore 
model. Again, mutual meetings timings must be found, which 
is challenging with a large time zone differences. Video (and 
less commonly audio) conferencing is used to conduct daily 
scrum coordination meetings. These are sometimes conducted 
as stand-up meetings (using video conferencing technologies). 
Communication challenges include ﬁpractical difficulties 
making sure people can interact; such as booking video 
conference rooms at both ends, Internet connectivity limitations 
on videoconferencing; tendency to underestimate investment 
required in travel and connectivityﬂ (Delivery Manager, 
Company H, May 2012). 
G.Traveller
Product owner teams have staff members onshore for 
discussions with clients and off-shore for disseminating 
information to development teams. The proxy product owner 
will usually spend time (1-3 months, depending on the scale of 
the project) on the client site at the start of the project 
becoming familiar with any special features of the client's 
requirements. The breakdown of product owner teams between 
onshore and offshore activities needs to be determined ﬁif you 
are sort of 70 people working from the offshore there are 5 to 6 
guys at the onsite all, every day at the same time zone [as the 
client]ﬂ (Practice Head, Company A, January 2010). The 
Traveler is important for supporting development teams ﬁwe 
have a field person at the customer site who can answer 
queries... They™re the ones who interact with the customer 
directlyﬂ (Architect, Company D, Jan. 2010).
Enterprises can also adopt a range of solutions in terms of 
locating teams ﬁOne scrum team is based onshore completely, 
the other scrum team was sent onshore for a month, had two 
iterations over there, and then came back and started doing 
iterations here, and then the third team is a distributed team that 
has been formed. So everybody is getting the exposure of 
working directly with the product owners and the business 
analysis is what we did to mitigate that riskﬂ (Delivery 
Manager, Company H, May 2012).
So, productowners act as a bridge between onshore and 
offshore. They can be based with clients or they can travel to 
clients. Alternatively, and at higher cost, entire teams can travel 
to clients to co-locate with product owners.
H.Intermediary
The product owner is supplemented with an intermediary  
from within the development team to mitigate domain 
complexity, the ﬁproxy product owner [is] an extension of the 
product owner, the product owner™s availability or 
understanding of the off-shoring process being limitedﬂ 
(Delivery Manager, Company H, May 2012). The intermediary 
will need to have extensive experience of the system business 
domain. 
In Company B ﬁwe have some kind of shared product 
ownership very limited that is done by [local Product 
Manager].  But it is mostly on requirements... we have like 
four/five different conferences [conference calls] with different 
stakeholders. So, like product managers and some other folks, 
engineering folks, and some people who are working on 
performance, for example.ﬂ (EngineeringManager, Company 
B, Jan. 2010)
I.Risk Assessor
Enterprises routinely conduct risk management to assess 
technical complexity and potential shortcomings in the 
development team skills and capabilities. Product owners 
perform 
ﬁrisk management, if something isseen as 
technically very complex, it will come up as part 
of the risk [assessment] of that particular project. 
Then, you will have to see how you mitigate that 
risk; if it requires support from a centre of 
excellence within [the company] or stronger 
[staff technical] profiles to be a part of that 
project then we will do that.ﬂ (Delivery Manager, 
Company H, May 2012). 
The risk mitigation might include ﬁassigning people called 
Technical Analysts, I mean SMEs [subject matter experts] with 
respect to their technical domain understandingﬂ (Program 
Head, Company H, May 2012).
Technical Specialists assigned to the scrum team can 
provide insight into managing complexity. For example, where 
multiple programming languages are being used the interfaces 
between language components require special skills. Similarly 
interfaces to external systems and credit card payment 
gateways require access to a technical specialist. Intelligent 
choice need to be made between sharing a technical  specialist 
between one or more sprint teams. Where the technical 
complexity is affecting the work of and entire sprint team, then 
a 100% assignment of a full-time technical specialist makes 
sense. Where the technical complexity affects some aspect of 
the work of the sprint team, then access toa part-time technical 
specialist will be sufficient.
V.D
ISCUSSION
The findings presented here support previous research that 
suggests agile methods can be scaled to large projects [34] and 
used in distributed software development settings [35]. The 
closest context to our study was presented in [36]. That study 
explored scrum developers working together yet based in USA, 
Canada and Russia. These previous studies tended to 
emphasize tailoring agile method practices rather than roles.
One of the companies studied in [36] centralized and co-
located scrum masters, product owners and architects. 
Companies A, B, D, E and H in the findings presented here had 
a distributed model of product ownership. Product owners are 
required to undertake new activi
ties to manage geographically 
distributed clients and development teams. The product 
ownership team concept emerges, in part at least, from the need 
to manage product owner and development team distribution.
160 The respondent from Company F described a highly 
regulated healthcare instrument project. The use of agile 
methods in highly regulated environments has been 
investigated in [37]. Again, however there was little specific 
discussion of the product owner role in [37].
This research has focused on practitioner descriptions of 
activities within the product owner role. This approach was 
similar to [10] that focused on roles within self-organizing 
teams. My contribution is to articulate the activities undertaken 
by product owners. I argue that product owner teams are 
required to manage the scale and complexity of product owner 
activities in globalized software development projects. 
VI.L
IMITATIONS
There are three tests for establishing the quality of 
descriptive empirical social research: construct validity, 
external validity and reliability [38].   
Construct validity can be ensured through using multiple 
sources of evidence. This has been achieved through 
conducting studies at eight companies with large studies at 
Companies H and E (along with their offshore service provider 
Company D). Multiple sources of evidence within these large 
studies has included corporate, program and project level 
management as well as development team members. 
External validity is achieved through replication of studies. 
Replication here is at eight companies and the range of project 
stakeholder respondents. However, the findings and 
conclusions presented here should not be generalized to small 
and medium sized companies. Smaller companies work under 
profoundly different commercial pressures with different 
quality assurance responsibilities.
Reliability is developed through use of the interview guide. 
This ensures consistency in the 
data collection. The interview 
guide is reproduced in Appendix 2. 
VII.C
ONCLUSIONS AND 
F
URTHER 
W
ORK
This paper has explored practitioner descriptions of agile 
method tailoring in large-scale enterprise software 
development. Specifically product owner role tailoring has 
been investigated.
Nine product ownership functions have been described that 
are used to scale agile methods to large projects: groom, 
prioritizer, release master, technical achitect, Governor, 
communicator, traveller, intermediary and risk assessor. 
The groom gathers requirements from business clients. The 
prioritizer ensures requirements
 bring value to the business. 
The release master manages and approves release plans. 
Technical architects provide architectural coordination on large 
projects. This architectural coordination is achieved by using 
reference architectures to guide and support self-organizing 
scrum teams. Governors are required to ensure project 
compliance with corporate guidelines and policies. The 
communicator bridges onshore and offshore geographical 
distribution. Travellers spend time onshore at client sites 
gathering first-hand knowledge of the client's needs. The 
intermediary acts as an interface to senior executives driving 
large scale development programs disseminating domain 
knowledge to teams. The risk assessor evaluates technical 
complexity.
These product owner activities provide a layer of 
governance to agile methods in the CMMI Level 5 certified 
companies investigated. Further, these activities can be 
performed by members of a product owner team. Thus, product 
owners can devolve selected activities to technical and 
remotely located colleagues.The product owner team becomes 
a key tool in tailoring agile methods for large scale distributed 
projects.
Further work, in collaboration with Company H, will 
explore agile methods and CMMi Level 5 certification.  That 
paper considers how agile projects gather and provide the 
evidence required by certification authorities.
Also, it is puzzling that engineering practices from XP such 
as pair programming and test driven development are not more 
widely used. Further investigation would help understand the 
lack commitment in these large enterprises to such practices.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
I am grateful to all the companies and interviewees who 
were generous enough to contribute their time and resources to 
participate in this research. Thanks also to the current and 
former students of the Executive MBA at the Indian Institute of 
Management, Bangalore who helped identify target companies. 
The research benefited in part from travel funding from the UK 
Deputy High Commission, Bangalore, Science and Innovation 
Network the Institute for Innovation, Design & Sustainability 
(IDEAS) at Robert Gordon University, UK, and 
accommodation and sustenance from Company H during the 
data collection visit to Delhi, India.
R
EFERENCES
[1]Computer Weekly, ‘Santander migration glitch affects Alliance 
& Leicester customers™ August 12, 2010, 
http://www.computerweekly.com/news/1280093541/Santander-
migration-glitch-affects-Alliance-Leicester-customers 
[2]BBC News, ‘Bank merger account glitches™, August 27, 2010  
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/moneybox/8946199.stm
[3]House of Commons, Hansard, September 11,  2012, Column 
117,http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmhan
srd/cm120911/debtext/120911-0001.htm
[4]D. Leffingwell, Scaling Software Agility: Best Practices for 
Large Enterprises, Boston, MA:Addison Wesley, 2007.
[5]C. Larman and B. Vodde, Scaling Lean and Agile Development: 
Thinking and Organizational Tools for Large-Scale Scrum: 
Successful Large, Multisite and Offshore Products with Large-
scale Scrum. Addison Wesley, 2008.
[6]S. W. Ambler andM. Lines, 
Disciplined Agile Delivery: A 
Practitioner™s Guide to Agile Software Delivery in the 
Enterprise
. IBM Press, 2012.
[7]S. de Cesare, M. Lycett, R. D. Macredie, C. Patel, and R. Paul, 
‘Examining Perceptions of Agility in Software Development 
161 Practice™, 
Communications of the ACM
, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 126–
30, Jun. 2010.
[8]‘Agile Alliance™. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.agilealliance.org/. [Accessed: 25-Sep-2011]
[9]T. Dyba and T. Dingsoyr, ‘What Do We Know about Agile 
Software Development?™, 
Software, IEEE
, vol. 26, no. 5, 2009, 
pp. 6-9.
[10]R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall, ‘Organizing self-organizing 
teams™, in 
Software Engineering, 2010 ACM/IEEE 32nd 
International Conference on
, 2010, vol. 1, pp. 285 –294.
[11]J. Stapleton, 
DSDM: Dynamic Systems Development Method
. 
Harlow, England: Addison Wesley, 1997.
[12]P. Coad, E. LeFebvre, and J. De Luca, 
Java Modeling in Color
. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1999.
[13]A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development
. Reading, MA: 
Addison Wesley, 2001.
[14]K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, 
AgileSoftware Development with 
Scrum
. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[15]K. Beck and C. Andres, 
Extreme Programming Explained
, 2nd 
ed. Addison Wesley, 2004. 
[16]X. Wang, K. Conboy, and O. Cawley, ‘Leagile Software 
Development: An Experience ReportAnalysis of the 
Application of Lean Approaches in Agile Development™, 
The 
Journal of Systems and Software
, vol. 85, no. 6, 2012, pp. 1287–
1299. 
[17]V. Balijepally, R. Mahapatra,S. Nerur and K. H. Price,Are Two 
Heads Better Than One for Software Development? The 
Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 
33 No. 1, 2009, pp. 91-118. 
[18]J. E. Hannay, E. Arisholm, H. Engvik, and D. I.K. Sjøberg, 
Effects of Personality on Pair Programming, IEEE Tans. 
Software Engineering, Vol. 36, No. 1, 2010, pp. 61-80. 
[19]K. M. Lui, K. C. C. Chan, and J. T. Nosek, The Effect of Pairs in 
Program Design Tasks, IEEE Tans. Software Engineering, Vol. 
34, No. 2, 2008, pp.197-211. 
[20]K. Schwaber, 
Agile Project Management With Scrum
. Redmond, 
WA, USA: Microsoft Press, 2004. 
[21]M. Cohn, 
Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using 
Scrum
, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2009. 
[22]R. Hoda, J. Noble and S. Marshall, Developing a Grounded 
Theory to Explain the Practices of Self-Organizing Agile Teams, 
Empirical Software Engineering Journal (ESE), Volume 17, 
Number 6, Pages 609-639, 2012. 
[23]R. Gittins, J. Bass, and S. Hope, ‘A Comparison of Software 
Development Process Experiences™, in 
Extreme Programming 
and Agile Processes in Software Engineering
, LNCS Vol. 3092, 
J. Eckstein and H. Baumeister, Eds. Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 231–236. 
[24]‘What is an SME? -Small and medium sized enterprises (SME) 
-Enterprise and Industry™. [Online]. Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/facts-figures-
analysis/sme-definition/index_en.htm. [Accessed: 11-Aug-
2012]. 
[25]M. Paasivaara, S. Durasiewicz, and C. Lassenius, ‘Using scrum 
in a globally distributed project: a case study™, 
Software 
Process: Improvement and Practice
, vol. 13, no. 6, 2008, pp. 
527–544.
[26]S. Jalali and C. Wohlin, ‘Agile Practices in Global Software 
Engineering -A Systematic Map™, in
IEEE 5th International 
Conference on Global Software Engineering (ICGSE)
, 2010, pp. 
45 –54. 
[27]E. Hossain, M. A. Babar, and H. Paik, ‘Using Scrum in Global 
Software Development: A Systematic Literature Review™, in
IEEE Fourth International Conference on Global Software 
Engineering (ICGSE),
2009, pp. 175 –184. 
[28]R. Hoda, J. Noble and S. Marshall, The Impact of Inadequate 
Customer Involvement on Self-Organizing Agile Teams, Journal 
of Information and Software Technology (IST) 
Volume 53, Issue 
5
, 
May 2011
, 
Pages 521-534
.
[29]M. Q. Patton, Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods, 2
nd
Edition, SAGE Publications, Newbury Park, 1990.
[30]M. B. Miles and A. M. Huberman, Qualitative Data Analysis, 
SAGE Publications, Newbury Park, 1984.
[31]NVivo, Help, 2012, http://help-nv9-en.qsrinternational.com/ 
nv9_help.htm
[32]B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss, 
Discovery of Grounded Theory: 
Strategies for Qualitative Research
, Piscataway: Aldine 
Transaction, 1999.
[33]J. M. Corbin and A. C. Strauss, 
Basics of Qualitative Research: 
Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory
, 
3rd ed. Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, 2008.
[34]D. J. Reifer, F. Maurer, and H. Erdogmus, ‘Scaling agile 
methods™, 
Software, IEEE
, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 12 –14, Aug. 
2003.
[35]B. Ramesh, L. Cao, K. Mohan, and P. Xu, ‘Can distributed 
software development be agile?™, 
Commun. ACM
, vol. 49, no. 
10, pp. 41–46, Oct. 2006.
[36]J. Sutherland, A. Viktorov, J. Blount, and N. Puntikov, 
‘Distributed Scrum: Agile Project Management with Outsourced 
Development Teams™, in 
System Sciences, 2007. HICSS 2007. 
40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on
, 2007, p. 274a.
[37]O. Cawley, X. Wang, and I. Richardson, ‘Lean/Agile Software 
Development Methodologies in Regulated Environments State 
of the Art™, in 
Lean Enterprise Software and Systems
, vol. 65, P. 
Abrahamsson and N. Oza, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2010, pp. 31–36.
[38]R. K. Yin, 
Case Study Research: Design and Methods
, 4th ed. 
Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, Inc, 2009.
A
PPENDIX 
1E
XAMPLE 
I
NTERVIEW 
G
UIDE
A.Motivation and Purpose of Research
I want to ask you about your experience of geographically 
distributed agile software development projects. The research 
involves interviews with people doing a range of different roles 
and from companies with different development models. 
I want to learn more about your views of agile processes. I 
am particularly interested to know what factors are affected by 
geographical location and separation. The purpose here is to try 
to understand the factors that affect project outcomes, 
successful or otherwise, so that we can try to learn for the 
future. 
162 B.Ethical Commitments and Informed Consent
I want to ask you the following questions and tape record 
your answers. I will keep your responses absolutely 
confidential. Certainly nothing will be shared with any client 
companies. I do plan to publish interview extracts but I will 
make names and companies anonymous. Can I switch on the 
recorder? 
C.Your Current Project(s)
How many projects are you working on currently?
What is (was) the title of your current (or most recent) 
project?
What is the project management structure?
How is the project organized geographically? 
How many people are in the project team?
D.Agile Practices
What Agile practices do you advocate for offshore 
projects?
What agile practices do you avoid or not recommend?
E.Requirements 
How are requirements decided and prioritized?
How do user stories evolve over time?
How do user stories move up or down the backlog?
F.Product Owner/Customer (POC)
How do you represent the product development team within 
the client organization?
How do you represent the client organization within the 
product development team?
G.Releases and Testing
How do unit tested code become a release?
How is user acceptance testing managed?
How are bugs reported back, prioritized and fixed?
H.Challenges
What challenges do you face in agile offshore projects?
How have you tried to address these challenges?
What challenges remain to be resolved?
I.Learning
How doeslearning take place within the team?
How does learning take place for you personally?
J.Any other comments
Do you have any further comments in relation to 
geographically distributed agile development projects?
163