 Governance Patterns in Global Software Engineering:  Best Practices and Lessons 
Learned 
 
Raja Bavani 
MindTree Ltd. 
Pune, 411057 India 
raja_bavani@mindtree.com 
 
 
Abstract

Over the past decade Global Software Engineering 
(GSE) has become the norm influenced by several factors such 
as market evolutions in emerging economies, availability of 
skilled pool of resources at optimal costs and globalization 
trends such as mergers and acquisitions.  Evidently, market 
leaders, large businesses as well as niche players in Software 
Product Engineering have leveraged GSE in several areas such 
as product development, sustenance, support, testing and 
professional services.   In this context, governance of GSE 
projects or engagements is a critical factor that provides 
adequate foundation and support structure to ensure results.  
This paper discusses three fundamental governance patterns 
and additional derived patterns observed in a set of GSE 
projects.  Also, this paper presents two case studies and our 
experiential findings on governance perspective.  
 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
The vision of GSE for any given project is to deliver 
work products of high quality on schedule by means of 
engaging geographically distributed teams that define the 
right architecture for distributed development and to follow 
the right processes and tools for coordination and 
communication 
[6].
   There are several challenges 
encountered in areas such as Requirement Engineering, 
Change Management and Project Management to name a 
few 
[6
].
   However, practitioners continue to evolve 
methodologies such as Distributed Agile Software 
Development based on Agile Principles [4, 8] in order to 
ensure value delivery 
[4
] in distributed projects.  The 
governance 
[1
] of GSE projects and engagements plays a 
significant role in doing the right projects in distributed 
model, doing them right time after time [11] and eliminating 
project failures during initial stages in order to improve the 
success rate of GSE projects.
  
Besides, effective governance 
is required in order to manage risks, constraints and issues 
related to a range of factors including legislative, 
competitive, and cultural changes applicable to organizations 
across the globe [11]
. 
 
The word governance originated from the Greek verb 

 (kubernáo) which means 

to steer

 was used 
for the first time in a metaphorical sense by Plato.   In 
general governance means a mechanism that includes a 
group of people (or committees or departments etc.) who 
make up a body for the purpose of administering something 
and hence to make the best decisions in a timely manner.  In 
case of software projects executed at a single location it has 
been a general practice to implement a governance 
mechanism at three levels namely project level, program 
level and organizational level [2, 3, 10].  In case of GSE 
projects executed across multiple geographies and time 
zones with the employees of project sponsor organization, 
external vendors and independent contractors the complexity 
of governance increases multifold.   With more than a decade 
of work experience in GSE, we have identified three 
fundamental patterns of GSE governance that give rise to 
additional derived patterns.  GSE engagements typically start 
with a governance mechanism that involves one of these 
patterns and mature towards governance patterns that yield 
better results or provide a better fitment to the overall 
strategy of GSE initiatives. 
II.
 
G
OVERNANCE 
P
ATTERNS
 
In any organization a team that focuses on governance 
activities that are strategic in nature involves the senior 
leaders of the organization.  At project level or program level 
even though the project manager or program manager 
manages the project or program, at GSE context it is 
necessary to have a governance structure that includes the 
executive sponsor 
[2
] and senior leaders across all locations.  
This enables globally distributed teams in aligning 
themselves with the GSE initiative as conceived jointly by 
the governance team. Structurally governance patterns are 
very similar to engagement patterns.   However 
in
 GSE 
context the term governance pattern fits well when we 
consider the structural as well as behavioral elements
. 
 In any 
GSE project the governance mechanism drives factors such 
as performance management of workflow processes and 
service levels.  Besides, the responsibility of financial 
management, contract management, relationship 
management and resource management fall under the scope 
of governance. Governance teams setup for local teams need 
to form a GSE governance team and work together as a 
single body at global level in order to run GSE projects and 
engagements successfully.
  
 
In general, GSE governance teams schedule periodic 
steering committee meetings to review the status of GSE 
initiatives and arrive at action items.  These meetings are 
attended by governance team members across geographies 
through conference calls or video conferencing.  Optionally, 
once in a year or every six months governance team 
2011 Sixth IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-0-7695-4503-5/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2011.1750 members plan to meet at a central location to have face-
to
-
face review meetings. 
The three fundamental governance patterns observed in 
GSE context are Delegate, Collaborate and Multi-Partner. 
From these patterns additional patterns can be derived to suit 
specific implementation of GSE governance. 
A.
 
Delegate 
In this pattern (Fig. 
1)
 the parent entity or project 
sponsoring organization (C) delegates work to its remote 
entity widely known as captive center in another location 
(C).     Subsequently, the remote entity delegates the entire 
work or part of the work to in-house teams or one or more 
service providers (P1). 
  
In Fig. 1 through Fig. 4, the solid 
lines show the direction of work delegation and the dotted 
lines show the 
co
mmunication paths of GSE governance 
team members. 
Typically in this pattern the senior management of the 
parent entity delegates GSE decisions to the remote middle 
management (Directors and Managers) with approved 
budgets.  Project governance becomes the responsibility of 
the remote entity. Steering committee reviews involving 
stakeholders from the parent entity are done on need basis 
only.  These reviews happen once or twice every year to 
focus on short-term goals that are not strategic. 
  
 
Figure 1. 
 
Delegate 
The benefit of this pattern as seen in several instances 
emerges from the complete ownership of the remote captive 
center. When this happens, the parent entity participates on 
need basis and waits for finished product or end results.  
While this is an encouraging factor for the remote entity, this 
pattern may impede projects because of the dependency of 
remote entity on parent entity in situations that involve 
collective decision making on critical matters such as 
additional funding or negotiating project delays.   Also, the 
absence of continuous collaboration on understanding the 
engineering processes, methods and protocols may cause 
disconnect among parent and local entities 
[3
].  In this 
model, service providers engaged with the local entity are 
limited to providing augmented staffing services or 
participating in small projects.  Because of this, they seldom 
get a big picture on their work responsibility as well as long-
term visibility on product roadmap.  Tactical measures in 
engaging service providers cause challenges in knowledge 
retention as well as executing critical projects.    
In majority of instances this pattern is seen in its simplest 
form when the parent entity delegates work to a remote 
service provider in the absence of a captive center.  
Typically, projects executed in such instances are selected so 
as to mitigate IP violation risks and to experiment GSE 
before considering strategic or key projects. Depending on 
whether the service provider is located in the same country 
or off the shore this phenomenon is termed as outsourcing or 
offshoring.   Most of the GSE initiatives originate with this 
governance pattern. 
B.
 
Collaborate 
In this pattern (Fig. 2) teams spread across multiple 
geography collaborate to implement governance.  The parent 
entity and remote entities or captive centers form project 
teams and implement collaborative governance. This pattern 
does not involve any outsourcing. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 
 
Collaborate 
This pattern is employed in projects that are very 
complex in nature and involve confidentiality as well as 
protection of IP within designated corporate groups.  Though 
this pattern constrains project sponsor from utilizing the 
strengths and maturity of service providers, it serves the 
purpose in executing strategic projects such as new product 
development initiatives.  The governance team includes 
leaders from all locations and hence this pattern involves 
periodic meetings and decision making opportunities to 
avoid delays during project execution.    
A variation of this pattern can be observed when an 
outsourced work is done across multiple cities in a country 
by a service provider (Fig. 3). In this case, service provider 
implements governance mechanism locally and rolls it up to 
the executive sponsor in order to implement collaborative 
GSE governance.  In this situation, it is necessary to from a 
steering committee that comprises of leaders from the parent 
organization as well as service providers. 
 
51  
Figure 3. 
 
Collaborate 

 A Variation 
C.
 
Multi-Partner 
In this pattern (Fig. 
4)
 the parent organization works with 
multiple partners and optionally has one or more local 
entities or captive centers.   This pattern fits well in case of 
large projects outsourced by the parent entity to multiple 
local entities or service providers in order to mitigate the risk 
of becoming dependent on a single entity.  Also, it provides a 
mechanism to segment the outsourced work to negotiate 
optimal price points as well as service levels.  For example, 
using this pattern, partitioning of product development or 
sustenance and product testing activities across partners 
provides an opportunity for independent testing and quality 
assurance.  Also, partners get an opportunity to have 
visibility on long-term product roadmap of project sponsors 
and align themselves well enough to execute projects. This 
enables congruence among project team members across 
locations over a period of time 
[5
]. 
 
Figure 4. 
 
Multi-Partner 
In practice, project sponsors implement this pattern by 
selecting a list of qualified service providers or vendors. 
Each qualified vendor executes designated projects of one or 
more product lines.  This variation can be termed as 
Qualified-Partner.   In some instances of this pattern the 
implementation of IT security policies defined by project 
sponsors, commissioning of physically secured workspace as 
well as facilitation of annual planning and steering 
committee reviews become the salient factors.  
Another variation of Multi-Partner is when project 
sponsors implement a mechanism to certify partners and 
involve only certified partners in GSE.  This variation of 
Multi-Partner pattern can be termed as Certified-Partner.  
These two variations of Multi-Partner pattern nurture long-
term relationships.  Governance in Certified-Partner pattern 
provides for annual joint planning sessions, periodic steering 
committee reviews, commissioning of remote development 
centers 
[3
] with IT security and policies as specified by 
project sponsors and assessment of IT infrastructure and 
security on a periodic basis.  
In practice the adoption and implementation of GSE 
initiatives follow a specific governance pattern to begin with.  
This is necessary to collectively decide on a common set of 
governance parameters across sites to steer GSE projects 
towards success.  Each governance pattern promotes a set of 
service offerings and relationships.  As relationship among 
participating entities matures governance pattern also 
changes in order to accommodate revised strategies and 
goals.  Typically, factors such as engagement maturity, 
product phase, service offering and cost model influence the 
maturity and transformation of governance patterns over a 
period of time. 
III.
 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY 
1 
This case study is about our experience in a GSE 
engagement with a multinational product development 
organization.  This initiative started in 2007 with our 
pa
rticipation as service provider 

the US.  During the first year we formed two teams of 
seventy engineers distributed across two cities in India.   For 
our project sponsors cost effectiveness was the primary 
driver during the initial stages.  Our customer facilitated a 2-
month onsite knowledge transfer to some of the key team 
members of virtual teams.  We adopted a minor variation of 
the delegate pattern of GSE governance. The service 
offerings were product sustenance and product testing.   This 
pattern consumed significant efforts from the customer as 
some of the senior leaders were involved in screening and 
induction of team members for remote teams.  Also, some of 
the initial projects were transactional and tactical in nature.  
Monthly governance meetings were conducted over 
conference calls during the first few months.  After 
knowledge transfer and stabilization phases we mutually 
agreed to facilitate governance meetings on a quarterly basis.  
Over a period of twelve months from the initiation of the 
first project, we found difficulties in the overall engagement 
as it was not enabling us in executing project phases fr
om 
remote locations because of disparate processes and 
leadership styles.  
In one of our governance meetings we discussed the 
importance of collaborative governance across sites and the 
need for engagement maturity.  This provided us a platform 
52 to improve results by means of identifying common goals 
and parameters to measure success and resolving issues 
across sites.  Also, 

independently governing two separate sites.  The governance 
team decided to entrust remote teams with the responsibility 
of screening and inducting new hires as well as managing 
team level issues.  With this transition, we were able to 
accommodate new service offerings such as professional 
services and new product development.  This helped us 
execute distributed projects that implemented agile principles 
and followed Scrum.   Overall, transitioning into collaborate 
pattern helped us in strengthening local governance as well 
as engineering methodologies and practices followed by the 
virtual teams. 
IV.
 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY 
2 
We started this engagement during 2005 with a product 
development organization based in Europe which was 
acquired by a US based Independent Software Vendor (I
SV
) 
after few years.  The GSE strategy of the customer was to 
have an independent testing team of 10 engineers based in 
India and conduct all product development and sustenance 
activities in Europe.  Senior members from customer team 
visited our offshore facilities and enabled knowledge 
transfer.  We adopted a minor variation of the delegate 
pattern of GSE governance in this project.  During the first 
two years, our service offerings were limited to manual 
product testing.    Project sponsors were satisfied as the 
remote team was able to mature in manual product testing 
and deliver good results.  The focus of the governance team 
that comprised of senior leadership from both organizations 
was to meet project schedule and provide adequate process 
quality on manual testing.  We built the culture of presenting 
defect analysis reports and trends to present process quality 
for product quality assurance.  We facilitated quarterly 
governance meetings over conference calls to present and 
discuss these parameters.   The results of the first two years 
of this GSE initiative met the expectations of project 
sponsors.  
The offshore team became well-versed in manual testing 
and wanted to get involved in test automation.  The 
motivation was to find an alternative in place of monotonous 
work content, gain expertise as well as optimize testing 
efforts.  With the delegated pattern of GSE governance it 
was challenging for us to bring in such changes.  This was 
the point when we collaborated with our customer in 
transforming GSE governance in our project.  Our team 
demonstrated the benefits of automation by developing 
a 
proof of concept and collaborated with our customer in 
evaluating two tools for test automation.  Meanwhile, our 
customer formed an additional virtual team in India.  With 
these changes we moved into collaborative governance that 
provides for collaboration of senior leadership from all 
virtual teams.  Eventually, our team underwent a training 
program on a preferred automation tool and contributed to 
test automation projects.  In this engagement we noticed that 
collaborative governance contributed to an increased level of 
collaboration among team members across sites and hence 
contributed to improving product quality as well.  
 
V.
 
B
EST 
P
RACTICES
 
A.
 
Establish Shared Vision 
Establishing a shared vision on GSE initiatives across 
governance team members is very essential.  This has to be a 
collaborative exercise supported by the executive sponsor. 
This helps the senior leadership at each location understand 
the vision and sensitize team members with the right context 
and shared vision.  Without this, virtual team members tend 
to restrict themselves to transactional engineering activities 
without relating their work to the overall business needs of 
project sponsors. 
B.
 
Define Success Parameters 
Even though every project needs well-defined milestones 
and goals, it is very critical to define success parameters at 
governance level.   This helps GSE governance teams 
understand project success in terms of a common set of 
parameters.   Without this step, GSE governance teams tend 
to focus on transactional issues and miss the big picture.  
C.
 
Ensure Early Success 
While it is imperative to have a long-term view of the 
future, it is equally important to focus on early success.  One 
way to accomplish this is to define success parameters 
beyond tested code.  To make this happen, any GSE 
governance team must have strong, visible commitment to 
the success of GSE initiatives 
[3
].  Having a one year 
roadmap and identifying milestones or events that can be 
measured against success every quarter is a way to ensure 
early success and mitigate risks. 
D.
 
Review and Track Actions 
Periodic steering committee reviews are very essential to 
understand and improve GSE initiatives.  Having a collective 
decision on specific, measurable, action items that are 
realistic and time-bound at the end of each review an
d 
systematically tracking them to closure ensures positive 
reinforcement in governance.  During initial stages it is 
required to have these reviews every month and as soon as 
the first few early successes happen, the frequency of these 
reviews can be once in two months or once in a quarter.   
E.
 
Facilitate Annual Planning Sessions 
Annual planning sessions are essential in case of large 
engagements that encompass multiple service offerings.  
These sessions provide a forum to review the service levels, 
commercial factors as well as best practices of GSE 
initiatives and help stakeholders align themselves for the 
future.   
VI.
 
L
ESSONS 
L
EARNED
 
Establishing strong local governance ensures successful 
GSE governance [3, 7].  In one of our projects we found that 
during steering committee reviews, the GSE governance 
team had to spend significant efforts in discussing and 
resolving transactional issues that could have been resolved 
53 earlier by remote teams.   We analyzed this situation and 
identified measures to strengthen local governance by means 
of aligning the parameters as well as frequency of local 
reviews. This helped us resolve several issues locally and 
provided adequate focus during our GSE steering committee 
meeting in discussing issues that impact teams and projects 
at a higher level. 
In another instance we realized that having technically 
savvy members in GSE governance team helps resolve 
technical issues that impact global teams.  In one of our 
Fixed Price projects that experienced more than 30% of 
schedule overrun, we conducted frequent reviews with the 
GSE governance team.  As some of the team members were 
technically savvy, they were able to understand and 
appreciate technical challenges faced by global teams in an 
objective manner. This helped us negotiate revised scope and 
schedule by reprioritizing use cases and find a win-win 
solution.  
VII.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
Governance has been one of the key success factors in 
GSE projects and it is going to provide the necessary 
foundation and support for GSE in future as well.   The three 
fundamental patterns and additional derived patterns 
discussed in this paper inherit certain key factors and 
differentiators.  For any of these patterns to be successful 
both the structure and behavior need to synchronize with the 
overall vision of GSE initiatives.  It is evident that countries 
and corporate entities from new geographies have started 
becoming a part of GSE.  Hence, during the next decade, 
focus on GSE governance is necessary in order to promote 
the success of GSE projects.  GSE governan
ce 
is in its 
nascent stage and holds immense potential for further 
research both in the academia and the industry. 
 
R
EFERENCES
 
 
[1]
 
Carmel Erran, Agarwal Ritu, The Maturation of Offshore Sourcing of 
Information Technology Work, MIS Quarterly Executive, June 20
02
, 
University of Minnesota. 
[2]
 
Crawford H.Lynn, et.al., Project Governance: The Pivotal Role of the 
Executive Sponsor, PMI Global Congress Proceedings, Canada, 
2005.  
[3]
 
Eppinger D.Steven, Chitkara R.Anil, The Practice of Global Product 
Development, MIT Solan Management Review, July 2009. 
[4]
 
Favaro John, Value-Based Management and Agile Methods, 4th 
International Conference on XP and Agile Methods, May 2003. 
[5]
 
Heeks Richard, et.al., Synching or Sinking: Global Software 
Outsourcing Relationships, IEEE Software, March/April 2001. 
[6]
 
Herbsleb.D James, Global Software Engineering: The Future of Scio-
technical Coordination, Future of Software Engineering, IEEE, 2007. 
[7]
 
Herbsleb James, Paulish Daniel, Bass Mathew, Global Software 
Development at Siemens: Experience from Nine Projects, ICSE 2005. 
[8]
 
Highsmith Jim, Cockburn Alistair, Agile Software Development: The 
Business of Innovation, Computer, September 2001. 
[9]
 
Komi-Sirvio Seija, Tihinen Maarit, Lessons Learned by Participants 
of Distributed Software Development, Knowledge and Process 
Management, Volume 12, Number 2, pp 108-122, 2005. 
[10]
 
Ramasubbu Narayan, Rajesh Krishna Balan, Towards Governance 
Schemes for Distributed Software Development, ICSE 2008,  May 
2009.  
[11]
 
Weaver Patrick, Effective Project Governance 

 

Standards to Project Governance, PMI Global Congress, Asia Pacific, 
2007.  
 
 
 
54