 Managing Customer Involvement in Globally Distributed Agile Projects 
 
Reem Bin-Hezam , Sultan Alyahya 
Information Systems Department 
College of Computer & Information Sciences 
King Saud University 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
rybinhezam@pnu.edu.sa, 
sualyahya@ksu.edu.sa 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract
— Agile software projects require frequent 
interactions between customer and team members especially 
during requirements analysis and 
acceptance testing. Though 
these phases normally require 
customer availability on-site, 
this type of involvement might be difficult with globally 
distributed projects where customer’s location is different 
from team members’ location. The traditional methods of 
customer involvement in distributed agile projects such as 
using the rich communication technologies (e.g. video-
conferencing solutions) are commonly used.  The problem 
with these methods is that team members may not recognize 
how their technical work requi
res customer involvement. 
Even if they know, they might 
forget to inform the customer 
or there might be a considerable time between the need for 
customer involvement and th
e nearest meeting with him. In 
addition, the review of the avai
lable mechanisms of customer 
support in thirty-six project management tools reveals a lack 
of computer-based support for customer involvement. This 
paper presents a research in-progress which aims to support 
the effective management of customer involvement in 
distributed agile teams. It proposes computer-based process 
support for managing customer involvement which can 
improve the meaningful communication between customer 
and agile team and improve customers’ awareness with 
regard to the state of activities
 in which he participates in.
 
 
Keywords—Global Software Development; Project 
Management; Agile; Process; Tool. 
 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
Agile software development has been widely adopted 
and has gained popularity within the last fifteen years. It was 
introduced by a group of
 software developers who 
published a manifesto for software development [1]. In 
order to meet the core agile values, frequent interactions 
between customer and team members to understand 
requirements and fast response to any changes requested by 
customer are essential.  
Effective communication between customer and agile 
team is a keystone to agile development practices. If this 
communication is not successful or effective, work will get 
delayed and productivity will be negatively affected. 
Furthermore, the huge expansion of software 
development industry across the world has encouraged 
having team members distributed in different geographical 
areas and sometimes far from customer location. 
For the sake of balancing between agility and team 
distribution, distributed agile teams face many challenges; 
one challenge is the coordination of customer involvement 
[2]. Coordination of customer involvement is one of the 
primary problems during 
developing software in agile 
distributed environments. Unlike traditional software 
development, one of the main principles of agile methods is 
to have customers closely involved thorough the whole 
development process: identifying requirements, prioritizing 
them and evaluating the output of each project iteration [1, 
3]. These processes require frequent face-to-face 
communications and customer availability through project 
time. This type of involvement might be difficult with 
distributed team members, where customer’s location is 
different from team members’ location.  
To deal with this problem, some studies (e.g. [4]) 
suggest providing a customer proxy representative who acts 
as a link between customer and the other team members. 
However, this solution adds a level of complexity because 
direct collaboration with customer is very important for the  
success of software projects [2, 5].  
Another solution [6] suggests traveling to the customer 
site in order to meet the customer and discuss requirements. 
In addition to the fact that this solution can be costly and not 
practical for some teams, travelling can only coordinate 
high level topics with the customer and clearly cannot be 
sufficient enough to manage the expected frequent 
communication between customer and development team 
during the project. 
Other studies (e.g. [6]) suggest using rich 
communication tools, such as video and phone 
conferencing, as a replacement for the face-to-face 
meetings. Two problems with th
is solution are time zone 
differences and the expense that can come with these tools. 
In addition to the limitations of the solutions mentioned 
above, another common limitation is that team members 
may not recognize how their technical work requires 
customer involvement. Even if they do know, they might 
forget to inform the customer or there might be a 
considerable time between the need for customer 
involvement and the nearest meeting with him. 
When it comes to putting solutions into practice, 
researchers found that customer involvement is not needed 
through the entire project time [4]. Not all involvements and 
collaborations need to be through synchronous 
communications or require online availability of the other 
team members. Only meaningful communication with 
customers is needed, regardless of how many rich 
communication channels are
 available [7, 8]. Most 
customer involvement and collaboration is needed during  
2016 IEEE 11th International Conference on Global Software Engineering Workshops2329-6313/16 $25.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSEW.2016.127 requirement analysis, testing and releasing stages [4]. 
Therefore, the solutions should focus on supporting 
activities needed at these stages. 
Although there are many 
project management tools 
currently available, the review conducted in this research for 
thirty-six tools shows that current support for most customer 
involvement processes is missing.  
This paper presents a research in-progress which aims to 
support the effective management of customer involvement 
in distributed agile teams. It proposes computer-based 
process support for managing customer involvement which 
can improve the meaningful communication between 
customer and agile team and improve customer’s awareness 
with regard to the state of activities in which he participates 
in. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II describes the main customer involvement 
processes. Section III describes the traditional methods of 
customer involvement in distributed agile projects whereas 
section IV provides a review of current tool support. Section 
V shows how current tools can better support the main 
customer involvement processes before concluding the 
paper in section VI. 
 
II.
 
CUSTOMER INVOLVEMENT PROCESSES
 
Many studies have discussed 
the points of 
communications between customer and software team in 
agile development (e.g. [7, 9-12]). Referring to the different 
agile practices, we identify below the main customer’s 
communication points through the project lifecycle. 
1.
 
Planning and Requirements Analysis  
In these stages, the customer involvement is the highest 
[9]. There is a need to communicate and collaborate with 
customer to discuss the requirements at the beginning of a 
project. In this process, requirements are collected, defined, 
and documented. This may be repeated at the beginning of 
each iteration and release throughout software development 
[7].  
It is also important to outline the scope of the next 
release, specify core features to be included, and give an 
estimated timeline for completion [11]. The main benefit of 
the planning stage is to make it possible for the project team 
to visualize the business process that is going to be delivered 
on the next release. Effective customer collaboration and 
working closely with them is important at this stage.  
The main customer involvement processes associated 
with the planning and requirement analysis include: 
•
 
Write a user story:
 the requirements are written by the 
customer and the development team breaks them down 
into smaller tasks. 
•
 
Modify a user story:
 if there is a need for 
modifications, usually after an acceptance test fails, a 
user story will be modified. 
•
 
Delete a user story:
 a user story may be removed if, 
for example, the customer finds that something is not 
important or not needed anymore. 
•
 
Prioritize a user story:
 the customer chooses the 
stories to be included on the next release based on their 
importance and cost estimation. 
•
 
Provide feedback about user story
: (e.g. software team 
may require customer clarifications on requirements at 
any point of time). 
2.
 
Acceptance Testing & Releasing 
The customer’s approval is needed after completing 
each user story; the customer may review the working 
software and either accepts or rejects it. 
The main acceptance testing processes carried out by the 
customer are: 
•
 
Write Acceptance Test:
 normally the customer is 
responsible for writing the t
est scenarios associated 
with each user story. These test scenarios describe 
what the user expects the system to do. 
•
 
Modify Acceptance Test:
 the customer may need to 
modify the provided test scenario. 
•
 
Delete Acceptance Test:
 acceptance tests can be 
deleted by the customer. 
•
 
Change the status of an Acceptance Test to ‘pass’ or 
‘Fail’:
 if the user story is implemented and integrated 
successfully, the customer should approve or reject the 
acceptance tests associated with the story. 
 
In addition, some user stories might be completed early 
in the iteration and hence customer can run its associated 
acceptance tests before the end of the iteration. Therefore, 
software team may want to: 
•
 
Request Running Acceptance Test  
This process might also be needed if acceptance testing 
failed and team members re-work on the corresponding user 
stories; customer needs to be contacted again for another 
acceptance testing after modifications are completed.  
Furthermore, Releasing is a special process of the 
integration process where part of the software is delivered 
to the customer [12]. The associated release processes 
include: 
•
 
T
rack release progress 
This process keeps the customer aware of the current 
status of the release and the amount of work done on the 
project. 
 
III.
 
T
RADITIONAL 
M
ETHODS OF 
C
USTOMER 
I
NVOLVEMENT 
IN 
D
ISTRIBUTED 
A
GILE 
S
OFTWARE PROJECTS
 
A.
 
Using Customer Proxy 
The good choice of a customer representative, who 
plays customer proxy role, minimizes the effect of the 
absence of an on-site customer [2]. Authors in [2] suggests 
assigning the role of customer proxy to a senior offshore 
developer with good domain knowledge. They believe that 
this involvement helps providing better understanding of the 
requirements. The use of customer proxy includes many 
disadvantages: it adds a level of complexity and sometimes 
customers face difficulties in reaching and communicating 
with customer’s proxies. 
8 B.
 
Traveling to Customer Site 
One of the current solutions to overcome the challenges 
resulting from the absence of an on-site customer is having 
the project manager travelled to the offshore team at specific 
points of project time (e.g. at the beginning of each 
iteration). This solution has been extensively discussed in 
the literature (e.g. [2]).  
In their study, Rothman and Hastie [6] believe that the 
expense to meet in person is cheaper than the cost of not 
meeting. Case studies have shown that teams who travelled 
to meet customer succeeded more than teams who did not. 
The return on investment of the relatively small amount of 
money spent to bring the team together at the beginning of 
the project could be measured in the improvement of 
collaboration among the team members, shortened decision 
making cycles, fewer misunderstandings and rework, and 
higher quality work in less time to market. 
Although this practice can bring benefits, sometimes it 
is simply not possible or is beyond the budget of the project. 
In addition, travelling to the customer will occur 
occasionally and can only support only high level 
coordination with customer. It is not practical to rely on this 
solution to manage the expected frequent communication 
between customer and development team during the project 
C.
 
Use of Rich Communication Technologies 
Many studies suggest using rich communication 
technologies to minimize the challenges faced with 
communicating with customers during distributed agile 
projects  [6]. This includes the use of: 
Synchronous communication solutions such as video 
and phone conferencing tools. These are not useful if there 
is no possible overlapping time between software team and 
customer. In addition, these tools might be expensive for 
some teams.  
Asynchronous communication solutions such as E-Mail 
Messaging. These are useful to send requests and file 
attachments, but still cannot be used as a central repository, 
as email content is distributed and separated. Managing and 
filtering emails becomes difficult as the team and project 
knowledge grow [13].  
Many case studies reported difficulties using both 
synchronous or asynchrono
us communication [14-17]. Tool 
cost, planning for meetings, cultural and language 
differences, resolving technical issues, different holidays 
and different time zones, slow turnaround in 
communication and misunderstandings are all problems 
facing distributed agile teams while using these 
technologies. 
As discussed above, all the current methods have 
problems associated with them. In addition to these 
problems, there is a common limitation that almost all 
distributed agile teams face when they have distant 
customer: team members may not be aware of how much 
their technical work needs customer involvement (e.g. 
change in code causes an acceptance test to fail). Although 
in some cases they know that customer involvement is 
necessary, they may forget to inform the customer or there 
might be a long time between the customer’s need and the 
next possible meeting with the development team.  
IV.
 
T
OOL 
S
UPPORT FOR CUSTOMER INVOLVEMENT
 
A review of thirty-six agile and non-agile project 
management tools have been conducted to identify the 
current customer involvement mechanisms provided in 
these tools (shown in Table I). The table shows seven 
different mechanisms and states weather it is fully or 
partially supported by the tool. The review includes both 
commercial and open source tools. Most of the tools 
covered in the survey were designed to support agile 
development on the first class, while some of them support 
also project management in general. 
1.
 
Forums, Wikis, and Software Documentation 
As online discussion is not always possible with 
distributed teams, some tools provide asynchronous 
collaboration with customers in form of forums, wikis, or 
product documentations with comments and voting 
features. These features are provided to keep the customer 
on the loop despite their availability and time zone 
differences. 
2.
 
Add Ideas or Requests 
Most of the tools assume development teams are 
responsible for adding user stories and test cases into tools. 
They only allow customers submitting ideas or requests (11 
tools fully support this and 4 tools partially support it by side 
online discussion or emails from customer). 
3.
 
Provide Feedback 
Similar to ideas and requests posting, some tools (17 
tools) allow customer to give feedback on release or specific 
user story. For instance, Min
gle provides a feature called 
“Hold signoff”, which creates a transition to allow customer 
to give feedback on user stories before they are considered 
'Done'. JIRA collects customer 
satisfactions through simple 
workflow to provide feedback on resolved issues by both 
rating their level of satisfaction and adding comments.  
4.
 
Prioritize a User Story 
About one-third of the studied tools allow prioritizing 
and/or voting mechanism either for customer submitted 
ideas or for available product requi
rements. In VersionOne, 
there is a voting platform that enables team members to 
capture, collaborate on and prioritize customer feature 
requests, and accordingly generate stories based on them. 
Planigle gives the customer the ability to view the backlog 
and give priority to items to be included in the next release.  
5.
 
Status Tracking  
Some tools provide the ability to track status of user 
stories. This allows customer to keep track of the current 
project progress without the need to ask the team.  The 
overall work progress and the status of backlog and release 
are available as a read-only feature to the customer by 
fourteen tools. This feature keeps the customer aware of the 
current status of the project. 
6.
 
Receive Notifications 
Most of the tools allow customers to receive 
notifications whenever changes they are interested in are 
made. Usually this is not an automated process, and 
customers must manually subscribe in interested events or 
requests they want to be aware of. Subscriptions may be 
9 done directly by the customer or by development team 
members in order to keep the customer in the loop. 
7.
 
Manage User Stories 
Managing user stories includes adding, modifying and 
deleting user stories. Only 2 tools (Pivotal Tracker and 
IceScrum) fully support the management of user stories. In 
Pivotal Tracker, the story can be created by anyone who 
can make decisions about story requirements and 
acceptance criteria. 
IceScrum allows customers to add, edit and delete 
stories in the sandbox. These stories must be refined by 
product owner before adding 
them into the product backlog. 
In AgileZen, customer can edit the status of stories. For 
example, story can be marked ready, indicating that it can 
be moved to the next phase. When customer encounters a 
problem with a story, they can mark it blocked, which can 
draw development team attention to the story. 
 
TABLE
 
I.
 
REVIEW
 
OF
 
CUSTOMER
 
INVOLVEMENT
 
MECHANISMS
 
IN
 
AGILE
 
PROJECT
 
MANAGEMENT
 
TOOLS 
 (

 FULL SUPPORT, 

 PARTIAL SUPPORT) 
Agile Tool
 
1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 
Forums /wikis 
Software 
Documentations 
Add 
Ideas/Requests 
Provide 
Feedback 
Prioritize a user 
story 
Status tracking 
Receive 
notifications 
Add/Modify a 
user story 
Delete user story 
Rally   
 
 

 
 
  

   
Mingle  
  

 

 
     
VersionOne  

 
 

 
 

 
    
ScrumWorks  

  

 

  

 

   
 TeamForge 

  

 

  

 

   
ExtremePlanner 
         
TargetProcess  
         
Pivotal Tracker  
  

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
Scrum VSTS  
         
IceScrum  
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
AgileWrap  
         
ScrumDesk  
   

      
Leankit  
         
DevSuite  
 

 

 

  

 

   
TinyPM  

 

 

 
   

 

 
 
Planigle  
    

     
Agilefant  
  

  

 

 

   
Axosoft 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
  
AgileZen 
  

 
   

 

 

 
Daily-Scrum 
  

 
      
Express 
         
JIRA 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
XPlanner 

 

        
BrixHQ 
         
Agile Bench 
         
SprintGround 
  

 

 
     
Planbox 
  

 

 

 
 

 
  
SpiraTeam 
   

 

     
Acunote 
         
Urban Turtle 
   

 
     
Wrike 
   

 
  

 
  
ActiveCollab 

 

 
 

 
  

 
  
Smartsheet 
 

     

   
Agilo 
      

   
Tuleap 

 
  

 

 
 

 
  
Odoo 
   

 

 

 

 
  
10 V.
 
 PROCESS SUPPORT NEEDED FOR CUSTOMER 
INVOLVEMENT
 
The available computer-based customer support 
mechanisms for distributed agile development team vary. 
Some tools do not provide customer role, and thus 
development team will manage customer involvement 
manually. In this case, they are likely to suffer from the 
limitations associated with the traditional management 
methods of customer involvement as mentioned in section 
III (i.e. they may not be aware of how their work needs 
customer involvement, they may forget to inform him, or 
there might be a long time between the customer’s 
participation need and the next possible meeting with the 
development team). 
Although there is reasonable number of tool 
mechanisms supporting customer involvement, the current 
tools do not support most customer involvement processes 
identified in section II. In addition, those mechanisms that 
support customer involvement processes still have 
limitations. Table II summarizes to what extent the current 
tools support the main customer involvement processes.  It 
also shows how current tools can better support the main 
customer involvement processes. 
 
TABLE
 
II.
 
SUPPORT
 
FOR
 
CUSTOMER
 
INVOLVEMENT
 
PROCESSES 
Customer Involvement 
Process 
Support Mechanism in 
Current Tools  
Proposed Support 
Write/Modify a user story 
- Add ideas /requests 
- Add/Modify a user story 
Two of the current tools provide the 
basic process. Writing and modifying 
user stories can be supported by provi
ding the necessary coordination (e.g. 
identify in which situations stories can be added or modified, identify who 
should be responsible for receiving the user story; notify the affected 
members). 
Delete a user story 
-Delete a user story 
Two of the current tools provide the bas
ic process. Deleting user stories can 
be supported by providing the necessary coordination (e.g. identify in 
which situations stories can be deleted, identify who should be affected by 
the deletion and notify the affected team members). 
Prioritize a user story 
- Prioritize a user story 
Current tools allow one customer to prioritize user stories. This function 
can be improved by providing coordination mechanisms supporting voting 
of multiple customers, and adding a mechanism to manage possible 
conflicts between them. 
Provide feedback about user 
story 
- Provide feedback 
Current tools provide the basic process. It can be supported by notifying 
corresponding team members about a new feedback posted. 
Write/ Modify Acceptance 
Test 
- Not supported 
Current tools do not support these two processes entirely. Two new 
functions can be proposed to allow customer to add/modify acceptance 
tests. The functions can also: 
- identify in which situations customer can add/modify acceptance tests. 
- identify who should be affected by the addition/modification and notify 
the affected team members. 
Delete Acceptance Test 
- Not supported 
Current tools do not support this proce
ss entirely. A new function can be 
proposed to allow customer to 
delete acceptance tests. The function can 
also: 
- identify in which situations acceptance tests can be deleted. 
- identify who should be affected by 
the deletion and notify the affected 
team members. 
Change the status of an 
Acceptance Test to 
‘Pass’/‘Fail’ 
- Not supported 
Current tools do not support this proce
ss entirely. A new function can be 
proposed to allow customer change stat
us of acceptance tests. The function 
can also: 
- identify in which situations st
atus of acceptance tests can be changed. 
- identify who should be affected by
 changing status of an acceptance test 
and notify the affected team members. 
Request Running 
Acceptance Test 
 
- Not supported 
Current tools do not support this process entirely. Automating such process 
can save customer’s time. He can 
be involved when required only. 
Track release Progress 
- Status tracking 
- Receive notifications 
Current tools allow custom
er to view the progress but do not automatically 
discover any potential delay (e.g. in delivering a release) and inform 
customer in advance. This can be done in a new function. 
11 VI.
 
CONCLUSIONS
 
This research is about helping customers be more involved 
in globally distributed agile projects. The traditional 
approaches have been reviewed in this paper. The review 
revealed that there is still a need for more support for customer 
involvement. Thus, more formal methods appeared through 
the use of project management tools. 
The tool support provided so far is still weak. The review 
of tools shows that all customer involvement processes are 
either entirely absent in the current tools or limited. 
This paper proposed a set of computer-based 
functionalities that can help support customer involvement in 
globally distributed agile projects. The new functionalities do 
not replace the need for informal communication between 
customer and team members as it is always important to be 
close to customer. However, not all involvements require 
synchronous communications. In addition, depending 
completely on humans to identify and coordinate how 
technical changes affect customer invol
vement is unrealistic.  
Future work will continue as fol
low: first, we will design 
a computer-based model capable of providing the process 
support proposed in this paper. Second, we will evaluate the 
approach through implementing a computer system and 
deliver it to distributed agile project management teams for 
assessment. 
 
R
EFERENCES
 
 
[1] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. v. Bennekum, A. Cockburn, W. 
Cunningham, M. Fowler
, et al.
 (2001, September 2014). 
Manifesto for Agile Software Development
. Available: 
www.agilemanifesto.org 
[2] M. Kajko-Mattsson, G. Azizyan, and M. K. Magarian, "Classes 
of Distributed Agile Development Problems," presented at the 
Proceedings of the 2010 Agile Conference, 2010. 
[3] I. Sommerville, 
Software Engineering
: Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, 2010. 
[4] I. A. N. Inayat, Muhammad; Inayat, Zubaria, "Successful 
Product-based Agile Software Development without Onsite 
Customer," 
International Journal of Software Engineering & Its 
Applications, 
vol. 6, pp. 1-14, April, 2012 2012. 
[5] S. Dorairaj and J. Noble, "Agile Software Development with 
Distributed Teams: Agility, Distribution and Trust," in 
Agile 
Conference (AGILE), 2013
, 2013, pp. 1-10. 
[6] J. Rothman and S. Hastie,
 "Lessons Learned from Leading 
Workshops about Geographically Distributed Agile Teams," 
IEEE Softw., 
vol. 30, pp. 7-10, 2013. 
[7] M. Korkala, M. Pikkarainen,
 and K. Conboy, "Distributed Agile 
Development: A Case Study of Customer Communication 
Challenges," in 
Agile Processes in Software Engineering and 
Extreme Programming
. vol. 31, P. Abra
hamsson, M. Marchesi, 
and F. Maurer, Eds., ed: Spri
nger Berlin Heidelberg,
 2009, pp. 
161-167. 
[8] M. Korkala, M. Pikkara
inen, and K. Conboy, "Combining Agile 
and Traditional: Customer Communication in Distributed 
Environment," in 
Agility Across Time and Space
, D. Šmite, N. B. 
Moe, and P. J. Ågerfalk, Eds., ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2010, pp. 201-216. 
[9] J. Koskela and P. Abrahamsson, "On-site customer in an XP 
project: empirical results from a case study," in 
Software Process 
Improvement
, ed: Springer, 2004, pp. 1-11. 
[10] S. Alyahya, W. K. Ivins, and W. Gray, "Raising the Awareness 
of Development Progress in Distributed Agile Projects," 
Journal 
of Software, 
vol. 8, pp. 3066-3081, 2013. 
[11] L. Maruping, "Implementing Extreme Programming 
in Distributed Software Project Teams: Strategies and 
Challenges," in 
Agility Across Time and Space
, D. Šmite, N. B. 
Moe, and P. J. Ågerfalk, Eds., ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2010, pp. 11-30. 
[12] S. Alyahya, W. K. Ivins, and W. A. Gray, "A Holistic Approach 
to Developing a Progress Tracking System for Distributed Agile 
Teams," pp. 503-512, 2012. 
[13] S. H. Rayhan and N. Haque, 
"Incremental Adoption of Scrum for 
Successful Delivery of an IT Project in a Remote Setup," in 
Agile, 
2008. AGILE '08. Conference
, 2008, pp. 351-355. 
[14] S. Alyahya, "A computer-based holistic approach to managing 
progress of distributed agile teams," PhD Thesis, School of 
Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, 2013. 
[15] M. Paasivaara, S.
 Durasiewicz, and C. Lassenius, "Using Scrum 
in Distributed Agile Development: A Multiple Case Study," in 
Global Software Engineering, 2009. I
CGSE 2009. Fourth IEEE 
International Conference on
, 2009, pp. 195-204. 
[16] E. Therrien, "Overcoming the Challenges of Building a 
Distributed Agile Organization," in 
Agile, 2008. AGILE '08. 
Conference
, 2008, pp. 368-372. 
[17] W. Williams and M. Stout, "Colossal, Scattered, and Chaotic 
(Planning with a Large Distributed Team)," in 
Agile, 2008. 
AGILE '08. Conference
, 2008, pp. 356-361. 
 
12