 Findings on AGSD architec
tural knowledge sharing 
Gilberto Borrego 
Facultad de Ciencias 
Universidad Autónoma de Baja California 
Ensenada, México 
Ramón Palacio 
Departamento de Computación y Diseño 
Instituto Tecnológico de Sonora 
Navojoa, México 
Alberto L. Morán 
Facultad de Ciencias 
Universidad Autónoma de Baja California 
Ensenada, México 
Oscar M. Rodríguez 
División de Investigación y Posgrado 
Instituto Tecnológico de Hermosillo 
Hermosillo, México 
 
Abstract
—Agile Software Development (ASD) is increasingly 
common in globally distributed teams – it is known as AGSD. 
However, while in ASD face-to-face interactions are preferred 
over document-based communications, in global software 
development document-based communication is preferred. These 
differences affect Architectural Knowledge Management. AGSD 
workers preferably convey architectural knowledge (AK) by 
frequent interactions across sites through unstructured and 
textual electronic media (UTEM) (chats, emails, forums, etc.), i.e., 
AK is articulated in these media. UTEM leave unstructured logs 
of shared AK. We present an empirical study to understand AK 
articulation through UTEM in AGSD teams. Our results are an 
ontological model about AK articulation through UTEM in 
AGSD teams, and 11 categories of UTEM interactions across 
sites, where requirements and coding themes were prominent. 
Also, we found 
that AK in UTEM is perceived as important, 
regardless of the interaction frequency.
 
Keywords— agile global software development; virtual teams; 
architectural knowledge; unstructured and textual electronic 
media. 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Nowadays, the adoption of agile software development 
(ASD) in global software development (GSD) companies is a 
fact [1], i.e., they use an agile global software development 
(AGSD) paradigm. In AGSD, communication between local 
and remote members is a challenge since ASD and GSD have 
different approaches. In ASD people interactions are preferred 
over following processes, and working software is preferred 
over comprehensive documentation [2]; in GSD geographic 
distribution of people increases the need for more explicit 
communication [3]. K
nowledge management (KM)
 is 
a 
significant challenge in AGSD 
[4], due to a limited knowledge 
transfer [5]. Hence, architectural knowledge
 management 
(AKM) is also a challenge in AGSD, since ASD reduces the 
time to write proper documentation, which negatively affects 
the coding phases [6], and generates 
documentation debt 
[7].  
In ASD, face-to-face (f2f) communication is preferred, 
thus, documentation debt is so
lved with teammates’ interaction
. 
AGSD d
evelopers prefer text media (particularly instant 
messaging - IM) because they reduce communication problems 
caused by language differences 
[8]. Text media such as email, 
IM, forums, etc., 
usually leaves a textual
 record of users’ 
interactions. In these media (unstructured textual electronic 
media – UTEM), there will be 
architectural knowledge
 (AK) 
recorded that will 
not likely be recorded elsewhere
, i.e, tacit 
AK is articulated in UTEM. These records could be valuable to 
complement and contextualize informal and ad-hoc documents 
used in AGSD. However, t
o the best of our knowledge, AK 
articulation in UTEM has not been
 sufficiently studied, and it is 
unclear which AK aspects are shared.
 
This work presents the resu
lts of an empirical study 
conducted in four Mexican AGSD companies. We observed 
UTEM interactions between local and
 remote members, and 
local members f2f interactio
ns, where AK issues were 
addressed. Our main goal was to understand and characterize 
AK articulation through UTEM in an AGSD environment. 
 
II.
 
S
TUDY DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS
 
 We conducted a two-phase study: (1) observation and (2) 
exploration, with 20 software engineers of four AGSD 
Mexican companies (named A, B, C and D – 11, 4, 3, and 2 
participants respectively). These companies had projects in the 
US, Spain and Latin America, and all the participants have 
contact with remote counterparts through UTEM. The 
companies apply Scrum to manage projects, and different 
software architecture practices (e.g. spike solutions, agile and 
ad-hoc modeling, participative design, pair programming). 
 In the observation phase, we stayed in the facilities of 
company A (the only one who granted us permission to 
monitor and analyze their UTEM interactions) during 3 weeks, 
5 days a week, and 8 hours per day, to observe UTEM 
interactions among remote and local team members, f2f 
interactions among local personnel, and documents related to 
SA topics. We observed f2f and SA documentation, to find a 
relation with UTEM interactions. We registered f2f interactions 
in a log with the following fields: beginning and ending time, 
support media (computer, notebook, board, etc.), participant 
name and a brief description of the interaction topic. UTEM 
interactions were captured with a custom developed software 
tool, which connects to Microsoft Lync, Microsoft Exchange 
and discussion forums of Target 
Process tool. We used the 4+1 
views architectural model [9] as a reference to identify when a 
document or an interaction relates to a SA topic. The findings 
of this phase can be summarized as a UTEM interactions 
categorization, a list of artifacts used to record architectural 
issues, and the main intentions of f2f interactions. In the 
2016 IEEE 11th International Conference on Global Software Engineering2329-6313/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2016.38193 exploration phase, we exposed the findings of the on-site 
observation to all the participants in four focus group sessions 
(one per company), aiming at finding correspondences among 
the companies regardless of their work dynamics. The audio of 
the focus groups sessions was re
corded and transcribed. Then, 
we applied Grounded Theory to understand AK articulation 
through UTEM in AGSD teams. 
As a result of the observation phase, we found that most of 
the architectural documents used
 by the participants were 
related to requirements specification (scenarios view). 
Technical documentation is almost absent and it is usually 
done by specific request only. Regarding the SA interactions, 
we registered 45 f2f interacti
ons and 216 UTEM interactions 
(145 IM conversations, 51 email messages and 20 discussion 
forums comments). It is worth 
saying that MS Lync defines an 
IM conversation as the group of messages sent while an IM 
window is opened. Based on these registered interactions in 
company A, and on the focus group sessions with all the 
participating companies, we developed an ontology that 
represents our understanding of AK articulation through 
UTEM in AGSD teams (see Fig. 1). The resulting ontology 
has two parts: communications
 aspects and AK aspects.
 
As the next step, we analyzed the captured UTEM 
interactions in order to categorize the AK topics that are 
discussed in these media. We obtained 11 UTEM interaction 
categories and they were related to different architectural views 
of the 4+1 views model. W
e observed that issues related to 
scenarios and implementation views were prominent. All 
participants evaluated the ob
tained categories in terms of 
incidence and importan
ce, during the focus group sessions. We 
found that the perceived importance of the evaluated topics is 
significantly higher than its perceived incidence. 
Regarding f2f 
interactions, we observed that 55% were related to the 
scenarios view, and the rest were related to the implementation 
and deployment views. We may see a correspondence between 
UTEM and f2f interactions, as scenarios and implementation 
views were frequent in UTEM interactions. Also, given that 
observation was performed only in company A, during the 
focus group sessions we asked the rest of participants for their 
most frequent architectural topics in f2f interactions. The topics 
reported were consistent with 
those observed in company A.
 
III.
 
D
ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
 
Despite that the only SA documents found were related to 
the scenarios view, we found that the most frequent SA topic in 
f2f interactions was also related to the scenarios view. This is 
due to the scenarios documents being generally incomplete or 
unclear. Additionally, f2f interactions related to the 
implementation view were the second in frequency. This 
reflects at least two agile values in AGSD teams: “Individuals 
and interactions over processes and tools” and “Working 
software over comprehensive documentation”. 
Further, most of the identified categories of UTEM 
interactions were related to the scenarios and implementation 
views, just as for the registered f2f interactions.
 This behavior 
corresponded with the usual behavior in ASD, i.e., the analysis 
and design phases are diluted, because problems are generally 
understood by experimenting with code 
[10]
.
 Also, we found 
that AK shared through UTEM is important, regardless of the 
interaction frequency in AGSD teams. These findings provide 
evidence of the importance of UTEM interactions, and that AK 
is shared through these type of media.  
Based on our ontological model about AK articulation 
through UTEM in AGSD teams, and the other findings of the 
study, we observe a trend where ASD practices are prominent 
in an AGSD. In fact, the most important drivers for AGSD 
relate to the Agile Principles and the rest of the drivers relate to 
global business perspectives [5].  
As future work, we plan to 
formalize our understanding of 
AK articulation through UTEM in terms of knowledge 
management, aiming at obtaining a set of design guidelines 
that support access to AK in UTEM thro
ugh a software tool.  
R
EFERENCES
 
[1] B. Ramesh, L. Cao, K. Mohan, and P. Xu, “Can distributed software 
development be agile?,” Commun. ACM, vol. 49, no. 10, p. 41, Oct. 
2006. 
[2] M. Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., 
Cunningham, W., Fowler, “The Agile Manifesto.” 2001. 
[3] P. Kruchten, “Contextualizing agile software development.,” J. Softw. 
Evol. Process, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 351–361, 2013. 
[4] M. Jiménez, M. Piattini, and A. Vizcaíno, “Challenges and 
Improvements in Distributed Software Developmen: A Systematic 
Review,” Adv. Softw. Eng., vol. 2009, no. 710971, p. 14, 2009. 
[5] N. Kamaruddin, N. Arshad, and A. Mohamed, “Comparison of drivers 
between global software development and agile global software 
development: A SURVEY,” in Computer and Mathematical Sciences 
Graduates National Colloqium 2013, At Faculty of Computer and 
Mathematical Sciences, UiTM Shah Ala, 2012. 
[6] R. Noordeloos and C. Manteli, “From RUP to Scrum in Global Software 
Development: A Case Study,” 2012. 
[7] E. Tom, A. Aurum, and R. Vidgen, “An exploration of technical debt,” J. 
Syst. Softw., vol. 86, no. 6, pp. 1498–1516, 2013. 
[8] H.-C. Estler, M. Nordio, C. A. Furia, B. Meyer, and J. Schneider, “Agile 
vs. Structured Distributed Software Development: A Case Study,” in 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Global Software 
Engineering, 2012. 
[9] P. Kruchten, “The 4+ 1 view model of architecture,” Software, IEEE, 
vol. November 1, p. 9, 1995. 
[10] B. Selic, “Agile Documentation, Anyone?,” IEEE Softw., vol. 26, no. 6, 
pp. 11–12, 2009. 
 
Fig. 1. Ontology that represents the involved aspects in AK articulation through UTEM in AGSD teams (all relations without labe
l are of type “have”)
. 
UTEM Interaction
Role
Artifact
Generated
Technological support
generate
Documentation
Software
Necessity
Topic
Architectural view
related to
related to
UTEM
share / refer to
participate
Benefit
Prejudice
refer to
Promoting
Situation
Inhibitory
Situation
refer to
Code
Component
Architectural
decission
take / explain
related to
Worker
Communication aspects
Architectural knowledge
194