 Understanding architectural knowledge sharing in 
AGSD teams: An empirical study 
Gilberto Borrego 
Facultad de Ciencias 
Universidad Autónoma de Baja California 
Ensenada, México 
gilberto.borrego
@uabc.edu.mx 
Ramón Palacio 
Departamento de Computación y Diseño 
Instituto Tecnológico de Sonora 
Navojoa, México 
ramon.palacio@itson.edu.mx 
Alberto L. Morán 
Facultad de Ciencias 
Universidad Autónoma de Baja California 
Ensenada, México 
alberto.moran@uabc.edu.mx 
Oscar M. Rodríguez 
División de Investigación y Posgrado 
Instituto Tecnológico de Hermosillo 
Hermosillo, México 
omrodriguez@ith.mx
 
 
Abstract
—
 
Nowadays, the use of agile methodologies (AM) in 
Global Software Development (GSD) – known as AGSD – is 
increasingly common. However, AM and GSD are not 
completely compatible. On the one hand, in AM people 
interactions (face-to-face) are preferred over document-based 
communications to share knowledge. On the other hand, in GSD 
knowledge sharing is conducted through documents to minimize 
the effect of the inherent four distances (physical, temporal, 
language and cultural). This means that tacit knowledge is 
preferred in AM and explicit knowledge is preferred in GSD. 
These differences between AM and GSD affect many aspects of 
software development, for instance: Architectural Knowledge 
Management. According to the literature, in AGSD it is 
preferred to convey Architectural Knowledge (AK) by frequent 
interactions across sites thro
ugh unstructured and textual 
electronic media (UTEM) (chats, emails, forums, etc.), that is, 
AK is articulated in these media. UTEM leave a textual record 
of the transmitted information, thus leaving an unstructured log 
of the shared AK of the project. In this paper we present an 
empirical study to understand AK articulation in UTEM in 
AGSD teams. Our results consist of an ontology that represents 
the involved aspects in AK articulation in UTEM in AGSD 
teams. Additionally, we identified eleven categories of 
interactions across sites th
rough UTEM, where requirements 
and coding themes are prominent. Finally, we found that AK in 
UTEM is perceived as important, regardless the interaction 
frequency. These results lead us to 
think that a tool to structure 
and exploit AK in UTEM is needed in AGSD, in order to bridge 
the gap between AM and GSD. 
Keywords— agile global softwar
e development; virtual teams; 
architectural knowledge; unstructured and textual electronic 
media. 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
In the last years, many companies where global software 
development is applied have adopted agile methodologies 
(AM) [1], i.e., they use an agile global software development 
(AGSD) paradigm. In AGSD, communication between local 
and remote members is particularly important. According to 
the agile manifesto [2], in AM people interactions are 
preferred over following processes, and software that actually 
works is preferred over comp
rehensive documentation. This 
means that the documentation produc
ed is only that which the 
team considers sufficient to understand the software being 
developed, as in AM it is emphasized that knowledge be 
transferred through interactions rather than through 
documents. Therefore, tacit knowledge predominates over 
explicit knowledge in AM. 
Also, geographic distribution in AGSD increases the need 
for a more explicit communication [3]. In addition, in GSD 
most of the knowledge is explicit (with formal documents and 
strict process tracking) to reduce the impact of the four 
distances of this approach (i.e. temporal, physical, cultural and 
linguistic) [4]; while in AM there are few documents, which 
are generally ad-hoc or informal. All this shows an important 
gap between AM and GSD (see Table I). 
It is known that knowledge transfer in AGSD is limited 
[5], therefore 
one of the significant challenges in AGSD is 
knowledge management (KM)
 [6], [7]. An important kind of 
knowledge handled in AGSD relates to software architecture 
(SA). SA can be defined as “
the structure or structures of the 
system, which comprise software elements, the externally 
visible properties of those elements, and the relationships 
among them
” [8]. SA knowledge or architectural knowledge 
(AK), not only refers to structures, software components, 
properties and relations, but also to the SA decisions that led 
to their current organization
 [9]. It could be said that AK 
T
ABLE 
I.
 
 C
OMPARISON BETWEEN 
GSD
 AND 
AM
 
(
BASED ON 
[4], [31]) 
Global Software Development 
Agile Methodologies 
Geographically distributed teams
 
Collocated teams 
Many documents (formal and 
based on standards)
 
Few documentation (informal 
or ad-hoc) 
Focused on process tracking
 
Focused on people and their 
interactions 
Different culture and time zone
 
Same culture and time zone 
2016 IEEE 11th International Conference on Global Software Engineering2329-6313/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2016.29109 management (AKM) [10] is also a challenge in AGSD, since 
AM reduce the time to write proper documentation, which 
negatively affects the coding phases [11].  
In AGSD, communication between local and remote team 
members is performed through phone calls, instant messaging, 
email, and video calls, etc.
 [12], i.e., they share knowledge 
through electronic media. 
Some of these communication 
means leave a textual record of the information transmitted 
through them, for example, in
 the log files of e-mail and 
instant messenger. In these 
media (which we will call 
unstructured textual electronic media – UTEM), and given the 
agile nature of the processes, there will be AK recorded that 
will not be probably recorded anywhere else. It can be said 
that tacit AK is articulated in UTEM (according to SECI 
Model [13]). Thus, these records could be valuable to 
complement and contextualize the informal and ad-hoc 
documents used in AM. This could reduce the problems about 
the lack of explicit and clear 
documentation in AM, including: 
waste of time answering the same questions and finding 
solutions to problems that had been submitted previously, loss 
of knowledge when a project member retires, defects in 
software evolution and maintenan
ce, lack of visibility for 
project monitoring and technical solutions and poorly 
understood requirements [14], [15]. 
This paper presents the results of an empirical study 
conducted in four Mexican AGSD companies. We observed 
UTEM interactions between local and
 remote team members, 
and face-to-face interactions between local members, where 
AK issues were addressed. The m
ain goal of the study is to 
understand and characterize 
AK articulation through UTEM 
in an AGSD environment. The rest of the paper is organized 
as follows: in Section II, we pr
esent related work, Section III 
presents a description of the study conducted, while in Section 
IV we present its results. In Section V we present a discussion 
of the results and finally in Section VI we present our 
conclusions and directions of future work. 
II.
 
R
ELATED WORK
 
Since KM was identified as a challenge in AGSD, there 
have been efforts to understand how agile teams communicate 
in distributed settings. In order to identify the related work of 
this study, we conducted a literature review considering two 
main topics: KM in AGSD and AKM in AGSD. 
Firstly, AGSD communications have been studied from a 
distributed cognition perspective [16], and it was found that 
local members heavily rely on knowledge codification, 
aiming at spreading it out to remote members through Web 
tools. This result was confirmed by Razzak and Smite [17], 
and additionally they mapped common KM practices in 
AGSD to standard KM strategies, called knowledge schools 
[18]. In addition, Dorairaj et al. [6] identified several practices 
in terms of knowledge generation, codification, transfer and 
application, in order to contribute to the successful 
implementation of AGSD projects. In another study [19], 
the 
importance of showing videoconferences on public displays 
to reduce the effect of GSD’s distances was highlighted
. 
Further, Boden et al. [20] showed that public displays in 
AGSD environments help to en
courage ad-hoc coordination 
and decision-making processes.  
On top of that, given that communication across sites is 
part of the base of KM strategies in AGSD, Juarez et al. [21] 
explored the use of social networks as a source of knowledge. 
By monitoring Facebook interactions on an agile and 
distributed team, they found that team members share 
technical knowledge, i.e., AK is 
shared through this social 
network. However, it was not reported what kind of AK was 
shared. The high occurrence of comments about AK makes us 
believe that constant communication through Facebook was 
used to mitigate the lack of technical documents.  
Regarding the works related to AKM in AGSD, taking 
into account that AGSD and GSD share common 
characteristics, Clerc et al. [22] validated AKM practices 
commonly used in GSD in an AGSD environment. They 
obtained that half of the validated practices were commonly 
used in AGSD, highlighting the following practices: (1) 
Frequent interaction between sites using electronic media 
(video/audio calls, chats, emails, etc.); (2) knowing who is 
who, i.e., knowing who the right people for each subject are. 
Surprisingly, the least common practices where more related 
to architectural design issues. 
Additionally, other studies have characterized problems 
related to SA and processes in AGSD [23], [24]. In short, these 
problems are characterized as follows: process-centric 
coordination, communication and integration cost, and 
interaction problems. Also, in the same studies, an 
architecture-centric paradigm w
as proposed to add efficiency 
and productivity to software cycles in AGSD, with support 
from Web 2.0 technologies. 
Recapping, the use of Web tools (UTEM - chats, emails, 
social media, etc.) is part of KM strategies in AGSD 
environments, since these tools are suitable to share codified 
knowledge across sites. Even, these tools have been proposed 
as a support for an architecture-centric approach in AGSD. 
However, it has been found that AKM practices that promote 
personalization get much more 
attention than those promoting 
centralization in AGSD [22]. This means that AGSD workers 
prefer to establish contact with a team member to get AK 
(usually through UTEM), instead of writing SA documents 
and sharing them through a common repository.  
Although the literature shows that AK is shared through 
UTEM in AGSD, to the best of our knowledge, until the 
present day, there is no complete understanding of AK sharing 
across distributed sites in AGSD environments, particularly 
regarding UTEM. 
III.
 
S
TUDY DESCRIPTION 
 
In this section we describe 
an empirical study involving 
four Mexican AGSD companies. The study consisted of an 
on-site observation on one of the four companies and an 
exploration of observations 
on all the four companies. 
A.
 
Objective 
To understand AK articulation 
in UTEM between local 
and remote members in AGSD teams, in order to have 
elements to technologically support AKM in distributed and 
agile teams. 
110 B.
 
Research questions 

 
RQ1
 - What elements are involved in AK articulation 
in AGSD teams?  

 
RQ2
 - Which are the most frequent AK topics in 
UTEM interactions in AGSD 
teams according to team 
members’ perception? 

 
RQ3
 – How are the perceived incidence and the 
perceived importance of AK topics in UTEM 
interactions among AGSD team members related? 

 
RQ4
 - How are the AK topics in UTEM and face-to-
face interactions, and AK documents related among 
them? 
C.
 
Participants 
Study participants were 20 software engineers working in 
4 different Mexican AGSD companies (see Table II). 
Participants stay in contact with remote counterparts through 
UTEM.  
The participating companies have projects with others in 
the US, Spain, Ecuador, Argentina, Colombia, Peru, 
Guatemala and Honduras. All the companies apply Scrum as 
methodological base to manage projects. However, regarding 
requirements management, company B and company D only 
use user stories; company A uses a mix of user stories and 
features; and company C receives requirement documents 
from its clients, but they have to be refined on the way. 
Regarding software design and construction, the four 
companies share the following 
practices: spike solutions and 
agile modeling. Company B and company C also apply pair 
programming and participative design agile practices. 
Regarding work distribution, participants of company B 
and company D, are part of 
development teams where remote 
developers are involved. Thus, these companies share 
responsibility in all the development cycle between local and 
remote members. Also, they only have face-to-face design 
meetings in case of a complex project. In the case of company 
A, the participants refine requirements with their remote 
teammates, and they have the product and development 
control. Also, participants of company A conduct system 
testing and develop deployment documents. Their remote 
teammates are responsible for user testing and software 
deployment. Finally, particip
ants of company C receive 
requirements documents and de
velop, test and deploy the 
software product. 
D.
 
Data gathering 
Data gathering was divided in two phases: observation and 
exploration. The observation phase was conducted only in 
company A in an on-site manner, given that it was the only 
company that granted us permis
sion to monitor and analyze 
their UTEM interactions. We conducted observation during 3 
weeks, 5 days a week and 8 hour per day. Six projects and 
eleven participants were involved, where interactions with 
team members from Spain and Latin America were 
performed.   
 The main intention of the observation phase was to 
register and analyze the UTEM interactions across sites. For 
this purpose, we asked company A participants for the most 
common UTEM that they use to interact with local and remote 
members. The following media was included: IM (Microsoft 
Lync), email (Microsoft Exchange) and discussion forums 
(part of the Target Process tool). The interactions through 
these media were captured with an 
ex-professo
 custom 
developed software tool. 
We decided to observe face-to-face interactions among 
collocated members, and to analyze the documentation 
artifacts related to SA aspects, in order to find a relation 
between them and UTEM interactions. Face-to-face 
interactions were registered in a log, including: beginning and 
ending time, supporting media (computer, notebook, board, 
etc.), participant name and a brief description of the 
interaction topic. It is worth saying that we did not interact 
with the participants during the observation, we only 
registered the observation in the log. 
In order to have a reference model to identify when an 
architectural topic was discussed, either in interactions or 
documents, we used the 4+1 views architectural model [25]. 
This model establishes five ar
chitectural views, which are 
described next: 

 
Scenarios view
: considers requirements, use cases, 
user stories, etc.;  

 
Logical view
: abstractions and key mechanisms, 
responsibilities separation and distribution;  

 
Implementation view
: classes, components and code, 
subsystems;  

 
Process view
: components and classes interactions at 
the business process level;  

 
Deployment view
: hardware, configuration, and 
deployment issues. 
During the exploration phase, we analyzed the findings of 
the observation phase along with the participants of the four 
companies. We conducted four focus group sessions (one per 
each company). The findings were summarized in (i) UTEM 
interactions, (ii) a list of artifacts used to record architectural 
issues, and (iii) the main intentions of face-to-face 
interactions. The audio of the focus groups sessions was 
recorded. 
T
ABLE 
II.
 
 P
ARTICIPANTS CHARATERISTICS PER COMPANY 
(A
VG 
=
 
A
VERAGE
,
 
M
ED 
=
 
M
EDIAN
) 
Company
 
Number of 
participants 
Participating 
projects
 
Age
a
 
Software 
engineering 
experience
a
 
AGSD 
experience
a
 
Avg 
Med 
Avg 
Med 
Avg 
Med 
A
 
11 
6 
23.7 
23 
1.5 
1.5 
0.9 
0.4 
B 
4 
3 
36.3 
35.5 
13.5 
13 
5.3 
5.5 
C 
3 
3 
26.3 
27 
3 
3 
1.6 
1 
D 
2 
2 
28.5 
28.5 
7 
7 
4.5 
4.5 
a.
 
Amounts expressed in years. 
111 E.
 
Data analysis 
To analyze UTEM interactions, participants of company 
A were asked for a list of keywords used in each project to 
refer to architectural issues, both formally and informally. 
This list was then used to filter UTEM interactions in order to 
keep only AK related interactions. Once filtered, interactions 
were read one by one to id
entify the main SA topics. 
In order to analyze face-to-face interactions each entry in 
the log was examined to obtain the main contact intentions 
among the local team members. 
Finally, the focus groups audi
os were transcribed and 
Grounded Theory was applied in order to understand AK 
articulation through UTEM in AGSD teams. 
IV.
 
R
ESULTS
 
The results of this study are presented in two subsections: 
Overall understanding of AK articulation in UTEM, and 
UTEM and face-to-face interactions. 
A.
 
Overall understanding of 
AK articulation in UTEM 
During the observation phase 
we registered 45 face-to-
face interactions of different SA aspects. Also, 216 UTEM 
interactions were recorded and analyzed, where 145 were 
from IM conversations, 51 from email messages and 20 from 
discussion forums comments. It is worth noting that, MS 
Lync defines an IM conversation as a group of sent messages 
while an IM window stays opened.
 
Based on these registered interactions in company A, and 
on the focus group sessions with all the participating 
companies, we developed an ontology (see Figure 1) that 
represents our understanding of AK articulation through 
UTEM in AGSD teams, with all the elements that we could 
identify (this fulfills 
RQ1
). The resulting ontology has two 
parts: communications aspects and AK aspects. We describe 
them in the following paragraphs. 
Regarding communication aspects, the main element is a 
UTEM interaction related to
 AK sharing among AGSD 
workers. The involved AGSD work
ers play a specific role in 
the team (developer, tester, analyst, product owner, client, 
etc.). We noted that AGSD workers 
frequently refer to a past 
interaction (IM conversation, email message, forum entry, 
etc.), in order to argue or give context to the current 
discussion. 
We found that UTEM interactions related to AK are 
promoted or triggered by different situations. Some of these 
promoting situations are the following: ask someone for 
specific information (through UTEM) to avoid wasting time 
looking for AK in documents; a team receives a new member 
and a remote team gives him AK 
context; poor or nonexistent 
AK documentation (AK is asked through UTEM); doubts on 
legacy systems and complex code
 components (experts are 
consulted through UTEM). 
We also found situations that inhibit AK interactions. 
Some of these situations are the following: referencing 
repositories (instead of extending an UTEM interaction to 
share AK), strict adherence to well-defined methodologies 
(avoiding misunderstandings and frequent questions), 
following documentation best practices (e.g. explicit 
documents and code conventions
), avoid asking a question to 
the same person several tim
es (avoiding feeling ashamed 
while asking). 
Additionally, we identified benefits and prejudices of 
establishing AK related interactions through UTEM. Some of 
the identified benefits were: requirements refinement, 
knowledge transfer among team members, and decreased 
number of software errors (bugs), among the most cited by 
participants. Furthermore, th
e most cited prejudices were: 
wasted time and a sense of knowledge unreliability (since 
knowledge comes from informal media such as IM and forum 
entries). 
Concerning AK aspects, we observed that artifacts are 
involved during UTEM interactions, either generated or as 
technological support artifacts. Also, AGSD workers refer to 
technological support artifacts (e.g. IDE, bug trackers, tasks 
managers, repositories, etc.) during UTEM interactions. 
Regarding generated artifacts, these are shared o referred in 
 
Figure 1. Ontology
 that represents the involved aspects in AK articulation through UTEM in AGSD teams (
all relations without label are of type “have”). 
Communication aspects
Architectural knowledge
UTEM Interaction
Role
Artifact
Generated
Technological support
generate
Documentation
Software
Necessity
Topic
Architectural view
related to
related to
UTEM
share / refer to
participate
Benefit
Prejudice
refer to
Promoting
Situation
Inhibitory
Situation
Worker
refer to
Code
Component
Architectural
decission
take / explain
related to
112 UTEM interactions by AGSD workers. This kind of artifacts 
include: documentation (for
mal or ad-hoc diagrams, 
specifications, schedules, etc.) and software, either 
components (executable, libraries, frameworks, etc.) or source 
code snippets or files. All these generated artifacts are related 
to a particular architectural view, according to their nature. 
It is worth highlighting that in the participating 
companies, most of the architectural documents were related 
to requirements specification. Technical documentation is 
almost absent. These documents are usually realized on 
specific request only. 
In addition, we observed that when a generated artifact is 
shared or referred, an ex
planation is associated to it. 
Architectural decisions are occasionally present in that 
explanation. For example: when a 
software artifact is shared, 
the sender usually explains how it works, and why it has to 
work in that manner. Also, architectural decisions could be 
taken through UTEM, depending of the work distribution of 
the AGSD team. For instance, when all the team members are 
developers (local and remote) 
it is more probable that this 
kind of decisions were taken using UTEM.  
Additional AK aspects that we identified were knowledge 
needs in a particular archi
tectural view. For example, 
participants manifested the fo
llowing AK needs: diagrams, 
access to architectural d
esign, access to e-mail and IM history 
(to look for AK), and know whom to ask specific 
architectural issues. Finally, we identified different 
architectural topics in UTEM 
interactions (e.g. coding, 
requirements, databases, testing,
 etc.) that are also related to 
different architectural views.   
B.
 
UTEM and face-to-face interactions categorization 
 Once a preliminary understanding of AK articulation in 
UTEM was achieved, and aiming at fulfilling 
RQ2
, we 
analyzed the captured UTEM interactions in order to 
categorize the AK topics that are discussed in these media (the 
same topics identified as part of AK in the ontology presented 
above). We obtained eleven U
TEM interaction categories (see 
Table III), which were related to
 different architectural views 
of the 4+1 views model. For example, Category 3 
(“Information request about the system’s internal flow”) was 
related to the implementation and processes views because 
their interactions were referred to coding and components 
interaction. It is worth clarifying the relationship of categories 
8 ("New project proposals") and 10 ("Databases topics 
clarification") with architectural views. Category 8 was 
related to the scenarios view, since interactions were about 
overall functionality for new projects. Category 10 was related 
to the implementation and deployment views, because its 
interactions were focused on databases querying, 
configuration and installation. 
 One of the highlights of the interactions was that 
participants commented that most of them repeat 
information. Whether by oversight or because the message 
was not well understood since the beginning, they turned to 
discuss some aspects through UTEM. In this regard, one of 
 
Figure 2. Likert valoration in terms of importance and incidence of the UTEM interactions, 
grouped by architectural views and company (A, B, C, D). 
Obtained from the participants evaluation of the 11 categories of the UTEM interations
 
(Note: logic view symbol is hidden behind the cumulus located on 
the point (4,4)). 
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
B
C
D
A
B
C
1
2
3
4
5
12345
IMPORTANCE
INCIDENCE
Scenarios
Logic
Implementation
Processes
Deployment
T
ABLE 
III.
 
 UTEM
 INTERACTIONS CATEGORIES RELATED TO ARCHITECTURAL VIEWS OF 
4+1
 ARCHITECTURAL MODEL 
(S
 
=
 
S
CENARIOS
,
 
L
 
=
 
L
OGIC
,
 
I
 
=
 
I
MPLEMENTATION
,
 
P
 
=
 
P
ROCESSES
,
 
D
 
=
 
D
EPLOYMENT
) 
Categories 
Architectural views 
S 
L 
I 
P 
D 
1.
 
Code segments sharing 
 
 
x 
 
 
2.
 
Testing/deployments environment settings 
 
 
 
 
x 
3.
 
Information request about the system’s internal flow 
 
 
x 
x 
 
4.
 
Communicate information about classes (without code sharing) 
 
 
x 
 
 
5.
 
Referencing business rules or internal operation that was explained by a third party 
x 
 
x 
x 
 
6.
 
Technical explanation about the solution of errors 
 
 
x 
 
 
7.
 
Business rules, features or user stories clarification 
x 
 
 
 
 
8.
 
New project proposals  
x 
 
 
 
 
9.
 
User level doubts about the functioning of a finished product  
x 
 
 
 
 
10.
 
Database topics clarification 
 
x 
x 
 
x 
11.
 
Information request about structuring data for a test 
x 
 
 
 
 
113 the participants in the focus groups mentioned: “
... you may 
cause a bad impression to th
e other person if you are 
continuously asking questions ...
". 
Another important aspect is that the scenarios and 
implementation views comprise many of the categories (see 
Table III). In addition, only category 10 is related to the logical 
view. This may mean that few 
issues of conceptual elements 
are discussed in UTEM interactions (in this case database 
schemas). Instead, programming requirements topics were the 
most predominant aspects. 
In order to identify how frequent and how important the 
identified categories are, we conducted an evaluation where 
all participants assessed the categories in those terms 
according to their personal perceptions. A Likert scale 
structured as follows was used: 1 – very rare/unimportant, 2 - 
rare/unimportant, 3 - neutral, 4 - common/important 5 - very 
common/important. We grouped the obtained responses by 
architectural view and by company, and we obtained the 
medians for each group.   
 To compare them, we created a scattered graph, where the 
X axis corresponds to incidence (frequency) values and the Y 
axis corresponds to importance
 values (see Figure 2). We 
observed that most of the architectural views were perceived 
at least as “Important” (more than 3 in the Likert Scale). In 
contrast, in terms of incidence, there is more variability in the 
perceptions. However, approximately half of the incidence 
perceptions were perceived at least as “Common” (more than 
3 in the Likert Scale). 
Furthermore, we visually note a difference between the 
incidence and importance of 
UTEM interactions. There is 
more dispersion in incidence pe
rceptions than in importance 
perceptions. In order to confirm 
this difference in an analytical 
manner, all the participants were took as a single sample of 
AGSD workers. We considered that it is valid to group the 
participants in that manner, since all of them share AK 
through UTEM regardless their work style; and precisely their 
style is reflected in the dispersion of incidence and 
importance. Subsequently, the median of perceived 
importance and perceived inci
dence was obtained from each 
participant. Thus,  two sets of 
data were obtained (graphically 
seen in Figure 3), where n1 = n2 = 20, i.e., the total number of 
participants in this study.  
Given the sample size and nature of data, we decided to 
apply a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (a non-parametric test). We 
defined the null hypothesis (H
0
) as follows: There is no 
difference between the incidence and importance perceptions 
of the UTEM interactions related to AK. The alternative 
hypothesis (H
1
) was: The perceived importance is 
significantly greater than the incidence perception of the 
UTEM interactions related to AK. After applying the 
statistical test, with a significance level of 0.01 (see details in 
Table IV), the null hypothesis (p-value = 0.00062 

 0.01, W 

W
p

 0.01
) was rejected. Therefore, we can establish that the 
importance perception of UTEM interactions is greater than 
the incidence perception for the pa
rticipants of this study (this 
fulfills 
RQ3
). 
 On the other hand, also face-to-face interactions were 
observed in order to have the complete scenario of the AK 
related interactions in an AGSD environment. As we 
mentioned earlier, we registered 45 face-to-face interactions 
in company A. We could highlight that 39% of these 
interactions were related to clarifications about current 
functionality, and 29% to current technical operation (see 
Table V). This means that programming and requirements 
topics are prominent in face-to-face interactions.  
Further, if we group the interactions by architectural view 
(see Figure 4) considering the 4+1 views architectural model, 
 
Figure 3. Median of perceived importance and perceived incidence in Likert Scale obtained from each participant 
(company A = blue box, company B 
= orange box, company C = yellow box, company D = green box). 
1
2
3
4
5
1234567891011121314151617181920
MEDIANS OF PARTICIPANTS' 
PERCEPTIONS
PARTICIPANTS
Inicidence
Importance
A 
B 
C 
D 
T
ABLE 
IV.
 
 W
ILCOXON SIGNED
-
RANK TEST DETAILS 
(
EFECTIVE SAMPLE 
SIZE 
N
 
=
 
16) 
W statistic values 
Z statistic values 
W-value 
5.5 
Z-value 
-3.2318 
Mean Difference 
-0.19 
Mean (W) 
68 
Sum of positive ranks  
5.5 
Standard Deviation (W)  
19.34 
Sum of negative ranks 
130.5 
p-value 
0.00062 
W
p

 0.01
 (n = 16)
 a
 
23 
 
a.
 
Effective sample size is n=16 because there are four pairs of perceptions of incidence 
and importance that are equals (see Figure 3). 
T
ABLE 
V.
  
F
ACE
-
TO
-
FACE INTERACTIONS RELATED TO 
ARCHITECTURAL VIEWS
 
Face-to-Face AK topics 
Incidence 
percentage 
Architectural 
view 
Current functionality clarifications 
39% 
Scenarios 
Current technical operation 
clarifications 
29% 
Implementation 
New functionality clarifications 
16% 
Scenarios 
Database programming 
clarifications 
11%
 
Implementation 
Application/environment settings 
5% 
Deployment 
114 we observe that 55% of them were related to the scenarios 
view, and the rest were related to the implementation (40%) 
and deployment (5%) views. From this perspective, we may 
see a coincidence between UTEM and face-to-face 
interactions, as these three architectural views (scenarios, 
implementation and deployment) were frequent in UTEM 
interactions.  
Additionally, given that observation was performed only 
in company A, during the focus group sessions we asked the 
participants from the other companies for their most frequent 
architectural topics in face-to-face interactions. The reported 
topics were: functionality clarification, technical operation of 
any application (both in a general way and in detail), and 
technical support on development issues. These topics were 
consistent with those observed in company A.  
V.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
 The discussion of results is organized three-fold: firstly 
we discuss UTEM interaction categories and companies’ 
work style; then we discuss AK documentation, UTEM 
interactions and face-to-face interactions; and finally, we 
present a discussion about problems related to AK sharing. 
A.
 
UTEM interactions categories
 and companies’ work 
style 
 Regarding UTEM interactions categories, it was initially 
considered that the four companies could have a similar 
behavior in terms of incidence and importance, as they work 
using the AGSD paradigm. However, when looking at a more 
detailed level, we noticed that each company has a particular 
behavior. For instance, if we compare the perceptions of 
company B and company C (see Figure 2), their perceptions 
are located in opposite sides of the incidence axis.  
On the one hand, considering the case of company B, we 
notice that the perceptions on both incidence and importance 
for all categories are high (see Figure 5). This suggests that 
knowledge is shared more by interactions than by documents. 
Particularly, in this company, it stands out that most of the 
participants work on projects with remote counterparts, who 
are also developers like them; thus they are part of a virtual 
team dedicated to coding. This is reflected in the incidence 
and importance behavior of company B (see Figure 5), as the 
categories with the highest values in both perceptions are 
related to the scenarios (C5, C7, C11), implementation (C3, 
C10) and deployment (C10) views. In other words, 
clarifications are common and important on the following 
topics: requirements (C7), databases (C10), test case 
structuring (C11), technical operations (C3), and business 
rules referenced by a third party (C5). 
On the other hand, considering the case of company C, we 
noticed that the perception of both incidence and importance 
for most categories tended to be low (see Figure 5). This 
behavior could mean that company C does not share much AK 
through UTEM interactions. In fact, participants of this 
company usually receive explicit
 and extensive requirements 
documents (up to 30 pages), and their doubts are clarified 
preferably by phone. In addition, their counterparts usually 
only establish requirements 
and they expect a finished 
software product. This is reflected in categories related to 
implementation (C1, C3, C4, C5, C6, C10) and deployment 
views (C2, C10), which are thos
e with the lowest incidence 
values.  
In general, we identified that the perception of incidence 
and importance of the eleven categories may reflect the 
companies’ work style. For exam
ple: company A reported that 
they rarely have developers as remote counterparts, however, 
their counterparts are testers and application installers. 
Therefore, categories related to testing and application 
deployments (C2 and C10) are the highest in incidence and 
importance (just below categories re
lated to requirements). In 
addition, company D reported that they have developers as 
counterparts, and that they use repositories as the primary 
means for sharing technical knowledge. This is reflected in 
categories related to implementation view (C1, C2, C4 and 
C10), because they are the highest on incidence in this 
company (again, just below categories related to 
requirements). However, categories related to implementation 
 
Figure 4. Face-to-face interactions incidence grouped by 
architectural  
view. 
55%
40%
5%
Scenarios
Implementation
Deployment
  
Figure 5. Company B and company C perceptions 
(expressed in Likert scale) 
of UTEM interaction categories along with the corresponding architectural 
view (S = Scenarios, L = Logic, I = Implementation, P = Process, D = Deployment) 
115 view are not considered as important by company D, as its 
participants are confident in their ability to derive technical 
issues, either from source code, or from database schemas. 
Furthermore, we identified that there is a dependency 
between working style and the way the company uses UTEM 
to share AK, which in turn shows the impact of this kind of 
media on AGSD [26]. Also, it is worth noting that even though 
companies presented different ways to distribute the work, 
most of the categories were related to the scenarios and 
implementation views, and were rated as the most frequent 
and the most important ones. 
The abovementioned also shows the relevance of the 
topics discussed through UTEM. We obtained that the 
perceived importance of the identified categories was 
significantly higher than the interaction incidence. This means 
that knowledge shared through UTEM is important, 
regardless of the sharing frequency and working style. 
B.
 
AK documentation, UTEM interactions and face-to-face 
interactions  
During the observation phase, we only found documents 
related to the scenarios view, i.e., documents related to 
features specification and user stories. Participants 
commented that requirements documents are generally the 
unique base to the whole development cycle. Also, they 
commented that they write technical documents only on 
request. Regarding this situation, one participant said that: “
... 
the only time I had to write a document is because there will 
be a meeting with the client...”
.  
Additionally, participants commented that they rarely 
write technical documents because these kind of document are 
rarely consulted: “
…
 
we generate UML diagrams, but we 
rarely see them, unless we do not understand the code…
”
. 
Particularly, company D heavily relies on the discipline and 
technical skills of its develope
rs. They mentioned that self-
documenting code (i.e. assigning descriptive names to 
variables, methods, classes, etc.) is a common practice.  
On the other hand, participants of company B said that 
they write technical diagrams, but only as an aid in problem 
understanding. These diagrams are usually ad-hoc and 
“disposable”, i.e., they are not kept as project documentation. 
This may be influenced by the fact that none of the six 
observed projects was in the early stages, and therefore the 
conceptual issues have already been addressed. However, 
company A reported that they work only based on the Scrum 
methodology, which does not include a phase to identify 
conceptual elements for software development [27]. It could 
be said that this behavior reflects the nature of the agile 
paradigm [2], in which design time
 tends to be reduced or even 
disappeared.  
Considering the UTEM interaction categories, it is 
noticeable that most of the categories related to requirements 
(C5, C7 and C11) were perceived as the highest in incidence 
and importance in the four participating companies. Also, 
55% of face-to-face interactions were related to the scenarios 
view (see Figure 3). Although requirements were the only 
documented architectural elemen
t, this behavior shows that 
these documents are unclear. In sum, this means that when an 
architectural view is not properly
 documented, it increases the 
interaction among the team members, both face-to-face and 
through UTEM (this fulfills 
RQ4
). Additionally, it reflects the 
application of two agile manifest
o values [2]: “Individuals and 
interactions over processes and tools” and “Working software 
over comprehensive documentation”. The former results in 
the feature of few docume
ntation or an inexistent 
documentation in agile teams as al
so evidenced by [28], [29].  
C.
 
Problems related to AK sharing  
Considering the point of architectural documents, it was 
found that the absence or lack of clarity in them, also 
encourages interactions consultation [30]. In this particular 
study, this was reflected in the leading causes of UTEM 
interactions. In principle, preferring working software and 
individuals’ interaction is beneficial for reducing delivery 
times [31]. In fact, most of the participants mentioned that 
consulting doubts through UTEM is a quick path to AK, 
which was perceived as a benefit for them. However, there 
must exist a high availability and willingness of people, in 
order not to become an obstacle [32]. In other words, inter-
organizational communication has a big influence on 
development speed [30]. 
In the case of AGSD teams, remote members are available 
only a few hours a day, regarding the time zone difference and 
the daily work activities. This reduces the available time to 
clarify issues between local and remote members (at least 
synchronously). For example, one 
of the participants reported 
the following regarding the availability of their counterparts: 
“
...sometimes I have days of delay... because the analyst is 
absent...
”. On the other hand, although remote members were 
fully available, some participants consider that they have to 
spend up to three hours a day on average doing requirements 
clarification activities, either by phone call or UTEM (part of 
the prejudices shown in Figure 1). 
Another negative consequence of sharing knowledge 
through personal interactions (by means of UTEM or face-to-
face) is AK vaporization [33]. This means that knowledge 
could be altered or lost through time, when knowledge is not 
properly codified. In the participating companies AK 
vaporization affects when new members are integrated into 
the teams, or when previous projects are taken up, as there is 
insufficient AK in documents. Then, architectural documents 
should be complemented by peer interactions (local or 
remote). Peer interactions do not guarantee the full acquisition 
of the needed knowledge, since it depends on the memory and 
knowledge of colleagues. 
On this regard one of the participants commented: 
“... I 
had to browse a lot in the code ... struggle a lot to understand 
how to make a small change in the application and I think I 
still do not know it well enough yet...”. 
This is, the lack of AK 
caused that a simple tasks took longer than planned. This 
confirms the importance of knowing at least the reference 
architecture in AGSD teams [30].  
Related to the time factor, on
e of the participants said: 
“... 
I have spent too much time in bug fixing... because I had so 
many questions for my counterpart that I preferred to stop...”
. 
One of the situations that inhibit UTEM interactions is that it 
could be embarrassing to ask too much through UTEM, or it 
could be annoying to receive 
too many questions. This could 
116 lead to a detriment of social relationships among team 
members, and may affect the knowledge flow (especially 
tacit) in agile teams [34].  
In the above case, the participant is more concerned with 
knowledge of the implementation view. While the categories 
related to the implementation view (C1, C3, C4, C6 and C10) 
were not perceived as frequent as those related to the scenarios 
view, the importance of these interactions is high, as they can 
adversely affect software development. 
On the other hand, the results of this study show that there 
is an accessibility problem regarding AK in AGSD 
environments. This problem is caused both by the preference 
to share AK through interpersonal interactions, and by the 
physical and temporal distances. In this paper we focus on 
UTEM interactions, which leave "traces" of information 
where AK could be extracted [26], [35]. On this regard, some 
participants reported efforts to recover this knowledge from 
email records and instant messenger conversations (as also 
reported in [26]). However, they do not have the mechanisms 
to effectively exploit these sources, i.e., currently this process 
consumes them so much time and effort, which should rather 
be spent on their substantive tasks.  
In order to reduce the time and effort required for AK 
recovery from UTEM records, first AK should be classified. 
One way to classify it is based on the proposed ontological 
model (see Figure 1), particularly considering the AK part. On 
this regard, the literature [36], [37] reports that there are 
documentation and artifacts mod
els that could be used to 
strengthen the classification of knowledge elements. 
D.
 
Threats to validity 
Although some of the results 
obtained in this study are 
consistent with others reported in the literature, we should 
consider that we only had 20 participants from four different 
AGSD local companies. Also, we should consider that more 
than 50% of the participants work in company A (11 
participants), thus the results could be skewed by their 
behavior. Although this evidence points out to internal 
validity regarding the included AGSD workers and 
companies, in order to gain extern
al validity it is necessary to 
conduct an additional study with a larger sample size, both 
from workers and companies. 
Also, it should be noted that the participating companies 
work based on the Scrum methodology, which focuses more 
on project management and control, rather than on software 
development itself. None of the companies reported a standard 
development methodology to support the engineering part of 
their software development process. That is, each company 
has its own set of methods, ev
en ad-hoc, to guide their 
software development cycle. Thus, it would be convenient to 
extend this study to other AGSD companies that have a more 
formal developing process. 
In this study we obtained a 
set of eleven categories of 
UTEM interactions related to AK, which were consistent 
among the four participant companies. The proposed set of 
categories does not intend to be comprehensive, but a starting 
proposal that can be reduced or extended as required.  
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
 
In this paper we presented the results of an empirical study 
conducted with four AGSD Mexican companies. We 
observed and analyzed different aspects related to software 
architecture in an AGSD enviro
nment: artifacts, unstructured 
text electronic media (UTEM) and face-to-face interactions. 
We used as a reference the 4+1 views architectural model in 
order to understand and characterize the architectural artifacts 
and the UTEM and face-to-face interactions related to AK. 
On the one hand, we found that scenarios were the only 
architectural view that is documented. Also, we found that 
face-to-face interactions related to the scenarios view were the 
most frequent, because the scenarios documents were 
generally incomplete or not clear. Additionally, face-to-face 
interactions related to the implementation view were the 
second in frequency. This refl
ects at least two agile values in 
the AGSD teams: “Individuals and interactions over processes 
and tools” and “Working software over comprehensive 
documentation”. 
On the other hand, we identi
fied eleven categories of 
UTEM interactions, where most of them were related to the 
scenarios and implementation views (coinciding with face-to-
face interactions). We observed that work distribution 
between local and remote members is a factor that affects the 
perceived incidence and importance of these categories. Also, 
we obtained that AK shared 
through UTEM is important, 
regardless of the interaction frequency in AGSD teams. All 
these show us that there exists valuable AK in UTEM 
interactions, regardless of the work distribution between local 
and remote members in AGSD teams. 
Furthermore, we developed an ontological model of the 
involved aspects in the articulation of AK in UTEM by AGSD 
teams. Based on this model and on the other findings of this 
study, we conclude that it exists a trend where agile practices 
are prominent in
 an AGSD environment, although the use of 
documents helps to minimize the effects of the four distances 
of GSD. In fact, it has been determined that the most important 
drivers for AGSD relate to the Agile Principles and the rest of 
drivers relate to global business perspectives [5]. 
For future work, we plan to formalize our understanding 
of AK articulation through UTEM in terms of knowledge 
management. We propose to explore the use of KoFi [38] as a 
methodology for this purpose, aiming at obtaining a set of 
design guidelines that ease the access to AK in UTEM through 
a software tool. There have been efforts to support agile and 
distributed development through social media mining [39], 
[40], but they only consider email messages as a source. Our 
intention is take email messages 
and instant messenger traces 
as the main sources. 
Also, it could be convenient to explore AK shared through 
video/audio calls, since many participants said that usually 
they clarify their doubts by these means too. 
Finally, this work can be considered as our first effort 
towards understanding AK articulation in AGSD teams, 
aiming at bridging the gap between agile development and 
GSD by means of architectural knowledge management. 
 
117 A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
The authors are grateful to
 the participating companies: 
EMCOR, Tiempo Development, Soft
tek and Nearsoft, for the 
support provided to carry out the present study, and for their 
willingness to continue working with us in future projects. 
Also, we are grateful to CONACyT for supporting this study 
with scholarship 394125 for the first author. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
B. Ramesh, L. Cao, K. Mohan, and P. Xu, “Can distributed software 
development be agile?,” Commun. ACM, vol. 49, no. 10, p. 41, Oct. 
2006. 
[2]
 
M. Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., 
Cunningham, W., Fowler, “The Agile Manifesto.” 2001. 
[3]
 
P. Kruchten, “Contextualizing agile software development.,” J. Softw. 
Evol. Process, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 351–361, 2013. 
[4]
 
A. Vizcaíno, F. García, M. Piattini, and P. Garrido, “El desarrollo 
global del software,” in Desarrollo Global de Software, A. Vizcaíno, F. 
García, and M. Piattini, Eds. Ra-ma, 2014, pp. 37–58. 
[5]
 
N. Kamaruddin, N. Arshad, and A. Mohamed, “Comparison of drivers 
between global software development and agile global software 
development: A SURVEY,” in Computer and Mathematical Sciences 
Graduates National Colloqium 2013, At Faculty of Computer and 
Mathematical Sciences, UiTM Shah Ala, 2012. 
[6]
 
S. Dorairaj, J. Noble, and P. Malik, “Knowledge Management in 
Distributed Agile Software Development,” in 2012 Agile Conference, 
2012, pp. 64–73. 
[7]
 
M. Jiménez, M. Piattini, and A. Vizcaíno, “Challenges and 
Improvements in Distributed Software Developmen: A Systematic 
Review,” Adv. Softw. Eng., vol. 2009, no. 710971, p. 14, 2009. 
[8]
 
L. Bass, P. Clements, and R. Ka
zman, Software Architecture in 
Practice, 2nd ed. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2003. 
[9]
 
M. Babar, T. Dingsøyr, P. Lago, and H. van Vliet, Software 
architecture knowledge management: theory and practice. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2009. 
[10]
 
H. Van Vliet, “Software architecture knowledge management,” in 
Software Engineering, 2008. ASWEC 2008. 19th …, 2008, pp. 24–31. 
[11]
 
R. Noordeloos and C. Manteli, “From RUP to Scrum in Global 
Software Developmen: A Case Study,” 2012. 
[12]
 
N. Ale Ebrahim, S. Ahmed, and Z. Taha, “Virtual Teams: a Literature 
Review,” Austrialian J. Basic Appl. Sci., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 2653–2669, 
2009. 
[13]
 
I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, The knowledge-creating company: How 
japanese companies create the dynamics of innovation. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1995. 
[14]
 
H. Holz, G. Melnik, and M. Schaaf, “Knowledge management for 
distributed agile processes: Models, techniques, and infrastructure,” in 
Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, 
2003. WET ICE 2003., 2003, pp. 291 – 294. 
[15]
 
N. Uikey, U. Suman, and A. Ramani, “A Documented Approach in 
Agile Software Development,” Int. J. Softw. …, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 13–
22, 2011. 
[16]
 
H. Sharp, R. Giuffrida, and G. Melnik, “Information Flow within a 
Dispersed Agile Team: A Distributed Cognition Perspective,” in Agile 
Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming SE  - 5, 
vol. 111, C. Wohlin, Ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 62–76. 
[17]
 
M. A. Razzak and D. Smite, “Knowledge Management in Globally 
Distributed Agile Projects – Lesson Learned,” in Global Software 
Engineering (ICGSE), 2015 IEEE 10th International Conference on, 
2015, pp. 81–89. 
[18]
 
M. Earl, “Knowledge Management Strategies: Toward a Taxonomy,” 
J. Manag. Inf. Syst., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 215–233, May 2001. 
[19]
 
J. Garbajosa, A. Yagüe, and E. Gonzalez, “Communication in Agile 
Global Software Developmen: An Exploratory Study,” in On the 
Move to Meaningful Internet Systems: OTM 2014 Workshops, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 408–417. 
[20]
 
A. Boden, F. Rosswog, G. Stevens, and V. Wulf, “Articulation spaces: 
bridging the gap between formal and informal coordination,” in 
Proceedings of the 17th ACM …, 2014, pp. 1120–1130. 
[21]
 
R. Juárez, R. Pimienta, and V. Ocegueda, “Using Social Networks for 
Integrating a Tacit Knowledge Repository to Support,” in Integrated 
Uncertainty in Knowledge Modelling and Decision Making, Beijing, 
China, 2013, pp. 167–179. 
[22]
 
V. Clerc, P. Lago, and H. Van Vliet, “Architectural Knowledge 
Management Practices in Agile Global Software Development,” in 
2011 IEEE Sixth International Conference on Global Software 
Engineering Workshop, 2011, pp. 1–8. 
[23]
 
D. Šmite, P. J. Ågerfalk, and N. B. Moe, “Architecture-Centric 
Development in Globally Distributed Projects,” Agil. Across Time Sp. 
Implement. Agil. Methods Glob. Softw. Proj., pp. 1–341, 2010. 
[24]
 
D. Šmite, P. J. Ågerfalk, and N. B. Moe, “Coordination between global 
agile teams: from process to architecture,” in Agility Across Time and 
Space: Implementing Agile Methods in Global Software Projects, 
2010, pp. 1–341. 
[25]
 
P. Kruchten, “The 4+ 1 view model of architecture,” Software, IEEE, 
vol. November 1, p. 9, 1995. 
[
26]
 
R. Harrison and V. Veerappa, “Social Media Collaboration in Software 
Projects,” in Software Project Management in a Changing World SE  - 
16, G. Ruhe and C. Wohlin, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 
401–424. 
[27]
 
K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, “The scrum guide,” Scrum. org, Oct., 
vol. 2, p. 17, 2011. 
[28]
 
C. J. Stettina and W. Heijstek, “Necessary and neglected? An empirical 
study of internal documentation in agile software development teams,” 
in Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Design 
of Communciation (SIGDOC 2011), 2011, pp. 159–166. 
[29]
 
D. Rost, M. Naab, C. Lima, and C. von Flach Garcia Chavez, 
“Architecture Documentation for DevelopeA Survey,” in Software 
Architecture, K. Drira, Ed. Montpellier, France: Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 72–88. 
[30]
 
A. Martini, L. Pareto, and J. Bosch, “Communication factors for speed 
and reuse in large-scale agile software development,” Proc. 17th Int. 
Softw. Prod. Line Conf. - SPLC ’13, p. 42, 2013. 
[31]
 
A. Smith, G., Sidky, Becoming Agile: ...in an imperfect world. 
Manning, 2009. 
[32]
 
C. Young and H. Terashima, “How did we adapt Agile processes to our 
distributed development?,” in Proceedings - Agile 2008 Conference, 
2008, pp. 304–309. 
[33]
 
J. Bosch, “Software Architecture: The Next Step.,” in EWSA, 2004, 
vol. 3047, pp. 194–199. 
[34]
 
S. Ryan and R. V. O’Connor, “Acquiring and sharing tacit knowledge 
in software development teams: An empirical study,” Inf. Softw. 
Technol., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1614–1624, Sep. 2013. 
[35]
 
A. R. Yanzer Cabral, M. B. Ribeiro, and R. P. Noll, “Knowledge 
Management in Agile Software Projects: A Systematic Review,” J. Inf. 
&amp; Knowl. Manag., vol. 13, no. 01, p. 1450010, 2014. 
[36]
 
M. Kuhrmann, D. M. Fernández, and M. Gröber, “Towards artifact 
models as process interfaces in distributed software projects,” in 
Proceedings - IEEE 8th International Conference on Global Software 
Engineering, ICGSE 2013, 2013, pp. 11–20. 
[37]
 
K. A. De Graaf, P. Liang, A. Tang, W. R. Van Hage, and H. Van Vliet, 
“Computers in Industry An exploratory study on ontology engineering 
for software architecture documentation,” vol. 65, pp. 1053–1064, 
2014. 
[38]
 
O. M. Rodríguez-Elias, A. Vizcaíno, A. I. Martínez-García, J. Favela, 
and M. Piattini, “Knowledge Flow Identification,” in Encyclopedia of 
Information Science and Technology, Second Edi., IGI Global, 2009, 
pp. 2337–2342. 
[39]
 
A. Moraes, E. Silva, C. da Trindade, Y. Barbosa, and S. Meira, 
“Recommending experts using communication history,” in 2nd 
International Workshop on Recommendation Systems for Software 
Engineering - RSSE ’10, 2010, pp. 41–45. 
[40]
 
S. M. Sohan, M. M. Richter, and F. Maurer, “Auto-tagging emails with 
user stories using project context,” Lect. Notes Bus. Inf. Process., vol. 
48 LNBIP, pp. 103–116, 2010. 
118