 Condensing architectural knowledge from 
unstructured textual media 
in agile GSD teams 
Gilberto Borrego 
Facultad de Ciencias 
Universidad Autónoma de Baja California 
Ensenada, México 
gilberto.borrego
@uabc.edu.mx 
 
Abstract
—
 Agile Global Software Development (AGSD) is a 
reality, since nowadays software products are required to get into 
the market with more speed than before. This situation has 
pushed Global Software Development (GSD) companies to adopt 
lighter ways to develop software (Agile Software Development - 
ASD) to satisfy market demands. However, AGSD companies 
have encountered increased technical debt and architectural 
knowledge (AK) vaporization, mainly because the inherent 
differences between ASD and GSD, especially in documentation 
handling. This paper describes a research project in which it is 
proposed to exploit the AK that is recorded in unstructured 
textual electronic media (UTEM) generally used in AGSD, in 
order to decrease the problems
 of software evolution and 
maintenance, caused by a lack of adequate AK. Until now, the 
preliminary results of this research show that this approach 
could be feasible in AGSD environments.
 
Keywords—agile global software development; architectural 
knowledge; unstructured textual media; architectural knowledge 
vaporization; technical debt, architectural knowledge condensation. 
I.
 
C
ONTEXT
 
Recently, many companies which apply global software 
development (GSD), have explored the use of agile software 
development (ASD) to addr
ess the demands of more 
development speed imposed by the current market conditions
 
[1]. 
The attention on ASD is due to its strong focus on 
collaboration, coordination and communication 
[2]
, necessary 
to strengthen the current dynamic
. 
In principle, ASD and GSD seem to be incompatible. This 
is inherent to the nature of both paradigms, as ASD was 
designed for co-located teams, while teams are distributed in 
GSD. Furthermore, methodological standardization is preferred 
in GSD, which involves developmen
t of plans based on a strict 
division of tasks and roles, and comprehensive documentation 
[2]
. Moreover, document-based communication is one way to 
lessen the effect of the four distances inherent in the GSD 
(linguistic, cultural, temporal and physical) 
[3]
. This kind of 
communication is contrary to the ASD principles 
[4], 
particularly the following
: people interactions over processes 
and tools, working software over a comprehensive 
documentation, and face-to-face interactions as the best 
method of conveying information within a development team.
 
Despite these differences, AGSD companies, i.e. that 
combine GSD and ASD, have benefits such as strengthening 
communication, collaboration and trust relationships, reduction 
of costs, errors and development time, and late requirements 
management 
[5]–[8]
. However, there are still problems to solve 
related to documentation, work distribution, time differences 
and synchronous communication, support tools, and balancing 
GSD formality and ASD informality 
[1], [9]. 
One of these significant AGSD problems is knowledge 
management (KM) 
[10]–[12]
. KM is a challenge in AGSD 
since knowledge transfer is limited 
[13]
, despite the 
communication and collaboration benefits of ASD in GSD. On 
the one hand, this is presumably because geographical teams 
distribution in AGSD increases the need for explicit 
communication (based on documents) 
[14]
. On the other hand, 
ASD generally results in a reduction of document formality 
(they are ad-hoc), and on a reduction of the number of 
documents, as the team decides 
which documents are needed to 
understand the project
 [15]
. That is, in AGSD tacit knowledge 
tends to predominate over explicit knowledge 
[12], [16]
. 
A relevant kind of knowledge in the software development 
cycle is that related to software architecture (SA). SA is "
the 
structure or structures of the system, which comprise software 
elements, the externally visible properties of those elements, 
and the relationships among them
" 
[17]
. SA knowledge, or 
architectural knowledge (AK), also refers to design decisions 
that led to the current SA 
[18]
. More, AK mana
gement (AKM) 
[19]
 is also a challenge in AGSD, since ASD reduces the time 
to write proper documentation, which negatively affects the 
coding phases 
[20]
. Finally, the most popular agile methods 
(e.g. Scrum and XP 
[21], [22]
) have lax manners to specify SA, 
thus SA is often expressed with informal notation 
[23]
.
 
II.
 
M
OTIVATION
 
It is increasingly common that GSD companies adopt ASD. 
Given the predominance of tacit knowledge in AGSD, these 
companies commonly have problems related to poor SA 
documentation, for example: (1) waste of time answering the 
same questions and finding solutions to problems that had been 
solved before, (2) loss of knowledge when a project member 
retires, (3) defects in software evolution and maintenance, (4) 
lack of visibility for project monitoring and technical solutions, 
(5) and poorly understood requirements 
[24], [25]. 
These problems are related to technical debt, especially in 
its facet of documentation de
bt. Technical debt is “
all that 
should belong to a properly developed software system, but 
which was purposely left out to remain in time or in budget
” 
[26]
. Documentation debt refers
 to documents such as SA 
design, user manuals, data model, updated requirements 
specification, etc. 
[27]
. Agile principles suggest to make it 
“lighter” and “sufficient”, however, sometimes the pressure to 
complete a sprint causes that developers omit documents 
[26]
. 
2016 IEEE 11th International Conference on Global Software Engineering Workshops2329-6313/16 $25.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSEW.2016.1669 On the other hand, agile developers are reluctant about 
documentation, since they consider it as a secondary and non-
creative activity 
[28]
. 
Both the lack of AK, as increasing technical debt, favor AK 
vaporization, i.e., loss of AK over time by not having it 
properly documented 
[29]
. When developers do not clearly 
understand the SA of a project, a greater effort is required to 
evolve it and maintain it, since they ignore the design decisions 
which led to the current software structure 
[30]
. Even, between 
40% and 60% of maintenance time is dedicated to understand a 
software when SA docu
mentation is unadequate 
[31]
.
 
Moreover, the effects of AK vaporization in ASD are not 
exclusive to software mainten
ance. For example, when a 
person withdraws from an ongoing project, and there is 
unadequate SA documentation, AK is vaporized by the 
absence of a team member. In the former case, AK is not 
completely vaporized, thanks to the shared source code 
ownership of ASD. However, it is complicated to extract tacit 
elements (e.g. design decisions
) by code examination only. 
Moreover, while in ASD AK vaporization is catered with 
frequent interaction among developers, in AGSD the four 
distances cause less efficiency in AK sharing, as opportunities 
for casual interaction 
[32] 
and informal awareness 
[33] are 
missed
. Once the AK has been vaporized, the only alternative 
to recover it, is analyzing the source code. This task is time 
consuming, and the knowledge obtained in this manner is 
generally unstructured, incomplete, and inconsistent 
[34]
, 
which does not guarantee that the software evolve as it was 
planned at designing time.
 
III.
 
P
ROBLEM STATEMENT
 
The predominance of tacit knowledge over explicit 
knowledge in AGSD converts AKM into a challenge in AGSD 
companies. This leads into an increased technical debt and AK 
vaporization, which also leads into problems in software 
evolution and maintenance.  
To the best of our knowledge, there are a few works that 
address AKM in AGSD. 
Babar [35] found that agile 
developers (distributed or not) use Wikis to share AK with 
informal formats. However, he reported that AK is difficult to 
find in Wikis, due to informal formats. Also, there are efforts to 
design lightweight methods to integrate AKM in AGSD [36], 
[37], however field tests are not reported for these methods. 
Clerc et al. [16] 
validated AKM practices of GSD in AGSD 
projects, finding that personalization techniques predominate 
over centralization. Finally, Urrego et al. [38] created a tablet  
application to capture AK during design meetings between 
local and remote members, but it requires more field testing. 
Thus, the literature shows that there is a lack of solutions to  
reduce technical debt and AK vaporization in AGSD 
environments, to ease softwa
re evolution and maintenance, 
impacting to the least extent possible
 the beneficial aspects of 
ASD and GSD.
  
IV.
 
S
OLUTION 
A
PPROACH
 
In AGSD communication between local and remote team 
members is carried out through 
phone calls, ins
tant messaging 
(IM), email and video calls 
[16]
. However, developers prefer 
text media, because they reduce communication problems 
caused by language differences 
[39]
. These means (which we 
will call unstructured textual electronic media – UTEM), leave 
a trace of interactions (logs), and given the agile nature of the 
processes, there will be AK that will not be probably recorded 
anywhere else. Even, comments on repository hosting services 
(e.g. Github) have been a source of AK, in the absence of 
formal documentation [40]. Hence, UTEM logs can be 
valuable to complement and contextualize informal and ad-hoc 
documents used in AGSD and thus reduce technical debt and 
AK vaporization, by “condensing” the AK in them. 
V.
 
G
APS
 
To the best of our knowledge, there is few evidence in the 
literature of the use of UTEM as a source of AK. Juarez et al. 
[41]
 found AK in Facebook entries, in scholar software 
projects, where Facebook was used as an interaction mean. 
Furthermore, Clerc et al. 
[16]
 reported that UTEM are used to 
share AK in AGSD projects. However, these works do not 
specify what kind of AK is shared through UTEM (e.g. 
detailed design, requirements, overall architecture, etc.). Also, 
machine learning techniques have been used to exploit 
informal sources. In 
[42],
 emails were analyzed to relate them 
to user stories depending of the email context. In [43], entries 
of Q&A sites were analyzed to
 extract features requests. 
However, in both projects accuracy was around 70%, which 
would not be acceptable for ma
ny development 
environments. 
Moreover, the latter works do not consider the IM preference 
of developers to share AK in AGSD 
[39]
.
 
VI.
 
R
ESEARCH 
Q
UESTIONS
 
 Once stated the research pr
oblem and solution approach, 
the main research question is: 

 
What kind of support is needed to perform AKM in 
AGSD leveraging UTEM traces, maintaining a balance 
between the preference of tacit knowledge of ASD and 
the need for explicit knowledge of GSD? 
At the same time, the secondary questions are the following: 

 
Which aspects of AK are shared through UTEM in AGSD 
environments? 

 
How can architectural artifacts be integrated with AK 
shared through UTEM in AGSD environments? 

 
How to technologically support AKM leveraging the AK 
shared through UTEM in AGSD environments? 

 
Which is the impact of implementing the AKM in AGSD 
based on the use of AK shared through UTEM? 
VII.
 
M
ETHOD
 
The method proposed to guide this research is briefly 
explained below. 
Understanding
. This phase consists of a literature review 
of AKM in AGSD, and an on-site observational study to 
understand the articulation of AK in UTEM in an AGSD 
company. Then, the results of this study are compared with the 
practices of other AGSD companies through focus group 
sessions. The results of both studies are brought together to 
obtain an understanding of how AKM is done in those AGSD 
companies
. 
Elaborating
. 
In this phase a two-iteration loop is started, 
in which the technological support solution for AKM in 
70 AGSD is refined, applying user centered design. In the first 
iteration, based on the results of the understanding phase, the 
first version of the technological support
 
is designed and 
implemented through a low-fidelity prototype. This prototype 
will be evaluated in terms of 
perceived usability and intended 
use. In the second iteration, the 
results of the latter evaluation 
are used as a basis to improve the next version of the 
technological support. This second evaluation will be 
conducted in an AGSD company, and the usability and 
intended use of this technolo
gical support will be evaluated, as 
well as the performance of participants
. 
Conclusion
. In this final 
phase 
the results of the second 
iteration of the elaborating phase 
are analyzed in order to 
obtain the final conclusions of this study. 
VIII.
 
I
NITIAL RESULTS
 
As first results of the on-site observational study, we 
captured UTEM (IM, email and forums) interactions related to 
AK. We analyzed them using the architectural model 4+1 
views and we obtained that issues concerning to scenarios and 
implementation views are prominent in UTEM interactions. 
This behavior is aligned with the usual behavior in ASD, i.e., 
the analysis and design phases are diluted, because the 
problems are generally understood by experimenting in code 
[34]
. In addition, as a result of overall understanding of the AK 
articulation in AGSD, we obtained an ontological 
representation (see Fig. 1), where two areas were identified: 
communication aspects and AK aspects. Finally, we obtained a 
list of AK topics shared by U
TEM, which was evaluated by the 
participant developers in terms of incidence and importance. 
We found that the perceived importance of the evaluated topics 
is significantly higher than its perceived incidence. That is, a 
topic is considered as valuable by AGSD developers regardless 
of how often it is treated through UTEM.
 
IX.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
 
The adoption of ASD in GSD is bringing new challenges, 
where AKM is included, main
ly due to a difference of 
perspectives between ASD and GSD, regarding software 
documentation. Agile AKM practices predominate in AGSD, 
which brings increased technical debt and AK vaporization. 
The proposed research addresses this problem by “condensing” 
the AK shared through UTEM, i.e., the exploitation of 
articulated AK in UTEM, since there is evidence that these 
means are preferred by developers in AGSD environments.
 
Our first results provide prel
iminary evidence about this 
way of addressing the problem, which could be helpful. Future 
work will be to design, implement and evaluate the first 
version of the technological support to condense AK. One 
feature that so far we see as mandatory, is that the 
technological support should be naturally integrated into the 
work dynamics in AGSD, so that team members do not see it 
as an extra workload. For this reason we propose the use of 
tagging during UTEM interactions, aiming at relating them to 
our AK ontology. Since these interactions will be captured, 
team members will be able to search AK in terms of the 
ontology tags. We chose the tagging technique because 
nowadays it is unobtrusively and successfully used in software 
development [44]. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
I thank my thesis directors PhD. Alberto L. Morán and 
PhD. Ramón R. Palacio Cinco, as well as the rest of my thesis 
committee: PhD. Oscar M. Rodríguez Elías, PhD Marcela D. 
Rodríguez Urrea and PhD. Eloísa del Carmen García Canseco.
 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1] B. Ramesh, L. Cao, K. Mohan, and P. Xu, “Can distributed software 
development be agile?,” 
Commun. ACM
, vol. 49, no. 10, p. 41, Oct. 
2006. 
[2] D. Šmite, P. J. Ågerfalk, and N. B. Moe, “Fundamentals of Agile 
Distributed Software Development,” in 
Agility Across Time and Space: 
Implementing Agile Methods in Global Software Projects
, 2010, pp. 1–
341. 
[3] A. Vizcaíno, F. García, M. Piattini, and P. Garrido, “El desarrollo global 
del software,” in 
Desarrollo Global de Software
, A. Vizcaíno, F. García, 
and M. Piattini, Eds. Ra-ma, 2014, pp. 37–58. 
[4] M. Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., 
Cunningham, W., Fowler, “The Agile Manifesto.” 2001. 
[5] S. Jalali and C. Wohlin, “Agile practices in global software engineering-
A systematic map,” in 
… , 2010 5th IEEE International Conference on
, 
2010, pp. 45 – 54. 
[6] H. Holmström, B. Fitzgerald, P. J. Ågerfalk, and E. Ó. Conchúir, “Agile 
Practices Reduce Distance in Global Software Development,” 
Inf. Syst. 
Manag.
, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 7–18, 2006. 
[7] Y. Li and A. Maedche, “Formulating Effective Coordination Strategies 
in Agile Global Software Development Teams,” in 
Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Information Systems
, 2012. 
[8] S. V. Shrivastava and H. Date, “Distributed Agile Software 
Development: A Review,” 
J. Comput. Sci. Eng.
, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 10–17, 
2010. 
[9] S. V. Shrivastava and H. Date, “Distributed Agile Software 
 
Fig. 1.
 
Ontology that represents the involved aspects in AK articulation through UTEM in AGSD teams (all relations without label are of
 type “have”
) 
UTEM Interaction
Role
Artifact
Generated
Technological support
generate
Documentation
Software
Necessity
Topic
Architectural view
related to
related to
UTEM
share / refer to
participate
Benefit
Prejudice
refer to
Promoting
Situation
Inhibitory
Situation
refer to
Code
Component
Architectural
decission
take / explain
related to
Worker
Communication aspects
Architectural knowledge
71 Development: A Review,” vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 10–17, 2010. 
[10] S. Dorairaj, J. Noble, and P. Malik, “Knowledge Management in 
Distributed Agile Software Development,” in 
2012 Agile Conference
, 
2012, pp. 64–73. 
[11] M. Jiménez, M. Piattini, and A. Vizcaíno, “Challenges and 
Improvements in Distributed Software Developmen: A Systematic 
Review,” 
Adv. Softw. Eng.
, vol. 2009, no. 710971, p. 14, 2009. 
[12] A. R. Yanzer Cabral, M. B. Ribeiro, and R. P. Noll, “Knowledge 
Management in Agile Software Projects: A Systematic Review,” 
J. Inf. 
Knowl. Manag.
, vol. 13, no. 01, p. 1450010, 2014. 
[13] N. Kamaruddin, N. Arshad, and A. Mohamed, “Comparison of drivers 
between global software development and agile global software 
development: A SURVEY,” in 
Computer and Mathematical Sciences 
Graduates National Colloqium 2013, At Faculty of Computer and 
Mathematical Sciences, UiTM Shah Ala
, 2012. 
[14] P. Kruchten, “Contextualizing agile software development.,” 
J. Softw. 
Evol. Process
, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 351–361, 2013. 
[15] D. Turk, R. France, and B. Rumpe, “Limitations of agile software 
processes,” in 
Third International Conference on Extreme Programming 
and Flexible Processes in Software Engineering
, 2002, pp. 43–46. 
[16] V. Clerc, P. Lago, and H. Van Vliet, “Architectural Knowledge 
Management Practices in Agile Global Software Development,” in 
2011 
IEEE Sixth International Conference on Global Software Engineering 
Workshop
, 2011, pp. 1–8. 
[17] L. Bass, P. Clements, and R. Kazman, 
Software Architecture in 
Practice
, 2nd ed. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2003. 
[18] M. Babar, T. Dingsøyr, P. Lago, and H. van Vliet, 
Software architecture 
knowledge management: theory and practice
. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2009. 
[19] H. Van Vliet, “Software architecture knowledge management,” in 
Software Engineering, 2008. ASWEC 2008. 19th …
, 2008, pp. 24–31. 
[20] R. Noordeloos and C. Manteli, “From RUP to Scrum in Global Software 
Development: A Case Study,” 2012. 
[21] I. Ghani and M. Bello, “Agile adoption in IT organizations,” 
KSII Trans. 
Internet Inf. Syst.
, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 3231–3248, 2015. 
[22] A. M. M. Hamed and H. Abushama, “Popular agile approaches in 
software development: Review and analysis,” in 
2013 International 
Conference on Computing, Electrical and Electronic Engineering 
(Icceee)
, 2013, pp. 160–166. 
[23] R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall, “How much is just enough?,” in 
Proceedings of the 15th European Conference on Pattern Languages of 
Programs - EuroPLoP ’10
, 2010, no. EuroPLoP, p. 13. 
[24] H. Holz and F. Maurer, “Knowledge management support for 
distributed agile software processes,” 
Adv. Learn. Softw. Organ.
, vol. 
2640, pp. 60 – 80, 2003. 
[25] N. Uikey, U. Suman, and A. Ramani, “A Documented Approach in 
Agile Software Development,” 
Int. J. Softw. …
, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 13–22, 
2011. 
[26] H. M. Sneed, “Dealing with Technical Debt in agile development 
projects,” 
Lect. Notes Bus. Inf. Process.
, vol. 166 LNBIP, pp. 48–62, 
2014. 
[27] E. Tom, A. Aurum, and R. Vidgen, “An exploration of technical debt,” 
J. Syst. Softw.
, vol. 86, no. 6, pp. 1498–1516, 2013. 
[28] T. Clear, “Documentation and Agile Methods: Striking a Balance,” 
SIGCSE Bull.
, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 12–13, Jun. 2003. 
[29] J. Bosch, “Software Architecture: The Next Step.,” in 
EWSA
, 2004, vol. 
3047, pp. 194–199. 
[30] M. Galster and M. A. Babar, “Empirical Study of Architectural 
Knowledge Management Practices,” 
2014 IEEE/IFIP Conf. Softw. 
Archit.
, pp. 239–242, Apr. 2014. 
[31] S. L. Pfleeger, 
Software Engineering: Theory and Practice
, 2nd ed. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall PTR, 2001. 
[32] E. Isaacs, S. Whittaker, D. Frohlich, and B. O’Conaill, “Informal 
communication re-examined: New functions for video in supporting 
opportunistic encounters,” 
… -Mediated Commun.
, pp. 1–30, 1997. 
[33] C. Gutwin, S. Greenberg, and M. Roseman, “Workspace Awareness in 
Real-Time Distributed Groupware: Framework, Widgets, and 
Evaluation,” in 
People and Computers XI
, M. A. Sasse, R. J. 
Cu
nningham, and R. L. Winder, Eds. London: Springer London, 1996, 
pp. 281–298. 
[34] B. Selic, “Agile Documentation, Anyone?,” 
IEEE Softw.
, vol. 26, no. 6, 
pp. 11–12, 2009. 
[35] M. a. Babar, “An exploratory study of architectural practices and 
challenges in using agile software development approaches,” in 
2009 
Joint Working IEEE/IFIP Conferen
ce on Software Architecture & 
European Conference on Software Architecture
, 2009, pp. 81–90. 
[36] I. Hadar, S. Sherman, E. Hadar, and J. J. Harrison, “Less is more: 
Architecture documentation for agile development,” 
2013 6th Int. Work. 
Coop. Hum. Asp. Softw. Eng. CHASE 2013 - Proc.
, pp. 121–124, 2013. 
[37] V. Eloranta and K. Koskimies, “Lightweight Architecture Knowledge 
Management for Agile Software Development,” in 
Agile Software 
Architecture: Aligning Agile Processes and Software Architectures
, 
Elsevier Science, 2013, pp. 189–211. 
[38] J. Urrego, R. Munoz, M. Mercado, and D. Correal, “Archinotes: A 
global agile architecture design approach,” 
Lect. Notes Bus. Inf. 
Process.
, vol. 179 LNBIP, pp. 302–311, 2014. 
[39] H.-C. Estler, M. Nordio, C. A. Furia, B. Meyer, and J. Schneider, “Agile 
vs. Structured Distributed Software Development: A Case Study,” in 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Global Software 
Engineering
, 2012. 
[40] J. Sheoran, K. Blincoe, E. Kalliamvakou, D. Damian, and J. Ell, 
“Understanding ‘Watchers’ on GitHub,” in 
Proceedings of the 11th 
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories
, 2014, pp. 336–
339. 
[41] R. Juárez, R. Pimienta, and V. Ocegueda, “Using Social Networks for 
Integrating a Tacit Knowledge Repository to Support,” in 
Integrated 
Uncertainty in Knowledge Modelling and Decision Making
, Beijing, 
China, 2013, pp. 167–179. 
[42] S. M. Sohan, M. M. Richter, and F. Maurer, “Auto-tagging emails with 
user stories using project context,” 
Lect. Notes Bus. Inf. Process.
, vol. 48 
LNBIP, pp. 103–116, 2010. 
[43] M. Xiao, G. Yin, T. Wang, C. Yang, and M. Chen, “Requirement 
Acquisition from Social Q&A Sites,” in 
Requirements Engineering in 
the Big Data Era
, vol. 558, no. February 2016, L. Liu and M. Aoyama, 
Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015, pp. 64–74. 
[44] R. Giuffrida and Y. Dittrich, “Empirical studies on the use of social 
software in global software development-A systematic mapping study,” 
Inf. Softw. Technol.
, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1143–1164, 2013.
 
72