 Cultural Aspects of Global Requirements Engineering: 
An Empirical Chinese-German Case Study 
Patricia Shiroma Brockmann 
Computer Science Department 
Ohm University of Applied Sciences 
Nürnberg, Germany 
Patricia.Brockmann@ohm-hochschule.de 
Thomas Thaumüller 
Computer Science Department 
Ohm University of Applied Sciences 
Nürnberg, Germany 
ThaumuellerTh41145@ohm-hochschule.de
Abstract
ŠGlobal software development places extremely high 
demands on requirements engineering. Learning to combine 
requirements engineering techniques across national, cultural 
and language borders presents unique challenges for develop-
ers. In this paper, we explore the significant cultural challenges 
to requirements engineering in global software development. 
As an empirical case study, we look at the difficulties involved 
in applying requirements engineering methods to a joint 
Chinese-German software project.
Keywords- global, software, requirements, engineering, agile, 
China, Germany, cultural aspects 
I.I
NTRODUCTION 
The increased prevalence of global software develop-
ment increases both technical as well as cultural complexity. 
Requirements engineering, in particular, requires higher 
levels of   communication, self-organization and frequent 
adaptation to a dynamic environment. In order to success-
fully requirements engineering methods to global software 
development, practitioners need to learn to communicate 
and collaborate effectively with team members from other 
countries and from other cultures.  
In this paper, we will investigate the use of requirements 
engineering in global software development. As a case 
study, we investigate the cultural challenges involved in 
applying agile requirement engineering methods in China. 
We present empirical experiences encountered during an 
ongoing joint Chinese-German software development 
project for a Chinese regional bank. 
In Section 2 we discuss the cultural challenges involved 
in global software development. Section 3 explores the 
application of agile methods to global software development. 
Section 4 presents a detailed analysis of the application of 
agile requirement engineering methods in China and Ger-
many. Section 5 presents our empirical results from an ongo-
ing joint Chinese-German software development project. 
Section 6 discusses future work. 
II.C
ULTURAL 
C
HALLENGES
As an aide to handling the complexity of cultural chal-
lenges, a number of authors have classified cultural differ-
ences according to different categories. Hofstede [1] used 
sophisticated multivariate statistical methods to analyze data 
collected from thousands of IBM employees around the 
world.  Hofstede classifies differences of cultural perspec-
tives in terms of five dimensions: 

Power distance 

Collectivism vs. individualism 

Masculine vs. feminine 

Uncertainty avoidance, ambivalence 

Long-term vs. short-term orientation 
 Trompenaars and Hampden-Turner [2] developed 
an expanded list based on knowledge gained from their con-
sulting work for large, multinational companies. They 
distinguish the following categories of cultural differences: 

Universalism vs. particularism 

Individualism vs. communitarianism 

Neutral vs. emotional 

Specific vs. diffuse 

Achievement vs. ascription 

Attitude to time 

Attitude to the environment 

Gender, race, class, religion 
For example, Laroche[3] observed that M-time (mono-
chromatic) individuals tend to start and end a review at 
scheduled times. P-time (polychromatic) people may feel 
that the review has been cut off abruptly, before they have a 
chance to express their views. Learning to analyze cultural 
differences in terms of alternate perspectives of the same 
situation can help students move beyond cultural stereo-
types. 
A number of authors have investigated intercultural as-
pects with a special focus on software engineering.  Re-
quirements Engineering can be adversely affected by dif-
ferent views of power distance. Kruchten [4] investigated 
the impact of intercultural factors on global software de-
velopment. Krutchen suggested the development of a matrix 
[factors x practices] to show which intercultural factors can 
have an effect on certain software development practices.   
One concrete example of how cultural factors can impact 
software development practices was identified by Thana-
sanki and Corbitt[5].  They investigated the role that power 
2009 Fourth IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-0-7695-3710-8/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2009.55353 distance and uncertainty in Thai culture play in Require-
ments Engineering. They observed that the deep, hierar-
chical organization levels and long chains of command in 
Thai organization require additional time for decision mak-
ing. They found that often the job title of the person making 
a decision was more important than technical considera-
tions. 
III.G
LOBAL
S
OFTWARE 
D
EVELOPMENT WITH 
A
GILE 
M
ETHODS
Agile methods in software development, such as 
Extreme Programming [6] and Scrum [7], have proven quite 
successful in addressing the uncertainty inherent to the dy-
namic environment of software development. Test-driven 
development, pair programming, continuous integration and 
frequent releases were originally designed for use at one 
single site. Continuous, face-to-face interaction between 
developers and also with the customer is a core principle of 
agile methods. The geographical and temporal separation of 
developer teams and customers makes this higher level of 
communication extremely difficult. 
The suitability of agile methods in globally distributed 
software development has been investigated by a number of 
authors. Sureshchandra und Shrinivasavadhani[8] discuss 
the successful introduction of a distributed agile model in a 
large software development company in India. Frequent 
rotation between onsite and offshore teams, as well as video 
conferencing equipment between the agile sites, aided in 
distributing business knowledge among teams. 
Paasivaara and Lessenius[9] identify communication as 
one of the biggest challenge in distributed software devel-
opment  Misunderstandings, especially in requirements 
engineering, are a common source of problems. Especially 
the informal communication necessary to build trust and 
respect among team members can be difficult to establish. 
Fowler [10] suggests sending ﬁambassadorsﬂ from one site 
to another. Because these ambassadors are responsible for 
informal communication, they should be rotated every few 
months so that they don™t lose contact with home. 
What role do intercultural aspects play in acceptance le-
vels of agile methods? Agile methods emphasize constant 
change and adaptation. Cultures with high uncertainty 
avoidance paired with long-term orientation may view con-
stantly changing requirements inherent to agile methods as 
frustrating. Furthermore, the introduction of agile methods 
can upset hierarchical organizational structures within a 
company.  In a country with high power distance, skipping 
over established hierarchical levels may result in resistance. 
Quick, non- bureaucratic decisions made at the operative 
level may prove completely unrealistic. 
IV.A
GILE 
R
EQUIREMENTS 
E
NGINEERING 
M
ETHODS IN 
C
HINA AND 
G
ERMANY
As part of an empirical case study, we investigate the 
suitability of agile requirement engineering methods for use 
in two very different countries, China and Germany. The 
reason we suggest using China and Germany is because of 
the large cultural distance between east Asian and western 
European cultures. 
First, cultural aspects of Germany were analyzed accord-
ing to Hofstede™s five dimensions of culture[1] and in rela-
tion to German cultural heritage as rooted in western Euro-
pean social market economy.  For each cultural dimension, a 
maximum of 100 points is possible. 

Power distance: The relatively low power distance (30 
points)  can be seen as consistent with a relatively equal 
distribution of power in social market economy. 

Collectivism vs. individualism: An above average value 
(62 points) for individualism can also be seen as a prefe-
rence for individual fulfillment over the good of the 
whole. 

Masculinity vs. femininity: An relatively high value (61 
points) for masculinity reflects high degree of gender 
differentiation of  roles. This is also consistent with a 
positive appreciation of competitive and assertive beha-
vior 

Uncertainty avoidance, ambivalence: A relatively high 
value (60 points) for uncertainty avoidance reflects an 
appreciation for rules, clarity and structured situations, 
coupled with a low tolerance for ambiguity.  

Long-term orientation: Hofstede found a surprisingly 
low value (25 points) for long-term orientation in Ger-
many. Respect for tradition and fulfillment of social 
obligations are characteristic for countries with short-
term orientation. Thrift and perseverance are not valued 
as highly in countries with short-term orientation. 
What effect do these cultural dimensions have on the ac-
ceptance of agile requirement engineering methods in 
Germany? 

Power distance:  Self-organization and a lack of fixed 
hierarchical structures, as advocated by methods, are 
well-suited to countries like Germany with a low power 
distance.  

Collectivism vs. individualism: Agile methods empha-
size the group over the individual, e.g. by advocating 
pair-programming and joint ownership of code. This can 
constrain the individualist tendencies of many German 
programmers. 

Masculine vs. feminism: Cooperation, communication 
and pair-programming are typical ﬁfeminineﬂ charac-
teristics, which may conflict with ﬁmasculineﬂ competi-
tive and assertive characteristics valued in Germany. 

Uncertainty avoidance: Unstructured situations encoun-
tered in agile methods may lead to a lack of acceptance 
in societies which value rules, safety and predictability. 
A low tolerance for ambiguity be advantageous in 
formulating clear, concise project requirements and in 
setting priorities of which features are most important.  
354 
Long-term orientation: Frequent iterations of require-
ments elicitation and short-term sprints in agile methods 
mesh well with Germany™s relative low value for long-
term orientation. 
Next, cultural aspects of China were analyzed according 
to Hofstede™s five dimensions of culture[1] and in relation to 
Chinese cultural heritage as rooted in Confucianism.  

Power distance: The very high power distance (80 
points) can be seen as having its roots in Confucian 
philosophy. Respect for elders and a fixed, hierarchical 
societal structure are traditional values. 

Collectivism vs. individualism: A very low value (20 
points) for individualism can also be seen as closely con-
nected to the Confucian precept that the good of the 
whole society plays a higher role than the good of the 
individual. This may also be a reflection of decades liv-
ing in a collectivist society under communist rule. 

Masculinity vs. femininity: An average value (50 points) 
for masculinity is consistent with a Confusion disap-
proval of competition and aggressive behavior. 

Uncertainty avoidance, ambivalence: Hofstede found a 
surprisingly low value (35 points) for uncertainty avoid-
ance.  This result seems surprising at first glance, be-
cause this does not seem to be consistent with hierar-
chical Confucianism structures which have a more nega-
tive view of change. If we look at Chinese views toward 
ambivalence, however, this result makes more sense.  A 
low value for uncertainty avoidance is found in cultures 
with relativistic philosophies and an inhibition towards 
expressing emotions in public. 

Long-term orientation: China has one of the highest val-
ues (98) for long-term orientation. Traditional Confucian 
values which place the family unit at the center advocate 
thrift, perseverance and sacrifice for coming generations 
as opposed to present consumption. This dimension may 
also have changed since the recent market reforms. 
What effect do these cultural dimensions have on the ac-
ceptance of agile requirements engineering methods in 
China? 

Power distance:  Self-organization and a lack of fixed 
hierarchical structures as advocated by agile methods 
seem in direct conflict to Confucian thought. Verbal 
communication across all team members, regardless of 
their roles, does not fit well with a high power distance. 
In cultures with a high power distance, the role of the 
person who says something can be more important that 
the substance of what is being said. 

Collectivism vs. individualism: Agile methods advocate 
joint ownership of code and team responsibility. This is 
in keeping with a high value of collectivism. 

Masculine vs. feminism: Cooperation, communication 
and pair programming fit well with Confucian ideals of 
group harmony. 

Uncertainty avoidance, ambivalence: Acceptance of 
ambivalence can hinder agile requirements engineering 
methods. Clear, concise story cards or verifiable, verbal 
elicitation from on-site stakeholders are vital to the suc-
cess of agile methods. Priorities of which features need 
to be implemented first have to be defined exactly. 

Long-term orientation: Frequent iterations and short-
term sprints do not conform to Confucian ideals of long-
term orientation. Constant change may be viewed as fru-
strating to Chinese team members. 
In summary, east Asian and western European cultures 
have quite different views on Hofstede™s five dimensions of 
culture. These cultural differences present significant chal-
lenges to successful requirements engineering. Whether agile 
methods can help or hinder this process will be investigated 
in the next section. 
V.R
EQUIREMENTS 
E
NGINEERING IN A JOINT CHINESE
-
GERMAN SOFTWARE PROJECGT
The hypothetical analysis presented above is currently 
being tested as a case study on a practical software devel-
opment project. The case study involves the requirements 
engineering, design and development of personnel software 
for a Chinese regional bank. Team members of the project 
are from the two countries analyzed above, Germany and 
China. 
Overcoming the language barrier between team members 
from the two countries is one problem which could be antic-
ipated beforehand. Thus,  additional time support for lan-
guage translation could be accounted for in the planning. 
Although all of the team members had to overcome some 
language barriers, they were usually able to communicate 
adequately in English.  
Time and geographical distances were also aspects which 
could be anticipated beforehand and taken into account in 
advance planning. Since the constant on-site presence of all 
stakeholders was not feasible, regular telephone calls and 
video conferences could be scheduled for frequent iterations 
of requirements elicitation. E-mail communication often led 
to more misunderstandings, due to additional ambiguities 
introduced in using a written language (English) which was 
foreign to both groups. As a result, e-mail was mainly used 
for asynchronous communication, to bridge temporal differ-
ences. 
Overcoming cultural barriers, however, proved to be 
more formidable. Team members with similar cultural 
expectations, such as those from different western European 
countries, had less difficulty working together. The larger the 
cultural distance between team members, such as those be-
tween China and Germany, the more difficulty they had in 
coordinating their different styles of communication, conflict 
management and especially in how individual members dealt 
with criticism and ambiguity. For example, German team 
355 members were often very open and direct in their criticism, 
which often lead to a ﬁloss of faceﬂ among Chinese team 
members. Chinese team members expressed their require-
ments in a form considered ambiguous to German team 
members. Feedback from the unit tests from Chinese team 
members was often so politely worded in order to avoid di-
rect criticism of an individual, that German team members 
misinterpreted the message as a positive validation that the 
results of unit tests were correct.  
How can such cultural misunderstandings be minimized? 
First, we return to Hofstede™s cultural dimensions and offer 
suggestions to bridging gaps for each aspect. 

Power distance:  Self-organization and a lack of fixed 
hierarchical structures prescribed by  agile methods may 
be disturbing in cultures like China with high power dis-
tance. One solution is to adapt some of the agile roles, 
such as ﬁScrum Masterﬂ to better fit hierarchical 
organizational structures. Instead of a democratically 
elected scrum master, the person with the highest status 
in the group would receive this title. 

Collectivism vs. individualism: Agile methods advocate 
joint ownership of code and team responsibility. This 
can be a problem for some German team members, who 
have a high level of individualism. Here, team training 
workshops and group social events may be of help in in-
creasing group cohesiveness. 

Masculine vs. feminism: Cooperation, communication 
and pair-programming advocated by agile methods can 
be hindered by a high value for masculinity, as in Ger-
many. Masculine values such as competition and asser-
tive behavior can be constructively redirected through 
conflict management techniques. 

Uncertainty avoidance, ambivalence: A high level of 
ambivalence, as in China, can prove to be a major ob-
stacle to agile requirements engineering methods. Ger-
man developers, who expect clearly defined project re-
quirements, express puzzlement at not understanding 
what their Chinese customers want. Frequent 
communication and cultural awareness training can help 
increase understanding on both sides. 

Long-term orientation: Frequent iterations and short-
term sprints may be viewed as frustrating to Chinese 
team members, who highly value long-term orientation. 
Here, schooling and communication about the goals and 
effectiveness of agile methods may be of help in defin-
ing the numerous iterations as steps toward an ultimate 
goal: software that works. 
Especially the last two dimensions discussed, uncertainty 
avoidance and long-term orientation, prove the most 
challenging in integrating groups with large cultural distance. 
Fowler's [10] suggestion to send "ambassadors" from one 
site to another, or frequent rotation of team members be-
tween sites, as advocated by Sureshchandra [8] are two me-
thods which could help in team building and to increase cul-
tural understanding. As both methods require significant 
financial resources, they were unfortunately not possible for 
this project. 
Kruchten discusses the use of proxies as one possible 
solution to bridge gaps between cultures. He defines proxies 
as ﬁbicodedﬂ individuals, able to operate equally at ease in 
two different cultures[4]. A typical proxy is someone born 
and raised in one culture, who has lived and studied for a 
number of years in a different culture. A proxy who has 
internalized the values and associated behaviors of a second 
culture can serve as an important bridge between two cul-
tures. 
Foreign students can make an extremely valuable contri-
bution as proxies. Proxies can be exchange students (from 
China) who spend a number of years studying at a foreign 
university (Germany). German students, who have spent a 
year studying or completing an internship abroad (in China), 
have had the opportunity to learn firsthand about another 
culture. Such proxies have a deepened understanding of two 
different languages and cultures and can thus aid in the 
translation of both language as well as cultural mentality. 
We paired groups of ﬁnativeﬂ with ﬁproxyﬂ team mem-
bers to form working teams. Proxy team members were vital 
in translating the differences between ﬁwhat was saidﬂ and 
ﬁwhat was meantﬂ between the Chinese and German team 
members. Proxies were able to translate Chinese cultural 
concepts to German team members, such as how to avoid 
ﬁlosing faceﬂ, or how to ﬁgive faceﬂ by complementing 
someone's work, and thus increase the prestige of all parties 
involved. Proxies translating communication from the Ger-
man team members could reword direct criticism, in order to 
avoid offending Chinese team members. Proxies were also 
better at interpreting the subtle nuances of requirements 
elicitation from Chinese stakeholders, which were often 
overlooked by German developers. These proxies proved to 
be the most valuable practical aid in learning to bridge cul-
tural differences. 
VI.C
ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Effective requirements engineering in a globally distrib-
uted environment requires not only new technical knowledge 
and tools, but also the ability to understand unfamiliar situa-
tions from different cultural perspectives. Analysis and 
communication of different values for cultural dimensions 
can help increase awareness and improve the effectiveness of 
communication between team members. The use of proxies 
can be an effective method to bridge cultural gaps between 
team members from different countries. The experiences 
gained from this project will be applied to a future project 
356 R
EFERENCES
[1] Hofstede, G. and Hofstede, G.J., Cultures and Organizations: 
Software of the Mind. McGraw-Hill, 2nd Edition, 2005. 
[2] Trompenaars, F. and Hampden-Turner, C., Riding the Waves 
of Culture, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1997. 
[3] Laroche, L. Managing Cultural Diversity in Technical 
Profession., Butterworth-Heinemann, 2002. 
[4] Kruchten, P., ﬁAnalyzing Intercultural Factors Affecting 
Global Software Development Œ A Position Paperﬂ, Proceed-
ings of GSD2004 3rd International Workshop on Global 
Software Development, IEEE 2006. 
[5] Thanasankit, T. and Corbitt, B. J., ﬁThai Culture and Com-
munication of Decision Making Processes in Requirements 
Engineeringﬂ. Proceedings of CATAC 2000, Cultural Atti-
tudes Towards Technology and Communication, Perth, 2000. 
[6] Beck, K., Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change. Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[7] Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M., Agile Software Development 
with Scrum. Prentice-Hall, 2002. 
[8] Sureshchandra, K. and Shrinivasavadhani, J., ﬁAdopting 
Agile in Distributed Developmentﬂ. IEEE International 
Conference on Global Software Engineering , IEEE, 2008. 
[9] Paasivaara, M. and Lassenius, C., ﬁCould Global Software 
Development Benefit from Agile Methods?ﬂ IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Global ‚Software Engineering , IEEE, 
2006
[10] Fowler, M., Using Agile Software Process with Offshore 
Development. 
(
http://martinfowler.com/articles/agileOffshore.html
),  July 
18,  2006 
[11] Verkamo, A.,I. et al., ﬁDistributed cross-cultural student soft-
ware project: A case studyﬂ. CSEE&T, 2005. 
[1]
[12] Lago, P., Muccini, H., AliBabar, M., ﬁDeveloping a 
Course on Designing Software in Globally Distributed 
Teamsﬂ. IEEE International Conference on Global Software 
Engineering,IEEE,2008.
357