 Software Documentation in a Globally Distributed 
Environment
Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow
Jaya Choudhury, Thushara B
Siemens Technology and Services Pvt. Ltd.
CTDC AA, IC SG EA D
Bangalore, India
jaya.choudhury@siemens.com,thushara.b@siemens.com
Abstract
: The Software Documentation lifecycle in a project 
dovetails in with the software development lifecycle. The 
challenges faced by the documentation team in a globally 
distributed setting have not received much attention. This paper 
highlights the challenges faced by the software documentation 
team in a globally distributed product development team.
Further the paperelaborates on the solutions implemented,
successes and failures of the team. This also includes the 
learnings of the team as it alignedwith the Lean model of 
Software Development.
Keywords—globalization; software documentation; Lean 
model; cloud; collaboration
I.I
NTRODUCTION
In today’s era, aterm with which every organization is closely 
related is “Globalization”. Every organization is working in a 
global environment producing for the globe.
With“globalization” being a keyword for today, the 
challenges faced during the creation of software 
documentationhave also grown significantly. Challenges are 
omnipresent throughout the development of software, which 
in turn affects the DDLC (Documentation Development Life 
Cycle) too.DDLC is a well-defined methodology ofvarious 
stages involved in the creation of structured software
documentation. DDLC goes hand in hand with Software 
Development Life Cycle[1].
Fig. 1
SoftwareDocumentation Development Life Cycle
As the project teams are now spread globally, the key
challengefaced by the documentation team throughout the 
DDLC is to communicate and collaborate with the global team
to get the right information within the fixed deadline. The 
documentation team must also adhere to the software model 
for development thatis followed for the project. To create 
quality software documentation, the establishment and support 
for the right infrastructure,content managementsystem,and 
translation process is a mandate.  Each member of the 
documentation team must be capable of multitasking too[2].
With the advent of the Lean model of Software 
development[3]within the project, the face of software 
documentation has also undergone a change, definitely for the 
better allowing us to overcome many challenges with success.
II.C
ASE 
S
TUDY
:J
OURNEY
O
F
T
HE
D
OCUMENTATION 
T
EAM 
A
T
EA,S
IEMENS
–T
HE 
H
ISTORY
The documentation team at EA, Siemens came into being in 
the year 2007 with a small team of twomembers. This team 
based at Bangalore, India,was led by the team lead who
assigned tasks to the team members and discussed the tasks, 
status, and issues with a dedicated global documentation 
manager located at Germany.The documentation teammainly 
updated and migrated the documents and proofread the 
translated documents. Most of the development was carried 
out at other locations across the globe(for example, 
Nuremberg, Berlin, Vienna etc) and the development team at 
Bangalore had minimal communication with the globally 
spread development teams for the project. The documentation 
team based out ofthe locations used to review the updates and 
place the documents in the Content Management System 
(CMS).The documentation team has expanded to 11 members 
and has also grown in the number of projects with which it is 
associated.
III.C
HALLENGES
F
ACED 
B
Y
T
HE 
D
OCUMENTATION 
T
EAM
To meet the twin objectives regarding on-time delivery of the 
documents along with quality, the documentation team 
encountered several challenges. Expectedly, these challenges 
2014 IEEE 9th International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-1-4799-4360-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2014.2390 covered different dimensions pertaining to the processes 
followed, technology used etc. 
A.Global coordination, communication and collaboration
This challenge is not restricted to the documentation teams 
but spread across other teams as well. Product teams are 
spread across multiple locations. Time difference among the
locations is definitely a hindrance when it comes to 
collaboration and finding a solution to a problem faster. From 
adocumentation perspective, to understand and author the 
requirements, gathering information from product teams 
spread across the globeis a major challenge. For example,
when the review comments from the global teamsare not 
received on time, it leads to extended work pressure later or 
delay in delivery. Further, due to the cultural differences, the 
holidays and vacations across the globe vary too. Planning and 
prioritizing thetasks is definitely a challenge keeping into 
consideration the time difference and availability of the 
members in order to adhere to thedeadlines. Also, 
communicating with people from different regions with 
different language background is a challenge when it comes to 
mutual understanding of accents and language.
B.Single point of contact
The presence of asingle point of contact–“Team lead” 
led to too much stress and workload on asingle person. It was 
difficultfor the leadto collect all the information and 
happenings on multiple products at a global level and pass the 
latest informationon tasks, domain, and status for the products
to all the colleagues at Bangalore 
in the stipulated time. In 
case the team lead wason emergency leave,theprogress of 
the work was hindered. The team members had to depend on 
the developer/ tester and the team lead for even minor 
information.
C.Translation
The software products developed are released for a global 
audience. Hence, documentation only in English language and 
releasing the software documentation in a single source 
language does not serve the purpose. A translation process 
must be effectively established to translate the documents in 
different languages as required by the customer. Cost is one of 
the challenges faced in the process. Also, there are last minute 
updates to the documentation owing to the changes in the 
software. Hence, establishing a translation process that helps 
in capturing the last minute updates in the translated 
documents is a big challenge. The documentation team was 
dependenton both external and internal partners for the 
purpose owing to the challenge imposed by cost and time.
D.Adherence to the software model of development
Software documentation must always be aligned with the 
Software model of development. Every software model is 
different from each other in terms of the processes, workflow, 
team structure, goals, etc [4]. The changes traverse to software 
documentation too and the major challenge is to adapt 
ourselves to the changing environment accordingly. In both 
Waterfall and Agile model of development, there are neither 
dedicated team members from the development team who 
provide the required support for the documentation team nor 
are they accountable for the time spent in support. Support 
from the global development team is mandatory to increase 
the domain and product knowledge to deliver a quality 
document. In the Waterfall model, the documentation team 
had a lot of work pressure towards the end of the release. With 
the advent of Lean model of software development that is a 
translation of lean manufacturingand lean ITprinciples and 
practices to the software developmentdomain, the face of the 
challenge has also undergone a change [3].In the Lean model 
of software development, the target is to produce a usable 
software at the end of a TAKT (TAKT is derived from the 
German word Taktzeit. In Lean context, it means cycle time.). 
Similarly, the documentation team too facedthe challenge of 
creating a usable documentation for the softwareat the end of 
the TAKT.
E.Issues with the CMS 
Together with the development team, the software 
documentation team is also spread across the globe. With 
increasing number of documents, arises the challenge of 
maintaining an innumerable set of documents as well as 
tracking the changesin the documents from different locations 
across the globe. Establishment of an effective content 
management system (CMS) [5] can definitely make the life 
easier.With the advent of innumerablefree and licensed CMS 
in the market, the challenge is to select a CMS that suffices the 
requirements of the documentation team for content 
management. For licensed CMS, cost is definitely a challenge 
to be overcome. 
In the documentation team, the supportfor content 
management system previously usedwas from another 
location. Hence, delay in support due to the difference in time 
zone was at times a reason for the delay in execution of the
tasks.It leadsto extended work pressure later or delay inthe 
delivery. Epic editor was used as the authoringtool.To add a 
screenshot or to provide links to
 the different topics consumed
almost 10 minutes.TIFgraphics format was only supported.
The team membershadto edit the graphics, change the 
format,and set theresolution before adding the graphics to the 
document, whichwas leading to an extra effort to be spent on 
the graphics. It was not possible to copy graphics intheCMS.
It would take at least 15 minutesto publish the document in 
any format.Software documentation was carried out across 
multiple locations and such instances of wastage of time often 
lead to ineffective global collaboration in terms of less output.
F.Issues in infrastructure for image capturing
In some cases, test systems were unavailable asthe 
software was integrated at a later stage from various locations
over the globe. This limitation didnot give the documentation 
team thescope to view the working software beforehand to 
analyze, test, understand, and write or capture real time 
screenshots. Dependability on the developers or the testers for 
the same causes lead to the production of low quality graphics 
and wastage of time as they lack the appropriate knowledge of 
the screen capturing methodology.
91 G.Ineffective review process 
The documents were sent to review to all the relevant 
stakeholders across the globe. This round of technical review 
is a mandate. An ineffective review process often leadsto 
increased workload at the end of the release cycle. For 
example, the documentation teamoftenreceived contradictory 
comments from multiple review
ers spread across different 
locations on the same topic making it difficult and time 
consuming for theauthor to check and addressthe comments
on time.
H.Multitasking
A single team of technical writers wereresponsible for 
multiple projects with overlapping deadlines for delivery. 
There weretimes when a last minute request camein from the 
customer end to have minor changes in the template as they 
wereviewing the document first time towards the end of the 
release cycle. The same change hadto be encapsulated in 
multiple documents thereafter. Also unplanned leave of any 
team member required the other team members to step into 
his/her shoes ensuring that the delivery does not get affected. 
IV.S
OLUTIONS
I
MPLEMENTED TO 
M
ITIGATE THE 
C
HALLENGES
A multi-pronged approach was brought in to address the 
challenges. 
Fig. 2
Solution Implemented –People, Process, and Technology Model
With the advent of Lean model of software development, 
the face of software documentation for the projects aligned to 
it has further changed for the better.
A.Effective global communication and collaboration
The documentation team sits closely with the product 
development teamsand is in touch with the global teams on a 
regular basis. The documentation team mostly interacts with 
teams from varying locations with time zone differences
ranging from 3:30hrsto 9:30 hrs. With the benefit of flexible 
timings for employees nowadays, a consensus is reached 
amongthe global team members about a range of time in 
which they can converse. This mode helps the documentation 
team in collaborating with the global product/documentation 
team effectively with no slippage 
in deadline or any additional 
effort. Understanding the counterparts spread across the globe 
is important and touching the right chord is a key to establish 
team collaboration that is spread across miles. It is always 
good to make sure that understanding is at the same level and 
there exists no communicationgap at all. Dedicated User 
Documentation representatives are present in each TAKT 
team. They are responsible for providing the documentation 
team required inputs for authoring requirements.Support from 
the development team is mandatory and hence it is the
responsibility of the documentation team to converse with the 
product owners to establish the process of making them 
accountable for giving the required information. A template 
called as Functional Description for User Documentation 
(FDUD) comprising of questions that best answers all the 
questions related to a new/modified requirement must be filled 
by a User Documentation representative and reviewed by the 
User DocumentationExpert and referred for authoring.
Presence of both User Documentation representatives and 
FDUD has ensured the timely availability of information for 
documentation from the development teams spread globally.
B.Distribution and delegation of tasks
The responsibility and the ownership of the task were 
distributed among the team members.The documentation 
team members are empoweredand the members (known as 
User DocumentationExperts)are now a part of the planning 
team for their respective projects and are well informed about 
all the details related to the product and its delivery. User
DocumentationExperts are empowered to take decision on the 
documentation in collaboration with stakeholders spread 
across the globe. User DocumentationExperts are the owner 
of the documents and are solely responsiblefor ensuring the 
quality of the documentation. If there are overlapping 
deadlines of multiple projects, releasing all the documents on 
time with high quality is the responsibility of User 
DocumentationExpert. Tracking the status of the tasks on 
each project on a daily basis, delegating the tasks, and 
ensuring its completion is their responsibility that can be 
accomplished successfully with extensive planning, discipline, 
and time management. The team members are responsible for 
providing status updates to the stakeholders in uniform 
intervals of time. The team members directly contact 
counterparts based out of other locations and get their queries 
clarified. Dependency on developers/testers for minor issues is
reduced. In case of major software documentation defects/new 
requirements, the team memberscheck and analyze the 
issue/requirement, identify the impacted documents 
(locations), and provide their suggestions to developers/ 
testers. 
The documentation teams spread across globally are
responsible to place the documents in the CMS and ensuring 
the inclusion of the documents in the software builds for the 
internal and external usage.
C.Transition to effective CMSand translation process
Cost is definitely a factor to establish an excellent working 
infrastructure. Investment in a highly usable content 
management system and establishment of an affordable 
translation management system both in terms of effort and 
time is definitely a value for time and money in the long run. 
92 Alsoa combination of “Cloud Computing and Cloud-based 
authoring” [6] is a great op
tion to establish a working 
infrastructure over the globe. In the cloud-based systems, all 
the content is centrally stored with regularly-scheduled 
backups and system maintenance to protect the data against 
accidental loss.
After several discussions, testing, and pilot-runs, the 
documentation teamtransitioned to COSIMA as the CMS.
This tool supports drag and drop option allowing us to copy
the graphics, text, and tables. The graphics and the links can 
be added to the document within 5 minutes.The tool supports 
single source authoring. The publication process is easy with 
COSIMA tool as no interface is required and it takes lesstime 
to publish in multiple output formats [7].Dedicated support 
for COSIMA is also present during the Bangalore working 
hours leading to nowastage of time.
Translation with COSIMA is also very easy. There are 
dedicated translators who translate the documents present in 
COSIMA and translation managers who overlook the process. 
In case the document is not present in COSIMA, external 
vendors have been identified for the process.
The transition to COSIMA helped the documentation to 
achieve their goals on time, with more efficiency and a higher 
degree of overall comfort for the team. 
D.Usable documentation ateach TAKT
The complete software documentation planning, creation, 
review, translation, delivery, risk management, defect fixes, 
and inclusion in the build are now the ownership of the 
documentation team. The User DocumentationExperts plan 
accordingly from the first TAKT itself to release a usable 
documentation at the end of every TAKT. Close collaboration 
with the global team and monitoring the progress of the 
development is required for the same. Extensive planning is 
mandatory and is the key to achieve the deadline with no 
compromise on quality. Seeing the unforeseen and being 
proactive is also very important to achieve the same. Changing 
the way of work to eliminate any wastage of effort is also 
encouraged. Oncea waste is detected in any software 
documentation process, User DocumentationExperts strive to 
eliminate it. For example, a User DocumentationExpert has
devised a process of how to develop UI messages in 
collaboration with the global Usability and Software 
documentation team thus eliminating a considerable amount of 
wastage of effort. In turn, the User DocumentationExpert also 
devised a process of identifying and entering the new/updated 
content for translation reducing the effort of translators. 
Software documentation defects are also measured.It must be 
eradicated and is thus a criterion to be fulfilled for the product 
to get releasedglobally.Adefect tracking tool is used globally 
toanalyze,check, and resolve the software documentation
defects.
Software development is completed at least two TAKTS 
before the release so that the documentation team has ample 
time to incorporate last minute updates as well as review 
comments from all the stakeholders spread across globally on
time. During the hardening TAKT, only defects are handled 
from the development team. Hence, there are seldom any last 
minute UI changes impacting the documentation. Documents 
are translated after finalizing the source content. In case of 
minor changes to the target language documents, the User 
DocumentationExpertupdatesthe target language documents 
reducingthe cost of translation.
All the source and translated 
documents are ready two weeks prior to the release.
E.Set up of infrastructure for image capturing
To capture the screenshots, test machines are currently 
made available to the documentation teams at all the locations
on time. The graphic file formats supported are TIF and PNG
format. There is no need toset the resolution of the graphics to 
place it in the document.In case of non-availability of real-
time screenshots in certain cases, the team still dependson
testers.
F.Setting up of effective review process
Each type of review (self review, peer review, editorial 
review, and technical review) is planned diligently to create a 
high quality document with zerodefects. Deadlines for any 
review are communicated clearly and beforehand to all the 
stakeholders to ensure the timely completion. A reminder is 
also sent to the stakeholders a day or two before the deadline 
to ensure its completion. Each documentation team assigned 
for the project plans interim reviews to avoid too many last 
minute review comments.For the review, the team is usinga
review plug-in. As a result, all the reviewers spread across 
globally are able to view the comments provided by each other 
and hence avoid duplicate comments from different authors. It 
takes less time for the author to incorporate the comments.
V.L
ESSONS 
L
EARNT
Implementing Lean and improvising the existing processes 
definitely helped the documentation team in going miles ahead
reinventing their roles and responsibilitiesand in establishing 
an effective collaboration with the global team. It resulted in 
the ownership of software documentation (targeted for the 
global audience)for multiple projectsat Bangalore.
A.What went well

Transparency with the global teams

Being proactive

Global responsibility of software documentation 
for multiple projects at Bangalore

Adherence tothe Lean model

Distribution and delegation of tasks across the 
team members over the globe

Introduction/Improvement of processes and 
technology

Increase in domain competency

On-time delivery

Availability of documents globally
93 B.What did not go well

Non acceptance of the huge number of changes in 
process and technology by certain team members

Time taken to prove the efficacy of the Bangalore 
team to the global team to establish effective 
collaboration

Time taken to adapt the new processes and 
technologies
C.Lessons learnt
Establishing processes that support efficient software 
documentationand embracing technology that eases the effort 
and management together helpedin creating quality software 
documentation in a globally distributed environment. 
The following figure depicts the growth of the documentation 
teamat EA, Siemens:
Fig. 3
Journey –From 2008 till date
VI.C
ONCLUSION
The papercan be summarized as the amalgamation of the 
well-defined solutions andapproach that was undertaken to 
develop software documentation efficiently.The solutions 
have worked out effectively with success. The product 
documentation teams can definitely identify with the 
challenges and the solutions that can beincorporatedinto their 
respective documentation processes.
Change is something that is constant. Hence, the team
cannot stop at the above mentioned solutions. There might 
arise a new set of challenges going forward, hence thelearning 
is to constantly improvise according to the changing 
challenges and environment to overcome the same always in 
due course of time.There is no dearth of learning.
R
EFERENCES
[1]White Paper on Technical Writing,
Tech Total
[2]Major Challenges Faced by a Technical Writer
,Black and White
Challenges of a Technical Writer.html
[3]Poppendieck, M & Cusumano, M.A, Lean Software Development: A 
Tutorial, 
Software, IEEE (Volume:29, Issue: 5), Oct 2012
[4]Vipul Agarwal, Evolving a new Free-Flow Software Development Life 
Cycle Model Integrating Concept of Kaizen, 
International Journal of 
Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering
(Volume 3, Issue: 9), Sept 2013
[5]Nath,M & Arora, A, Content management system: Comparative case 
study, 
International Conference on Software Engineering and Service 
Sciences (ICSESS), July 2010
[6]
D
r. Rao Mikkilineni & Vijay Sarathy, Cloud Computing and Lessons 
from the Past, 
1
st
International IEEE Workshop on Collaboration and 
Cloud Computing, 2009
[7]Brochure_COSIMAgo_en_web, 
DOCUFY®
94