 Usage of SCRUM Practices within a Global Company
Mauricio Cristal 
mauricio.cristal@gmail.com 
Daniel Wildt 
FACENSA, Brazil 
daniel@facensa.com.br 
Rafael Prikladnicki 
PUCRS, Brazil 
rafaelp@pucrs.br 
Abstract 
Global companies that experimented extensive 
waterfall phased plans are trying to improve their 
existing processes to expedite team engagement. 
SCRUM has become an acceptable path to follow for 
those companies because it comprises project 
management as part of its practices. SCRUM has been 
used with the objective of simplifying project control 
through simple processes, easy to update 
documentation and higher team iteration over 
exhaustive documentation. Instead of investing team 
effort on producing static documentation, SCRUM 
proposes to focus on team continuous improvement 
aiming to add value to business processes. The 
purpose of this industry report is to describe two 
projects that experimented SCRUM practices within a 
globally distributed company. This company has 
development centers across North America, South 
America and Asia. This report covers challenges faced 
by the project teams, strengths and practical 
recommendations of using SCRUM in a globally 
distributed environment. 
1. Introduction 
Distributed software development has been 
increasing during the past years in technological global 
market [1, 2]. Various companies are outsourcing to 
third party consultant companies on emergent 
countries, while others decided to open captive 
development centers with full-time employees on 
emergent countries in order to develop internal 
Information Technology assets (Internal Offshoring) 
[3]. Organizations aim at the development of large 
projects on offshore centers (1+ year duration). Reason 
for this decision is that long duration projects would be 
more suitable to absorb offshore centers learning curve 
about domain knowledge [4].  
Usually, an initial strategy defines that offshore 
centers would responsible only for development effort 
[4]. This scenario supports an adoption of waterfall 
lifecycle as standard lifecycle. Onshore teams are 
responsible for planning and testing efforts while 
offshore teams are primarily assigned to developing 
tasks. While captive offshore development centers are 
increasing their business domain background they 
continue to follow waterfall life cycle, and its 
exhaustive documentation associated to waterfall 
lifecycle can impact team™s productivity negatively.  
Team members that have an acceptable business 
background start to struggle on processes and controls 
that do not make sense to their daily activity. Thus is 
not acceptable to invest so much effort on documenting 
and creating controls as used on the initial strategy of 
the offshore centers. 
In this context, this report describes the experience 
on piloting agile practices (more specifically SCRUM 
practices) in two projects within a global company that 
have waterfall as standard life cycle. We present 
challenges faced by the project teams, as well as 
strengths and practical recommendations 
This paper has the following structure: Section 2 
presents agile and SCRUM concepts. Section 3 
contextualizes the organization and describes the 
experience with the two projects. Section 4 covers a 
discussion with strengths and practical 
recommendations on using SCRUM on global 
companies. Section 5 concludes the paper. 
2. Agile software development 
Effective communication, focus on people, listen 
the customers, and always looking at improvement 
opportunities are some principles that can address what 
being Agile is about [5]. When applying agile 
methodologies, teams look for an agreement to deliver 
working and valuable software to its final users in 
short development cycles, also known as a time box.  
SCRUM [7] and eXtreme Programming (XP) are 
examples of Agile Methodologies teams can use [6]. 
While XP focus on programming practices like Test 
Driven Development, refactoring and simple design, 
SCRUM is focused on planning [6]. Since both are 
based on the Agile Manifesto [5], they look for 
motivated individuals, and ways to make teams evolve 
and grow on each iteration cycle.   
Teams focusing on SCRUM follow some practices 
that will lead them for a definition regarding what will 
2008 IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-0-7695-3280-6/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2008.34222 be implemented within a release and, after proper 
prioritization, what will be implemented as part of an 
iteration. In a distributed team, the implementation of 
an agile methodology is not a simple task. It is 
important for the team to change its mindset and 
prepare for commitments and a real new enterprise 
culture [8]. 
The mechanics of SCRUM expects a team to build 
a product backlog, a place where one can see all 
requirements pending for a project, sized based on 
complexity, days or some other unit of measure the 
teams decide. Inside a product backlog you have a 
simple sentence for each requirement, something that 
will be used by the team to start discussions and details 
of what is needed to be implemented by the team. 
The prioritization process happens with the help of 
the project team. SCRUM defines simple roles [7]: 
†
The product owner: responsible to be the voice 
of business inside a SCRUM project. May be 
also seen as the business partner role.  
†
SCRUM Team: formed by its developers, 
testers and other roles you can find 
†
SCRUM Master: responsible to keep the team 
focused on the practices and values that are 
needed to be applied inside the project and also 
responsible to help the team whenever they 
face some problem during the process.   
After the prioritization, the team has a decision 
about what will be part of a release. That is the release 
planning meeting. Based on that, other meeting is 
planned, where the team details features that need to be 
implemented as part of a time box. Within that time 
box the team implements all tasks expected for the 
project, design, coding, testing, inspection and 
validation for instance. This is the Sprint. The duration 
of a sprint can change, from one week to four weeks.  
The sprint planning meeting occurs in the beginning 
of each time box. The number of sprints in a release is 
defined by the team. It may have two or even ten 
sprints. It is all based on the goals of the release. If the 
focus remains the same, one ca
n still continue to have 
more sprints. If the project focus changes, it is better to 
close the game, finish the release and start a new one, 
with new goals and expectations. 
During the sprint, the team works with all they have 
for one specific feature. It is needed to get one feature 
ﬁdoneﬂ to start another. Done means a feature ready to 
go to production, fully coded, tested and with quality. 
The design is another important topic. Design needs to 
be done during the sprint, and a team can use artifacts 
they find useful, like UML modeling, or even focusing 
on acceptance criteria and testable tasks, proved by 
using unit or functional tests. No matter what is the 
decision of the team regarding a way to document and 
formalize what will be done, it is important to question 
if what is being done is adding value to the process or 
not. Waste elimination and continuous improvement is 
always on the top practices when applying agile 
principles [9]. 
But the usage of agile practices is still maturing in 
the IT industry. Looking at distributed teams, there is 
the need for more attention of the whole team in the 
communication process. Different approaches are 
needed in this case, based on how teams are organized. 
Teams can be isolated, not working in a cross 
functional environment, distributed across regions, or 
fully distributed [10]. This experience report will focus 
on the distributed SCRUM of SCRUMs approach, 
where you have different SCRUM teams across 
regions and short meetings to integrate these different 
regions [18]. We can find several studies in the 
distributed development literature related to agile 
development in distributed environments [11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. While most of those studies are 
being conducted by research groups [11, 12, 13, 14, 
17] we still have little experience shared by the 
software industry [15, 16, 18].  
3. Experience report 
The experience described in this paper was lived 
within a global organization that maintains software 
development centers in Americas and Asia. Technical 
teams work only for captive offshore development 
centers. This company developed a set of global 
standard processes following three market standards: 
†
 Capability Maturity Model (CMM) ® 
†
 PM Body of Knowledge (PMBoK) ® 
†
 Microsoft Solutions Framework (MSF) ® 
In order to disseminate software development 
culture and processes globally, this organization 
decided to pursue Capability Maturity Model (CMM) 
level of maturity assessment. Available set of 
processes were only based on waterfall life cycle. 
Project team members follow available processes and 
phases, regardless project size and complexity. 
According to the organization strategy and a set of 
processes available at that time, documentation is 
generated onshore. Software product is developed 
offshore and tested back again onshore. In the past, 
distributed location justified extensive documentation 
while offshore centers were dealing with their domain 
learning curve acquiring business knowledge. 
Nowadays this scenario has changed. Offshore 
centers have 5+ years of background on application 
domain knowledge. They are working on large, 
medium and small projects. In addition responsibilities 
have increased from ﬁonly development centerﬂ to a 
223 center responsible for planning projects, developing, 
testing and requirements engineering. 
According to set of defined processes on this 
organization project life cycle should follow extensive 
waterfall phases generating a significant amount of 
required documentation. Lessons learned showed that 
for larger projects (1+ year duration) standard practices 
were suitable. On the other hand, for medium and 
small projects (up to 9 months duration) standard 
practices were adding too much of complex and 
bureaucracy to team members. In addition business 
was not satisfied with results achieved by the end of 
project as also captured on lessons learned sessions. 
For medium and large projects documentation 
produced usually were outdated by the end of project 
because business most of times were maturing their 
business requirements along the project. Due to this 
dynamic and changing environment some issues were 
listed as possible causes: 
1.Powerful project managers were putting 
processes up front of business interests causing 
frustration on business expectation. 
2.Weak project managers were accepting so 
many change requests flooding team work by 
paper work in order to keep documentation 
records up to date. Some projects had decided 
to have two project managers. One to track 
project status and another one only to maintain 
documentation. This practice was causing team 
members frustration because they were moved 
out from technical tasks. 
Projects lessons learned sessions also showed that 
benefit of documentation was low in comparison to 
effort required to generate and maintain it. Often 
developers with new assignments were contacted to 
resolve issues on past delivered projects. Application 
support teams instead of using existent documentation 
were reaching developers to resolve production issues.  
Those facts demonstrated that processes should be 
adapted to medium-small projects on this company. 
Organization decided to innovate on medium-small 
projects life cycle. It was clear that waterfall was not 
working for short-term projects. Agile methods were
then selected to be run on two pilot projects. 
An assumption was that agile methods would bring 
more interaction between business partners and 
technical team. Moreover, unstable requirements 
would be gathered on iterative way along the project as 
business partners were expecting. The two projects will 
be referenced in this paper as Project A and Project B. 
Project A is a finance domain project related to 
global taxes control on finance business processes. 
This project had eight team members collocated in 
North and South America. 
Project B is a logistics domain project related to 
outbound and fulfillment processes. This project has 
ten team members collocated in North and South 
America and Asia as well. Table 1 depicts both pilot 
projects properties in summary: 
Table 1. Projects analyzed in this paper 
 Project A Project B 
Business  
Domain 
Finance 
Logistics 
Roles and 
locations 
Role 
1 Product Owner 
6 dev/testers 
1 SCRUM master 
Loc. 
US 
BR 
US 
Role 
2 Product Owners 
3 dev/testers 
6 dev/tester 
1 SCRUM master 
Loc. 
CHI 
US 
BR 
US 
Team size 
8 team members 
12 team members 
Locations: United States (US), Brazil (BR), China (CHI) 
Both pilots faced challenges while adapting existing 
organizational processes to agile practices, as table 2 
summarizes: 
Table 2. Challenges identified 
Challenge Project Phase 
Lack of formal document for 
requirements 
A 
Planning 
Inadequate team structure 
A, B Planning 
Communication issues 
A, B 
Developing 
Management not used to agile 
practices 
A, B Closing 
Lack of formal requirements can be described as the 
barrier of project team had in terms of capturing 
business requirements in an easy and effective way. 
Project B had developed a software requirements 
document but experimented difficulties on having it 
signed off by business partners that were located in 
Asia. This fact caused lack of commitment from 
business to agreed requirements during project 
development. Project A had no formal software 
requirements document. Requirements were gathered 
on exhaustive meetings (8 hours duration) and 
documented in minutes. Every time a backlog item 
required clarification, these minutes were researched 
impacting team members productivity negatively. 
Inadequate team structure can be captured as 
inappropriate decisions in terms of team organization 
and task assignment. For instance Project A faced a 
barrier between generalist against specialist behavior 
on technical team. Agile practices states that every 
team member must collaborate as a generalist in 
project tasks. In this project even with performance 
testing training available test team avoided to execute 
performance testing because they were primarily 
functional testers. Root cause for this reaction is a 
common human avoidance of missing his/her 
knowledge silo and avoidance to accept changes. 
224 Communication issues are a common challenge on 
distributed projects. Both projects experimented 
communication barriers especially during development 
phase. In project A, lack of team commitment on 
attending remote SCRUM meetings impacted team 
collaboration. SCRUM meetings needs to be attended 
by all team members in order to keep awareness on 
project updates. According to agile practices SCRUM 
meetings have a daily recurrence and it must be a very 
short duration meeting. Project A not only 
experimented lack of attendance but often SCRUM 
meetings lose focus getting into details of technical 
solutions debating unsuitable subjects with an 
inadequate attendance. That was a most acceptable 
reason on lessons learned session why SCRUM 
meetings lost importance during project development. 
SCRUM management basis its practices for project 
schedule control on time-box practices. For instance it 
means that a team can define that every month a 
product release will be achieved. Requests that fits on 
one month time box are going to be delivered others 
are going to be released on following month and so 
forth according to request priority in product backlog. 
On both projects nor technical management nor the 
SCRUM master had enough political power to define 
an acceptable time box for projects A and B. Project A 
missed a strong leadership from SCRUM master 
during negotiations with business partners flooding 
team members with a long list of last time changes by 
the end of each sprint. On project B lack of 
management maturity on agile practices impacted 
development life cycle. Instead of cutting a sprint 
scope and postponing to following sprint, management 
decided to interrupt functional test. Both immature 
decisions caused team rework and overtime generating 
frustration and impacting software quality in terms of 
defects. These failures were fixed in the end of each 
iteration. The team was able to do a retrospective 
exercise and find ways to improve the current process. 
This can help the team to increase its maturity while 
using agile principles and SCRUM practices. 
4. Discussion
Challenges were faced since the organization was 
more familiar with waterfall life cycle, but lessons 
learned have also captured a list of important strengths 
on using agile practices: 
- Weekly software product builds was successfully 
used in project A: releasing as many builds as possible 
project team can eliminate wastes in terms of waiting 
for a whole package to be tested [10]; 
- Even though business partners took more time 
than expected to approve requirements document in 
project B during acceptance phase they participated 
and collaborated with project team anticipating tests 
and providing adequate support on defects tracking;
- Project A reported communication issues as one 
challenge faced. Although same project also described 
a strength that every sprint delivered not only increased 
team motivation but also improved collaboration and 
engagement. Comparing interaction and cooperation 
levels between technical teams and business partners 
on first sprint and last sprint a major improvement 
could be notice according to recorded project lessons. 
4.1. Practical recommendations  
Based on challenges and strengths faced, project 
teams were able to document a set of recommendations 
for projects within the same environment and scenario. 
Use cases should be integrated with user stories
: 
project A decided to separate use case diagram from 
user stories. Use cases diagrams were stored on a 
diagram tool and user stories were stored in a 
worksheet. During project development, keeping both 
synchronized and accessing its records was quite 
difficult and time consuming.  
While piloting agile practices the team must
document SCRUM meeting minutes
 in order to 
record agreements and decisions. SCRUM practices 
suggest to document when is necessary and useful. 
Lessons captured from project A recommend to 
formally document SCRUM meetings outcomes. 
Especially during piloting period, both technical team 
and business partners were not aware of processes 
limitations and responsibilities on agile practices. For 
this reason, recording decisions might be a positive 
practice. Moreover, team interaction in this scenario is 
limited to emails and conference calls. Since engineers 
and business partners are dislocated there is neither a 
ﬁwar roomﬂ nor white boards where decisions could be 
revisited when necessary. 
SCRUM master needs to be a strong negotiator
and also owns a 
de-facto
 political power over technical 
team and business partners. Since agile practices are 
based on team collaboration and trust, a SCRUM 
master needs to be a person strong enough to deal with 
business in terms of requirements priority and also to 
push team members to deliver on agreed time box. In a 
global scenario, this is even more complex. For this 
reason, the SCRUM master needs to combine not only 
leadership on project team and business partners, but 
also cope with distance, trust, and cultural diversity. 
Assigning testers and developers to work 
together
 is an important future recommendation. For 
instance, assigning testers to peer review unit test 
scripts can improve unit tests coverage. This decision 
225 can help on anticipating defects to development phase 
instead of finding only after promoting build to test 
team. In project B, developers and testers worked in 
silos, impacting team collaboration. Moreover, 
dislocation between engineers promoted an 
environment where each group created their own 
practices, impacting code quality.  
Keeping valuable documentation
: moving project 
B from a waterfall to an iterative and agile approach 
did not change the need for documentation. Since the 
team is working in a distributed environment, the 
documentation may even increase [18], and the team 
will need to adapt some of the documentation to 
become more effective. For this reason, one should 
define and document what brings value to the project 
and what can be useful to the distributed teams.  
The use of a ﬁglobalﬂ taskboard 
can help on 
improving the productivity of global agile teams. The 
teams of both projects were using meeting minutes and 
local spreadsheets to control the activities planned for 
each sprint and the product backlog. This sometimes 
caused delays and unexpected problems. An interesting 
initiative would be the development of a tool to help 
global teams on the planning and execution of a sprint.
5. Conclusions 
In this paper, we have presented the experience on 
the usage of SCRUM practices in two pilot projects 
within a global company. Agile methods are becoming 
more common in today™s software development 
industry. Companies see the advantages of applying 
such practices, and make sense to also think on the 
usage of agile practices in a distributed environment. 
 Particularly in this experience report, the use of 
SCRUM was a challenge, since the company culture 
was not agile-oriented, and was hard to change the 
mind of several people for the advantages of applying 
SCRUM together with traditional practices already in 
place. The initial results were very positive, and future 
plans include the use of SCRUM in a more systematic 
way through the institutionalization of agile practices 
in a global level within the company. 
7. Acknowledgements 
Study partially supported by the Research Group on 
Distributed Software Development of the PDTI 
program (Law 8.248/91). 
8. References 
[1] Sengupta, B., Chandra, S., Sinha, V., ﬁA Research 
Agenda for Distributed Software Development,ﬂ In: 28th 
ICSE, pp. 731-740, Shanghai, China, 2006. 
[2] Herbsleb, J. D., ﬁGlobal Software Engineering: The 
Future of Socio-technical Coordination,ﬂ 29
th
 ICSE, 188-198, 
Minneapolis, USA, 2007. 
[3] Prikladnicki, R., Audy, J. L. N., Damian, D., Oliveira, T. 
C., ﬁDistributed Software Development: Practices and 
Challenges in Different Business Strategies of Offshoring 
and Onshoringﬂ, In the IEEE 2
nd
 Int™l Conf on Global 
Software Engineering, Munich, Germany, pp. 262-271, 2007. 
[4] Carmel, E., Tija, P., ﬁOffshoring Information 
Technology: Sourcing and Outsourcing to a Global 
Workforceﬂ, UK: Cambridge, 2005. 
[5] agile manifesto http://www.agilemanifesto.org. 
[6] Beck, K.., ﬁExtreme Programming Explainedﬂ, Embrace 
Change. 2005. 
[7] Schwaber, K., ﬁAgile Project Management with Scrumﬂ. 
2004. 
[8] Schwaber, K., ﬁThe  Enterprise and Scrumﬂ. 2007. 
[9] Poppendieck, M., Poppendieck, T., ﬁImplementing Lean 
Software Development: From Concept to Cashﬂ, 2005. 
[10] Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, J., Puntikov, N., 
ﬁDistributed scrum: agile project management with 
outsourced development teamsﬂ, In HICSS, 2006. 
[11] Layman, L., Williams, L., Damian, D., Bures, H., 
ﬁEssential communication practices for Extreme Programmin 
in a global software development teamﬂ, 
Information and 
Software Technology
, Elsevier, 48 (2006), pp. 781-794. 
[12] Agerfalk, P. J., Fitzgerald, B., ﬁFlexible and distributed 
software processes: old petunias in new bowlsﬂ, CACM, 49 
(10), pp. 27-34, 2006. 
[13] Hazzan, O., Dubinsky, Y., ﬁCan diversity in Global 
Software Development be enhanced by Agile Software 
Development?ﬂ, Workshop on GSD for the Practitioner at 
ICSE, Shanghai, 2006. 
[14] Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Mohan, K., Xu, P., ﬁCan 
distributed software development be agile?ﬂ, CACM, 49 
(10), pp. 41-46, 2006. 
[15] Flor, N. V., ﬁGlobally distributed software development 
and pair programmingﬂ, CACM, 49 (10), pp. 57-58, 2006. 
[16] Taylor, P. S., Greer, D., Sage, P., Coleman, G., McDaid, 
K., Keenan, F., ﬁDo Agile GSD Experience Reports Help the 
Practitioner?ﬂ, Workshop on GSD for the Practitioner at 
ICSE, Shanghai, 2006. 
[17] Paasivaara, M., Lassenius, C., ﬁCould Global Software 
Development Benefit from Agile Methods?ﬂ, In: ICGSE, 
Florianópolis, Brazil, 2006. 
[18] Fowler, M., ﬁUsing an Agile Software Process with 
Offshore Developmentﬂ, available online at 
www.martinfowler.com/articles/agileOffshore.html, 2008. 
226