 Communication between Developers and Testers in 
Distributed Continuous Agile Testing 
Daniela S. Cruzes 
SINTEF-ICT 
Trondheim, Norway 
daniela.s.cruzes@sintef.no 
Nils B. Moe 
SINTEF-ICT 
Trondheim, Norway 
nils.b.moe@sintef.no 
Tore Dybå 
SINTEF-ICT 
Trondheim, Norway 
tore.dyba@sintef.no 
 
Abstract
—
 
Software developers and testers have to work to-
gether to achieve the goals of software development projects. In 
globally distributed software projects the development and test-
ing are often scattered across multiple locations forming virtual 
teams. Further, the distributed pr
ojects are so complex that none 
of team members can possibly possess all the knowledge about 
the project individually. During testing in such teams, developers 
and testers need to coordinate and communicate frequently. 
However, coordination is affected by the availability of the pro-
ject information, which is distributed among different project 
members and organizational structures. Many companies are 
facing decisions about how to apply agile methods in their dis-
tributed projects. These companies are often motivated by the 
opportunities of solving the coordination and communication 
difficulties associated with global
 software development. In this 
paper we investigate the communication between testers and 
developers in two teams from two software companies perform-
ing continuous agile testing in a distributed setting. We describe 
four communication practices used by the team: handover 
through issue tracker system, formal meetings, written commu-
nication and coordination by mu
tual adjustment. We also discuss 
communication between testers and developers in collocated ver-
sus distributed testers and developers. We have found that early 
participation of the testers is very important to the success of the 
handover between testers and developers. The communication 
between developers and testers is not sufficiently effective 
through written communication and that it changes depending 
on the type of the tasks and experience of the testers.  
Keywords—Continuous Agile Testing; Global Software Devel-
opment; Communication;  
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Global software development has matured considerably 
since its inception and has become an integral part of the in-
formation technology landscape. Now, many companies are 
facing decisions about how to a
pply agile methods in their dis-
tributed projects [14] [26]. One of the main challenges is the 
disconnection between important activities, such as planning, 
analysis, design, programming a
nd testing. A number of recent 
trends have focused on the need to transform organizations to 
deliver software continuously 
[12], where a tight connection 
between development and testing 
is required to ensure errors 
are detected and fixed as soon 
as possible. Agile methods sup-
ports continuous development and enable complex and busi-
ness and safety-critical software to be developed. To develop 
high-quality software in distributed
 teams, it is essential to use 
software testing methods and tools effectively and efficiently.  
The current software testing practices are far from satisfac-
tory, as indicated in various st
udies on software testing practic-
es [16]. Besides, while many 
companies are facing decisions 
about how to apply agile testi
ng methods in their distributed 
projects, there is a lack of empi
rical studies related to process-
es, methods and tools for testing and quality assurance in glob-
al software development [25][27].  
Communication in distributed se
ttings in a main challenge 
for teams’ effectiveness. Alzoubi
 et al. [1] performed a system-
atic review of communication ch
allenges in empirical studies 
of GDAD (Globally Distributed Agile Development), and 
found out that the knowledge about GDAD communication is 
limited. The review showed that
 study results are scattered, 
inconclusive, and ambiguous, and scarcely any studies opened 
up the communication process or focused on the social interac-
tion and behavior of teams as pa
rt of the research. Hummel et 
al. [15] also investigated the role of communication in agile 
software development by conducti
ng a structured, systematic 
literature review. The authors found that despite its acknowl-
edged importance, the knowledge of communication and agile 
software development is limited because hardly any studies 
open up the communication proce
ss. The findings highlight a 
vital research gap that needs more attention, namely, how effi-
cient and effective GDAD communication software teams are 
achieved in practice and what techniques are used to enhance 
GDAD communication.  
GDAD also creates a number of challenges in relation to 
alignment between developers and 
testers. Recently, Barney et 
al. [3] were the first to exp
licitly study alignment in a global 
setting. The goal was to understand the levels of alignment 
between key stakeholder groups within a company on the pri-
ority given to aspects of softwa
re quality developed as part of 
an offshoring relationship. Th
ey found that communication and 
coordination are important fact
ors for misalignment between 
developers and testers, but did not
 investigate the issue further. 
In this paper, we focus on the communication that happens 
2016 IEEE 11th International Conference on Global Software Engineering2329-6313/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2016.2759 between testers and developers, to capture the complex nature 
of these team members working together in a continuous test-
ing process in GDAD.  Our research questions are: 
1)
 
How do developers and testers communicate in 
distributed continuous agile testing? 
2)
 
How is communication impacted by types of team 
configuration between testers and developers in 
distributed continuous agile testing? 
 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II we summarize the literature in alignment between de-
velopment (mostly requirements) and testing phases. We also 
present the literature on distributed
 continuous agile testing.  In 
Section III we describe the methodology followed for this re-
search and details of the context in which we base our results. 
Section IV presents the results, 
and in Section IV we provide a 
discussion of the results with imp
lications to research and prac-
tice and limitations. Finally in the conclusion we provide the 
final remarks of the study with 
the plans for future research. 
II.
 
T
ESTING IN GEOGRAPHICALLY DISTRIBUTED AGILE 
DEVELOPMENT 
(GDAD) 
A.
 
Brigding the Gaps Between
 Development and Testing 
Studies of the gaps and challenges between development 
and testing have mostly focused on collocated projects 
[3][4][29][33][35]. In addition, only one article explicitly men-
tions that some of the projects followed the agile methodolo-
gy[4], but not focusing on speci
fic challenges of distributed 
agile software development (Table
 1). Barney et al. [3] do not 
say explicitly that the two projects are agile, but we inferred 
them to be agile since Ericsson is known by their long-term 
usage of agile.  
Some studies indicate that 
communication processes tend 
to have the capacity to mediate the interactions and misalign-
ment between developers and te
sters [3][4][29][35]. In addi-
tion, Taipale and Smolander [29]
 defined process improvement 
propositions, including adjusting testing according to the busi-
ness orientation of the organizational unit, enhanced testability 
of software components, early i
nvolvement of testing, and use 
of risk-based testing. Zhang et 
al. [35] affirms that developer–
tester conflict occurs because 
they do not document their work 
or follow standardized procedures
; they also engage in strongly 
negative behaviors and consequently develop negative percep-
tions of each other. Bjarnason et
 al. [4] adds that cooperation 
and requirements engineering prac
tices are also a critical basis 
for alignment. Barney et al. [3] 
were the first to explicitly study 
alignment in a global setting and in addition to communication. 
The main reasons for misalignment were found to include cul-
tural factors, control of quality in the development process, 
short-term versus long-term 
orientations, understanding of 
cost-benefits of quality improvements, and coordination. Uu-
sitalo et al. [33] found a number of practices that increase the 
communication and interaction between requirements and test-
ing roles, namely early tester 
participation, traceability policies, 
consider feature requests from te
sters, and linking test and re-
quirements people. Linking pe
ople or linking artifacts were 
seen as equally important for the communication effectiveness. 
B.
 
Continuous Agile Testing 
Continuous agile testing is one approach that is increasing-
ly being adopted by software companies [7]. This approach 
does not just mean testing on agile
 projects, but testing an ap-
plication with a plan to learn 
about it and let the product infor-
mation and customer feedback 
guide the testing. Continuous 
agile testing, involves immediatel
y integrating changes into the 
main system, continuously testing all changes and updating test 
cases to be able to run a regression test at any time to verify 
that changes have not broken existing functionality [12][21]. 
For achieving the goals of continuous agile testing it is essen-
tial that team members work effectively as a team, and that 
developers and testers are integrated
 as a team [17][29]. It is in 
general challenging to implemen
t this kind of approach in 
many contexts because it requires more interactions between 
the developers and the testers, 
especially for global teams.  
Table 1 - Studies on Alignment between Testing and Development 
 
Taipale and 
Smolander [29] 
Uusitalo et al. [33] Bjarnason et al. [4] Zhang et al. [35] 
Barney et al. 
[3] 
Number of Studied of Compa-
nies/Projects 
7 (26 Units) 6 (one project 
each) 
6 1 (Large Global 
company) 
2 (3 Projects) 
Collocated 
Yes Yes 2 /6 Yes Not clear No 
Distributed 
No No 4/6 Yes Not Clear Yes 
Agile 
No No 2/6 Yes Not Clear 2/3 Yes 
Level of business orientation  

 
 

 
  
Level of testing involvement 

 

 

 
  
Testing schedule stability  

 
    
Level of communication and interaction  

 
 

 

 

 
Level of planning of testing  

 

 
   
Level of use of components  

 
    
Level of complexity 

    
Coordination and Cooperation 
 
 

 
 

 
Requirements Quality 
 
 

 

 

 
Validation and Verification Quality 
 
 

  
Knowledge of Testers 
 
 

 

 
Traceability of Requirements and Tests 
  

 
  
Cultural Factors 
  
 
 

 
60 Crispin and Gregory [7] disc
uss the Agile Testing quad-
rants that are largely adopted in 
practice. Each quadrant in Fig. 
1 reflects different reasons to te
st. Traditionally software test-
ing focuses almost exclusively 
on the right hand side (Q3 and 
Q4), criticizing the product, but not
 playing a productive part in 
supporting the creation and guidance of the product (Q1 and 
Q2). Moreover, traditionally, soft
ware testing is involved late 
in the development process to de
tect failures but not to prevent 
them. In agile testing, the tester
s are not only involved in iden-
tifying, but also in preventing failures by continuous interac-
tion with developers and customers. Automation is an 
important enabler for agile testing. Automation of the tests in 
Q1 is usually easiest to implement, and at the same time makes 
a big impact on the process effectiveness. Tests in Q3 are usu-
ally performed manually.  
Continuous agile testing in
creases the need for improved 
communication and coordination 
between testers and develop-
ers, in addition to a new mind-set
 at the personal and organiza-
tional levels. In the context of GDAD projects, geographical 
and temporal distribution makes 
regular interaction challenging 
[1][2]. Yet, few papers have addressed the solutions and chal-
lenges in global software testing.
 Collins et al. [6] describe an 
industrial experience on the applica
tion of distributed testing in 
a software development environment following Scrum. The 
authors report on the adaptation in a testing process to make 
feasible the distributed tests in 
an agile environment, the solu-
tions implemented to reduce th
e impact of communication is-
sues and the difficulties observed in the allocation of tasks in 
the software project. Collins et a
l. identified four main chal-
lenges and key lessons learned 
for minimizing the impact of 
the geographical distance between
 the testing teams: communi-
cation and coordination are essential factors for the success of 
distributed testing; the project 
information should be available 
with details to all members; automation reduces the needs of 
physical presence in the testi
ng process; supporting tools are 
always important, but testing 
team organization is more. 
Shah et al. [25]conducted a study of three vendor-side test-
ing teams. Their findings show 
how the participant test engi-
neers perceive global software testing (GST) and deadline 
pressures, the challenges that they encounter, and the strategies 
that they use for coping with the challenges. The authors high-
light the need for (1) appreciati
ng test engineers’ efforts, (2) 
investigating the team structure’
s influence on pressure and the 
GST practice, (3) understanding culture’s influence on other 
aspects of GST, and (4) identifying and addressing quality-
dilemma situations.  
Tervonen et al.[32]studied th
e outsourcing of software 
testing in the Oulu area, the ways in which it is used, and de-
termined the observable benefits and obstacles. The advantages 
that have most commonly been realized by the companies for 
the outsourcing of testing were: time zone effectiveness, an 
improved logging of communication,
 and closer proximity to 
the market. 
We have previously described an experience report in 
which we describe how continuous testing based on continuous 
and frequent feedback ensures knowledge sharing and safe-
guarding the quality of the system under development [21]. We 
found the following enablers for a successful virtual agile team 
that testers were allocated in China and the developers in Nor-
way: coordination by mutual adju
stment, dedicated testers and 
low turnover, shifting working hours, and self-management 
and autonomy. Non-technical fact
ors, such as socio-technical 
and organizational factors, have
 a significant influence on the 
way software testing is performed in an agile virtual team.  
III.
 
R
ESEARCH 
M
ETHODOLOGY
 
A.
 
Data Collection  
In the study presented in this paper, we aim to investigate 
how testers and developers communicate in GDAD. To answer 
our research questions we perf
ormed two case studies [23][34] 
in the industry. We followed the teams for about 1,5 years as 
part of a four year project in
 which we do action research [9] 
[18] with the teams. The unit of analysis is the project, one 
company each. 
 
 
Fig. 1.
 
Agile test quadrants [7] 
Functional Tests 
Examples 
Story Tests 
Prototypes 
Simulations 
Exploratory Testing 
Scenarios 
Usability Testing 
UAT (User Acceptance Testing) 
Unit Tests 
Component Tests 
 
Performance & Load Testing 
Security Testing 
“illity” Testing 
 
 
Q2 Q3 
Q1 Q4 
F
Automated 
& Manual 
Automated 
Tools 
g 
Manual 
Business Facing 
Technology Facing 
Supporting the Team 
Critique the Product 
61 The case studies reported in this paper are based on two 
distributed teams at two soft
ware companies, both headquar-
tered in Norway, and with software developers and testers dis-
tributed in several countries, including Norway, Poland, 
Sweden, and one of them with a testing center in China (Fig. 
2). Moreover, we drew up a non-disclosure agreement for 
companies. This step was important to establish a formal link 
between researchers and companies, and ensure data confiden-
tiality. We performed interviews 
with different roles in each 
company asking about the comm
unication between developers 
and testers as shown in Tables 2 and 3.  
B.
 
Data Analysis 
We used thematic analysis to
 analyze the data from the 
semi-structured interviews we performed with team members, 
a technique for identifying, an
alyzing, and reporting themes 
found in qualitative data that are relevant to describe a phe-
nomenon [5][8]. To support the data analysis, we used a tool 
for creating mind maps of the transcribed interviews. We then 
classified the data collected acco
rding to themes and, finally, 
all researchers interpreted and 
discussed the themes. The data 
from the interviews were analyzed for each company and ena-
bled the within-case analysis. In addition we complement the 
results with the observations from the different meetings with 
the teams and managers. Then, we aggregated the results to 
compare both companies in a cross- case analysis.  
C.
 
Company A 
Company A is a multinational provider of software for a 
safer, smarter and greener future in the energy, process and 
maritime industries. The team as investigated consists of 15 
members (12 in Norway) including 4 
testers (3 in China, one in 
Norway) and one test manager (i
n Norway), as shown in Fig. 
2. Some members are working pa
rt-time in the 
team. The team 
follows a Scrum-based process, where a release is 2-4 months 
long. The goals of this process 
are to be a common platform for 
communication and understanding of the software testing pro-
cesses; clarify responsibilities, milestones/tollgates and ex-
pected outputs; form the basis fo
r project governance; and, be a 
high level checklist for projects. 
The team follows a continuous testing software process. In the 
Planning phase, the testers develop 
a high-level test strategy for 
the product, and a test plan for the releases, and decide on how 
to follow up the project (test environment, sched-
ule/milestones). In the Development and Testing phase the 
main objectives are to design and refine test cases for the fea-
tures (user stories / enhancements
) within the scope and to exe-
cute and report the test according to the test plan. This phase is 
typically accomplished in several sprints. In the Stabilizing 
Phase, the main objectives are to perform a complete system 
functional test, system integration test, and relevant non-
functional tests in a test envi
ronment similar to the production 
environment. Typically, severa
l runs of system and non-
functional test are accomplished during the stabilizing phase. 
Each run of the system test is done on a new release candidate. 
When the acceptance criteria are matched according to the test 
plan, the project is released a
nd deployed. After the release, 
some of the team members start a new release while some do 
support and others do bug fixing. 
Table 2 – Data Collection in the two companies 
 
Company A
 
Company B
 
Focused Interview on 
communication 
Test Leader 
Scrum master 
Two testers 
Two developers 
Two testers 
Test Leader 
Retrospective  
Observations 

 

  
Planning Meetings  
Observations 
 

  
Process –  
Documentation Analysis 

 

 
Discussions on  
testing processes 

 

 
 
 
Table 3 – Semi-Structured Interview 
Interview Guide
 
1)
 
Tell us about your testing experience in general and here. 
2)
 
Which types of testing do you perform? 
(e.g. unit, integration, smoking, functionality, system, ac-
ceptance, performance, regression, exploratory, manual)  
3)
 
How is testing work shared between testers and developers  ?  
a.
 
Are testers part of the team?  
b.
 
Does the team have a common project goal? 
c.
 
Is there a defined time scheduled for testing? 
4)
 
How are responsibilities and the scope of work defined between 
developers and testers?  
a.
 
Do you have an overview of what other developers (and test-
ers) are doing? 
b.
 
How are tasks handed over to testers? How do a tester know 
what to test? 
c.
 
Are there well-defined hand-off points throughout the devel-
opment process?  
5)
 
When and how do testers and developers interact?  
a.
 
How do testers and developers give each other feedback? 
b.
 
How do team testers and developers share relevant project in-
formation with each other?  
c.
 
Do testers participate in meetings and discussions?  
d.
 
Are testers able to discuss solutions? 
e.
 
What are shared “artifacts” between testers and developers? 
f.
 
Are there clearly defined forms of interaction between devel-
opers and testers (e.g. Jira, specific artifacts, defined time) ?   
6)
 
When you have a problem or a question during testing who 
helps you? 
a.
 
When you have a doubt that relates to implementation, do you 
talk to the developer directly? How? 
b.
 
How easy is it to test a feature that you have never tested be-
fore? 
7)
 
What “works” well in the testing setting you have? 
8)
 
What hinder work (bottlenecks) in testing?  
9)
 
Is there anything else you would like to add that you think is 
interesting in this context? 
 
 
62  
 
Fig. 2.
 
Configuration of the Teams at Company A and Company B 
The tester in Norway is a newly hired person fully dedicat-
ed to the team. At the time of the study, he was still trying to 
learn the system under developmen
t. In China, two testers with 
four and one year of experience on the product, work 100% on 
the team and one tester with six years of experience on the 
product is working 50%.  
The testers in China are domain experts, but do not have 
background in software engineeri
ng. In Norway, the test man-
ager is the one responsible for planning, communicating and 
organizing the test work between
 the team members in Norway 
and the testers in China. Working with China takes 40-50% of 
her time. The test manager is also working with the support 
department, and she acts as buffer between testers and devel-
opers. She is also engaged in the user acceptance testing with 
the customer.  
Most of the testing in China is performed manually by fol-
lowing test scripts developed and maintained by the Chinese 
testers. When new functionality is to be implemented in the 
software, the team uses some tim
e to ensure that everyone un-
derstands what is being developed,
 so that the test scripts can 
be updated. While test automation is seen as important in agile 
testing, it is not widely implemented in the testing activities. So 
far, the automatic user interface tests have a very short “life”. 
The user interface is changed frequent and then the tests are 
broken. According to the testers, it takes too long to update the 
automatic tests. In addition, th
e ability to automate tests de-
pends on the knowledge of the tester. The tester responsible for 
implementing automatic testing was on maternity leave at the 
time of investigation, which is 
one reason for why the level of 
automation was low.  
Furthermore the Chinese testers are also responsible for in-
tegration testing and performance testing. The system inte-
grates with several external systems (e.g. SAP), and when 
functionality is added or changed there is a need to run integra-
tion tests. Performance is important; however, performance 
testing is not needed for every release. When important mod-
ules, components or the database are changed, performance 
testing is scheduled. The team-lead, test manager and one ar-
chitect take the decision regard
ing performance testing. The 
testers in Shanghai use designated tools when they are doing 
performance testing.  
D.
 
Company B 
Company B is leading supplier of intelligent transportation 
systems to the public transport sector, including fare collection, 
travel information, infotainmen
t, fleet management and traffic 
management. The investigated team consists of 9 members (8 
in Poland one in Sweden) including 2 testers (in Poland), Prod-
uct owners (POs) (in Norway) and customers mostly in Scan-
dinavia. The team follows a Scrum-based process, where a 
release is about 6 months long. Th
e testers are part of the team, 
allocated 100% for testing, and are also members of a team of 
testers in the organization, with a test manager in Poland. The 
test manager responsibility is to align the processes among 
teams in the organization. Also
 to identify good practices that 
can be spread in the organization. The test manager does not 
interfere in the daily work of the 
testers; he is also engaged in 
the user acceptance testi
ng with the customer.  
The testers have background in computer science and soft-
ware engineering; therefore th
ey can do development if need-
ed. Domain knowledge was acquired during the work in the 
company. One of the two tester
s has eight years experience as 
a tester, and for two years has been working in this company. 
The second tester has four years experience as a tester and one 
year in the company.  
The team follows a continuous testing software process. In 
the Sprint Planning, testers a
nd developers estimates the dura-
tion of the testing for each user
 story planned to be implement-
ed in the sprint. During the sprint, when the user story is 
implemented, the developer performs unit tests and integration 
tests. In some new areas the developers write automated unit 
tests, but legacy code is not yet covered by any automated 
script. When a developer is done with a task he or she changes 
the status of the task to “ready for testing”. The tester checks 
everyday the ready for testing user stories and test them. The 
testers are part of the daily 
standup meeting, where project 
progress and challenges are discussed, and issues related to 
implementation are solved. Test
ers use theinformation shared 
during the standups to start planni
ng the test cases and also to 
start thinking about which testi
ng environments needs to be 
created for when specific user 
stories are implemented. Devel-
opers usually don’t do regression tests or user acceptance tests. 
Testers perform regression tests 
based on risk areas he defines 
 
Nearshore 
Sweden 
 
Onshore 
Norway 
Nearshore 
Poland 
Team - Company A 
Onshore 
Norway 
 
Farshore 
Shangai 
Project or 
Delivery 
Manager 
Product 
Owner 
Test Lead 
Scrum 
Master 
Tester 
Tester 
Project or 
Delivery 
Manager 
Solution 
Architect
 
Developer 
Tester 
Product 
Owner 
Solution 
Architect
 
Test Lead 
Team - Company B 
Developer 
Developer 
Solution 
Architect
 
Scrum 
Master 
63 by viewing the code changes and th
e user stories. Close to the 
release, the testers run the user acceptance tests (UATs) de-
fined by the customers. Deploy
ment and deployment tests are 
to be conducted by the Operations team. 
While test automation is seen as important in agile testing, 
it is not widely implemented in the testing activities. Some 
developers have started to focus on automated unit tests. And 
testers have also shown interest in getting more involved in 
implementation tasks. Furthermor
e the testers are also respon-
sible for integration testi
ng and regression testing.  
IV.
 
R
ESULTS
 
During the data analysis, we identified four main themes 
coming from the interviews with developers, scrum master, 
testers and test managers. The codes from the sources of in-
formation were organized into four main themes: handover 
through issue tracker system, formal meetings, written com-
munication and coordination by mutual adjustment.  
A.
 
Handover through Issue Tracker System 
Handover in this context means, the passing of control authori-
ty of a user story from developers
 to testers, most of the times 
after a code review. After the handover the user story goes to 
the state of Ready for Testing. 
Both teams investigated relied 
on JIRA (issue tracking system) when handing over the user 
story from developers to testers.
 In both companies, the testers 
affirmed that the communicati
on through JIRA is not suffi-
cient, as they still have to ask many questions.  In company B, 
this is not much of a problem 
as the developers and testers 
have direct access to each other and are able to talk directly to 
each other when there is a need for clarifications. In Company 
A, the testers often do not have 
direct access to the developers, 
for two main reasons, the temporal distance and the role of the 
test leader as the broker between
 the testers in China and de-
velopers in Norway. In Company A one tester said explained 
the need for communication with the developer: 
"Sometimes 
the developers have very limited time 
to code, then the descrip-
tion of the user stories not alwa
ys get detailed information, we 
need to communicate with th
e developer directly because 
sometimes they just leave the main
 direction of the new feature, 
without details. Sometimes we 
can get some requirements doc-
uments from Sharepoint or fr
om somewhere. Some times the 
requirements are not easy to understand because business 
people write them. So the main source for us to understand the 
issue is from JIRA"
 
When we asked the testers in Company A on how often the 
descriptions are easy to understand, they answered that about 
30% of the cases. In other cases, the tester from company A 
explained why handover through the issue tracker is not 
enough for doing their job: 
" It takes a long time to understand 
the new feature. We are not involved in the requirement speci-
fication and we miss lots of inform
ation. It may be helpful that 
when a big new feature is introduced; that the developers 
could give a small demo to understand how it works. Some-
times it is not ready for the testing, because other features 
needs also to be implemented befo
re it is possible to test but we 
don’t get this feedback." 
The test leader in Company A is aware of the challenge re-
lated to handover in JIRA. She has found out that if the de-
scriptions in JIRA are long and detailed, testers will ask less 
questions and misunderstandings will be found late. This is one 
reason for why some developers 
write short descriptions to 
ensure that the testers ask questions. The test leader in Norway 
always encourages the testers in
 China to talk to her, scrum 
master and developers in Norway. The test leader in company 
A explained
: “Every day Testers check new functionality cre-
ated in JIRA and plan what test 
that need to be run. However 
some developers write a lot and some developers write very 
little. It seems to be more efficient to have short descriptions, 
then feedback and then give them answers than using a lot of 
time documenting. So them asking is
 important. We repeat it in 
every meeting (video). It is better to have a culture where peo-
ple ask questions, than a culture where people use a lot of time 
trying to write good documentation. You should not try to 
standardize the way of writing in
 JIRA; you should continuous-
ly focus on reminding people to ask questions
.  
However, asking questions and getting fast feedback was 
challenging because of the time difference and developers not 
being as accessible as needed. Specially close to a release. 
Even though the Chinese testers were encouraged to ask ques-
tions, the testers had the impression that the developers are 
always busy and don’t want
 to be disturbed.  
While having the testers in another time zone had the po-
tential of testing while the developers were sleeping, the time-
zone differences also introduced some challenges. When a test-
er was missing important informa
tion about the new feature to 
test and can´t get immediate feedback from a developer be-
cause he or she is busy, or has ended the working day, there is 
a delay in the process. Then a tester might end up wasting time 
trying to find documentation for 
that feature (that might be 
incomplete or missing), or waiting to the next day before con-
tinuing on testing the new feature.
 The testers also voiced that 
one possible way to help mitigate this problem is to join the 
planning meeting before release.
 But they have problems with 
this approach because of the 
temporal distance between their 
center and the developers
’ team in Norway.  
In Company B, the developers and testers are mostly co-
located with a developer in 
Sweden, and rely on informal 
communication to solve the ch
allenges with handover in the 
issue tracker system. When talk
ing about the need for infor-
mation to perform the job, usi
ng JIRA descriptions and infor-
mal communication, one tester in company B said:
 “I can say 
that it is enough for me because here we are in open space and 
we talk a lot about details t
ogether with the developers and if 
there is something unclear we discuss and if it is still not clear 
we send an email to the PO, and it gets clarified.” 
In Company B, we asked one de
veloper if when developing 
a new feature if he had the awareness to change the descrip-
tions on JIRA or changing the ha
ndover approach for a specific 
user story. The developer answered:
 
It is not a formal ap-
proach. But yes. I even differentiate if it is Tester 1 or Tester 2 
that is doing the testing. Then I write different testing proce-
dure or description of what 
the implementation is about. Like 
Tester 1 knows the system so well that he will immediately see 
that he needs more information 
about the description. I think I 
know what they know more or less. We have very rudimentary 
documentation on the issues and it can be improved
.“
 
64 B.
 
Formal Meetings 
Formal meeting as planning 
meetings, daily meetings, ret-
rospectives, weekly meetings with 
the test leader are one of the 
venues where testers and developers have an open forum to 
communicate with each other. These meetings are important 
for the testers to participate as they use these to be updated 
about what is happening in the team, listen and participate of 
the discussion of the solutions, 
have inputs for the priorization 
of Bugs
 and give some feedback to the developers. Both com-
panies make use of these meetings regularly, but testers in 
Company A are not able to participate in most of them, be-
cause of the time zone differences. One tester in Company A 
said: 
“Our leaders prioritizes the bugs, and sometimes, if they 
do not agree in the prioritization, then they have a joint discus-
sion. One of our leaders has 
a very good overview of what 
happens in support and in production; therefore she got a good 
overview of the business. The other one knows the technical 
system very good and the business requirement.” 
In Company A, sometimes the testers are left out of some 
decisions, for example about th
e decision of running or not 
some tests for each release, the test leader said: 
“By each re-
lease there is a discussion if there is a need to do performance 
testing. Sometimes important m
odules, components (that affect 
performance) or the DB is changed, and then performance 
testing is scheduled.” 
The test leaders are the ones taking the 
decision in Norway. When there are no important changes, 
performance testing is not done. Shanghai is doing this testing 
and they use a tool for it.”
 
In Company B the testers participate in the daily standup 
and also participate in the spri
nt planning, reviews and demos, 
they also use this formal mee
ting to communicate to the devel-
opers some feedback on different issues, for example feedback 
on some user friendliness issue:  “
Actually I have a pretty good 
contact with the developers and this standup meeting clarify a 
lot. And I get all information I n
eed in the morning. Then I am 
always informed on changes that occur.” 
C.
 
Written Communication 
Written communication is noticeable more used in Compa-
ny A than in Company B. The reason is because the testers and 
developers are not in the same location. One tester in Company 
B commented:
 “When the tasks are not simple I have to ask 
afterwards, I know if they are 
busy or if they have meetings and 
I can decide when to ask questions. Sometimes if I see that 
someone is busy, I just send an email, or use communicator. I 
know that it is not good to get interrupted all the time.
 One 
tester in Company A said:
 We usually use E-mail with archi-
tect, Lync with Test Leader. We communicate more with the 
Test Leader; she is coordinator. So,
 we talk more with her. And 
we send mail when we have a long list of questions. The email 
is usually answered in the next day. Talking on Lync is easier 
for us than writing".
 
 
On the test reports, containing the results of tests, which 
were executed during the testing phase, in Company B one 
developer said:
 “Mainly we use informal communication and it 
is good enough. Sometimes I just ask to wait for discussing the 
issue later. When I have to ask 
to wait, then we create a JIRA 
issue and I take care of it later. But sometimes after that I can 
have two hours of talking about bugs. 
Another developer in 
Company B said:
 I only get reports on what is related to me. 
And actually sometimes I answer 
with. Hey… This is not a 
bug… Sometimes it is a configura
tion problem. It is a matter of 
sharing the results. I don’t get a report of the structured report 
on the bugs found on the test. Like, after a week, we could get 
some report on, like this week, we ran xxx number of tests and 
XXX passed or XXX failed. Currently we get more bad news 
than good news from testers.” 
The Swedish developer in Company B voiced that one way 
to the testers to have a better understanding of the user stories 
can be to have unit tests always as a deliverable from the de-
velopment phase, because it would 
be much easier for the test-
er to understand what the code is supposed to do. Another 
developer said
: “We have a JIRA field that we are supposed to 
fill with the testing procedure. This should be done by the de-
veloper, but sometimes because of the pressure of getting other 
work done so we don’t fill this testing procedure, and then the 
tester have to fill in this field.” 
D.
 
Coordination by mutual adjustment in the virtual team 
Agile teams are encouraged 
mutual adjustment over docu-
mentation, which enables coor
dination by informal communi-
cation. In both companies testing is performed continuously 
during development and stabilizing.
 In both teams, in the de-
velopment phase a developer pick
s tasks in JIRA. The task is 
implemented and the developers 
run unit tests. When the task 
is completed, JIRA is updated. Testers can then start doing 
their job. Some developers write a very detailed JIRA descrip-
tion while others write only a very short text, which makes it 
challenging for the testers to unde
rstand how to run the test.  
In company A, when testers find bugs or when they identi-
fy questions they need to ask their remote colleagues in Nor-
way, they first discuss among th
emselves to understand if it is 
a real bug and if they can solve the issue. Even though the test-
ers and developers have been on the product for a long time, 
the testers sometimes find bugs that the Norwegian developers 
do not perceive as a bug. Then the Norwegian team-lead (who 
knows the technology and the techni
cal system), and the test 
manager (who knows what happens in support and produc-
tion), look at the test-report and discuss with the Chinese. If the 
Chinese testers and the developers agree that it is not a bug, 
then the Chinese update the test scripts accordingly. Having 
such discussions and aiming at 
achieving a shared understand-
ing enable shared mental models
 in the team and strengthens 
the autonomy of the Chinese testers.   
The varying levels of details in the specifications are not 
seen as a problem by the team management in Company A.  
But it is seen as a problem by the testers, once that to coordi-
nate work, there is always a n
eed to communicate with the test 
leader. The testers in China asked for better documentation 
from the developers. One reason for that could be that they do 
not understand how they can talk more to the developers be-
cause they seem to be so busy 
and there is time difference.  
They are encouraged to talk to them, but get the feeling it is not 
really appreciated, at least by some. Then is a problem that 
they get two different signals 
65 V.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
A.
 
How do developers and testers comm
unicate in distributed 
continuous agile testing? 
As shown in the results section, in the teams we investigat-
ed, testers and developers have mainly contact through the user 
stories, testing of the user st
ories is reason for them to com-
municate. Therefore, one of th
e main topics discussed when we 
talk about interaction between testers and developers in a dis-
tributed agile testing context is the handover between testers 
and developers. But our results show communication through 
JIRA/user stories showed to be not enough in both teams and 
they had to find turnarounds to avoid misunderstandings. In-
formal communication also plays 
a very important role on the 
communication and teams needs to find ways to keep this 
channel open. The cases shown in this paper shows how direct 
communication facilitates the daily work of testers and conse-
quently developers. There is though little research on handover 
and knowledge transfer across roles in a software team [28].  
Another main area of discussion was the participation on 
the meetings. Testers appreciate to participate in the meetings 
and get information about plans and daily changes and discus-
sions in the project. As also pointed by Melnik et al. [19], 
knowledge sharing based on recurring practices such as agile 
stand-up meetings and socializa
tion of team members enable 
agility and oppose communication errors on the team level.  
This is also confirmed in our study; because the testers are not 
able to be part of the main m
eetings of the development team, 
they miss a lot of information th
at would make their job faster 
and more effective. 
In the case where the testers a
nd developers are distributed, 
there is a higher need to also
 use other communication media 
such as email and Lync. Emails makes the communication 
more asynchronous and the testers many times have to wait for 
one or more days to get the answer to their questions. It was 
also pointed out by the testers in
 Company A (distributed) that 
they would prefer to not have to
 write an email in most of the 
cases, so they try to find the an
swer sometimes in some other 
documents and they end up using more time than it would be 
needed if they could just ask a developer. Lateral communica-
tion is very also important 
for enabling coordination through 
mutual adjustment between testers and developers and we 
could see that the usage of a broker between testers and devel-
opers created distances between them. On creating norms for 
the use of JIRA for the handover between testers and develop-
ers, it should be taken in consideration both testers and devel-
opers needs for information and how these norms will affect 
the daily job of testers and developers.  
Relative to more traditional settings, communication pro-
cesses that occur in agile testing are expected to be rapid, cus-
tomized, temporary, greater in
 volume, more informal, and 
more relationship-based [10]. Hu
mmel et. al. [15] describes six 
social agile practices and thei
r impact on communication, and 
found that developers strongly pr
eferred direct over indirect 
communication, these results ar
e also confirmed by our study. 
They also found that a compromise between formal 
documentation and informal communication was necessary 
because both extremes were neither feasible nor desirable in 
real-life projects.  
B.
 
How is communication impacted by types of team 
configuration between testers and developers in 
distributed continuous agile testing? 
Team distribution refers to the extent to which team mem-
bers of the software development projects are separated from 
each other (distributed) or clos
e to each other (collocated) in 
terms of the physical location [36]
.  Therefore, team distribu-
tion influences how, when and 
how frequent team members 
communicate [15][20][30]. The 
amount of verbal communica-
tion is lower in distributed pr
ojects compared to collocated 
teams, which may result in mi
scommunication, misunderstand-
ings and confusion among team 
members. In Company A (dis-
tributed developers and testers), the team leader has to 
constantly remind the testers to ask questions to get clarifica-
tions. In Company B (collocated developers and testers), test-
ers and developers just organically talk and get clarifications. 
Temporal distance showed to be a major impediment for 
closer collaboration in Company A (distributed). This result 
also confirms the studies in 
communication in other contexts, 
also evidenced by Hummel, co-location enables quick and effi-
cient direct communication due 
to close proximity; and, ena-
bles to clarify questions face-to-face, besides, the daily 
meetings, enables high freque
ncy and high amount of direct 
communication in and after the m
eetings for co-located teams 
[15]. Improving collaboration in
frastructure among distributed 
teams doesn’t really solve the problem. It is important that 
team members are able to cont
act their remote colleagues at 
any time, without need to write an email or wait until the next 
meeting with the team lead. 
The collaboration among remote 
members is highly important for an agile team to carry out 
work together in a two-week iteration.  In hectic periods there 
is a need to extend and shift working hours to be more flexible 
which is a cost for some of the team members. In addition, 
being in a different time zone makes it difficult for the testers 
to be part of the daily activities of the teams. Sometimes the 
testers miss knowledge on how the 
system is supposed to work 
and on what is expected when it comes to quality.  
Company A (distributed) experienced some time zone ben-
efits as well. For them it is bene
ficial for the team that testing 
happens while developers are sleeping, because it enables con-
tinuous testing and integrates testing activities as closely as 
possible with coding. Firstly, errors can be fixed quickly while 
the context is fresh in the developers’ minds and before these 
errors lead to knock-on effects.
 Secondly, the underlying root 
causes that led to the problems may be more easily identified 
and eliminated. However, they often lost a day because of the 
need to clarity issues related 
to the feature under test. Another 
benefit of having remote tester 
was that it might be beneficial 
to the team that testers do not get too close to the developers 
which make them report what they perceive as bugs, not what 
the developers want them to report.  
On the participation of the regular meetings, Company A 
(distributed) had much more problems in keeping the testers 
informed regularly about daily 
changes in the project. Several 
empirical studies have shown th
at engaging testers earlier and 
throughout the software developmen
t process is beneficial to a 
project team’s performance [
13]. To continue improving the 
testing and development activities, the team from Company A 
66 plans to invest more in the initial phase of each release. The 
goal is to make sure that everyone in the virtual team has a 
shared mental model of what will be delivered for the next 
release. The testers need to be
 more involved in the planning 
phase to get a better understanding of the goal of the iteration. 
Organizing early demos for the 
testers might be one option. 
Furthermore, the degree of formality of the communication 
was bigger in distributed than in
 collocated teams. This result 
is also aligned with previous 
results from studies on communi-
cation in agile systems development [15].  
Regarding the quadrants of testing, the testers that are far 
from the developers also get further from the business envi-
ronment and it is harder for them to be able to perform tasks 
related to the “business facing”, like criticizing the product in a 
customer perspective, in talks 
with the testers they mentioned 
how they get further from the 
business and business view, and 
it ends up that their tests are much more limited to “correction” 
than to “critiquing” the product. 
Besides, the tests that are per-
formed by each role (testers and developers) are much more of 
a black-box when they are so far apart. Hindering more the 
possibilities for collaboration between
 roles. The lack of trans-
parency of the activities in both sides also limits the possibili-
ties for the testers to discuss 
how they can support the team on 
“building” the product, especially
 when the testers are not even 
able to attend the meetings in the team.  
C.
 
Implications for research and practice 
Results from this research can aid team leaders to see their 
team’s collaboration practices 
(i.e. communication via hando-
ver, chat systems, written or informal communication), trends 
(i.e. coordination by mutual adju
stment) and flaws (i.e. missing 
or indirect communica
tion, lack of participation in meetings) 
between testers and developers. The team can keep a constant 
check on reduced or increased communication among mem-
bers through repeated checks. As a result, the leaders can take 
necessary action to orient the teams in a better way to incorpo-
rate more communication strate
gies among roles in the team 
for better performance.   
To help bridge this gap, communication strategies can be 
used. Tarone [31] defines Comm
unication Strategies (CS) as a 
mutual attempt of two interlocutors to agree on a meaning in 
situations where requisite meani
ng structures do not seem to be 
shared. Therefore, it can be viewed as attempts to bridge the 
gap between interlocutors in 
real communication situations. 
Four facets of communication st
rategies explained by Mohr 
and Nevins [23]: frequency, di
rection, modality and content. 
In 
the contexts we evaluated we see that teams can benefit on 
being aware of these concepts to get the communication to be 
more effective. However, it is challenging for developers to 
balance the completeness, conciseness and clarity of the con-
tent of the information that they 
need to share with the testers. 
Writing well enough specifications seems to be particular chal-
lenging because such specifications will require that the devel-
opers spend a lot of time doing it, and some developers are 
lacking skills in writing in another language. We found that 
both teams seem to find oral co
mmunication to be the best way 
to convey the information. On 
the consideration, teams needs 
to be able to know more about the 
competences
 and skills (who 
know what) so developers can prepare every handover with the 
specific tester in mind and try 
to understand what that specific 
tester would need of information. .
 It is important for an organ-
ization to decrease the knowledge and experience gap between 
its software developers and testers and create a working envi-
ronment in which developers and testers trust each other and 
maintain a good relationship and have an open channel for in-
formal communication. To build 
trust between developers and 
testers, an organization may also
 engage developers and testers 
in social activities outside work, besides thoroughly participa-
tion of both roles on the formal meetings of the teamwork.  
D.
 
Limitations 
The research reported here has limitations. First, our study 
was limited to members of two companies and two projects. 
The two projects had different characteristics, helping to over-
come some issues with genera
lizability of our results. Within 
the projects, we were careful to interview members playing 
different roles on the team, so 
we could obtain different per-
spectives of communication between
 developers and testers.  
Another limitation of our study is that we relied mainly up-
on interviews and observations to derive our results. The lack 
of standardization that it implies inevitably raises concerns 
about reliability. To reduce some of these concerns, we dis-
cussed and improved the interview protocol iteratively before 
data collection.  One researcher also visited the companies 
many times to better understand their context and observe the 
teams. The interviews were also conducted in different mo-
ments of the projects. For the 
analysis, two researchers coded 
all interviews individually and in a second step, they discussed 
each coding before including it in the software tool. One relia-
bility issue that we did not overcome was the triangulation of 
the results with multiple methods of data collection.  
VI.
 
CONCLUSION
 
In this paper we have presented the results from a study on 
how developers and testers co
mmunicate in a distributed con-
tinuous agile testing environment. The testers and developers 
make use of different forms of
 communication, we describe 
four main themes: handover thr
ough issue tracker system, for-
mal meetings, written communication and coordination by 
mutual adjustment. We have found that early participation of 
the testers is very important to the success of the handover be-
tween testers and developers and this is accomplished through 
participation in planning, standups and review meetings. The 
communication between developers and testers is not suffi-
ciently effective through written communication and it has to 
be augmented by informal comm
unication. One important ob-
servation is that the communication changes depending on the 
type of the tasks (new or old) and also on the experience of the 
testers and how much the developer knows about the experi-
ence of the tester.  
Regarding the distribution or
 collocation between testers 
and developers, it is reasonable 
to conclude that distribution 
does affect the work of testing by creating more asynchronous 
communication and consequently
 less informal communication 
between developers and testers. The trade-off between "good 
documentation" vs. "asking questions" strategies is still an 
open question and needs to be better investigated to understand 
the real effects of it.  
67 Temporal distance showed to be a major impediment for 
closer collaboration between testers and developers and partic-
ipation of the testers on formal meetings of the project, such as 
planning, daily meetings and retrospectives. Some mitigation 
were also planned by the leaders after the results of this inves-
tigation, for example adding a video tapping of the daily meet-
ing and planning meetings, so th
e Chinese testers could watch 
them afterwards.  
 The results of this study also indicate a number of direc-
tions for future research. There 
are a number of models of team 
effectiveness, originating from several disciplines of science 
[11]. In particular, teamwork ha
s been a much-researched topic 
in management science and in psychology. Although the mod-
els use different terminology, there a number of similarities in 
the mechanisms included. Communication is central in all 
models; and, as with other areas
 of software development re-
search, we also need more empirical studies and better theoret-
ical grounding in studies of soft
ware teams and software team 
effectiveness. Our next goal is 
to apply a theoretical framework 
of team effectiveness in the 
understanding of how to team up 
testers and developers effectively. .  
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
This work was supported by the Smiglo project, partly 
funded by the Research Council of Norway under the grant 
235359/O30.  
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Y. I. Alzoubi, A. Q. Gill, A. Al-Ani, “Empirical studies of 
geographically distributed agile development communication 
challenges: A systematic review”, Information & Management, August 
2015, ISSN 0378-7206. 
[2]
 
N.-D. Anh, D.S. Cruzes, and R. Conradi, “The impact of global 
dispersion on coordination, team performance and software quality - A 
systematic literature review,” Information and Software Technology, 
2015, pp. 277-294. 
[3]
 
S. Barney, V. Mohankumar, P. Chatzi
petrou, A. Aurum, C. Wohlin, and 
L. Angelis. “Software quality across borders: Three case studies on 
company internal alignment” 
Inf. Softw. Technol.
 56, Jan. 2014, 20-38.
 
[4]
 
E. Bjarnason, P. Runeson, M. Borg, 
M. Unterkalmsteiner, E. Engström, 
B. Regnell, G. Sabaliauskaite, A. Loconsole, T. Gorschek, R. Feldt: 
“Challenges and practices in aligning requirements with verification and 
validation: a case study of six companies.” Empirical Software 
Engineering 19(6): 1809-1855 (2014) 
[5]
 
R. E. Boyatzis, “Transforming qualitativ
e information: thematic analysis 
and code development”. Sage Publications, 1998.   
[6]
 
E. Collins, G. Macedo, N. Maia, 
and A. Dias-Neto, “An Industrial 
Experience on the Application of Distributed Testing in an Agile 
Software Development Environment,” IEEE Seventh International Conf. 
on Global Software Engineering (ICGSE), 2012,, pp. 190-194. 
[7]
 
L. Crispin and J. Gregory, “Agile T
esting: A Practical Guide for Testers 
and Agile Teams”, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2009. 
[8]
 
D. S. Cruzes, T. Dybå: “Recommended Steps for Thematic Synthesis in 
Software Engineering.” ESEM 2011: 275-284 
[9]
 
R.M. Davison, M.G. Martinsons, 
N. Kock, “Principles of canonical 
action 
 
research”, Information Systems Journal 14 (2004) 65–86. 
  
[10]
 
G. DeSanctis and P. Monge, “Communication Processes for Virtual 
Organizations.” J. of Computer-M
ediated Communication, 3: 0, 1998. 
[11]
 
T. Dingsøyr, T. Dybå: “Team effectiveness in software development: 
Human and cooperative aspects in team effectiveness models and 
priorities for future studies.” CHASE 2012: 27-29 
[12]
 
B. Fitzgerald  and K.-J. Stol , "C
ontinuous software engineering: A 
roadmap and agenda." JSS. To be published in 2016. 
[13]
 
M. L. Gillenson, M. J. Racer, S.
 M. Richardson, and X. Zhang,  
“Engaging Testers Early and Throughout the Software Development 
Process: Six Models and a Simulation Study”. Journal of Information 
Technology Management, 22(1), 8-27, 2011. 
[14]
 
G. K. Hanssen,  D. Smite and N. B.
 Moe : “Signs of Agile Trends in 
Global Software Engineering Research: A Tertiary Study.” Sixth IEEE 
International Conf. on Global Software Engineering (ICGSEW), 2011. 
[15]
 
M, Hummel, C. Rosenkranz, and R. Holten. “The Role of 
Communication in Agile Systems Development: An analysis of the state 
of the art”, Business and Inf. Systems Engineering 5(5): 343–355, 2003. 
[16]
 
J. Lee, S. Kang, D. Lee. : “Surve
y on software testing practices”, IET 
Softw.,  Vol. 6, Iss. 3, pp. 275–282, 2012. 
[17]
 
S. Marczak, D. Damian: “How interaction between roles shapes the 
communication structure in requirements-driven collaboration”. RE 
2011: 47-56 
[18]
 
L. Mathiassen: "Collaborative Practice Research" Scandinavian Journal 
of Information Systems: Vol. 14: Iss. 1, Article 5, 2002. 
 
[19]
 
G. Melnik, G. and F. Maurer.: “Direct Verbal Communication as a 
Catalyst of Agile Knowledge Sharing”, Proceedings of the Agile 
Development Conference (pp. 21-
31). Washington, DC, USA:, 2004. 
[20]
 
C. de O. Melo, D. S. Cruzes, F. Kon, R. Conradi: “Agile Team 
Perceptions of Productivity Factors”. AGILE 2011: 57-66. 
[21]
 
N. B. Moe, D. Cruzes, T. Dybå, E.
 M. Mikkelsen: “Continuous Software 
Testing in a Globally Distributed Project”. ICGSE 2015: 130-134 
[22]
 
N. B. Moe, D. Smite, G. K. Hanssen, and H. Barney, “From offshore 
outsourcing to insourcing and partnerships: four failed outsourcing 
attempts,” Empirical Software Engineering, 2013, pp. 1-34. 
[23]
 
J.  Mohr  and  J.  R.  Nevin,  “C
ommunication  strategies  in  marketing 
channels: A theoretical perspective,” The Journal of Marketing , vol. 54, 
no. 4, pp. 36–51, 1990. 
[24]
 
J. Gerring, “Case Study Research: Pr
inciples and Practices”. Cambridge 
University Press, 2006.   
[25]
 
H. Shah, M.J. Harrold, and S. Sinha, “Global software testing under 
deadline pressure: Vendor-side experiences,” Information and Software 
Technology, 2014, pp. 6-19. 
[26]
 
D. Šmite,  N. B. Moe and P. J. Ågerfalk: “Agility Across Time and 
Space: Implementing Agile Methods in Global Software Projects”. 
Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 2010. 
[27]
 
D. Šmite, C. Wohlin, T. Gorschek, a
nd R. Feldt, “Empirical evidence in 
global software engineering: a system
atic review,” Empirical Software 
Engineering, 2010, pp. 91-118. 
[28]
 
C. J. Stettina, E. Kroon,: “Is there an agile handover? an empirical study 
of documentation and project handover practices across agile software 
teams”. In: 19th ICE & IEEE-ITMC International Conference, The 
Hague, Netherlands (2013). 
[29]
 
O. Taipale and K. Smolander: “Imp
roving software testing by observing 
practice”. ISESE 2006: 262-271.  
[30]
 
D. Talby, O. Hazzan, Y. Dubinsky, 
A. Keren: “Agile Software Testing 
in a Large-Scale Project”. IEEE Software 23(4): 30-37 (2006). 
[31]
 
E. Tarone, “Some thoughts on the notion of communication strategy*,” 
TESOL quarterly, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 285–295, 1981 
[32]
 
I. Tervonen, A. Haapalahti, L. Ha
rjumaa, J. Similä: “Outsourcing 
Software Testing: A Case Study in the Oulu Area”. QSIC 2013: 65-74. 
[33]
 
E. J. Uusitalo, M. Komassi, M. 
Kauppinen, A. M. Davis: “Linking 
Requirements and Testing in Practice”. In: Proceedings of 16th IEEE 
International Requirements Engineering Conference, pp. 295-302, 2008. 
[34]
 
J. Verner, J. Sampson, V. Tosic,
 N. Bakar, and B. Kitchenham, 
“Guidelines for industrially-based multiple case studies in software 
engineering,” in Third International Conference on Research Challenges 
in Information Science, 2009. RCIS 
2009., april 2009, pp. 313 –324.   
[35]
 
X. Zhang, T. F. Stafford , J. S. 
Dhaliwal, M. L. Gillenson, and G. 
Moeller: “Sources of Conflict between Developers and Testers in 
Software Development”. Inf. & Management, 51(1), 13-26, 2014. 
[36]
 
P. J. Ågerfalk, B. Fitzgerald, S. A.
 Slaughter : “Flexible and distributed 
information systems development: state of the art and research 
challenges”. Inf Syst Res 20(3):317– 328, 2009.  
 
68