 Development of a Set of Best Practices for 
Distributed Pair Programming
Bernardo José da Silva Estácio 
Faculdade de Informática (FACIN) 
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS) 
Porto Alegre, Brazil 
bernardo.estacio@acad.pucrs.br 
 
 
Abstract 
— This paper presents a research idea related to the use 
of Pair Programming in the context of Distributed Software 
Development. Organizations have been distributing their 
software development activities around the world for over a 
decade now which requires distributed teams to work together to 
achieve the project goal. Agile methods have been recently 
adopted by software engineers aiming to provide faster and more 
valuable results to the customer by fostering face-to-face 
communication, rapid response to changes, among others. 
Despite sounding contradicting, it has been claimed that 
distributed software development have been adopting agile 
methods as a strategy to make distributed teams more 
productive. Pair programming is one of the agile practices used 
in such context. It has been argued that pair programming in 
distributed software development contributes to increase the 
product quality and the productivity. For this reason, the goal of 
this idea proposal is to understand the advantages and challenges 
of Distributed Pair Programming, and to develop a set of best 
practices to facilitate its adoption. 
Keywords— Pair Programming, Distributed Software 
Development, Extreme Programming. 
 
I.
 
 
D
ESCRIPTION 
O
F 
T
HE 
P
ROBLEM 
A
ND 
J
USTIFICATION 
O
F 
T
HE 
I
DEA
 
Globalization has had an impact on different branches of 
industry, and consequently, in software development. In the 
scenario of seeking the most advantageous markets, lower cost 
of manpower, better product quality, among other factors, IT 
companies began to distribute their development software 
processes. In this context, in the late 90's Distributed Software 
Development (DSD) emerges. DSD is characterized as a 
software project that is developed by team members physically 
distant from each other [2].  
Almost at the same time, with the publication of the Agile 
Manifesto in 2001, agile methods were made available with the 
main characteristic to be an adaptive approach toward 
environments with volatile requirements. For its innovative 
characteristic, agile methods have attracted interest from both 
academia and industry up to the present day [3], over a decade 
later. Extreme Programming (XP) [4] is considered one of the 
most-adopted agile method in industry [5]. It offers a range of 
techniques and practices with a focus on software 
development, unlike other methodologies such as Scrum [12] 
that has its focus more toward project management practices.  
One of the most popular practices adopted by agile 
practitioners is called Pair Programming. Pair Programming 
(PP) is defined as the cooperation between two programmers 
using one computer to develop software. Although this concept 
has not been defined by the XP creators, it has gained 
popularity when XP was proposed. The benefits of adopting 
this practice are, among others: increased productivity, 
increased product quality due to the high number of defects 
found in the continuing review performed by the pair of 
developers, reduction of the risk of being dependent on only 
one person’s knowledge about the code and module system, 
increased collaboration and team communication, and 
improvement of working conditions engaging programmers 
reducing their isolation feelings [1], [6]. Pair programming in a 
distributed environment, called Distributed Pair Programming, 
has became a common practice due to the availability of 
communication infrastructure. 
With the trend of the DSD, some challenges regarding 
communication and collaboration emerge and Distributed Pair 
Programming (DPP) becomes an important source of research. 
Some studies have sought to investigate the effectiveness of the 
practice of DPP  as shown in  Baheti [7], Canfora [8] and 
Hanks [9]. Other studies, such as Natsu [10] and Stotts [11] 
proposed tools to support DPP. However, despite the 
investigations and discussions provided by these studies, there 
is no study to the best of our knowledge that has investigated 
how distributed pair programming is performed. Literature 
lacks studies that explore proposals for best practices to 
facilitate the performance of this activity in such distributed 
context. We believe that having knowledge about how DPP is 
conducted is relevant to the improvement of results achieve by 
this practice. 
Therefore, the research question that guides this idea 
proposal is "What are the main benefits and challenges of the 
DPP and what best practices can enable a better adoption of the 
pair programming practice in distributed development? 
II.
 
M
ETHODOLOGY
 
In order to answer our research question, we will conduct an 
empirical study. We chose such approach because of the  
strong human intervention suffered by the execution of the 
practice. The research approach is going to be qualitative, 
2012 IEEE Seventh International Conference on Global Software Engineering Workshops978-0-7695-4788-6/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSEW.2012.833 exploratory-type and is going to use primary and secondary 
research methods.  
Broadly, we intend to adopt the following research 
methods: systematic mapping of the literature, field study, and 
experiment. The systematic mapping of the literature will 
guide the research of related work and research opportunities. 
The field study will collect information about how DPP is 
adopted in the industry. We will conduct interviews to identify 
needs and difficulties in day-to-day software development 
teams. We describe the goal of adopting each of these methods 
in more details below as a stepwise plan. 
•
 
To study existing literature aiming to improve 
knowledge related to agile and distributed software 
development. 
•
 
To systematically map related work aiming to 
identify a set of lessons learned already documented 
in literature. Findings from this step will be used to 
support the development of the subsequent research 
steps. 
•
 
To define a preliminary set of best practices for DPP 
based on the systematic mapping step. 
•
 
To conduct a field study field and experiment: 
consists in carrying out interviews with some 
software development companies that implement the 
DPP in order to evaluate the documented best 
practices and identify best practices that are not 
present in the preliminary set created.  
•
 
Experiment: The realization of an experiment is 
going to be planned to assess the benefits of a subset 
of these practices in a controlled environment, 
identifying possible areas for improvement. 
•
 
To define a final set of best practices for DPP based 
on the findings identified in the field study and in the 
experiment. 
III.
 
P
LANNING 
A
ND 
M
OTIVATION
 
This idea has been identified in the second semester of 
2011 as a result of a investigation about the adoption of agile 
methods in distributed software development. This 
investigation was designed intended to deepen the theoretical 
knowledge in the area of agile methods in DSD aiming to 
identify research opportunities. The strategy was to identify 
articles of impact from the analysis of citations of these 
articles. The purpose of this idea was a result of opportunities 
arising in this analysis. 
Another step towards the exploration of this theme was the 
experience as an intern in the development center of a large 
multinational organization located in the PUCRS Technology 
Park, called TECNOPUC, in Porto Alegre, Brazil. During the 
internship it was possible to observe how programmers 
dealing with distributed pair programming work. The findings 
from this experience motivated us to further investigate the 
topic. 
We are currently concluding the systematic mapping 
aiming to identify related studies in the literature that describe 
lessons learned. As a consequence of this mapping, we will 
have a preliminary set of best practices for DPP. The design 
and planning of field study and of the experiment are also in 
course.  
IV.
 
P
OTENTIAL 
C
ONTRIBUTIONS
 
At the end of this study it is expected the results obtained 
could contribute to both the academia and industry. In 
academia, this research will contribute to furthering 
knowledge about how DPP takes place in practice and which 
best practices can help distributed teams to be more effective 
when they adopt this practice. This knowledge will add value 
to areas such as DSD, Agile Methods and Software Quality. 
Another contribution is the systematic mapping developed, 
which allow the knowledge of related studies and research 
opportunities for future work. The industry will benefit from 
this research from the set of best practices proposed of DPP, 
whose goal is to help organizations to identify the main needs 
of the difficulties in DPP, and have the support for the 
implementation of DPP more effectively and facilitated. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
The development of this work is financially supported by the 
PUCRS/HP Research Agreement. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Arisholm, E., Gallis, H.G., Dybå, T., and Sjøberg, D.I.K., “Evaluating 
Pair Programming with Respect to System Complexity and Programmer 
Expertise”. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2007. 33(2): 
pp. 65-86.
 
[2]
 
Herbsleb, J. D., Moitra, D., “Guest editor´s introduction: global software 
development“, IEEE Software, 18(2), 2001. 
[3]
 
Dyba, T.; Dingsøyr, T. “Empirical studies of agile software 
development: A systematic review”. In: Inform. Softw. Technol Journal, 
2008. 
[4]
 
Beck,K.; Andres,C.“Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change”. 2 .ed. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004. 
[5]
 
Boehm,B. “A Spiral model of software development and enhancement”. 
ACM. ACM SIGSOFT Engineering Notes,11(4):14-24,1986. 
[6]
 
Williams, L., Kessler, R., Cunningham, W. and Jeffries, R. (2000) 
“Strengthening the Case for Pair-Programming”, IEEE Software. 
[7]
 
Baheti, P.; Gehringer, E.;Stotts, D. “Exploring the efficacy of distributed 
pair programming”. In: Extreme Programming and Agile Methods—XP 
Agile Universe ,2002, pp.387-410. 
[8]
 
Canfora,G;Cimitle,A;Visaggio,C. Lessons learned about distributed pair 
programming: what the knowledge needs to address? In: Proceedings of 
the Twelfth IEEE International Conference of Enabling Technologies; 
Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, 2003. 
[9]
 
Hanks, B. “Empirical evaluation of distributed pair programming”. in 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies , 2008, pp. 530-544. 
[10]
 
Natsu, H.; Favela, J. ; Moran, A. L.; Decouchant, D.;  Martinez-
Enriquez, A. M. “Distributed pair programming on the Web”. In: 
Proceedings of the Fourth Mexican International Conference, 2003,pp. 
81-88. 
[11]
 
 Stotts, D.; McC. Smith, J.; Gyllstrom, K.“Support for Distributed Pair 
Programming in the Transparent Video Facetop”. Technical Report, 
North Carolina University, 2004. 
[12]
 
Schwaber, K. “The Scrum Development Process”.  In: Proceedings of 
the 10
th
 Annual  Conference on object oriented programming systems,
 
languages and applications
 (OOPSLA).  
Texas.pp. 117-134.1995. 
 
 
34