 Scaling Agile Scrum Software Development  
Providing Agility and Quality to Platform Development by Reducing Time to Market  
Madan Mohan Jha       Rosa Maria Ferrer Vilardell 
Siemens Technology and Services Pvt. 
Ltd.   Siemens Schweiz AG, Bu
ilding Technologies Division, International 
Pune, India        Zug, Switzerland 
Madan.Jha@siemens.com
       
rosa-maria.ferrer@siemens.com
 
 
Jai Narayan 
Siemens Industry, Inc. 
Buffalo Grove, USA 
jai.narayan@siemens.com
 
 
Abstract
—
agile software development approach aims at 
overcoming the limitations of plan-driven software development 
by allowing requirement change
s during all phases of product 
development and providing agility to organization to respond to 
changing market needs. Soft
ware organizations have successfully 
implemented agile scrum in distributed software development. 
However, they also encoun
tered many challenges while 
implementation which led to considerable amount of effort spend 
just to manage work. Difficulties were primarily in the areas of 
communication, culture, different time zones, different level of 
domain know how across scrum teams, and knowledge 
management. In this practice paper, we will share practices  and 
systems implemented, challenges
 encountered along with their 
countermeasures, and lessons 
learnt in successfully scaling the 
Agile Scrum development to 16 globally distributed scrum teams 
with 100+ team members, successfully delivering 2000+ user 
stories which required execution of 3000+ product test cases and 
1000+ system test cases for verification and validation in a single 
version of platform release Providing Agility and Quality to 
Platform Development by Reducing Time to Market
. 
Keywords—Scaling Scrum; Agile Software Development; 
Distributed Software Development; Agile Scrum 
I.
 
BACKGROUND 
 
The characteristics of Global Software Engineering 
(GSE) have significant effects on planning, communication, 
coordination, and 
control and mitigating the effects is a 
challenge [1]. Compared to plan-driven software development 
approaches, agile methods are more flexible when it comes to 
taking requirements’ 
changes into consi
deration during all 
phases of software development [2]. Agile methods emphasize 
extensive collaboration between customers and developers, 
and encourage small self-organized collocated teams [3]. 
Mitigating the Global Software Engineering challenges by 
themselves is not a straightforward task and combining agile 
practices with a global or distribu
ted context complicates 
things even further. The Distance factor in GSE implies a 
different way of working, 
organizational standards, 
organizational cultures and policies, which may decrease a 
team’s cohesion [4]. 
II.
 
INTRODUCTION
 
We are working on platform development for one of the 
Siemens Business unit which can be used as a global product 
and can also be used as a platform for future building 
technology applications
. Platform development is spread 
across three continents (Europe, Asia, and North America), 
over four locations, and 16 Scrum teams. We follow Agile 
Scrum for Software development. Agile methods, and in 
particular Scrum [5], have become main-stream in 
contemporary software development in both small and large 
organizations [6]. Agile Scrum in general operates broadly 
around seven basic elements which are defined to meet the 
expectation of Agile Manifesto. The seven basic elements are 
(i)Self Organized, Cross Function Collocated Team,(ii)Shorter 
Iterations of work called “Sprin
t”,(iii)Continuous Monitoring 
of Progress via “Daily Scrum”,(i
v)Shippable product every 
month,(v)Monthly re-evaluation of project goal,(vi) Lean 
Documentation, (vii) Continuous Integration. The Scrum 
teams are organized as small teams comprising of experienced 
developers, testers, analyst and technical writers working as a 
single team. Other key members of Scrum team are Product 
Owner, Scrum Master, and 
management representative also 
called as stakeholders. Key reason for having collocated team 
is that business people 
and developers must 
work together in 
close collaboration throughout th
e projects and should rely on 
face- to-face communication for resolving issues rather than 
following the traditional formal
 methods.  Frequent face-to-
face communication also improves a feeling of “ONE TEAM” 
and also builds trust. In this pr
actice paper, we will share our 
approach for scaling scrum, the challenges we faced and how 
we overcame and the lessons we learnt during this journey. 
III.
 
IMAPACT ANALYSIS FOR SCALING SCRUM
 
 Agile Scrum recommends some key practices like 
maintaining a Product and Sp
rint Backlog, Spri
nt Planning, 
Daily Scrum, Sprint Review, Sprint Retrospective etc. Since 
Agile Scrum primarily was de
signed for small collocated 
teams, so scaling of Agile Scrum for Globally Distributed 
Software Engineering (GDSE) w
ill have its impact on agile 
2016 IEEE 11th International Conference on Global Software Engineering2329-6313/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2016.2484 scrum practices, and Scrum roles. 
We identified that the 
following standard Scrum practices were impacted while 
scaling Agile for GDSE. 

 
Product Owner and development team must work together 
throughout the 
project, while scaling, 
although, Product 
Owner and development team w
ill be operating in different 
time zones and may not be a
ble to work collaborate face to 
face.  

 
The most efficient and effective method of conveying 
information to and within a development team is face-to-
face conversation and here again different scrum teams can 
work in different time zones. 

 
Best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from 
self-organizing teams. Scaling scru
m will have bigger 
impact over this practice as many scrum teams will be 
involved and will require careful communication and 
coordination.  

 
Scrum Master focuses on removing impediments. While 
scaling, Scrum Master will invest more time in inter team 
communication and coordinati
on for dependencies, if any. 

 
Product Owner closely works with team to meet business 
objectives. In case of scaling, it can be too overwhelming 
and challenging for the Product Owner as he/she may be 
responsible for requirements 
which will require many 
Scrum teams to work in different time zones. 

 
Self-Organized teams define goals and achieve them. 
Deciding the goal can be challenging and tricky as Scrum 
team will have to consider dependencies and their 
resolutions.  
IV.
 
T
HEME FOR SCALING SCRUM
 
After completing impact 
analysis of scaling Agile Scrum 
it was clear that we needed a formidable, clear approach and 
set of new practices which will help
 us in overcoming the 
challenges resulting from Glob
ally Distributed Software 
Engineering. We moved from 
traditional Scrum to Hybrid 
model where we added new roles and new practices which 
will act as guiding principles to
 all stakeholders. We grouped 
our practices broadly under two themes. 
•
 
Structure for Scaling Scrum 
•
 
Operationalized Scaled Scrum  
V.
 
STRUCTURE FOR SCALING SCRUM
 
 Outcome of the impact analysis of scaling Agile Scrum 
was analyzed and it was clear that since we are in a distributed 
product development which
 has software and hardware 
components, hence we cannot im
plement pure Agile Scrum. 
We adopted an in-house devel
oped hybrid model called 
Product Evolution Process (PEP) 
along with measures which 
will help us in estab
lishing strong infrastructure for 
Communication and Coordination, Maintain High Ownership 
Team Culture, System for Dependency Identification and 
Adaptation, Transparency of Pla
nning, Attention to Quality, 
Common Goal and Proactive and efficient leadership team for 
quick impediments resolution. 
A.
 
Hybrid Model 
The PEP agile is an in-house developed hybrid model 
which consists of Requiremen
t Engineering, System Testing, 
Field Testing and Release to
 Market phases defined in 
traditional waterfall way, which is sequential; but Software 
Design, Development and Pro
duct Testing, follow the Agile 
Scrum Practices. Hybrid model starts and ends with waterfall. 
Agile Scrum is sandwiched
 in between waterfall phases. 
 
 
Figure 1Hybrid Model 
B.
 
Backlog Grooming 
Backlog Grooming follows
 layering and filtering process 
of waterfall model. We use multidimensional analysis 
approach which includes evaluating the business requirements 
against legacy systems of existi
ng product family, existing 
reference competitor’s system,
 technological advancement and 
Market needs. Once the requirement is validated through all 
these four validation points, it 
is moved to the Program 
Backlog. The Program Backlog now goes through the 
segregation process where every requirement is being 
evaluated on measures like whether the need is specific to the 
application or generic need for platform. Filtering process 
starts on segregated Program Backlog requirements. In the first 
level of filtering platform 
specific requirements, which are 
generic in nature, are selected and moved to the next level by 
filtering out application requirements. In the second level of 
filtering, only requirements wh
ich are synchronized with 
business goals are moved to the Release Backlog. All Release 
Backlog requirements have an absolute rank. Based on the 
program team capacity and project end date the final Release 
Backlog is created. All finalized high ranked Release Backlog 
requirements are also evaluated for non-functional 
requirements (NFR) with the he
lp of scenario based approach. 
Availability of absolute ranke
d Release Backlog with identified 
NFR passes the readiness check for Agile Scrum execution. 
C.
 
Empower Scrum Team 
1.
 
Global Central Leadership  
New set of roles were defined and introduced for program 
monitoring and control. Representatives from different 
engineering streams were chosen for driving the overall 
program. This team has rep
resentations from 
Architecture, 
Project Management, Product Po
rtfolio Management, Product 
Testing, System Testing, Release Management, End User 
Training, and Pr
oduct Documentation. Global Central 
Leadership team work hard to facilitate cross site impediments 
resolutions and expedite overall decision making process . 
85 2.
 
Scrum Team Organization 
Scaling of Scrum has a huge impact on autonomy of the 
team and empowered team is the soul of Agile Scrum. Teams 
are organized with singular objective of “Make them 
independent and reduce depen
dency”. Scrum teams were 
assigned modules based on competency, domain know-how, 
and market proximity fo
r support. Scrum teams have complete 
ownership for the assigned m
odules. Product Owners (14+) 
were assigned for the modules, so that Product Owners will 
help teams in meeting busine
ss objectives of the module. 
Program level Product Owner 
(Discipline Product Manager) 
ensures that product owners are working together to meet 
program level business objective. Global technical leads (14+) 
were empowered for taking techni
cal decisions. Scrum Master 
(4+) has to facilitate inter tea
m location issues resolution as 
well as also facilitate inter site team issue resolution by 
coordination and cooperation with other location Scrum 
Master. Central Leadership also
 plays a pivotal facilitation 
role in inter site issue 
resolution. Roles like Site Manager were 
introduced for resolving people
 management, infrastructure, 
procurement issues and logistical issues.  
 
Figure 2 Program Organization 
D.
 
Model for Inter and Intra Team Communication 
Communication is key to agile practices. Our 
communication model is designed 
on two levels, Horizontal 
and aggregated Vertical communication. 
 Horizontal comm
unication is a communication which 
takes place within the function such as: 
•
 
Architects have weekly meeting with all the global 
technical leads (GTLs) to revi
ew design decision taken 
by the scrum teams. So 
all the stakeholders from 
different locations respons
ible for making technical 
decisions know the implications on their module as 
well as can suggest good design practices in order to 
make overall product design and architecture 
sustainable. 
•
 
 Test Management (Product 
and System) will have 
their weekly meeting with 
their counterpart at different 
sites, over a Virtual Meeting, for deliberating on 
testing related prog
ress, dependency and issue 
resolution. 
•
 
 Build and configuration management team will have 
weekly meeting with thei
r counterpart at different 
sites, over a Virtual Meeti
ng, for deliberating topics on 
build management dependency and issue resolution. 
•
 
Documentation team will have weekly meeting with 
their counterpart at different s
ites, over a Virtual 
Meeting, for deliberating topics on documentation for 
dependency and issue resolution.  
•
 
Scrum Master will have communication with his team 
for plan progress and impediments. 
Vertical Aggregated communication where all: 
•
 
Scrum Masters along with Global leads for 
documentation, Test Management (Product/System), 
Release Management, Architect, Global Project Lead, 
End User Training meet on weekly basis to discuss all 
location sprint delivery progress, dependencies and 
issue resolution.  
•
 
Global Leadership team also meets on weekly basis to 
review overall program prog
ress and key impediments. 
•
 
Finally Central Global Leadership communicates 
overall progress to top management. 
E.
 
Sprint Plan – Global bottom-up planning  
All Scrum Masters are responsible for their sprint plan 
creation for their respective teams based on the available 
capacity. Team Capacity is calculated based on the team’s 
velocity. Every Scrum master shares their teams’ capacity and 
Global project lead roll up the numbers of all the teams to 
decide the cutline 
for the market release. 
Sprint Plans have Theme/Epic and Stories. Every 
requirement is linked with Theme
 and for one requirement we 
will have only one Theme. Th
e Theme can have multiple 
Epics and Epics can have m
ultiple stories. A
ll Theme/Epic 
and Stories are interlinked and inter team dependencies 
marked which enable teams to 
proactively adapt to the plan. 
Cross site dependencies are communicated in advance with 
correct linking with Theme/Epic/Story. Global Project Lead is 
responsible for rolling up the site specific sprint plan at 
program level and monitors 
the overall program progress and 
facilitates highlighting risk, if an
y team, is on a critical path.  
F.
 
Quality First 
Since we are developing a platform on which future 
applications will be built and also 
can be used as a global 
product. Hence, it’s imperative to have the mindset as well as 
measures for “Quality First”.   
•
 
Unique Infrastructure for Unit Testing by having two 
suits of Unit Tests V1 and 
V2 suits, where V1 test suits 
will not require platform support and V2 test suits will 
require platform support for ex
ecution. Both the test 
suits are completely automated and require very 
minima
l manual intervention. 
•
 
Infrastructure for Static Code 
Analysis of all modules 
of platform 
•
 
Infrastructure for Build 
process, local as well as global 
•
 
Weekly Component test for delivered story in a week  
•
 
Monthly Product Tests  for delivered Epic in a Sprint  
•
 
Monthly System Test once Theme is ready 
•
 
Weekly Automated and Manual Build Qualification 
Test (BQT) for ensuring consiste
ncy of delivery by all 
scrum team in a sprint 
86 •
 
Strong and Robust  Automation infrastructure for 
various variability testing lik
e testing product on 
different Operating 
Systems (OS), different Office 
Versions, Different combinati
on of Anti-viruses and 
firewalls testing, Compatibility testing of various OS 
patches and different prod
uct version computability 
testing 
G.
 
Common Goal 
When it comes to goal setting it binds all as we have an 
approach of having common goals on parameters like Project 
performance, quality targets, 
Processes and Budget Adherence. 
All functions share the same goal like Project management 
team which includes Scrum Ma
sters and Global Project Lead 
share the same goals, Architect and GTLs, similar is with Test, 
release and documentation management. 
VI.
 
OPERATIONALIZED SCALED SCRUM
 
Operationalization holds the key to success and it also 
plays an important role in id
entifying what is working at 
ground level and what requires tw
eaking so that we get better 
results.  
A.
 
Hybrid Model – Process Tweaked for Excellence 
During our journey we identified
 that we have to tweak 
our hybrid model for generati
ng better utilization of available 
capacity and this in turn will lead to great results. Keeping this 
objective in mind we identified opportunity in modification of 
some of the hybrid model processes given below: 
1)
 
Agile Approach for Requirement Engineering –
Hybrid 
model defines requirement enginee
ring phase as waterfall but 
we executed the complete process with Agile philosophy of 
Inspect and Adapt with lean processes resulting in reduction 
of wait time. System testers were inlcuded in requirement 
discussion for documenting acceptance criteria on behalf of 
product owners, members from development team supported 
product owner in documenting the requirement which 
significantly impacted on over all requirement engineerng 
process quality and schedule. 
2)
 
Quality over Quantity –
 We introduced the concept of 
“stop the line” which empha
sizes on quality over quantity. If 
any Scrum team is having defects count above the ceiling 
level in a particular Sprint, 
we encourage the team to deliver 
less features than projected velocity an
d focus on quality.This 
includes closing existing defects and working on preventive 
mechanism to reduce defects for future sprints
.  
3)
 
Early System and Product Acceptance Test – 
System 
test is supposed to start once all development is over and 
follow waterfall model but we 
made change to this process 
and included system test team inside Scrum by starting system 
test of requirements as and when they pass the product test 
and are ready for system test.We kept the dedicated system 
test phase unchanged.We also started early product acceptance 
test of the requirements which has passed system test. By 
using this approach, we get defect of system and product 
acceptance test early, resulting in positive impact on overall 
product quality. 
B.
 
Sprint Review and Reporting 
Sprint review and reporting for us is putting robust and 
proactive inspect and adapt mechanism in place where we 
review sprint planning, 
performance of quality assurance 
mechanism and process adherence so that we are collectively 
reaching to target with predictability. The Measures put in 
place are given below:   
1)
 
Weekly Review: 
Weekly review meeting is chaired by 
global project lead where participants from global leadership 
team participate along with Scrum Masters to deliberate on 
following aspect of program 
a)
 
Sprint Progress Review: 
All Srum Masters are 
reponsible for reporting overall 
Sprint progress status (Scrum 
of Scrum) of their Scrum teams
 to the global project lead on 
the following parameters 
•
 
Highlight Impediments 
 
•
 
 
Satus on what is gettin
g delivered in this week 
•
 
  Status on ovreall Sprint plan – On target or Not 
going to meet sprint target 
•
 
Weekly defect status (Open/Implemented) 
b)
 
Progress on overall pr
ogram quality:
 Global Project 
lead presents the overall progress collective report of program 
which has the data from all Scru
m teams. The Report has the 
following details: 
•
 
Weekly UT execution report 
•
 
Weekly Static Code Analysis report 
•
 
Program defect carpet along with its trend 
c)
 
Product Test progress: 
Global Product test lead 
provide status on the overall prog
ram product testing status, 
impediments if any.  
d)
 
System Test progress:
 Global System test lead 
provide status on the overall program system testing status, 
impediments if any.  
e)
 
Product Documentation progress: 
Product 
documentation lead provide status on the overall program 
product documentation stat
us, impediments if any.  
The obejective of this  meeti
ng is to understand inter Scrum 
team dependencies, external 
impediments and how we can 
improve across site collaboration so that collectively we are 
achieving our program goal.  
2)
 
Monthly Reporting: 
Global Project lead is reponsible to 
update overall program on monthly basis to the senior 
management on Schedule, Bu
dget and Quality based on the 
input gathered over four weeks by the Scrum Masters 
3)
 
Milestone Meeting : 
Global project lead along with 
global leadership team present milestone readiness status on 
Scope, Schedule, Cost and Quality to
 the senior management 
who in-turn takes decision on 
granting proposed milestone.
 
C.
 
Visualization 
for Transperency 
1)
 
Tools Infrastructure for Scaling Scrum : 
State of art 
tools infrastructure for planning 
and tracking, Test 
Management, Defect Management, Requirement Management 
are used. All these tools are in
terlinked and have bidirectional 
linking, like requirement is linked with Themes, Themes are 
linked with Test cases and if there is any defect, then the 
87 defect is linked with the The
me. This linking is etablished 
across Theme/Epic and Stories. Components test defects are 
linked to stories, Product test
 defects are linked to Epics and 
System test defects are linked to Themes. Dependencies 
across Scrum teams are also managed in the same tool which 
helps Scrum Master to proactively adapt their Sprint plan. 
2)
 
Set Configured as Query fo
r Quick Gap Identification : 
Queries for general guidelines for tool usage are created to 
identify if there is any gap. Some of the gaps can be like  story 
is planned in a sprint and if 
the status is in “In-progress” even 
after the sprint, then it will come 
out as gap,  absent of 
requirement to theme linking will 
be marked as gap, no child 
of theme or orphan Story/Them
e/Epic will be marked as gap 
etc   
3)
 
 Dashboard for Program and Scrum Team 
Dashboards are available from
 individual Scrum teams 
which can be rolled up to the pro
grams level spri
nt on sprint 
which ensures transparency across all roles. Below mentioned 
picture is a snapshot of program level dashboard for sprint 
progress.   
 
Figure 3: Program Sprint Progress Dashboard 
D.
 
Proactive Risk Management 
Focus for risk management is
 a systematic approach for 
minimizing exposure to potential 
losses for individual teams 
and overall program. The primary sources for risk are lessons 
learnt from previous version, Sp
rint retrospective findings. 
Global Project Lead facilitates con
tinuous assessment of what 
could go wrong and ensures 
high-priority risks are addressed. 
Top five risks are presented to top management every month 
and tracked very closely. Technical risks are managed and 
tracked by Architects as technical debts. 
E.
 
Product Release Management 
Continuous integration is one of the important Scrum 
practices. We have the following build process: 
1)
 
Daily Builds : 
Happens over night everday for each 
team. 
2)
 
Weekly Builds: 
Three kinds of weekly builds are 
created every week. Team build is created when scrum team 
finalizes its delivery. Site build is invoked when all scrum 
teams builds are created successf
ully and when 
all site builds 
are created, global build is invo
ked which is consumed by the 
components, product and 
system test teams. 
F.
 
Continuous Improvement : 
We believe in continous 
improvement, hence we keep refining our processses based 
on our failures while execution.   
 
VII.
 
CHALLENGES AND 
L
ESSONS LEARNED
 
1)
 
Sprint coordination
: 
a)
 
Make sure dependencies are identified on time and 
the sprint planning for a
ll teams is done accordingly. 
b)
 
Make sure we are working on the highest ranked 
requiremensts, not starting too many at the same time, but 
closing first the existing ones
 before starting new ones (and 
this assuring the whole team workload). Target is to focus on 
the important features and to be able to verify as soon as 
possible this functionality and 
reduce the risk with it 
2)
 
Avoid late change request
s by requesting early 
acceptance tests by PO for the closed features 
3)
 
Coordination between development teams, 
documentation and training, 
assures the know how transfer 
and the update of the last ch
anges to all th
e stakeholders 
4)
 
Find a balance between fea
ture implementation and 
quality 
5)
 
Availablity of groomed Backlog is a key to success 
otherwise teams have to wait fo
r work and it will have an 
impact on cost and capacity utilization 
6)
 
Managing tool ecosystem 
along with velocity is 
overwhelming and requires driv
e and motivation from top 
7)
 
Management should be open to accepting failures 
because scaling is like juggling act and failures are bound to 
happen  
8)
 
Scaling requires robust tools 
ecosystem in place for 
transparency and visualization 
9)
 
Scaling has high entry inves
tment cost and initially may 
not seem to be a correct choice 
10)
 
Failure should be looked at as a short term hindrance 
for long term benefits 
11)
 
Requires committed managem
ent and motivated 
leadership for successful implementation  
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
We would like to thank Abhishek from IPD, V S Mani, 
Manjunath Rao and Debi Prasad Mahapatra for their valuable 
review comments. We would 
also thank Kulwant who 
provided us with pictures. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
K. Dullemond, B. van Gameren, R. van Solingen, How Technological 
Support Can Enable Advantages of Agile Software Development in a 
GSE setting”, Fourth IEEE Inter
national Conference on GlobalSoftware 
Engineering, 2009, pp. 143-152. 
[2]
 
S. Bowen, F. Maurer, “Pr
ocess Support and Knowledge Management 
for Virtual Teams Doing Agile Software Development”, Proceedings- 
IEEE Computer Society’s International Computer Software and 
Applications Conference, 2002, pp. 1118-1120. 
[3]
 
M. Cottmeyer, “The Good and Bad of Agile Offshore 
Development”,AGILE ’08, 2008, pp. 362-367 
[4]
 
 K. Schwaber, M. Beedle, Agile Software Development with Scrum, 
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2002. 
[5]
 
VersionOne, Inc., 6th Annual State of Agile Development Survey, 2011.  
[6]
 
D. Batra, “Modified Agile Practices for Outsourced Software Projects”, 
Communications of the ACM 52(9)
, 2009,pp.143-148
 
88