 GAME:
 Governance for Agile Man
agement of Enterprises 
A Management Model for Agile Governance  
Alexandre J. H. de O. Luna 
Informatics Center. Federal University of 
Pernambuco, Recife, Brazil. 
The University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada. 
ajhol@cin.ufpe.br
,
luna@ece.ubc.ca
  
Philippe Kruchten 
Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering (ECE). University of British 
Columbia (UBC), Vancouver, Canada. 
pbk@ece.ubc.ca  
Hermano P. de Moura 
Informatics Center (CIn). Federal 
University of Pernambuco (UFPE), 
Recife, Brazil. 
hermano@cin.ufpe.br
Abstract
—
 Agility at the business and organizational levels 
presents a challenge for many enterprises. Business agility 
demands the ability to sense and respond to changes in 
competitive environments, whereas organizational agility 
demands the dexterity to sense broader market opportunities and 
respond with changes that are organization-wide. These 
challenges require an information and communication 
technologies (ICT or IT) environment flexible and customizable 
simultaneously with the coordination across multiple 
organization units, also demands effective and responsive 
governance in order to deliver faster, better, and cheaper value to 
the business. Driven by these challenges, the goals of the 
candidate’s PhD thesis is to conceive, define, and evaluate a 
management model for agile governance on global development 
environments.
Preliminary insights suggest the model’s format 
should be a corporative game, applying constructs of 
gamification
, fun theory and game theory, generating a practical 
approach to facilitate the implementation of a collaborative and 
adaptive culture, in order to establish relational integration 
mechanisms as well as a better understanding of how these 
arrangements can help the organizations to attain greater 
enterprise agility and support its overall strategy. 
Keywords
—
 Information Systems, Agile Governance, IT 
management, Organizational behavior, Software Engineering. 
Concentration areas: 
Sotware Engineering, Information Systems, 
IT Management, IT Governance
I.I
NTRODUCTION
Advances in information and communication technologies 
(ICT or IT) have allowed business to automate the design, sales 
and support of their products and services. In fact, IT can also 
be seen as a decisive component to
 enables enterprise agility or 
the ability to sense and respond
 to changes in
 the competitive 
business environment. 
Actually, the design and main
tenance of the IT for 
enterprise agility can be a challenge when the competitiveness 
of organization’s products and services is depending of the 
application of models and frameworks that have no guidance 
details of how to implement and deploy the necessary 
management instruments and governance mechanism, such as 
ITIL, COBIT, among others [1], [2]. 
Indeed, the lack of practical approach by some models 
related with governance and IT management generates several 
questions and difficulties to the IT and business teams, such as: 
i) where to begin?; ii) how to adapt?; iii) what to prioritize? [3] 
At the same time, these issues lead the enterprises to hire 
several specialized consulting services, causing, in most cases, 
high investments, lengthy deployments, and generating the 
long-term external dependencies to the organization [4], [5]. 
Consequently, the challenges 
become even greater when 
dealing with these matters on a global software development 
and distributed environment, 
where cultural differences, 
awareness and communication style, if not treated properly can 
lead to conflicts.Arguably, in Global Development 
Environments governance issu
es are even more relevant and 
necessary, as well as its implementation even greater 
challenging [6]. 
II.R
ESEARCH 
O
BJECTIVE
The objective of this 
candidate’s PhD thesi
s is to address 
these challenges through conception, definition, and 
evaluation of a management model for agile governance,
guided by the following research question: 
How should be a management 
model, which can be easily 
assimilated by the organizational culture, and can help to 
reduce effort and increase the results of the process of 
deploying responsibilities and governance mechanisms, in a 
global, distributed and heteroge
neous environment, in order 
to deliver faster, better, and cheaper value to the business? 
In the subsequent sections this paper gives an overview of 
the related theoretical framework, the methodology adopted to 
elaborate and evaluate the model, preliminary results and 
expected results. 
III.B
ACKGROUND AND 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK
This work is based on six areas of influence: General 
Administration Theory, General Systems Theory,Agile 
Governance,
Gamification
, Fun Theory and Game Theory. 
A.Agile Governance 
Corporate governance is the 
set of processes, customs, 
policies, laws and institutions affecting the way a corporation is 
directed, administered or controlled. Corporate governance also 
includes the relationships between the various parties involved 
and the purposes for which a society is governed [7]. 
On the other hand, ICT Governance is defined as a subset 
of Corporate Governance focused discipline on information 
and communication technologies and their performance 
systems and risk management [8]. 
Additionally, the Agile Methodologies [9] have been 
disseminated more and adding
 competitiveness and dynamism 
to the process of software develo
pment in the area of Software 
2013 IEEE 8th International Conference on Global Software Engineering  Workshops978-0-7695-5055-8/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSEW.2013.2088 Engineering, through initiatives where the principles of 
communication and collaboration are essential [10],[11].  
Moreover,Dubinsky & Kruchten [12],[6] highlight that 
Software Development Governance (SDG) has emerged in the 
last few years to deal with es
tablishing the structures, policies, 
controls, and measurements for communication and for 
decision rights, to ensure the 
success of software development 
organizations. 
Recently, it has emerged the proposal of Agile Governance 
[13], [14], which provides the wide application of principles 
and values of Agile Software Development [15] to the 
conventional governance processes. As a consequence of this 
original work, it was proposed by De Oliveira Luna [16] the 
creation of a reference model for this concept, thus resulting in 
the agile framework: MAnGve. 
However, the MAnGve is focused only in the deployment 
process.As a 
catalyzer
, the MAnGve, accelerates the 
Governance deployment, but has no answers for the other 
aspects of the IT environment.Hence, this research considers 
this 
gap
 as an opportunity to expand and explore the paradigm 
of Agile Governance, by proposing a management model for 
global development environments.
B.General Administration 
Theory and General Systems 
Theory 
According to Birkinshaw & Goddard [17],amanagement 
model is defined as a system of rules governing the business 
direction or set of goals delineators for a particular program of 
management action, and conditioners for its implementation, or 
even, the means by which a compan
y seeks to adjust or modify 
their position in the market. 
In keeping with Porter [18],management models determine 
the relationship between the human element and the business 
structure formally established to become the agent capable to 
providing an effective organization. Thus, whatever the 
management models adopted the act of structuring and 
organizing becomes essential for an
 enterprise to survive in a 
competitive economic environment. 
Furthermore,as indicated by Drucker [19], organizational 
quality should occur as a whole and be a consequence of the 
degree of interdependence of th
e components and participants 
in the management model adopted. Therefore, the efforts of 
commitment to the success should be seen as a result a 
restructuring of work styles, and wherefore a definition of 
functional strategies and operationalization of corporate 
policies, targeted to the vision of the organization's summit. 
In addition, several authors [20], [21] have suggested 
analyzing organizational structures through a theory of systems 
capable of providing a wide and comprehensive view of the 
decision-making, because in their view, the process of making 
decisions becomes easier when it is known the system within 
which these decisions should be taken. 
C.Fun Theory, Gamification and Game Theory 
Theory of fun is about how to use ludic attributes to 
motivate people to do edifying (good) things, probably 
increasing productivity and generating satisfaction and 
enjoyment during activities. It is based on the concept of 
maximizing intrinsic reward for the active creation or 
discovery of novel, surprising patterns allowing for improved 
prediction or data compression. It generalizes the traditional 
ﬁeld of active learning, and is related to old, but less formal 
ideas in aesthetics theory and developmental psychology [22]. 
According to Deterding 
et al.
 [23] the most recent 
phenomenon in Information Systems trajectory is 
‘
gamification’
, an umbrella term for the use of game elements 
(rather than full-fledged games) to improve user experience 
and user engagement in non-game services and applications.In 
other words,
 gamification
 is about how to use game thinking 
and game mechanisms in a non-game context, in order to 
engage people and solve problems. 
Game Theory aims to help understand situations in which 
decision-makers interact,something closely related with 
Governance.However, its scope is vastly larger, and devotes 
very little space to games in the 
everyday sense; its main focus 
is the use of game theory to illuminate economic, social, 
political, and biological phenomena [24].  
Eventually, the combination of these approaches can be 
applied as an instrument in order to reduce the risks and 
challenges related with the governance issues in a global 
software development and distributed environment. 
IV.R
ESEARCH 
M
ETHOD AND 
P
RELIMINARY 
R
ESULTS
The definition of the methodological tools is directly 
related to the problem being studied. The methodological 
framework of reference, when carefully selected, is what gives 
scientific rigor to a research [25]. 
In fact, in this work, a 
combination of methods and 
techniques will be applied in several crucial moments of its 
development, which can include: re
view of the state of the art 
of agile governance, review about management models in the 
context of the General Administration Theory and General 
Systems Theory; review of the theoretical constructs that can 
be used on the model assembly in the context of: 
Gamification
,
Fun Theory and Game Theory; among others. At last, in 
summary the methodological framework of this research is 
summarized below in Table I. 
T
ABLE 
I-C
LASSIFICATION OF 
M
ETHODOLOGICAL APPROACH
[25].
About the objective
Exploratory
About the technical 
procedure
Literature Review, Systematic Mapping 
Review, Bibliometrics and 
Scientometrics
About the nature of variables
Qualitative
About method approach
Inductive
About methods of procedure
Comparative and Structuralist.
A.Model Development 
In addition, according to the objective of this research it can 
be classified as exploratory, as it aims to present the proposal 
for a management model for Agile Governance. Furthermore, 
the preparation of the proposed model will be based on an 
inductive approach, supported by 
structuralist and comparative 
methods. Meanwhile, the use of 
such methods of procedure 
will be essential to conduct a qualitative analysis of 
information obtained in a literature review [26]. 
B.Model Evaluation 
This work intends to use the procedure of case study to 
evaluate the application of the 
model in a real organization. A 
case study is an intensive analysis
 of an individual unit (e.g., a 
person, group, enterprise, or 
event) stressing developmental 
89 factors in relation to context. 
This research intends to apply 
instrumental case studies for evalu
ate the proposed model. This 
type of case study is used to provide insight into an issue or 
helps to refine a theory or model [27]. 
C.Preliminary Results 
As one of the initiatives of this research, is being conducted 
a Systematic Mapping Literature Review about the state of art 
of Agile Governance in the world. This study should return a
set of theoretical constructs to contribute with the model core 
definition, such as: concepts, principles, practices, problems, 
challenges, benefits, motivations, among others. The 
preliminary results about this study are promising, and should 
generate a relevant publication soon. Indeed, these evidences,
lead us to believe that 
agile governance
 can be 
widely
 and 
holistically
 defined, as: 
“the ‘means’ by which strategic competitive advantages 
ought to be achieved and improved on the organizational 
environment, under an agile approach in order to deliver 
faster, better, and cheaper value to the business.”
At the same time, as a complementary study line is being 
conducted an Exploratory Literature Review about 
Management Models in the context of General Administration 
Theory and General Systems Th
eory. This another study 
should contribute with a set of theoretical constructs to the 
design of the model, such as: approach, usefulness, 
applicability, shortcomings, limitations, critical success factors, 
among others. 
Furthermore, is being started another Exploratory Literature 
Review about how 
Gamification
, Fun Theory and Game 
Theory, can be applied to the model assembly in order to 
overcome the organizational barriers and potentiate the natural 
assimilation and internalization of the model being proposed. 
V.E
XPECTED 
R
ESULTS
The authors believe that not 
only software development 
organizations, but also whole IT industry will benefit with the 
results of this research. In fact, improving the competitiveness 
of governments and companies through the improvement of 
their governance and management shall result in significant 
economic returns. In a broader context, they believe that it will 
help any kind of organization to deliver faster, better, and 
cheaper value to the business. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge to CAPES, Brazil’s Science 
without Borders Program and CNPq by the research support. 
Special thanks to 
Benedito Donizeti Bonatto, Ivaldir Honório 
de Farias Júnior, Derick Hsieh and Hootan Rashtian
 for their 
valuable contributions and for revising this article. 
R
EFERENCES
[1] 
L. Gerke and G. Ridley, “Tailoring CobiT for Public Sector IT Audit: 
An Australian Case Study,” in 
Information technology governance and 
service management: frameworks and adaptations
, 1st ed., K. Klinger, 
Ed. Hershey: Information Science Reference (an imprint of IGI 
Global), 2009, pp. 101
–
125. 
[2] 
T. Mendel, “ITIL’s Final Breakthrough: From ‘What’ to ‘How’,” 
CSO 
Online
, pp. 1
–
3, 2004. 
[3] G. Spafford and G
. Kim, “Top ITIL Myths,” 
Internet News.com
, pp. 2
–
3, 2004. 
[4] 
ISACA, “COBIT Case Studies by Industry,” 2013. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.isaca.org/Knowledge-Center/cobit/Pages/COBIT-Case-
Studies.aspx. [Accessed: 27-May-2013]. 
[5] 
M. Fry, “Top Ten Reas
ons Organizations are Unsuccessful 
Implementing ITIL,” 
TechRepublic
, pp. 1
–
8, 2005. 
[6] Y. Dubinsky, S. Ravid, A. Rafaeli, and R. Bar-
Nahor, “Governance 
Mechanisms in Global Development Environments,” 
2011 IEEE Sixth 
International Conference on Global Software Engineering
, pp. 6
–
14, 
Aug. 2011. 
[7] 
A. Cadbury, “The Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance,” 
London, 1992. 
[8] IT Governance Institute, 
Board briefing on IT governance
, 2nd ed. 
Rolling Meadows: IT Governance Institute, 2001, p. 66. 
[9] T. Dybå a
nd T. Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile software 
development: A systematic review,” 
Information and Software 
Technology
, vol. 50, no. 9
–
10, pp. 833
–
859, Aug. 2008. 
[10] 
P. Kruchten, “Contextualizing agile software development,” 
Journal of 
Software Maintenance and Evolution
, pp. 1
–
12, 2011. 
[11] 
Y. Dubinsky, A. Yaeli, and E. Zarpas, “Governance of software 
development: The transition to agile scenario,” in 
Software 
Applications: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications
, P. 
Tiako, Ed. Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference, 2008, pp. 
309
–
327. 
[12] 
Y. Dubinsky and P. Kruchten, “(POP
-038) 2nd workshop on software 
development governance (SDG),” 
2009 31st International Conference 
on Software Engineering - Companion Volume
, pp. 455
–
456, 2009. 
[13] A. J. H. De Oliveira Luna, C. P. Costa, H. P. De Moura, and M. A. 
Novaes, “(POP
-009) Agile Governance in Information and 
Communication Technologies: Shifting Paradigms,” 
JISTEM Journal 
of Information Systems and Technology Management
, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 
311
–
334, 2010. 
[14] F. A. Cummins, 
Building the Agile Enterprise: With SOA, BPM and 
MBM
, 1st ed. Burlington: Elsevier Science, 2009, p. 336. 
[
15] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. van Bennekum, A. Cockburn, W. Cunningham, 
M. Fowler, J. Grenning, J. Highsmith, A. Hunt, R. Jeffries, J. Kern, B. 
Marick, R. C. Martin, S. Mellor, K. Schwaber, J. Sutherland, and D. 
Thomas, “Manifesto for Agile Software Development,” 2001. [Online]. 
Available: http://agilemanifesto.org/. [Accessed: 01-May-2013]. 
[16] A. J. H. De Oliveira Luna, 
“MAnGve: A model for Agile Governance 
in ICT,” Federal University of Pernambuco, 2009.
[17] 
J. Birkinshaw and J. Goddard, “What is your management model?,” 
MIT Sloan Management Review
, no. 50216, 2009. 
[18] M. E. Porter, 
Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing 
Industries and Competitors
. Free Press, 1980, p. 432. 
[19] P. F. Drucker, 
The frontiers of management
, First Edit. New York: 
Truman Talley Books, 1986, p. 553. 
[20] 
W. Hofkirchner, “Ludwig von Bertalanffy. Forerunner of evolutionary 
systems the
ory,” 
IFSR 2005: Proceedings of the First World Congress 
of the International Federation for Systems Research
, p. 6, 2005. 
[21] 
L. Von Bertalanffy, “The History and Status of General Systems 
Theory.,” 
Academy of Management Journal
, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 407
–
426, 1972. 
[22] 
J. Schmidhuber, “Formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic 
motivation (1990
–2010),” 
Autonomous Mental Development, IEEE 
Transactions
, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 230
–
247, 2010. 
[23] 
S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke, “From game design
elements to gamefulness: defining gamification,” 
Proceedings of the 
15th International Academic MindTrek Conference Envisioning Future 
Media Environments
, 2011. 
[24] 
C. F. Camerer, “Progress in Behavioral Game Theory,” 
Journal of 
Economic Perspectives
, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 167
–
188, Nov. 1997. 
[25] B. Gower, 
Scientific method: A historical and philosophical 
introduction
. London and New York: Taylor & Francis e-Library, 
2002, p. 288. 
[26] 
I. Jebreen, “Using Inductive Approach as Research Strategy in 
Requi
rements Engineering,” 
International Journal of Computer and 
Information Technology
, vol. 01, no. 02, pp. 162
–
173, 2012. 
[27] R. K. Yin, 
Case Study Research: Design and Methods
. SAGE 
Publications, 2003, p. 181.  
90