 Understanding Collaborative Practices  
in Distributed Agile Development  
Research Proposal  
Sunila Modi 
Brunel University 
School of Information Systems, Computing & Mathematics 
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK 
sunila.modi@brunel.ac.uk
 
 
Pamela Abbott 
Brunel University 
School of Information Systems, Computing & Mathematics  
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK 
pamela.abbott@brunel.ac.uk
 
 
 
Abstract
— Agile methodologies in software development are 
gaining prominence in global settings where distributed cross-
cultural software teams collaborate on projects, addressing the 
needs of dynamic business environments. However, undertaking 
collaborative work in distributed settings can create significant 
challenges, especially as a number of agile principles and 
practices rely on physical proximity and face-to-face interactions. 
An interpretative qualitative approach using case studies has 
been adopted to gain deeper insights into how such teams work. 
The analysis is being informed by theoretical concepts of 
awareness, common ground and boundary objects.  Early 
findings suggest that distributed team members use multifaceted 
techniques, such as shared software artifacts that evolve over 
time to negotiate and enhance common ground for better 
collaborative practices to emerge. It is expected that research 
undertaken will provide a framework to understand this process. 
Practically, the research will propose guidelines for global 
software teams planning to adopt agile methods in distributed 
environments. 
Keywords — distributed collaborative work, globally distributed 
agile teams, boundary objects, establishing and negotiating 
common ground, awareness cues. 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Agile methods have been in existence for over a decade and 
have brought significant changes 
to software engineering, in 
terms of values, principles and practices [11]. Whilst plan-
driven and agile methods are intended to improve software 
development processes, agile methods require a distinctly 
different set of approaches. Traditional waterfall methods 
follow a sequential path, seeking stability in the project 
requirements and a predetermined plan of action. Whereas 
agile methods try to add value to the business by using an 
iterative and incremental approach where software developers 
work on small modules and respond to users’ evolving 
business requirements. Hence agile methods try to provide the 
flexibility needed, as well as enough rigor to the software 
development process by accepting “feedback and change” and 
“embrace, rather than reject, higher rates of change” [28]. The 
agile values are fundamental and govern the agile software 
development process [15]. They are popular, because they 
provide flexibility and establish close communication with 
users. The agile methods were originally developed for 
collocated environments, as the tenets include: the need for 
physical proximity, reliance on face-to-face communication, 
cooperation on all parts of the project and a suitable 
collaborative environment where trust and shared 
understandings can be developed through a team culture [15]. 
Recently, agile methodologies are increasingly gaining 
prominence in global settings where distributed software teams 
are set-up to work on projects, to address the need for 
accelerated deadlines of dynamic business environments; thus 
reducing expenditures by assigning work to countries with 
lower labor costs and increasing market proximity [2,22].  
Adopting agile methods in globally distributed environments 
can create significant challenges especially as a number of 
agile principles and practices rely on physical proximity and 
face-to-face interactions. 
II.
 
R
ESEARCH 
F
OCUS
 
The motivation of this research comes from exploring how 
collaborative practices take place within globally distributed 
cross-cultural agile teams and how distributed teams members 
accomplish common ground or a shared understanding to carry 
out collaborative work. With this aim in mind, we draw upon 
the theoretical lens of boundary objects, awareness cues and 
the theory of common ground to examine how they interrelate 
with each other to help explain how effective collaborative 
practices take place in globally distributed agile environments. 
We have identified the following research questions (RQ):  
RQ 1:  How do globally distributed agile development 
teams collaborate with each other to establish common ground 
or a shared understanding?  
RQ 2: How do knowledge sharing interactions take place 
between distributed agile teams so that effective collaborative 
activities take place?  
RQ 3: What transformations take place to the work 
practices in distributed agile teams so that collaborative work 
can be carried out in a continuous manner? 
RQ 4: What can we learn from existing distributed agile 
development teams to convey to other global software teams 
who are planning to adopt agile methods in a distributed 
manner? 
2013 IEEE 8th International Conference on Global Software Engineering  Workshops978-0-7695-5055-8/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSEW.2013.1674 III.
 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK 
 
In this section, we explore the theoretical grounding for our 
study by unpacking the following concepts (a) common 
ground (b) boundary objects and (c) awareness cues. 
A.
 
Common Ground  
One of the fundamental aspects of distributed agile teams 
is about communicative and coordinating actions in order to 
partake in collaborative work. Clark’s theory of common 
ground regarding mutual knowledge, beliefs and assumptions 
maintains that the participants must have a shared awareness 
to carry out a joint activity [8]. It has been defined as "mutual 
knowledge, mutual beliefs, and mutual assumptions" between 
two parties where successful grounding in communication 
requires “to coordinate both the content and process" [8, 9]. In 
collocated environments establishing and negotiating common 
ground is a natural process, as the shared location provides the 
shared context whereby team members can be part of each 
other’s workspace and share artifacts related to project easily. 
The theory of common ground originated in the linguistics and 
cognitive psychology but now has been applied in many other 
domains. The theory is especially useful when investigating 
distributed collaborative work where it is more challenging to 
achieve a mutually shared understanding. Clark & Brennan [8] 
use the term “grounding” to describe the process of 
developing mutually shared understanding where it allows 
actors to establish and negotiate common ground in an 
incremental manner. Failure to establish and maintain 
common ground can result in serious breakdowns in 
collaborative work [9]. 
B.
 
Boundary Objects  
 The initial concept of boundary objects was introduced by 
Star & Griesemer [25] as “…objects which are both plastic 
enough to adapt to local needs and constraints of the several 
parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a 
common identity across sites” and they “sit in the middle of a 
group of actors with divergent viewpoints”. They classify 
boundary objects into four functional categories: repositories, 
ideal type, coincident boundaries, and standardized forms. 
Where repositories can be objects such as a library or database. 
Ideal types are abstractions from different domains and may 
include diagrams, drawings, and clay models and are open to 
interpretation. Coincident boundaries are objects which have 
the same boundaries but different internal contents, for 
example an office building can a coincident boundary because 
representatives from different organizations can all work within 
the same physical boundary. Lastly, standardized forms are 
objects that provide different communities with a common 
method to communicate. From communities of practices (CoP) 
perspective Wenger [27] categorizes three types of boundary 
objects: (a) artifacts (tools, and documents, models shared by 
CoPs); (b) discourses: (a common language that can be shared 
across CoPs) and (c) processes: (shared processes, routines, 
procedures that facilitate coordination of and between CoPs).  
The significance of the role of boundary objects has been 
increasing, especially in initiating and supporting collaborative 
work practices in distributed organizational contexts, where 
knowledge sharing across the boundaries is an essential part of 
the work. Carlile [6,7] focuses on boundaries from a 
knowledge sharing perspective, in terms of syntactic, semantic 
and pragmatic boundaries. Where syntactic boundaries are the 
simplest, where knowledge can be transferred between actors 
providing that there is a common syntax. A semantic boundary 
is more complex because common meanings need to be 
developed in order to translate knowledge; for example, 
between a marketing department and a sales division they 
interpret what each other require in order to market and sell a 
product. Pragmatic boundaries are the most complex, as 
common interests need to be developed socially and politically 
to transform knowledge at a pragmatic boundary [7]. Boundary 
objects allow actors from different communities to reconcile 
their different meanings and produce shared understandings, 
which in turn enable cooperation between actors [3]. 
Furthermore, they provide a vehicle for convergence in 
meanings to establish shared understanding and through a 
process of transformation which enables creating common 
ground [3].  
Within information systems development, examples of 
boundary objects are presented in the literature including 
requirements specification [1, 18] and developing prototypes 
[12]. Levina and Vaast [18] differentiate between boundary 
objects and “boundary objects-in-use”, to examine some of the 
social and political dynamics of sharing knowledge across 
boundaries; where certain boundary objects become boundary 
objects-in-use when they are integrated meaningfully into the 
local practices and they maintain their common identity in joint 
practice.  Barrett & Oborn [1] examine cross-cultural issues 
within the context of a global software development case study.  
They discuss how the role of boundary objects can have a dual 
function of enabling collaboration early on and impeding and 
hinder the collaborative process at later points in the software 
development process. Doolin & McLeod [12] draw on the 
sociomateriality dimension and boundary objects as a basis of 
analysis, where they trace how a prototype is developed and 
used within IS development. These studies build on the 
previous work on boundary objects [3,6] demonstrating the 
importance of studying boundary objects in facilitating 
knowledge sharing as well as the fragile and emergent nature  
they have in practice. In globally distributed agile 
development, the project artifacts such as the user stories, the 
shared code and test cases are an integral part of agile work 
practices; which could be seen as boundary objects in-use as 
they provide a common focus to the project goals and act 
mediators in the communication, coordination and cooperation 
processes between the team members across the boundaries.  
C.
 
Awareness cues 
Drawing upon the literature of awareness within the 
computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) field, 
awareness is defined as “an understanding of the activities of 
others, which provides a context for your own activities” [13].  
Having appropriate awareness cues of team activities, tasks, 
artifacts and expertise of team members is essential in 
distributed software teams as it facilitates collaborative and 
cooperative activities to take place, which in turn supports the 
development of common ground. In distributed teams the 
awareness cues are reduced due to the distance therefore the 
members can face a lack of team and task awareness and 
75 generally experience more challenges in maintaining 
awareness needed for the progress of tasks, the artifacts and 
their respective offshore team members [10, 17]. The 3C-
collboration model [14, 16] defines collaboration as “the union 
of communication, coordination and cooperation efforts”, 
where awareness is a contingent part of communication, 
coordination and cooperation processes. The model can be 
used as an evaluative mechanism, within an existing 
distributed agile development practices to gain an 
understanding of the on-going awareness challenges that 
distributed development teams face [20]. Furthermore the 
concepts of boundary objects, awareness cues and common 
ground can be interlinked (see Figure 1) [21]. Within the 
globally distributed agile settings, the project artifacts aid in 
raising awareness which subsequently contribute to 
establishing and negotiating common ground for joint 
collaborative practices to take place across the boundaries. 
 
 
Figure 1: Interrelationship with common ground, awareness cues and 
boundary objects. 
IV.
 
R
ESEARCH 
M
ETHODS 
 
 In order to address the research questions the following will 
be carried out (i) on-going review of the literature and (ii) to 
gain deeper insights of how distributed agile teams carry out 
collaborative practices an interpretative approach using case 
studies will be adopted. An interpretative approach is best 
suited where there is a complex relationship between people 
and processes, and where researchers are interested in a 
subjective understanding of the participants [26]. A case study 
approach allows an authentic representation of the situation to 
be explored [4, 29]. Case studies permit “thick descriptions” 
[29] which provide rich and valuable findings.  A number of 
methods will be deployed for the data collection including (a) 
semi-structured interviews, (b) observations and (c) document 
analysis. The interview questions will be formulated 
beforehand; however, a large degree of flexibility will be 
incorporated to allow the researcher to pursue relevant issues 
which arise during the interviews and to allow open-ended 
answers from the interviewees. The interviews will be 
conducted with various team members of the distributed agile 
development teams. Consent from the participants will be 
gained to record the interviews. The data will be analyzed 
using thematic analysis from the literature sources [5]. The 
information will be coded into themes. This analysis will be 
combined with the field notes from the observations and the 
document analysis to gain an overall sense of the insights from 
the case studies with relation to the review of the literature. 
Further comparisons of case studies will be carried out to 
identify the similarities and differences of the themes and 
patterns of how collaborative practices are supported in 
distributed agile settings. 
V.
 
R
ESEARCH 
P
ROGRESS 
 
 So far, we have examined one case study within an 
international bank and financial services company ABC Bank 
and its headquarters are based in the UK and it has distributed 
business centers and IT centers across the globe. The bank has 
set up captive centers in India where a number of teams work 
on an offshore basis. Our study is based on a distributed agile 
software development team (called the Operational Data Cache 
team), which is established across the London and India. The 
initial data collection of sixteen semi-structured interviews has 
been completed, where each interview lasted on average one 
hour. Eight face-to-face interviews with individuals from the 
London team and eight video-conference interviews with the 
India team counterparts were carried out. From examining the 
initial data, we reported on 
the communication challenges 
associated within distributed agile development [19]. Secondly 
the 3C Collaboration model was used for further analysis as an 
evaluative mechanism to explore how awareness was being 
raised across the borders; this was reported in [20]. Building on 
this line of research in order to address RQ1 and partially RQ2 
the 3C collaboration model has been extended to understand 
how common ground or shared understanding is being 
established and negotiated within the distributed agile team 
[21]. 
VI.
 
E
XPECTED 
R
ESULTS
 
Our findings would provide us w
ith a greater insight in the 
following (i) how distributed cross-cultural agile teams work in 
a collaborative manner and (ii) what transformations take place 
to the agile work practices and challenges the teams have to go 
through in order to carry out the collaborative work on an on-
going basis. We therefore would contribute to the debate on 
how collaborative practices care out in globally distributed 
agile teams. Moreover, we expect to propose suggested 
guidelines for practitioners and senior management of global 
software teams of the key considerations they should focus on, 
when planning to adopt agile methods in geographically 
distributed environments. 
VII.
 
E
VALUATION
 
The evidence of contribution from the study will be 
presented at suitable conferences and journals. We will be 
examining at least two case studies of global distributed agile 
teams in depth. Thus, the research would offer a platform for 
additional research which could go towards generalizability 
into how collaborative practices take place on an ongoing basis 
in globally distributed agile environments. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
M. Barrett and E. Oborn, “Boundary object use in cross-cultural 
software development teams,” Human Relations, vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 
1199–1221, 2010 
[2]
 
D. Batra, “Modified agile practices for outsourced software projects,” 
Commun. ACM, vol. 52, (9), pp. 143–148, Sep. 2009. 
76 [3]
 
B. A. Bechky, “Sharing meaning across occupational communities: The 
transformation of understanding on a production floor,” Organization 
Science, vol. 14, (3), pp. 312–330, 2003. 
[4]
 
I. Benbasat, D. K. Goldstein, and M. Mead, “The case research strategy 
in studies of information systems,” MIS quarterly, pp. 369–386, 1987. 
[5]
 
V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in psychology,” 
Qualitative research in psychology, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 77–101, 2006. 
[6]
 
P. R. Carlile, “A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries: 
Boundary objects in new product development,” Organization science, 
vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 442–455, 2002. 
[7]
 
P. R. Carlile, “Transferring, translating, and transforming: An integrative 
framework for managing knowledge across boundaries,” Organization 
science, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 555–568, 2004. 
[8]
 
H. H. Clark and S. E. Brennan, “Grounding in communication,” 
Perspectives on socially shared cogn
ition, 
vol. 13, no. 1991, pp. 127–
149, 1991. 
[9]
 
C. D. Cramton, “The Mutual Knowledge Problem and Its Consequences 
for Dispersed Collaboration,” Organization Science, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 
346–371, May 2001 
[10]
 
D. Damian, L. Izquierdo, J. Singer, and I. Kwan, “Awareness in the 
wild: Why communication breakdowns occur,” in Global Software 
Engineering, 2007. ICGSE 2007. Second IEEE International Conference 
2007, pp. 81–90. 
[11]
 
T. Dingsøyr, S. Nerur, V. Balijepally, and N. B. Moe, ‘A decade of agile 
methodologies: Towards explaining agile software development’, 
Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 85, no. 6, pp. 1213–1221, Jun. 
2012. 
[12]
 
B. Doolin and L. McLeod, “Sociomateriality and boundary objects in 
information systems development,” European Journal of Information 
Systems, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 570–586, 2012. 
[13]
 
P. Dourish and V. Bellotti, “Awareness and coordination in shared 
workspaces,” in Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on 
Computer-supported cooperative work, New York, NY, USA, 1992, pp. 
107–114. 
[14]
 
C. A. Ellis, S. J. Gibbs, and G. Rein, “Groupware: some issues and 
experiences,” Commun. ACM, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 39–58, Jan. 1991. 
[15]
 
M.Fowler, and J. Highsmith “Manifesto for Agile Software 
Development.” [Online].Available:http://agilemanifesto.org/. [Accessed: 
10-Feb-2013]. 
[16]
 
H. Fuks, A. Raposo, M. A. Gerosa, M. Pimentel, D. Filippo, and C. 
Lucena, “Inter- and intra-relationships between communication 
coordination and cooperation in the scope of the 3C Collaboration 
Model,” in 12th International Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work in Design, 2008. CSCWD 2008, 2008, pp. 148 –153 
[17]
 
J. D. Herbsleb, “Global Software Engineering: The Future of Socio-
technical Coordination,” in Future of Software Engineering, 2007. FOSE  
’07, 2007, pp. 188 –198. 
[18]
 
N. Levina and E. Vaast, “The emergence of boundary spanning 
competence in practice: implications for implementation and use of 
information systems,” MIS quarterly, pp. 335–363, 2005. 
[19]
 
S.Modi, P. Abbott, and S.Counsell, “Exploring communication 
challenges associated with Agile practices in a globally distributed 
environment” RAISE 2012- Researching Agile development of 
Information SystEms Conference 11th Oct 2012 London. 
[20]
 
S. Modi, P. Abbott, and S.Counsell, “Raising Awareness in Distrbuted 
Agile Development : A Case Study Perspective” (2013). UK Academy 
for Information Systems Conference Proceedings 2013. 
[21]
 
S.Modi, P. Abbott and S.Counsell, “Negotiating Common Ground in 
Distributed Agile Development:A Case Study Perspective” in Global 
Software Engineering, 2013. ICGSE 2013. 8th IEEE International 
Conference, 2013. 
[22]
 
B. Ramesh, L. Cao, K. Mohan, and P. Xu, “Can distributed software 
de
velopment be agile?,” Commun. ACM, vol. 49(10), pp. 41–46, Oct. 
2006. 
[23]
 
J. Sapsed and A. Salter, “Postcards from the edge: local communities, 
glob
al programs and boundary objects,” Organization Studies, vol. 25, 
no. 9, pp. 1515–1534, 2004 
[24]
 
S. L. Star, “This is not a boundary object: Reflections on the origin of a 
concept,” Science, Technology & Human Values, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 
601–617, 2010 
[25]
 
S. L. Star and J. R. Griesemer, “Institutional ecology,translations’ and 
boundary objects: Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of 
Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39,” Social studies of science, vol. 19,(3), pp. 
387–420, 1989 
[26]
 
G. Walsham, “Doing interpretive research,” European Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 320–330, 2006. 
[27]
 
E. Wenger, “Communities of practice and social learning systems,” 
Organization, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 225–246, 2000. 
[28]
 
L. Williams and A. Cockburn, “Agile software development: it’s about 
feedback and change,” Computer, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 39 –43, Jun. 2003 
[29]
 
R. K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods. SAGE 
Publications, 2003 
 
77