 Scrum-based Methodology for Distributed Software 
Development 
 
Eva del Nuevo, Mario Piattini 
Alarcos Research Group 
University of Castilla La Mancha 
Ciudad Real, Spain 
{Eva.Nuevo, Mario.Piattini}@uclm.es 
Francisco J. Pino 
IDIS Research Group 
University of Cauca 
Popayán, Colombia 
fjpino@unicauca.edu.co
 
 
Abstract
ŠThere are many companies doing software 
development in a distributed way nowadays, due to the great 
benefits that it provides; however, this type of development also 
leads to multiple complications such as deteriorated 
communications. Among the most widespread methodologies for 
software development is the Rational Unified Process (RUP). 
However, in recent decades a series of methodologies have 
emerged, called ﬁagile methodologiesﬂ, which aim to develop 
software quickly, focusing on people and frequent delivery of 
software. Of the existing agile me
thodologies, Scrum is one of the 
most widely-applied, due to its ability to complement other 
methods and processes. For this reason, the strategies proposed 
by Scrum may be suitable for the distributed management and 
deployment of the phases and disciplines of RUP. In this paper 
we present a methodology based on the integration of RUP and 
Scrum, called 
scRumUP
, which has been so designed as to be 
appropriate in a distributed environment.  
Distributed software development; Agile software development; 
Agile methods; Agile methodologies; Scrum 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Companies located in different places are currently looking 
for cost savings and are seeking to be competitive in the 
development of software products. However, to ensure the 
quality of the products developed, these companies need to 
have a methodology which provides elements to face the 
challenges involved in Global Software Development (GSD). 
Approaches widely used and accepted by the software industry, 
such as Scrum and the Rational Unified Process (RUP), could 
be used to propose a methodology for supporting and guiding 
GSD. RUP is a generic framework for iterative and incremental 
software development that can be modified to adapt to different 
development needs; and Scrum is an iterative and incremental 
generic framework for project management and agile software 
development, which has the ability to complement other 
methods and processes. In this regard, a methodology that 
integrates elements from these approaches can offer a complete 
and robust proposal for addressing GSD. It can, moreover, be 
strengthened by the different elements from these two 
approaches. 
Taking into account the aspects described above, this paper 
proposes 
scRumUP
, a methodology for global software 
development that incorporates and integrates into the process 
management described by Scrum the concepts of software 
development proposed by the Rational Unified Process. This 
methodology has been designed to be applied in a distributed 
environment, and its purpose is to offer guidelines for the 
management and development of software in a distributed 
environment, using the advantages provided by the integration 
of agile methods such as Scrum and traditional methodologies 
such as the Rational Unified Process. Therefore, 
scRumUP 
is 
aimed at companies doing GSD that want to improve the 
management of their projects and reduce the complications 
resulting from the distribution by the application of agile 
methods. Although it is not necessary for the company to be 
applying agile methods, in that case the transition would be 
smoother. In addition, 
scRumUP
 has been adapted to that of a 
Spanish software development company, which is currently 
using it in a pilot project. 
The document is structured as follows. Section II presents 
the related work on agile methods in distributed environments. 
Section III describes the methodology that we have developed 
and proposed for guiding GSD. Section IV presents the 
adaptation of this methodology to that of the software 
development company. Finally, the conclusions and future 
work are outlined in Section V. 
II.
 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK
 
Although we know there are articles dealing with the 
integration of heavy and light methods, this section will only 
focus on analyzing various articles that address the topic of 
agile methods in GSD. 
There are several articles dealing with agile methods in 
distributed environments. In [1], some best practices for 
distributed agile teams are presented, such as organizing the 
team structure around the architecture, rotating the times of day 
when the coordination meetings are held, and having 
ambassadors and boundary spanners. The author of [2] divides 
agile practices into three categories: feasible, infeasible and 
modified. He concludes that agile practices need to be modified 
for outsourced software projects and that research into the 
subject could lead to a hybrid approach that harmonizes agility 
and discipline. In [3] a case study that uses their own 
methodology based on Scrum and Feature-Driven 
Development (FDD) is presented. However, the methodology 
is not explicitly defined, placing more emphasis on the 
2011 Sixth IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-0-7695-4503-5/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2011.2366 coordination techniques used in the sprint (shared mailing list, 
status emails, daily meetings and CVS repository), and in the 
lessons learned from the application of the methodology to a 
real case, than on the methodology itself. The study described 
in [4] presents several guidelines for achieving agility in global 
software development, such as acquiring up-to-date knowledge 
on new technologies, clearly defining roles and responsibilities, 
or standardizing the IT platform. The authors in [5] suggest a 
framework for software globalization project management 
using a distributed agile approach by means of an industrial 
case study that shows successfully integrated practices from 
agile software development and distributed software 
development. In [6] two distributed team structures (partial 
offshoring and complete offshoring) are proposed. In the first 
one, the onshore team is the design team and sends the 
requirements to the offshore team, which responds with a fully-
tested working code. In the second one, the only person left 
onshore is the customer, who sends the features to the offshore 
team, which responds with a fully-tested working code. The 
study shown in [7] recommends best practices for globally 
distributed teams, such as hourly automated builds from one 
central repository, seamless integration of XP practices, like 
pair programming with Scrum, or the writing of the three 
scrum questions before the meeting. 
The main difference between the papers mentioned above 
and our paper is that none of these papers explicitly proposes a 
process that describes how to apply agile methods to 
distributed software development. Most of these papers 
recommend practices and techniques that have been 
successfully applied in a real case, but without specifying in 
detail what activities and tasks have been carried out. From this 
analysis of the literature, which includes the papers mentioned 
above as well as other papers related to the subject, we found 
the need to define a methodology that joins the benefits 
provided by agile methods to a software development process, 
such as RUP. Our contribution is therefore a hybrid proposal 
that performs the project management following Scrum and the 
software development following RUP. It also uses the agile 
practices Test-Driven Development (TDD) and Continuous 
Integration (CI) during development. 
III.
 
P
ROPOSED 
M
ETHODOLOGY
 
We describe 
scRumUP
 here, by presenting first of all the 
conceptual support on which it was developed, then the 
distributed structure, and finally the process proposed by the 
methodology. 
A.
 
Conceptual Support 
This methodology is based on the Scrum Guide [8] and on 
previous research in articles and books on the subject, as well 
as on the Rational Unified Process [9]. We have taken special 
care to follow many of the recommendations provided in [10] 
on best practices for scaling agile development, as well as other 
findings [11] and the systematic review that we have conducted 
on the topic. 
One of the most important elements of distributed 
development may be how to manage distributed teams, since 
this affects the productivity of those teams and thus the product 
development itself. Interaction and coordination are also 
factors to be taken into account if we want successful 
distributed software development. 
1)
 
Structure of the teams and distributed sites 
Among the methods used to manage distributed teams, the 
ideal one is Distributed Scrum of Scrums according to [12]. 
Distributed Scrum of Scrum teams are stable, long-term teams 
made up of workers (7 ± 2 persons) with multiple skills who 
are able to do all the work to complete a feature of the Product 
Backlog but without members who are geographically 
dispersed. When a team has all the skills needed to complete a 
feature of the Product Backlog it is called a feature team. A 
customer-centric feature of the Product Backlog is a unit of 
functionality from the customer™s point of view. Organizing the 
structure around the job function should be avoided (e.g. 
analysts in USA, programmers in India), as serious 
communication problems between the various teams may 
appear and the integration of the system can be problematic; 
instead, the team structure should be organized around the 
architecture (i.e., forming feature teams). 
However, if it is not possible to form this type of teams, due 
to the structure of the organization or organizations involved, 
the Fully Distributed Scrum method (or dispersed teams) can 
be chosen, in which teams have the same characteristics as 
those seen in Distributed Scrum of Scrums, but with the 
difference that in this case, members of a team may be 
distributed geographically (for more information on team 
building, see section III.B.1.Formation of distributed teams). 
2)
 
Interaction and coordination 
The best way of interaction is face-to-face conversation 
(one of the key agile principles), and to carry this out in a 
distributed environment, the use of videoconferencing tools is 
advisable, as eye contact can collect additional information that 
is very important when interpreting the communication. 
Videoconference meetings can be started informally to foster 
social relationships between the teams. Social relationships 
among team members may also be reinforced through visits to 
other teams or by sending ambassadors. Another highly 
recommended practice to create links that support 
communication among dispersed team members is to start the 
distributed agile development in a co-located way (all team 
members together) at the beginning of the project. 
Coordination between distributed teams is achieved through 
frequent meetings. Wherever problems caused by time 
differences arise, other methods for conducting these meetings 
should be tried (see section III.B.2.Distributed Meetings). 
3)
 
Practices 
The following practices are important for achieving agility 
and coordination in the implementation of 
scRumUP
. 
•
 
Test-Driven Development (TDD): For each unit of 
functionality of the code, a test is written first. The test 
is run to see if it fails, which would show that the 
property we are trying to implement is not 
implemented yet. Then only the code necessary to pass 
the test is produced and all the tests are run (the one 
that we have just created, along with other existing 
67 tests). If the tests are successful, the next step is to 
refactor the code. 
•
 
Continuous Integration (CI): According to [13], 
"Continuous Integration is a software development 
practice where members of a team integrate their work 
frequently; usually each person integrates at least daily, 
leading to multiple integrations per day. Each 
integration is verified by an automated construction 
that includes tests to detect integration errors as 
quickly as possibleﬂ. 
B.
 
Distributed Structure 
Dealing with distributed teams means having to face a 
number of challenges that can negatively impact product 
development. If the time zone difference between teams is very 
large, there may be no overlapping work hours between some 
teams and it may not be possible to conduct frequent meetings 
for the proper coordination of the work. This lack of meetings 
must be supplemented with more documentation (in a form that 
all members can see, e.g. a Wiki) so that all teams can 
successfully follow the project. 
If there is overlap of working hours and it is possible to 
conduct the meetings, we recommend the use of 
videoconferencing, as face to face communication is one of the 
key agile principles. Whenever videoconferencing is not 
possible, due to technical or bandwidth problems, the telephone 
can be used as an alternative. 
1)
 
Formation of distributed teams 
According to [14] and [10], there are several ways to make 
the transition toward feature teams: big-bang reorganization, 
gradual expansion of team responsibility and gradual 
introduction of feature teams applied only to the most 
important features of the Product Backlog. 
•
 
Big-bang reorganization: This reorganizes the teams, 
by grouping various specialists on the same team so 
that the new teams have knowledge of most of the 
system. This strategy can work well, but it involves 
some risk, since the change from component teams 
(consisting of specialists in an area) to feature teams is 
big. 
•
 
Gradual expansion of team responsibility: This 
approach makes a gradual transition through small 
steps, to expand the team™s responsibility from single 
component teams to multi-component teams, finally 
reaching feature teams. This strategy does not work as 
well as big-bang organization, because it has the 
disadvantages both of the component teams and of the 
feature teams. 
•
 
Gradual introduction of feature teams applied only to 
the most important features: This strategy involves the 
gradual introduction of feature teams applied only to 
the most important features of the Product Backlog. 
However, this approach has disadvantages too, because 
the feature team may need to make changes to the code 
of the component teams, meaning that component 
teams lose control over some of the features. 
Furthermore, the transition to feature teams with this 
strategy is slow. 
These three forms of making the transition can be applied 
whether the team is dispersed (with members in different 
geographic locations) or not. If there are component teams in 
different geographical locations in the organization, it would be 
advisable for the teams formed after the transition to feature 
teams to be co-located, that is, with all the members in the 
same geographical location. In those cases where dispersed 
teams are the only choice, members of the same team should be 
co-located for the duration of the first sprint, at least. 
2)
 
Distributed meetings 
If there are overlapping working hours among the teams, 
distributed meetings may be conducted during these hours, 
using tools such as videoconferencing or the telephone. 
However, if there are no overlapping working hours, other 
methods will have to be applied to conduct the meetings. 
According to [11], there are several methods for dealing with 
distributed meetings: 
•
 
Meetings through documentation: This method 
schedules the meeting at a time when most members 
can attend the meeting. The meeting will be 
documented in a Wiki, to inform members that can not 
be present. This is the least effective way of managing 
distributed meetings. 
•
 
Liaison approach: With this approach, two meetings 
are held at different times and there is a link person 
who attends both of them. The link shares information 
between the members of the two areas. 
•
 
Alternating meeting times: This method alternates the 
schedule of the meetings, so that the meeting 
sometimes takes place during normal working hours of 
one team, and other times during normal working 
hours of the other team/s. 
•
 
Share the pain: This approach selects the schedule of 
the meeting that best suits the team as a whole. In this 
way, each team has flexible working hours. To choose 
the time of the meeting, each team member is asked 
the following questions: What time is best for you to 
meet? What times are you willing to meet? What times 
are off-limits? The resulting schedule is the one that 
works best for the team. 
•
 
Feel the pain: In this case, the meetings are always held 
outside the working hours of one of the teams, i.e. 
there is one team that "feels the pain" of having to 
work outside working hours. 
C.
 
Proposed Process 
The development methodology for distributed 
environments that we propose describes a process that aims to 
guide and organize the work involved in the development of 
software products in distributed environments. This process 
consists of two different parts (see Fig. 1). 
The first phase of the process is the Release Planning 
phase. In this phase the initial planning of the release is 
68 Release Planning
Sprint
Potentially shippable product increment
Require-
ments
Elicitation
Principal
PO
Sprint Planning
Development Work
Sprint Review
Sprint Retrospective
[No more sprints]
General
RPM
Local
RPM
Principal
PO
Team
PO
SM
Team
General
SPM
Local
SPM
Team DemoPO Demo
Principal
PO
Team
PO
2..N
Team
PO
2..N
SM
2..N
Team
2..N
Stakeholders Demo
Principal
PO
Analysis
& Design
Team
Team 
Retrospective
Retrospective of retrospectives
Team
PO
SM
Team
Implementation &
Test
Deployment
SM
Team
Daily
Scrum
Team
PO
2..N
SM
2..N
Team
2..N
Principal
PO
Weekly
meetings
Team
Team
SM
2..N
Team
2..N
Product
Increment
<<Output>>
<<Output>>
Team
PO
Principal
PO
Team
PO
SM
Team
Team
PO
2..N
Team
PO
2..N
Team
PO
SM
Team
 
Figure 1. 
 
Phases, activities and roles of the process 
performed; however, this plan may change over time through 
adjustments made in other subsequent planning activities. This 
phase consists of three activities: Requirements elicitation, 
General Release Planning Meeting and Local Release Planning 
Meeting. The activity Requirements elicitation involves the 
Principal Product Owner and collects the stakeholders™ needs 
as requirements, by means of some requirements capture 
technique (e.g. user stories). In the General Release Planning 
Meeting activity the Product Owners define the vision of the 
product, and create and prioritize the Product Backlog, i.e. the 
artifact that will store the product features. The Product 
Owners should decide what Product Backlog features have 
higher priority, based on information provided by stakeholders 
and their personal criteria. Although there are several ways to 
manage the Product Backlog [11], in 
scRumUP
 the use of a 
single backlog with sections for multiple teams has been 
considered, where all the members share the same Product 
Backlog and the Principal Product Owner divides that Product 
Backlog so that each section is assigned to a team. The last 
activity of this phase is the Local Release Planning Meeting, in 
which the Team Product Owner informs the team of the 
Product Backlog section that has been assigned to them, and 
then the team estimates the features of that section. 
The next element of the process is the sprint, which is an 
iteration that results in a potentially shippable product 
increment. It consists of four phases: Sprint Planning, 
Development Work, Sprint Review and Sprint Retrospective. 
 The Sprint Planning phase aims to identify which part of 
the Product Backlog will become working software in this 
sprint. It is a phase which consists of two activities. The first 
one is the General Sprint Planning Meeting, where the 
Principal Product Owner and the Team Product Owners meet 
to decide what work will be carried out in the sprint. Finally, 
the Product Owners set the goal of the sprint and identify the 
features that each team must complete during that phase, so 
that the dependencies between the features of the teams are 
minimal. In the Local Sprint Planning Meeting activity the 
Team Product Owner meets his own team (including the 
ScrumMaster). They first identify the tasks, i.e. detailed work 
pieces needed to turn the Product Backlog into working 
software that must be broken down in order to be made in less 
than a day. They estimate the number of hours needed to carry 
out each task and assign these tasks to individual team 
members according to the particular skills of each one. Then 
the Sprint Backlog and the Sprint Burndown are created from 
the tasks identified. 
The Development Work phase (see Fig. 2) consists of 
several activities carried out in an iterative and incremental 
way, as in the Rational Unified Process. The end of this phase 
results in a potentially shippable product increment that 
consists of an executable code, along with the models and 
manuals related to this code. 
The first activity of this phase is Analysis and Design. 
During analysis the requirements are analyzed in detail, to 
address issues not treated yet, thereby achieving a better 
understanding of these requirements. Unlike the business 
model, which uses the customer's language, the model created 
during the analysis uses the language of developers, so it is 
possible to reason about the internal aspects of the system and 
refine the requirements. Design allows us to acquire a deeper 
understanding of issues related to non-functional requirements 
and restrictions. In design, the system is modeled in such a way 
69 DevelopmentWork
AnalysisandDesign
CreateSystem
Specification
Implementationand
Testing
Team
Team
Deployment
Team
Daily Scrum
Team
Weeklymeetings
Product
Increment
<<Output>>
Create/Update
Manuals
Answerandcomment 
Scrum questions
SM
Team
PO
2..N
SM
2..N
Team
2..N
Principal
PO
Weekly ScrumScrum of Scrums
Answerand
comment 
coordination
questions
Discuss
dependencies
betweenteams
Discuss
coordination
solutions
UpdateSprint 
BacklogandSprint 
Burndown
Sprint 
Backlog
Sprint
Burndown
<<Input/Output>>
<<Input/Output>>
Refine System
Specification
System
Specification
<<I/O>>
Integratework
done
Create/UpdateTests 
Plan
Writetest
Check test
Writecode
Run tests
Manuals
<<Input/Output>>
Refactor code
Integratecode
Tests Plan
[Test doesnotfail]
[Tests fail]
UpdateSystem
Specification
Identifythe
architecture
<<Input/Output>>
<<Input/Output>>
<<Input/Output>>
<<Output>>
[Othewise]
[Firstrelease
iteration]
ReporttoPrincipal 
ProductOwner
<Input>>
Team PO
Shared
Document
<Output>>
Shared
Document
<<Output>>
<<Output>>
Update
project
monitoring
ReleasePlan
Release
Burndown
Implement
product
increment
[Otherwise]
[ Lastrelease
iteration]
<<Input/Output>>
<<Input/Output>>
Source
code
Tests Report
<Input>>
[Test 
fails]
[Tests 
do not
fail]
<Output>>
<<I/O>>
<Input>>
<<I/O>>
<Output>>
<<I/O>>
<Input>>
<Input>>
Product
Backlog
Section
<Input>>
<Input>>
<<Output>>
 
Figure 2. Activity Diagram of the Development Work phase 
as to support all the requirements, and an abstraction of the 
implementation of the system is created. The result of design is 
the Design Model, which attempts to preserve the structure of 
the Analysis Model; it serves as a scheme for implementation. 
In 
scRumUP
, implementation and testing are performed jointly, 
due to the application of the Test-Driven Development 
practice. Implementation is the center of the construction phase 
and it transforms the Design Model to executable code that 
meets user expectations. The most important objective of 
implementation is to develop the architecture and the system as 
a whole. In this activity, the use of Continuous Integration (CI) 
is very important, since code from different teams has to be 
integrated. There must also be a single repository, supported by 
version control systems. This activity will focus on the 
implementation of Sprint Backlog tasks and on monitoring 
Continuous Integration and Test-Driven Development (see 
section III.A.3.Practices). The tests, whose purpose is to verify 
the result of the implementation, should follow a Tests Plan 
that will be created at the beginning of this activity or in the 
Release Planning phase; and they will be carried out using 
Test-Driven Development (TDD) or Acceptance Test-Driven 
Development (ATDD). ATDD and TDD practices can be 
considered a form of development, since first of all tests are 
created and then the code that passes these tests is written. Test 
scripts and the result of testing will be written up by a 
document called Test Report, which will be shared by members 
of all the teams. 
The deployment activity will manage all aspects related to 
the operation on the user's environment. The first task of this 
activity is to create or update the manuals that will help those 
who will use the product increment created during the 
development work. If this is the latest iteration of the release, it 
will be necessary to implement the product increment in its 
operating environment. The last task of this activity is to update 
the project monitoring by the corresponding Team Product 
Owner. 
The next activity is the Daily Scrum. It is a meeting of 
about fifteen minutes in length, whose purpose is the short-
term planning of the sprint for each one of the teams. The 
ScrumMaster and the team are present at this meeting. Each 
team member answers the three daily Scrum questions: What 
did you do yesterday? What are you going to do today? and, 
Do you have any blockers? 
The Weekly Meetings activity consists of two different 
meetings. On the one hand we have Weekly Scrums, which are 
the weekly meetings of Team Product Owners and the 
Principal Product Owner, allowing the latter to track the project 
and the Team Product Owners to coordinate distributed teams 
from the point of view of dependency management. On the 
other hand, we have Scrum of Scrums, which are also weekly 
coordination meetings but where representatives of different 
distributed teams are present. At this meeting they discuss 
dependencies, integration issues, and any other issues that 
could impact other teams. 
The next phase of 
scRumUP
 is the Sprint Review phase, 
which aims to ensure that teams have met the goal of the sprint 
and shows the results to the stakeholders. This phase is divided 
into three activities: Team Demo, Product Owner Demo and 
Stakeholders Demo. In the Team Demo activity a 
demonstration of the work done is made to the Team Product 
Owner. In the second activity, which is the Product Owner 
70  
Figure 3. Product Owner Hierarchy 
Demo, each Team Product Owner shows the work done by his 
team in the sprint. Then the demonstration to be presented to 
the stakeholders is prepared by identifying which parts of the 
work done by each of the teams will be displayed, as well as 
which individuals will attend the meeting. The last meeting is 
the Demo stakeholders, in which stakeholders, the Principal 
Product Owner, the Team Product Owners and representatives 
of the teams are present, and a demonstration of the work done 
is given to the stakeholders, so that the comments that they can 
offer on this job are collected. 
The last phase of 
scRumUP
 is the Sprint Retrospective, 
which aims to analyze the previous sprint to see how it was 
carried out and to apply the lessons learned in the following 
sprint. This phase consists of two activities: Team 
Retrospective and Retrospective of Retrospectives (optional). 
In the Team Retrospective activity, the team identifies what 
practices worked well and also what problems arose during that 
phase, to try to find solutions to prevent these problems from 
recurring in the next sprint. If there were dependencies between 
the teams in the previous sprint, an optional meeting called 
Retrospective of Retrospectives may be held to analyze the 
sprint from the point of view of coordination between teams 
and to discuss the problems identified, as well as what can be 
done to solve these problems. 
As for the roles, in 
scRumUP
 we find the same ones as 
those found in Scrum: 
•
 
The ScrumMaster is responsible for ensuring that the 
process is understood and followed. The ScrumMaster 
must be seen as a means of connection between 
members of the team, not as a team representative. 
There is a ScrumMaster for each team. 
•
 
The Product Owner is responsible for maximizing the 
value of the work done by the team. In 
scRumUP
 a 
hierarchy of Product Owners exists (see Fig. 3). There 
will be a Principal Product Owner, who will have 
project management functions and who will provide 
the overall direction and priorities for the product, as 
well as several Team Product Owners, who will 
coordinate the priorities of their Product Backlog team 
with the other teams. 
•
 
The team does the job. It must have the ability to self-
organize and to complete a customer-centric feature. 
Finally, the artifacts that need to be produced and 
maintained in 
scRumUP
 are shown in Table 1. We have 
defined templates to support each one of these artifacts. In 
these templates an overview of the artifact is provided, 
specifying a brief description, its purpose, and its scope, but 
there are also specific sections for each artifact based on the 
information that has to be stored for each one. 
TABLE I. 
 
A
RTIFACTS
 
Name Description 
Requirements 
Specification 
It is a list of all the functional and non-
functional requirements identified in the 
Requirements Elicitation activity, organized by 
features. 
Name Description 
Business Case 
It contains the business context, costs, budgets, 
the goal of the release, factors that indicate 
whether the goal of the release has been met, a 
probable delivery date, a list of risks, and the 
Use Case Model. 
Product Roadmap 
It is a document that specifies to a high level 
when a set of features will be delivered. 
Product Backlog 
It is a prioritized list of product features which 
the Product Owner owns. 
Release Burndown 
It is a graph that shows the estimated amount of 
remaining Product Backlog across the time of a 
release. 
Release Plan 
It is a document that aims to detail the planning 
for releases that are closer in terms of time. 
Sprint Backlog 
It is a list of tasks with all the work that the 
team identifies as necessary to achieve the 
sprint goal, i.e. to turn its section of the Product 
Backlog into a potentially shippable product 
increment. 
Sprint Burndown 
It is a graph that shows the estimated amount of 
remaining Sprint Backlog across the time of a 
sprint. 
System 
Specification 
It consists of the Analysis Model and the Design 
Model. 
Tests Plan 
The Tests Plan should include a test strategy, 
tools and resources needed for these tests. 
Tests Report 
This artifact will store the test scripts created in 
the implementation and testing activities and the 
results of all the tests performed by the teams. 
Source code 
The source code produced by different teams 
during the implementation and testing activities 
will be stored and documented in this artifact. 
Manuals 
In consists of three manuals: User Manual, 
Maintenance Manual and Operation Manual. 
Potentially 
shippable product 
increment 
The product increment is created during the 
sprint and it is the output of this process. 
Shared document 
(Wiki) 
There are three shared documents: The Team™s 
Wiki, Shared Wiki of the Teams, and The 
Product Owner™s Wiki 
 
IV.
 
A
PPLICATION OF THE 
M
ETHODOLOGY
 
The methodology presented in the previous section has 
been adapted to that of a Spanish software company of 
technology and innovation. The firm is a leader in solutions 
and services in sectors such as Transport and Traffic, Energy 
and Industry, Public Administration and Health, Financial 
Services, Security and Defense, or Telecom and Media. This 
71  
Release Planning
Sprint
Potentially shippable product increment
Requirements 
Elicitation
Sprint 
Planning
Development Phase
Sprint Review
[No more sprints]
General 
RPM
Local 
RPM
General 
SPM
Local 
SPM
Team Demo
PO Demo
Stakeholders
Demo
Product 
Increment
<<Output>>
<<Output>>
Measurement 
Phase
Testing Phase
Initial 
Estimation
Planning and 
Management
Sprint Retrospective
Team 
Retrospective
Retrospective of 
Retrospectives
Formal Technical 
Reviews
Peer Reviews
First 
Measurement
Second 
Measurement
System 
Measurements
Metrics 
Evolution
Design
Implementation
Execution and 
Evaluation
Regression
Performance 
Testing
Functional Design
Technical Design
Coding, unit tests
Integration Tests
System Tests
Implementation
Configuration Management
Daily Scrum
Weekly Scrum
 
Figure 4. Integration of the methodologies 
company operates in over 100 countries and employs more 
than 30,000 professionals worldwide, sharing its knowledge of 
different sectors and countries to find innovative solutions to 
challenges that customers face. It was interested in applying 
agile methods without having to change its development 
process completely. The company gave us its methodology so 
it could be enriched with 
scRumUP
 to strengthen its distributed 
development process. The methodology of the company 
consists of several methodologies, and many of these are 
applied in parallel during the software development. Since 
Scrum is a generic framework for project management, the 
activities of 
scRumUP
 shown in the previous section are still 
kept in this adaptation. It has been necessary to add other 
phases and activities of the company methodology to the 
process, however. The main criterion used for the adaptation is 
to maintain the consistency of the methodology. That being so, 
the activities involved in project planning in the methodology 
of the company are now in the Release Planning phase, and the 
verification activities (such as Formal Technical Reviews and 
Peer Reviews) are at the Sprint Retrospective phase. The three 
main methodologies of the company are still carried out in 
parallel, but now, thanks to the activities Daily Scrum and 
Weekly Scrum, the coordination between the teams and the 
project tracking is increased.  
The different methodologies that existed in the enterprise 
and that were performed in parallel were: Development 
Methodology, Measurement Methodology and Testing 
Methodology. The Development Methodology was responsible 
for defining the development environment with the roles, 
responsibilities, tools and work products. The Measurement 
Methodology defined phases, activities and techniques needed 
to perform measurements and obtain metrics. Finally, the 
Testing Methodology defined phases of a test cycle and its 
alignment with the different phases of the life cycle of a 
product. A part of the general methodology was responsible for 
continuous verification, by means of the activities Peer 
Reviews and Formal Technical Reviews. 
After a discussion of possible ways of integrating 
scRumUP
 with the methodology of this company, it was 
decided that the best form of integration was the one shown by 
Fig. 4.  
The process is still composed of two distinct  parts: the first 
part is the Release Planning phase, in which the release is 
planned; and the  second is a sprint made up of the following 
phases: Sprint Planning, Development Phase, Measurement 
Phase, Testing Phase, Sprint Review and Sprint  Retrospective. 
Two of the activities related to planning of the company 
prior methodologies have been added to the Release Planning:  
Initial Estimate (from the Measurement Methodology) and 
Planning and Management (from the Testing Methodology). In 
the Initial Estimate activity a first approximation of the initial 
estimate template of the measurements is performed. In the 
Planning and Management activity the testing process is 
organized, by answering the questions of how much, how, 
when and by what means, the different tasks of the test group 
are going to be performed. It was decided to separate these 
activities from their respective methodologies, to add them to 
the Release Planning phase, thereby maintaining a consistent 
methodology. It is at that Release Planning phase, after all, that 
the initial planning of the release is done. 
72  
 
Figure 5. Screen of the Spanish version of the methodology modeled with EPFC 
 
The Sprint Planning and Sprint Review phases do not 
change with respect to 
scRumUP
 . 
In this new adaptation, the prior development work now 
corresponds to the three core methodologies of the company, 
carried out in parallel: Development Phase, Measurement 
Phase, and Testing Phase. The Development Phase corresponds 
to the Development Methodology, along with two additional 
activities: Daily Scrum and Weekly Meetings. The 
Measurement and Testing phases correspond to the 
Measurement and Testing methodologies respectively, but 
without the initial activities related to planning, which are now 
in the Release Planning phase. 
Finally, the activities for verification of the methodology of 
the company cited below have been added to the Sprint 
Retrospective phase: Formal Technical Reviews (FTRs) and 
Peer Reviews. The consistency of the methodology is thus 
maintained, since the goal of this phase is to analyze the 
previous sprint, to see how it went and to apply the lessons 
learned. The activity Formal Technical Reviews is carried out 
by each multidisciplinary team, in order to ensure the 
development of products under the appropriate technical 
parameters, as well as to detect errors and get feedback from 
the processes and the development standards. The Peer 
Reviews activity is carried out between different teams, to 
perform a series of ﬁpeerﬂ checks over the life cycle of 
projects. They are similar to FTRs, but are carried out among 
different projects by technical staff from each of the projects 
that intersect. 
The integration of the methodologies was presented to the 
company and reviewed by its quality control department. From 
that moment on, constant communication was maintained with 
members of the quality department. The aim was to refine the 
methodology and to adapt it to the needs of the company. After 
some modifications, the company finally accepted the 
methodology, and since then this methodology is being applied 
in a pilot project. 
The methodology was modeled with the Eclipse Process 
Framework Composer tool (Fig. 5), in order to be available for 
all of the distributed teams easily and quickly. Employing this 
tool, the activities, tasks, roles, work products and guidelines 
needed to carry out the distributed process are described and 
made available on the web. 
V.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS AND 
F
UTURE 
W
ORK
 
In this article we have proposed 
scRumUP,
 a methodology 
for distributed software development based on a combination 
of one of the most widely-used agile methods, Scrum, with one 
of the most established development methodologies, the 
Rational Unified Process (RUP). It is intended to cover the 
need for a hybrid proposal for distributed development, uniting 
the benefits provided by agile methods with the robustness of 
the Rational Unified Process (RUP). This methodology can be 
beneficial for those organizations that perform software 
development in a distributed way, since it takes into account 
many of the best agile practices and it has been specifically 
developed for distributed environments. 
The application of agile methods like Scrum to distributed 
software development can be beneficial, since these methods 
emphasize the most critical challenges of distributed 
development, such as communication and coordination. The 
application of RUP to distributed software development 
strengthens it by means of an established development process, 
and by ensuring that there is the documentation needed to 
enable project monitoring for distributed teams. The fact that 
both methodologies, Scrum and RUP, are generic frameworks 
that allow adaptation to different needs has made the 
integration of both methods less complicated in order to create 
scRumUP
. The agile practices Test-Driven Development 
(TDD) and Continuous Integration (CI) have also been 
integrated in the methodology. The use of TDD is important, 
because it improves the design and produces higher- quality 
code [15]. The application of CI is justified, as several teams 
73 may be working on the same part of a product if the 
development is distributed, and therefore a common integration 
of the whole code is needed if we are to detect errors early. The 
RUP approach for implementation and testing has not been 
used, since the development proposed by RUP is based on 
components (prebuilt objects with well defined interfaces that 
can be used in different places), and Scrum agile development 
is based on features (units of functionality from the user point 
of view). That is the reason why the integration of these 
practices with RUP has been less straightforward. Moreover, 
TDD and CI are more appropriate for supporting distributed 
development, as they allow continuous testing and code 
integration. 
We are now awaiting the results of the first pilot project, 
expecting them to provide more information about the 
performance and the utility of the methodology. When the 
company provides us information of the application of the 
methodology we will present an experience report with details 
about the project and the distribution. Our future work is 
therefore to improve further the methodology from the 
feedback we will have obtained from the results of the pilot 
projects carried out within the company.  We also want to 
apply 
scRumUP
 in other companies to get feedback with a 
broader view in order to consider the contexts in which the 
methodology can apply. The purpose of that would be to 
provide a thorough methodology that can be applied well in 
distributed environments. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENTS
 
We acknowledge the assistance of the following projects: 
ORIGIN (IDI-2010043(1-5)) funded by CDTI and FEDER, 
PEGASO-MAGO (TIN2009-13718-C02-01, FEDER and 
MEC of Spain) and Agreement Unicauca-UCLM (4982-
4901273). Francisco J. Pino acknowledges the contribution of 
the University of Cauca, where he works as Associate 
Professor. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Ambler, S.W., The Distributed Agile Team. Dr. Dobb's Journal, 2009. 
34(1): p. 45-47.G. 
[2]
 
Batra, D., Modified agile practices for outsourced software projects. 
Communications of the ACM, 2009. 52(9). 
[3]
 
Kussmaul, C., R. Jack, and B. Sponsler, Outsourcing and offshoring 
with agility: A case study. 2004. p. 147-154. 
[4]
 
One-Ki (Daniel) Lee, Probir Banerjee, Kai H. Lim, Kuldeep Kumar, Jos 
van Hillegersberg, and Kwok Kee Wei. 2006. Aligning IT components 
to achieve agility in globally distributed system development. Commun. 
ACM 49, 10 (October 2006), 48-54. 
[5]
 
Lee, S. and H.S. Yong, Distributed agile: project management in a 
global environment. Empirical Software Engineering, 2009: p. 1-14. 
[6]
 
Phalnikar, R., V.S. Deshpande, and S.D. Joshi. Applying agile principles 
for distributed software development. 2009. Singapore. 
[7]
 
Jeff Sutherland; Anton Viktorov; Jack Blount; Nikolai Puntikov; , 
"Distributed Scrum: Agile Project Management with Outsourced 
Development Teams," 
System Sciences, 2007. HICSS 2007. 40th Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on
 , vol., no., pp.274a, Jan. 2007.  
[8]
 
Schwaber, K. and J. Sutherland. Scrum Guide. 2010; Available from: 
http://www.scrum.org/storage/scrumguides/Scrum%20Guide.pdf
. 
[9]
 
Jacobson, I., G. Booch, and J. Rumbaugh, El Proceso Unificado de 
Desarrollo Software. 2005: Addison Wesley. 438. 
[10]
 
Larman, C. and B. Vodde, Practices for Scaling Lean & Agile 
Development. 2010: Pearson Education. 
[11]
 
Woodward, E., S. Surdek, and M. Ganis, A Practical Guide to 
Distributed Scrum. 2010: IBM Press. 
[12]
 
Sutherland, J.; Schoonheim, G.; Rijk, M.; , "Fully Distributed Scrum: 
Replicating Local Productivity and Quality with Offshore Teams," 
System Sciences, 2009. HICSS '09. 42nd Hawaii International 
Conference on
 , vol., no., pp.1-8, 5-8 Jan. 2009. 
[13]
 
Fowler, M. Continuous Integration. 2006; Available from: 
http://www.martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.html
. 
[14]
 
Larman, C. and B. Vodde, Scaling Lean & Agile Development. 2009: 
Pearson Education. 
[15]
 
Sangwan, R.S. and P.A. Laplante, Test-driven development in large 
projects. IT Professional, 2006. 8(5): p. 25-29. 
 
74