 Using Scrum in Distributed Agile Development: A Multiple Case Study 
 
 
Maria Paasivaara, Sandra Dura
siewicz and Casper Lassenius 
Software Business and Engineering Institute 
Helsinki University of Technology 
P.O.Box 9210 FIN-02015 TKK, Finland 
Firstname.lastname@tkk.fi 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Distributed agile development (DAD) has received 
increasing interest both in industry and academia as 
global software development (GSD) is becoming main-
stream. However, agile methods and in particular agile 
practices have been designed for collocated software 
development, and are thus 
not directly applicable to 
DAD. In this paper, we present findings from a multiple 
case study on agile practices in two small and one mid-
sized distributed Scrum project. Based on an interview 
study of 19 project team members, we describe how 
Scrum practices, such as daily scrums, backlogs, and 
sprints were successfully adopt
ed to distributed devel-
opment. We also describe supporting GSD practices 
employed, such as frequent
 visits and multiple commu-
nication modes that the projects used. Finally, we de-
pict the challenges and benefits the case projects 
reported, as well as lessons learned from applying 
Scrum in distributed settings
.  
 
1.
 
Introduction 
Global software development (GSD) including out-
sourcing, subcontracting and partnerships has become a 
common business reality [29]. GSD offers many poten-
tial benefits, e.g., reduced development costs, but also 
creates significant challenges with respect to communi-
cation, coordination, and control [1]. Several of these 
challenges have been identified [7][17][21], and solu-
tions have been proposed, i.e., to reduce intensive col-
laboration between sites [5], and to minimize 
interdependencies between modules being developed at 
different sites [9][12]. 
However, many of the existing solutions are based 
on the assumption of stable requirements. This makes it 
possible to develop a clear modular structure and mi-
nimize communication. The current dynamic business 
environment requires projects to work with uncertain 
requirements and implementation technologies [26]. As 
a consequence, software development organizations 
have attempted to apply agile development to GSD [1], as 
agile methods are particularly suitable for projects facing 
high uncertainty [6]. Due to the physical separation of de-
velopment teams in GSD, many of the key assumptions 
within agile development, with respect to, e.g., customer 
interaction, team communication, and being face-to-face 
[35], do not hold. To gain the benefit from agile develop-
ment, the practices need to be modified when applied to 
distributed settings. In addition, supporting practices known 
from GSD might be needed. 
Previous case studies [10][11][24][32] have shown that 
agile methods such as Scrum [31] and XP [2] can be suc-
cessfully customized to distributed projects. Distributed 
versions of agile methods like Scrum [33] and XP [18] 
have also been developed. 
Nevertheless, scientific research on pairing agile soft-
ware development and GSD, also referred to as distributed 
agile development (DAD), is scarce. There are only a few 
reported experiences in applying DAD to industrial 
projects, e.g, [34][36] and even fewer case studies, e.g, 
[20]. However, in our experience, many companies are 
interested in taking DAD into use, or have already started 
to use it.  
In this paper, our goal is to shed additional light on 
DAD by presenting the results of a multiple case study on 
applying Scrum in distributed settings. Our data is based 
upon semi-structured interviews in three case organiza-
tions. We describe both how agile practices have been tai-
lored for adoption to distributed development, as well as 
supporting GSD practices employed, and lessons learned.  
Following this introduction, we present practices re-
ported in the literature for using agile practices in distri-
buted projects. Then, we describe our case study method 
and our findings. Finally, we discuss our findings and sug-
gest future research topics. 
2.
 
Previous work on distributed agile devel-
opment 
Distributed software projects with volatile requirements 
and uncertain implementation technologies need effective 
practices to be organized and managed successfully. We 
performed a literature review on practices used in distri-
2009 Fourth IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-0-7695-3710-8/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2009.271952009 Fourth IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-0-7695-3710-8/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2009.27195 buted agile software development projects. Based on 
our findings, we divided the practices into two groups: 
1) agile practices, and 2) supporting global software 
development practices. Agile practices include practic-
es that come from some agile method and are either 
used as such or adopted for use in distributed projects. 
Supporting global software development practices in-
clude practices that help tackle the distributedness of 
DAD.  
2.1
 
Agile practices 
The literature offers some advice especially on how 
to use Scrum and XP practices in distributed agile 
projects. Frequently used practices in Scrum related 
projects have been summarized in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. Agile practices 
Name Description Refer-
ences 
Distributed 
daily Scrums 
For coordination and communica-
tion. Scrum questions should be 
answered before the meeting via 
email to overcome language prob-
lems. Skype and professional web 
conferencing tools can be useful. 
[3][8] 
[16][28] 
[29][32] 
[33] 
Sprint plan-
ning meeting 
Meeting at the beginning of 
each iteration to decide what to 
develop  in the iteration. If difficult 
to schedule due to time-zone differ-
ences, only lead-developers can 
meet. As many issues as possible 
should be clarified before the meet-
ings to keep them short. 
[3][14] 
[20][32]  
Review 
meeting 
The team, including the remote site 
presents and discusses the progress 
of the project. Can be centered on 
the local team and product owner to 
minimize the amount of remote 
meetings. 
[3] 
Demonstra-
tions of 
working 
functionality 
After each iteration, new functio-
nality is presented usually as part of 
the sprint review meeting. They 
might be held using videoconferenc-
ing and/or desktop sharing.  
[3][8] 
[11] 
Proxy/ 
Remote 
customer 
A business/software analyst  inter-
faces with the customer on the other 
site. The proxy customer can make 
decisions on behalf of the real cus-
tomer. A remote customer commu-
nicates with the team through 
videoconferencing or email. The 
customer can also receive prototypes 
that he can test and comment upon. 
[18][20] 
[24][32] 
Distributed 
Scrum of 
Scrums 
For bigger teams. Only the Scrum 
masters meet, either in person or via 
tele- or videoconference. The Scrum 
masters meet every 2-3 days using 
tools similar to daily scrum meet-
ings. 
[16][34] 
[33] 
 
2.2
 
Supporting GSD practices 
Besides agile practices, the literature on DAD reports 
practices that tackle some of the new challenges arising 
from DAD. Not only agile practices aid teams in DAD de-
velopment, but known GSD practices can also help a team 
work effectively in DAD. Challenges caused by distribu-
tion include, for example, communication problems 
[3][18][28][29][32][33], lack of close physical proximity 
[1][14][36], lack of team cohesion [29], lack of shared con-
text and knowledge [32][36], unavailability of team mem-
bers [36], and cultural differences [17][21]. 
The supporting distributed practices strive to provide 
solutions to these challenges. Commonly used supporting 
practices are summarized in Table 2. 
 
Table 2 Supporting GSD practices 
Name Description Refer-
ences 
Frequent 
visits 
Used to build and maintain trust and 
enhance collaboration. 
Seeding visits
 
early in the project aim at building a 
relationship. 
Maintaining visits
 are 
shorter and aim at maintaining the 
collaboration. Team members should 
continually rotate between sites and at 
least one team member at a time 
should be visiting. 
[4][8] 
[11][29] 
Multiple 
communica-
tion modes 
Several different kind of communica-
tion should be available that can also 
be applied in parallel, i.e., individual 
and conference telephone, teleconfe-
rence, videoconference, email, instant 
messaging, Wiki and desktop sharing 
[4] 
Mirroring/ 
balanced sites 
Reduce the dependency between sites. 
Each role in a team at one site has a 
counterpart on the other site.. 
[4][13] 
Ambassador/ 
rotating guru 
Experienced engineers are sent to the 
other site for a longer period of time. 
Ambassadors report lessons learned 
and set future directions for the 
projects. Rotating gurus provide initial 
training and mentoring to the other 
site. 
[4][13] 
[24] 
Synchroniza-
tion of work 
hours 
Maximization of overlapping work 
hours to ensure constant communica-
tion. For example, early morning 
shifts for one site and late evening 
shifts for the other site. 
[29] 
3.
 
Research method 
The research presented in this paper is a multiple-case 
study [37] of three globally distributed software develop-
ment projects using Scrum. We chose a multiple-case study 
as multiple sources of evidence provide a better validity for 
the findings [30][37]. We used purposeful sampling [27], 
looking for globally distributed software development 
projects that had experience in using some agile method or 
at least a collection of agile practices. We contacted large 
Finnish companies that we knew used agile methods in 
their distributed projects. All the companies were highly 
196196 interested in improving their agile processes, and in 
particular hearing how other companies have applied 
agile methods in their distributed projects. Company 
contact persons identified candidate projects, from 
which we selected one project from each company. 
Only one company chose not to take part in our study, 
because their suggested project had only recently 
started using Scrum and their project manager said that 
they were still in the early learning phase. All chosen 
projects had mainly applied practices from Scrum. 
Thus, even though we were not purposefully searching 
for projects using Scrum, the fact that all selected 
projects used the method, made it possible to compare 
Scrum usage in three different projects, each coming 
from a different company.
 
We collected data using semi-structured interviews 
[27] that were recorded and later transcribed by an out-
side professional transcription company. Altogether we 
performed 19 interviews each lasting 1.5-2.5 hours. In 
each project, we interviewed product owners, scrum 
masters, developers, and testers. We conducted mostly 
face-to-face interviews with one researcher asking 
questions and the other one taking notes. Because of 
our limited traveling budget we could visit only the Finnish 
sites, and interviewed offshore personnel during their visits 
to Finland. In one case project, EnergySoftware, we had the 
possibility to interview one offshore team member while 
she was visiting Finland, and two additional offshore team 
members via SkypeOut calls. One researcher who had par-
ticipated in the interviews 
checked each transcription by 
listening to the tape and at the same time correcting possi-
ble transcription errors. In addition, we arranged feedback 
sessions at PrintCo and PulpCo during which we presented 
our findings and asked for corrections or further input. No 
significant new information was discovered during the 
feedback sessions. At EnergySoftware, the company did 
not agree to arrange a feedback session. 
The purpose of the interviews was to find out which 
agile practices and how the companies have applied to dis-
tributed projects, what have been the benefits and chal-
lenges of using these practices in a distributed project, 
which GSD practices companies have been using in addi-
tion to agile practices and what have been the benefits and 
drawbacks of applying agile practices to a distributed 
project. An overview of the case projects and the number of 
persons interviewed is shown in Table 3. 
Table 3 Overview of case projects 
Case Type of company  &  
Type of development 
Project duration 
(Scrum usage) 
Countries involved 
(participating person-
nel) 
Teams per site Interviewees 
PrintCo Service company: Development of 
a new version of printing service 
software for internal use in new 
markets. 
2 years (5 months) Onsite: Finland (7) 
Offsite: Latvia, two sites 
(2+1) 
Germany (1) 
People from all sites 
viewed as one single 
team 
5 : 
Onsite (4)  
Offsite (1) 
 
PulpCo Industrial company: Further devel-
opment and maintenance of an 
information management tool for 
internal use. 
3 years (14 
months) 
Onsite: Finland, main 
site + one subcontractor 
consultant working close 
to onsite  (9+1) 
Offsite: Russia, subcon-
tractor (6) 
One team onsite, one 
team offsite 
7: 
Onsite (4) + subcon-
tractor consultant 
working close to 
onsite 
Offsite (2) 
Energy-
Software 
IT company: Further development 
and maintenance of a large energy 
software product that is in use in 
several companies all over the 
world. 
~10 years (1,5 
years) 
Onsite: Norway (~20) 
Offsite: Malaysia (~20) 
5-7 teams, often com-
bined across sites, num-
ber of teams and persons 
in each team  varies 
accross iterations 
7: 
Onsite (4) 
Offsite (1 face-to-
face, 2 over Skype) 
 
To analyse the data, each researcher coded the in-
terviews of one case. The grouping and analysis was 
done by all three researchers using Atlas.ti qualitative 
data analysis software. In Atlas.ti, we created categories 
that partly arose from the data and partly were estab-
lished in the beginning through discussion with all re-
searchers. Then we collected quotations from the data 
under these groups. Based on these findings the agile 
and GSD practices, their application, and their benefits 
and challenges are described in Section 4. 
4.
 
Results 
In this section we describe the Scrum practices that 
our case projects used, how these practices were ap-
plied to distributed settings, which supporting GSD practic-
es were used, and which benefits and challenges the agile 
way of development brought according to our interviewees. 
4.1
 
Scrum practices  
In this section, we describe how the case projects ap-
plied Scrum practices in their distributed projects. Table 4 
summarises the collected experiences. 
4.1.1
 
Daily Scrums 
The use of daily scrum meetings was clearly the most 
important Scrum practice used by all case projects. In the 
meetings, lasting approximately 15 minutes, each team 
197197 member answered the three Scrum questions: ﬁWhat 
did you do since the last scrum meeting? Do you have 
any obstacles? What will you do before next meeting?ﬂ 
In EnergySoftware and in PrintCo the daily scrum 
meetings were distributed, since their teams were dis-
tributed. EnergySoftware used telephone conferencing 
and web-cameras to arrange the meetings. EnergySoft-
ware had several distributed teams, thus their meetings 
for different teams were consecutive, and took place in 
the same meeting room, one after another. In general all 
daily meetings were distributed, even though some 
teams were collocated at the offshore site, since the 
product owner for each team from onsite participated in 
the daily scrum meeting of his or her team whenever 
possible. PrintCo had only one team and it was distri-
buted. They used internet relay chat (IRC) for arranging 
daily scrum meetings. Typically, all team members 
wrote their answers to the scrum questions prior to the 
meeting, and the meeting commenced by everybody 
sending their answers, and reading the others™ messag-
es. Subsequently, discussion took place. At the time of 
the interviews the company had just bought videocon-
ferencing equipment and the team was planning to start 
using videoconferencing at least once a week for the 
daily meetings.  
PulpCo had one onsite team and one offsite team. 
Their daily scrum meetings were held separately for 
each team. The onsite scrum master participated in 
some daily scrums of the offshore team to check on 
them. In the beginning, he did it once a week, but later 
on more seldom. He used Intervoice teleconference to 
participate in the meetings. He felt that when he joined 
the scrum meetings, the offsite team reported to him 
instead of reporting to the other team members, thus he 
was not sure whether the meetings were always done 
properly. PulpCo™s Finnish one-man subcontractor par-
ticipated in onsite meetings via teleconference, and 
once a week in person. He used Office Communicator 
with integrated Live Meeting. PulpCo was the only 
project that did not have daily distributed meetings be-
tween the two main sites. This might be one of the rea-
sons that the interviewees from this project to complain 
about not properly knowing the situation on the other 
site. 
In all case projects, discussion took place after the 
three questions were answered. The meetings always 
took at most 15 minutes as suggested by Scrum. In 
PrintCo, the meetings were often shorter, since answers 
to the questions were written beforehand. In Energy-
Software, the meetings initially lasted only a few mi-
nutes, before the teams really learned to discuss and tell 
their impediments. That was especially difficult for 
persons coming from an Asian culture. The scrum mas-
ters started to encourage everybody to talk and tell 
more about their tasks and impediments. At the time of 
the interviews these meetings normally took 15 minutes 
and were found very useful by all participants.  
If problems or need for one-to-one discussion were en-
countered during daily meetings, teams set up separate 
meetings after the daily scrums and continued discussions 
in smaller groups or one-to-one either by teleconference, 
chat or email. In all the case projects, daily scrum meetings 
encouraged team members to communicate more also out-
side the meetings, which was seen as one of the greatest 
benefits of these meetings. Daily scrum meetings also pro-
vided a good way for everybody to get an overview of the 
project situation. In particular, the interviewees reported 
that it was easier to monitoring the offshore situation than 
before. Moreover, problems were identified quickly, since 
now it was difficult to hide problems over longer time. 
Even though arranging daily meetings was a heavy process, 
they were seen as very useful by all the projects. When 
comparing the projects, that had distributed daily meetings, 
to the project where they had mainly site-specific daily 
meetings, a clear difference could be seen. Most of the par-
ticipants of the distributed meetings mentioned the above 
benefits: increased transparency to the other site, getting a 
good overview of what was happening in the project and 
adding communication across sites. One of our intervie-
wees even stated: 
ﬁI think that [daily scrum meetings] was 
the best thing that happened to these distributed teams.ﬂ
 
However, the participants of the site-specific, non-
distributed meetings in PulpCo mentioned these things as 
problems: they did not have enough communication and 
contacts with the other site, nor did they know enough what 
was happening at the other site. 
4.1.2
 
Weekly scrum-of-scrums 
EnergySoftware was the only project having several 
distributed scrum teams, thus it was also the only project 
arranging distributed weekly scrum-of-scrum meetings. 
These meeting took place once a week. One team member 
from each team participated in the meeting. The team de-
cided who participates; the participant was not always the 
same person. In addition to the team representatives, all 
scrum masters typically also participated in these half-hour 
long meetings. During the meeting the three scrum ques-
tions were answered. Now the questions did not address 
single persons, but a whole team. Thus, each team repre-
sentative told what his or her team had been doing since the 
last meeting, what it was planning to do before the next 
meeting and what kind of impediments they had. Moreover, 
they have two additional questions: ﬁHave you put some 
impediments in the other teams™ way?ﬂ and ﬁDo you plan 
to put any impediments in the other teams™ way?ﬂ. The goal 
of these questions was to ensure successful integration.  
Weekly scrum-of-scrums were considered very benefi-
cial, since they distributed information between the teams 
and revealed possible problems early on. They also opened 
198198 discussion channels between the teams and that way 
encouraged informal communication between the 
teams. 
4.1.3
 
Sprints 
Iterations in Scrum are called sprints. The length of 
one sprint in Scrum is normally four weeks, but can be 
also shorter or even longer. Our case projects used both 
four-week and two-week iterations. In PrintCo the 
normal iteration length was two weeks, which was re-
garded as very good in that quite small project. A larger 
project, EnergySoftware, had synchronized 4-week 
sprints in the development teams. This meant that all 
sprints started and ended at the same time. The varia-
tion of the end and start dates was at maximum a 
couple of days. The maintenance team was the only 
exception to this 4-week sprint cycle, as their sprint 
cycle was two weeks. The reason was that fixes to cus-
tomers were released every two weeks. Also in Ener-
gySoftware all the interviewed persons were happy 
with the current sprint lengths. 
In PulpCo the sprint length of the onsite team was 
four weeks and of the offsite team two weeks. The 
shorter offsite sprint length made it possible for onsite 
to monitor the offsite more frequently. The sprints in 
PulpCo were sometimes lengthened due to the different 
vacation times of the team members in these two coun-
tries. By prolonging the sprints when needed, the teams 
to could stay synchronized. 
Due to short sprints, clear deadlines and goals it was 
quite clear for all the team members in our case projects 
what was supposed to be done during the next sprint, as 
one team member commented: 
ﬁBefore Scrum I could 
not really understand when there is a deadline and 
what should be done until that deadline (–) because 
there were many different deadlines for customers and 
development stages (–)ﬂ 
Sprints with clear deadlines and goals were seen to 
increasee the transparency in our case projects. Espe-
cially offsites benefited a lot, since often the offsite 
team members do not have a clear picture of the overall 
project in a traditional distributed setting. In addition, 
the frequency of feedback between onsite and offsite 
was increased. There was no possibility any more to 
delay the completion of a task because it was ﬁonly 
95% readyﬂ. 
In addition to normal sprints, one of our cases, 
PulpCo, had ﬁrelease sprintsﬂ two to three times a year. 
The purpose of the release sprints were to complete all 
items and to move the whole system to system testing. 
An item was considered ready when it was developed, 
integration tests were completed, version reports made 
and user guides updated. The advantage of a release 
sprint was that onsite managers paid more attention to 
the product and gave more feedback. 
4.1.4
 
Sprint planning meetings 
Before starting each sprint a sprint planning meeting 
takes place. In PrintCo and EnergySoftware the sprint 
planning meetings were distributed, since the teams were 
also distributed. In PulpCo the meetings were separate for 
both onsite and offsite teams.  
In EnergySoftware sprint planning meetings were di-
vided into three phases: distributed meeting, local meeting 
onsite and local meeting offsite. The distributed meeting 
was arranged using teleconferencing and Microsoft Net-
Meeting for application sharing. During the distributed part 
of the meeting the product owner presented the prioritized 
items in the backlog, and team asked questions. Because of 
the time-zone difference this part of the meeting was time-
boxed for those three common working hours for both sites. 
After that the offsite working day ended. The onsite team 
continued by dividing the backlog items into more detailed 
tasks, adjusting the estimates made by the product owner 
and making initial assignments of the tasks to different 
team members. The offsite continued the work the follow-
ing morning by discussing and commenting on the draft 
plan they have received from onsite.  
Also PrintCo had distributed sprint planning meetings 
arranged as teleconference and supported by application 
sharing. Due to the closer distance between onsite and off-
site, a one hour plane trip, especially in the beginning a 
couple of offsite team members visited onsite during sprint 
planning, which made these meetings more efficient. Sev-
eral of our interviewees would have prefered on-site plan-
ning to distributed if possible. They commented that in 
particular effort estimation requires lots of discussion, 
which is difficult to do efficiently while distributed. How-
ever, with a two-week sprint cycle arranging only face-to-
face meetings would not have been economically possible. 
In PulpCo, onsite and offsite had separate meetings. 
Only the onsite scrum master participated in the planning 
meeting of both teams. He was seen by the offshore team as 
their product owner and a link between the teams. Since 
PulpCo had the most important roles at onsite, the planning 
of the offsite sprint started by the onsite scrum master and 
architect selecting items to th
e product backlog. The offsite 
meeting was arranged via teleconference with Live Meet-
ing and desktop sharing. Besides the onsite scrum master, 
the onsite chief designer and architect participated in these 
meetings, as needed. During the visits of offsite personnel 
to onsite, the meetings were arranged face-to-face. During 
the first part of the meeting the team decided what backlog 
items would be implemented in the next sprint. Then, the 
team worked on its own and split the backlog items into 1-2 
work day tasks and estimated their effort. The onsite plan-
ning meeting had the same agenda. The Finnish subcon-
tractor participated in the onsite meetings face-to-face or by 
using Office Communicator when the parts he developed 
were discussed. 
199199 Sprint planning meetings were considered very use-
ful, since they provided visibility to the work on both 
sites and gave team members an opportunity to partici-
pate in planning. However, the distributed meetings 
were quite challenging and tiring, because of the often 
bad voice quality of teleconference calls. Moreover, it 
was difficult to always know who was talking when not 
seeing the persons from the other site. Also, the issues 
discussed were sometimes difficult to explain when 
distributed. At the time of the interviews, none of the 
projects could use videoconferencing and even web 
cameras were not possible for all the projects because 
of the narrow bandwidth. All the projects found collo-
cated planning meetings preferable, but they could be 
arranged quite seldom, even though all the projects had 
sometimes arranged planning meetings during the visits 
of offsite personnel to onsite. 
4.1.5
 
Sprint demos 
At the end of a sprint, the developed functionality is 
demonstrated to all interested parties. The meeting is 
called demo or sprint review meeting. All case projects 
arranged demos that both onsite and offsite personnel 
participated in. The demos were normally arranged 
using teleconference and application sharing. During 
visits, face-to-face demos were sometimes arranged. In 
EnergySoftware and PrintCo the demos were team spe-
cific, even though other interested parties could partici-
pate in addition to the team members. In PulpCo, the 
offsite and onsite teams had their demos together. That 
way both sites had the possibility to give and receive 
more immediate feedback. In PrintCo, the demos were 
combined with sprint planning meetings. After the 
demo there was just break before the team continued 
the meeting by starting to plan the next sprint. 
According to our interviewees the demos were 
beneficial since they increased the visibility of the 
project in both directions. They also offered one more 
possibility to monitor the work at offsite. For example, 
in PulpCo, before starting to use Scrum, the teams were 
working independently for long periods of time. This 
usually led to a lot of rework for the offsite team as 
they often misunderstood the requirements. Short 
sprints with demos at the end mitigated this problem. 
The biggest problem with demos was the same as with 
other distributed meetings: the used technology, tele-
conferencing and application sharing, did not offer 
good enough possibilities to communicate efficiently 
according to our interviewees. 
4.1.6
 
Retrospective meetings 
A retrospective meeting normally takes place in the end 
of a sprint. During that meeting the team discusses three 
questions: ﬁWhat has been good during this sprint?ﬂ, ﬁWhat 
has not been that good?ﬂ and ﬁWhat kind of improvements 
could we do?ﬂ.  
In EnergySoftware and PrintCo the retrospective meet-
ings took place directly after th
e demos as distributed tele-
conference meetings. In PulpCo neither of the teams had so 
far regular retrospective meetings. The onsite team had 
arranged a retrospective meeting once, and that was re-
ceived very positively. Normally, in that project just the 
offsite and onsite scrum masters discussed the possible im-
provements, but rest of the teams did not participate. 
4.1.7
 
Backlogs 
Backlogs are lists of items to be developed. In the sprint 
planning meeting, a product owner with his or her team 
selects from the product backlog items to be developed 
during the next sprint to the sprint backlog. Our case 
projects used different tools to manage their backlogs. 
EnergySoftware used Jira, with separate backlogs for all 
the teams. The backlogs were updated by the respective 
product owners and all the team members had access to 
their backlog. All the teams were very satisfied with this 
tool. 
PrintCo had their backlog in a Wiki, but they were look-
ing for a better tool, since they felt that the wiki editor was 
awkward to use and not really designed for this purpose. 
The good side was that everybody could access the wiki 
and follow the project progress by looking at the project 
burndown chat there. However, in this project the responsi-
bilities of the product owner were still quite unclear. Thus, 
the backlog was sometimes updated by one of the two 
product owners, sometimes by the scrum master. 
PulpCo had their backlog in Team Foundation Server, 
where it was updated by the onsite product owner, scrum 
master and chief designer. In practice, everyone could add 
items into the product backlog, but the offsite team mem-
bers had never put anything into the backlog yet. 
In all our case projects, the backlogs could be accessed 
by all team members, which was considered beneficial. 
Only EnergySoftware had a clear process of updating back-
logs, the other projects were still practicing the usage of 
backlogs and having problems both with the tools and re-
sponsibilities of different roles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200200 Table 4. Summary of the distributed Scru
m practices, their challenges and benefits
Distri-
buted 
Scrum 
practice 
How applied to distributed projects? Challenges Benefits 
Daily 
scrum 
Distributed teams used teleconference 
and web cameras, or chat. 
Cultural differences, e.g. about reporting 
impediments. 
It takes time to learn to report informa-
tion that is useful for others. 
 
Brings transparency to a distributed project. 
Reveals possible problems early on. 
Creates contacts and encourages to informal commu-
nication especially between the sites. 
Mentioned as the most useful Scrum practice for 
distributed projects. 
Weekly 
scrum-of-
scrums 
Using teleconference and web cameras. No specific challenges mentioned. Distributes information between the teams. 
Reveals possible problems early on.  
Opens discussion channels and encourages informal 
communication between the teams. 
Sprints 2-4 week long sprints used depending 
on the project.  
When several teams, sprints are syn-
chronized. 
Different religious or other holidays in 
different countries cause synchroniza-
tion challenges. 
Provides frequent monitoring opportunities between 
the sites. 
Sprint 
planning 
meeting 
Distributed meetings can be arranged 
using teleconferencing and application 
sharing. 
The meeting can be divided into several 
parts: a distributed part and site specific 
parts. 
Sometimes collocated during visits. 
Time-zone differences cause challenges 
to arrange, especially longer meetings. 
Cultural and language differences may 
cause silence of some participants.  
Exhausting with long teleconferences. 
Sound quality not always good enough. 
Difficult to recognize speakers when not 
seeing the faces. 
Give a possibility for team members from all sites to 
participate, to ask clarifications, to understand tasks 
and to commit to common goals. 
Brings transparency to a distributed project. 
 
Sprint 
demo 
Distributed meetings can be arranged 
using teleconferencing and application 
sharing. Can be a combined meeting 
with sprint planning and retrospective 
meetings. 
The same technical problems as in sprint 
planning. 
Brings transparency to a distributed project. 
Prevents problems by providing a frequent monitor-
ing opportunity between the sites. 
Ensure the understanding of the requirements, espe-
cially regarding the offsite. 
Retrospec-
tive meet-
ing 
Distributed meetings can be arranged 
using teleconferencing and application 
sharing. 
Can be a combined meeting with sprint 
planning and demo. 
Similar technical problems as in sprint 
planning. 
No specific benefits mentioned. 
Backlogs Access to backlogs by all distributed 
team members 
Backlogs in Jira, Wiki or Team Founda-
tion Server. 
Updating responsibilities unclear. 
Wiki editor awkward to use. 
All team members can access, pick items and follow 
the progress. 
4.2
 
Supporting GSD practices 
In addition to the above agile practices, our case 
project used supporting GSD practices as well. These 
are described next.  
4.2.1
 
Frequent visits  
All projects arranged visits between the sites for 
team members. EnergySoftware and PrintCo did not 
have a planned schedule for the visit: they were ar-
ranged on a need basis. PulpCo, on the other hand, ar-
ranged one-week visits of a few offshore team members 
to onsite regularly every two months. Normally, the 
offshore scrum master and the chief developer traveled, 
sometimes accompanied by a developer having some 
urgent problem. The main reason for these visits was to 
provide enough information for the offsite until the next 
visit. If possible,  offsite members participated in sprint 
planning and review meetings during their visits. Ac-
cording to our interviewees, it would have been more 
productive to have trips every month, but the long tra-
vel time (15h by car/direction) made it impractical. Before 
each visit, an agenda was created and the offshore team 
collected questions which were more easily discussed face-
to-face than by chat or email. During the visit, the offshore 
team spent most of the time in meetings with onsite domain 
experts. The Finnish one-man subcontractor visited onsite 
normally once a week and during the offsite visits, twice a 
week. Every time the offsite people came for a visit, leisure 
activities were arranged, such as sauna or dinner. These 
gave the members of both teams the possibility to get to 
know each other on a personal level. 
Both in EnergySoftware and PrintCo, several visits took 
place in the beginning, when the projects had just started to 
apply Scrum, and a bit more seldom later on. At PrintCo, a 
couple of persons from offsite visited onsite for a couple of 
days, during which a lot of meetings and informal discus-
sions took place. 
At EnergySoftware during the first half a year after 
starting to apply Scrum, the project had several persons 
from onsite working full-time at offsite. Subsequently, the 
team members, especially from offsite, have traveled fre-
quently between the sites on a need basis. The visits nor-
201201 mally lasted between two and four weeks, which made 
it possible for a team to really work together. Especially 
during critical phases, it was considered important to 
collocate the team, e.g. for the last iteration before a 
release or for the first iteration, when most of the plan-
ning takes place. Besides these visits, EnergySoftware 
had started to arrange annual social gatherings for the 
whole project for a long weekend. During these gather-
ings the project members heard and discussed future 
actions, had team building exercises and social events. 
Everybody we interviewed saw these as successful 
events and managers regarded them as investments for 
the future. At the time of the interviews, approximately 
half of the project team members had visited the other 
site and basically all had met face-to-face in the annual 
gatherings.  
All projects arranged frequent visits, which pro-
vided good opportunities for getting to know persons 
from the other site, discuss difficult issues, and get a 
better picture of the project
. Face-to-face meetings also 
increased trust between team members and encouraged 
them to continue communication after the visits. It 
seemed to be important to arrange visits not only in the 
beginning of the project, but quite frequently during the 
project, as well. The visits normally lasted from a few 
days at PrintCo, to a few weeks at EnergySoftware. 
Thus, the visits were not just short trips to meetings, but 
instead longer stays during which distributed team 
members could really work 
together. Of course, the 
projects tried to schedule the trips so that the visitors 
could participate face-to-face in the most important 
regular meetings, such as sprint planning meetings. 
In all the projects it was mainly offsite personnel 
that travelled. The reason for this was that onsite per-
sonnel was mainly experts that did not have time to 
travel. Offsite personnel, on the other hand, were main-
ly developers that found it extremely useful to meet the 
onsite experts face-to-face and ask questions and dis-
cuss difficult issues. Some of our interviewees, espe-
cially from offsite, hoped that also onsite personnel 
would travel more often to provide for many more off-
site persons an opportunity to meet them and to share 
the sometimes quite heavy and tiring traveling duties 
between onsite and offsite. Even though our case 
projects arranged quite a lot trips, none of the intervie-
wees mentioned any problems of arranging trips due to 
cost reasons or limitations to travel because of costs. 
Instead, it seemed that all the projects found the current 
model of frequent visits as very useful and even more 
visits were hoped for. 
4.2.2
 
Multiple communication modes  
Besides face-to-face visits, onsite and offsite mem-
bers communicated a lot using different kind of elec-
tronic media: email, phone calls, chat, application 
sharing and teleconferencing. Also tools, like Jira, Wiki 
and Team Foundation Server, were accessible by all team 
members regardless of the location. It seemed to be impor-
tant that there were many different possibilities to commu-
nicate between the sites. Tool choice seemed to depend 
both on the purpose of the communication, e.g. chat was 
used to ask short questions or for checking whether the 
other party was available to receive a phone call, and prefe-
rences of a user. Some preferred synchronous voice com-
munication, while others with limited language skills 
preferred written communication. Thus, it seemed to be 
important to offer several different communication tools for 
distributed teams. Video-conferencing was not used at the 
time of the interviews in any of our case projects. Energy-
Software used web cameras, but would have preferred vi-
deoconferencing, if just the bandwidth between the sites 
would have allowed it. PrintCo had just ordered new video-
conferencing equipment and was planning to use it instead 
of teleconferencing. The challenges faced with current 
communication tools were mainly related to the bad voice 
quality and difficulties to understand and explain difficult 
issues when not being able to communicate face-to-face. 
4.3
 
Challenges faced 
All our case projects faced challenges when starting to 
use Scrum in a distributed project. For all the projects 
Scrum was a totally new method, thus training was needed. 
Most interviewees thought that they did not receive enough 
Scrum training in the beginning. In one project, offsite did 
not even get any training; they were just sent some material 
about Scrum, which was really not enough according to our 
interviewees. 
Scrum expects open communication, which was diffi-
cult in the beginning, especially by offshore team members 
who were not used to communicate openly. For example, in 
EnergySoftware, daily scrum meetings were very short in 
the beginning, only a few minutes, and especially for Asian 
people it seemed to be difficult to report impediments. 
However, the situation improved a lot in all the projects 
later on, when participants learned to follow the Scrum 
practices and also saw the benefits of frequent and open 
communication. 
Even though it seems to be a good idea to have separate 
scrum teams at onsite and offsite, the two projects that had 
distributed teams, PrintCo and EnergySoftware, had better 
transparency and fewer communication problems than 
PulpCo, the only project having separate offsite and onsite 
teams. In PulpCo, especially offsite hoped for more fre-
quent communication between the sites. 
4.4
 
Positive experiences 
Even though all case projects faced challenges when 
taking Scrum into use, the overall experience was very pos-
itive. Based on our interviews, all projects were very satis-
202202 fied with the decision to start to use this agile method 
and were planning to continue its usage also in the fu-
ture. The agile practices were considered very suitable 
for distributed projects, especially because they fos-
tered frequent and open communication, provided good 
visibility to the project and improved trust between 
distributed developers.  
According to our interviewees, Scrum practices 
provide a frequent and structured way of communica-
tion for a distributed project. Daily scrum meetings 
with the three questions was one of the most liked prac-
tices. In a daily scrum meeting you could get quick 
answers and clarifications, monitor what was happen-
ing at the other site, and get access to the right persons, 
as one of our interviewees said: 
ﬁEveryone is there [in 
daily scrum meeting], domain experts are supposed to 
be there, all members are there and you can actually 
talk and get what you want.ﬂ
  
Since Scrum emphasizes fast problem solving, it 
encouraged distributed team members to talk about 
issues more openly than before starting to use Scrum. 
That was considered especially important when col-
laborating with cultures where problems are not used to 
be discussed openly. 
The frequent and structured communication forced 
by Scrum also encouraged distributed team members to 
informal one-to-one communication between sites, e.g. 
after daily scrum meetings. The regular communication 
was seen to lower the threshold to talk and phone to 
foreign colleagues.  
Scrum practices with short iterations and daily 
meetings provide frequent check-points for monitoring 
the distant sites. The practices ensure that, e.g. misun-
derstood requirements are revealed early on or that no-
one can work for a long time alone with a problem. 
5.
 
Discussion and conclusions 
In this paper we presented a multiple-case study on 
the application of Scrum practices to three globally 
distributed projects. We also discussed the challenges 
and benefits related to the application of these practices 
and Scrum in general to distributed projects. The con-
tribution of this paper was twofold. First, we believe 
that companies planning to take Scrum into use in their 
distributed projects will find
 the collected experiences 
useful. Second, little empirical literature on the usage of 
agile practices, especially Scrum practices, in distri-
buted projects exist. Therefore, our multiple-case study 
provides an addition to the scientific knowledge. 
5.1
 
Lessons learned 
Based upon the case studies, we extract the follow-
ing lessons learned: 
-
 
Do not distribute your project if you do not need to! A 
distributed project brings additional challenges, more 
effort and can take longer than a collocated project. 
-
 
Proper Scrum training is needed in the beginning if the 
team has not used Scrum before. Besides classroom 
trainings, for example, a visiting engineer or an outside 
expert could help the team to apply the Scrum practices 
during the first iteration. Just sending material about 
Scrum is not enough!  
-
 
Scrum is based on frequent and open communication, 
which is also its main benefit when applied to a distri-
buted project according to our results. Remember to en-
courage and ensure open communication, otherwise the 
benefits of Scrum cannot be realized. 
-
 
Frequent visits of development personnel from collabo-
rating sites are needed especially in the beginning of a 
project, and in critical project phases, such as testing, or 
planning of new functionality. Visits should preferably 
be at least a few weeks long, so that persons get to 
know each other well and really learn to work together. 
Plan visits and a visiting schedule properly. Do not save 
in travelling budget. 
-
 
Arrange an access to multiple communication tools Œ 
videoconferencing for regular meetings; and internet 
telephones, desktop sharing and chat for unofficial 
meetings. Tools that are easy to access and use lower 
the threshold to communicate outside official meetings. 
5.2
 
Limitations 
As a multiple case study, the generalizability of the re-
sults is limited.   
Though we interviewed several people in different roles 
from each project, additional interviews might have pro-
vided additional insight. Due to resource limitations and 
confidentiality issues, we were not able to triangulate our 
findings by, e.g. document analysis or observation. Fur-
thermore, data was validated only in two cases using feed-
back sessions, since the third company declined to arrange 
for such a possibility.   
5.3
 
Future research 
In the future, we hope to augment this study by addi-
tional case projects on distributed agile development. We 
also hope to be able to collect and analyze communication 
data from several sources to get a more complete under-
standing of communication in distributed agile develop-
ment.  
Acknowledgements
 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial sup-
port of the Academy of Finland (Grant No. SA 107636, 
2005-2007) and the Finnish Funding Agency for Technolo-
gy and Innovation (MaPIT project). We also thank our case 
203203 companies and all the interviewees for sharing their experiences. 
References 
[1]
 
Agerfalk, P. and Fitzgerald, B. Introduction. 
Communications 
of ACM
, vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 26-34, 2006. 
[2]
 
Beck, K. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change. 
Addison Wesley, New York, 2000. 
[3]
 
Berczuk, S., Back to basics: The role of agile principles in 
success with an distributed scrum team. 
Proceedings of 
AGILE
, 2007, pp. 382-388. 
[4]
 
Braithwaite, K. and Joyce, T. XP expanded: Distributed ex-
treme programming. 
Proceedings of 6th International Confe-
rence on Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in 
Software Engineering
, XP 2005. Springer, 2005, pp. 180-188 
[5]
 
Carmel, E. and Agarwal, R. (2001). Tactical approaches for 
alleviating distance in global software development. IEEE 
Software, March/April, p. 22-29. 
[6]
 
Cockburn, A and Highsmith, J. Agile software development: 
The people factor. 
Computer,
 vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 131-133, 
2001. 
[7]
 
Damian, D. Global software development: growing opportun-
ities, ongoing challenges. Software Process: Improvement 
and Practice, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 179-182 2003. 
[8]
 
Danait, A. Agile offshore techniquesŠa case study. Proceed-
ings in Agile Conference, 24-29 July 2005, pp. 214-217. 
[9]
 
Ebert, C. and De Neve, P. Surviving Global Software Devel-
opment. 
IEEE Software
, (March/April) 2001, 62-69. 
[10]
 
Farmer, M. (2004) DecisionSpace Infrastructure: Agile De-
velopment in a Large, Distributed Team. 
Proceedings of the 
Agile Development Conference 
2004.  
[11]
 
Fowler, M. Using an agile software process with offshore de-
velopment. 2006. 
http://martinfowler.com/artcles/agileOffshore.html
. Refe-
renced: 19.12.2007. 
[12]
 
Herbsleb, J.and Grinter, R. 
Architectures, coordination, and 
distance: Conway's law and beyond.
IEEE  Software
, 16, 5, 
(Sept.-Oct. 1999), 63 Œ70. 
[13]
 
Hogan, B. Lessons learned from an extremely distributed 
project. 
Proceeding of the Agile Conference
, 23-28 July 2006. 
[14]
 
Holmstrom, H., Conchùir, E.Ò, Agerfalk, P.J., Fitzgerald, B. 
(2006). Global Software Development Challenges: A Case 
Study on Temporal, Geographical and Socio-Cultural Dis-
tance. 
ICGSE-06. International Conference on Global Soft-
ware Engineering
, (pp. 3-11). Florianopolis. 
[15]
 
Jain, N. Offshore agile maintenance. Proceedings of Agile 
Conference, 2006 
[16]
 
Jensen, B. and Zilmer, A. Cross-continent development using 
Scrum and XP. 
Proceedings of XP
. Springer Berlin, 2003, pp. 
146-153. 
[17]
 
Krishna, S., Sahay, S., and Walsham, G. Managing cross-
cultural issues in global software outsourcing. 
Communica-
tions of the ACM
, Vol. 47, No. 4,pp. 62-66,2004. 
[18]
 
Kircher, M., Jain, P., Corsaro, A. and Levine, D. Distributed 
Extreme Programming. Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on eXtreme Programmingand Flexible Processes in 
Software Engineering, Sardinia, Italy, May 20 - 23,2001. 
[19]
 
Kussmaul, C., Jack, R., and Sponsler, B. Outsourcing and off-
shoring with agility: A case study. p. 147-154, 2004. 
http://www.springerlink.com/content/nr9xt91c6jxuf751
 
[20]
 
Layman, L., Williams, L., Damian, D. and Bures, H. Essential 
communication practices for extreme programming in a glob-
al software development team. 
Information and Software 
Technology,
 vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 781-794, 2006.  
[21]
 
MacGregor, E., Hsieh Y. and Kruchten, P, "The impact of in-
tercultural factors on global software development", Canadian 
Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2005, pp. 
920-926, 2005.  
[22]
 
Mockus, A. and Herbsleb, J. Challenges of Global Software De-
velopment. 
Proceedings of the Seventh International Software Me-
trics Symposium
, (METRICS 2001, IEEE), 182-184. 
[23]
 
Ngo-The, A., Hoang, K., Nguyen, T., and Mai, N. Extreme pro-
gramming in distributed software development: A case study. 
Pro-
ceedings of International Workshop on Distributed Software 
Development
, August 2005. 
[24]
 
Nisar, M. and Hameed, T. Agile Methods Handling Offshore 
Software Development Issues. 
Proceedings of INMIC 2004, 8
th
 In-
ternational Multitopic Conference,
 Dec.2004. 417-422. 
[25]
 
Paasivaara, M. and Lassenius, C. Synchronizing Global Software 
Development Using Incremental Development and Frequent Deli-
veries. 
Proceedings of the ICSE Internaltional Workshop on Glob-
al Software Development
, Edinburgh, May 2004. 
[26]
 
Paasivaara, M. and Lassenius, C. Could global software develop-
ment benefit from agile methods?" Proceedings of the Internation-
al Conference on Global Software Engineering, ICGSE '06., Oct. 
2006, pp. 109-113. 
[27]
 
Patton, M. Q. 
Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods
. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. 1990. 
[28]
 
Poole, C. J. Distributed product development using extreme pro-
gramming. pp. 60-67, 2004. (Available: 
http://www.springerlink.com/content/kkfhajn8a4jbclau) 
[29]
 
Ramesh, B. Lan-Cao, Mohan, K. and Peng-Xu, Can distributed 
software development be agile? 
Communications of the ACM
, vol. 
49(10), pp. 41-46, 2006. 
[30]
 
Robson, C. Real World Research. A Resource for Social Scientists 
and Practitioner-Researchers. Blackwell. 1997. 
[31]
 
Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. Agile Software Development with 
Scrum. NewYork, United States: Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[32]
 
Simons, M. Internationally Agile. 
InformIT
, March 15
th
, 2002.
 
[33]
 
Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, J. and Puntikov, N. Distri-
buted scrum: Agile project management with outsourced devel-
opment teams. Proceedings of 40th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, HICSS 2007, pp. 274a-274a. 
[34]
 
Smits, H. and Pshigoda, G. Implementing scrum in a distributed 
software development organization. Proceedings of AGILE 2007, 
pp. 371-375. 
[35]
 
D. Turk, R. France, and B. Rumpe, ﬁAssumptions Underlying 
Agile Software-Development Processesﬂ, 
Journal of Database 
Management
, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 62Œ87, 2005. 
[36]
 
Yap, M. Follow the sun: distributed extreme programming devel-
opment. Proceedings of Agile Conference, 24th-29th July 2005, 
pp. 218-224. 
[37]
 
Yin, R.K. 
Case Study Research, Designs and Methods
. Thousand 
Oaks, California: Sage Publications, 1994. 
 
204204