 Coaching Global Software Development Projects
 
 
Maria Paasivaara  
Software Business and Engineering Institute 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
 Aalto University 
P.O.Box 19210, 00076 Aalto, Finland 
Maria.Paasivaara@tkk.fi 
 
 
Abstract
Š This paper presents a multiple-case study on how 
three globally distributed software development projects from a 
large Scandinavia-based IT organization introduced agile 
practices with the help of a company internal coaching team. The 
data was gathered by ten semi-structured interviews: we 
interviewed four coaches and six persons from the coached 
projects. We describe how the coaches cooperated with the case 
projects, helping them to adopt agile practices. We present the 
challenges the projects faced, as well as the benefits they gained. 
Our results show that when coaching globally distributed 
projects it is especially important to gain executive support from 
all the sites, to involve all sites in the change process, to build a 
common vision in a collaborative workshop, to invite coaches as 
early as possible, to aim for a long-term coaching relationship, 
and to remember that the project team owns the change, coaches 
are there just to support the team. 
Keywords- Agile coaching; agile software development; global 
software development 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
In collocated agile development, coaching has been 
recognized as useful in helping organizations adopt and sustain 
the use of agile methodologies [2][3]. For collocated 
development, case studies and experience reports have been 
published, but the literature on coaching globally distributed 
software development is still scarce. As global software 
development (GSD) is more challenging than collocated 
development, the need for coaching in such projects, which are 
often faced with serious issues related, e.g., to communication 
and trust, can be even greater.   
The agile coaches working with the team can either be 
external consultants, or internal agile experts. Companies often 
use a combination of both, with external consultants doing 
initial training and helping to kick-start agile development, as 
well as helping to initiate the development of internal coaches 
that later take over the coaching [2][5][7][11]. A good agile 
coach strives to make him or herself unnecessary as quickly as 
possible [3]. 
In this paper, we describe how three distributed software 
development projects from a large, global Scandinavia-based 
IT organization took agile practices into use with the help of a 
company internal coaching team. First, we present the 
challenges the case projects faced. Second, we describe how 
the coaches cooperated with the projects in adopting agile 
practices and supporting GSD practices. Third, we present how 
the projects benefitted from coaching. Finally, we discuss 
lessons learned. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II presents a 
brief literature review on agile coaching, Section III describes 
the research methods, Section IV presents the results, and 
finally Section V discusses the results and the limitations of the 
study, as well as presents proposals for future research topics.  
II.
 
P
REVIOUS 
W
ORK
 
Adopting and sustaining the use of agile methodologies can 
be greatly facilitated by the use of agile coaching. An agile 
coach is an experienced user and teacher of agile 
methodologies, who can take on many roles, such as teacher, 
facilitator, coach-mentor, conflict navigator, collaboration 
conductor, problem solver etc. to help teams adopt and 
improve their use of agile methodologies [3].  
While much of the focus in the literature has been on the 
mentoring and teaching aspects of agile coaches, there is also 
an emerging understanding of the ﬁlife-coachingﬂ role an agile 
coach sometimes need to take [3], as well as attempts to 
develop coaching frameworks based upon sports coaching 
analogies [11]. 
Benefits of coaching include improved understanding of 
agile practices and ways of working [2], better teamwork [10], 
higher product quality [13], and lower overall project cost [13].   
While an agile coach strives to teach a team to work 
independently as quickly as possible, at the organizational level 
there can often be a need for permanent, or at least long-term, 
availability of coaches to help roll-out, support and reinforce 
the use of agile practices. Thus, organizations often opt for 
developing internal coaches that combine an in-depth 
understanding of the organization, its customers, and processes 
with coaching skills and an excellence in the use of agile 
methodologies. Internal coaches can be developed through co-
coaching with experienced, sometimes external expert coaches, 
as well as by providing coaching training. [2][5][8].  
Existing literature on agile coaching describe the roles and 
ways of working of agile coaches, experiences in building agile 
coaches and coaching communities within organizations. A 
number of tutorials and workshops on agile coaching have also 
been arranged at various conferences [14][15][16][17][18][19]. 
While these reports are interesting, there is very little literature 
2011 Sixth IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-0-7695-4503-5/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2011.3384 on the particulars of coaching and building coach communities 
for globally distributed software development projects.  
In [7], the authors describe how they used remote 
mentoring to overcome problems with varying skill levels, 
building trust, and selling distributed agile development to 
management. Skillful persons at the main site were given the 
role of remote mentor. The role of the mentors were both to 
help guide the remote team, as well as monitor things the local 
team did that could have an impact on the remote team. 
Mentors reserved 20% of their working time for mentoring. In 
addition to the mentors on the main site, the local team also had 
local mentors that communicated actively with the remote 
mentors. Communication tools used included wikis, instant 
messaging, and Waccplanner. 
III.
 
M
ETHODOLOGY
 
A.
 
Case Study 
This study is based on a qualitative multiple-case study 
approach [1]. We used a case study approach since we wanted 
to get an in-depth understanding on how globally distributed 
projects are coached in practice. The studied coaching team 
was selected purposefully, i.e., we chose an information rich 
case [12] based upon availability.  
The projects were purposefully selected, by the researchers 
and coaches. We selected projects that had ongoing or recently 
finished coaching efforts. Some projects were selected based 
upon researcher familiarity based upon an earlier study.  
B.
 
Case Organization 
The case organization is a Scandinavia-based IT company 
providing software products and services. It has development 
centers both in Europe and in Asia. Typically, the development 
projects are distributed between two or several locations. 
The studied coaching team is located at a large software 
development center in an Eastern European country. All the 
projects coached by this team have at least part of the personnel 
located at that center. All the chosen three case projects were 
distributed between two sites: one project between the Eastern 
European center and Finland and two projects between the 
Eastern European center and Norway.  
C.
 
Data Collection 
The data collection method was semi-structured interviews. 
The researchers and the case company representatives 
discussed the interview goals and choosing the interviewees. 
We wanted to interview both case project representatives and 
coaches to understand the projects and coaching from both 
viewpoints. The final selection of the interviewees was made 
by the coaching team. We interviewed four coaches, including 
the coaching team leader, as well as six persons from three 
coached projects, i.e., two persons per project. The 
interviewees from the coached projects were persons who had 
worked closely or quite closely with the coaching team 
members. From each project we interviewed the local project 
manager / team leader and one senior developer, both located 
at the Eastern European site. 
All interviews lasted 1-2 hours, and were carried out in 
English. None of the interviewees or the researchers were 
native English speakers. The two researchers were present in 
all the interviews, one being the main interviewer, the other 
one presenting supporting questions and taking detailed notes. 
All the interviews were tape recorded. 
The interviews were relatively loosely structured and 
conversational in order to maintain adaptability to the 
individual experiences and projects. All the interviews were 
performed during one week in May 2010.  
D.
 
Data Analysis 
All the interviews were transcribed by a professional 
transcription company. The first round of analysis was made 
based on the interview notes. Based on this analysis categories 
for coding were created. The transcribed interviews were then 
coded using the created categories. Finally, the data was 
extracted from the coded interviews under 16 categories, such 
as problems in the case project, changes suggested by coaches, 
collaboration with coaches, and benefits of coaching.  
IV.
 
R
ESULTS
 
A.
 
The Coaching Team 
At the time of the interviews, the coaching team had existed 
for five years. During this time the team had grown from two 
to eight coaches, and had altogether coached over 50 projects. 
In approximately half of the projects the coaches had been 
involved only for a brief time, e.g., by assessing the project and 
at the same time mapping their problems and giving the project 
guidelines on how to improve. The second half of the projects 
had built a long-term coaching relationship with the coaching 
team, which meant the involvement of the coaches in most 
cases for over a year. 
The coaching team had not actively marketed their services, 
since they were constantly offered more work that they could 
handle. Most contacts were taken informally, in trainings or 
workshops given by the team, or even when meeting in the 
corridors. The management sometimes contacted the team as 
well, involving them in troubled projects. Quite often, projects 
request only ﬁa little bit of helpﬂ, but soon the need of help and 
coaching activities gets broader and broader. Typically, when 
the coaches are contacted, the project is in a crisis.  
The coaches aim to work in pairs as much as possible to be 
able to discuss the challenges and solutions of the case projects 
together, since cases are always different and very challenging, 
so no standard solutions are available. Junior coaches are 
trained by working in pairs with more experienced senior 
coaches. According to the interviewed coaches it takes 
approximately one year to train a junior coach, before he or she 
is ready to work as a primary coach. The background of the 
current coaching team members was technical; before joining 
the coaching team, they had all worked in development 
projects, many of them in distributed projects. 
The coaching team teaches their customer projects agile 
and lean ways of working, thus they feel it important to use the 
same practices they teach to the case projects also inside their 
85 own coaching team. In their team they use weekly iterations, 
starting on Mondays with ﬁIteration Planning and Assessment 
Meetingﬂ and ending on Friday afternoons with ﬁRetrospective 
Meetingﬂ. By working as a team and changing pairs the 
coaching team tries to maximize the learning and knowledge 
transfer inside the team. 
The coaching team has a ﬁdeep and narrowﬂ approach, 
which means that they prefer taking a long term responsibility 
of the case project: They help the project to identify 
improvement needs, and create an improvement roadmap. 
They support each step of following the roadmap, until the 
project can gradually follow continuous improvement steps on 
its own. During the most intensive coaching phase the case 
project receives daily support from the coaches: facilitation of 
activities, such as planning, estimation, retrospectives and daily 
meetings, as well as support for problem solving and answering 
questions. The coaches ﬁliveﬂ with the case project: they 
participate in meetings, and give advice and feedback after the 
meetings. More information on how this coaching team works 
can be found from our earlier article [21]. 
At the time of the interviews the coaching team provided 
their services for free, since they were paid from the company 
common budget. However, there was discussion whether this 
service should be paid by the projects. 
B.
 
Case Projects 
Facts of our case projects ar
e collected to Table 1.  
Table 1. Case projects 
Case Banking Telecom Energy  
Customer 
industry 
Bank 
Telecom operator Energy companies 
Project type 
Customer 
specific 
application, 
change from 16 
to 32 bits 
Development and 
maintenance of a 
customer specific 
software  
Development and 
maintenance of  a 
legacy software 
product 
Distribution 
(#personnel 
min-max) 
Finland (6-15), 
Eastern 
European 
country (6-10) 
Norway (7-15), 
Eastern European 
country  (10-16) 
Norway (15-30), 
Eastern European 
country (6-30) 
Project 
length 
2004 - ongoing 2007 - ongoing 1980™s - ongoing 
(Transfer during 
2009) 
Coaching 
period 
2008 - ongoing 2007-2010 2009- ongoing 
Situation 
when 
coaching 
started 
Challenged 
project 
New collaboration 
starting  
Challenged 
project, transfer to 
other site planned 
Process 
change 
From waterfall 
to RUP 
First Scrum, then 
ﬁScrumbanﬂ  
From waterfall to 
Scrum 
 
A description of each case is given in connection with the 
results in sections C, D and E. In each of those sections we 
present the results of one case, starting with a presentation of 
the case project and the challenges it faced when the coaches 
were contacted. Then, we present the solutions that were 
applied with the help of the coaches. Finally, we discuss the 
benefits of coaching and the lessons learned. 
C.
 
Banking Case 
1)
 
Case Description 
This case project, distributed between Finland and the 
Eastern European software center, was doing a conversion 
from 16 to 32 bits to a large legacy banking application. The 
project was sold to the end customer, a bank, in phases. After 
each phase the customer could decide whether to continue the 
conversion or not.  
The Eastern European team invited coaches to help them, 
after discussing the problems with coaches during coffee 
breaks and learning that coaches might be able to offer some 
help. The local project manager was especially hoping that the 
coaches could offer support in creating processes for their 
development, since at that moment they felt that they basically 
did not have a process. The coaches were involved in the 
project from the end of the second phase, when the project was 
in serious trouble. 
2)
 
Challenges 
The challenges of this project date, at least partially, back to 
the project sales phase when the amount of the work, and thus 
the costs, were clearly underestimated. This led to other 
problems, since cost cutting, including savings in testing, was 
taken as the guiding principle by the Finnish managers:  
ﬁThe first phase being, well, the disastrous phase. And from the disaster, 
which meant that the costs were over budget and the quality was not enough, 
they [Finns leading the project] started to focus on these things. And the 
second phase was nicknamed the quality improvement phase and the third 
phase was nicknamed cost-reducing phase.ﬂ 
ŒProject team member 
Waterfall type of process model was used. Specification, 
analysis and design were done in Finland, after which the 
development took place in the Eastern European center. Finally 
the testing was performed in Finland and the end customer took 
care of the acceptance testing. The work was divided into 
separate phases with not much overlap: 
ﬁAnd actually, when we started to cooperate with the coaches almost all 
the specification for all the applications which we have implemented until now 
had already been written. So, there was no way how to change the whole 
process of creating a new application, because specification had already been 
done for the most parts.ﬂ
 Œ  Project team member 
This caused also other problems for the development team, 
since many of the persons who had done the analysis and 
design were no longer working for the project when the 
development took place. Thus, there was no-one to ask, but a 
lot of questions. The conversion was agreed to be ﬁas isﬂ, but 
there was a mismatch: The 16 bit application was not always 
behaving according to the specification, so the developers were 
wondering which one they should follow, the old application or 
the documents. In spite of the ﬁas isﬂ deal the customer wanted 
to have some changes, as well. Moreover, there were no 
acceptance criteria, so developers were not sure what the 
customer would finally want and accept.  
Since the project had serious challenges, the Finnish project 
manager was changed four times during the first three phases. 
This of course showed as discontinuity to team members, when 
all new project managers tried solve the challenges in the 
project by different means, without clear successes. 
3)
 
Solutions 
86 Iterations, planning and assessment meetings
. The first 
change the coaches introduced to the Eastern European team 
was four-week iterations with planning meetings in the 
beginning and assessment meetings in the end. At that time, the 
case company was using iterative RUP model as a new 
recommended process model, thus this was a model that 
affected on the recommendations by the coaches. The coaches 
helped in creating and taking into use new ways of working, as 
well as new tools, e.g., to set up JIRA to support the new 
processes. Moreover, they helped in quality improvements, e.g. 
in improving the quality of code, as well as to set up a testing 
team and automated testing at the Eastern European site.  
Vision for continuous improvement.
 The coaches created 
together with the Eastern European development team a vision 
and process for continuous improvement:  
ﬁWe had a vision what to do. We had some end point where we would like 
to come. But it takes quite a long time. So we were all the time or by small steps 
doing all these small increments. So it was continuous work. Using coaches is 
not for one or two months. You can do it this way, but still, it™s better in some 
longer time.ﬂ
  - Project team member 
One team.
 The coaches suggested that the project personnel 
should behave as a one team, not as two separate teams, one in 
Finland and the one at the Eastern European site. However, this 
was not so easy to accomplish. One of the efforts towards this 
goal was that the Eastern European team members started to 
give iteration demos directly to the Finnish end customer. This 
practice was quickly stopped by the management decision that 
the Finns should give the demos. The explanation to this was 
that the end customer feels more comfortable when being able 
to speak Finnish. The Eastern European team members did not 
like this decision: 
ﬂDefinitely that™s a bad decision, because the team should have some 
feedback from the customer. That™s actually one of the basic points of agile way 
of working, which has been decided to be implemented at [the Eastern 
European site] as a process. It was a bad decision, but we couldn™t do anything 
about it.ﬂ 
Œ Project team member 
The Eastern European team members suspected that the 
reason for this decision might have been their quite direct 
comments to the end customer: 
ﬁThat we mentioned at the last demonstration which we had with the 
customer, that the application is not ve
ry well tested, because there is much 
more code implemented than the testers are able to test.ﬂ
 Œ Project team 
member 
The Eastern European team members felt that the lack of 
testing capacity was the biggest bottleneck in the project and 
had discussed this several times with the Finns without 
satisfactory results. The decision regarding demos cut this first 
direct contact between the Eastern European team members 
and the end customer. Instead, they had to communicate with 
the end customer through a ﬁFinnish proxyﬂ, i.e. the Finnish 
project manager. The Eastern European team members felt that 
this communication was not good enough: 
ﬁWe got a feeling that he is not telling us everything, and not telling us 
everything that the customer thinks or what we should know, but also not 
telling everything what we are saying to th
e customer. (–) It is important that 
the project manager, who is our proxy in this case should tell us everything.ﬂ
 Œ
Project team member 
The aim, one distributed team, was still quite far.  
Selling changes to the other site.
 In the third phase, the 
project faced another serious drawback, when the Eastern 
European developers had made some changes to the 
architecture on their own: 
ﬂWe tried to make the architecture better so we could work more 
efficiently and make also the maintenance easier.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
However, the Finnish site was not happy about these 
changes. Instead, they required all the changes to be removed. 
Thus, basically everything achieved at the Eastern European 
site during that iteration had to be rewritten and the team had 
nothing to deliver to the end customer. There were rumors 
about stopping the whole project. The Finnish project 
management travelled to the Eastern European site. The 
Eastern European team decided to involve the coaches in the 
discussion on how to continue the project and the cooperation 
between the sites. The coaches helped, e.g., by showing the 
Finnish project manager, project owner and branch manager 
the development process the Eastern European team was using: 
ﬁAnd the process how we are doing things was explained to the Finnish 
side, because until that time, it was not absolutely clear for them how we work. 
And they maybe imagined it in different way. So, coaches helped with 
explaining things.ﬂ 
Œ Project team member 
The meeting was successful: 
ﬁAlmost all of what we proposed or what we hoped we could get for the 
rest of the third phase was approved or agreed.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
The main success of this meeting was of course that the 
project continued. Besides that, the meeting resulted in other 
beneficial things to the project and especially to the Eastern 
European site: more communication between the sites and 
more power to the local project manager. At the time of the 
interviews, when the fourth phase of the project was about to 
start, the iterative process, already taken into use at the Eastern 
European site, was planned to be taken into use at the Finnish 
site, as well. Moreover, the plan was that the Eastern European 
team would be able to meet and stay in frequent contact with 
the end customer. Thus, besides supporting the changes, the 
coaches helped in selling the changes. 
The interviewed Eastern European team members did not 
yet regard this as an agile project, but saw that the 
improvements planned for the fourth phase will take the project 
already much closer to agile.  
4)
 
Collaboration with Coaches 
The main collaboration forum in this project was a regular 
one-hour weekly meeting between the coaches and a few 
senior Eastern European team members. In the beginning of the 
collaboration, this meeting was more like a training of agile 
principles and practices and how to implement them. Later on 
it became a collaboration forum to discuss specific issues and 
improvements in the project: 
ﬂWe were using coaches not as teachers to tell us, ok, do it this way, but 
all the time we are chatting, ok, we have got this problem, and they say maybe 
you could try to study and look at this
, or we can tell you how some other 
project has done or something like this. So, really continuous work. And when 
the problems came we were solving them.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
At the time of the interviews there were plans to involve the 
whole Eastern European team into close collaboration with the 
coaches: 
87 ﬁNow we are trying to have those regular meetings also with other team 
members, as we think that it™s essential also for everyone to understand why we 
come with such decisions after each such discussion with coaches. So this is 
one thing, involving all team members.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
In the beginning, the coaches supported the team by 
participating in the team meetings, such as planning and 
assessment meetings, and taught the team how to run these 
meetings.  
5)
 
Benefits of Coaching 
Our interviewees were very satisfied with the help from the 
coaches and even commented that coaching saved the project.  
ﬁAlmost all new things which are at the moment on the project came from 
the coaches or from our chat with them.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
The quality improved significantly and bug fixing times 
dropped. The new processes helped the Eastern European team 
to work transparently, and thus build trust with the Finnish site. 
The end customer started to receive deliveries once a month 
and was able to run tests already during the development, thus 
being able to take the application into production use earlier. 
Our interviewees suspected that without the help from the 
coaching team they most probably would have made some 
architecture related improvements and taken some new tools 
into use, but probably not made any process related 
improvements, e.g. iterations. One of our interviewees 
described how the project would most probably look like at the 
moment if the coaches had not been invited:  
 
ﬁSo having real waterfall (–) and the quality would be really bad, and 
the customer would be so disappointed that there wouldn™t be a chance of 
starting phase four. I think we would have ended the project at April last year.ﬂ 
Œ Project team member 
6)
 
Lessons Learned 
The project was close to a catastrophe, when the coaches 
came into the picture. Even though the coaching most probably 
saved this project, this case clearly demonstrates that coaching 
only one site in a distributed project is not very effective. The 
biggest problems in the project involved both sites: lacking and 
ill functioning processes and the lack of collaboration between 
the sites. Thus, solving these problems by coaching only one 
site is impossible. However, in this case the Eastern European 
team and coaches finally managed to involve the other site, as 
well. Thus our interviewees were at least somewhat hopeful 
regarding the future of the project.  
D.
 
Telecom Case 
1)
 
Case Description 
This case is about building and maintaining a customer 
specific application for a telecom company. The case is a 
continuum of projects between the customer, a Norwegian 
branch of a Scandinavian telecom company, and the Eastern 
European software center of our case company. In this case, the 
relationship between the partner companies started as a one-
year long development project of a component to larger 
application developed by the Norwegian customer company. 
The Norwegian customer had own developers, but in this 
project the whole development work was done by a 16-person 
development team from the Eastern European software center, 
with support of two architects and a project manager from the 
customer company. After the component was finished the 
collaboration between the companies continued: a few 
developers from the Eastern European team participated in the 
maintenance of the application. After a few months, the 
Norwegian customer wanted to broaden the collaboration again 
to consist of maintenance and further development of 15 
services and applications. At this time also the development 
was distributed between the sites. Two distributed teams, each 
of them having two developers from the Eastern European 
center and 4-5 persons from Norway, had their own 
subprojects. In addition, four Eastern European developers 
concentrated on maintenance work and two Eastern European 
testers served both development and maintenance. In this 
paper, this whole continuum of projects is dealt with as one 
case. 
In this case the coaches were briefly involved already in the 
beginning of the first project, when the local project manager 
asked for their advice, as he was new in his role. Frequent 
collaboration started after a couple of months and continued 
until the end of the one-year project. During the following year, 
the collaboration was infrequent until the case organization 
wanted to change the contract with the end-customer as service 
based, which required some changes in the ways of working, as 
well. Thus, coaches were invited to assist in this.  
2)
 
Challenges 
The project team of 16 developers from the Eastern 
European center was created almost over-night when the 
project started. The team members did not know each other 
previously. The team was quite inexperienced in many 
aspects: most of the team members were juniors, their English 
skills were not very good and none of them had previous 
experience of Scrum. The customer was using Scrum and thus 
requested the team to use Scrum, as well. 
3)
 
Solutions 
Agile trainings.
 In the beginning the coaches arranged short 
basic agile trainings to the Eastern European development 
team to introduce them to agile and Scrum. 
Co-located kick-off and knowledge transfer period.
 The 
coaches suggested that the proj
ect would start by a collocated 
working period. Thus, the Eastern European team members 
moved to Norway for one month to work with the customer™s 
people, to get acquainted with the product and to start with 
knowledge transfer. The developers were given an opportunity 
to meet some final users of the system, as well as customer™s 
marketing personnel.    
Ambassador.
 The coaches suggested that an ambassador or 
bridge, a member of the Eastern European development team 
would move to Norway to be a contact person at the 
customer™s site. In the beginning, this ambassador 
concentrated especially on facilitation of communication 
between the sites; he helped in solving problems and finding 
correct persons to answer questions coming from the Eastern 
European team, he solved misunderstanding and helped in 
language difficulties by communicating in English with the 
customer and explaining the communication in his own 
language to his team members. Later on, when communication 
started to run more and more on its own, the ambassador has 
88 concentrated on maintaining th
e backlog. He collects tasks 
from the customer organization and participates in customer™s 
meetings where the backlo
g items are prioritized. 
Penalty points for lack of communication
. The contract with 
the customer was based on delivered story points. During the 
couple of first iterations the Eastern European development 
team was able to deliver as planned, but then problems started 
to add up. The main reasons were the long response time of 
customer™s personnel to the questions coming from the team 
and the problems with customer™s testing environment. The 
coaches were asked for help. The solution to long response 
time was defined penalties to support fast responses from the 
customer. If the team had to wait for more than eight hours for 
an answer, they got one story point, which was then converted 
to money. The same solution was applied to customer™s testing 
environment. If a component was not running for more than 
eight hours, the team got one story point. To easily measure 
the delays in communication, they introduced a new issue type 
to Jira, called question. Whenever somebody in the 
development team had a question to customer personnel, he or 
she put that to Jira, as an issue.   
Kaizen workshop.
 In the last studied phase of this 
collaboration the case organiza
tion wanted to change the 
contract with the Norwegian customer as service based. At 
this phase the collaboration included both maintenance, as 
well as small scale development activities. The line manager 
from the Eastern European delivery center contacted the 
coaching team. The coaches suggested starting with process 
changes. According to them Kanban could be a better match 
than Scrum for a service level agreement. The first step was to 
arrange two ﬁKaizen workshopsﬂ led by the coaches. The 
workshops had participants from both locations: a couple of 
representatives from the Eastern European team, as well as a 
couple or architects and a couple of business managers from 
Norway. In the first workshop the root causes for the problems 
were cooperatively found and solutions drafted. The first 
version of the collaboration interface between the companies 
was defined. The decision about taking Kanban into use was 
made and a rough definition of the process was drafted. After 
one month, in the second collaborative workshop in Norway, 
the Kanban process was established.  
Scrumban.
 The process used at the time of the interviews 
was called ﬁScrumbanﬂ by our interviewees, since main part 
of the Scrum still remained: iterations with related meetings, 
as well as Daily Scums. Kanban board, with related stages in 
Jira was taken into use. The managers were not yet ready to 
give up iterations, since they were afraid that they could not be 
able to have enough control in pure Kanban.  
Distributed Daily Scrums.
 The distributed projects have a 
daily scrum meeting over Skype with a camera. It is a stand-
up meeting around one computer in at both sites:  
ﬂOn one screen we have this Jira plug-in and see the Kanban board and on 
a different screen we have the video conference, so we can see the people. It™s 
better, because we feel that we are together. It™s important to have this 
feeling, I think we are one team, not that there is somebody in [city in 
Norway] and somebody here in [city in the Eastern European county] .ﬂ
 Œ 
Project team member  
Collocated iteration planning.
 Both maintenance and 
development projects have still iterations and in the beginning 
of the iteration the Eastern European team members usually 
travel to Norway for a planning meeting. 
Rotating ambassador.
 The ambassador sitting in Norway 
wanted to concentrate more on development, thus in a Kaizen 
workshop the role of a rotating ambassador was created. This 
role is divided between two members of the Eastern European 
team. One person at a time spends a few weeks in Norway and 
then a few weeks at the home site, before the next one travels 
to Norway for a few weeks. 
4)
 
Collaboration with Coaches 
In this case the collaboration with the coaches was partially 
irregular. In the beginning of the project the local project 
manager asked one of the coaches for advice, when he was 
starting in a new role, in managing a distributed project that 
would be using Scrum. However, at this point ﬁofficialﬂ 
coaching did not yet start. After a couple of months, when the 
project faced problems, the project manager discussed with 
that coach again. A regular 2-hour weekly meeting cycle was 
established between the coaches, the local project manager 
and a couple of senior team members. In the beginning, these 
meetings were more like trainings facilitated by the coaches. 
Later on the emphasis changed, mainly the current problems 
and possible solutions were discussed. Between the meetings 
the project team worked on implementing the solutions. When 
this first project ended and maintenance phase started, the 
collaboration changed to irregular again. The two Kaizen 
workshops were the next major collaborative effort, after 
which this case continued in self-improvement phase. 
The coaches explained that this case has not been high 
priority for them, since it is going fairly well, and they have 
other more business critical cases. However, this case has been 
important as a learning experience for the coaches, since in 
this case the people were open to new things. Thus the 
coaches could experiment with new ideas, e.g. regarding 
Kanban, which they could later on use in other cases. 
5)
 
Benefits of Coaching 
Our interviewees gave only positive comments regarding 
the collaboration with the coaches. They believed that even 
without coaches they would have tried Scrum, since customer 
requested that, but would have been more difficult: 
ﬁI think that without those coaches, of course we would try to find a way 
how to fix the things ourselves, but if you don™t have experience from tens of 
projects and you are not specialized for the processes and so on, it™s hard to 
see all the consequences of the ideas you have.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
After the first couple of months the project faced 
challenges. The coached were asked to help. The penalty point 
system that they suggested proved to be successful:  
ﬁ(–) we where in red numbers (–) and then it switched, and at the end 
the project was very successful on all, (–
) the customer was very satisfied. (–) 
we absolutely saved a lot of money after all those improvements were 
implemented.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
89 The Kaizen workshop arranged by the coaches was seen by 
our interviewees as one of the biggest benefits of coaching: 
 
ﬁI think it was this first Kaizen workshop. It was the major benefit and 
also contribution to the project (–) because they really (–) inspired the 
customer about changes.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
 
Even though the Kaizen workshop was already a success, 
one of our interviewees suggested how it could be even further 
improved: 
 
ﬁSo probably a good idea is that all of them [developers] will be 
participating in the Kaizen workshop. Because after that, we have to as 
developers try to explain the changes. 
And it™s not like when explained by the 
coaches.ﬂ
  - Project team member 
6)
 
Lessons Learned 
In this case collaboration with the coaching team started 
already in the project planning phase, thus the coaches could 
influence already the first decisions regarding the practices 
used in the project. They, e.g. suggested ambassador role and 
collocated working period in the beginning. Thus, serious 
mistakes were avoided. Moreover, the coaches followed the 
project quite frequently, thus problems could be solved, before 
they grew too big, e.g. the problem of long response time from 
the customer could have caused serious consequences, if not 
solved. The coaches facilitated two Kaizen workshops, in 
which representatives of both parties of this distributed 
collaboration searched the root causes of challenges and 
drafted solutions. These workshops proved to be very 
successful in unifying the views of different parties and led to 
the implementation of the new Kanban process. 
E.
 
Energy Case 
1)
 
Case Description 
This case is about the transfer of the main part of 
development and maintenance activities of a 15 year old 
legacy energy sector software product from the case 
company™s site in Norway to the same company™s software 
center in the Eastern European country. This product had been 
mainly developed and maintained in Norway by a 30-person 
team following a waterfall process. At the time of the transfer, 
the project had already employed during a couple of years a 
small team of around seven developers in that Eastern 
European center working with one area of the application. The 
transfer, which happened for the cost reasons, required the 
Eastern European software center to hire over 20 persons to 
the project, partially internally, partially externally. In the 
beginning, the idea was not to change the process model 
simultaneously with the transfer, even though agile processes 
interested project members in Norway and the local project 
manager in the Easter European center had already experience 
from a couple of agile projects. 
The Eastern European project manager contacted the 
coaches, who had helped him already in one of his previous 
agile projects. For the project manager, even though somewhat 
experienced in agile, this was the first ramp-up, and the first 
highly distributed project. Thus, he did not know what kind of 
problems to expect. The coaches came up with the suggestion 
of taking agile processes into use during the transfer ramp-up. 
After some selling work the suggestion was accepted.     
2)
 
Challenges 
The project was challenged before the transfer. It was losing 
money. The production process was not in a good shape, the 
project suffered from bad quality, repetitive error corrections 
and late deliveries. The application was old and messy, the 
code was not well documented, and standards were not used. 
Partial reason for these last problems was probably that 
several third party companies had been involved in the 
implementation earlier, all doing things a bit differently. New 
developers joining the project complained that it takes a lot of 
time to study and understand the application before being able 
to implement anything new. 
The main challenge for the transfer project was to carry out 
both a transfer and a process chan
ge to agile while keeping the 
production up and running. 
3)
 
Solutions 
Agile transformation combined with transfer ramp-up
. The 
first major suggestion made by the coaches was to change the 
waterfall process model to agile and do it right away, at the 
same time with the transfer of the main part of work to the 
Eastern European software center. 
Agile trainings.
 The project members in Norway were 
interested in agile and wanted to participate in an agile 
training. This was a selling opportunity for the coaching team. 
Thus, one of the coaches travelled to Norway to give an agile 
training. After the training the Norwegian team leaders were 
so excited about agile, that their project manager agreed with 
the suggestion made by the coaches on the agile 
transformation while the transfer ramp-up. Later on, the 
coaches arranged a few more agile trainings to educate all 
project members at both locations.  
Distributed teams.
 All teams formed around six product 
areas were designed to be distributed both during the transfer, 
and after that. Namely, the Norwegian team members were 
very experienced; they knew the application, as well as the 
customers. Thus, all direct customer communication was 
planned to be taken care of by the Norwegians, also in the 
future, whereas the main part of the development and 
maintenance work was transferred to the Eastern European 
software center. All the distributed teams had at least a 
Norwegian team leader, as well as a Norwegian Product Area 
Manager, which was the main role in taking care of direct 
customer communication.   
A series of co-located hands-on knowledge transfer periods.
 
The transfer was started by the Eastern European team 
members spending a couple weeks in Norway. During the next 
three months they travelled back and forth. From every team 
the Eastern European members visited Norway 2-3 times for a 
couple weeks at the time and between the trips worked a 
couple of weeks in their own office. The knowledge transfer 
was based on hands-on work on the application. 
Two pairs of coaches ﬁlivingﬂ with the project teams
. Four 
coaches supported the project during the first few months of 
the transfer. The coaches worked in pairs, each pair supporting 
90 a few teams. The coaches helped the teams in everything, 
from carrying out the daily Scrum meetings to taking coding 
standards into use. After the first few months, the teams 
needed less support, thus the coaches gradually moved to the 
background.       
Distributed Daily Scrums, planning and assessment 
meetings.
 Since all teams were distributed, all the team 
meetings were normally distributed, as well. Both 
teleconference and videoconference was used. Especially in 
the beginning, the coaches participated regularly in most of 
those meetings to help the teams:  
ﬁThey kind of started to participate in those meetings with us to see how we 
are doing and give ideas what you can do better in those meetings to make 
them effective, to see more problems. (–) And they were kind of monitoring 
the progress, if we are doing better and better each time, and trying to see the 
good points, the bad points, telling us the good points and the bad points. (–) 
and if we had a struggle with any of those processes (–) then we would ask 
them and they would say ok, now you do this and this and the outcome of that 
should be like this. And so, they were really like guides following your work, 
but not disturbing you.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
Team leader meetings.
 The team leaders and project 
managers had weekly distributed teleconference meetings, 
where the team leaders were sharing what had happened 
during the week and what everyone was struggling with. The 
coaches participated in those meetings, as well. 
ﬁPointing out problems is okﬂ.
 The coaches helped in 
visualizing the problems and creating a feeling in the project 
that it is ok to find and point out the problems. Our 
interviewees from the Eastern European center explained that 
the mentality in their country has been that: 
ﬁIf there™s a problem just be quiet, don™t tell anyone, try to solve it on your 
own, and don™t point yourself out by saying somewhere is a problem.ﬂ
            
- Project team member 
The interviewees explained that this mentality comes from 
the history, the country has often been under the power of 
some other country and if you were a ﬁtroublemakerﬂ there 
was a risk that you ended up to jail. Thus, earlier the practice 
had been to try to solve problems on your own somehow, so 
that the upper management would not see the problems. This 
caused a lot of stress and people were exhausted. The coaches 
helped in visualizing the problems and creating the 
atmosphere of sharing and discussing the problems:  
ﬁAnd they helped us learn that if you don™t say it, you still have it, and 
you™ll never get rid of it. (–) You feel better in the workplace now. (–) So it 
really helped to open up the atmosphere, to stop being afraid to say 
something, so it helped to solve the problems.ﬂ
 Œ Project team member 
Travelling coach
. During the intensive transformation phase 
the coaching was concentrated
 in the Eastern European 
development center. Since the teams were distributed there 
was a need for a coach counterpart also in Norway. A person 
for that role had already been chosen from the Norwegian site, 
but due to his other obligations, this person finally refused the 
role. Therefore, it was decided that one of the Eastern 
European coaches would spend 1,5 months in Norway. His 
goals were to first understand how people were working there 
and second to assist them to solve their current challenges, 
such as improvement of the estimation process and setting up 
the Team Foundation Server. 
4)
 
Collaboration with Coaches 
In this case the collaboration with the coaches was really 
intensive during the first few months of the transformation. 
The project had four coaches supporting the teams almost full-
time, as described earlier. During these first months the 
coaches participated in most of the team meetings and helped 
the teams step by step to improve their ways of working.  
ﬂThey are doing it all the time step by step. ‚Ok, now you learned 
something, now let™s focus on the next step to make it even better.™ﬂ
 Œ Project 
team member 
The coaches participated in the weekly team leader 
meetings, as well as had a weekly meeting with the local 
project manager to follow-up the transformation progress. 
When the intensive phase was over, the coaches gradually 
moved on to support other projects, while only one coach 
remained. His job was to support the teams in continuous 
improvements. Teams could contact him whenever having 
problems, and time to time he dropped in to the team meetings 
to see how they were doing. At the time of the interviews, the 
project was working to reach CMMI level three, with help of 
this coach. After reaching this target, the plan was that the 
project would move to self-improvement phase and also the 
last coach would leave.  
5)
 
Benefits of Coaching 
The project benefitted greatly from the coaching, which in 
this case was very intensive. The coaches supported the teams 
in taking the agile practices into use, and visualizing and 
solving the problems, as soon as they occurred. Without 
coaching, according to our interviewees the project could look 
like this:  
 ﬁThe project would be still the same and struggle with the same problems. 
(–) it™s faster when somebody who understands these new things help you, 
than that you have to struggle on your own (–) I would say maybe, it takes 
maybe four, five times longer [without coaches]. (–) because of the project 
size, because you have to learn how to do it, but even then you are not sure if 
this is correct way. Then there are misunderstandings. Then you have to learn 
based on your failures. And it can be even more than five times, so–ﬂ
 Œ 
Project team member 
6)
 
Lessons Learned 
In this case, the coaches were invited already before the 
transfer project started, which gave them a good possibility to 
influence on some important decisions. They, e.g. successfully 
sold the idea of combining 
the transfer with agile 
transformation to the project lead
ers. Moreover, in this project 
both sites, as well as the project leaders were involved in and 
committed to coaching already from the beginning, which 
made a very good starting point for coaching. 
The development work of a project being in red number was 
transferred reasonably fast to a new site and at the same time 
the process was changed from waterfall to agile. This does not 
seem like an easy task. This project might well have ended up 
as a catastrophe, but it did not. Thus, most probably many 
91 things were done correctly and the support by four mentors 
certainly helped tremendously. 
V.
 
D
ISCUSSION AND 
C
ONLUSIONS 
 
A.
 
Cross-case summary 
This paper presented a study on three distributed projects 
all taking into use a new, more agile software development 
process supported by a company internal coaching team. In all 
the cases the process model taken into use was different. In the 
banking case the change was from waterfall to iterative RUP 
model. In the telecom case Scrum was taken into use first, 
since the customer required it and later on, in connection to a 
contract model change to service level agreement, started a 
change towards Kanban. In the Energy case the waterfall 
model was changed to Scrum, while at the same time 
transferring most of the work to the other site. 
The Banking project, was seriously challenged already 
before the process change. In this project the coaching 
concentrated on the Eastern European site, where also the 
process transformation took place. The Finnish site was not 
really involved in the change. Thus, it seems that in this case 
the process changes and coaching did not help the project as 
much as it could have. In the other two cases both sites were 
involved in the change already from the beginning, thus in 
these cases the agile process was really used in the 
collaboration between the sites. In these two cases the coaches 
participated in planning GSD practices for supporting the 
collaboration between the sites, which certainly benefitted the 
cases, as well. 
The Energy case differed from the other two cases in that 
the agile transformation was combined with the transfer of the 
major part of development activities to the other site. This 
very challenging combination succeeded, at least partially 
because the coaches invested in 
this case more time than they 
normally do. The other cases were supported by one or two 
part-time coaches, while in this case four almost full-time 
coaches were involved during the first few months.  
B.
 
Lessons Learned 
In this section we summarize the most important lessons 
learned from our case projects on coaching globally distributed 
software development projects: 
Ensure executive support from a high enough level and 
from all the sites.
 The higher management finally decides if the 
project is allowed to make process changes and use resources 
to this change. The Banking project did not have that kind of 
support from the management of the Finnish site, thus the 
Czech site had to fight to be able to do changes. 
Involve all distributed sites in the process change and 
ensure their commitment.
 Coaching only one of the sites and 
changing process only there, might be better than doing 
nothing. However, really taking agile process into use in a 
distributed project should include all the sites. Namely, in a 
distributed project the most difficult problems are most often 
between the sites, e.g., in communication and collaboration 
between the sites. Earlier studies have showed that agile 
processes, such as Scrum, improve communication and add 
visibility across the sites. However, to reap all the benefits, all 
the sites need to be using the same agile practices. 
Involve coaches in ﬁsellingﬂ the changes to the other sites 
and the management.
 Coaches have experience from several 
projects and from several change processes, thus they can help 
in explaining why changes are needed, what they mean in 
practice and what the consequences are. As outsides to the 
project, coaches will provide an objective view to the project, 
which might help, as well. In our case projects the help from 
the coaches in ﬁsellingﬂ the changes both to the other sites and 
the management was highly valued. 
Ensure that coaches have knowledge of successful GSD 
practices.
 As noticed in our case projects, besides helping in 
taking the agile practices into use, the coaches suggested and 
helped the projects to take into use many successful GSD 
practices, such as ambassador, and collocated working periods. 
Moreover, in distributed projects agile practices need to be 
applied, so that they can be used in spite of the distribution, 
thus coaches™ experience from GSD projects is essential. 
Involve coaches already in the planning phase of a new 
project.
 By involving the coaches early, they can help in 
planning suitable processes and GSD practices for the project. 
Thus, unnecessary mistakes could be avoided. One of our case 
projects, the Telecom project, involved the coaches in planning 
the practices before the project even started, which proved to 
be a good decision. In the Energy project, the coaches were 
involved before the planned transfer of development to the 
Eastern European site and the change to agile with very good 
results. 
Start the change by arranging a collaborative workshop 
with coaches and representatives from all the sites to create a 
common vision.
 It is important to involve both development 
personnel, as well management and business people to this 
workshop. In one of the cases, the Telecom project, a couple of 
these kinds of workshops were arranged, during which the 
participants unified their views on the root causes of the 
challenges, and agreed together on new processes and action 
steps. The interviewed coaching team members told us that 
these ﬁKaizen workshopsﬂ are nowadays their standard tools 
that they use in most of the coached distributed projects. The 
interviewees from the Telecom project suggested that inviting 
everyone from the project team to the workshop would make it 
even more useful. However, in large projects that might not be 
possible. 
Agree on regular meetings with coaches
. Our case projects 
had regular, mostly weekly 1-2 hour meetings with the 
coaches, which they found very useful. During these meetings 
progress and problems were discussed and solutions created 
together. 
Aim for a long-term coaching relationship.
 Our 
interviewees emphasized that a long term coaching relationship 
is beneficial. In all case projects the coaching relationship had 
lasted at least one year, often longer. Even though the most 
intensive change period is over, having a regular contact with 
92 the coaches helps to ensure that processes do not start to 
deteriorate, continuous improvements are made, and problems 
are solved as soon as they occur. Coaches are in this self-
improvement phase a kind of back-up who can be asked for 
advice when team faces problems. 
Remember that the project team owns the change Œ the 
coaches cannot make it happen on behalf of the team.
 Our 
interviewees found it as important that the whole project team 
is involved and engaged in the change, the coaches are there 
just to help and support them. Moreover, even though the 
coaches were supporting mainly the project manager, they 
cannot take over that job. 
C.
 
Limitations 
As a multiple-case study of three distributed projects 
coached by one coaching team working for one company the 
generalizability of the results of this study is limited.  
Even though the interviewers had previous experience from 
two of the interviewed three case projects, the interviews of the 
current study provide a limited view on the case projects, as 
only two persons per project from only one site were 
interviewed. Thus, additional interviews, especially from the 
other sites could have provided additional insight. Moreover, 
the coached projects and the interviewees were not selected 
randomly, which might bring some bias to the selection.  
D.
 
Future Research 
In the future, we are planning to augment this study by 
collecting quantitative data on the success of coached and non-
coached case projects to be able to quantify the benefits of 
coaching.  
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
The author gratefully acknowledges the financial support of 
the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation 
(Cloud Software Program). My thanks go to the Case 
Company for making this study possible. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
 Yin, R.K. 1994 Case Study Research, Designs and Methods, Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, California, 1994. 
[2]
 
S. Hanly, L. Waite, L. Meadows, and R. Leaton. Agile coaching in 
british telecom: Making strawberry jam. In AGILE, pages 194Œ202. 
IEEE Computer Society, 2006. 
[3]
 
L. Adkins. Coaching Agile Teams: A Companion for ScrumMasters, 
Agile Coaches, and Project Managers in Transition. Addison-Wesley, 
2010. 
[4]
 
G. Hedin, L. Bendix, and B. Magnusson. Coaching coaches. In M. 
Marchesi and G. Succi, editors, Extreme Programming and Agile 
Processes in Software Engineering, 4th International Conference, XP 
2003, Genova, Italy, May 25-29, 2003 Proceedings, volume 2675 of 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 154Œ160. Springer, 2003. 
[5]
 
A. Padula. Organically growing internal coaches. In Y. Dubinsky, T. 
Dybå, S. Adolph, and A. S. Sidky, editors, 2009 Agile Conference, 
Chicago, IL, USA, 24-28 August 
2009, pages 237Œ242
. IEEE Computer 
Society, 2009. 
[6]
 
R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall. Organizing self-organizing teams. In 
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on 
Software Engineering - Volume 1, ICSE ™10, pages 285Œ294, New 
York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM. 
[7]
 
J. J. Shrinivasavadhani and V. Panicker. Remote mentoring a distributed 
agile team. In AGILE, pa
ges 322Œ326. 
IEEE, 2008. 
[8]
 
K. Silva and C. Doss. The growth of an agile coach community at a 
fortune 200 company. In Proceedings of the AGILE 2007, pages 225Œ
228, Washington, DC, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer Society. 
[9]
 
W. Krebs. Turning the knobs: A coaching pattern for XP through agile 
metrics. In D. Wells and L. A. Williams, editors, Extreme Programming 
and Agile Methods - XP/Agile Universe 2002, Second XP Universe and 
First Agile Universe Conference Chicago, IL, USA, August 4-7, 2002, 
Proceedings, volume 2418 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 
60Œ69. Springer, 2002. 
[10]
 
B. Victor and N. Jacobson. We didn™t quite get it. In Agile Conference, 
2009. AGILE ™09., pages 271 Œ274, 2009. 
[11]
 
P. Brennan. What agile teams can learn from sports coaching. In A. 
Sillitti, A. Martin, X. Wang, and E. Whitworth, editors, Agile Processes 
in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming, 11th International 
Conference, XP 2010, Trondheim, Norway, June 1-4, 2010. 
Proceedings, volume 48 of Lecture Notes in Business Information 
Processing, pages 269Œ276. Springer, 2010. 
[12]
 
M. Q. Patton. Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Sage 
Publications, Newbury Park, Calif., 2nd edition, 1990. 
[13]
 
C. Ebert, C. H. Parro, R. Suttels, and H. Kolarczyk. Better validation in 
a world-wide development environment. Software Metrics, IEEE 
International Symposium on, 0:298, 2001. 
[14]
 
R. Davies and J. Pullicino. What does an agile coach do?  In P. 
Abrahamsson, M. Marchesi, and F. Maurer, editors, Agile Processes in 
Software Engineering and Extreme Programming, 10th International 
Conference, XP 2009, Pula, Sardinia, Italy, May 25-29, 2009. 
Proceedings, volume 31 of Lecture Notes in Business Information 
Processing, pages 198Œ199. Springer, 2009. 
[15]
 
R. Davies and L. Sedley. Exploring agile coaching. In P. Abrahamsson, 
R. Baskerville, K. Conboy, B. Fitzgerald, L. Morgan, and X. Wang, 
editors, Agile Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme 
Programming, 9th International Conference, XP 2008, Limerick, 
Ireland, June 10-14, 2008. Proceedings, volume 9 of Lecture Notes in 
Business Information Processing, pages 244Œ245. Springer, 2008. 
[16]
 
S. Fraser, E. Lundh, R. Davies, J. Eckstein, D. Larsen, and K. Vilkki. 
Perspectives on agile coaching. In P. Abrahamsson, M. Marchesi, and F. 
Maurer, editors, Agile Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme 
Programming, 10th International Conference, XP 2009, Pula, Sardinia, 
Italy, May 25-29, 2009. Proceedings, volume 31 of Lecture Notes in 
Business Information Processing, pages 271Œ276. Springer, 2009. 
[17]
 
S. Fraser, R. Reinitz, J. Eckstein, J. Kerievsky, E. Lundh, R. Mee, and 
M. Poppendieck. Coaching for agile and xtreme practices A fishbowl 
with piranhas. In M. Marchesi and G. Succi, editors, Extreme 
Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering, 4th 
International Conference, XP 2003, Genova, Italy, May 25-29, 2003 
Proceedings, volume 2675 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 
451Œ454. Springer, 2003. 
[18]
 
S. Fraser, R. Reinitz, J. Eckstein, J. Kerievsky, R. Mee, and M. 
Poppendieck. Xtreme programming and agile coaching. In R. Crocker 
and G. L. S. Jr, editors, Companion of the 18th Annual ACM SIGPLAN 
Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and 
Applications, OOPSLA 2003, October 26-30, 2003, Anaheim, CA, 
USA, pages 265Œ267. ACM, 2003. 
[19]
 
O. Hazzan and Y. Dubinsky. Coaching agile software projects: tutorial 
proposal - ICSE 2010. In J. Kramer, J. Bishop, P. T. Devanbu, and S. 
Uchitel, editors, Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International 
Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 2, ICSE 2010, Cape 
Town, South Africa, 1-8 May 2010, pages 481Œ482. ACM, 2010. 
[20]
 
E. Lundh. Elements of an art - agile coaching. In P. Abrahamsson, M. 
Marchesi, and F. Maurer, editors, Agile Processes in Software 
Engineering and Extreme Programming, 10th International Conference, 
XP 2009, Pula, Sardinia, Italy, May 25-29, 2009. Proceedings, volume 
31 of Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, pages 238Œ239. 
Springer, 2009. 
[21]
 
M.P
aasivaara, C. Lassenius. How Does an Agile Coaching Team Work?  
Proceedings of the International Conference on Software and Systems 
Process. May 21-22, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.
93