 Distributed Agile Development: Us
ing Scrum in a Large Project 
 
 
Maria Paasivaara, Sandra Dura
siewicz and Casper Lassenius 
Software Business and Engineering Institute 
Helsinki University of Technology 
P.O. Box 9210, FIN-02015 TKK, Finland 
firstname.lastname@tkk.fi 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
While seemingly incompatible, combining large-scale 
global software development and ag
ile practices is a chal-
lenge undertaken by many companies. Case study reports 
on the successful use of agile practices in small distributed 
projects already exist. How these practices could be ap-
plied to larger projects, how
ever, remains unstudied. This 
paper reports a case study on agile practices in a 40-
person development organizati
on distributed between Nor-
way and Malaysia. Based on seven
  interviews in the devel-
opment organization, we describe how Scrum practices 
were successfully applied, e.g., using teleconference and 
web cameras for daily scrum meetings, synchronized 4-
week sprints and weekly scrum-of-scrums. Additional agili-
ty supporting practices for distributed projects were identi-
fied, e.g., frequent visits, unofficial distributed meetings 
and annual gatherings are described
.
 
 
1.
 
Introduction 
Many software projects are faced with global software 
development (GSD), including outsourcing, subcontracting 
and partnerships. A lot of challenges related to GSD have 
been identified [12,19] and so
lutions to these have been 
proposed, e.g., dividing work into separate modules and 
making them independent in order to minimize communi-
cation between sites [10]. However, for software projects 
developing genuinely novel products, making a clear mod-
ular structure and minimizing communication might be 
difficult or even impossible. Projects with uncertain re-
quirements and implementation technologies cannot pro-
vide clear requirement specifications to all parties up front 
[23].  
In collocated software development this kind of project 
scenario led to the introduction of agile methods. At the 
bottom of these methods lies the assumption that software 
development is an empirical rather than a defined process 
and needs a different way of working than described in the 
waterfall model  [27,29].  
Cockburn proposes that agile methods are particularly 
suitable for development projects facing high uncertainty 
[5]. Nevertheless, agile methods cannot be simply taken 
into use in GSD as they rely heavily on face-to-face com-
munication [6], which is very seldom possible in distri-
buted projects. To gain benefits from agile development the 
practices need to be modified in order to apply to distri-
buted settings. 
Some case studies [8,9,21,31] have shown that agile 
methods such as Scrum [29] and XP [1] can be successfully 
customized to distributed projects. Even distributed ver-
sions of agile methods like distributed Scrum [32] and DXP 
[16] have been developed. 
Nevertheless, advice on pairing agile software devel-
opment and GSD, also referred to as distributed agile de-
velopment (DAD), is scarce. There are only a few reported 
experiences in applying DAD to industrial projects, e.g., 
[33,34]. However, it seems that quite many companies are 
interested in taking DAD into use, or have already started 
to use it.  
In particular, advice for large projects is missing in the 
literature. Existing publications are mostly limited to the 
use of XP in small and middle-sized GSD projects 
[3,11,20]. Although there are some experience reports dis-
cussing the aspects of Scrum in GSD [e.g., 2,14], no case 
studies have been performed on a distributed Scrum project 
with the aim of thoroughly describing the applied practices 
and their benefits and related challenges. The aim of this 
paper is to report on such a case study. 
This paper presents a single-case study of a large distri-
buted software development project that started to apply 
agile practices from Scrum. First, we present experiences 
reported in the literature on using agile practices in distri-
buted projects. Then, we describe our case study method 
and our findings. The results include experiences on how 
Scrum practices were applied in our case project, what kind 
of challenges were faced and what kind of other support 
practices were taken into use.  Finally, we discuss our find-
ings and suggest future research topics.   
2008 IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-0-7695-3280-6/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2008.3887 2.
 
Related Work 
Distributed software projects with volatile requirements 
and uncertain implementation technologies need effective 
practices to be organized and managed successfully. We 
performed a systematic literature review on practices used 
in distributed agile software development projects. Based 
on our findings from the literature we divided the practices 
into two groups: 1) agile practices, and 2) agility supporting 
distributed practices. Agile practices include practices that 
come from some agile method and are either used as such 
or applied to distributed projects. Agility supporting distri-
buted practices include practices that help to tackle some of 
the new challenges arising from DAD. They can be also 
known GSD practices that can help the project to be more 
agile. 
2.1
 
Agile practices 
The literature offers some advice especially on how to 
use Scrum and XP practices in distributed agile projects. 
The most frequently reported practice is the daily scrum 
meeting, as it provides at least a partial solution to one of 
the biggest challenges in GSD [19] and in DAD Œ commu-
nication [25,26,31]. The daily scrum meeting normally 
takes 15 minutes during which each team member answers 
the three scrum questions [28]: What did you do since last 
scrum meeting? Do you have any obstacles? What will you 
do before next meeting? Sutherland et al. recommends 
answering these three scrum questions before the scrum 
meeting via email to shorten the time needed for a telecon-
ference [32]. This approach also helps to overcome lan-
guage barriers. Berczuk reports that Skype with speaker 
and microphone, provides sufficient voice quality and is 
easy to set up for the scrum meetings [2]. The use of Web 
conferencing for these meetings has also been described 
[7,14]. According to [7], daily scrum meetings both en-
hance communication and provide a coordination mechan-
ism for everyone in the project. Jensen and Zilmer [14] add 
that these meetings greatly improve cross-team project 
management. Burndown charts displayed on the Wiki pag-
es for cross-location viewing [7] provide visibility for the 
project progress. 
Sprint planning and review meetings improve commu-
nication, coordination and team cohesion [12]. Usually the 
whole team participates in a planning meeting [1,28]. Due 
to time-zone differences it can be difficult to find a suffi-
cient block of time that suits all parties [2]. Thus, Layman 
et al. [18] suggest that only lead-developers take part in the 
planning meetings. Simons [31] on the other hand empha-
sizes the importance of the participation of the whole team 
to get the viewpoints of all team members. He suggests that 
pre-work should be done before the actual planning meet-
ing: customers and developers should clarify as many is-
sues as possible before the meetings to keep the actual 
planning meeting short since these kind of remote meetings 
held via web conference [18] or phone [31] are arduous. 
Berczuk [2] reports that sprint review meetings can be cen-
tered on the local team and the product owner to minimize 
the amount of remote meetings.  
Demonstrations of working functionalities can be ar-
ranged for customers at the end of every sprint [7,9]. They 
might be held using videoconferencing with desktop shar-
ing [23]. Jain [13] reports that a customer could try out a 
new feature using VNC to connect to the developer™s com-
puter. 
It might be difficult for an offshore team to have a busi-
ness customer working physically on their development site 
[31]. Instead, a proxy or a remote customer may help trans-
fer business domain knowledge from the customer to the 
developers, and thus enhance communication [21]. The 
remote customer communicates with the development team 
either through videoconferencing or email [16]. A further 
possibility is to send to the customer prototypes that he can 
test and comment [18]. A proxy customer is helpful when 
the real customer is unavailable to answer questions. The 
proxy customer can make decisions on the behalf of the 
real customer [18] and interface with the real customer 
when questions arise that he cannot answer [31]. 
2.2
 
Agility supporting distributed practices 
Besides agile practices, the literature on DAD reports 
practices that tackle some of the new challenges arising 
from DAD. Not only agile practices aid teams in DAD de-
velopment. Also known GSD practices can help a team to 
be more agile. Practices that have been created to solve 
problems caused by the distributedness of team members 
and that also help projects in their attempt to develop in an 
agile way are here referred to as ﬁagility supporting distri-
buted practicesﬂ.  
The challenges caused by the distribution include, for 
example, communication problems [2,16,25,26,31,32], lack 
of close physical proximity [12,22,34], lack of team cohe-
sion [26], lack of shared context and knowledge [31,34], 
and unavailability of team members [34]. 
The supporting distributed practices strive to provide 
solutions to some of the challenges. Frequent visits are used 
to build and maintain collaboration relationships between 
distributed team members [9]. A good collaboration rela-
tionship needs to be created for the remote communication 
to work effectively. There are two kinds of visits: seeding 
visits and maintaining visits. Seeding visits occur early in 
the project. Their aim is to build a relationship [9,17] and 
they should be intense during the early development cycles 
[26]. Maintaining visits are shorter and they aim to main-
tain the collaboration relationship [9]. Ramesh et al. [26] 
recommend that people from both onshore and offshore 
sites should travel. Customers and product managers should 
visit the development team. Developer representatives 
should travel to the customer site. According to Braithwaite 
and Joyce [4] and Danait [7], team members should conti-
88 nually rotate between the sites and at least one team mem-
ber at any time should be away from his or her home loca-
tion. This helps distant teams get along better and develop 
peer-to-peer relationships [7]. It is easier to maintain trust 
with remote team members if you have worked collocated 
with them in the past [4]. 
A practice that particularly enhances communication 
between distributed teams is multiple communication mod-
es [4]. Team members should be provided with several dif-
ferent kinds of communication media that can also be 
applied in parallel, i.e., individual and conference tele-
phone, teleconference, videoconference, email, instant 
messaging, Wiki and desktop sharing. A major part of the 
missing face-to-face communication is substituted by these 
tools to alleviate distance [4]. 
Mirroring [11] and balanced sites [4] can be used to re-
duce the dependency on the other site. These practices 
mean that each role in a team at one site has a counterpart 
on the other site. These persons may work closely together 
with their counterparts. For example, special knowledge on 
architecture is good to have on both sites. 
For successful collaboration, team members need to 
gain a common understanding on how the teams at differ-
ent sites work, think, communicate, and in general deal 
with the various issues and problems that arise from the 
development effort. Therefore, it is useful to send an expe-
rienced engineer for a longer period of time to the other site 
to facilitate cultural exchange [25].  
The ambassador [11,21] or rotating guru [34] are simi-
lar practices that aim at more than just cultural exchange. 
The ambassadors report lessons learned and set future di-
rections for the project. They participate in daily meetings 
and retrospectives of the visited team [11]. Business-
oriented ambassadors provide business context information 
to the offshore team [4]. Rotating gurus, who usually are 
senior team members, provide initial training and mentor-
ing to the other site. As pointed out by Nisar and Hameed 
[21], this is workable only for a bit larger budget projects. 
The synchronization of working hours that is a wide-
spread practice in GSD is important also for DAD. Con-
stant communication is possible only through the 
maximization of overlapping work hours. For example, 
early morning shifts for onshore site and late evening shifts 
for the offshore site let the teams ﬁto share the painﬂ of 
synchronizing the work schedule [26].  
 
3.
 
Research method 
The research presented in this paper is a single-case 
study [35] of a large distributed product program using an 
agile process. We used purposeful sampling [24] when 
looking for a suitable case. Our aim was to find a globally 
distributed project that already for some time had used an 
agile method or at least a collection of agile practices. The 
large globally distributed IT company that we contacted 
searched for suitable projects for our study, this chosen 
case being one of them. 
The product program that we will from now on call 
EnergySoftware, develops a software product for oil and 
energy companies. The product is already in use in several 
customer companies and the current development aims for 
new versions. Every new version is a new ﬁprojectﬂ and the 
development of the whole product is called here as pro-
gram. The development work is distributed between two 
countries, Norway and Malaysia, where our case company 
has its own offices. We will describe the case program in 
more detail in Section 4.1. 
We collected data using semi-structured, open-ended in-
terviews that were recorded. We asked our interviewees to 
tell in their own words about the project and the practices 
they use. Altogether we performed seven interviews each 
lasting 1-2 hours. From Norway we interviewed 4 persons, 
each in a face-to-face interview with one researcher asking 
questions and the other one taking notes. From Malaysia 
we were able to interview only one person face-to-face 
while this person was visiting Norway. In this interview we 
had one researcher interviewing, but no note taking. Since 
we could not visit Malaysia for cost reasons, we inter-
viewed two additional persons from Malaysia over the 
phone. We used SkypeOut calls that were recorded. From 
Norway we interviewed a product development director, a 
scrum master and two developers. From Malaysia we inter-
viewed three developers. One of them had left the project 
recently. 
We sent all recordings to an outside professional tran-
scription company. One researcher that had participated in 
the interviews checked each transcription by listening to the 
tape at the same time correcting possible transcription mis-
takes.  
The qualitative data analysis was done by one research-
er, who coded all the interviews
, developing separate codes 
for all the identified practices and problems.  
4.
 
Results 
4.1
 
Case description 
Our case study is a product development program from 
an IT company that has a globally distributed organization. 
The company™s main activities are in Europe, but it also has 
offices in other parts of the world, e.g., in Asia. The com-
pany is quite experienced in carrying out distributed 
projects, but using agile methods in distributed projects is a 
new experience. 
The case chosen for our study is a large product devel-
opment program that has been going on for ten years. Many 
large customers all over the world are using the product. 
New product versions are released approximately twice a 
year and between the main releases, service packs are 
89 shipped. Currently, six old versions are maintained, since 
not all the customers upgrade with every new release. 
The product organization has grown over the years from 
18 persons to a current size of 190 employees. The service 
organization all over the world sets up new releases for 
customers, e.g. by configurating the system and in some 
cases they make also modifications. The product develop-
ment organization has approximately 20 persons in one 
location in Norway and another 20 persons in one location 
in Malaysia. The Malaysian organization is slowly grow-
ing. In this study we focus only on the product develop-
ment organization.  
Our case oraganization has used Scrum for 1,5 years. 
Earlier, their development process was a combination of 
waterfall and iterative way of working, containing lots of 
up-front planning activities and a massive amount of do-
cumentation. The old process was considered very rigid 
and bureaucratic. The development was done in incre-
ments. The quality was not considered good enough after 
the first increments, and only after the last increment every-
thing worked. There was also a perceived customer need 
for more agility. The organization had had an unchanged 
way of doing things already for many years. This was 
another driver for change. The project manager in Norway 
proposed Scrum, and discussed it with key development 
personnel. Subsequently they decided to try it; to do some-
thing completely new. They got an approval from a higher-
level manager to test Scrum for three months. They have 
been using Scrum ever since.  
When starting to use Scrum they gave a brief descrip-
tion of the process, and basically explained: ﬁThe old 
processes are not mandatory anymore. You can use what-
ever process you wantﬂ. However, there were some minim-
al requirements for which practices to apply and some 
rules: Specifications should be written for everything that is 
implemented, a detailed design document should be pro-
duced, and there has to be some evidence for all testing that 
is done. The most important goal for the teams was to pro-
duce release quality in every sprint. 
The overall product consists of five modules or ﬁprod-
uctsﬂ as the teams call them. A customer can buy one or 
more ﬁproductsﬂ. Since the program is constantly develop-
ing new versions, each release project is called ﬁa projectﬂ. 
The product development organization is divided into sev-
en teams. Five of them are built around the different mod-
ules or ﬁproductsﬂ, and each of them has a separate product 
owner. The product owners are not seen as team members, 
maybe because they travel a lot collecting requirements. 
The two remaining teams include a framework team and a 
maintenance team. The maintenance team is seen as the 
most important team, where the most experienced persons 
are required, since they need to know the whole product 
and their work has direct and constant impact on customer 
satisfaction.  
The number of persons in each team varies between re-
lease projects and also between iterations, mainly because 
different releases emphasize different modules. In each 
team, there may be from two up to nine persons. Some 
teams are distributed between Norway and Malaysia, but 
not all. In some teams all the developers are in Malaysia 
and only their product owner is in Norway. Actually, all the 
product owners are located in Norway. There are also two 
scrum masters and one back-up scrum master in Norway 
and one scrum master in Malaysia. This means that one 
scrum master may have several teams to work with. The 
development organization is depicted in Figure 1.  
The time difference between the two sites is seven 
hours during the winter and six hours during the summer. 
However, the daily working time is a bit longer in Malaysia 
and they also have longer breaks. Thus, the common work-
ing time for the sites is normally a couple of hours during 
winter and one hour more during summer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Product development organization.
 
 
 
4.2
 
Agile practices 
In this section we describe how agile practices were ap-
plied in this distributed product program. 
Daily scrum meetings
. Daily scrum meetings between 
sites are arranged using telephone conferencing and web-
cameras. Application sharing is also possible, but is not 
normally needed. The meetings take place during the two 
hours that the teams have common working time. The 
meetings for different teams are consecutive, and take place 
in the same meeting room. The first meeting starts at quar-
NORWAY: approx. 20 persons 
5 product teams 
5 product owners 
Framework 
tea
m
2 scrum masters 
Maintenance 
tea
m
MALAYSIA: approx. 20 persons 
1 scrum master 
90 ter to nine Norwegian time. Then the next one starts at nine 
and so on. The consecutive order makes it possible for the 
same persons to participate in several meetings, if needed. 
This is the case, for example, for the scrum masters. In ad-
dition to the team members, also the product owner normal-
ly joins the meeting. Even if the team has members only 
from Malaysia, the meeting is still distributed, since the 
product owner is in Norway. After the three scrum ques-
tions there are normally some discussions or questions. 
In the beginning, it was difficult to encourage every-
body to talk and tell enough about their tasks and impedi-
ments. This was the case especially for persons coming 
from an Asian culture. Thus, in the beginning, the meetings 
lasted only a few minutes. Now everybody is used to the 
meetings, and communication is better. The meetings take 
15 minutes each. If more discussion or clarifications are 
needed, the team schedules additional meetings after the 
scrum meeting. 
Weekly scrum-of-scrums.
 A scrum-of-scrums meeting 
is arranged once a week. One team member from each team 
participates in this meeting. The team decides who partici-
pates; the participant is not always the same person but can 
vary. In addition to these team members, all scrum masters 
typically also participate in this meeting. The meeting takes 
half an hour. During the meeting the three scrum questions 
are answered. Now the questions do not address single per-
sons, but a whole team. Thus, each team representative tells 
what his or her team has been doing since the last meeting, 
what it plans to do before the next meeting and what kind 
of impediments they have. Moreover, they have two addi-
tional questions: ﬁHave you put some impediments in the 
other teams™ way?ﬂ and ﬁDo you plan to put any impedi-
ments in the other teams™ way?ﬂ. The goal of these ques-
tions is to ensure successful integration.  
Synchronized 4-week sprints.
 The five module teams 
and the framework team have synchronized 4-week sprints. 
This means that all the sprints start and end at the same 
time. They have the same code trees, and at the end of a 
sprint they build an environment for the sprint demonstra-
tions. Even though the teams during one release project 
stay quite stable, it is possible to change the emphasis be-
tween different modules between the sprints and move per-
sons from one team to another. 
2-week maintenance sprints.
 The maintenance team is 
the only exception to the 4-week sprint cycle, as their sprint 
cycle is two weeks. The reason is that hot fixes are released 
every two weeks. The maintenance team has a sprint plan-
ning session, during which they choose a set of issues from 
the backlog for the sprint. Since customers sometimes need 
fixes right away, they have a fast track routine for handling 
such requests. To accommodate for this, the team leaves a 
buffer of 20% of the capacity for handling fast track issues. 
The needed buffer is possible 
to forecast at least to some 
level, since it depends on the situation in the customer in-
stallation projects at that moment. 
Distributed sprint planning meetings.
 The sprint 
planning meetings are divided into three phases: distributed 
meeting, local meeting in Norway and local meeting in 
Malaysia. 
 The first part is time-boxed for three hours. Malaysian 
and Norwegian team members participate in this virtual 
meeting through teleconferencing. For application sharing, 
Microsoft NetMeeting is used. In these meetings, webca-
meras are not used. In the meetings, the Scrum framework, 
a document that describes how Scrum is applied, is typical-
ly reviewed first. In particular, any adjustments done since 
the last sprint planning are highlighted. An adjustment 
could be, for instance, a new concept for doing peer re-
views. Thus, sprint planning sessions can have the addi-
tional role of a training session.  
After that the product owner starts to go through items 
in the backlog, and the team asks questions. Before the 
meeting, the product owner has prioritized the backlog and 
made preliminary estimates for the backlog items. This 
phase of the meeting lasts until lunch hour in Norway. 
Then it is time for the Malaysian team to go home.  
The Norwegian team typically continues the meeting 
for the rest of the day. The team divides the backlog items 
into more detailed tasks and adjusts the estimates made by 
the product owner. Moreover, the team makes at least the 
initial assignment of the tasks to different team members. 
The Malaysian team continues the work the following 
morning. They meet locally and discuss and comment on 
the draft plan they have received from Norway. They might 
do some adjustments and also add their names to some 
tasks. If needed, the issues raised are discussed together in 
the next daily meeting.  
Sprint demos.
 Demos are arranged using the same 
technology as in the sprint planning meetings: teleconfe-
rence and application sharing. In addition to the team, their 
product owner and scrum master participate. The team has 
prepared an agenda for the demonstration. Following the 
agenda, each issue is gone through. If the quality seems to 
be good, everybody applauds. 
Retrospective meetings.
 Retrospective meetings take 
place directly after demos. The team, their product owner, 
and scrum master participate in the retrospective, which is 
arranged as a distributed meeting. It is time-boxed for a 
maximum of one hour, during which the team discusses 
three questions: ﬁWhat has been good during this sprint?ﬂ, 
ﬁWhat has not been that good?ﬂ and ﬁWhat kind of im-
provements could we do?ﬂ.  
Nightly builds and automated testing.
 The teams 
check in their code at least daily to CVS, a centralized ver-
sion control system in Norway. It can be accessed by all 
team members. During every night the whole product is 
built. If the build is not successful, the team that broke it 
will fix errors and rebuild after the errors have been fixed. 
Separate backlogs for each team.
 The project uses a 
tool called Jira for managing backlogs. All team members 
91 have access to Jira. Each team has its own backlog in Jira. 
It is updated by the respective product owners. The main-
tenance team has an own backlog, to which all product 
owners can add new issues. The process of adding issues to 
the maintenance backlog is a bit different from what the 
other teams have: All customers have access to Jira, where 
they report found bugs. The service organization checks 
each issue first, and if they find a product related bug they 
move that task over to product development and assign it to 
the product owner of that specific area. The assigned issues 
are prioritized using categories 
describing their criticality. 
The product owner who received the bug analyses it and 
when he marks it ﬁverifiedﬂ, it automatically moves to the 
maintenance backlog. The product owner decides, as well, 
to which maintained versions a fix is going to be done. All 
teams have been very satisfied with this tool. 
Team rooms.
 The basic principle is that in Malaysia 
and in Norway there is one room for each team, so that at 
least for collocated team members it is easy to discuss. 
When a person switches his team, he also relocates into the 
new team™s room. The project has gradually moved to this. 
Transition backlog. 
The transition backlog is not yet in 
use, but in the planning state. The idea is to put in good 
practices that some team has tried and found useful into the 
backlog. In this backlog they could keep track of the im-
provements as well as prioritize them. 
 
4.3
 
Agility supporting distributed practices 
Unofficial distributed meetings
. After starting to use daily 
scrums, the teams feel that there is more one-to-one com-
munication between the sites. This kind of communication 
often takes place after official scrum meetings. For exam-
ple, if one or two persons from Malaysia are starting a big-
ger task they may decide to have a start-up meeting with 
the product owner to discuss details. Unofficial communi-
cation may take place through teleconferences, chat, email, 
or over the internet using headset.  Some team members 
also use web cameras. 
Centralized v
ersion control.
 The project has a centra-
lized version control system, a CVS server, in Norway. It 
can be accessed by all team members through VPN. The 
teams check in their code at least daily. 
Visiting engineer durin
g the first iteration
. When the 
daily scrum was taken into use in the Malaysian office, one 
engineer, a scrum master from the Norwegian office, tra-
veled to Malaysia and stayed there during the first sprint. 
He had studied Scrum, but it was still quite new to him. 
Thus, he worked together with the teams and they jointly 
found solutions for how to apply Scrum.  
Onsite system expert
. When the Malaysian office was 
established four years ago, two persons from Norway 
moved there. One of them runs the office, and the other one 
is an expert who knows the customers™ business and how 
different components of EnergySoftware work. 
Frequent visits.
  During the first half a year after start-
ing to apply Scrum, the project had several persons from 
Norway working full-time in Malaysia. Now, the team 
members travel frequently between the sites. These visits 
normally last between two to four weeks, which makes it 
possible for a team to really work together. Especially dur-
ing the critical phases, it is important to collocate the team, 
e.g. for the last iteration before a release or for the first ite-
ration, when most of the planning takes place. 
At the moment, people travel when needed. In the be-
ginning, they had a traveling plan for the Norwegians. Now 
they have noticed that the Malaysian team members travel 
more often. Thus, they are thinking of taking into use a 
traveling plan for the Norwegians again to make them tra-
vel. Most Norwegians are subject area experts, whose 
knowledge it would be beneficial to share in Malaysia. At 
the moment, approximately half of the project team has 
visited the other site and all have met face-to-face in the 
annual gatherings. 
Annual gathering.
 The project has arranged social ga-
therings for the whole project, including also the service 
organization. The last gathering was in Rome and all 190 
persons traveled there for a long weekend. The product 
development organization held a half-day session together 
during which they heard and discussed future actions and 
had a team building exercise. The rest of the time was used 
for common social events. Everybody we interviewed saw 
this as a successful event and managers thought that it was 
an investment for the future. It was an event that people 
were still talking about. 
 
4.4
 
Challenges faced 
No possibility for videoconference.
 One challenge at 
the moment is that the network connections between the 
offices are not fast enough for videoconferencing. Howev-
er, they hope this to be solved soon, in order to make it 
possible to see people and their reactions in meetings. The 
web camera solution, which is in use at the moment, is not 
good enough: the resolution is poor, and there are transmis-
sion delays.  
Misunderstanding requirements
. Misunderstandings 
are common. A developer might have a totally different 
picture in his head about some functionality than a product 
owner. This is especially the case when developers are sit-
ting far away from the product owner, but it has also hap-
pened in Norway. In the worst case, the misunderstanding 
might not be noticed until the iteration demo. To verify the 
correct understanding, the product owners have learned to 
ask follow-up questions. By asking such questions, they 
make a developer explain in his own words what he is 
planning to do or what the functionality should do. The 
follow-up question can be for example: ﬁDo you have an 
idea how you are going to code this?ﬂ These kinds of ques-
92 tions can be asked at the end of daily scrum meetings to 
begin a discussion.  
Silence caused by distance
. In the beginning, the daily 
scrum meetings were very short when team members did 
not know how to communicate and how much to tell. Now, 
after a period of daily practice, this problem is over. How-
ever, the same problem is still present in some sprint plan-
ning sessions, where discussion is less guided. Especially 
the Norwegians think that the Malaysian team members are 
very silent. We got comments like this: ﬁIt can go maybe 
20 minutes before we hear anything or we have to ask:  Are 
you still there?ﬂ The Norwegians felt that they themselves 
are very eager to ask questions from the product owner in 
these meetings, almost like attacking him with questions, 
whereas the Malaysians seem to prefer just listening. Thus, 
the Norwegians felt that they cannot be sure whether the 
off-site team has really understood everything.  They were 
hoping to find a better solution for this. 
4.5
 
Positive experiences 
Even though facing challenges, the overall experience 
on starting to use agile practices in this large distributed 
project has been very positive. Based on our interviews, it 
seemed that the whole organization was satisfied with the 
decision to start to use an agile method. They saw many 
things that had helped them make this change successful: 
their organization was already very experienced, they had 
competent people, they got commitment from the manage-
ment and they had a version control system and regular 
builds already in place. 
The agile practices were considered very suitable for 
distributed projects, as one of our interviewees stated:ﬂI 
think the strength of working in an agile way when we are 
different, and in different locations is that you actually have 
more frequent communication. And also focus on issues, 
impediments, and that you solve them on the way and do 
not wait until they make a big risk for the project.ﬂ 
Taking agile practices into use had many benefits ac-
cording to our interviewees. The most important benefits 
mentioned are discussed next. 
Better quality.
 One of the biggest differences to the 
earlier way of working was an improvement in overall 
quality. Although increments had been used before, the 
quality of the product was not good after the first incre-
ments: only at the end of the last increment everything 
worked. Now, at the end of each iteration, a working demo 
is built. Thus, the quality at the end of an iteration is quite 
close to release quality. 
Better and more frequent communication
. Our inter-
viewees thought that communication quality is better than 
before and communication is much more frequent, espe-
cially between the sites. There is also more one-to-one 
communication between the sites, e.g., after the daily scrum 
meetings.  
A big difference between the current situation and the 
situation one year ago was perceived. Now everybody has 
to talk, and is trained to talk in the scrum meetings. There is 
a feeling that the Scrum setting has forced increased com-
munication, which is considered to be very beneficial. Sur-
veys to all team members after each release project have 
been conducted already before the agile time. In these sur-
veys they were asked, e.g., about processes used, testing 
concepts, code reviews, documentation, product owners, 
and cooperation and communication. The scores for com-
munication and collaboration have risen continuously since 
they started using Scrum. Currently, they score very high. 
One of the scrum masters commented on this saying: ﬁThis 
gives a good indication that Scrum works.ﬂ 
Frequent communication also ma
kes it easier to identify 
misunderstandings, e.g. regarding the understanding of the 
requirements, making it possible to take corrective action 
earlier.  
Improved motivation.
 The team members are now 
more motivated than before. A scrum master explained: 
ﬁThey motivate themselves (–) They get clear and quick 
clarification so they don™t have to wait. They get access to 
the right people at the right time and everyone has the same 
value in the team (–) That they can have an impact on the 
work that they and also their team is doing, is something 
that makes you feel good.ﬂ   
 
5.
 
Discussion 
In this paper we have described how agile practices 
based on Scrum have been applied to a large distributed 
software development program. The overall experiences in 
using Scrum in a distributed setting have been very posi-
tive. All our interviewees stat
ed that accordin
g to their ex-
perience an agile method, like Scrum, suits well to 
distributed settings and actually helps in solving the biggest 
problem of GSD projects, namely communication, by al-
most forcing distributed team members to communicate 
frequently and really learn to communicate. 
The contribution of this paper is a detailed description 
on how agile practices have been successfully applied to a 
distributed software development program. We believe that 
these experiences are useful for other companies planning 
to apply agile practices to similar settings. 
5.1
 
Limitations 
In this study we were able to interview only seven per-
sons. By being able to interview a few more persons from 
different teams and from different roles, we might have 
received a bit more complete picture. Moreover, we were 
able to interview face-to-face only one Malaysian team 
member. Two other interviews were telephone interviews, 
which is always more difficult. It is especially more diffi-
93 cult to build a confidential atmosphere while not seeing the 
other person, which may cause that not everything is said.  
5.2
 
Future research 
In the future we plan to study a few more distributed 
projects using agile practices and compare the way they 
have applied agile practices to distributed settings, the chal-
lenges faced and positive experiences gained. Actually, at 
the moment we have already interviewed persons from two 
other distributed projects, which have taken agile practices 
from Scrum into use. 
 
Acknowledgements
 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial sup-
port of the Academy of Finland (Grant No. SA 107636, 
2005-2007) and the Finnish Funding Agency for Technolo-
gy and Innovation (MaPIT project). We would also like to 
thank our case company and all the interviewees. 
References 
[1]
 
Beck, K. 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change
. Addison Wesley, New York, 2000. 
[2]
 
Berczuk, S., Back to basics: The role of agile prin-
ciples in success with an distributed scrum team. 
Pro-
ceedings of AGILE
, 2007, pp. 382-388. 
[3]
 
Boland, D. and Fitzgerald, B. Transitioning from a Co-
Located to a Globally-Distributed Software Develop-
ment Team: A Case Study at Analog Devices Inc. 
Pro-
ceedings of the ICSE Workshop on Global Software 
Development
, Edinburgh, Scotland, 2004. 
[4]
 
Braithwaite, K. and Joyce, T. Xp expanded: Distri-
buted extreme programming. 
Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Extreme Programming 
and Agile Processes in Software Engineering
, XP 
2005. Springer, 2005, pp. 180-188  
[5]
 
Cockburn, A. 
Agile software development.
 Boston, 
MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, Longman Publishing Co., 
Inc., 2002. 
[6]
 
Cockburn, A and Highsmith, J. Agile software devel-
opment: The people factor. 
Computer,
 vol. 34, no. 11, 
2001, pp. 131-133. 
[7]
 
Danait, A. Agile offshore techniques - a case study. 
Proceedings of the Agile Conference
, July 24-29, 
2005, pp. 214-217. 
[8]
 
Farmer, M. DecisionSpace Infrastructure: Agile De-
velopment in a Large, Distributed Team. 
Proceedings 
of the Agile Development Conference 
2004.  
[9]
 
Fowler, M. Using an agile software process with off-
shore development. 2006 (Available: 
http://martinfowler.com/articles/agileOffshore.html) 
Referenced: 19.12.2007. 
[10]
 
Herbsleb, J.and Grinter, R. 
Architectures, coordination, 
and distance: Conway's law and beyond.
 
IEEE  Soft-
ware
, 16, 5, (Sept.-Oct. 1999), pp. 63 Œ70. 
[11]
 
Hogan, B. Lessons learned from an extremely distri-
buted project. 
Proceeding of the Agile Conference
, Ju-
ly 23-28, 2006. 
[12]
 
Holmström, H., Conchùir, E.Ò, Agerfalk, P.J., Fitzge-
rald, B. Global Software Development Challenges: A 
Case Study on Temporal, Geographical and Socio-
Cultural Distance. 
Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Global Software Engineering,
 
ICGSE™06, 
Florianopolis, 2006. pp. 3-11. 
[13]
 
Jain, N. Offshore agile maintenance. 
Proceedings of 
the Agile Conference
, 2006. 
[14]
 
Jensen, B. and Zilmer, A. Cross-continent develop-
ment using scrum and xp. 
Proceedings of the XP
. 
Springer Berlin, 2003, pp. 146-153. 
[15]
 
Karlsson, E., Andersson, L. and Leion, P. Daily Build 
and Feature Development in Large Distributed 
Projects. 
Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Software Engineering,
 Limeric, Ireland, 2000, pp. 
649-658. 
[16]
 
Kircher, M., Jain, P., Corsaro, A. and Levine, D. Dis-
tributed Extreme Programming. 
Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on eXtreme Programming and 
Flexible Processes in Software Engineering
, Sardinia, 
Italy, May 20 - 23, 2001. 
[17]
 
Kussmaul, C., Jack, R., and Sponsler, B. Outsourcing 
and offshoring with agility: A case study. 
Proceedings 
of the 
4th Conference on Extreme Programming and 
Agile Methods
, Calgary, Canada, August 15-18, 2004.
 
Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, pp, 147-154. 
[18]
 
Layman, L., Williams, L., Damian, D. and Bures, H. 
Essential communication practices for extreme pro-
gramming in a global software development team. 
In-
formation and Software Technology,
 vol. 48, no. 9, 
2006, pp. 781-794. 
[19]
 
Mockus, A. and Herbsleb, J. Challenges of Global 
Software Development. 
Proceedings of the Seventh In-
ternational Software Metrics Symposium
, (METRICS 
2001, IEEE), pp 182-184. 
[20]
 
Ngo-The, A., Hoang, K., Nguyen, T., and Mai, N. Ex-
treme programming in distributed software develop-
ment: A case study. 
Proceedings of the International 
Workshop on Distributed Software Development
, Au-
gust 2005. 
[21]
 
Nisar, M. and Hameed, T. Agile Methods Handling 
Offshore Software Development Issues. 
Proceedings 
of the INMIC 2004, 8
th
 International Multitopic Confe-
rence,
 Dec.2004. pp 417-422. 
[22]
 
Ågerfalk, P. and Fitzgerald, B. Introduction. 
Commu-
nications of ACM
, vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 26-34, 2006. 
[23]
 
Paasivaara, M. and Lassenius, C. Could Global Soft-
ware Development Benefit from Agile Methods? 
Pro-
ceedings of the Interna
tional Conference on Global 
94 Software Engineering, ICGSE '06
., Oct. 2006, pp. 109-
113. 
[24]
 
Patton, M. Q. 
Qualitative Research and Evaluation 
Methods
. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. 1990. 
[25]
 
Poole, C. J. Distributed product development using 
extreme programming. 
Proceedings of the 5th Interna-
tional Conference, XP 2004,
 
Garmisch-Partenkirchen, 
Germany, June 6-10, 2004. Springer Ber-
lin/Heidelberg, pp. 60-67. 
[26]
 
Ramesh, B. Cao, L., Mohan, K. and Xu, P. Can distri-
buted software development be agile? 
Communications 
of the ACM
, vol. 49(10), pp. 41-46, 2006. 
[27]
 
Royce, W. Managing the Development of Large Soft-
ware Systems. Reprinted from 
Proceedings, IEEE 
WESCON
, August 1970, pp 1-9. 
[28]
 
Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. 
Agile Software Devel-
opment with Scrum
. New York, United States: Prentice 
Hall, 2001. 
[29]
 
Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. 
Agile Software Devel-
opment with Scrum
. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle Riv-
er, N.J., 2002. 
[30]
 
Schwaber, K. 
Agile Project Management with Scrum
. 
Microsoft Press, Redmond, Washington, 2004. 
[31]
 
Simons, M. Internationally Agile. 
InformIT
, March 
15
th
, 2002.
 
[32]
 
Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, J. and Puntikov, 
N. Distributed scrum: Agile project management with 
outsourced development teams. 
Proceedings of the 
40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Sys-
tem Sciences
, HICSS 2007, pp. 274a-274a. 
[33]
 
Smits, H. and Pshigoda, G. Implementing scrum in a 
distributed software development organization. 
Pro-
ceedings of AGILE 2007
, pp. 371-375. 
[34]
 
Yap, M. Follow the sun: distributed extreme program-
ming development. 
Proceedings of the Agile Confe-
rence
, July 24-29, 2005, pp. 218-224. 
[35]
 
Yin, R.K. 
Case Study Research, Designs and Methods
. 
Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, 1994. 
 
95