 Could Global Software Development Benefit from Agile Methods? 
  Maria Paasivaara and Casper Lassenius 
Software Business and Engineering Institute 
Helsinki University of Technology 
P.O.Box 9210 FIN-02015 TKK, Finland 
Maria.Paasivaara@tkk.fi, Casper.Lassenius@tkk.fi 
   
 Abstract 
At first glance, agile methods and global software 
development might seem incompatible. Agile methods 
stress continuous face-to-face communication, whereas 
communication has been reported as the biggest problem of 
global software development. One challenge to solve is 

how to apply agile practices in settings where continuous 

face-to-face interaction is missing. However, agile methods 

have been successfully used in distributed projects, 

indicating that they could benefit global software 
development. This paper discusses potential benefits and 

challenges of adopting agile methods in global software 

development. The literature on real industrial case studies 

reporting on experiences of using agile methods in distrib-

uted projects is still scarce. Therefore we suggest further 
research on the topic. We present our plans for research in 
companies using agile methods in their distributed projects. 
We also intend to test the use of agile principles in globally 

distributed student projects developing software for 

industrial clients. 
1. Introduction 
Global software development, including outsourcing, 
subcontracting and partnerships, is becoming increasingly 
common. However, software projects developing genuinely 
novel products are often faced with uncertainty regarding, 
e.g., both requirements and implementation technologies, 

and subcontractors or partners need to be involved long 
before these uncertainties can be resolved. In such projects, 
the parties cannot receive clear requirement specifications 

at the beginning. Instead, close cooperation and communi-
cation between the parties is required during the whole pro-

ject, as the project both builds a product and tries to 

understand what to build at the same time. Another trend, 

the usage of agile development methodologies in software 

development, emphasizes communication and close col-

laboration. Such methodologies are thus particularly suit-
able for development projects facing high degrees of 
uncertainty. Many of the agile practices are built on face-
to-face communication and collocation is assumed. Thus, 
even though these two trends seem incompatible, there are 
some elements that connect them, e.g., the need for fre-

quent communication [11, 17]. Even though most agile 

methods have been designed for collocated usage and their 

practices typically require face-to-face interaction, agile 

methods, such as Scrum [15] and XP [2], have been suc-

cessfully used in distributed projects (e.g., [4, 5, 11, 17]). 

These experiences indicate that agile methods could help 

solve some problems of distributed development by provid-

ing practices that can be applied in distributed settings. 

However, there are still many challenges to be solved to be 

able to apply agile methods to globally distributed projects, 

where collocation and continuous face-to-face interaction 
between developers is missing.    
This paper discusses the potential benefits of adopting 
agile methods in distributed software development projects 
and the unsolved challenges that agile methods bring along. 

At the moment, the literature on the usage of agile methods 
in distributed projects is scarce. There are few reported 

experiences on applying agile methods to distributed indus-

trial projects, even though we know that several companies 

have carried out that kind of experiments. In this paper we 

first discuss the benefits and challenges of applying agile 

methods in distributed projects based on current literature. 
Then, we suggest further research ideas on the topic. Fi-
nally, we present our own research plans to study both in-

dustrial projects using agile methods and testing the usage 

of agile principles in globally distributed student projects 
developing software for industrial clients.   
2. Combining distributed development and 
agile methods 
Global software development literature brings up many 
challenges related to distributed development, e.g., interde-
pendencies among work items that are distributed, difficul-
ties of coordination, difficulties of dividing the work into 
modules that could be assigned to different locations, con-

flicting implicit assumptions that are not noticed as fast as 

in collocated work, and communication challenges [10]. 

Literature suggests dividing the work into separate modules 

that then can be distributed to different sites to be devel-
oped [7]. These modules should be independent in order to 

minimize communication between sites [7]. The authors 
 emphasize that it is possible to split only well-understood 
products for which architecture and plans are likely to be 

stable. However, in the current development environment 
with a lot of uncertainties, dividing the software into mod-
ules and specifying the modules in detail upfront is often 

impossible. Moreover, this way of development, specifying 
and dividing work first and then in the end integrating all in 
ﬁa big bangﬂ, is challenging, since integration can cause 

huge problems, that may not have been expected. As a so-
lution Battin et al. [1] suggest an incremental integration 

plan, which would be based on clusters and shared incre-

mental milestones to avoid ﬁbig bangﬂ integration. This 

strategy was used successfully at Motorola. Ebert and De 

Neve [3] provide similar experiences about the usage of 

incremental development in Alcatel, where they developed 
each increment within one dedicated team and based their 
progress tracking on successfully integrated and tested cus-

tomer requirements. The authors report that a stable build 
proved to be one of the key success factors and that glob-
ally applied continuous builds improved project cycle time. 

Neither the Alcatel nor the Motorola case report the inte-

gration interval, but it seems these cases did not use very 

frequent regular build cycles, such as daily or weekly 

builds. However, even very frequent builds are possible in 

distributed development. Karlsson et al. [8] report their 

experiences of using daily builds and feature-based devel-

opment successfully in distributed projects. 
Incremental integration and frequent deliveries is a core 
practice in agile methodologies [9] but its use in distributed 
development has not received much attention yet. Fowler 
[5] and Simons [17] reported their experiences on using 

agile methods in offshore software development projects. 

According to Simons [17] an iterative model seems to work 

well in distributed projects and can eliminate some of the 

problems that distribution brings. Continuous integration 

and build verification tests solve integration problems in 

small steps and help avoid large integration problems at the 

end of the project. Moreover, iterative development with 

frequent deliveries provides increased visibility into project 

status, which makes it easier for project mangers and cus-

tomers to follow project progress [17]. Fowler [5] discusses 
suitable iteration lengths for offshore projects and con-
cludes that two-week iterations are minimum, because of 

the communication overheads of distributed development, 

and two to three month iterations start already to be too 

long. Moreover, our earlier research [12, 13] studying five 

inter-organizationally distributed software development 

projects using iterative and incremental development 

showed that iterative development and frequent deliveries 

are beneficial to distributed projects. Thus, it seems that at 

least the agile principles of frequent deliveries and continu-

ous integration seem to suit global software development. 
Both Fowler [5] and Simons [17] emphasize that main 
benefits of using agile development in their projects have 

been the high responsiveness to change and fast delivery of 
business value, and that these benefits have outweighed the 
challenges of distributed development. 
2.1
 Distributed extreme programming 
A few studies have presented experiences on using ex-
treme programming (XP) in distributed software develop-

ment projects. Both Fowler [5] and Simons [17] give quite 
detailed descriptions of their experiences of using XP in 
large projects distributed between the US and India. Both 

onshore and offshore teams used agile methods and the 

projects applied the agile communication principles in 

these highly distributed settings. The projects successfully 
used practices such as continuous integration, short itera-
tions, regular short status meetings, multiple communica-

tion modes, proxy customers in offshore teams and 

resource rotation. Nisar and Hameed [11] and Xiaohu et al. 

[18] describe their experiences on using XP in offshore 

teams collaborating with onshore customers. Both papers 

discuss projects where the development work is done in 
offshore teams only but the onshore customer is tightly 
involved in project communication. Nisar and Hameed [11] 

report briefly the main agile principles they followed and 

emphasize that client satisfaction is the main reason to use 

XP, which has proven to be successful in their offshore 
projects.  For the project presented by Xiaohu et al. [18] the 
main reason for implementing XP practices was to reduce 

the communication delay and improve communication 

quality between the customers and the offshore develop-

ment team. Both Nisar and Hameed [11] and Xiaohu et al. 

[18] conclude that the reported projects have been very 

successful and the XP principles they have followed have 

proven to work. Karlsson et al. [8] and Farmer [4] report 

their experiences on using a few XP practices (e.g., con-

tinuous builds and unit tests [4] and planning game, small 

releases, continuous integration and automatic testing [8]) 
in large distributed projects. Both papers found the applied 
agile practices useful but hard to implement. All these re-

ported experiences on the usage of XP in distributed pro-

jects were successful according to the respective authors. 

This leads us to a conclusion that XP principles could be 

useful in distributed projects, even though a lot of work is 

needed in designing how to implement the XP principles in 

distributed settings. 
2.2
 Distributed Scrum 
In his book Schwaber [16] presents how the Scrum 
method can be scaled to large projects involving multiple 
Scrum teams. He presents some scaling mechanisms, such 
as daily scrum of scrums for coordinating the work of 
Scrum teams. According to Schwaber [16] these scaling 

mechanisms enable the usage of Scrum also in geographi-

cally distributed projects. He suggests that in these kinds of 

projects high-bandwidth technology for source code shar-
ing, synchronized builds and alternative communication 
 methods such as instant messaging need to be employed. 
Besides the experiences described by Schwaber [16], we 

did not find experience reports on using Scrum in distrib-
uted projects from the literature, but we have encountered 
its usage in a few distributed industrial projects. In one of 

the projects a Finnish customer company was developing 
software using both several onsite subcontractors and a 
subcontractor that had both onsite developers working in 

the customer™s premises and offshore developers. Earlier, 
the company had used a waterfall type process with its 

main subcontractor. This development model had many 

problems, which led the company to experiment with the 

usage of Scrum. The customer company had applied Scrum 

practices to suit its needs, especially communication prac-

tices and tools had received special attention. Local devel-
opers and offshore developers worked normally in separate 
teams consisting approximately of six developers. When 

new knowledge, e.g., new practices needed to be trans-
ferred to offshore teams, some persons from the offshore 
teams were invited to work locally as members of onshore 

teams during one sprint. Otherwise mainly electronic com-

munication was used, e.g. mailing lists, Wiki, IRC, Mes-

senger, Skype and tele- and videoconferencing. Project 

documents and reports were stored in the Wiki and daily 

communication between the teams took place through IRC, 

Messenger and Skype. The idea was to keep communica-

tion as visual as possible, thus, e.g. daily scrums of scrums 

were arranged using videoconference if possible. The pro-

ject used two week sprints which ended with sprint demos 
in which all teams presented their results. Offshore devel-
opers participated in the sprint demos through videoconfer-

encing and desktop sharing. Sprint demos were open to all 

stakeholders and they were seen as one true measure of 

completion. The project used test-driven development and 

continuous integration. Fast communication and reaction to 

any integration problems were seen as important drivers of 

success. Since the project was developing a product to be 

sold to several customers, a real end customer could not be 

involved. Instead, the customer company™s system architect 

took the role of proxy customer to the offshore teams. He 

was regarded as capable of both talking about technical 
issues and passing on business requirements. In summary, 
this still on-going distributed project was successfully using 

Scrum principles in a project that was both geographically 

and organizationally distributed. The project had invested a 

lot of effort in developing communication practices to build 

and maintain frequent communication between onshore and 

offshore teams. Even though the project had experienced 

some communication problems with the offshore teams, 

such as misunderstandings of the requirements or develop-

ers not asking for help fast enough when having problems, 

the project was so far seen as very successful. Thus, based 
on limited experiences it seems that it is possible to apply 
Scrum principles to distributed projects when enough atten-

tion is paid on planning how to arrange frequent communi-
cation efficiently. Of course, this is just one case project, 
thus more reported industrial experiences are needed. It 

would be particularly interesting to gather more detailed 
information about communication arrangements in other 
distributed projects using Scrum. 
2.3
 Challenges of distributed agile methods  
There are several challenges for the application of agile 
methods to global software development, communication 
probably being the most obvious one. In the global soft-
ware development literature, communication is often seen 
as the most challenging problem of distribution (e.g. [10]) 
whereas the agile methods basically rely on communica-
tion, preferably face-to-face communication, instead of 

documentation. The application of agile principles to global 

software development poses several questions regarding 
communication: How could daily communication be ar-

ranged effectively? What kind of communication practices 

and media are suitable for supporting different agile prac-

tices? How could informal communication, that is impor-

tant to agile methods, be encouraged? How could the risk 

for misunderstandings, e.g. regarding requirements, be 
minimized? How could trust be build and retained between 
teams to ensure open communication?  
Agile methods use short iterations, frequent builds, and 
continuous integration. These practices pose challenges to 

configuration management and version management. Espe-

cially when the distributed teams come from different com-

panies, e.g., the customer company is using subcontractors, 

using a common tool or set of tools might be challenging to 

arrange. Moreover, long distances and bad infrastructures 

might cause extra challenges. This poses a question: How 

could these practices be made possible and functioning in 

globally distributed projects both regarding the technical 

aspects and trust issues between the companies?  
Agile methods emphasize change; the business envi-
ronment and customer requirements are not stable, but 

changing. Thus, agile methods see frequent communication 

with customers as important. However, in distributed de-

velopment, the customers may be located far away making 

frequent interaction difficult to arrange. For example, an 

XP practice, on-site customer, might be challenging to ar-

range when distances are large and if an on-site customer 

can be arranged he or she might gradually lose connection 

to his or her own environment. 
Cultural challenges are common to global software de-
velopment. Introducing an agile method can change the 
command and control model in a company; developers 
need more autonomy and decision-making power than what 

they are used to, to be able to implement the agile practices 

[5]. 
 2.4
 Possible benefits of distributed agile methods 
Besides being the biggest challenge, communication 
can be also be seen as a major benefit of agile methods, 
since they explicitly emphasize communication and provide 
many useful communication practices. Even though the 
practices are originally designed to be used in collocated 

development, many practices seem to be transferable to 

distributed development, when suitable tools are found, as 
some successful examples in the literature show (e.g. [5, 
11]). Thus, the strong emphasis on frequent communication 
can be regarded as strength. 
Also short iterations, frequent builds, and continuous in-
tegration emphasized by agile methods can be seen as 

benefits in addition to being challenges. The benefits of 

short iterations are numerous [5, 13]: They bring transpar-

ency of work progress to all partners. Both the developers, 
project managers and customers can frequently get a good 
picture of how the project is progressing. While the cus-

tomer can monitor real progress, the distributed developers 
can get instant feedback on their work, which is motivating. 
Moreover, seeing high quality work early and frequently 

builds trust and respect between distributed partners mak-

ing further collaboration easier. 
From the customer™s point of view this way of develop-
ing brings additional flexibility when the customer can do 

changes during the development phase without time con-

suming negotiations with subcontractors. It also enables the 

customer company to bring subcontractors into the project 

already in the early phases of development, when the cus-

tomer is not yet able to specify the requirements in detail 

but can rely on early correction of direction when needed. 
Frequent integration and testing also ensures that all parties 
have understood the requirements correctly. This is a typi-

cal uncertainty in distributed development, especially when 

participants have not worked together before and come 

from different cultures. Continuous integration and testing 

gives fast feedback and any misinterpretations become 

visible early and possible misunderstandings have less 

damaging consequences. Moreover, learning from mistakes 

is fast and happens early, thus preventing problems to ac-

cumulate or grow. 
Even the problems with cultural differences can be 
helped by using agile methods [11]: frequent and open 

communication between the participants and frequent re-

leases to customers build trust and project participants learn 

quickly more about each others cultures. Thus, the prob-

ability of serious cultural problems decreases quickly.  
3. Suggestions for future research 
The combination of agile methods and distributed de-
velopment poses several challenges, but also possible bene-
fits. As Section 2 showed, the literature on using agile 
methods in global software development is still scarce. 
Thus, more research on this interesting topic would benefit 
especially the companies considering using this combina-
tion in their software development projects. 
3.1
 Themes for future research 
Below we list a few major questions that arise based 
upon the challenges and benefits of distributed agile meth-
ods: 
• How should the agile practices be applied to dis-
tributed projects? 
• What are the most effective agile practices for dis-

tributed use? 
• To what kinds of distributed projects are agile 
methods best suitable? 
• What are the biggest challenges in applying agile 
practices to distributed projects? 
• How could these be avoided or alleviated? 
3.2
 Our plans for future research 
We plan to study the usage of agile methods in indus-
trial projects. We are especially interested in how agile 
methods can be successfully tailored and applied to distrib-
uted projects. Moreover, we plan to study what the benefits 
of using agile methods in distributed projects are and to 

what kinds of distributed projects they are especially suit-

able. Finally, we will study what kind of problems or chal-

lenges the agile methods bring to distributed projects and 
how these challenges could possibly be solved.  The main 

research method will be qualitative case study [19]. By 

using purposeful selection [14] a group of 2-4 case compa-

nies using agile methods in their distributed projects will be 
selected for the study. In particular, we will try to include 
distributed projects using Scrum, since we did not find any 

experiences of using that approach in distributed projects in 
the literature, whereas the literature has reported already a 
few experiences of using extreme programming in distrib-

uted projects (e.g. [5, 11, 17, 18]. The main data collection 

method regarding this group of companies will be qualita-

tive semi-structured interviews [14]. 
Besides collecting industrial experiences, we plan to ar-
range a course on distributed software development. The 

course has two goals: first, to teach distributed software 
development to our students, and second to give us a possi-
bility to study how agile practices can be applied to distrib-

uted projects. The course is planned to be arranged between 

three different universities situated in Finland, Brazil and 

the US. During this course the students are first taught the 

agile methods they are supposed to use during the course. 

The methods, practices and tools to be used are selected 

based on the first part of this research, namely on the inter-

views in the case companies. At the moment we expect that 

we will select the Scrum approach that is modified for use 

in distributed development. The members of each student 
group are distributed to three different locations. These 
projects will each have a real customer offering a limited-
 scale project. The usage of practices is observed and the 
communication behavior of the student groups is analyzed 

based on data collected by surveys and archiving email 
communication, which will be analyzed using the TeCFlow 
tool [6]. We hope to be able to find successful practices and 

challenges, as well as improvement ideas.  
4. Conclusions 
At first glance, agile methods and global software de-
velopment might seem incompatible, since communication 
is often reported as the biggest problem of distributed de-
velopment, whereas frequent collaboration and face-to-face 
communication belong to the basic principles of agile 

methods. However, there is a possibility that this problem 

could be turned into a solution: agile methods could pro-

vide communication practices that could, with some apply-

ing, be used to satisfy the communication needs of 
distributed development. The literature on real industrial 

case studies reporting experiences on the usage of agile 

methods in distributed projects is still scarce; therefore this 

paper suggests further research on this topic. In particular, 

experiences on how to apply agile methods to distributed 
projects and how to accomplish functioning communication 
would be interesting, but also studies reporting the chal-
lenges would be valuable.  
Acknowledgements
 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial sup-
port of the Academy of Finland (Grant No. SA 107636, 
2005-2007). 
References
 [1] Battin, R.D., Crocker, R., Kreidler, J., and Subramanian, K. 
Leveraging resources in global software development. 
IEEE 
Software
, (March/April 2001), 70-77. 
[2] Beck, K. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 

Change. Addison Wesley, New York, 2000. 
[3] Ebert, C. and De Neve, P. Surviving Global Software Devel-

opment. 
IEEE Software
, (March/April 2001), 62-69. 
[4] Farmer, M. (2004) DecisionSpace Infrastructure: Agile De-

velopment in a Large, Distributed Team. 
Proceedings of the 
Agile Development Conference 
2004.  
[5] Fowler, M. Using Agile Software Process with Offshore 

Development. 

(http://martinfowler.com/articles/agileOffshore.html
) 7.1.2004 
[6] Gloor, P. Laubacher, R. Dynes, S. and Zhao, Y. Visualiza-

tion of Communication Patterns in Collaborative Innovation 
Networks: Analysis of some W3C working groups. 
Proceed-
ings of ACM CKIM International Conference on Information 

and Knowledge Management,
 (New Orleans, Nov 3-8, 
2003). 
[7] Herbsleb, J.and Grinter, R. 
Architectures, coordination, and 
distance: Conway's law and beyond.
 IEEE  Software
, 16, 5, 
(Sept.-Oct. 1999), 63 Œ70. 
[8] Karlsson, E., Andersson, L. and Leion, P. Daily Build and 

Feature Development in Large Distributed Projects. 
Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Software Engineer-

ing,
 (Limeric, Ireland, 2000), 649-658. 
[9] Larman, C. and Basili, V. Iterative and Incremental Devel-

opment: A Brief History. 
IEEE Computer
, (June 2003), 47-
56. 
[10] Mockus, A. and Herbsleb, J. Challenges of Global Software 

Development. 
Proceedings of the Seventh International 
Software Metrics Symposium
, (METRICS 2001, IEEE), 182-
184. 
[11] Nisar, M. and Hameed, T. Agile Methods Handling Offshore 

Software Development Issues. 
Proceedings of INMIC 2004, 

8th International Multitopic Conference,
 Dec.2004. 417-422. 
[12] Paasivaara, M. 
Communication Practices in Inter-
Organisational Product Development
. Doctoral Dissertation. 
Helsinki University of Technology, 2005. Available at: 

http://lib.tkk.fi/Diss/2005/isbn9512279355/
 [13] Paasivaara, M. and Lassenius, C. Synchronizing Global 

Software Development by Using Incremental Development 

and Frequent Deliveries. 
Proceedings of the ICSE Inter-
naltional Workshop on Global Software Development
, Edin-
burgh, May 2004. 
[14] Patton, M. Q. 
Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods
. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. 1990. 
[15] Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. 
Agile Software Development 

with Scrum
. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 2002. 
[16] Schwaber, K. 
Agile Project Management with Scrum
. Micro-
soft Press, Redmond, Washington, 2004. 
[17] Simons, M. Internationally Agile. 
InformIT
 (March 15
th, 2002)
 [18] Xiaohu, Y., Bin, X., Zhijun, H. Maddineni, S. Extreme 

Programming in Global Software Development. 
Proceedings 
of the Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer 

Engineering,
 2-5 May 2004. 1845 Œ 1848. Vol.4  
[19] Yin, R.K. 
Case Study Research, Designs and Methods
. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, 1994. 
