 Scrumconix: Agile and 
documented method to AGSD
Luis T. Portela 
Programa Educativo de Ingeniería en TI 
Universidad Tecnológica del Sur de Sonora 
Cd. Obregón, México 
 
Gilberto Borrego 
Facultad de Ciencias 
Universidad Autónoma de Baja California 
Ensenada, México 
 
Abstract
—Many companies have adopted agile software 
development (ASD), mainly due to it can handle scarce 
requirements. However, some unsolved challenges exist in ASD, 
particularly in global software development (GSD) companies 
(known as AGSD). These challenges include ASD lax 
documentation contrasted by the methodological standardization 
required in GSD, due to its inherent distances. Lax 
documentation leads to documentation debt and architectural 
knowledge (AK) vaporization, which cause negative effects on the 
development process and on the product itself. In order to reduce 
these effects, we propose Scrumconix, a hybrid method that uses 
a lightweight approach to document in AGSD environments, 
which also aims to decrease the effect of linguistic and cultural 
distances. In addition, we present preliminary results of 
Scrumconix implementation in a Mexican AGSD company.
 
Keywords— agile global software development; architectural 
knowledge vaporization; documentation debt; Scrum; ICONIX. 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
Agile software development (ASD) have become a popular 
and effective way to deliver software in situations with scarce 
requirements [1]. Many companies, including those that apply 
global software development (GSD), have adopted ASD [2], 
since they have recognized its benefits (e.g. manage changing 
priorities, team productivity and project visibility [3]). 
However, unsolved challenges exist in ASD, particularly in 
GSD companies (named AGSD companies). 
One of the main 
challenges in AGSD relates to software documentation. On the 
one hand, methodological standardization is preferred in GSD, 
which involves comprehensive documentation 
[4]
. This 
preference is driven by the inherent distances in GSD: 
linguistic, cultural, physical and temporal [5]
. 
On the other 
hand, in ASD individuals’ interactions and working software 
are preferred over comprehensive documentation, processes 
and tools 
[6]
. This reduces the formality and the quantity of 
documentation 
[7]. Further, ASD practices dominate GSD 
practices in an AGSD environment [8]. Thus, there is a lack of 
formal documentation in AGSD, which leads to architectural 
knowledge (AK) vaporization and documentation debt [9]. 
In ASD, documentation debt is solved with teammates' 
interaction, however in AGDS, the four distances hinder  this 
solution.
 This lack of documentation causes defects in software 
evolution and maintenance, lack of visibility for project 
monitoring and technical solutions, and poorly understood 
requirements [10]. Furthermore, 
ASD developers omit 
documents due to sprint pressure [9], and because they consider 
documentation as a secondary and non-creative activity 
[11]
. 
However, ASD developers recognize that documentation is 
important to understand and communicate about a software 
system [12]. In order to reduce AK vaporization and 
documentation debt in AGSD, we propose a hybrid method 
(called Scrumconix), which uses lightweight documentation, 
mainly based on diagrams, to decrease the effect of linguistic 
and cultural distances. Also, we present preliminary results of 
Scrumconix implementation in a Mexican AGSD company. 
II.
 
S
OFTWARE DEVELOPMENT METHOD DEFINITION
 
Scrumconix uses the project managing framework of 
Scrum [13], and part of the software engineering guide of 
ICONIX [14]. It is basically composed of two parts: Sprint 
Zero and Sprint One to N, described below. The Scrum 
activities that are not described is because they are unchanged. 
A.
 
Sprint Zero 
In this sprint the Scrum Team gets the overall project 
understanding, through the following phases.   
1)
 
Overall requirements gathering. 
The product owner 
gather overall project requirements supported with Graphic 
User Interface Storyboards (GUIs) (i.e. mockups, wireframes, 
etc.). Namely, while the product owner is gathering the client 
requirements, he could draw the corresponding GUIs, to better 
confirm the requirements understanding.   
   
2)
 
Domain and use case modeling. 
The product owner 
leads a two-hour meeting where, based on the product owner’s 
project knowledge and GUIs, the Scrum team develops the 
domain model. This model is an UML class diagram (without 
attributes and methods), that represents the real-world objects 
involved in the project. The domain model is refined 
throughout the project to reflect the current problem 
understanding. Then, in another session(s), the Scrum team 
develops the use cases diagram, supported by the domain 
model, GUIs and the product owner’s project knowledge. 
Subordinated use cases [15] are preferred since they are more 
useful in the estimation phase. 
 
3)
 
Reference software architecture.
 Based on the use cases 
diagram, domain model and product owner’s project 
knowledge about non-functional requirements, the Scrum 
team has the elements to propose a reference architecture (RA) 
[16] to the project.  
4)
 
Overall project estimation. 
Once the Scrum team 
knows the involved use cases and the project RA, the use case 
points technique could be applied for estimation. In this 
manner, a project’s end date could be obtained, as well as, 
project effort in terms of hour/person. 
2016 IEEE 11th International Conference on Global Software Engineering2329-6313/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2016.39195 5)
 
GUIs refinement. 
The product owner decides which use 
cases will be developed in the next sprint, and he gathers 
details of the involved GUIs, to have enough elements to plan 
the next sprint. This is because the requirements gathering 
phase doesn’t delve too deeply in details.
 
6)
 
Sprint planning
. In a four-hour meeting, the product 
owner and Scrum team plan the next sprint. In this meeting, 
the product owner presents the chosen use cases and their 
detailed GUIs. Since use cases were just identified, product 
owner and scrum team describe them in a collaborative 
manner using robustness diagrams [14]. In ICONIX, this 
diagram is used to analyze use cases description and to 
identify use cases objects. This objects could be boundary 
(GUIs or another system interfaces), entity (domain entities), 
and controllers (software actions). In our experience, we have 
observed that use case text could be omitted, due to robustness 
diagram (along with UML notes) could be clear enough to 
describe use cases flows. Thus, a robustness diagram is a 
graphic version of a use case textual description. While Scrum 
team draws the robustness diagrams, the domain model could 
be updated with class attributes and even new entities. Further, 
each object in the robustness diagram represents a sprint task, 
for instance: a boundary object could be a GUI coding task, 
and a control object could be a method coding task. Each of 
these tasks are small enough to be estimated through any agile 
estimation technique. Thus, new benefits could be obtained 
using robustness diagrams in sprint planning: (1) a lightweight 
documentation for each use case, (2) a collaborative way to 
get agreement about detailed functionality of each use case, 
and (3) easy task identification and estimation. 
In summary, with a few artifacts (GUIs, domain model, 
use cases diagram, reference architecture, and robustness 
diagrams), the understanding of a software project could be 
obtained. Thus, Sprint Zero is aligned with agile manifesto [6].  
B.
 
Sprint One to N 
The subsequent sprints (one to N) are composed of coding, 
testing, and refinement of: GUIs, use cases, and domain 
model. We describe Sprint One to N in the next paragraphs. 
1)
 
Coding. 
The Scrum team develops the corresponding 
use cases supported with robustness diagrams, RA, the domain 
model and the use case diagram
. 
 
2)
 
GUI Storyboards refinement.
 It is conducted in the 
same way as in the
 
previous sprint. The Product owner could 
receive new requirements
.  
3)
 
Test case development. 
Some AGSD teams have a 
dedicated testing team. In this case, when the Scrum team is 
coding, the testing team develops test cases based on 
robustness diagrams and GUIs. 
4)
 
Testing/Bug fixing. 
When a testing team exists, they 
conduct the test cases execution. When the same Scrum team 
tests their own code, we recommend using the corresponding 
robustness diagrams to follow all the use cases flows.
 
5)
 
Sprint planning. 
It conducted in the same way as in the 
previous sprint. The RA could be refined due to new 
requirements or the discovery of new details
.  
III.
 
P
RELIMINARY RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
 
Scrumconix was implemented with two teams (9 members 
total) in a Mexican AGSD company. After two months since its 
implementation, we obtained participants' opinions through a 
questionnaire and a focus group. They felt that the domain 
model domain model was useful to visualize the project’s 
scope, use cases diagrams helped them identify software 
functionality, and robustness diagrams provided a clear and 
common language. Also, these artifacts were sufficient to 
perform an accurate estimation and to produce test cases. 
Participants also said that the use of diagrams improved the 
communication between local and foreign team members. 
Finally, we can conclude that Scrumconix was perceived as 
useful and lightweight 
to document and understand a software 
project. However, when the client requests a change over a 
developed use case, participants do not update the 
corresponding artifacts. Also, the participants did not report 
any experiences about the use case points technique because 
they did not apply it. These issues have to be addressed in later 
studies.
 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1] J. Cho, “A Hybrid Software Development Method For Large-Scale 
Projects: Rational Unified Process With Scrum,” 
J. Issues Inf. Syst.
, 
2009. 
[2] VersionOne, “10th anual state of agile report,” 2015. 
[3] A. Smith, G., Sidky, 
Becoming Agile: ...in an imperfect world
. Manning, 
2009. 
[4] D. Šmite, P. J. Ågerfalk, and N. B. Moe, “Fundamentals of Agile 
Distributed Software Development,” in 
Agility Across Time 
and Space: 
Implementing Agile Methods in Global Software Projects
, 2010, pp. 1–
341. 
[5] A. Vizcaíno, F. García, M. Piattini, and P. Garrido, “El desarrollo global 
del software,” in 
Desarrollo Global de Software
, A. Vizcaíno, F. García, 
and M. Piattini, Eds. Ra-ma, 2014, pp. 37–58. 
[6] M. Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., 
Cunningham, W., Fowler, “The Agile Manifesto.” 2001. 
[7] D. Turk, R. France, and B. Rumpe, “Limitations of agile software 
processes,” in 
Third International Conference on Extreme Programming 
and Flexible Processes in Software Engineering
, 2002, pp. 43–46. 
[8] V. Clerc and P. Lago, “Architectural Knowledge Management Practices 
in Agile Global Software Development,” 2011. 
[9] H. M. Sneed, “Dealing with Technical Debt in agile development 
projects,” 
Lect. Notes Bus. Inf. Process.
, vol. 166 LNBIP, pp. 48–62, 
2014. 
[10] N. Uikey, U. Suman, and A. Ramani, “A Documented Approach in 
Agile Software Development,” 
Int. J. Softw. …
, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 13–22, 
2011. 
[11] T. Clear, “Documentation and Agile Methods: Striking a Balance,” 
SIGCSE Bull.
, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 12–13, Jun. 2003. 
[12] Y. Shmerlin, I. Hadar, D. Kliger, and H. Makabee, “To Document or 
Not to Document? An Exploratory Study on Developers’ Motivation to 
Document Code,” in 
Advanced Information Systems Engineering 
Workshops: CAiSE 2015 International Workshops
, A. Persson and J. 
Stirna, Eds. Stockholm, Sweden: Springer International Publishing, 
2015, pp. 100–106. 
[13] K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, “The scrum guide,” 
Scrum. org, Oct.
, 
vol. 2, p. 17, 2011. 
[14] D. Rosenberg and M. Stephens, 
Use Case Driven Object Modeling with 
UML: Theory and Practice
. Apress, 2008. 
[15] A. Cockburn, “Structuring Use Cases with Goals,” 
J. Object-Oriented 
Program.
, vol. Sept-Oct a, 1997. 
[16] P. Clements, F. Bachmann, L. Bass, D. Garlan, J. Ivers, R. Little, R. 
Nord, and J. Stafford, 
Documenting Software Architectures: Views and 
Beyond
. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
 
196