 Successfully transforming to Lean by changing the 
mindset in a global product development team 
 
Utpal Samanta, V. S. Mani 
Siemens Technology and Services Pvt. Ltd. 
Bangalore, India 
utpal.samanta@siemens.com, vs.mani@siemens.com  
 
Abstract
—this paper describes the experience of a global 
software engineering organization in transforming to Lean. 
Deploying Lean processes did result in several improvements, but 
the primary goal–usable software at the end of each takt 
(iterations or increments, or single-piece flow)–was not achieved. 
We recognized that to achieve the primary goal and larger 
benefits of Lean, we needed to change the mindset of the global 
development team, and we defined approaches to enable this 
change. We have described the steps taken to make this change. 
The results achieved are also presented. 
Keywords—Lean, global, software engineering, mindset, 
culture 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
We are a global software development organization within 
a large multinational corporation that develops mission critical 
software where the cost of failure is very high. We had 
decided to transform to le
an. Despite re-engineering the 
processes we still faced issues, and the main objective to have 
usable software after every takt was not achieved. In addition, 
several features were still spanning multiple takts. We realized 
that the essence of lean was not only the process but also the 
mindset–a mental model of how the world works [1].  
Fig. 1.
 
80 percent of the Lean opportunity is in the culture [2] 
In fact, it is estimated that effective enablement of Lean 
methodology depends 80 percent on culture and mindset, and 
only 20 percent on processes (see Fig. 1). We defined an 
approach to work on the changing the mindset. 
II.
 
B
ACKGROUND
 
The global development orga
nization was distributed 
across centers in Asia and Europe. The delivery centers 
reported into the global headquarters (see fig. 2). Key experts 
in areas such as architecture, product management, usability, 
domain related, and system testing were at the headquarters. 
 
 
Fig. 2.
 
The initial structure of the global development organization 
Things were going well and multiple releases were 
successfully delivered. However, the development of an 
innovative new product saw the global development team’s 
performance marred by significant time lags and cost 
overruns.  
 
The organization quickly realized this was due to 
challenges introduced by the new product such as cyclic 
dependencies across the requirements of different sub-
systems.  
 
To correct this situation, it was decided to deploy Lean 
practices with emphasis on takts to ensure coordination across 
all locations. A three-month long pilot project using Lean was 
started and three takts were planned.  
 
Based on the successful pilot, a complete project migrated 
to Lean. Subsequently, other projects followed. Within two 
years of deploying Lean we saw improvements in 
productivity, quality, and several other aspects [3].  
 
However, we were still unable to have completely usable 
software at the end of each takt and had to introduce additional 
takts exclusively for testing and fixing defects.  
2015 IEEE 10th International Conference on Global Software Engineering978-1-4799-8409-1/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICGSE.2015.17135 III.
 
C
HALLENGES
 
Our approach for Lean is based on nine core principles [3]. 
We had deployed the Lean processes across the entire global 
team. An assessment of the degree of implementation of Lean 
processes, which examined aspects such as the process map, 
process implementation, and usage of templates, showed the 
processes were being followed.  
 
This led us to realize there was a need to change the 
mindset of the global team so as to internalize six of the nine 
core elements (see Fig.3). 
Fig. 3.
 
Six of the nine core principles depended on mindset 
It is known that people’s beliefs have power and changing 
their beliefs–even the simplest beliefs–can have profound 
effects [4]. The teams worked on identifying their limiting 
beliefs [5] in each of the six mindset-dependent core principles 
of our approach. To do this, takt team speakers, Lean coaches, 
and seniors talked to the team members to identify what 
problems were limiting them with regard to the core 
principles. 
A.
 
Employee empowerment 
In project terms we focused on four things. One, that we 
are one global team and equally responsible and accountable 
for the business results. 
Two, every team member had to feel empowered to raise a 
red flag when a show-stopping problem was noticed. In the 
earlier operating model the red flags were only raised by 
managers and initially the team members were reluctant to do 
this as they considered raising a red flag as a responsibility of 
the managers. Overcoming this limiting belief required 
encouraging them to speak up when they saw problems in 
scope, quality issues, basically anything that could potentially 
lead to a project breakdown. In 
addition, it required creating a 
culture where team members felt free to ask questions.  
 
Three, the management had to learn to accept the red flags 
raised for valid reasons, and support the team and avoid the 
temptation to micromanage even when critical deadlines and 
milestones were delayed. 
 
Four, takt team members had to work as a team and 
assume full responsibility for their takt results. They had to 
feel empowered to say “if we need to achieve this, this is what 
we need to do”. Previously, teams were more or less working 
in silos on tasks that were given by headquarters, and an “I did 
as was told to” way of working was common. To overcome 
the prevailing mindset, they had to feel empowered to work as 
a team to solve problems and stand up for decisions they took.  
B.
 
Continuous improvement 
The aim was to make continuous improvement the core of 
our Lean journey and a part of our culture. In project terms, it 
meant creating more value through continuous improvement. 
It involved changing the mindset from local optimization to 
global systemic improvements and changing mindset of team 
members from “responsibility for a component” to 
“responsibility for the whole product”. This required team 
members to have a deeper understanding of the customer view 
of the requirements, and how these were met by the systems 
and solutions the team developed.  
C.
 
Quality is fixed (Scope variable, quality fix) 
This core principle emphasizes that quality cannot be 
compromised. All committed work products (takt results) had 
to be delivered on time, within budget, with specified quality. 
In project terms, it meant that the tasks picked by the team 
members had to be completed with the required quality within 
the takt. In the past requirements often spanned multiple takts, 
which resulted in late integration of few features leading to 
quality issues. This change in mindset was hard for team 
members who now had to appreciate the urgency and need for 
intensive collaboration between all locations.  
D.
 
QCD (Quality, Cost, and Delivery):  
The aim was to enable the mindset of all team members 
that they are fully accountable for the committed takt results 
delivered by them. This meant that team members had to 
indentify the dependencies for their takt results and ensure that 
the committed features are delivered according to the quality, 
cost, and delivery criteria. 
E.
 
Synchronized Processes 
The aim was to work hand in hand as one global team in a 
globally distributed organization. This meant the development 
of hardware, firmware, software, and end-user documentation 
had to be synchronized to ensure that at the end of each takt of 
equal duration, a usable version of the features was available. 
This required a mindset where all takt team synchronize their 
current status continually. 
F.
 
Usable software after each takt 
Team members had to develop a mindset that at the end of 
each takt, the all committed takt results had to be integrated, 
system tested, and releasable to internal customer. One of the 
challenges was the ability to define small testable user stories, 
136 which required breaking down larger functionality into smaller 
meaningful pieces across the entire product development. 
IV.
 
M
EASURES
 
To overcome the limiting beliefs and changing the 
mindsets we defined a series of measures that were rolled out 
across all locations. 
A.
 
Measures to empower employees  
1)
 
Takt kick-off meeting: 
In this meeting the commitment of the project takt team 
was communicated based on their assessment of 
feasibility. The project takt team had to take responsibility 
to deliver and honor the commitment with required quality.
 
This enabled the mindset of one team with one goal. 
2)
 
Process to raise red flags: 
This process helped team members to change their mindset 
and realize that raising a red to stop the line was 
everyone’s responsibility. In 
addition, valid red flags 
raised were appreciated and supported by the key 
stakeholders such as R&D head and product manager.  
3)
 
Expert support: 
This measure helped reinforce the mindset that team 
members were not alone in solving their day to day 
problems and had expert support. Team members were 
encouraged to reach out to expert in the communities of 
practice within the global team such as architecture, 
domain-specific topics, usability, while assessing 
feasibility and exploring solutions.  
4)
 
Competence development to take on global roles: 
We augmented our organization-wide training program [6, 
7], with the goal of providing team members cross-
functional competences and behavioral skills to take on 
global roles. This helped develop mindset that we are one 
global team where all delivery centers have equal 
accountability and responsibility for business results (see 
fig 4). In addition, it helped creating mindset that global 
roles are open to any deserving candidate at any center  
Fig. 4.
 
Changing the mindset from delivery sites to one global team 
The additional training focused on providing a deeper 
understanding of the complete system, the high-level 
architecture of the different components, detailed 
walkthrough of the designs of their specific components 
and modules. The training of team members was 
rigorously monitored by the project management team and 
was conducted by the experts in the team. The training also 
helped team members to effectively participate in different 
cross-functional teams.  
5)
 
Fun@work 
Fun@work is part of the organization-wide 4 C approach 
[5]. The aim of fun@work was to enable the mindset that 
work is fun, creative and challenging-work is not 
monotonous. Previously team members considered work to 
be very task oriented and monotonous. In addition, the 
fun@work initiative helped team members in solving 
problems creatively. It also helped intensify 
communication, cooperation, and collaboration. 
Fun@work included a reward for the best team in a takt, 
badges signaling commitment to the takt goal, introducing 
quality mascots to communicate thoughts on quality, and 
identifying quality ambassadors to strengthen the culture 
of quality.  
 
Empowerment stemmed from the new mindset of being 
one global team, the collaboration with team members within 
and across locations and the support that was global in nature. 
They knew they had the backing of their team while being 
responsible for their tasks. 
B.
 
Continuous improvement:  
The goal was to develop a mindset that continuous 
improvement is everyone’s responsibility and also nurture a 
sustainable culture across all levels through a structured 
approach. An outcome of this was a series of improvements 
which enabled the mindset of viewing problems through the 
eyes of customers. Previously all customer interactions and 
customer related information were only available at the 
headquarters.  
These include:  
1)
 
Defect analysis 
Field defects were analyzed at a system level by a cross-
functional team with representation from team members of 
all subsystems. In addition, the development team started 
to get monthly feedback from the Customer Care 
Department. 
2)
 
Job rotation 
Project team members are deputed to the Customer Care 
Department for a few months to understand first-hand real 
customer issues and usage of the systems and solutions we 
develop. 
3)
 
Meeting with product management 
Monthly meeting with the product management team were 
scheduled where the details of the market situation were 
shared and the development team could clarify 
requirements. This further strengthened customer 
orientation. 
4)
 
Participation in customer acceptance tests 
Developers are sent to participate in customer acceptance 
tests so that they understand the real configurations which 
enabled them to improve many aspects of the software 
such as workflow management and testing.  
5)
 
First demo to product management team 
Features were first demonstrated to product management 
and their feedback of the product management is 
incorporated in the next implementation of the feature. 
137 These measures helped the team in viewing problem 
situations through the eyes of the customer. This helped the 
global team understand the ramifications of the problem and in 
proposing solutions which helped minimize local optimization 
by moving from “responsibility for component” to 
“responsibility for the whole product.” 
C.
 
Quality is fixed: 
We introduced several measures to enable a mindset of 
quality within the team. This meant team members had to 
internalize that quality was priority. The committed quality for 
the takt results had to be achieved at the end of each takt. This 
meant that no open defects were permitted at release time and 
all requirements are successfully integrated. Teams had to 
assign the highest priority to open defects and re-rank new 
features. 
1)
 
Quality gates 
The quality gate, a set of eleven quality-related key 
performance indicators (KPIs), was defined for the Takt 
goal. If the component did not achieve the goal it was not 
integrated. One of the KPIs was the number of defects 
identified in system test. The goal for this KPI was zero 
severity 1 and severity 2 defects. 
2)
 
Fixing defects  
Fixing defects was the highest priority in a takt and had to 
be done before implementing new features. Every team 
member had a quality, cost, deliverable (scope) target. 
3)
 
Pick mandatory requirements to manage workload 
If the workload demanded, team members could only pick 
the mandatory tasks in a takt. 
D.
 
QCD (Quality, Cost, Delivery)  
1)
 
Takt teams given end-to-end responsibility for features 
Every takt team was assigned end-to-end responsibility for 
customer features. The takt team had to take ownership of 
the features assigned and had to view the feature through 
the eyes of the end user. The team had to do what was 
necessary for the feature to do what was expected of 
product, which is the essence of end-to-end responsibility.  
This measure helped move the team from “responsibility for 
component” to “responsibility for the whole product”. 
 
TABLE I. 
 
S
UMMARY OF 
C
HALLENGES AND 
M
EASURES
 
Core element 
Aim 
Challenge/Mindset change required 
Measures/ Enablers 
Employee 
empowerment 
•
 
Team members raise red 
flags when show-stopping 
problems are noticed. 
Management team accepts 
all red flags raised.  
•
 
Takt team members had to 
work as a global team and 
assume full responsibility 
for their takt results. 
•
 
Overcoming team members’ reluctance 
in taking on what was seen as a 
responsibility of a manager.  
•
 
Management to accept the red flags 
raised for valid reasons, and support the 
team.  
•
 
Moving away from the earlier “I did as 
I was told to” way of working.  
•
 
Takt kick-off meeting to communicate commitments. 
•
 
Process to raise red flags introduced to encourage team 
members raising concerns as soon as they were detected. 
•
 
Expert support to reinforce technical confidence in team 
members. 
•
 
Intensified training to provide team members an understanding 
of the overall system and detailed insights in their specific 
components.  
•
 
Fun@work initiatives to promote teamwork. 
Continuous 
improvement 
•
 
Value creation through 
continuous improvement. 
 
•
 
Make continuous improvement a part 
of our culture and this is responsibility 
of everyon in the organization. 
•
 
Intial focus on  viewing problems 
through the eyes of customers. 
 
•
 
Defect analysis by a cross-functional team with feedback from 
the Customer Care Department to understand the issues faced by 
customers. 
•
 
Job rotation involving deputation to the Customer Care 
Department to sensitize the team members to end-user issues 
and  the impact of defects. 
•
 
Meeting with product management to share details on the 
market situation and clarify details. 
•
 
Participation in customer acceptance tests to understand real 
configurations essential to improve workflows and testing. 
•
 
First demo to product management team to incorporate feedback 
in the next takt. 
Quality is 
fixed (Scope 
variable, 
quality fix) 
•
 
All work products had to be 
delivered on time, within 
budget, with specified 
quality within the takt. 
•
 
Quality cannot be compromised.  
Teams had to assign the highest 
priority to open defects and re-rank 
new features. 
•
 
Quality gates that ensure only code with acceptable quality is 
integrated. 
•
 
Fixing defects prioritized ensures the focus is always on creating 
high-quality software at every takt. 
•
 
Pick mandatory tasks only to manage workload. 
QCD 
(Quality, 
Cost, 
Delivery) 
•
 
Everyone is responsible for 
Quality, Cost, Delivery. 
•
 
All team members feel that they are 
fully accountable for the committed 
takt results delivered by them. 
•
 
Takt teams given end to end responsibility for features, which 
helped move the teams from component view to a product view. 
Synchronized 
processes 
•
 
All takt results to be 
synchoronized across the 
global organization. 
•
 
All takt teams synchronize their current 
status continually. 
•
 
Common processes, tools, KPIs, and takt duration. 
•
 
Status calls involved all key stakeholders ensured 
synchronization at all levels. 
•
 
Automation to enable continuous integration. 
Usable 
software after 
each takt 
•
 
At the end of each takt, 
software with committed 
features that met the quality 
criteria had to be delivered. 
•
 
All committed takt results had to be 
integrated, system tested, and 
releasable to internal customer by the 
end of each takt. 
•
 
Formation of cross-functional takt teams instead of traditional 
sub-system specific takt teams. 
•
 
Competence in writing smaller user stories that could be 
implemented, tested, and delivered in a single takt, by applying 
usage-centered design 
138  
E.
 
Synchronized processes 
We introduced measures to facilitate collaboration and 
cooperation between team members.  
1)
 
Common processes, tools, KPIs, and takt duration 
All locations shared the same lifecycle processes, used the 
same tools and had the same KPIs. In addition, the takt 
duration was the same across all locations, which was 
sacrosanct. 
2)
 
Status calls involved all key stakeholders 
Project status across all departments (engineering, product 
management, and customer care) was communicated at all 
levels through a global meeting attended by all key 
stakeholders ensured synchronization at all levels. 
3)
 
Automation 
The teams practiced continuous integration which was 
enabled by automation of daily builds. The takt teams had 
to maximize the test automation to assess the quality of the 
feature developed. This included extensive unit test 
automation, automated smoke tests after build roll out, and 
integration test automation. Coupled with the defect 
prioritization, the test automation enabled the teams to 
complete the testing in every takt.   
 
The synchronized processes help orchestrate the actions of 
the global team. 
F.
 
Usable software after each takt 
1)
 
Competence in writing smaller user stories 
Competence in writing smaller testable user stories was 
important towards achieving this. A smaller user story is 
one that can be implemented, tested, and delivered with the 
required quality in one takt. Workshops were organized to 
train product owners, architects, domain experts, test 
experts, developers, usability engineers, user 
documentation experts in usage-centered design, a basis 
for smaller user stories [9]. 
 
2)
 
Cross-functional takt teams 
Over time the requirements were not only more cross-
functional, but also introduced cyclic dependencies among 
the different sub-systems. To address this situation, cross-
functional takt teams were formed. Previously, takt teams 
were formed around sub-systems because the sub-systems 
were largely developed in a single location. This change 
led to increased collab
oration as the team was fully aware 
of the dependencies and could better plan their takt. This 
improvement also helped to overcome the limiting belief 
that multi-location takt teams cannot work. 
 
V.
 
R
ESULTS AND 
L
ESSONS 
L
EARNED
 
The measures introduced enabled the global team in being 
more productive as is reflected in the results presented below. 
A.
 
Results  
Mindset change works and is effective. The team delivered 
the higher quality, conforming to all release criteria. In one 
instance, the team delivered the product one week ahead of 
schedule, with 20 percent more requirements than committed 
at 10 percent less than the budgeted cost. The team 
engagement was very high reflected in a retention rate of over 
95 percent. 
B.
 
Lessons learned 
We present some of the things we would do if we had to re-
live the journey. 
1)
 
Focus on mindset from the begining 
We started the migration to Lean with full focus on process 
but learned that, in a globally 
distributed development team 
it’s more important to focus on changing the mindset. 
2)
 
Continuous improvement: 
Continuous improvement is the core of the Lean journey. 
3)
 
Work as one team 
In a globally distributed development organization, it’s critical 
to work as one team. 
4)
 
Customer focus: 
Always view problems through the eyes of customers 
5)
 
Fun@Work 
Being people-centric business, it’s essential that teams enjoy 
their work. 
R
EFERENCES
 
 
[1]
 
Mary Poppendieck and Tom Poppendieck, “Lean Mindset”, Addison-
Wesely, 2014  
[2]
 
Christian Schmidkonz, Dr. Alexander Gerber, “Agile Software Product 
Development at SAP in the Context of Lean”, Presentation at OOP 2011  
[3]
 
Uma Viswanath, “Lean transformation: how lean helped to achieve 
quality, cost and schedule: case study in a multi-location product 
development team”, 2014 IEEE Ninth International Conference on 
Global Software Engineering 
[4]
 
Carol. S. Dweck, "Mindset: The New Psychology of Success", Random 
House, 2006 
[5]
 
John Whitmore, "Coaching for Performance: GROWing Human 
Potential and Purpose - The Principles and Practice of Coaching and 
Leadership", Nicholas Brealey Publishing; 4th Edition, 2009 
[6]
 
Ganesh Samarthyam, Girish Suryanarayana, Arbind Kumar Gupta, 
Raghu Nambiar, "FOCUS: an adaptation of a SWEBOK-based 
curriculum for industry requirements." International Conference on 
Software Engineering Article 2012 
[7]
 
Gerd Hoefner, V. S. Mani, “4 C: An approach for effective people 
management in an offshore software development center.” 2012 IEEE 
Seventh International Conference on Global Software Engineering 
[8]
 
Peter Hines, Pauline Found, Gary Griffiths and Richard Harrison, 
“Staying lean: thriving, not just surviving, Second Edition”, Auerbach 
Publications, 2011 
[9]
 
Mike Cohn, “User Stories Applied: For Agile Software Development”, 
Addison-Wesley, 2004 
 
 
139