 Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
   95Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Global is prohibited.ABSTRACTIt has been argued that competitive necessities will increasingly require OSS companies to participate in 
cooperative business networks in order to offer the complete product/service (whole product) demanded 
by customers. It is envisaged that these business networks will enhance the business models of participant 

while such propositions have intuitive appeal, there is a lack of empirical research on such networks. This 
article examines Zea Partners, a network of small open source companies cooperating to deliver the ‚whole 
product™ in the area of content management systems (CMSs). It investigates how participation in the net
-
faced by the network. The article concludes that reconciling the coordination needs of OSS networks with 




Delivering the ‚Whole Product™: Business Model Impacts and Agility 
Challenges in a Network of Open Source FirmsJoseph Feller, University College Cork, Ireland 
Patrick Finnegan, University College Cork, Ireland 
Jeremy Hayes, University College Cork, Ireland
INTRODUCTIONResearchers (Agerfalk, Finnegan, Hayes, Lun
-dell, & Ostling, 2006; Feller, Finnegan, Hayes, 
& Lundell, 2006a; Fitzgerald, 2006) have re
-
should adopt a ‚whole product™ approach (cf. 
Moore, 1999) by forming a network/ecosystem 
of partners with complementary capabilities 
ﬁto offer a professional product and service in 
an agile, bazaar-friendly mannerﬂ (Fitzgerald, 
2006, p. 294). This ‚whole product™ approach is 
consistent with the challenges of ﬁproductizing 
OSSﬂ discussed by Woods and Guliani (2005), 
as well as developments in the production and 
use of other complex product/service offerings 
as discussed by Davidow and Malone (1992). 
This approach is regarded as appropriate when 

variety of customized products, and when the 
nature of the product development process 
IGI PUBLISHINGThis paper appears in the publication, Journal of Database Management, Volume 19, Issue 2edited by © 2008, IGI Global701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Suite 200, Hershey PA 17033-1240, USA
Tel: 717/533-8845; Fax 717/533-8661; URL-http://www.igi-global.com
ITJ4143 96   Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Globalis prohibited.means that individual organizations do not have 

of product design (Davidow & Malone, 1992; 
Huang, 2001). In such circumstances, market 
forces require organizations with similar goals 
to align themselves in IT-mediated partner net
-works in order to meet customer requirements 
(Stafford, 2002).
Moore (1999) popularized the concept 
of the ‚whole product™ as the cornerstone of 
market-driven, rather than product-driven, 
businesses. However, the concept resonates 
with the dynamics of the open source software 
phenomenon, which, due to the licensing struc
-ture, emphasizes services and meta-services 
surrounding the artifact. Indeed, Woods and 
Guliani (2005) describe as the challenge of 
‚productizing™ open source software as the need 

and related services. Thus, networks of cooper
-ating, small, open source software organizations 
may represent what Clemons and Row (1992) 
term a ﬁmove-to-the middle,ﬂ where networks 
of organizations interact in order to deliver 
value (in the form of the whole product) to the 
end consumer.
This article examines Zea Partners, a busi
-
-agement systems and selling related services, 
all based around the Zope application server. It 
investigates how participation in the network 
augments the business models of participant 

-
the network in trying to ensure the business 
agility necessary to offer the ‚whole product™. 
The article begins by discussing the theoretical 
foundation for the study. Next, the research 
objective and research methods are discussed. 
The case environment is then outlined and 


to share business model components within 
a centrally managed network, and to engage 
in agile competitive practices by making net
-work-level changes in response to changes in 
the external environment. The need to address 
adaptability and alignment issues in addition to 
business agility is highlighted, however. Con
-sequently, the article concludes that reconciling 
the coordination needs of OSS networks with 

a critical issue if such networks are to achieve 

in a bazaar-friendly manner.
THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
OSS has been investigated from a variety of 
disciplinary and theoretical perspectives. The 
two dominant research themes, however, have 
been: (1) OSS software engineering tools and 
techniques and (2) the socio-cultural analysis 
of OSS communities. Commercial organiza
-tions are under-represented in the research, not 
just in terms of quantity, but more importantly 
in terms of depth of research. In particular, 
the understanding of economic and business 
model issues surrounding OSS is limited (Feller, 
Finnegan, Kelly, & MacNamara, 2006b). In 
this section, we draw on the wider literature 
on business models and business networks to 
develop the theoretical grounding for our study. 
In particular, we examine how extant research on 
business models and networks can improve our 

to form the type of agile business ecosystems 
envisaged by Fitzgerald (2006).In keeping with the increasing com
-mercialization of OSS, researchers such as 
Krishnamurthy (2005), Weber (2004), Spiller 
and Wichmann (2002), Raymond (2001), and 
Hecker (2000) have documented a series of 
OSS business models. However, much of this 
work concentrates on the source of the revenue 
stream and neglects other aspects of the busi
-ness models. This is not surprising, as the terms 
‚business model™ and ‚revenue model™ are fre
-quently, and incorrectly, used interchangeably. 
Looking outside the OSS literature, it is evident 
from the work of Timmers (1999), Mahadevan 
(2000), and Osterwalder and Pigneur (2002) 
that business models must examine value-add
-ing activities in the context of a supply chain 
or business network. Osterwalder and Pigneur 
(2002) propose a comprehensive approach, and 
detail an ontology that focuses on four aspects 
 Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
   97Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Global is prohibited.of the organization: product innovation, infra
-structure management, customer relationship, 

business model as a blend of three streams: 
value, revenue, and logistics. The value stream 
is concerned with the value proposition for buy
-ers, sellers, and market makers. The revenue 

earn revenue, and the logistics stream involves 
detailing how supply chain issues will affect the 
organizations involved. Timmers (1999) argued 
that architectures for business models can be 

-struction of a value chain. Value chain elements 

-mation can be integrated both within the value 
chain and between the respective value chains 
of interacting parties. Furthermore, Evans and 
Wurster (2000) argue that as more advanced 
information standards are introduced, levels 
of collaboration between organizations can be 
achieved that were previously only possible 
within a vertically integrated hierarchical intra-
organizational structure. Thus, many economic 
entities have recognized the importance of the 
composition of the supply chain (or business 

(Christiaanse, 2005).
-lationships have been advocated for decades 
(Kaufman, 1966; Van de Ven, 1976; Cash & 
Konsynski, 1985; Henderson, 1990; Finnegan, 
Galliers, & Powell, 2003). These relationships 
have been described as business webs (Tapscott, 
Ticoll, & Lowy, 2000), partnerships (Hender
-son, 1990), networks (Nelson, 1988; Joynt, 
1991; Finnegan et al., 2003), strategic alliances 
(Joynt, 1991; Bronder & Pritzl, 1992; Lei & 
Slocum, 1992), virtual organizations (Davidow 
& Malone, 1992; Goldman, Nagel, & Preiss, 
1995), joint ventures (Kanter, 1989; Oliver, 
1990; Campell, Hollingsworth, & Lindberg, 
1991), service consortia and stakeholder or 
value-chain partnerships (Kanter, 1989), promo
-tional and obligation networks (Campell et al., 
1991), agency federations, trade associations, 

-cial interlocks, and agency-sponsor linkages 
(Oliver, 1990).
The reasons for such business cooperation 
include: resource procurement and allocation 
(Galaskiewicz, 1985; Clemons & Row, 1992; 
Alter & Hage, 1993), political advantages 
(Galaskiewicz, 1985), risk sharing and acquir
-ing expertise (Alter & Hage, 1993), stability 
(Oliver, 1990), legitimacy (Galaskiewicz, 1985; 

& Row, 1992), and innovating (Ticoll, Lowy, 
& Kalakota,
 1998). Participants in business 
networks believe that collaboration will result 

the ability to change 
rapidly while providing customized services or 
products at a low cost (Alter & Hage, 1993). 
Thus, the ability to quickly assess new busi
-ness opportunities, to identify suitable trading 
partners, and to effectively coordinate delivery 
of products and services across the business 
network is important (Sadeh, Hildum, & 
Kjenstad, 2003). Following this logic, agility 
is seen as an important characteristic of busi
-ness networks.Agility is a business-wide capability that 
includes organizational structures, information 
systems, logistics processes, and mindsets 
(Christopher, 2000). The term agility has cre
-
(Lo, 1998) and is recognized as a prerequisite 
for success in dynamic or turbulent environ
-ments (Christopher, 2000; Camarinha-Matos, 
Afsarmanesh, & Rabelo, 2003). Fingar (2000) 
believes that ﬁthe ability to change is now more 
important than the ability to create–Change 

business and technology architectures whose 


(1999) argue that the concept of agility has two 
main attributes: responding to change promptly 
and appropriately, and capitalizing on the oppor
-tunities that are created by change. In a business 
network, agility is highly dependent not only 


(Camarinha-Matos et al., 2003). Infrastructure 

 98   Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Globalis prohibited.characteristic of the agile organization (Chris
-topher, 2000), and is dependent on both internal 
and external factors (Thomke & Reinertsen, 
1998). External factors include changes in the 
needs of the end customer, while internal factors 
include changes in the development process. 
Thomke and Reinertsen (1998) argue that design 

a development strategy that can endure a higher 
probability of design changes, (2) having the 
ability to produce late changes to the product 
design in order to better integrate it with the 
technology and the needs of the customer, and 
(3) preventing late changes to the product design 
by making design commitments at a very late 
stage in the development process.To conclude, agile business networks de
-signed to meet customer demands for custom
-ized products are reasonably well understood 

recent work by Woods and Guliani (2005) and 
Fitzgerald (2006) has drawn attention to the 
importance of agile networks to OSS busi
-
emerged from various OSS communities and 
thus cannot be considered to be the same as 

research on business networks to date. There
-fore, there is a need for further research on the 
development of agile bazaar-friendly business 
ecosystems to deliver whole products in the 
OSS domain.RESEARCH O
BJECTIVE AND METHODThe objective of this study is to explore the 
emerging phenomenon of a business network 

product™. Two research questions were formu
-lated to support this objective:RQ1: 
How does an OSS network affect the busi
-ness models of participant organizations?
RQ2: What challenges are faced in ensuring 
that the network is agile?Case studies are regarded as the most com
-monly used qualitative research method in IS 
and are especially useful for studying organi
-zational aspects of IS (Benbasat, Goldstein, & 
Mead, 1987). Cases are most appropriate when 
the objective involves studying contemporary 
events, without the need to control variables or 
subject behavior (Yin, 1994). The single case 
study method is considered to be a potentially 
rich and valuable source of data, while suited 
to exploring relationships between variables 
in their given context (Yin, 1994; Benbasat et 
al., 1987). We thus adopted a ﬁsoft positivistﬂ 
epistemology as discussed by Kirsch (2004), and 
our method follows in the tradition of Eisenhardt 
(1989) and Madill, Jordan, and Shirley (2000); 
it is designed to reveal preexisting, relatively 
stable, and objectively extant phenomena and 
the relationships among them in a manner that 

constructs.The subject of the case study (Zea Partners) 
was chosen as it represented an interesting case 
in the area of open source business practice in 
that it is one of a small number of such networks 
aiming to deliver the ‚whole product™ in an OSS 

a thorough archival search to determine the 
existence of public domain material on the 
network and participant companies. As a result 
of this preliminary analysis, the researchers 
prepared a case study protocol (cf. Yin, 1994). 
Based on this protocol, 16 interviews took place 

a 17-month period from November 2004 to 

separate interviews with the network founder 
(elite interviewing, cf. Marshall & Rossman, 
1989) and also participated in four intensive 
workshops with network members during this 
time which facilitated member checking. The 
choice of interviewees was based on a number 
of factors. These were:
1. Willingness to cooperate: 
In order to 
obtain useful material, it was necessary for 
a potential interviewee to be interested in 
the study and willing to cooperate. Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
   99Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Global is prohibited.2. History of network involvement: 
Inter-viewees had to have been involved in ongo
-ing network planning and/or project activity 
over a period of time. A consequence of 
this selection criterion was that the views 
of recent members were not studied.3. Seniority: In order to get contextual ma
-terial on business strategy and experience 
with network activities, it was necessary 
to speak with senior staff within each part
-
criterion was that the views of junior staff 
were not studied.Interviews, conducted using an interview 
guide (cf. Patton, 1980) were generally of one- 
to two-hour duration, with follow-up telephone 

emerged during transcription. Interviews were 
complemented by comprehensive reviews of 
documents and presentations at the workshops. 
The content analysis was conducted using 
Osterwalder and Pigneur™s (2002) business 
model framework as well as Aitken et al.™s 
(2002) and Lee™s (2004) agility frameworks. 
This is in line with Lee and Baskerville (2003), 
who, in addressing the issue of generalization, 
describe the process of generalizing from theory 
to empirical description (whereby the research 

to another one).Case EnvironmentZea Partners was founded in 2003 as the Zope 
Europe Association (ZEA) and changed its name 
to Zea Partners in 2006. Headquartered in Bel
-gium, Zea Partners operates as an international 
network of businesses that build software and 
deliver services around the application server 
technology called Zope, which is widely used 
for developing content management systems, 
intranets, portals, and related applications. Zea 

-ing partners and 16 associate partners located 
in The Netherlands, Italy, Norway, Belgium, 
Germany, the United Kingdom, Lithuania, the 
United States, Spain, France, and South Africa. 
The management team seeks project contracts 
on behalf of network members and performs 
network management activities such as market
-ing and project management. The team also 
develops the network™s business strategy in 
conjunction with the managing partners.The partner companies are typically small 
(10 people or less). These companies have 
recognized that their size limits the contract 
(deal) sizes for which they could effectively 
compete, as well as their geographic range. 

that a number of companies can pool their 
resources to compete for larger contracts on a 
global scale. More importantly, in the context 
of competing on the basis of a whole product, 
the network allows partners to offer a full range 
of value chain activities, rather than concentrat
-ing exclusively on their own specialties (e.g., 
development, consultancy, training, etc.). The 
network is currently working on ensuring that 
all partners can conduct marketing under the 
one brand.According to the network™s founder, the 
goal is:–to say that we have the whole product. We 
are going to group together all the people who 
need a whole product made but can™t invest the 
resources to do it, and then take that whole 
product and make it offerable by anyone in 

-ability it™s just amazing. It™s really the only way 

He sees this as being the value proposition 
of the network, and acknowledges that, through 
partnering, the network can compete for larger 
deal sizes without competing directly with the 
large international consulting companies. In 
comparing the Zea Partners network with such 
consulting companies, he notes the increased 

he argues that:
Instead of having a cathedral
1 model of Accen
-ture, or something like that, we want to have 
multiple players in multiple countries. We can 
 100   Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Globalis prohibited.move things around as new trends emerge, new 
specialties emerge, stuff like that.ﬂ
He also highlights the importance of the 
fact that:The people in the network are the people that 
created Silva, the creators of Plone, the creators 

creators of each one of these things. And we 
want to explain to customers that it™s in their 
interests to have a relationship that rewards 

the guy who wrote it can get the job done at a 
pretty effective rate.
However, due to the early stage of de
-
coordination amongst partners is still on a 
person-to-person basis. There is an acknowl
-edged need amongst members to evolve the 
organization of the network towards the use 
of quotas, geographical regions, and so forth. 
To date, coordination has meant observing 
trademark and domain rules, as well as some 
network terms and conditions to ensure that 
products/services delivered by partners meet 
the expectations of the customer. Finally, he 
acknowledges that it is critical to build trust 
amongst partners so that invoices are paid on 
time and other responsibilities are met.FindingsThe Osterwalder and Pigneur business model 
ontology was used as a lens to investigate how 
the presence of the Zea Partners network affects 


per the pillars of the Osterwalder and Pigneur 
(2002) framework, and are discussed below.
Zea Partners enhances the value that mem
-
target customer 
segment
 (
value proposition
) by allowing smaller 
organizations to group together to deliver the 
whole product as part of a consortium. The 
fact that the network spans many geographic 
territories with multiple languages and special
-ized local knowledge means that a consortium 
made up of small organizations can compete 

-eration increases the range of projects in which 
members can become involved. Zea Partners 
covers 12 different countries which, from a 
geographical spread, makes it comparable 
with a large company. In terms of targeting 
customers, the Zea Partners brand is purpose
-fully designed to be a mark that distinguishes 
participants in the network as being leaders in 
the market. Thus, organizations must already 
have a good reputation before they can join 
the network. The Zea Partners network also 
enhances the business model of participants 
by adding to the range of 
capabilities that 
underpin their value propositions. Many of 
the Zea Partners members are small start-ups 
that consist of two to four people with mostly 

of Zea Partners membership has, thus, been 
the ability to access Zea Partners™ expertise in 
areas such as project management, customer 
relationship management, requirements man
-agement, tendering, and sales to complement 
technical expertise. According to the founder of 
one of the participant companies (Infrae), the 
development of 
capabilities
 within Zea Partners 
is vital to delivering a professional service. In 
relation to the production of documentation, 
he noted that ﬁover time we gradually removed 
all dependencies on the community, because it 
was completely unpredictable.ﬂWith regard to 
information strategy,
 Zea 
Partners™ stated aim is to ﬁlearn together, share 
experiences and refer leads to each other.ﬂ 
However, as yet, resource problems have lim
-ited Zea Partners™ ability to meet their ideal in 
terms of information
 strategy. Nevertheless, 
Zea Partners are proving very successful in 
enhancing the manner in which a participant 

feel and serve
). The market for Zope and Plone is character
-
network with whom they want to do business. 
A key value added by Zea Partners is that the 


where the demand for Plone services exceeds 
 Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
   101Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Global is prohibited.supply, Zea Partners can partner with member 

leaving the local participant with ownership 
of the customer. Furthermore, a key aspect of 
customer relationships amongst open source 

trust and loyalty
 can be enhanced 
by providing access to the originator of the 
software. Thus, Zea Partners aims to assemble 
project teams that contain relevant software 
The OSS network model necessitates the 
inter-organizational management of business 
infrastructure. A key challenge has been inte
-grating different participants in a seamless man
-ner to deliver the ‚whole product™ to customers. 
Zea Partners aims to lower friction in inter-or
-ganizational teams by establishing a common 
approach through the use of 
resources, 
for example: standing contracts, having customer 

-ology or a common way of thinking about a 
problem, assigning work, tracking results, and 
reporting bugs. This is summed up by the Zea 
Partners founder as being the:–big difference between a rabble and an army. 
You can take a thousand people that speak dif
-ferent languages, that never worked together 
and they can get defeated by 50 people that 
are well trained.
Business Model PillarEffect of Zea Partners on Members™ Business Models
Product 
InnovationTarget Customer Seg
-mentEnhances reputation and branding of participants by providing a single ‚market leader™ brand
Value Proposition
Extends geographic coverage, supports the ability to offer spe
-cialized expertise, products and services in many languages, and leveraging local knowledgeCapabilitiesEnhances existing capabilities by providing a broader range of business capabilities, especially project management and customer relationship managementCustomer 
RelationshipInformation StrategyAims to provide lead referrals and to contribute to the sharing of experiences and knowledgeFeel and ServeTrust and Loyalty
Leverages access to expertise of software originators to build customer trustInfrastructure 
ManagementResourcesLowers friction when building teams, through information shar-ing, common methodology, tracking results, reporting bugs, and 
so forthnetwork reduces the information asymmetry between client and consultant resulting in customers ‚joining™ the community
Partner NetworkNetwork means that members do not have to outsource to part-ners outside the networkFinancialsRevenue ModelIncreases deal size for members by creating ﬁwhole productﬂ consortiaCost StructureEnables cost-sharing amongst membersIncreases revenue and lowers expenses through sharing among Table 1. Effects of Zea Partners network on participants™ business models
 102   Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Globalis prohibited.This approach is also evident in the Zea 
Partners approach to the 

-tivities and processes at the level of individual 

network allows members to act as a ‚value shop™ 
(cf. Stabell & Fjelstad, 1998) or service provider 


-ing, choice, execution, control, and evaluation) 
as if they were one integrated organization. One 
of the areas where Zea Partners differs from the 
ﬁvalue shopﬂ concept (as per Stabell & Fjelds
-tad, 1998) is that in the traditional ﬁvalue shopﬂ 
model, the information asymmetry between 
the client and the service provider (in this case 

drivers and results in high prices. This is not 
seen as desirable by Zea Partners. Instead the 
network endeavors to reduce this asymmetry so 
that the customer, instead of being a recipient 
of content management, becomes a participant 
in the OSS community:There are certain people that need support 
contracts. There has not been a need for it in 
any of the projects we have been involved in. 
I™m a big believer in teaching the people to 

themselves.(Chief Architect, Plone Solutions)
Finally, in relation to infrastructure man
-agement, the 
partner network
 aspect of the 
business model is a service that Zea Partners 
completely operates on behalf of its members. 
Thus they do not need to outsource activities 
to non-member organizations.
Enhancing the 

 of the busi
-ness models of participants is a key objective of 
the Zea Partners network. Zea Partners aims to 
increase the ‚deal size™ that members can tender 

aspect of the Zea Partners™ approach is, thus, 
the sharing of resources and common expenses. 
Thus participants can focus on key value-adding 
activities of their business models, while shar
-ing the resources, costs, and risks of secondary 
value activities. An interesting revenue model 
arising in relation to OSS companies providing 
consulting services is an effort to move away 

This move is occurring as the constant innova
-tion with OSS results in the need for much less 
customization and thus shorter development 

-lenges for network-based project management 

the participant providing the service.The discussion of Table 1 above refers to 
the effects of the Zea Partners network on the 
business models of the network participants, and 
not the business model(s) of Zea Partners itself. 
However, the various effects, taken as whole, 
result in the Zea Partners network operating as 
an entity in its own right, and engaging in agile 
competitive practices. Aitken et al. (2002) pres
-ent a framework for understanding agility in the 
context of internal activities such as marketing, 
production, design, organization, management, 
and people. This framework is utilized in the 
present study as a tool for describing the agile 
characteristics of Zea Partners, as summarized 
in Table 2 and discussed below.
The members of Zea Partners are already 
independently able to utilize recognition of the 
Zope and Plone brands as a marketing tool, but 


Partners promotes agile marketing in several 
ways, such as simplifying brand management 
(one brand vs. many) and allowing the network 

reducing the burden on individual members 
(e.g., in order to increase brand awareness of 
Zea Partners and its member organizations, the 
founder is active in giving interviews, attend
-ing conferences, etc.). The long-term goal of 

so that the network can project a professional 
image on behalf of the member organizations 
that simply would not possess the resources to 
do this individually.
The most important characteristic of Zea 
Partners vis-à-vis production is its ability to 
leverage the large amount of diverse skills pos
-sessed by the member organizations. According 
to the chief architect of Plone Solutions: Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
   103Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Global is prohibited.The thing that will make the network strong 

can swap out components or companies. If one 
company does not have the domain knowledge 
we normally have another company–It™s very 
Thus, the network allows delivery of the 
‚whole product™, which would not be possible 
for the smaller members to do as a stand-alone 
provider. Likewise, many design issues associ
-ated with delivering the whole product are ad
-dressed through leveraging common experience 
with a common set of tools, working practices, 
communication norms, and cultures that serve 
to harmonize and integrate the practices of 
In terms of organizational activity, while 
the network facilitates matching member com
-petency with customer need, Zea Partners does 
not currently use explicit coordination processes 
to schedule work. Previous attempts to do so 
have had negative results
for example, an 

not to accept new work for a certain time period 

the client organization was unable to sign the 
contracts in the agreed timeframe, thus trapping 

-ity. However, by not having explicit scheduling 
mechanisms in place, Zea Partners believes 
that it is more agile than traditional consulting 

more dynamically and effectively and thus to 
smooth out the peaks and valleys that are a 
characteristic of technology consulting and 
development work.From a management perspective, the 
goal of Zea Partners is to ensure that network 
management and governance does not impede 

the fact that open source software is by nature 
highly decentralized. The founder of Zea Part
-ners believes that this fact results in ﬁa higher 

open source space are thus better equipped to 

example, while a larger proprietary software 

particular language because the market is not 

leverage the work of individual developers 
and smaller groups who wish to support that 
language. Having a decentralized governance/
management structure and a decentralized ap
-proach to consulting means that if a need is 
encountered for an unanticipated skill set, it is 
less of a problem to meet the need than it would 
be in the traditional consulting model. Finally, 
in relation to people, Zea Partners leverages the 
availability of access to the original author(s) 
and/or core maintainer(s) of the software 
Activity Area
Key CharacteristicsMarketingProductionNetwork provides harmonized and integrated collection of diverse production processes and capabilities to deliver the whole productDesignNetwork provides harmonized and integrated collection of diverse design processes and capabilities to deliver the whole productOrganization
Network serves as competency rallying mechanism to deliver multi-lingual, whole prod-uct services across a wide geographic areaManagementNetwork distributes responsibility and revenue through simple, decentralized, and trans-parent network governance structuresPeopleNetwork provides customers with access to original software authors and/or experts with unique competenciesTable 2. Agile characteristics of Zea Partners
 104   Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Globalis prohibited.products to respond to customer demand in an 
agile fashion.Zea Partners is made up of a number of au
-tonomous organizations, each having different 
philosophies, operating in different countries, 
and meeting the needs of a diverse group of 
clientsmeaning that it can draw from a wider 
variety of experiences. The chief architect of 
Plone noted that
 there are consequential social 
and management challenges:You will, of course, get the complexity that comes 
from coordinating different companies with dif
-ferent working styles, and the whole chemistry 
thing where not all people have worked with 
the other people all the time.The business agility challenges that are 
faced by the network were analyzed using the 
work of Lee (2004) as a lens. He expands on 
the concept of internal agility by also consider
-ing the adaptability of a supply chain as well 
as the alignment of players within that supply 
chain. Lee™s work is used to frame the content 
analysis of agility-related challenges facing 
Zea Partners and is summarized in Table 3. The 
categorization of challenges according to this 

beyond agility to matters of adaptability and 
alignment. Consequently, while Zea Partners 
has been able to engage in agile competitive 
practices, the challenges that management has 
articulated indicate the need to move beyond 
short-term agile practices to consider structural 
and technological changes in OSS markets, and 
create performance incentives.CONCLUSIONThis article has responded to the need to 
expand our understanding of economic and 
business aspects of the OSS phenomenon (cf. 
Feller et al., 2006b) by exploring the business 
model and agility aspects of participation by 
open source companies in a business network 
designed to deliver the ‚whole product™ (cf. 
Fitzgerald, 2006). This participation is seen by 
those studied as a business imperative in order 

sizes™ with traditional integrated companies. The 
study indicates that participation in the network 

elements of their business model to the network. 
This is particularly evident in the division of 
responsibility for customer-facing activities 
between participants and the central network. 
It is this division of responsibility that results in 
the network being able to engage in agile com
-petitive practices, as network-level changes can 
be made rapidly in response to changes in the 
external environment. Thus, the challenges that 
the network faces in ensuring that the multitude 
of reciprocal interdependencies necessary for 
the delivery of a whole product do not adversely 
affect the agility of the network. Nevertheless, it 

for the network in competing in the software 
and consulting sector. It is evident that further 
work is necessary to address adaptability and 
alignment issues.The need for agility, adaptability, and align
-ment is a problem in all business networks. How
-ever, Zea Partners is not typical of other business 
networks, which rely on formal coordination 
mechanisms and legal agreements. Rather we 
observe that the relatively informal characteris
-
the informal structures characteristic of the 
online communities of OSS developers from 

two approaches to the coordination issue is a 
critical issue for future research if OSS networks 

Hage, 1993) and to deliver whole products in a 
‚bazaar-friendly™ manner (Fitzgerald, 2006).
Overall, our study contributes to the un
-derstanding of the commercialization of open 
source software. Previous studies of commercial 


and JBoss (e.g., Krishnamurthy, 2005; Watson, 
Wynn, & Boudreau, 2005) or very large multi-
nationals like Apple, IBM, and Sun (e.g., West, 
2003). Our study examines the perspective of 

business network in a manner that takes more 
complete consideration of the business model 
 Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
   105Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Global is prohibited.AGILITY 
Objectives:To respond to short-term changes 
in demand or supply quickly and to handle external disruptions smoothlyKey Challenges:to ‚smooth out peaks and valleys™ associated with traditional 
work Foster collaborative relationships with partners based on the need for particular competencies Develop network-level competencies (e.g., project manage-ment) to complement the core activities of participantsADAPTABILITY 
Objectives:To adjust the network™s design to 
meet structural shifts in markets; to modify supply network to strategies, products, and technologiesKey Challenges: Leverage partner expertise in different geographical regions 
to understand the market for the total product Plan for the introduction of new members into the network to meet requirements for particular competencies; also, ensure an adequate evaluation of potential members Create an understanding of the needs of different types of 
customers (typically niche markets that traditional competitors do not serve) Effectively manage the expertise of network partners to en
-sure that the competencies of the network evolve in response to changes in the product technologies that originate outside the networkALIGNMENT 
Objectives:To create incentives for better 
performanceKey Challenges: Exchange information and knowledge freely amongst network partners Manage partner responsibilities in delivering the whole product in a manner that allows partners to focus on their core competencies Effectively provide non-core competencies in a manner 
model components to the network Equitably share risks, costs, and gains of initiatives Enable customers to understand the business value of engag-ing with and contributing to the OSS communityTable 3. Key challenges for Zea Partners
concept than has been done to date in the OSS 
domain. Nevertheless, the methodology utilized 
for the study was exploratory, and thus the 

should be duplicated as part of the process of 

just exploratory. In particular, further research 
is needed to replicate the study by assessing the 
results in a wider variety of networks.ACKNOWLEDGMENTThe present work was funded by the European 
Commission (via IST Project 004337) and by 
the Irish Research Council for the Humanities 
and Social Sciences (via the O3C Business 
Models project). 106   Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Globalis prohibited.REFERENCESAgerfalk, P., Finnegan, P., Hayes, J., Lundell, B., & 
Ostling, M. (2006, June). 12 (not so) easy pieces: 
Grand challenges for open source software. 
Proceed
-ings of the 14th European Conference on Information 
Systems, Gotenburg, Sweden.
Alter, C., & Hage, J. (1993). 
Organisations working 
together.
 London: Sage.Benbasat, I., Goldstein, D.K., & Mead, M. (1987). 
The case research strategy in studies of information 
systems. MIS Quarterly, 11
(3), 369Œ386.Bronder, C., & Pritzl, R. (1992). Developing strategic 
alliances: A conceptual framework for successful 
co-operation. 
European Management Journal,
 10(4), 412Œ421.Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsarmanesh, H., & Rabelo, 
R.J. (2003). Infrastructure developments for agile vir
-tual enterprises. 
International Journal of Computer 
Integrated Manufacturing, 16(4Œ5), 235Œ254.Campell, J.L., Hollingsworth, J.R., & Lindberg, 
L.N. (Eds.). (1991). 
The governance of the American 
economy.
 New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cash, J.I., & Konsynski, B.R. (1985). IS redraws 
competitive boundaries. Harvard Business Review,
 63(2), 131Œ142.
integration hubs. 
Communications of the ACM, 
48(4), 95Œ100.Christopher, M. (2000). The agile supply 
chaincompeting in volatile markets. 
Industrial Marketing Management, 29(1), 37Œ44.Clemons, E.K., & Row, M.C. (1992). Information 
technology and industrial cooperation: The role of 
changing transaction costs. 
Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 9(2), 9Œ28.Davidow, W.H., & Malone, M.S. (1992). 
The virtual 
corporation. New York: HarperCollins.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989). Building theories from case 
study research. 
Academy of Management Review,
 14(4), 532Œ550.Evans, P., & Wurster, T.S. (2000). 
Blown to bits: 
How the new economics of information transforms 
strategy.
 Boston: Harvard Business School Press.Feller, J., Finnegan, P., Hayes, J., & Lundell, B. 
(2006a, June 8Œ10). Business models for open source 
software: Towards a mature understanding of the 
concept and its implications for practice. 
Proceed
-ings of the IFIP 2.13 Conference on Open Source 
Software, 
Genoa, Italy.
Feller, J., Finnegan, P., Kelly, D., & MacNamara, 
M. (2006b, July 12Œ15). Developing open source 
software: A community-based analysis of research. 
Proceedings of the IFIP 8.2 Working Conference 
on Social Exclusion
Societal and Organisational 
Implications for Information Systems, 
Limerick, 
Ireland.Fingar, P. (2000). Component-based frameworks 
for e-commerce. 
Communications of the ACM, 
43(10), 61Œ66.Finnegan, P., Galliers, R.D., & Powell, P. (2003). 
Applying triple loop learning to planning electronic 
trading systems. 
Information Technology and People,
 16(4), 461Œ483.Fitzgerald, B. (2006). The transformation of open 
source software. MIS Quarterly, 30
(3), 587Œ598.Galaskiewicz, J. (1985). Interorganisational relations. 
Annual Review of Sociology,
 11,
 281Œ304.Goldman, S.L., Nagel, R.N., & Preiss, K. (1995). 
Agile competitors and virtual organizations: Strat
-egies for enriching the customer.
 New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold.Hecker, F. (2000). 
Setting up shop: The business of 
open-source software.
 Retrieved from 
http://www.
hecker.org/writings/setting-up-shop
Henderson, J.C. (1990). Plugging into strategic 
partnerships: The critical IS connection. 
Sloan 
Management Review, 30
(3), 7Œ18.Huang, C. (2001). Using intelligent agents to man
-age fuzzy business processes. 
IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and CyberneticsŠPart A: Systems 
and Humans, 31(6), 508Œ523.Joynt, P. (1991). International dimensions of manag
-ing technology. 
Journal of General Management,
 16(3), 73Œ84.Kanter, R.M. (1989). The future of bureaucracy 
and hierarchy in organizational theory: A report 

Social theory for a changing society.
 Boulder, CO: 
Westview.
 Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
   107Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Global is prohibited.Kaufman, F. (1966). Data systems that cross com
-pany boundaries. 
Harvard Business Review, 44
(1), 141Œ155.Kirsch, L.J. (2004). Deploying common systems 
globally: The dynamics of control. 
Information 
Systems Research, 15
(4), 375Œ395.Krishnamurthy, S. (2005). An analysis of open source 
business models. In J. Feller, B. Fitzgerald, S. Hissam, 
& K. Lakhani (Eds.), 
Perspectives on free and open 
source software.
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lee, A.S., & Baskerville, R.L. (2003). Generalizing 
generalizability in information systems research. 
Information Systems Research, 14
(3), 221Œ243.Lee, H. (2004). The triple-a supply chain. 
Harvard 
Business Review, 82
(10), 102Œ112.
Lei, D., & Slocum, J.W. (1992). Global strategy, 
competence-building and strategic alliances. 
Cali-fornia Management Review,
 35(1), 81Œ97.Lo, W.K. (1998). Agility, job satisfaction and organi
-zational excellence: Their factors and relationships. 
Third Proceedings of ISO 9000 and Total Quality 
Management (pp. 330Œ336).Madill, A., Jordan, A., & Shirley, C. (2000). Objec
-tivity and reliability in qualitative analysis: Realist, 
contextualist and radical constructionist epistemolo
-gies. British Journal of Psychology, 91
(1), 1Œ20.Mahadevan, B. (2000). Business models for In
-ternet-based e-commerce: An anatomy. 
California Management Review, 42
(4), 55Œ69.Marshall, C., & Rossman, B.G. (1989). 
Designing qualitative research.
 Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Moore, G. (1999). 
Crossing the chasm.
 New York: 
Harper-Perennial.
Nelson, R.E. (1988). Social network analysis as 
intervention tool. 
Group and Organisation Studies,
 13(1), 139Œ158.Oliver, C. (1990). Determinants of interorganisational 
relationships: Integration and future directions. 
Acad
-emy of Management Review,
 15(2), 241Œ265.Osterwalder, A., & Pigneur, Y. (2002, June 17Œ19). 
An e-business model ontology for modelling e-
business. Proceedings of the 15th Bled eCommerce 
Conference, 
Bled, Slovenia.Osterwalder, A., Ben Lagha, S., & Pigneur, Y. (2002, 
July 3Œ7). An ontology for developing e-business 
models. Proceedings of IFIP DSIAge 2002, 
Cork, Ireland.Patton, M.Q. (1980). 
Qualitative evaluation and 
research methods.
 Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Raymond, E.S. (2001). 
The cathedral and the bazaar
 (2nd ed.). Sebastopol, CA: O™Reilly.
Sadeh, N.M., Hildum D.W., & Kjenstad, D. (2003). 
Agent-based e-supply chain decision support. 
Jour-nal of Organizational Computing and Electronic 
Commerce, 13
(3Œ4), 225Œ241.
achieving agility in manufacturing organisations: An 
introduction. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 62(1Œ2), 7Œ22.Spiller, D., & Wichmann, T. (2002). 
Basics of open 
source software markets and business models
. 
FLOSS 

part 3. Berlin: Berlecon Research.
value for competitive advantage: On chains, shops, 
and networks. 
Strategic Management Journal, 
19(5), 413Œ437.Stafford, T. (2002). Trust, transactions, and relational 
exchange: Virtual integration and agile supply chain 
management. Proceedings of the 8th Americas Con
-ference on Information Systems
 (AMCIS ™02).Tapscott, D., Ticoll, D., & Lowy, A. (2000). 
Digital capital: Harnessing the power of business webs.
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.Thomke, E., & Reinertsen, D.G. (1998). Agile prod
-
in uncertain environments. 
California Management 
Review, 41
(1), 8Œ30.Ticoll, D., Lowy, A., & Kalakota, R. (1998). Joined 
at the bit: The emergence of the e-business com
-munity. In D. Tapscott (Ed.), 
Blueprint to the digital 
economy: Creating wealth in the era of e-business.
 New York: McGraw-Hill.
Timmers, P. (1999). 
Electronic commerce: Strate
-gies and models for business-to-business trading.
 Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Van de Ven, A.H. (1976). On the nature, formation 
and maintenance of relations among organisations. 
Academy of Management Review,
 1(4), 24Œ36. 108   Journal of Database Management, 19(2), 95-108, April-June 2008
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of  IGI Globalis prohibited.Watson, R.T., Wynn, D., & Boudreau, M. (2005). 
Jboss: The evolution of professional open source 
software. MIS Quarterly Executive, 4
(3), 329Œ341.
Weber, S. (2004). 
The success of open source.
 Cam
-bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.West, J. (2003). How open is open enough? Meld
-ing proprietary and open source platform strategies. 
Research Policy,
 32(7), 1259Œ1285.Woods, D., & Guliani, G. (2005). 
Open source for 
the enterprise. Sebastopol, CA: O™Reilly.
Yin, R.K. (1994). 
Case study research, design and 
methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.ENDNOTE1
cited contrast between the hierarchical cathe
-dral model characterizing proprietary software 
and the distributed model of the open source 
bazaar.
Joseph Feller received his PhD from University College Cork, Ireland, where he is currently a senior lecturer 
in business information systems. He has published three books, and his work on open source software and 
electronic business has been published in a number of international journals and conferences, including 
Information Systems Journal, Software Process
Improvement and Practice, Systemes d™Information et 
Management, IEE Proceedings
Software, Annals of Cases on Information Technology, and Electronic 
Journal of E-Government
. He has also published more than 60 technical and practitioner articles, most 
recently for the Cutter Benchmark Review. He is the program co-chair for the Third International Conference 
on Open Source Systems (OSS 2007), and currently serves as associate editor for the 
International Journal 
of Technology Enhanced Learning 
and the International Journal of Social and Humanistic Computing.Patrick Finnegan received his PhD from the University of Warwick, England, and is currently a senior 
lecturer in information systems at University College Cork. His research on inter-organizational systems 
and electronic business has been published in a number of international journals and conferences, including 
Information Technology and People, DATABASE, Information Systems Journal, International Journal of 
Electronic Commerce, Electronic Markets, and Information Resources Management Journal
. He is cur
-rently an associate editor of the
 Information Systems Journal
 and president of the Irish Association for 
Information Systems.Jeremy Hayes is a lecturer in business information systems at University College Cork. His research in
-terests are in the areas of electronic business models, inter-organizational systems, open source software, 

including the 
European Journal of Operational Research
, European Conference on Information Systems 
(ECIS), and IFIP.
 Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
