 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Federated process framework in a virtual enterprise using an ...Kyoung-Il Bae;Jung-Hyun, Kim;Soon-Young, HuhJournal of Database Management; Jan-Mar 2003; 14, 1; ABI/INFORM Collectionpg. 27 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.