 Theme-based Product Release Planning: An Analytical Approach 
 
Nishant Agarwal 
BITS Pilani University, India 
nishant21591@gmail.com 
 
Reza Karimpour 
University of Calgary, Canada 
reza.karimpour@ucalgary.ca
 
 
Guenther Ruhe 
University of Calgary, Canada 
ruhe@ucalgary.ca
 
 
Abstract
 
Release planning is part of iterative software 
development and strongly impacts the success of a 
product by providing a roadmap for future releases. As 
such, it is of key importance for lean and agile 
organizations. Often features
 are highly dependent on 
each other and the value of a release is influenced by a 
set of bundled features constituting a theme.  
This paper addresses the topic of theme-based 
release planning. Themes might be defined, manually, 
upfront or as the result of computer-based analysis. In 
this paper, we propose an analytical approach to 
detect themes from a given set of feature dependencies. 
On top of an existing 
release planning methodology 
called EVOLVE II, our approach applies clustering 
performed on a feature dependency graph. The release 
plans generated from such an approach are a balance 
between two goals: (i) considering the values of 
individual features, (ii) de
tecting and utilizing synergy 
effects between semantically related features. 
As a proof-of-concept, we present a case study 
addressing the theme-based release planning for 50 
features of a text proce
ssing system. The preliminary 
evaluation results show impr
oved release plans with 
regards to accommodating themes. 
Keywords
: Release planning, theme-based product 
release planning, feature de
pendencies, clustering, case 
study. 
1.
 
Introduction 
As software and other products are getting more 
and more complex and larger in size, incremental and 
iterative development is rapidly replacing monolithic 
product creation approaches [1]. Release plans have to 
consider various criteria like time-to-market, customer 
satisfaction and risk [2]. Systematic methods for 
product release planning are seen as an approach to 
maximize stakeholder sati
sfaction, generate higher 
revenues and achieve resource-efficient development 
[3].  
One of the key aspects of lean product management 
is to focus on creating value, rather than blindly 
shipping features. Certain f
eatures would have higher 
value when they are releas
ed along with a specific set 
of features, leading to better release plans [4], [5]. 
Offering semantically related features as a bundle helps 
the product manager to deliver products that are 
focused on a particular “theme” per release.  
A
 theme
 is meta-functionality of a product release, 
integrating a number of individual features under a 
joint umbrella. It can be thought of as an abstraction, 
i.e., a group of features that are inter-related to each 
other in a way that they depict a context and can be 
viewed as a single entity from a higher level.  
Theme-based release planning
 aims at offering 
features in a particular release in consideration of their 
semantic cohesiveness. The release plans generated 
from such an approach are a balance between two 
goals: (i) considering the values of individual features, 
(ii) detecting and utilizing synergy effects between 
semantically related features. 
The main contributions of the paper are: 
•
 
A clustering based approach for soliciting 
themes from existing feature dependencies 
(value, effort or usage related). 
•
 
Analytical approach for theme-based planning 
which is based on an existing release planning 
optimization method called EVOLVE II. 
•
 
Performing a case study for planning of 50 
features and 81 feature dependencies and 
subsequent comparison of the results gained 
from application of theme-based release 
planning versus planning 
on isolated features.  
Through our approach, we were able to generate 
theme-centered release plans of proven degree of 
optimality in terms of overall value and quality. 
Besides, the managers are given the flexibility to 
administer the release planning process. 
The paper is structured into eight sections. Section 
2 describes related work. Section 3 presents a short 
description of the formal approach to theme-based 
release planning. 
The methodology and 
implementation with integrated tool support are 
presented in Section 4. The case study design is 
described in Section 5, followed by the results and key 
findings presented in Section 6. Threats to validity are 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5824739 discussed in Section 7. A summary and outlook for 
future research is provided in Section 8. 
2.
 
Related work 
2.1.
 
Release planning 
One of the most prominent issues involved in 
incremental and iterative soft
ware development is to 
decide upon which features should be offered when 
and why. This decision is inherently complex and of 
high impact on overall business success. Various 
formal and informal methods for release planning 
exist. For an overview, we re
fer to [3]. In Scrum [6], 
releases are planned usi
ng a simple greedy algorithm 
by selecting the highest priority product backlog items 
into proposed releases. Schwaber [7] suggests that the 
product owner should use a pool of imaginary Ping-
Pong balls to allocate relative business value to 
backlog items. Greening [8] discusses various 
challenges and application of Enterprise Scrum for 
larger project teams. 
Carlshamre [9] observed that a large number of 
features might be non-isolated and depend on other 
features. An overview of the 
state-of-the art in feature 
dependencies is given in [10]. A solution 
accommodating advanced feature constraints and its 
empirical evaluation is presented in [11]. 
EVOLVE II [3] is an evolutionary release planning 
method that tries to generate optimized and diversified 
release plan alternatives. It
 is a complete framework 
encompassing every stage of the release planning 
process, from modeling to stakeholder input, plan 
optimization, and post-optimization tasks like what-if 
analysis. EVOLVE II has an associated decision 
support system called ReleasePlanner (RP) [12] which 
is designed to implement and support the planning 
process. A stakeholder-centric variation of it was 
evaluated in [13] for the planning of an agile tool 
called 
Agilefant
. In this paper, we apply 
ReleasePlanner with the advanced capabilities of [11] 
to accommodate more complex feature dependencies. 
This allows us to determi
ne optimized release plans in 
consideration of extracted themes. 
2.2.
 
Theme-orientation  
With regard to theme-based release planning, there 
have been a few attempts by researchers to group 
features into clusters, using different metrics and 
perform release planning usi
ng these clusters. Feature 
trees were used by Fricker and Schumacher et al. [14] 
to perform release planning by grouping features by 
constructing feature trees. They also model software 
evolution with introduction of new features through 
different graphs and visuali
zations. However, the entire 
process of construction of 
trees and decision making is 
mostly manual. Additionally, requirements in the 
software descriptions are not prioritized in their 
research. Even, some textual descriptions might lead to 
different interpretations resulting in improper 
groupings. 
Agile and lean practices favor theme-based 
releases. Leffingwell, in [4], states that a release is 
characterized primarily by a release theme and a 
release date, followed by a list of prioritized features. 
He also mentions that in agile planning, a release plan 
constitutes a release theme, list of features, 
assumptions, dependencies and other components. It is 
mentioned that strategic product themes are realized by 
epics
 [5], and how epics are decomposed into specific 
features. 
Finally, there have been studies on requirement 
clustering as well. For instance in [15], authors use 
clustering and visualization to facilitate the discovering 
of unknown requirement interdependencies. 
3.
 
Problem statement 
In this section, a semi-formalized description of the 
theme-based release planni
ng problem is given. The 
formulation is based on the definition of features and 
their interdependencies, the definition of resource 
constraints, and the desc
ription of the planning 
objective.  
3.1.
 
Features and their interdependencies 
This paper uses the concept of a “feature” as the 
basic unit for release planning. Features are the 
characteristics of the product offered to the customer. 
According to the definition given by Wiegers [16], a 
product feature is defined
 as a set of logically related 
requirements that provide a capability to the user and 
enable the satisfaction of business objectives
. 
We assume a set of features F = {f(1), f(2), … , 
f(N)}. The goal of theme-ba
sed release planning is to 
assign the features to a finite number K of release (or 
sub-release) options, such that the overall value of the 
releases is maximized, where the value is determined 
by both the value of the individual features and the 
contribution to a specific theme of the product.  
Features are often dependent on one another. Many 
types of dependencies can exist between features. 
Some of the dependencies are described below: 
4740 Weak Precedence
: Features A and B are in a 
weak 
precedence
 dependency if feature B cannot be offered 
in an earlier release than feature A. However, both the 
features can be offered in the same release. 
Strict Precedence
: Feature A and feature B are in 
strict precedence
 if feature A has to be offered in an 
earlier release than feature B. Both of them cannot be 
offered in the same release. 
Coupling
: Feature A 
is coupled to
 feature B 
signifies that both the features have to be offered in the 
same release creating a cyclic dependency between the 
two. 
Synergy
: If features A and B have a 
synergy
 
dependency between them, then the value of both of 
these features increases by a fixed percentage (given 
by the user) in case they are offered together in a 
release. 
NAND
: If features A and B are connected together 
by a 
NAND
 dependency, then both of them cannot be 
offered together in a release. 
Based on the nature of their dependency, we 
broadly classify feature de
pendencies into direct and 
indirect dependencies: 
Direct Dependencies
: They reflect a degree of 
similarity between features. 
Hence, features directly 
dependent are assumed to have a degree of 
commonality amongst them. Examples are coupling, 
weak precedence, and synergy. 
Indirect Dependencies
:
 They reflect a degree of 
dissimilarity between features linked together by such 
dependencies. Hence, features connected by such 
dependencies are assumed to differ from one another to 
some extent and their occurrence together in a release 
is not favorable. Examples 
are strict precedence, and 
NAND. 
3.2.
 
Resource constrains 
Each feature consumes different types of resources 
for its implementation. Let 
us consider T different 
resource types being relevant to implement the 
features. Every feature f(
i) requires an amount of 
human resources r(i,t). Every release option k has a 
certain amount of resource capacity of type t available. 
This capacity bound is denoted by Cap(k,t). Thus, the 
resource requirements for all features assigned to 
release k must satisfy the following constraints:  

 
i: x(i)=k
 r(i,t) 

 Cap(k,t) for k = 1…K and t = 1..T 
Besides human resources, features might consume 
financial resources as well. Human resources can also 
be expressed in monetary terms taking into account the 
financial effort to provide these resources.  
In general, we have assumed linearity in the 
resource constraints, e.g. the financial effort for a set of 
features is defined as the sum of the financial efforts 
for all individual features. This is not necessarily 
fulfilled in all practical cases, but it typically represents 
a good compromise between meaningfulness of the 
model and the computational effort to solve it. 
3.3.
 
Objective function 
Defining the objective of planning is critical for 
success of planning. Formula
tion of these objectives is 
difficult. As a simplification, objectives typically are 
formulated as an additive function defined on the set of 
features. For each individual 
feature, projections on its 
potential value, urgency, frequency of use, usefulness 
or risk of implementation are made. While often 
individual functions are pursued, it appears to be more 
realistic to consider a combination of them. We 
combine them linearly into a single objective function 
expressing the overall utility of a plan.  
As discussed in [13], features are prioritized by 
stakeholders and resource constraints are applied 
before generating a release plan. The objective is the 
maximization of a function F(x) among all release 
plans x satisfying the t
echnological and resource 
constraints, with added advantage for features which 
are part of a theme and occur together in a release. F(x) 
is composed of the weighted average priority vector 
defined for each feature f(n). For further details, see 
[3]. 
4.
 
Theme-based release methodology 
To keep focus on the main contribution of the 
paper, we concentrate on the new and additional 
aspects of the extraction and consideration of themes 
as part of the release planning process. On top of the 
established planning process of EVOLVE II, we 
describe three additional steps called graph 
transformation, clustering and theme-based plan 
generation. The three components are described below. 
4.1.
 
Graph transformation  
4.1.1.  Description. 
We consider the interdependencies 
between features as underl
ying criteria for clustering 
them into themes. As described earlier, we classify 
dependencies into two broad categories, i.e., direct and 
indirect. Direct dependencies 
reflect that there exists 
some similarity between the participating features. 
Similarly, indirect depe
ndencies reflect that the 
participating features are dissimilar. As each 
4741 dependency has its own significance, we assign 
weights depending upon the importance of the 
dependency.
 
We construct a weighted 
graph G = (V,E), where V 
represents a set of the features of the graph and E is the 
set of edges representing the dependencies. If there is a 
constraint between two features, then an edge is added 
between them in E with pos
itive (negative) weight for 
a direct (respectively indi
rect) dependency. We have 
used undirected edges because it is a generic approach 
that incorporates all types of dependencies, some of 
which are mentioned in the 
previous section. Directed 
edges could not have incorporated dependencies like 
synergy, NAND, XOR etc. Thus, an edge between two 
features depicts the presence 
of a constraint between 
them. The thickness of the edge represents the weight 
of dependency. 
The process of graph transformation can be broken 
down into the following steps: 
First, select a constraint 
from a list of constraints. For that constraint, add 
features that appear in it as nodes, if they are not 
already present in the feature graph. Then an edge is 
added between every two features that are related to 
each other by a dependency in that constraint. The 
weight of an edge is determined by the type of 
dependency it visualizes. Weights can be pre-assigned 
to dependencies by the user. Finally, repeat the steps 
above for all constraints in the list. 
 
4.1.2 Illustrative example. 
We consider a project with 
five features calle
d A, B, C, D and 
E. Among them, the 
following three dependencies are defined: 
 
i.
 
A, B, C and D are mutually coupled 
ii.
 
A and C precede E  
iii.
 
A and C are mutually exclusive 
To model the feature graph for this example, we 
start from the first dependency in which features A, B, 
C and D are involved. As seen
 in Figure 1(a), we create 
a graph in which each feature node is connected to all 
other nodes that participate in the dependency 
statement. The weight for each edge is set to one. 
The second constraint links 
features A, C and E. In 
the model, A, C and E are connected (see Figure 1(b)). 
As A and C were already c
onnected due to a previous 
constraint, we increase the weight of the edge 
connecting these two by one. 
Finally, the third statement adds mutual exclusion 
constraint between A and C.
 Hence, to emphasize the 
negative effect of this constraint on previous 
constraints, we deduct one fr
om the weight of the A-C 
edge (see Figure 1(c)). 
 
 
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 1. Graph transf
ormation for sample 
dependencies 
4.2.
 
Clustering 
Looking for themes from clusters of features, we 
applied the Chinese Whispers (CW) [17] algorithm. 
Form analyzing tool alternatives such as the one 
described in [18], we decided using CW, as it is 
simple, fast and interactive. The manager can alter the 
parameters in the algorithm to get different clusters.  
CW is an efficient graph-clustering algorithm 
applicable to undirected, weighted graphs. It has a 
linear (in the number of edges) run-time complexity, 
which makes CW a very efficient algorithm. The 
output is a non-deterministic partitioning of the graph. 
The algorithm performs in a bottom-up fashion: 
First, each node is assigned to a unique class. Then the 
nodes are processed for a specific number of iterations 
and inherit the strongest class in the local 
neighborhood. This is the class whose sum of edge 
weights to the current node is maximal.  
In case of multiple strongest classes, one is chosen 
randomly. Regions of the same class stabilize during 
the iteration and grow until they reach the border of a 
stable region of another class. As the classes are 
updated immediately, a node 
can obtain classes from 
the neighborhood that were introduced there in the 
same iteration. 
4.3.
 
Creating theme-based planning 
alternatives 
ReleasePlanner [12] is a 
planning tool that uses 
integer and constraint 
programming in conjunction 
with specialized heuristic
s to generate optimized 
release plans. It is designe
d to handle complex feature 
dependencies and to accommodate resource 
constraints. The tool takes a list of features, 
stakeholder priorities, resource constraints, and 
dependencies as input, and generates unique alternative 
release plans. Following the 
diversification principle 
4742 [3], it allows the manager choose the best plan for his 
purpose.  
However, RP is not inherently designed to manage 
themes while making release decisions. For this reason, 
we add additional synergy constraints in accordance to 
the clusters to support themes in the planning process. 
We formulate synergy constraints between all pairs of 
features in a cluster, with 
an increment factor for a 
pair. Defining clusters like this is advantageous 
because it favors bigger subsets of clusters to be 
formed. This aspect is integrated into the overall 
objective function serving as the goal of planning. 
Table 1. Feature list
 
Feature ID 
Feature content 
1-10 
New, Open, Close, Save, Save as, Search, 
Protect, Print Preview, Print File, Send To. 
11-20 
Set Properties, Exit, Undo, Redo, Cut, Copy, 
Paste, Paste S
p
ecial, Go To, Find. 
21-30 
Replace, Select All, Default, Print Layout, 
Web layout, Zoom, Header/Footer, Page 
Numbers, Date/Time, S
y
mbol. 
31-40 
Bookmark, Hyperlink, Font, Paragraph, 
Bullets/Numbering, Change Case, 
Back
g
round, Hel
p
, Search, Insert Table. 
41-50 
Delete Table, Format Table, Import Data, 
Sort, Check Spell, Check grammar, Speech, 
Mail Mer
g
e, Macro, Set O
p
tions. 
5.Case study design and implementation 
5.1.
 
Context 
For the purpose of evaluating our approach, we 
tested the methodology on a word processing product 
that incorporates 50 f
eatures and 81 feature 
interdependencies. Release plans are generated looking 
for three releases (iterations) ahead of time. The dataset 
is taken from a graduate course project [19]. It is 
available online at 
http://pages.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/~ruhe/publications.htm#
CopyOfDataset. As the project
 is derived from the 
commonly known word processing tool MS Word, 
some intuitive dependencies were added. The set of 
features is summarized in Table 1. 
5.2.
 
Implementation 
We perform the steps outlined in Section 4 to 
generate theme-based release plans for the given 
dataset. 
 
5.2.1  Graph transformation. 
We use an open source 
tool Gephi [20] for graph vi
sualization and application 
of  CW graph clustering. Dependencies are mapped as 
edges, with suitable weights for different kinds of 
dependencies, according to the rule stated earlier. 
 
For our study, we used thr
ee kinds of dependencies, 
namely weak precedence, coupling and synergy, with 
weights of 1, 2 and 3, re
spectively. The weights are 
decided based on user’s perception of the impact of 
each type of dependency. 
 
5.2.2. Clustering. 
We now apply the CW algorithm to 
detect themes from the feat
ure graph. This step favors 
stakeholder involvement fro
m the beginning. The user 
may (or may not) group the features into rough clusters 
beforehand, and the algorithm will refine them and use 
them as a basic solution. 
 
As the algorithm is interactive, for different 
configurations of input parameters (number of 
iterations=15, minimum edge weight=0.0, class 
propagation type=top), it produces different clusters. 
Hence, the product manager can choose the ones that 
fit his purpose. Also note that the results of clustering 
algorithm are meant to be taken just as a suggestion. 
Managers can alter the clusters and feed them in a 
release planning engine. For a specific input, the 
algorithm generates different solutions in each 
iteration. Figure 2 shows eight clusters generated by 
CW.  
Figure 2
. 
Clusters genera
ted from CW 
 
5.2.3.  Generation of th
eme-based release plans. 
We 
use ReleasePlanner for finding optimized release plans, 
considering themes of products. We added a new 
dependency called 
Synergy same release
 into the tool 
and used it to add constraints between pairs of features 
in a cluster, as stated before. We then run the release 
planning optimizer to generate plans, which fulfill all 
- Circle represents a feature 
- Color denotes a cluster 
- Edges show dependencies 
4743 the added constraints as well. Alternative plans of 
different structure are genera
ted, and the most suitable 
one is selected (see [3] for further details).
 
6.Case study results and key findings 
The results of the case study are presented in 
Section 6.1. Three evaluati
on metrics are described in 
Section 6.2 and key findings of the case study are 
summarized in Section 6.3. 
6.1.
 
Case study results  
Figure 2 shows a visualization of the results of the 
clustering algorithm. Detailed results are shown in 
Table 2.
 The nodes represent features and edges are the 
dependencies. The weight of each dependency is set by 
the user. The edge also becomes thicker as the number 
of dependencies between a pair of features increases. 
Each color represents a cluster.  Both release plans 
(with and without appli
cation of theme-centric 
planning) are 100% optimal in their feature 
assignment. 
Table 2. Clustering results from CW 
 
Cluster
 
Features
 
C1 
Cluster 1 Insert Table, Delete Table, Format Table, 
Im
p
ort Data, Sort. 
C2 
Cluster 2 Undo, Redo, Cut, Copy, Paste, Paste 
Special, Go To, Find, Replace, Select All 
C3 
Cluster 3 New, Open, Close, Save, Save as, Search, 
Protect, Print Preview, Print File, Send To, 
Set Properties, Exit, Default, Print Layout, 
Web layout, Zoom, Header/Footer, Page 
Numbers 
C4 
Cluster 4 Date/Time, Symbol, Bookmark, Hyperlink 
C5 
Cluster 5 Font, Paragraph, Bullets/Numbering, 
Chan
g
e Case, Back
g
round 
C6 
Cluster 6 Help, Search 
C7 
Cluster 7 Check Spell, Check grammar, Speech, Set 
Options. 
C8 
Cluster 8 Mail Merge, Macro 
 
Figure 3 shows a visualization of the release plan 
generated with theme support. The figure clearly 
depicts the number of features assigned to a release, 
portion of clusters allotted to different releases and the 
dependencies between them. The release plans don’t 
totally depend on the themes that were fed as input. 
The results are a tradeoff between the most optimal 
assignment and theme incorporation. The vertices 
denote the features in a release with colors denoting 
different clusters. The release plans proposed with and 
without clustering are depicted in Table 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. Release planswith theme focus
In Section 6.3, we discuss the key findings of this 
approach. The results clearly state that features in a 
cluster tend to stay together in a release. The 
methodology gives flexibility to the user to govern the 
clustering process. Also, the overall value of plans 
improved after applying our approach. The feature 
distribution improved because additional synergy was 
taken into account. 
6.2.
 
Evaluation metrics 
We now empirically evaluate our results based on 
three metrics aimed to characterize the degree of theme 
cohesiveness. 
 
6.2.1. Metric M1. 
Definition
:
 For a given plan x, 
M1(j,k,x) describes the percentage of features of 
cluster j assigned to release k (related to the total 
number of features of cluster j). 
 
Release 1
 
Release 2
 
Release 3
 
4744 Figure 4 shows the results of the evaluation in 
terms of M1 applied on release plans generated with 
and without application of the theme focus. 
 
6.2.2. Metric M2. 
Definition
:
 For a given plan x, 
M2(j,k,x) describes the percentage of features of 
cluster j assigned to release k (related to the total 
number of features of release k). 
 
Figure 5 shows the results of the evaluation in 
terms of M2 applied on release plans generated with 
and without application of the theme focus. 
 
6.2.3. Metric M3. 
Definition
:
 For a given plan x, 
M3(j,k,x) describes number of interdependencies 
amongst the features released in release ‘k’. In other 
words, it is the number of edges in the feature graph, 
between the features released in a release ‘k’. 
 
Table 4 shows the results of the metric applied on 
release plans, before and after applying our approach. 
6.3.
 
Key findings 
This section describes the key findings based on the 
case study and its detailed analysis. 
 
6.3.1 Features in a cluster tend to stay together. 
We 
added synergy constraints for features in a cluster, if 
they occur together. Hence, in the final release plan, 
features in a cluster tend to be released together. The 
RP tries to find a tradeoff solution between the 
optimum feature assignment, 
and an assignment that 
puts all features of a cluster together in one release.
 
 
Table 3. Release plans with and without the 
application of theme based approach
 
Release 
Feature set without 
theme based approach
 
Feature set with theme 
based approach 
1 
Insert Table, Delete Table, 
Table Format, Sort, Import 
Data, Help, Search, Font, 
Bullets/Numbering, New 
File, Open File, Close File, 
Page Numbers, 
Header/Footer, Undo a 
Task, Select All, Cut, 
Copy, Paste, Paste Special, 
Go To, Find, Replace, 
Date/Time, Symbol, 
Bookmark, H
yp
erlink 
Help, Search, Font, New File, 
Open File, Close File, Save 
File, Save as Different File 
Format, Page Numbers, Print 
Layout, Header/Footer, Undo 
a Task, Select All, Cut, Copy, 
Paste, Paste Special, Go To, 
Find, Replace, Date/Time, 
Symbol, Bookmark, 
Hyperlink 
2 
Change Case, Send To, Set 
Properties, Exit, Save File, 
Save as Different File 
Format, Search File, 
Protect File, Print Preview, 
Print File, Default, Print 
Layout, Web layout, Mail 
Merge, Macro, Set Options 
Paragraph, 
Bullets/Numbering, Change 
Case, Background, Send To, 
Set Properties, Exit, Search 
File, Protect File, Print 
Preview, Print File, Default, 
Web layout, Zoom, Redo a 
Task 
3 
Paragraph, Background, 
Zoom, Check Spell, Check 
Grammar, Speech, Redo a 
Task 
Insert Table, Delete Table, 
Table Format, Sort, Import 
Data, Mail Merge, Macro, 
Check Spell, Check 
Grammar, Speech, Set 
Options 
 
 
Figure 4. M1 values of plans before and after clustering 
4745  
Figure 5. Application of metric M2 before 
and after clustering (with and without 
theme focus)
 
Table 4. Release coherency values M3 
 Without clusterin
g
 With clusterin
g
 
R1 
57 60 
R2 
19 12 
R3 
6 21 
Total 
82 93 
 
Considering metric M1, if we compare the release 
plans of both the approaches, C3 appears to be spread 
across all three releases, if the theme-based 
methodology was not applied. After applying the 
methodology, C3 is spread to just two releases. Also, 
in the conventional approach, cluster C5 is spread 
across all three releases, while with the new approach, 
a major portion of C5 is allocated as theme in Release 
2. 
Considering metric M3, we conclude that, as a 
tendency, there has been an increase in the number of 
interdependencies between features packaged into a 
release. With the exception of Release 2, the 
interdependencies increase for releases 1 and 3. Hence, 
the features in a release are more inter-related if our 
approach is applied. 
Releases are now more theme-specific. Our goal 
was to have a release plan where each release reflects a 
theme of a product. Considering the M2 metric, for 
each release, there has been an improvement in the 
coverage of clusters. In the old approach, Release 1, 2 
and 3 had portions from 6, 4 and 4 different clusters, 
respectively. After applying the theme based approach, 
the number reduced to 5, 3, and 3, respectively. Also, 
the distribution of clusters has improved in our 
approach, leading to more theme-centric release plans.  
There is a huge scope of variations in results. To 
keep up with the agile and lean methodologies, our 
approach allows scope of incremental development by 
involving the product manager to vary different aspects 
to generate different release plans. The release plans 
are not only dependent on the way the clusters are fed 
into the software. The plans can be altered by changing 
the number of releases, resource capacities per release, 
increment factor in synergy constraint, etc. Hence, the 
project manager can alter these and can get desired 
changes in the results. 
 
6.3.2. Product manager governing the clustering 
process. 
As stated earlier, the product manager can 
govern the clustering pr
ocess. Various input 
parameters in the algorithm allow the user to get 
different clusters for diffe
rent configurations. Also, 
weak groups can be pre-specified so that the algorithm 
refines them into better cl
usters. Hence, the product 
manager can play an important role in deciding the 
final clusters. It can serve as a strategy to tap hidden 
business value. The proposed method tends to release 
dependent features together
, thus promoting specific 
and theme- based products, rather than releasing 
features from different domains
. Hence, specificity of a 
release can be tapped as a unique marketing strategy 
and can be used to get the hidden business value, 
which otherwise might have been ignored.
 
 
6.3.3. Improved release plans. 
Adding additional 
synergy value to a group of features makes the release 
planning optimizer understand that it is beneficial to 
release them together. Fo
r example, in the earlier 
release plan, Save was not released together with open 
or new. There is no value of a word processing tool, if 
we are not able to save our work. With the 
implementation of additional synergy, the RP 
understands that if save is release along with Open, 
New, etc., it will add more value to the release. 
Similarly, Formatting op
tions like Paragraphing, 
Bullets etc., are offered together in the theme-base 
release plans. 
 
Current implementation leads to constraint 
explosion. Our current implementation of this approach 
is based on the synergy relationship that may lead to 
constraint explosion for bigger datasets and is not 
scalable. 
7.
 
Threats to validity 
Although the results for the current dataset look 
convincing and the evaluation metrics suggest the 
release plans are theme-based, yet there are some 
threats to validity of our approach.  
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
Before 
After 
Before 
After 
Before 
After 
R1 R2 R3 
C8 
C7 
C6 
C5 
C4 
C3 
C2 
C1 
4746 Firstly, dependencies cannot be the sole criteria for 
clustering features into groups. There are many other 
approaches like, textual comparison of feature names, 
textual comparison of feat
ure description, counting 
references between codes of features etc. that can 
symbolize themes equally well. 
Secondly, we can modify
 the clustering algorithm 
more, so that it gives more freedom to the user to 
govern the way clusters are formed. There can be 
functionalities like the user could manually redistribute 
features amongst clusters after the algorithm groups 
them. In addition, the PBI size could be included in the 
clustering process. Instead of
 treating features, just as 
mere nodes, the algorithm should consider them as 
features with value, and 
apply clustering accordingly. 
Also, iterative value addition to subsequent releases 
should also be taken into consideration.  
Thirdly, using undirected edges for the feature 
graph also has a drawback. Though it depicts that the 
participating features are connected in some way, it 
does not clearly show which feature is dependent on 
the other, in case of ‘precedence’ or ‘requires’ 
dependency. However, it is used as a generic approach 
so that it can accommodate several other types of 
dependencies mentioned in the paper.  
Lastly, the synergy constraint should be modified 
to solve the problem of constr
aint explosion. Instead of 
putting a constraint for every 
pair of feature, it should 
be designed in a way such that it favors maximum 
features from a cluster to be allocated to one release. 
Furthermore, additional ev
aluation metrics should be 
designed to judge whether the approach actually gives 
theme based release plans.
 Additional metrics to 
evaluate if a given cluster symbolizes a theme or not 
should also be proposed. 
8.
 
Summary and future research 
We have presented an explorative study on theme 
based product release planning. We have discussed its 
meaning, advantages and a methodology to implement 
it: 
•
 
Theme-based release planning helps the project 
manager to tap hidden business opportunities by 
releasing highly interdepe
ndent features together. 
•
 
The approach favors delivering specific theme-
oriented products in each release, as opposed to 
releasing generic products. 
•
 
The method allows stakeholder involvement in the 
early stages of release plan development, in terms of 
clustering features, feature prioritization, thus 
promoting agile methodology. 
•
 
A tool support and detailed evaluation supports our 
methodology of theme based release planning. 
Future work is targeted on mitigating existing 
threats to validity and improvement of the 
methodology. We will focus on modifying the 
clustering algorithm to allow more stakeholder 
participation and create alternative clusters that 
symbolize the idea of theme. 
The next milestone is to 
modify the synergy constraint, so that the number of 
constraints does not increase too much with the 
addition of new features. Most importantly, we are 
planning for intensive real-world evaluation of the 
proposed theme-centric planning approach. 
Additionally, integration with issue management 
systems like JIRA may be considered. The latest 
version of ReleasePlanner supports importing from and 
exporting to JIRA. 
With regard to the validity of this work, one other 
future direction can be to test the entire approach on a 
live project possibly by integrating to project’s backlog 
dataset, generating the plans and receiving feedback 
from developm
ent team.  
Acknowledgments 
This research was supported by the Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, 
NSERC Discovery Grant 
250343-12. Authors would 
like to thank Fazlul Chowdhury for providing access to 
the project data used for the case study. Thanks also to 
Amanpreet Singh for useful di
scussions in the course of 
the project and anonymous reviewers for their 
constructive feedback. 
References  
[1] C. Larman and V. R. Basili, “Iterative and incremental 
developments: a brief history,” 
Computer
, vol. 36, no. 6, Jun. 
2003, pp. 47–56. 
[2] M. Svahnberg, T. Gorschek, R. Feldt, R. Torkar, S. B. 
Saleem, and M. U. Shafique, “A systematic review on 
strategic release planning models,” 
Inf. Softw. Technol.
, vol. 
52, no. 3, 2010, pp. 237–248. 
[3] G. Ruhe, 
Product Release Planning: Methods, Tools, 
and Applications
. Auerbach Publications, 2010. 
[4] D. Leffingwell, 
Scaling software agility: best 
practices for large enterprises
. Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 2007. 
[5] D. Leffingwell, 
Agile Software Requirements: Lean 
Requirements Practices for Teams, Programs, and the 
Enterprise
, 1st ed. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2011. 
4747 [6] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, 
Agile software 
development with Scrum
. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 
2002. 
[7] K. Schwaber, 
Agile project management with Scrum
. 
Microsoft Press, 2004. 
[8] D. R. Greening, “Enterpr
ise Scrum: Scaling Scrum to 
the Executive Level,” in 
2010 43rd Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS)
, 2010, pp. 1–10. 
[9] P. Carlshamre, K. Sandahl, M. Lindvall, B. Regnell, 
and J. Natt och Dag, “An industrial survey of requirements 
interdependencies in software product release planning,” in 
Requirements Engineering, 2001. Proceedings. Fifth IEEE 
International Symposium on
, 2001, pp. 84–91. 
[10] Å. G. Dahlstedt and 
A. Persson, “Requirements 
Interdependencies: State of the Art and Future Challenges,” 
in 
Engineering and Managing Software Requirements
, A. 
Aurum and C. Wohlin, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2005, pp. 95–116. 
[11] M. Przepiora, R. Karim
pour, and G. Ruhe, “A hybrid 
release planning method and its empirical justification,” in 
ACM-IEEE international symposium on Empirical software 
engineering and measurement
, Lund, Sweden, 2012, pp. 
115–118. 
[12] ReleasePlanner [Online]. Available: 
www.releaseplanner.com. [Last access: Sep-2013]. 
[13] V. Heikkilä, A. Jadallah, K. Rautiainen, and G. Ruhe, 
“Rigorous Support for Flexible Planning of Product Releases 
- A Stakeholder-Centric Approach and Its Initial Evaluation,” 
in 
2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences (HICSS)
, 2010, pp. 1–10. 
[14] S. Fricker and S. Schumacher, “Release Planning with 
Feature Trees: Industrial Case,” in 
Requirements 
Engineering: Foundation for Software Quality
, vol. 7195, B. 
Regnell and D. Damian, Eds. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 
2012, pp. 288–305. 
[15] S. Reddivari, Z. Chen, a
nd N. Niu, “ReCVisu: A tool 
for clustering-based visual exploration of requirements,” in 
Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), 2012 20th IEEE 
International
, 2012, pp. 327–328. 
[16] K. E. Wiegers, 
Software requirements
. Microsoft 
press, 2003. 
[17] C. Biemann, “Chinese whispers: an efficient graph 
clustering algorithm and its application to natural language 
processing problems,” in 
Proceedings of the First Workshop 
on Graph Based Methods for Natural Language Processing
, 
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2006, pp. 73–80. 
[18] U. Brandes, M. Gaertler, and D. Wagner, 
“Experiments on Graph Clus
tering Algorithms,” in 
Algorithms - ESA 2003
, G. D. Battista and U. Zwick, Eds. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 568–579. 
[19] F. A. Chowdhury, “Fu
ll Course Project - SENG 652,” 
University of Calgary, Dep. of Computer Science, 29 pages. 
[20] M. Bastian, S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy, “Gephi: An 
open source software for exploring and manipulating 
networks,” in 
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs 
and Social Media
, 2009, vol. 2. 
 
 
4748