 Introduction to Agile and Lean Software Engineering Minitrack 
 
 
Ashley Aitken (Chair) 
School of Information Systems 
Curtin University, Perth – Australia 
ashley.aitken@cbs.curtin.edu.au 
 
Jay Trimble (Co-Chair) 
Intelligent Systems Division 
NASA Ames Research Center 
jay.p.trimble@nasa.gov 
 
 
 Over the last decade and a half the pendulum has 
swung decidedly towards agile and more recently 
lean software developmen
t and away from a more 
traditional software engineering approach.  There are 
many who feel, however, that the pendulum may 
have swung too far and may need to move back to 
more of a middle ground between these approaches 
(and there are signs that it already is happening).   
 Now in its third year, this minitrack continues to 
explore the middle ground between traditional 
software engineering (TSE) and the new agile 
software development (ASD) and lean software 
development (LSD), or what we call agile and lean 
software engineering (ALSE).  This year the 
minitrack includes seven contemporary and high 
quality international papers covering many aspects of 
agile and lean software development and engineering.  
As always it has a mixture of academic research and 
industry experience papers.   
 The minitrack commences with a case study 
paper by Rodríguez et al. 
that “provides empirical 
evidence of how lean software development can be 
combined with agile software development to 
enhance the software development process” in a 
paper entitled “Combining Lean Thinking and Agile 
Methods for Software Development.” The paper 
makes it clear what lean thinking brings to agile 
software development.   
 Oorts et al. in their paper “Building Evolvable 
Software Using Normalized Systems Theory” looks 
at the application of the NS development process to a 
budget management application and explains the 
advantages of this approach.  For those not familiar 
with the theory the pa
per also introduces the 
Normalized Systems Theo
ry and its foundations.  
 The paper on “Guiding Flexibility Investment in 
Agile Architecting” by Fernández-Sánchez et al. 
presents a process to assist software architects in 
making decisions about flexibility investments in 
software architecture.  Agile software development 
embraces continuous change but as the authors 
suggest, “designing for flexibility entails high costs 
and risk that comes with the assumption change will 
happen.”  
 
 “Exploring the Relationship Between 
Organizational Adoption Mo
tives and the Tailoring 
of Agile Methods” is the title and focus of the paper 
by Tripp et al.  Through an exploratory study of the 
forces that impact the manner in which agile methods 
are tailored they find that various motives for agile 
adoption are associated with
 different configurations 
of project management and ASD approaches.   
 Scheerer et al. present a multiteam systems 
perspective on “Coordination in Large-Scale Agile 
Software Development” in teams of teams 
(employing agile and lean software development), 
particularly “to describe different conceptual strategy 
types for inter-team coordination.”   
 Clark et al. present a paper proposing a move 
“Toward the Model Driven Organization” to ensure 
alignment of an organization’s systems and its goals.  
In the paper they discuss the shortcomings of current 
alignment management approaches and present their 
MDO vision.   
 Aitken concludes the minitrack with a proposal 
for a “Dual Application Model for Agile Software 
Engineering” that reinvents the traditional logical 
model of software as a runnable application that is 
central to development.  It is suggested that this 
approach brings to ASD more of the benefits of 
traditional software engineering without the pains.   
 This year we have a new co-chair in Jay Trimble 
and we are grateful for hi
s assistance organizing the 
minitrack.  We thank all the authors for submitting 
their papers and the many reviewers from around the 
world for their constructive and detailed reviews 
containing valuable feedback to help improve the 
papers.  These papers are going to make this year’s 
minitrack the most engaging and interesting for 
researchers and practitioners alike. We welcome 
everyone with an interest 
in this area to come along 
to hear the presentations and, most importantly, to 
contribute to the discussion at HICSS-47.   
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5844759