 Dual Application Model for Agile Software Engineering 
 
Ashley Aitken 
School of Information Systems 
Curtin University of Technology 
A.Aitken@Curtin.Edu.Au 
 
Abstract
 
There are problems with Traditional Software 
Engineering and with Agile
 Software Development.  A 
new approach called Agile Software Engineering that 
combines the best of both 
is proposed and an aspect of 
this approach described. The Dual Application Model 
involves the development 
of a logical software 
application focused on capturing the functional 
requirements and a physical software application 
focused on transforming the logical application to meet 
the non-functional requireme
nts.  It has advantages 
and disadvantages like any approach to software 
development but meets two of
 the principles proposed 
for Agile Software Engin
eering. Frameworks and tools 
are proposed to support the Dual Application Model 
but are not essential to the approach.  The approach 
provides an almost complete separation of concerns 
between defining and specifying (in code) the domain 
solution / software problem
 for which the domain 
experts are primarily responsible and designing and 
implementing the software solution to meet the non-
functional requirements for which the software 
developers are primarily responsible.   
 
1. Introduction  
 
Agile Software Development (ASD) has gone 
mainstream at 35% and dominates Traditional 
Software Engineering (TSE) at 21% and Waterfall 
Software Development (WSD) at 13%, according to a 
global developer survey, as reported in [1].  This 
doesn’t mean that everything in TSE (or even WSD) 
was wrong and everything in ASD is right.  In fact, 
there is a risk in such a dramatic move from TSE to 
ASD of throwing the baby out with the bath water.  It 
is important to transfer to ASD (perhaps with some 
reinterpretation) those concepts and practices from 
TSE (and even WSD) that have been found to be 
effective and not to just discount them because they are 
traditional (just as new concepts and practices 
shouldn’t be adopted just because they are new).   
The overall objective of this research programme is 
to develop a new approach to software development 
that combines the best of TSE with the best of ASD 
(and even WSD).  This paper represents a first step in 
this research.  It discusses the context within which this 
new approach was first deve
loped, explains the new 
approach, including some of the theoretical and 
practical advantages and disadvantages, and discusses 
areas of further research (e.g. data supporting the 
efficacy of the approach) and development to support 
the new approach (e.g. development tools, class 
libraries, and frameworks).   
Software models, like all models, are defined by 
their scope – the breadth of their representation, their 
perspective – the particular view of the software, and 
their level of abstraction – the amount of detail or 
complexity is included in the model.  There are also 
many different representations for models (e.g. 
physical, textual, graphical, mathematical, and 
computational models), each
 with their different 
characteristics, advantages and disadvantages.   
Software development is all about modeling.
  
Software models include textual models (e.g. user 
stories, use-cases and requirements documents), 
graphical models (e.g. class diagrams, sequence 
diagrams), and other models (e.g. mathematical 
models).  An important soft
ware model that is often 
overlooked, whilst right in front of everyone’s eyes, is 
the source code.  The source (and executable) code for 
an application is another model, it just happens to be 
one that can be executed (i.e. can be run directly or 
interpreted) and the primary goal of software 
development (i.e. to build a software application).  
Software models can represent the (mostly) static 
relationships between entities within the software, 
somewhat analogous to a 
photograph. Examples of 
models of static aspects are the UML Class Diagrams 
and Deployment Diagrams [2].  Software models can 
also represent the dynamics within and between 
entities within the software, somewhat analogous to a 
movie.  Examples of models
 of the dynamics are the 
UML Sequence and Interaction Diagrams.   
Software development is problem solving.
  As a 
result, all software development, no matter which 
approach or methodology is used, goes through the 
same cycle of requirements, analysis, design and 
implementation, independent of what form each takes 
or what models are (or are not) constructed.  WSD 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5884789 aims to do this only once, whereas best practice for 
TSE and ASD aims for highly iterative and 
incremental development.  Any source code that is 
written has some design, analysis and requirements 
that directs its development 
and provides context, even 
if it’s all done within developers’ heads.   
The next section of this paper discusses some of the 
problems with Traditional So
ftware Engineering and 
Agile Software Development and a solution based on 
the best of both called Agile Software Engineering.  
The following section introdu
ces the Dual Application 
Model as an approach to software development that is 
compatible with Agile Software Engineering.  The 
paper finishes with further 
discussion of this approach, 
including related work, answers to common questions, 
possible tools or framewor
ks, and future research 
directions.   
2. Agile Software Engineering 
Traditional Software Engineering (TSE) is defined 
here as the best practice software engineering that was 
undertaken before agile software development came 
along.  It was planned, highly iterative and 
incremental, and employed many models of the 
software system being developed, as exemplified by 
the the Rational Unified Process [3].  Agile Software 
Development (ASD) is defined here by the Agile 
Manifesto [4] and tends to be highly iterative and 
incremental but adaptive rather than planned and 
generally embraces less formal processes and fewer 
persistent models (e.g. primarily the code) and 
formalities than TSE [5].   
 
2.1. Analysis versus Design 
 
Analysis is the process of understanding the 
domain and the software problem
 itself.  Here the word 
“problem” is used in the sense of the task to be 
undertaken, e.g. to develop a software system to do 
specified information proce
ssing and/or storage in a 
particular domain meeting 
specified constraints.  
Analysis involves modeling 
the problem independent 
of any possible final solution,
 in particular independent 
of any non-functional requirements and any decisions 
made about the solution.  Analysis or logical models 
are models of the problem (not just a general model of 
the problem domain).   
Design is the process of determining and specifying 
a solution to the problem with specific implementation 
technology that meets the non
-functional requirements.  
In essence, if there were no non-functional 
requirements or implemen
tation constraints there 
would be no need for design.   In software 
development, the analysis mode
l is in effect a solution 
meeting the functional requi
rements but not the non-
functional requirements or im
plementation constraints.  
The design or physical models
 are models of a solution 
modified to meet the non-functional requirements 
using the chosen implementa
tion technologies [6].   
Software development is initially driven by a 
domain problem (e.g. in a business or technical area). 
However, solving the domai
n problem is, almost by 
definition, the task of domain e
xperts.  It is not the role 
of software developers to determine how a business 
should solve its business problems, even information 
processing problems, or to find the solution to some 
technical business problem 
(although it seems, at least 
in business, this is often the case).   
For any domain problem there is a domain solution 
that is chosen by the domain experts from a set of 
possible domain designs to meet the functional and 
non-functional requirements within their domain.  The 
task for software developers is to take this domain 
solution on as a software development problem with its 
own non-functional requirements and find the most 
appropriate software solution from a number of 
possible software designs.  The domain solution is in 
essence the functional requirements and analysis or 
logical models, a complete specification of what the 
software system should do.   
Whilst is possible to use automated tools to create 
different representations of the logical models (e.g. 
using CASE tools) a
nd to create different 
representations of the physical models separately, it is 
not generally possible to use tools to automate (at least, 
not completely) the transformation from logical models 
to physical models or vice-versa.  This is because this 
is where creative design happens, tradeoffs are made, 
solutions to meet non-functional requirements are 
determined, and there is not yet any way to fully 
automate these decisions (or the search through the 
solution space).   
Software  Design Choices
Software Solution 1
Software Solution 2
Software Solution...
Domain Design Choices
Domain Solution 1
Domain Solution 2
Domain Solution...
Domain
Problem
Software
Requirements
Software
Problem
Software 
Application
Software 
Solution
Domain
Solution
 
Figure 1. Domain Problem-Solution versus Software Problem-Solution 
4790 In summary, software analysis is about 
understanding the functional requirements as presented 
or developed in logical mode
l(s) with the help of the 
domain expert(s).  For software this can be done, for 
example, with user stories,
 use-cases or requirements 
documents and various other analysis models.  
Software design is then a
bout modifying the logical 
model(s) to form physical 
models and to ensure the 
results meet the non-functi
onal requirements with the 
chosen implementation technologies.   
For software development the non-functional 
requirements can be characteristics like speed, 
reliability, ease-of-use, scalab
ility, and persistence.  As 
a result of these different non-functional requirements 
we have different roles and expertise within software 
development like algorithm 
designer, UI designer, 
persistence designer, and the designer of the software 
architecture (upfront or incr
ementally as the system is 
developed).  Software analysis is about understanding 
and modeling (if these are 
not already provided) the 
domain solution, and software
 design is about finding a 
software realisation of the domain solution that meets 
the non-functional requirements.  
The benefits of the analysis / logical models are: 1) 
that they focus purely on the software problem / 
domain solution, 2) they are independent of any 
decisions related to the software solution (e.g. 
architecture or technology deci
sions), and 3) they are 
independent of any non-functional requirements (e.g. 
they do not have to concer
n themselves with meeting 
non-functional requirements) .  Inevitably, there must 
be a logical model of the problem, even if it is only 
partial and/or temporarily ma
intained in the heads of 
the software developers.   
 
2.2. The Problems with Traditional Software 
Engineering and Agile Software Development 
 
One of the main strengths of TSE was, in the 
author’s opinion, its multi-m
odel approach to software 
development.  Having models that give different 
perspectives on the software at different stages in the 
lifecycle allowed developers to focus on particular 
aspects of the software de
velopment task (e.g. the 
requirements, the analysis, the design, and the 
implementation).  As engin
eers in other disciplines 
also use multiple models (e.g. of buildings and roads) 
there is strong reason to think of this as a key aspect of 
an engineering approach to software development.   
The biggest practical problem with traditional 
software engineering relevant to this paper was not the 
waterfall approach (as many agile software developers 
informally argue) since best practice traditional 
software engineering was highly incremental and 
iterative.  The biggest problem was the fact that the 
various models developed (e.g. requirements, analysis, 
design, and code) quickly became out-of-sync with 
each other, particularly when developers changed the 
code without updating the other models.   
The requirements (combining functional and non-
functional requirements) and analysis (only functional 
requirements) models were al
so most often a collection 
of static and dynamic textual, graphical, and sometime 
mathematical models.  The static textual and graphical 
models could quickly become very complex and 
difficult to understand, and the dynamic textual and 
graphical models had trouble capturing the full 
dynamical nature of the domain solution.  These 
models were also very hard to verify and validate, 
because of their form or the 
fact that they were partial 
and incomplete.   
One of the main strengths of Agile Software 
Development (ASD) is the incremental development of 
the software, without detailed overall plans, or even 
detailed requirements specifications.  The software 
development work is often done one (vertical) piece at 
a time to create incremental value for the users and 
stakeholders.  The quickest way to achieve this ASD 
suggest is by going directly to the source code model 
with minimal and often only 
transient forms of other 
modeling.  ASD employs, ge
nerally speaking, even 
less than “just-in-time” modeling. Most ASD models 
(except the source code) are considered only temporary 
artifacts and often only fo
r momentary communication 
between developers.   
Of course, ASD is a very broad church [ A, so it is 
difficult to claim it has a specific problem (since there 
will often be a form(s) of ASD that don’t have that 
problem).  That said, the probl
em that is most relevant 
to this research and commonly found in ASD is the use 
of the source code model as the primary artifact and 
form of documentation for 
everything related to the 
software development.  The source code does not only 
include the functional source code but also unit testing, 
test harness, and other supporting code and comments 
within the code.  It seems 
reasonable to suggest that it 
is not optimal to include all documentation and 
alternative models, including logical models, within 
the physical model code (i.e. the final solution).
 
The ASD code does capture most (if not all) of the 
physical aspects of the solutio
n.  For example, implicit 
in the code is the architecture of the final application, 
the physical design of each API, and the optimized 
algorithms and data structures for each module.  
However, by their very nature these are solution 
specific and implementation sp
ecific.  They are after 
all the source code that meets the functional and non-
functional requirements in the chosen implementation 
technologies.  The problem is that the logical model is 
generally not recorded because there is no easy 
4791 mapping between logical a
nd physical models, and 
thus lost when the focus is only on the physical source 
code.   
Some snippets of the logical model may be saved 
as comments in code or separate documentation (e.g. a 
user story, a diagram here, or a photo of a whiteboard 
sequence diagram there).  However, this separate 
documentation suffers from the same problems that 
plague traditional documentation, i.e. that it can be 
come out-of-date and out-of-sync very quickly if the 
solution changes.  Most significantly though, if other 
developers, e.g. those allocated the job of maintaining 
the source code, want to get a real understanding for 
the problem domain and domai
n solution they have to 
attempt to see it within 
the code through all the 
modifications made to meet the non-functional 
requirement and the technology chosen for the 
implementation.  The goal of the physical source code 
is to meet the non-functional requirements rather than 
to clearly express the logical model.  
 
2.3. Agile Software Engineering 
 
Agile Software Engineering (ASE) aims to 
combine the best of TSE and ASD and overcome the 
problems with each.  It adopts the highly iterative and 
incremental approach of TSE and ASD, and most often 
the adaptive approach of ASD rather than the planned 
approach of TSE. ASE adopts the multi-model view of 
TSE against the limited and primarily physical 
modeling approach of ASD.  Its approach to the 
problem of out-of-sync models is primarily to 
eliminate all perman
ent models of the software except 
the source code model (or what can be represented in 
the source code model).  ASE’s approach to the out-of-
sync models problem is to encourage the maintenance 
of multiple models and support tools or automated 
generation of models separately within the logical or 
physical spaces so that they can be kept in sync.   
This paper focuses on the problems mentioned 
above, i.e. in TSE of the requirements, analysis, and 
design models becoming out-of-sync and the lack of 
analysis or logical mode
ls in ASD. How can a 
development approach have multiple models, with not 
just physical models, that do 
not (or at least should not) 
become out-of-sync?  This paper also does not provide 
a complete description of ASE, it is still a work in 
progress, but it suggests here a couple of the general 
principles of ASE in line with these identified 
problems: 
   
Principle of Appropriate Models: 
This principle 
states that the most appropriate place to work on 
logical aspects of a problem 
is in logical models of 
the problem and the most appropriate place to 
work on physical aspects of a software solution are 
in the physical models.  
 
 
This may seem obvious but it is not what is 
generally done in ASD. As mentioned, ASD tends to 
work primarily on the source code model, i.e. a 
physical model for the system
.  Any logical models are 
either implicit in the physi
cal model or temporary and 
transient models discarded once the physical model is 
produced.   
 
Principle of Only Forward Engineering:
 This 
principle, a corollary to the previous one, states 
that it is inappropriate to reverse engineer or work 
back from physical models 
back to logical models.  
Doing so is, generally, a violation of the previous 
principle even if possible.  
 
 
Of course, the latter doesn’t mean you cannot 
reverse engineer if/when it is possible and necessary, 
for example if you receive 
code without any logical 
models.  However, the aim is to not encourage 
developers to start with the traditional source code (i.e. 
a physical model) and then try to work back to logical 
models if needed since this is often very difficult, if not 
impossible, to do completely.   
 
3. The Dual Application Model 
 
The goal of ASE may seem difficult to attain – a 
combination of TSE and ASD – that at the very least 
meets the principles specified above.  In this section, 
an approach to software development called the Dual 
Application Model (DAM) is proposed that, at least 
partially, provides a step in that direction.   
Before the Dual Application Model is explained in 
detail it should be said that it only relates to specific 
aspects of the approach to software development (in 
particular, which models are developed).  For all other 
aspects of software development the approach assumes 
the best current practice in software development.  For 
example, highly iterative de
velopment with Scrum [7] 
or a Kanban [8] approach to work management, the use 
of unit testing and acceptance test driven development.  
Although the paper discusses 
the development of two 
models it is definitely not suggesting that these will be 
developed in a waterfall fashion, each may be built up 
incrementally during each iteration just as the 
traditional source code model is developed in ASD, or 
that these will necessarily be the only models 
developed.    
 
3.1. Overview of the Dual Application Model 
 
4792 The DAM proposes that software developers 
develop two applications inst
ead of just the one that 
they will deploy. The first application, called the 
Logical Application (LA)
, implements a runnable 
logical model of the domai
n solution, / software 
problem.  The second application, called the Physical 
Application (PA), implemen
ts the physical model of 
the desired software system, which is actually in fact 
the desired software system.   
Logical
Application
Physical
Application
 
Figure 2. Logical and Physical Application 
This DAM approach may sound crazy.  Why 
should developers do twice the work to achieve the 
same outcome?  The assumptions (that needs to be 
proven) are 1) that there will be some extra work but it 
won’t be twice the work (as will be explained), and 2) 
that this approach has other advantages like higher 
quality and overall productivity that outweigh this 
extra work (whilst also bein
g in line with the principles 
of Agile Software Engineering).  It is proposed that the 
DAM is a way to achieve ASE without discarding the 
multiple models of TSE (i.e. without throwing the baby 
out with the bath water) and, it is claimed, will achieve 
better productivity and higher quality, primarily 
because of the separation of concerns.   
In essence, this paper is suggesting that developers 
swap the traditional logical models (i.e. traditional 
declarative requirements sp
ecifications and analysis 
models) for a runnable LA, 
the development of which 
can be guided by user stories or use-cases).  Recall the 
problems with declarative 
requirements and analysis 
models, is that they are of
ten incomplete, inconsistent, 
difficult to validate, get out-of-sync with development.  
The LA should go along way to solving some of these 
problems – software abhors inconsistency, software 
can be exercised and tested to verify and determine 
validity, and incompleteness stands out in software, 
particularly when it is exercised and tested.   
 
3.2. Logical Application (LA) 
The LA is in essence a runnable logical model of 
the domain solution / software problem.  Unlike 
traditional requirements or analysis models that were 
often incomplete, inconsistent, and piece-meal (i.e. 
only representing portions of
 the logical model), the 
LA can be a complete and detailed model of the 
software problem so far.  It should also be a “natural” 
model of the problem since it is aiming to clearly 
capture the logical model.  
It does, by definition, lack 
any details pertaining to th
e physical implementation.  
The goal of the LA is to capture the desired 
software system independent of any non-functional 
requirements or implementa
tion technologies.  The LA 
is a direct, explicit, and executable model of the 
domain solution. Having an 
executable logical model 
means the users can try out the logical model, that 
logical unit tests may be written, as well as logical 
system tests.  These tests may then be mapped to 
physical unit and system tests.   
Of course, any runnable software application must 
be implemented in some programming language and 
have some design, it is not possible to escape the 
“physicalness” of even a logical model.  However, the 
design of the LA is chosen to best represent the domain 
solution and to be as easy 
and quick as possible to 
develop and change.  The best way to do this is usually 
to match the domain solution and logical model as 
closely as possible.  As 
a result, many LAs would be 
object-oriented because object orientation is a natural 
way to model many problem 
domains.  However, other 
LAs could be written using functional or other styles of 
programming.   
The physical constraints on the LA should be 
minimal.  For example, it should be assumed that the 
application has a very large amount (but not infinite) 
memory, a very fast (but not infinitely fast) processor, 
and a very high (but not in
finite) network bandwidth. 
The LA should not be concerned with persistence since 
that is a non-functional requirement (i.e. that the 
software shall be able to maintain state when the 
application is not running).  
It should not be concerned 
with the solution application 
architecture, e.g. whether 
it is a one tier, two-tier or n-tier application for Web, 
desktop, mobile or an em
bedded platform, since these 
are architecture and implemen
tation constraints of the 
physical model.   
The DAM does not constrai
n the technologies used 
to implement the LA.  They should be whatever is best 
able assist the developer to as easily and as quickly as 
possible model the problem
 domain solution in a 
natural way.  Contemporary programming languages 
that would seem to meet 
these requirements would be 
languages like Ruby, Groovy or Python, i.e. the 
dynamic programming languages because of their 
dynamic typing, brevity 
and rapid application 
development.  This is not to say that the LA could not 
be developed in pretty much any programming 
language.   
4793 Whilst there may be some advantage of developing 
in LA in a programming language that can also be used 
for the PA it is not a requirement.  It could be 
beneficial because it could allow the developer to copy 
some source code directly from the LA to the PA, at 
least initially.  The LA can be considered a first draft 
for the PA [6].  The probl
em with using the same 
programming language for the LA and PA is that it 
could confuse developers with regard to which model 
they are working on.  The temptation is also that 
developers may not develop a separate LA (since they 
believe it is just being copi
ed to the PA anyway).  
Recall that the benefit of the LA is not just that it 
can be used as a draft for the PA but also that even 
after the PA starts to be 
transformed into the physical 
application that will satisfy the non-functional 
requirements, the LA should still be a natural 
representation of the domain solution / software 
problem.  Developing further 
user stories, use-cases, 
and functional requirements firstly within an 
unadulterated LA will be a lot easier than developing 
them in the PA, which will be more complex due to its 
persistence technology, UI design, and various 
optimizations.   
 
3.3. Physical Application (PA) 
The goal of the Physical Application (PA) is to 
firstly implement the f
unctional requirements as 
represented in the LA and then the non-functional 
requirements of the software system.  Developers of 
the PA have a clearly defined LA to work from. In 
effect, to implement the functional requirements the 
developer only need to translate / port (if necessary) 
the LA to the PA impl
ementation and deployment 
environment.  For example, 
logical types in the LA 
need to become physical types in the PA.  If the LA 
and PA use the same or “compatible” languages at 
least this step could be a relatively easy and perhaps 
even a semi- or fully-automated process.    
The full design of the PA is the primary task of 
software developers.  The LA, which can become the 
first draft of the PA for software developers, should 
come almost for free from the domain experts and 
product owner. The PA then needs to be modified and 
changed until the PA meets the non-functional 
requirements.  Aspects of the PA that could need to 
determined and changed include the architecture, the 
presentation and the persistence.   
The PA is, of course, familiar to software 
developers since it is what they normally deliver. There 
is one significant difference, however, between 
development of the PA and the traditional executable 
that developers deliver.  When developing the PA 
developers do not have to worry about defining the 
software problem in any way. They can work directly 
with what is specified in 
the LA.  At this stage the 
developer is free to focus on optimizing the user 
interface, perfecting the persistence, scaling the 
architecture, … all to ensure the final deliverables meet 
the non-functional requirements.  In these areas the 
developer is the expert (not the product owner), 
although of course the product owner and users have a 
say in the outcome through setting the non-functional 
requirements and feedback on incremental versions of 
the PA.   
Key to the development of the PA will be a list of 
changes made to the LA that accompany the user 
stories, use-cases, and/or functional requirements for 
this particular iteration.  As the LA is source code it 
can be kept in a version control system (e.g. SVN or 
Git) and changes can be tracked.  The PA developer(s) 
will thus have a description of the functionality with 
source code changes that already implement this 
functionality in the LA.  The PA developer(s) will also 
have a record of the non-functional requirements in 
some form, generally for the 
entire software solution or 
specifically for these user stories, use-cases, or 
functional requirements.   
The PA developer(s) will then use their expertise to 
translate those changes (a
dditions, modifications, and 
deletions) from the LA to the PA and implement the 
any required user interface, persistence, architecture or 
other changes necessary to meet the non-functional 
requirements. It seems po
ssible that with a well-
designed PA, many developers could actually work on 
this PA at the same time, e.g. UI specialists could work 
on the user interface, persistence specialists could work 
on the persistence, and others could translate the LA 
code and integrate with the other changes.  Some 
changes to the LA may be superficial, e.g. renaming of 
variables or modules, and can perhaps be ignored by 
the PA developer.  However, such changes are often a 
form of documentation, done 
to convey meaning and to 
Software  Design Choices
Software Solution 1
Software Solution 2
Software Solution...
Domain Design Choices
Domain Solution 1
Domain Solution 2
Domain Solution...
Domain
Problem
Logical
Application
Software
Problem
Physical
Application
Software 
Solution
Domain
Solution
 
Figure 3. Logical Application becomes primary Requirements and Analysis Models
 
4794 correct or guide interpretations so perhaps they are 
important for the PA developer to consider as well.  
 
3.4. Advantages and Disadvantages 
 
Some possible advantages of the DAM include: 
1.
 
The LA clearly and as naturally as possible 
captures the static and dynamic nature of the 
desired software system, i.e. the problem domain 
solution and the software problem, and the PA 
captures the static and dynamic nature of the 
desired software solution (since it is the desired 
software system).    
2.
 
The LA works out any inconsistencies, 
incorrectness, incompleteness in the logical model 
before the more difficult PA is further developed.  
It is significantly more effective and efficient to 
find problems early in the software development 
lifecycle [9].   
3.
 
The DAM offers nearly complete separation of the 
analysis and design (as defined earlier), which 
should improve the results of each task.  When 
developing the LA the developers focus primarily 
on capturing and defining the problem as related 
by the product owner and/or domain expert(s) and 
are not distracted by other concerns.  When 
developing the PA developers focus primarily on 
implementing the provided pa
rts of the LA in the 
chosen implementation t
echnologies and designing 
the solution to meet the non-functional 
requirements and not about the domain solution or 
software problem. 
Some possible disadvantages of DAM include: 
1.
 
The development of the 
LA and PA seems to 
involve more work than just the development of 
the PA.  Although, as mentioned above some of 
this work may be “copied” over, at least initially, 
to the PA.  It is suggested that any extra effort in 
developing this extra model has significant 
advantages and payoffs in the short to medium 
term for the software development.   
2.
 
The product owner needs to work with both the 
LA to check its functionality and the PA to check 
it meets the non-functional requirements.  They 
may also be confused somewhat by the two 
different applications and hesitant to go back to 
work on the LA when the PA is available.   
3.
There is nothing physically stopping developers 
from implementing new functionality directly in 
the PA without im
plementing it firstly in the LA.  
This may be “strongly discouraged” by 
management (or technology) but it is hoped that 
the advantage of using the LA will become clear 
to developers and they will choose to develop 
functionality in it first.  
 
Further, and as discussed earlier, it is not possible 
to directly generate the PA
 from the LA (or reverse 
engineer the other way), although some automation 
may be possible.  The reas
on is that design is about 
making choices between alternatives and tradeoffs 
between these alternatives, e.g. the different user 
interface options, the different persistence options, the 
different architecture opti
ons, and different algorithm 
design options.  So it is generally not possible for tools 
to perform the LA to PA transition.   
However, it is entirely possible to uses tools to 
automate generation of various logical models from 
other logical models and va
rious physical models from 
other physical models.  For example, it is possible to 
use UML graphical analysis
 models and a CASE tool 
to generate (a skeleton of) the LA source code and to 
reverse engineer the UML gr
aphical analysis models 
from the LA source code.  Si
milarly, it is possible to 
use UML graphical design or
 deployment models and a 
CASE tool to generate (a skeleton) of the PA source 
code and to reverse engin
eer the UML graphical design 
models from the PA source code.   
Logical
Application
Physical
Application
Analysis
Models
Design
Models
Automatic Generation
with CASE Tools
Manual
 
Figure 4. Automatic generation and reverse 
engineering of models in Analysis or Design 
 
4. Further Discussion 
 
4.1. Related Work 
 
The notion of logical and physical models of 
software is obviously not new.  Even the use of a 
traditional programming language for the logical 
model may not be novel (although TSE often used 
graphic models for their logi
cal models).  However, it 
is thought that preserving 
the LA and using source 
code changes (diffs) to communicate the incremental 
changes to the functional requirements to the 
developers of the PA is novel.  The DAM encourages a 
full lifecycle iterative and incremental approach to 
development with all changes to the functionality of 
the PA being implemented in the LA firstly (i.e. always 
doing explicit analysis before design). 
Model-Driven Development (MDD) [10, 11] and 
the OMG instance Model-Driven Architecture (MDA) 
4795 [12] are more ambitious attempts at automation of 
software development than the DAM by working at 
higher levels of abstraction (like current source code is 
a higher level of abstraction than machine code) and 
automating the compilation down to machine code.  
Whilst it is possible to abstr
act away from a concrete 
platform and to map an abstraction to a concrete 
platform, it is much more difficult to see any 
compilation being able to make all the designs and 
design tradeoffs that are needed to meet varied and 
custom non-functional requirements any time soon.  
Whilst the LA may correspond to the Platform 
Independent Model (PIM) and Platform-Specific 
Models (PSMs) may correspond to the initial draft PAs 
(for various platforms), this approach does not seem to 
address the tradeoffs, optimisations, and custom 
designs needed to meet the non-functional 
requirements.   
In its simplest expression, the DAM approach is 
basically two software application written in regular 
programming languages, the LA language usually 
higher level and easier to develop in than the PA 
application.  The LA application is focused only on 
functional requirement and has no specific project-
related non-functional requirements.  The PA is a 
reimplementation of the LA
 on chosen implementation 
technologies to meet the projects non-functional 
requirements.  Source code changes (diffs) in the LA 
are used to specify required functional changes to the 
PA.  The DAM approach does not see the LA as being 
at a higher level of abstrac
tion to the PA; it is just 
using the simplest (physi
cal) software language and 
environment to implemen
t (only) the functional 
requirements as quickly and easily as possible.  The 
LA is as detailed and complex as the domain solution / 
software problem requires it to be.  The DAM 
approach does embrace transformations and reverse 
engineering between models at various levels of 
abstraction for the logical 
application and the physical 
application separately.  However, it does not seek (at 
least at this stage) anything 
more than simple syntactic 
transformations between the LA
 and PA.  This is seen 
to be where the true work and expertise of software 
developers.   
 
4.2. Common Questions 
 
Who develops the logical application?  
The LA will 
be developed by a software developer(s) with the co-
operation and, perhaps, even the participation of the 
product owner (or users and domain experts).  The 
product owner will raise a user story, use-case or 
functional requirement and the developer will 
implement that in the LA directly, sometimes even 
whilst with the product owner.   
Is the LA the same as a prototype?
 The simple 
answer is, generally speaking, no.  A prototype is 
usually a quick and dirty im
plementation of a physical 
design as a test of the appropriateness of the solution or 
the feasibility of finding a solution. LAs are supposed 
to be well designed to capture the functional 
requirements.  Further, once the feasibility of the 
problem has been determined by a prototype it is 
supposed to be discarded for a better-designed 
solution.  The LA is designed to stay around and 
always be the arbiter and “point of record” for the 
domain solution / software problem (especially as it 
changes).   
In a way, the DAM approach mimics some aspects 
of rapid prototyping, especially as it was often done in 
the 1990s, e.g. some devel
opers would implement a 
prototype in Smalltalk [13] and then re-implement the 
real system in C or C++ to meet the non-functional 
requirements (often speed).  Smalltalk is an effective 
rapid application development environment, allowing 
developers to run the application and fill in missing 
code / modules as they are found at run-time.  Most 
Smalltalk environments also employ the idea of an 
application image that is persistent (including the 
development environment), which would be very 
useful for LA development.   
As [14] writes, Smalltalk "can also be used to avoid 
the shift between the description/specification of a 
system and its implementation."  This is the goal of the 
LA.  However, we think it is novel to use this approach 
within a highly iterative a
nd incremental approach.  
Mostly prototyping is for early evaluation or 
specification and the prototype is subsequently 
discarded.  DAM suggests maintaining the LA and the 
description / specification of the domain solution / 
software problem, and modifying it as needed in order 
to modify the PA subsequently.   
Will the product owner just want developers to 
deploy the LA?  
The problem with many traditional 
prototypes is that they we
re part logical and part 
physical application. They often included persistence, 
screen designs (albeit rushed), and although they often 
did not meet all of the non-functional requirements 
they often met a few (or even many). Obviously then 
the customer would be interested in getting the 
software deployed immediately.  The LA will usually 
have inappropriate user interface design, persistence 
and architecture and not attempt to meet any non-
functional requirements.  For example, the logical 
application for a Web application could be a desktop 
application, or vice versa (as discussed later).
   
What about applications that don’t have basic input 
and output screens (e.g. embedded software or 
games)?
 Applications that don’t have basic input and 
output still necessarily have some form of input and 
4796 some form of output.  In these cases the LA would still 
have logical and abstract representations of these 
interfaces.  For the case of games, the 2D for 3D nature 
of the game can be considered a non-functional 
requirement and the LA can again work with 
abstractions of these inputs and outputs (e.g. game 
control inputs and abstract 
scene descriptions).   
Why not just use one application and try to keep 
the logical and physical aspects separate in the same 
source code (e.g. by using interfaces and aspects)?
 
This is an interesting idea but probably difficult and 
doomed to fail.  The whole idea of the design of 
software is to bend and twist the logical application as 
little a possible but as much as needed to meet the non-
functional requirements and implementation 
technology choices.  Good luck trying to maintain the 
logical aspects of code that 
is implemented in assembly 
language for speed or memory optimisation.  Whilst 
some very simple applications may see similarity 
between the LA and PA, in real world cases they will 
be very different.   
 
4.3. A Framework or Platform for the LA 
 
In essence, the LA can be developed from scratch 
in any programming language and software 
development environment th
at meets the requirements 
for a logical application.  As mentioned, this may often 
be an interpreted single command-line or desktop 
application that the developer can share with the 
product owner directly (or via some source code 
control system) to validate.   
There are, however, common aspects of the LA that 
could be factored out to 
make implementation easier. 
For example, the simple handling of inputs and 
outputs, making it easier for developers just to declare 
they need a user interface with these inputs, outputs, 
and/or commands and for such an interface to become 
available.  Remember the user interface design is not 
central here but it does need to capture grouping of 
inputs, outputs, commands etc.   
A first approach to this w
ould be to develop a set of 
libraries or an application framework, which made 
developing applications easier than starting from 
scratch. A LA Framework (L
AF) could provide all the 
foundational functionality for any LA.  Similarly, there 
could be libraries for si
mple logical storage of 
information.  These could be just extended version of 
collections that allow the LA to model the grouping of 
entities in the domain solution (e.g. a collection of 
customers, or a folder of doc
uments).  All of these seek 
to raise the level of abstraction that is used to create the 
LA and make it quicker and easier to implement.  A 
second approach could go even further.  A 4GL-like 
software application could be provided in which the 
product owner could define the logical interfaces. They 
could define logical screen
s with inputs, outputs, and 
or commands, grouping and describing the logical 
types of these inputs and outputs and perhaps textually 
describing what each of the commands will do.  This 
application could be a singl
e-user desktop application 
or a Web-based application for multiple users and 
multiple projects. 
It is usually beyond the ability of the product owner 
to go much beyond the interfaces, typically what would 
be described in a use-case, i.e. the interaction between 
users (or actors as they are called in UML) and the 
interfaces of the software system.  Usually a software 
developer would be required to develop the internals of 
the application with guidan
ce and information from the 
product owner (e.g. how the 
output is computed, what 
are the steps in completing the actions).  The software 
developer brings the logical application to life for the 
product owner with this coding
 of the domain solution.  
An interesting question is what sort of software 
developer will be required to develop the LA.  Recall, 
it is devoid of any technicalities related to non-
functional requirement like usability, persistence, 
optimizations.  Also the developer needs to work 
closely with the users, pr
oduct owner, and/or domain 
experts to really understand the domain solution and 
software problem.  Could 
a business analyst with the 
right training and skills undertake this task?  This role 
of LA developer is somewhat distinct from the roles of 
traditional or agile software developers.   
 
5. Summary and Future Research 
 
This paper has highlighted the differences between 
analysis and design and logical
 and physical models.  It 
has focused on some problems with Traditional 
Software Engineering and some problems with Agile 
Software Development as motivation for a new 
approach to software development called the Dual 
Application Model. It invol
ves the development of two 
software applications instead of the regular one 
deliverable application.  The first application is the 
Logical Application and it 
is a runnable logical model 
of the domain solution / software problem.  It is 
independent of any solution technology and the non-
functional requirements and is runnable.  It is 
developed as a clear and natural record of the domain 
solution / software problem so that it can be rapidly 
developed and easily maintained. The Logical 
Application is developed with
 close involvement of the 
user(s), product owner, and/or domain expert(s). 
The second application is th
e Physical Application 
and it is a physical model of the software solution and 
what is eventually delivered 
as the software solution.  
4797 The Logical Application is a first draft for the Physical 
Application but the application must be extended and 
modified to run on the 
physical implementation 
platform and to meet all the non-functional 
requirements of the software solution, e.g. persistence, 
ease-of-use, speed, and reliability.  The development of 
the Physical Application is 
the domain and expertise of 
software developers, although the product owner 
through their desire for various non-functional 
requirements directs it.  The development of the PA, 
like the LA, is done iterativ
ely and incrementally and 
directed by changes to the LA source code, user 
stories, use-cases, functi
onal, and also non-function 
requirements provided by the product owner.  
This approach in line with
 the proposed principles 
of Agile Software Engineering, i.e. to have separate 
logical and physical models 
and to work forward from 
the logical to physical models (in each iteration).  It 
also supports multiple models developed separately 
from the Logical and Physical
 Applications or used to 
generate (at least initially) parts of the Logical and 
Physical Applications.  It
 does not include, however, 
the generation of the Physical Application from the 
Logical Application (as done in MDD) since this is 
where the real expertise of software developers is 
needed.  A number of advantages and disadvantages of 
this approach are discussed with the belief that overall 
it will lead to the more efficient and effective 
development of higher quality software.   
There are four important features of this approach. 
Firstly, the LA is a full model of each particular 
version of the domain soluti
on / software problem not 
some high-level abstraction 
that leaves out details and 
may be inconsistent.  Secondly, every iteration of the 
LA is a runnable application that can be verified with 
automated and manual testing and validated by the 
product owner, users, and other stakeholders before 
significant effort is made to implement that iteration of 
the PA.  Thirdly, changes to the LA can be tracked by 
a source code version control system and provided to 
software developer to guide
 them in updating the PA. 
Compare this to TSE when changes to logical models 
were generally hard to track.  Fourthly, the LA and PA 
can be developed iteratively and incrementally and in 
parallel because of the ease of tracking the changes to 
the LA 
The approach has been “walked through” for 
simple software development problems (e.g. a library 
management software system).  It needs, however, to 
be trialed in larger more real-world software 
development projects to see and measure how effective 
and efficient it may (or may not) be.  There is also a lot 
of room for research and development of class 
libraries, application framew
orks, and CASE tools to 
support the Dual Application Model.  If successful this 
approach could become a central component of Agile 
Software Engineering.   
 
6. References 
 
[1] D. West, T. Grant, M. Gerush and D. D’Silva, 
Agile 
development: Mainstream adoption has changed agility
, 
Forrester Research
, 2010. 
[2] J. Rumbaugh, I. Jacobson and G. Booch, 
Unified 
Modeling Language Reference Manual, The
, Pearson Higher 
Education, 2004. 
[3] P. Kruchten, 
The rational unified process: an 
introduction
, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004. 
[4] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. v. Bennekum, A. Cockburn, W. 
Cunningham, M. Fowler, J. Gre
nning, J. Highsmith, A. Hunt, 
R. Jeffries, J. Kern, B. Marick, R. C. Martin, S. Mellor, K. 
Schwaber, J. Sutherland and D. Thomas, 
Manifesto for Agile 
Software Development
, http://agilemanifesto.org/, 2001. 
[5] A. Aitken and V. Ilango, 
A Comparative Analysis of 
Traditional Software Engineering and Agile Software 
Development
, 
System Sciences (HICSS), 2013 46th Hawaii 
International Conference on
, IEEE, 2013, pp. 4751-4760. 
[6] I. Jacobson, 
Object-Oriented Software Engineering
, 
Addison-Wesley, 1992. 
[7] K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, "What is Scrum", URL: 
http://www.scrumalliance.org/system/resource/file/275/whatI
sScrum.pdf (2007). 
[8] K. Hiranabe, 
Kanban applied to software development: 
From agile to lean
, http://www.infoq.com/articles/hiranabe-
lean-agile-kanban, 2008. 
[9] B. W. Boehm, "Software engineering economics", 
Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on (1984), pp. 4-
21. 
[10] S. J. Mellor, T. Clark and T. Futagami, "Model-driven 
development: guest editors' introduction", IEEE Software, 20 
(2003), pp. 14-18. 
[11] O. Pastor, S. España, J.
 I. Panach and N. Aquino, 
"Model-driven development", Informatik-Spektrum, 31 
(2008), pp. 394-407. 
[12] A. G. Kleppe, J. Warmer
, W. Bast and M. Explained, 
The model driven architecture: practice and promise
, 
Addison-Wesley Longman Pub
lishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, 
2003. 
[13] A. Goldberg, 
Smalltalk-80: The Interactive 
Programming Environment
, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 
1984. 
[14] F. Kordon, "An introduction to rapid system 
prototyping", Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 
28 (2002), pp. 817-821. 
 
 
4798