 Introduction to Agile Software Engineering Minitrack 
 
 
 
Ashley M. Aitken 
School of Information Systems 
Curtin University of Technology 
ashley.aitken@cbs.curtin.edu.au 
 
 
 This minitrack seeks to explore the 
middle ground between traditional software 
engineering (TSE) and the new agile 
software development (ASD), or what we 
call agile software engineering (ASE).  The 
minitrack includes six contemporary and 
high quality research papers.   
 The paper titled “Identifying Common 
Characteristics in Fundamental, Integrated, 
and Agile Software development 
Methodologies” by Dyck and Majchrzak 
presents research into the characterization of 
software development methodologies.  It 
identifies common characteristics that can 
be found in both traditional and agile 
software development methodologies and 
describes a structured approach to the 
classification of these methodologies.   
 The paper titled “The
 Many Lives of an 
Agile Story: Design Processes, Design 
products, and Understandings in a Large-
Scale Agile Development Project” by Read 
and Briggs presents results from a 2.5-year 
Action Research study of how an ASD team 
developing a complex software system 
adapted the user story concept and the 
Scrum agile management approach.  It 
introduces and discusse
s the practicalities 
and advantages and disadvantages of a 
parameterized version of user stories.   
 The paper titled “A
utomated Acceptance 
Testing as Requirements Engineering 
Practice” by Haugset and Stalhane describes 
how the use of automated acceptance test-
driven development (ATDD) impacts 
requirements engineering in software 
development.  In particular, it discusses how 
ATDD can be seen as a mix of the 
traditional documentation focus in 
requirements engineering and the agile focus 
on iterative communication.   
 The paper titled “Towards a Framework 
for Assessing Agility” by Poonacha and 
Bhattacharya addresses the need for 
organizations to be able to measure and 
monitor their agility.  
It identifies and 
categorizes the enablers of agility and then 
discusses how the analytic hierarchy process 
(AHP) and an adaptive network-based fuzzy 
inference system (ANFIS) can be used to 
calculate the agility of an organization 
(based on the values of various parameters 
entered for an organization).   
 The paper titled “Agile Values, 
Innovation and the Shortage of Women 
Software Developers” by Ken H. Judy 
discusses how the percentage of female US 
software developers has significantly 
declined over the years.  It then considers if 
agile values and practices can drive changes 
in the software development industry to 
attract and retain more female developers.   
 The paper titled “Scrum Practice 
Mitigation of Global Sof
tware Development 
Coordination Challeng
es: A Distinctive 
Advantage?” by Bannerman, Hossain, and 
Jeffery examines whether Scrum practices, 
used in four global software development 
projects, provide any distinctive advantages 
in mitigating the coordination challenges 
found in such projects, when compared with 
traditional approaches.   
2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.34052782012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.3405278