 A Comparative Analysis of Traditional Software Engineering  
and Agile Software Development 
 
 
Ashley Aitken 
School of Information Systems 
Curtin University Œ Perth, Australia 
A.Aitken@Curtin.Edu.Au 
Vishnu Ilango 
School of Information Systems 
Curtin University Œ Perth, Australia 
VishnuIlango@gmail.com 
Abstract
 
Over the last decade (or two) the pendulum of 
developer mindshare has swung decidedly towards agile 
software development from a more traditional engineering 
approach to software development. To ascertain the 
essential differences and any possible incompatibilities 
between these two software development paradigms this 
research investigates a number of traditional and agile 
methodologies, methods, and techniques. The essential 
differences between traditional software engineering and 
agile software development are found not to be (as one may 
first suspect from a cursory consideration) related to 
iteration length or project management, but rather more 
related to other attributes like the variety of models 
employed, the purpose of the models, and the approach to 
modeling. In the end though the two approaches are not 
seen to be incompatible, leading to the future possibility of 
an Agile Software Engineering (ASE).
1.Introduction 
Software development has gone through a significant 
change in the last decade or two. The arrival late in the 20th 
Century of Extreme Programming (XP) represented the 
emergence (but not the birth) of a new approach that would 
become Agile Software Development
 (ASD). The history 
of software development is, of course, much longer and 
probably even pre-dates the first electronic digital 
computers that arrived in the 1940s. After an initial period 
when it was considered to be a craft, software development 
was commonly thought of as a kind of engineering. ASD 
seems to provide a new alternative (somewhat craft-like but 
more developed). However, there are still those who think 
of ASD as a form of software engineering.
This seems somewhat problematic. Either there has 
been a significant change in approach and ASD is not 
software engineering or the notion of what is currently 
understood to be software engineering is different to what 
was previously understood to be software engineering. To 
make this clear this paper shall use the term Traditional 
Software Engineering (TSE) to specifically refer to that 
form of software development that took an engineering 
approach to software development as it was understood 
prior to the arrival of ASD.  
It is thus interesting to consider (without value 
judgment) what has changed during this paradigm shift. 
The question that this research addresses is what are the 
essential similarities and differences between ASD and 
TSE and do these make them incompatible. It addresses 
this question by undertaking an investigation and review of 
a number of software development methodologies, 
methods, and techniques within the TSE and ASD 
paradigms. It considers a set of attributes of each of these to 
ascertain what, if any, are the essential differences between 
TSE and ASD. The research involves a comparative 
analysis of commonly known software development 
methodologies, methods, and techniques as presented in the 
literature and used in industry. It also considers if there is 
room for a common ground between traditional software 
engineering and agile software development. It does not 
aim to be complete in its coverage or analysis but aims to 
focus on popular methodologies, methods, and techniques 
and the essential similarities and essential differences.
The contribution of this paper is two fold: 1) it provides 
a brief overview and introduction to a range of software 
development methodologies, methods, and techniques, and 
2) it provides a discussion of these methodologies, 
methods, and techniques in relation to TSE and ASD. Other 
research has performed comparative studies of different 
agile software development approaches [1, 2] but none 
other seems to have compared TSE and ASD with the aim 
to ascertain the essential similarities and differences 
between the two approaches. The research is limited by the 
somewhat ad-hoc nature of the data gathered and the fact 
that it is not complete or comprehensive (e.g. it does not 
consider testing or other verification and validation tasks).
The next (second) section of this paper discusses 
software development in general, including phases of 
development, software development lifecycles, and 
approaches to software development. In the following 
section it provides an introduction to a number of TSE and 
ASD methodologies, methods, and techniques. In the fourth 
and penultimate section the paper provides an analysis and 
discussion of various aspects of the methodologies, 
methods, and techniques. The final section provides a 
summary of the findings and some conclusions. The results 
may not be definitive or comprehensive but they do provide 
a starting point for further discussion and research into the 
relationship between ASD and TSE.
2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.3147492013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.314751 2.Software Development 
Software development has always involved problem 
solving. This section briefly investigates the nature of 
problem solving, the software development lifecycle and, 
finally, various paradigms in software development.
2.1Software Development Phases 
No matter how software development is performed or 
what approach is taken the essential task involved is, as 
mentioned above, problem solving. The way developers 
solve problems is generally the same no matter what the 
problem is or the approach taken. Problem solving involves 
four essential activities: requirements Œ gathering and 
documenting details about the problem; analysis Œ 
understanding the problem in enough detail to ensure a 
correct solution; design Œ finding and specifying an optimal 
solution to the problem; and implementation (if needed) Œ 
implementing the solution in whatever form it takes.  
The essential problem in software development is how 
to implement, using certain technologies and within certain 
constraints, a particular information processing system.
1
Although there are associated problems of understanding 
the domain these are generally non-software related. It can 
be argued that no matter what paradigm or approach is 
taken to software development each of the problem solving 
activities has to be undertaken to some extent. In essence, 
every developer goes through the requirements, analysis, 
design, and implementation cycle, be it over an extended 
period, a week, a day, an hour or minutes, and whether or 
not they document the results, discuss them with others on 
a whiteboard, or just consider them informally within their 
head. There is no escaping these activities.  
2.2Software Development Lifecycles 
A software development lifecycle (SDLC) gives a high-
level perspective of how the different problem-solving 
activities may be worked through in phases by an 
individual or team doing software development. McConnell 
[3] provided a rather exhaustive list of SDLCs. The popular 
SDLCs in some form of contemporary use are: 1) 
Waterfall, 2) Iterative, 3) Iterative and Incremental, 4) 
Evolutionary Prototyping, and 5) Ad-hoc or Code-And-Fix 
SDLC.
2.2.1Waterfall.
 The Waterfall SDLC was presented by 
Royce [4] as a method for teaching software development. 
It involves sequentially completing each phase in full and 
then moving on to the next phase. It was never meant to be 
a practically useful approach to software development. The 
idea that requirements can be totally completed, and then 
                                                                    
1
 This is not always understood by software developers or 
managers who sometimes perceive (at least part of) the task of 
software developers is to solve the domain problem.  
analysis totally completed, and then design totally 
completed and then implementation totally completed, is 
practically impossible [5]. It does not recognize that 
learning occurs during development resulting in the need to 
modify earlier deliverables. In reality, some projects aim to 
approximate the Waterfall SDLC, with as little rework or 
correction as possible (e.g. Contractual Waterfall).  
2.2.2Iterative.
 The Iterative SDLC involves sequential 
attention to each phase in problem solving but allows for 
developers to go back and repeat the sequence again, to 
further the results of each activity. The Iterative SDLC 
matches more closely the real world in that it recognizes 
the need to go back and modify the results of earlier phases, 
and it recognizes that software developers can never really 
completely finish any activity. In this pure form, the 
Iterative SDLC sees developers trying to refine a complete 
solution to the problem through each cycle. Since the focus 
is on producing a complete solution, usually many 
iterations would be needed before that is achieved, and 
when to stop iterating is problematic with any scope creep.  
2.2.3Iterative and Incremental.
 The Iterative and 
Incremental SDLC is a special case of the Iterative SDLC 
in which the aim is not iterate on the complete scope of the 
problem but rather on a small subset of the scope. Iterations 
will usually continue until this subset is adequately 
addressed. Like the basic Iterative SDLC, the Iterative and 
Incremental SDLC, has nothing to say specifically about 
the duration of the iterations or the time spent in each 
activity Œ just that some requirements, some analysis, some 
design, and some implementation are repeated in that 
general order. The Iterative and Incremental SDLC is the 
current best practice for software development.
2.2.4Evolutionary Prototyping.
 The Evolutionary 
Prototyping SDLC involves iterative and incremental 
development but in the case where the final destination for 
the development is not well defined. It is for cases where 
the developers and the stakeholders are exploring possible 
solutions. The developers use an iterative and incremental 
approach to build a prototype and then seek feedback to 
undertake further development in a possibly different 
direction. The emphasis is on building, sometimes quick 
and dirty implementations of an idea, to test it out and 
determine if it is worth further investigation. The notion of 
a prototype should mean that when the final destination is 
found the prototype is discarded and a similar system is 
built with more of a focus on quality. However, this is often 
difficult to do when the customer has seen (and is willing to 
use and pay for) working software.
2.2.5Ad-hoc (or Code-And-Fix).
 Whereas the group of 
iterative SDLCs (2-4 above) generally involves iterating 
through the different problem solving activities, the Ad-
Hoc SDLC allows any combination and variation of these. 
It is meant to describe the SDLC for an individual or group 
of software developers working in an ad-hoc fashion, i.e. 
47504752 not following any prescribed approach to the problem 
solving activities [6]. In such a case, a software developer 
may on one day spend a few hours in each activity, or on 
another instance spend a few minutes in each activity, or, 
generally speaking, any variation in between. The activities 
besides coding may be done informally (with pencil and 
paper, on a white board, even just inside ones head) or 
more formally (using various notations), and may or not be 
persisted as a part of the project. The typical ﬁhackerﬂ 
could, for example, be said to be following the Ad-hoc 
Iterative and Incremental SDLC.  
2.3Software Development Paradigms 
A software development paradigm is a general approach 
to undertaking software development, a way of thinking 
about software development, and a metaphor for software 
development. The three main paradigms for software 
development considered here are: 1) software development 
as a craft, 2) software development as engineering, and 3) 
software development as an agile (and lean) practice.
2
2.3.1Software Development.
 When software 
development started out there were those who became 
skilled at it through experience and craftsmanship. As a 
result, software development was seen as a craft and those 
who could do it effectively as craftsmen (and 
craftswomen). There was an emphasis on techniques as 
opposed to predefined method or methodologies (perhaps 
because no-one had spent much time thinking about them 
as yet). The craft was passed on to newcomers through an 
apprenticeship where they would learn from the master(s) 
and eventually become skilled and experienced in the craft. 
This way of learning a craft is not the most effective or 
efficient way of transferring knowledge and skills Œ a 
craftsman can only mentor so many new software 
developers and the process of learning is slow.
2.3.2Software Engineering.
 As a result of a significant 
increase in the capability of computers and the arrival of 
high-level programming languages, some software 
developers found the craft no longer able to keep up with 
increased scope and demands of software development. 
There was a demand for more complex software and much 
larger software systems that could not be developed by 
individual craftsmen. These software projects were often 
delivered late (if at all), over budget (often significantly), 
and did not meet all the requirements (and often had 
significant bugs) [8]. This situation was generally referred 
to as the ﬁsoftware development crisis.ﬂ
As a result a new paradigm for software development 
gained favor at the NATO conference in 1968 [9]. It 
considered software development as a form of engineering 
                                                                    
2
 Another is ﬁsoftware development as gardeningﬂ [7] Hunt, A. 
and Thomas, D. 
The pragmatic programmer: from journeyman 
to master
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2000. 
(e.g. software engineering was to computer science as civil 
engineering was to physics). The hope was (and, for many, 
still is) is that if software development can develop as an 
engineering discipline then it would be possible to develop 
complex and large software development projects on-time, 
on-budget, with fewer bugs, and to meet most (if not all) of 
the requirements. Engineering is generally thought of as 
processes for using knowledge to achieve objectives, 
usually in building (or at least designing) complex systems 
or structures. Engineers put a great deal of effort into 
predicting and planning their work and generally work with 
fixed requirements, i.e. they know what they are supposed 
to build at the commencement of the project (e.g. a bridge 
or a road). Engineers also use many models as they work.  
There are many who disagree with this perspective of 
software development as a form of engineering [10] [11]. 
They claim that software development is not a form of 
engineering because it is more complex, more malleable, 
and that designing software is much more of a creative 
task. Whilst it is true there is more complexity in software 
it is important to separate the domain complexity from the 
mapping of the domain onto the chosen development 
technologies to meet the non-functional requirements 
(NFRs). Similarly those who say every piece of software is 
quite unique should remember that software development is 
not a domain problem but a translation problem. It is also 
argued that software development is not engineering 
because the compiler essentially performs the build step in 
software development. This is confusing the bricklaying 
with the design of the building. The essence of software 
development is design, and design is making this code meet 
the non-functional requirements, not finding a solution to a 
domain problem. Software developers, even those who just 
code, are not just laying bricks, they are investigating the 
requirements, analyzing the problem, and designing a 
solution (often at the same time in their head).  
2.3.3Agile Software Development.
 The agile software 
development approach [12] [13] [14] (that also incorporates 
many aspects of lean software development [15] [16] [17]) 
is characterized by taking an adaptive approach to change 
within software development. That is, software 
development is undertaken in a way that makes responding 
to change perhaps less difficult and less expensive that 
would be in an engineering approach. For example, agile 
software development keeps the development process and 
artifacts as light (and minimal) as possible, so not as to 
require rework. Agile is also about having a people 
(developer) focus, removing waste (the lean contribution), 
and collaboration rather than contractual negotiation 
between developers and client. Rather that seeing software 
development as a form of engineering, Cockburn [18] sees 
it as a co-operative game.
ASD is a ﬁbroad churchﬂ and can mean many things to 
different people. It is broadly defined by the ﬁAgile 
Manifestoﬂ Œ a manifesto and set of values and principles 
declared by a group of leading software developers. The 
values proposed in the Agile Manifesto [19] are: 
47514753 •
Individuals and interactions over processes and tools 
•
Working software over comprehensive documentation 
•
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation  
•
Responding to change over following a plan 
ASD is also thought of as an approach to software 
development that focuses on incrementally and iteratively 
adding business value, with the process of how the software 
is developed being be left up to the team who are 
responsible for its development. It also adopts the lean 
focus on reducing waste and only doing activities or 
creating artifacts that directly add value. ASD has become 
very popular with 76% of organizations reporting in 2009 
that they have adopted agile techniques [20]. 
3.Methodologies, Methods, and Techniques 
For this research a number of different methodologies, 
methods, and techniques for developing software were 
reviewed and characterized according to a number of 
different attributes (e.g. history, process, artifacts, iteration 
length, project management, scope within SDLC and 
applicability in different contexts). Methodologies, 
methods, and techniques were distinguished as follows: 
Techniques
 Œ a way of doing some aspect or part of 
software development [18]. They may relate to technical 
(e.g. coding or testing) or non-technical (e.g. management) 
aspects of software development.
Methods
 Œ a process, however general or specific, and a 
notation (set of deliverables or artifacts, including 
documentation and source code) [21]. A method usually 
includes a number of different techniques as well.
Methodologies
 Œ a collection of methods or a 
framework for determining a method [18]. Usually a 
methodology cannot be used as is but needs to be 
customized to fit the project and other constraints.  
3.1Methodologies 
This section will consider only two methodologies for 
software development Œ the Unified Process Methodology 
and the Crystal Family Methodology. The former is more 
commonly associated (but not exclusively) with TSE and 
the latter with ASD.  
3.1.1Unified Process Methodology.
 The Unified Process 
(UP) is a generic name for the IBM Rational Unified 
Process [22, 23], which is a commercial process developed 
originally by Rational Corporation and then acquired by 
IBM (when they purchased Rational). The UP was 
developed as a process to accompany the Unified Modeling 
Language (UML), a set of mostly graphic models covering 
all phases of software development. The UP is large and 
extensive (like the UML) containing many processes and 
techniques to help with the development of many different 
types of software. Overall, the UP is described as an 
iterative and incremental, architecture-centric and use-case 
driven methodology. If anything it is this focus on textual 
and graphic models and upfront architecture that 
differentiates UP from more agile methods.
3.1.2Crystal Family Methodology.
 The Crystal Family 
(CF) of methods was developed by Alistair Cockburn in 
1992 [12]. The methods within the family are chosen based 
on several factors such as team size, system criticality and 
project priorities. It aims to be human-powered, ultra light, 
and stretch-to-fit. Methods within the Crystal Family 
include Crystal Clear, Crystal Yellow, Crystal Orange and 
Crystal Red with larger projects requiring more 
coordination and heavier methodologies than smaller ones. 
The general process focuses on iterative and incremental 
development with delivery on a regular basis, a focus on 
software deliveries as milestones (rather than written 
documents), direct user involvement, automated regression 
teaching, two viewing per release, and workshops for 
product and method turning at the beginning and in the 
middle of each increment. Key tenets include teamwork, 
communication, and simplicity as well as frequent 
reflection for process improvement. The Crystal Family 
promote frequent delivery of working software, high user 
involvement, adaptability and the removal of bureaucracy 
or distractions, but have a relatively restricted 
communication structure that suits a single co-located team.  
3.2Methods  
This section provides an overview of a range of 
different (but predominantly ASD) methods. 
3.2.1Extreme Programming Method
. Extreme 
Programming (XP) [24] is a programming-focused 
software development method that intends to improve 
software quality and responsiveness to changing customer 
requirements through simplest coding solutions. Kent Beck, 
Ward Cunningham, and Ron Jeffries introduced XP in the 
latter parts of the 1990s. XP is highly iterative and 
incremental and includes six stages (with embedded 
implicit phases). It uses story cards for requirements and 
then primarily code-based models (for testing and 
implementation). Other models (e.g. analysis and design 
models) are primarily for communication and generally are 
not persisted. Iteration lengths are generally 1-4 weeks and 
there is no specific project management approach (although 
Scrum is usually used). XP is most suitable for small to 
medium sized project and small co-located teams. It has a 
number of practices, including planning game, TDD, 
customer involvement, refactoring, pair programming, 
collective ownership of code, continuous integration, 
sustainable pace and coding standards. It is a coder and 
code-focused method that appeals to coders but relies on 
highly skilled developer. It provides working software in 
short cycles but it is more difficult to scale to large projects 
or to sustain long-term maintenance.  
3.2.2
Scrum Method.
 Scrum (S) is a mostly project 
management method that concentrates on how team 
47524754 members should function in order to develop software 
flexibly in a constantly changing environment [1]. Scrum 
was introduced by Takeuchi and Nanoka in 1986 but the 
contemporary movement was introduced by Ken Schwaber 
and Jeff Sutherland in the mid 1990s [25] [26]. Scrum 
includes three stages pre-game, development, and post-
game, with the pre-game being divided into two sub-stages 
called planning and architecture, and the development stage 
consists of a number of sprints Œ iterative cycles where 
functionality is developed or enhanced to produce new 
increments. Scrum does not specify the way features are 
specified, just that there is a list of such features (called the 
backlog). Iterations can last from around one week to 
around one month with three to eight sprints before a 
release. Scrum also requires customer involvement as the 
ﬁproduct owner.ﬂ Scrum is ideally suited for project with 
rapidly changing requirements. It helps to improve 
engineering practices and its flexibility allows it to adapt to 
changing contexts. Some notions such as ﬁself-organizingﬂ 
teams may lead to uncertainty and risks and it may not 
always be possible to ﬁmake the sprint.ﬂ
3.2.3Feature Driven Development.
 Feature Driven 
Development (FDD) [27] [28] is an iterative and 
incremental software development method that is model-
centric, business requirements-driven and emphasizes 
quality through the process with a timely, accurate and 
meaningful status reporting and progress tracking for all 
levels of leadership. Jeff Luca, Peter Coad and Stephan 
Palmer developed it in 1997 as an evolution of the Coad 
Method. It consists of five stages: 1) develop an overall 
model Œ high-level description of the system, including 
requirements and domain models; 2) build a feature list 
based on client-valued functionality; 3) plan by feature Œ 
sequence features according to their dependencies; and then 
4) design by feature and 5) build by feature, are executed 
iteratively for small groups of features selected from the 
feature list. FDD uses models for specification (as well as 
communication) and encourages frequent progress 
reporting. Iterations are usually around 2 weeks in length. 
According to Palmer and Felsing [29], FDD is suitable for 
most projects, even those requiring considerable agility. 
FDD offers predictability if requirements are stable but 
knowledge sharing may be hindered by individual class 
ownership within development.
3.2.4Dynamic Systems Development Method.
 Dynamic 
Systems Development Method (DSDM) is a software 
development method based upon the Rapid Application 
Development methodology [30], the goal of which is to 
deliver projects on time and on budget while adapting to 
changing requirements [31]. This is achieved by fixing time 
and resources and then adjusting the functionality that can 
be delivered within those constraints. DSDM consists of 
five stages: feasibility study, business study, functional 
model iteration, design and build iteration and 
implementation, with the first two being sequential and the 
last three being iterative and incremental. It encourages a 
number of non-code-based models as well as code-based 
prototyping across the stages of development. Iterations are 
time-boxed from a few days to a few weeks. Although it 
works best with small teams of between two and six 
developers, DSDM can support many teams on a project. 
DSDM also requires active user involvement. It has a 
strong framework for design but it is difficult to see how 
changes can be incorporated into the non-iterative stages of 
development.
3.2.5Adaptive Software Development Method.
 The 
Adaptive Software Development (ASD) method was 
developed by James Highsmith in 2000 [32] based on 
earlier methods (e.g. ﬁRADical Software Developmentﬂ co-
authored with Bayer [33]). It involves iterative and 
incremental development with constant prototyping and 
encourages continuous adaptation of the process for high-
speed and high-change projects. Projects iterate through 
three stages: speculate Œ a form of adaptive cycle planning, 
collaborate Œ concurrent component engineering by a team, 
and learn Œ quality review to learn from mistakes, with 
project initiation at commencement and final quality 
assurance and release at the end. It includes non-code based 
models (e.g. project mission and product specification 
outline). Iteration length and project management details 
are not specified. It aims to build an adaptive organizational 
culture for developing complex large systems.
3.2.6Personal and Team Software Development 
Process.
 These are in fact two related methods. The 
Personal Software Process (PSP) [34] and the Team 
Software Process (TSP) [35]. Both originated from the SEI 
at Carnegie Mellon University. The PSP, as its name 
suggests, is about individual developers creating individual 
processes for their module-level development. Key to the 
PSP is each engineer refining these processes based on 
detailed measurements made whilst developing (e.g. time 
in each phase, type and number of errors, lines of code 
produced) to improve productivity and quality. PSP 
probably requires the most discipline of any methods but 
results can be striking [36] [37]. The TSP is a team related 
process that devolves responsibility to the team to plan and 
estimate their development work (using aggregate data 
from each developers PSP). The TSP shares a number of 
features in common with ASD but overall the PSP and TSP 
would be more likely considered a form of TSE.  
This research also considered other methods including 
the Waterfall Method [4], Prototyping Method [38], Spiral 
Method [39], Model Driven Development [40] but do not 
report on them in detail here due to space restrictions.  
3.3Techniques  
The research considered the following (predominantly 
agile) software development techniques (with many coming 
from [24]): Pair Programming, Behavior Driven 
47534755 Development [41], Use-Case Driven Development [42], 
Test Driven Development [43], Acceptance Test Driven 
Development, Unit Test Driven Development, Planning 
Game, Customer Involvement, Collective Ownership, 
Sustainable Pace, Coding Standards, Standup Meetings, 
Simple Design, Refactoring, System Metaphor, 
Component-based Development, Time-boxed 
Development, Change Tolerant Development, Risk Driven 
Development, Customer Focus Groups, Domain Object 
Modeling, Developing by Feature, Empowered Teams, 
Frequent Delivery, Continuous Delivery, Integrated 
Testing, Regular Builds, Configuration Management, 
Continuous Integration, Continuous Delivery, Domain 
Drive Design [44]. The aim was to consider which of the 
techniques were compatible with TSE and ASD or not.  
4.Comparative Analysis and Discussion 
Comparing and seeking the similarities and differences 
between software development paradigms is fraught with 
problems. The first is that there is no clear or agreed upon 
definition of each of the paradigms. The second is that each 
paradigm is a broad enough to allow a wide variety of very 
different methodologies, methods, and techniques within 
their bounds. For example, the Agile Manifesto is broad   
enough to allow a focus on processes, tools, etc. as long as 
there is more of a focus on people, code, etc.  
This situation makes it easy for readers to pick a part 
any statements claimed herein. For example, it is claimed 
in this paper that ASD focuses primarily on code-based 
models and generally does not persist non-code-based 
models, even the user stories. Of course, there are those 
who will disagree with this statement and give evidence of 
a particular agile method or company that does use and 
persist non-code-based models. Such counterclaims are, 
however, missing the purpose of this paper. It is attempting 
to seek the essential nature of traditional software 
engineering and agile software development and then 
determine the similarities and differences between them. 
There will always be specific variations that don™t fit the 
essential approaches characterized here. Trying to 
characterize these essentials aspects is important though.
Similarly, this research tries to focus on best practices 
rather than actual practices (with all their variations and 
failings). For example, it shall explain that the best practice 
for TSE was a highly iterative and incremental software 
development lifecycle. However, many organizations seem 
to fallback into a pseudo waterfall or at least longer-
iteration software development lifecycle. On the other side, 
a similar phenomenon has recently been reported in that 
many organizations employing ASD with Scrum seem to 
fallback to something called ﬁWater-scrum-fallﬂ [45]. In 
reality most companies seem to develop their own 
minimally prescriptive process (at an organizational level 
or within teams). This was the case with TSE and this is the 
case with ASD. There is nothing wrong with ﬁhome grown 
selective customizations,ﬂ albeit that they are often a lot 
less complete and a lot less detailed than what is prescribed 
in either TSE or ASD methods.
4.1Analysis of Methodologies and Methods 
This research collected general data for more than a 
dozen different approaches, categorized them (and their 
components) as methodologies, methods, or just 
techniques, and then evaluated them according to their 
recommended iteration length and how much the 
approaches aligned with the general approaches of TSE and 
ASD. Two custom pictographic representations are used to 
summarize this data.  
Figure 1 shows all of the approaches and displays 
iteration length, how the approach is categorized, and 
where it lies on a continuum between fully TSE and fully 
ASD. The two axes indicate the length of the iteration and 
the position on a spectrum between TSE and ASE. The 
offering of the approach is also shown by its inclusion 
inside the boxes for methodology, method, or techniques. 
Please note the position inside each box is not important, 
only the membership of each category is relevant. For 
example, some items are just techniques, some are methods 
with techniques and some may be methodologies with 
techniques.
Figure 1 Œ Agility, Components, and Iteration Length 
Figure 2 represents a summary of the information 
collected about all approaches with regard to the SDLC 
phases and which deliverables are produced within the 
approach (x-axis lower box), which phase are managed by 
the approach (x-axis upper box), and the year of 
introduction (y-axis). Amongst a number of things it 
demonstrates that whilst many of the TSE approaches were 
47544756 full-lifecycle, many (but not all) of the ASD are more 
focused in their application.  
Figure 2 Œ SDLC Phases, Project Management, 
Deliverables and Year of Introduction
In the next part of this section, TSE and ASD (will be 
compared based on the preceding review. They will be 
compared according to the values and principles and 
characteristics of the ASD approach. Finally, the essential 
similarities and differences between TSE and ASD and any 
compatibilities (or incompatibilities) between the different 
paradigms will be discussed.  
4.2Comparing Values and Principles 
Table 1 indicates the general way in which values and 
principle are perceived to differ between TSE and ASD. It 
is not clear, however, that this must be the case. This 
section will consider the values and principles of ASD to 
see if they are that incompatible with TSE.  
Table 1 Comparing Values and Principles of TSE & ASD 
Source: (Adapted from [19]) 
Traditional Software 
En
g
ineerin
g
 (TSE) 
Agile Software Development 
(ASD)
Processandtoolsdriven.
Peo
p
leandcollaborationdriven.
Document driven. Every activity is 
measured by intensive 
documentation or deliverables. 
Code or programming driven. 
Working software is used as a 
measure for progress. Emphasizes 
more importance to the design of 
the
code.
Does not involve customers 
continuousl
y
.
Involves customers continuously. 
Does not welcome changing 
requirements during the projects 
progress. Difficult to change 
direction
oncecontractsaresi
g
ned.
Welcomes changing requirements 
during the projects progress. Easy 
to change direction as the 
re
q
uirementchan
g
es.
Does not encourage the delivery of 
workin
g
softwaretocustomers
Delivers working software 
continuousl
y
tocustomers
continuousl
y
.
Does not generally encourage a 
delivery within two weeks to two 
months. Iterations are longer. 
Encourages software delivery or 
release cycles every two weeks 
(or less) to two months 
(maximum). Shorter iterations. 
Does not generally encourage self-
organized teams. 
Software can be delivered at its 
best from co-located teams. 
Follows the phases of SDLC 
formally. For example, encourages 
formal analysis and planning. 
Does not follow the phases 
formally. For example, does not 
have a formal analysis or 
p
lannin
g
 
p
hase.
All the requirements decided in the 
requirements gathering phase 
should be delivered by the final 
software
built.
Short software deliveries for 
individual features or stories. The 
features or stories can evolve 
fre
q
uentl
y
.
Does not emphasize constant pace 
among developers and customers or 
users, as the users are not 
continuously involved throughout 
the project Œ In traditional 
approaches customers are involved 
only during pre and post delivery of 
the
software.
Developers and customers or 
users should be able to maintain a 
constant pace indefinitely to 
promote sustainable development. 
Consider the values from the Agile Manifesto (AM): 
4.2.1Individuals and interactions over processes and 
tools.
 Early in ASD there was a major rejection of 
processes and tools (generally from a revolt against the 
UP). However, with the ever-growing number of processes 
and tools associated with ASD it is not as clear now that 
they are always discounted compared to individuals and 
interactions. On the other hand teamwork and interactions 
have always been a part of TSE. If individuals and their 
interactions have not always worked so well, it is probably 
a fault of the project management rather than the TSE 
approach itself. It is not clear then that TSE is incompatible 
with individuals and interactions being more important than 
processes and tools. One could also say that TSE has 
always seen processes and tools as aids for individuals and 
their interactions (e.g. consider the swim-lanes in the UP).  
4.2.2Working software over comprehensive 
documentation.
 This value seems to use documentation as 
a derogative term, in comparison to code (that becomes 
working software). This is inappropriate because code is 
just as much a form of documentation as any requirements, 
analysis, or design document. In reality they are all models, 
code just happens to be the model that is generally closest 
to the final executable software. It is also disingenuous to 
suggest that models other than the code are less important 
or just ﬁdocumentation for documentation sake.ﬂ Just as the 
code is developed to produce the required working 
software, so too are the other models in TSE. TSE builds 
requirements, analysis and design models because it is 
believes these models enable this approach to build better 
software and to build it faster (e.g. errors found in models 
in earlier phases of the SDLC could be corrected with less 
effort and time than those found later in the SDLC).  
4.2.3
Customer collaboration over contract 
negotiation.
This value seems a little disingenuous as well, 
47554757 i.e. to assume that TSE would prefer contract negotiation to 
collaboration with the customer. It is true that contract 
negotiation is common under TSE but it would be fair to 
say that it is common under ASD as well. Most of the 
business world is not ready for ﬁtime and materialsﬂ 
software development. If anything the ASD approach has 
just included two items (a third will be discussed next) into 
the contract. These being: 1) that they cannot guarantee 
completion of all requirements, but 2) that they guarantee 
to add value almost immediately and to continue doing that 
(less the contract be terminated). In reality, many TSE 
projects have been contracted in this manner as well, with 
staged delivery (of high priority requirements firstly), and 
out-clauses if stages were not completed satisfactorily. On 
the other hand TSE employed contract negotiation to 
protect developers from scope creep, whereas ASD 
manages that problem by never agreeing to deliver 
everything, only to continually deliver. 
4.2.4Responding to change over following a plan.
 It is 
true that TSE was generally built around planning for the 
entire development project. Much of this was a result of the 
contract negotiation discussed above. Firstly though, any 
plan of any real worth is a living document that changes as 
the project progresses. TSE may have planned an entire 
project but no plan survives its first encounter with the 
actual work and plans are almost guaranteed to change after 
each iteration or release. Secondly, there is no reason to 
believe that TSE could not work within an environment 
that only planned each iteration (even if they were very 
short iterations). Even ASD working within a negotiated 
contract has plans for the overall project, whether they are 
more lightweight and less detailed plans or not. Within the 
right agreement and with the right tools it should be clear 
that TSE could respond to change just as easy as ASD.  
4.3Comparing Methodologies, Methods, and 
Techniques 
Comparing methodologies is not easy because by their 
very nature they need to be customized before they can be 
used, and there is often room for a large degree of variation 
in all aspects of the custom method. So, for example, the 
Unified Process (UP) methodology that is often held up to 
be the archetype for TSE can be customized to provide lean 
and agile methods, e.g. the dX method [46, 47], the Agile 
Unified Process [48, 49], and the Essential Unified Process 
[50]. So rather than compare methodologies, or even 
methods, directly the paper will discuss a number of 
different characteristics of methods. These are: 
4.3.1Project Management.
 There are two aspects of 
project management that are relevant to this comparison: 1) 
who manages the project, i.e. who is responsible for the 
success of the project, and 2) what management techniques 
are used. TSE is often portrayed as having top-down 
project management, e.g. with a dedicated Project Manager 
role, whereas ASD is portrayed as devolving responsibility 
to the team (perhaps with the help of coaches and Masters.) 
The latter form of project management is definitely not 
restricted to ASD though. The TSP was strong on making 
the team responsible for managing the development, from 
estimating schedules to getting the job done. Many 
methods (ASD and TSE) now empower teams to take 
responsibility for planning iterations (or releases) and 
delivering on those plans.
4.3.2Iteration Length.
 Ostensibly a highly iterative and 
incremental software development lifecycle seems to be 
one of the defining characteristics of ASD. This is also 
probably due to the fact that ASD is often compared with a 
Waterfall SDLC (often attributed to TSE). Unfortunately, 
this is somewhat of a straw-man comparison. Most (if not 
all) contemporary software development methods employ 
iterative and incremental SDLCs. That said, just as TSE 
development often cannot meet best practice and falls back 
to pseudo waterfall, so too can ASD fall back to ﬁWater-
Scrum-fallﬂ as mentioned earlier. So the notion that ASD 
differs from TSE in that it is highly iterative (i.e. iteration 
lengths are from a few weeks to a few months) whereas 
TSE is predominantly waterfall is incorrect. Even the 
poster-child for TSE methods, the Unified Process, 
suggests iteration lengths of a few weeks to a month or so.  
4.3.3Functional Increments.
 TSE has allowed any form 
of increment within development, e.g. components or 
horizontal slices of functionality in layers of the software 
architecture. ASD has been emphatic about the need for 
vertical increments of functionality that complete a user 
story. The reason for this is two fold: 1) to deliver directly 
usable value to the customer, and 2) to ensure that no waste 
is produced in over-engineering or poorly engineering any 
part of the solution. The only code that is developed in each 
layer is that necessary to fulfill the current user story. This 
may be a more lean approach but it is not clear that it leads 
to the most effective design of each layer, at least not in the 
most direct fashion. Clearly, TSE is not incompatible with 
the development of vertical slices if desired. TSE, however, 
can proceed with adding value in components or horizontal 
layers even if they are not visible directly to the user.  
4.3.4Models (aka Documentation).
 TSE has been 
committed to developing models within all phases of 
software development. Whilst these have traditionally been 
in the form of documentation (including figures and text), 
this is not the only way to build models. As mentioned 
earlier, TSE believes that constructing these models before 
implementing the code can find errors earlier and correct 
them with less effort. ASD (as evidenced in a number of 
the methods, e.g. DSDM) are not against additional models, 
just that the most popular methods prefer code to text and 
figures and prefer not to persist anything but code. Also in 
ASD temporary and fragmented models are generally used 
to aid communication between individuals and within the 
47564758 team rather than to specify the system in an alternative way 
(or within a different phase) as is the case in TSE.    
4.3.5Architecture.
 TSE processes almost always involve 
upfront design of the architecture. This is often 
characterized by ASD as ﬁbig upfront architecture (or 
design)ﬂ and made to sound synonymous to waste and even 
poor design. However, it is not necessary for the design of 
the whole software application to be completed up front. 
The claim by ASD that architecture emerges is also hard to 
comprehend. Big decisions like the approach to persistence 
or a multi-tiered or multi-layered architecture need to be 
made some time early in the software development project, 
since they are central to the structure of the solution. ASD 
claims that such architectural decisions are made just in 
time in ASD whereas often too early in TSE.  
4.3.6Techniques.
 Comparing the applicability of ASD 
techniques to TSE is also interesting. For this research a list 
of techniques (described in the previous section) that are 
predominantly associated with agile software development 
were investigated. For each technique it was considered 
whether the technique was only useful with ASD or TSE or 
could successfully be used within both paradigm. It was 
found that nearly every practice that is associated with 
ASD could be applied in the context of TSE. This is to say 
that these practices are not really defining differences 
between ASD and TSE. The only standout technique is 
component-based development (CBD), which is not really 
compatible with ASD™s focus on vertical feature 
development, i.e. development of a particular feature across 
all layers in an application, as opposed to focusing on a 
particular component or subsystem within one layer.
5.Summary and Future Work 
This research has reviewed agile software development 
(ASD) methodologies, methods and technique against a 
backdrop of traditional software engineering (TSE). The 
goal of this research was to try to ascertain if these 
approaches to software development were compatible by 
considering their similarities and differences. It has found 
that in areas where one would, perhaps, initially assume 
there are differences (e.g. in iteration length because it is so 
often mentioned) TSE and ASD are very similar. Where 
they do seem to differ is subtler (e.g. in the use of models). 
TSE is not incompatible with individuals and 
interactions over processes and tools, working software 
over comprehensive documentation, customer collaboration 
over contract negotiation, or responding to change over 
following a plan. TSE encompasses the belief that creating 
(and persisting) requirements, analysis, and design models 
will improve all project outcomes (like time, budget, 
functionality, and quality). Similarly, ASD does not seem 
to be against further modeling or non-code models, even 
persisting those models, as long as they add value. It 
embraces other models, particularly for example various 
testing activities (although these are still often in code). 
ASD has revolutionized the management of software 
development, although a number of the techniques have 
been used previously in TSE (e.g. in TSP). 
TSE and ASD as best practiced are similar in their 
pursuit of short iteration lengths. They both have to employ 
all the phases of software development, even if more 
informally and without ﬁdocumentationﬂ within ASD. Both 
seek significant customer involvement, although where 
ASD demands it, TSE has generally just desired it (and 
both often struggle to achieve it). Both develop models (aka 
documentation) for communication between individuals (or 
within teams). And, finally, both aim to deliver value all 
the time though the form of this value may differ. 
The differences start with the fact that ASD requires 
that value delivered is directly visible to the user, whereas 
TSE is generally happy with value that is not immediately 
visible to the user (e.g. in components or hidden layers). 
ASD is better at only modeling to a level of detail that is 
needed, whereas TSE generally tries to build complete 
models (iteratively). TSE likes to make as much knowledge 
about the problem and solution explicit within the models, 
whereas ASD, generally speaking, is happy for that 
knowledge to live within developer™s heads (and indirectly 
in the code). ASD supports and encourages emergent and 
evolving architecture whereas TSE encourage upfront 
architecture (with justification and evaluation of options). 
Most models that persist in ASD are often code-based, 
whereas TSE encourages many models for specification. 
In the end it seems that there is nothing really 
incompatible with applying all the principles and values of 
ASD, along with most (if not all) of the practices, to TSE. 
The only reason it would seem that ASD would be unhappy 
with multiple models for specification (not just 
communication) is if they cannot be shown to improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the overall software 
development. So, it seems there is room and the possibility 
for a merger of these two approaches, perhaps an Agile 
Software Engineering (ASE
). Future research will be 
needed to consider what would be required to make this a 
reality.
6.References 
[1] Pekka, A., Outi, S., Jussi, R. and Juhani, W. 
Agile Software 
Development Methods - Review and Analysis
. VTT 
Publications, City, 2002. 
[2] Awad, M. A. 
A comparison between agile and traditional 
Software Development Technologies
. The University of 
Western Australia, 2005.  
[3] McConnell, S. 
Rapid development: Taming wild software 
schedules
. Microsoft Press Redmond, WA, USA, 1996. 
[4] Royce, W. W. 
Managing the development of large software 
systems
. City, 1970. 
[5] Laplante, P. A. and Neill, C. J. The demise of the waterfall 
model is imminent and other urban myths. 
ACM Queue
, 1, 10 
2004), 10-15. 
47574759 [6] McConnell, S. and Tripp, L. Guest Editor's Introduction: 
Professional Software Engineering - Fact or Fiction? 
IEEE
Software
(November/December 1999). 
[7] Hunt, A. and Thomas, D. 
The pragmatic programmer: from 
journeyman to master
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2000. 
[8] Gibbs, W. W. Software's chronic crisis. 
Scientific American
,
271, 3 (1994), 72-81. 
[9] Naur, P. and Randell, B. Software Engineering: Report of a 
conference sponsored by the NATO Science Committee (7Œ11 
Oct. 1968), Garmisch, Germany. 
Brussels, Scientific Affairs 
Division, NATO
 (1969). 
[10] DeMarco, T. Software Engineering: An idea whose time has 
come and gone. 
IEEE Software
, 26, 4 (2009), 95-96. 
[11] Loka, R. R. Software development: What is the problem? 
Computer
, 40, 2 (2007), 112-111. 
[12] Cockburn, A. and Highsmith, J. 
Agile software development
.
People's Posts & Telecommunications Publishing House, 
2003.
[13] Cohen, D., Lindvall, M. and Costa, P. 
Agile software 
development
. 2003.
[14] Martin, R. C. 
Agile software development: principles, 
patterns, and practices
. Prentice Hall PTR, 2003. 
[15] Poppendieck, M. and Poppendieck, T. 
Lean software 
development: An agile toolkit
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2003.
[16] Poppendieck, M. and Poppendieck, T. 
Implementing Lean 
Software Development: From Concept to Cash (The Addison-
Wesley Signature Series)
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2006.
[17] Ebert, C., Abrahamsson, P. and Oza, N. Lean Software 
Development.
IEEE Software
2012), 22-25. 
[18] Cockburn, A. 
Agile Software Development
. City, 2000-2001. 
[19] Beck, K., Beedle, M., Bennekum, A. v., Cockburn, A., 
Cunningham, W., Fowler, M., Grenning, J., Highsmith, J., 
Hunt, A., Jeffries, R., Kern, J., Marick, B., Martin, R. C., 
Mellor, S., Schwaber, K., Sutherland, J. and Thomas, D. 
Manifesto for Agile Software Development
. City, 2001. 
[20] Ambler, S. W. 
Agility at Scale: Become as agile as you can 
be
. 2009.
[21] Paige, R. F. When are methods complementary? 
Information 
and Software Technology
, 41, 3 (1999), 157-162. 
[22] RationalSoftware Rational Unified Process: Best Practices 
for Software Development Teams (1998). 
[23] Kruchten, P. 
The rational unified process: an introduction
.
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004. 
[24] Beck, K. 
Extreme programming explained: embrace change
.
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2000. 
[25] Schwaber, K. SCRUM Development Process (1987). 
[26] Schwaber, K. and Sutherland, J. What is Scrum. 
URL:
http://www.scrumalliance.org/system/resource/file/275/whatIs
Scrum.pdf2007)
.
[27] Coad, P., Lefebvre, E. and De Luca, J. 
Java modeling in 
color with UML: Enterprise components and process
.
Prentice Hall, 1999. 
[28] Anderson, D. J. Feature-Driven Development (2004). 
[29] Palmer, S. R. and Felsing, M. 
A practical guide to feature-
driven development
. Pearson Education, 2001. 
[30] Martin, J. 
Rapid application development
. Macmillan 
Publishing Co., Inc., 1991. 
[31] Stapleton, J. 
DSDM, dynamic systems development method: 
the method in practice
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 1997. 
[32] Highsmith, J. A. 
Adaptive software development
. Dorset 
House, 2000. 
[33] Bayer, S. and Highsmith, J. RADical software development. 
American Programmer
, 7 (1994), 35-35. 
[34] Humphrey, W. 
Introduction to the Personal Software 
Process
. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1997. 
[35] Humphrey, W. S. Team Software Process (2000). 
[36] Humphrey, W. S. Using a defined and measured personal 
software process. 
Software, IEEE
, 13, 3 1996), 77-88. 
[37] Humphrey, W. 
A Discipline for Software Engineering
.
Addison-Wesley, Sydney, 1995. 
[38] Naumann, J. Prototyping: The New Paradigm for Systems 
Development.
Management information systems quarterly
, 6, 
3 1982), 29-44. 
[39] Boehm, B. A spiral model of software development and 
enhancement. SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. 
Notes
, 11, 4 1986), 14-
24.
[40] Beydeda, S., Book, M. and Gruhn, V. 
Model-driven software 
development
. Springer Verlag, 2005. 
[41] North, C. 
Intoducing BDD
. Dannorth.net, City, 2006-2011. 
[42] Jacobson, I. 
Object-Oriented Software Engineering
.
Addison-Wesley, 1992. 
[43] Janzen, D. and Saiedian, H. Test-driven development 
concepts, taxonomy, and future direction. 
Computer
, 38, 9 
(2005), 43-50. 
[44] Evans, E. 
Domain-driven design: tackling complexity in the 
heart of software
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004. 
[45] West, D., Gilpin, M., G
rant, T. and Anderson, A. 
Water-
Scrum-Fall is the reality of agile for most organizations 
today
. 2011.
[46] Booch, G., Maksimchuk, R., Engle, M., Young, B., Conallen, 
J. and Houston, K. 
Object-oriented analysis and design with 
applications
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2007. 
[47] Ambler, S. W. 
Skinnier RUP
. City, 2006. 
[48] Ambler, S., Nalbone, J. and Vizdos, M. 
Enterprise unified 
process, the: extending the rational unified process
. Prentice 
Hall Press, 2005. 
[49] Van Baelen, H. 
Agile (Unified Process)
. 2011.
[50] Jacobson, I. 
EssUP: The Essential Unified ProcessŒAn 
introduction
. City. 
47584760