 A Secure Business Process Modelling For Better Alignment between Business 
and IT 
Youseef Alotaibi 
Department of Computer Sciences, 
Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia, 
Email: [yaotaibi@uqu.edu.sa] 
 
Abstract
 
The existing information 
system (IS) development 
methods do not meet the requirements to resolve 
security-related IS problems 
and they fail to provide 
for the successful integra
tion of security and systems 
engineering during all deve
lopment process stages. 
Security should be considered during all software 
development process and the requirements 
specifications should be identified. This paper aims to 
propose an integrated security and IS engineering 
approach in all software dev
elopment process stages 
by using i* language. The proposed framework is 
divided into two 
separate parts: modelling information 
technology system and modelling IS security. The 
results indicates that cons
idering security IS goals in 
the whole system development process can have a 
positive influence on system
 implementation, better 
meet business expectatio
ns and positively impacts on 
business process performance. 
 
Key words: 
Business process; Business Process 
Modelling; Security; i* Model; UML
 
 
1.
 
Introduction  
Security plays a crucial role in business PM [20]. 
However, the literature shows that it is quite 
challenging to add security into BPs for several 
reasons. Firstly, the integration of security into a 
developed business PM is 
not very well understood. 
Secondly, security properties are complicated and 
error-prone when integrated manually [2]. 
Furthermore, a lack of expe
rienced IS developers can 
result in security leaks. Therefore, IS developers need 
to have concrete guidelines and appropriate tools to 
develop secured business PM applications [3].  
Security is considered a non-functional requirement 
(NFR) by many in the software engineering 
community. Non-functional requirements represent 
constraints, such as authorized and unauthorized 
accesses, where the systems are operating [12]. 
Therefore, security requirements must be defined after 
identifying the system. However, there are many 
challenges in implementing security into IS.  Firstly, 
security requirements are often complicated to analyse 
and model. The requirement of separate functional and 
non-functional requirements is a major problem in 
analysing the NFRs whereas the NFRs could be related 
to one or set of the functional requirements at the same 
time. However, when the NFRs are stated separately 
from the functional requirements, the relationship 
between them cannot be seen easily. Secondly, IS 
developers may lack knowledge on developing and 
modelling a secured system [5][19]. 
Security should be considered throughout the entire 
business development process and requirements 
specifications should be identified. If security is only 
considered in certain stages of the development 
process, the security requirements will conflict with the 
system’s functional requirements
 [10]. Therefore, the 
issue of security must be taken into account with 
functional requirements during the system 
development stages in order to limit conflict.  This can 
be done by defining them in the early stages of system 
development and making attempts to anticipate them. 
However, when security is only added in the late stages 
of system development, the 
chance of more conflicts 
occurring is increased, which may require a lot of 
money to address. 
The literature shows that there are many 
commercial methods, such as ITBPM, OCTAVE, 
CRAMM, EBIOS, and MEHARI available to IT 
security officers to perform a risk analysis of the 
security problems and define
 the security solutions 
[18]. However, these existing methods do not meet the 
requirements to resolve security-related IS problems 
and they fail to facilitate the successful integration of 
security during all development process stages.  
Thus, in order to create a secured business PM 
helping to improve the alignment between business and 
IT, this paper will propose an integrated security and 
IS engineering approach in all development process 
stages using the 
i*
 language. In our proposed secured 
business PM framework, there are five stages in 
software development to cr
eate a secured IS: (1) early 
requirements stage; (2) late requirements stage; (3) 
architectural design stage; (4) detailed design stage; 
and (5) implementation stages. The results show that 
considering security IS goals in the whole system 
development process can have a positive influence on 
2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.59547922016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.5954793 system implementation and better meet business 
expectations.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
outlines the related work. Section 3 presents our 
secured business PM framework. Finally, section 4 
summaries the paper. 
 
2.
 
Related Work 
Security is an essential aspect of all information 
processing activities and all organizations have to 
develop actively mechanisms and tools to maintain and 
ensure the security and integrity of their information 
resources [23].  
The literature shows that only a few approaches 
consider security requirements as a primary part of all 
software development proces
ses.  For example, applied 
the process-oriented approach to represent security 
requirements as harmonious goals and used them 
throughout the software system development. This 
proposed non-functional requirements (NFRs) 
framework uses security requirements and permits 
system developers to cons
ider design decisions which 
are related to the non-func
tional requirements [9]. 
In [1], the authors demonstrated the application 
method for BP remodelling to achieve better 
realization and representation of the non-functional 
processes. This approach was adapted from the 
developed software engineering method to link the 
NFRs to the conceptual models. In a case study of BPs 
in healthcare, the authors used a cancer registration 
process in Jordan to show how the NRF graphing 
technique containing the goal operations and 
interaction analysis and goal evolution can be applied 
to create a NFR model fo
r BPs by using RAD.  
In [14], the authors proposed the requirements 
specification framework involving the separation of the 
delegation and trust relationships. This was undertaken 
to bridge the gap between the functional and trust 
requirements of the IT system and its trust 
management and privilege management infrastructure. 
This framework supported the automatic verification of 
IS requirements identified in the formal modelling 
language called the Delegation Logics and trust 
management [17]. The health care process was used as 
a case study to validate this framework.   
In [18], the authors employed the requirements 
engineering approach to model and map IS security 
goals at an early stage of the software development 
process. In reference to alignment between business 
and IS, these approaches used five major steps: (1) 
identifying organizational environments; (2) derivation 
of security goals; (3) detecting security requirements 
from goals; (4) detecting constraint and security 
requirements; and (5) analysing risks at the 
architectural level. 
In [16], the authors proposed an extension of UML, 
called UMLsec to provide security features in the 
UML model, such as access control and 
confidentiality. The study used four different UML 
diagrams: (1) class diagrams to guarantee that the 
exchange of data conforms to the security levels; (2) 
state chart diagrams to avoid the indirect flow of 
information from high to low values with the object; 
(3) interaction diagrams to guarantee the accuracy of 
important security interactions between the objects; 
and (4) deployment diagrams to guarantee that the 
physical layer can meet the security requirements in 
communication.  
In [11], the authors proposed SecureUML, an 
expressive UML-based language, to construct their 
security design models. This method combines the 
design specifications for distributed systems with the 
security policy specifications. 
It is used to automate the 
model analysis semantically and meaningfully. This 
security policy contains the 
declarative aspects, such as 
static access control information and the programmatic 
aspects, which are based on the dynamic information 
known as the authorization satisfaction constraints. The 
SecureMOVA tool was used to implement this 
approach.  
BPs are an essential source for software systems 
engineering [6][8] and much
 attention has been given 
to BPs in the area of IS security and software 
engineering. In [24] the authors proposed a formal 
meta-model integrating the modelling processes and 
the process-related Role 
Based Access Control 
(RBAC) models which co
ntain the role, role 
hierarchies and the tasks’ 
duty constraints. This 
proposed approach was used to extend the UML2 
activity models, which are known as Business 
Activities. The library and runtime engines were 
implemented to manage the Business Activities 
runtime models and enforce the software system’s 
policies and constraints. 
The gap between systems development and systems 
security may result in a lack of understanding of the 
security risks. In [13], the authors examined how to 
integrate security as the functional requirement in BPs 
analysis and modelling. They extended the semantic 
approach to the secure collaborative inter-organization 
e-Business processes proposed in [15]. They proposed 
the secure activity resource coordination (SARC) 
framework to create business PM characterized by the 
secure exchange of information across organizational 
boundaries. This framework has been evaluated against 
the Enriched Use Case and the UML activity diagram 
standard. 
In [21], the authors proposed the Model Driven 
Development (MDD) approach for ISs development. 
This approach was particularly focused on the security 
47934794 requirements where the security was modelled along 
with all other BP aspects. They identified a set of the 
rules and a checklist to automatically transfer and 
obtain the set of UML analysis classes and use cases 
from the secure business process (SBP) model. The 
proposed approach was validated through a case study 
of a real BP in the area 
of payment for electrical energy 
consumption.   
In [19], the authors adapted
 use cases to propose an 
abuse case model that captured and analysed security 
requirements. This model identified the specifications 
of every interaction between the system and one or a 
set of actors, as such interactions can negatively affect 
the system. The misuse 
case concept describes 
functions which the system should not allow [22]. 
Furthermore, the miss-actor concept is defined as 
someone who accidentally or intentionally starts the 
misuse case. In this approach, security is considered by 
analysing a security-related misuse case. 
However, these approaches have several 
drawbacks. They only provide guidance, for instance, 
as to how security can be handled during certain stages 
of the software development process.  In other words, 
existing methods of IS development do not meet the 
requirements necessary to resolve security-related IS 
problems, and they fail to provide successful security 
integration during the development process stages. For 
example, the approach in [16] is only applicable 
throughout the design stage while the approach in [19] 
can only be used in early requirements analysis. Table 
1 summarizes the existing literature on software 
development process stages. 
References 
Software Development Process 
Stages 
Early Requirement 
Late Requirement 
Architectural Design 
Detailed Design 
Implementation 
[19] 

 
 
 
 
 
[16] 
 
 

 
 
 
[14] 

 

 
 
 
 
[18] 

 
 
 
 
 
[1] 

 
 
 
 
 
[13] 

 
 
 
 
 
[21] 
 
 
 

 

 
[20] 
 
 

 

 
 
Table 1: Related Work on Existing Software 
Development Process Stages 
A further limitation our review of the existing work 
highlights is that most of the previously mentioned 
approaches only deal with specific security 
requirements, goals and constraints. For example, 
UMLsec proposed in [16] focuses on access control 
security requirements and integrates them into the 
model-driven software development process. Table 2 
summarizes the literature on existing security goals. 
References
 
Security Goals 
Integrity
 
Confidentiality 
Availability 
Reliability 
Privacy
 
Access Control 
[19] 
 
 
 
 
[16] 
 

 

 
 
[14] 
 
 

 
 

 

 
[18] 

 

 

 
 
[1] 
 

 
 
 
 

 
[13] 
 

 
 
 
 

 
[21] 

 
 
 
 

 

 
[20] 

 
 
 
 

 

 
Table 2: Related Work on Existing Security Goals 
Therefore, we propose a security approach covering 
all stages of the software development process and 
considering all security requirements, such as access 
control and encryption, security goals, such as integrity 
and secrecy, and security constraints, such as 
authorized and unauthorized access in this paper. 
 
3.
 
Secured Business PM Framework
 
Many IS security problems can occur when an 
organization’s assets need to be protected from threats 
and attacks. However, it is a complex task to protect 
these assets since the business environment changes 
rapidly. Business organizations comprise complex 
business structures that are evaluated and updated 
within the customer structures and demands. These 
structures consist of processes, models, strategies and 
sets of activities worked toge
ther to achieve business 
goals. For better alignment between IS and business, IS 
security problems have to be addressed by managing 
security in the form of defining, analysing, modelling 
and mapping the IS attacks and identifying suitable 
security requirements in order to respond to these 
attacks in five different IS development stages: the 
early requirements stage, late requirements stage, 
architecture design stage, detailed design stage and 
implementation stage. 
This paper aims to present a requirements 
engineering-based approach for business and IS 
analysts to better understand security problems, define 
47944795 their associated security goal
s, and to detect security 
requirements and constraints from the goals. We have 
divided our proposed secured business PM framework 
into two parts: modelling the information technology 
system and modelling the information system security, 
as shown in figure 1. Part 1 consists of the BP, the 
system behavior, system behavior analysis, and the use 
case and they have been explained in detail in [4][7]. 
Part 1 describes the specifications of the IT 
environment of organization, in relation to 
infrastructure and assets, base
d on the already accepted 
business PM methodology known as business PM 
towards the derivation of IT goals, as proposed in 
[4][7]. Business assets are anything that the business 
organization owns and has an
 economic value to the 
business organization. For 
example, the business assets 
in the mobile phone order management process in a 
telecommunication company are the personal 
information of the company’s consumers and staff and 
the company’s data and knowledge mana
gement. IS 
assets are anything that is part of the IT department 
which provides support to the business assets. For 
example, the IS assets in our case study are the 
hardware, software, people and the network. Protection 
of these assets is essential for the continued existence 
of the business organization. 
As security is the major element in IS in this 
proposed secured business PM approach, part 2 
describes how to define, model, and analyse the attacks 
on IS and the business organization. It identifies the 
qualities such as reliability, safety, usability, expected 
from IS. 
3.1
 
Modelling IS Security level 
In order to make our proposed IS security model 
more readable and understandable, it has been divided 
into six major components:  

 
Business Assets 
Business assets are anything which have an 
economic value to the organization such as 
information, process, knowledge and people. They are 
central to the realization of the organization’s business 
goals and objectives. Technical plans and structural 
calculation processes are examples of business assets. 
It is an important to pr
otect the business assets and 
survival of the organization.  

 
Information System Assets 
Information System assets are any components 
which are part of IS and their operating environment 
such as hardware, software, network and people. In 
organizations, the business assets management depend 
on the IS as the IS assets support them. The operating 
system, Ethernet network, and system administrator are 
examples of IS assets. Th
e IS assets need to be 
protected to ensure business continuity, reduce 
business damage, and increase return on investment 
and business opportunities.  

 
Constraint 
Constraints are the restrictio
n that can influence the 
analysis and design the under development system. In 
other words, they are the restrictions on the IS assets 
such as fail, success, authorized, and unauthorized 
access.  

 
Security Goals 
Security goals are concerned with safeguarding 
business and IS assets which protect the organizations 
or individuals which depend on them. The security 
goals are mapped into differen
t IS assets constraints or 
restrictions. They aim to ensure the integrity, 
availability, and secrecy of the information and 
processes in the organization, where integrity 
safeguards the completenes
s and accuracy of the 
information and processing methods and ensures that 
the information remains unchanged from the source to 
destination entity, availability ensures that the 
authorized users have access to the IS when required, 
and secrecy or confidentiality ensures that the 
information is only accessed by authorized person, 
entities, or processes.   

 
Security Mechanisms and Techniques 
Security mechanisms and techniques include access 
control, safeguard, encryption and decryption used to 
reduce the risks that affect the business and IS assets 
and solve the constraints or restrictions. Where the 
access control is the selective restriction of access to 
the information by authorized persons or entities only; 
safeguard is the procedures or mechanisms that protect 
against threats, limit the information security incident 
impact, decrease the vulnerability and remove 
incidents such as anti-virus software or backups; 
encryption is the process of encoding the information 
in such way that hackers cannot read it while only the 
authorized pers
on and entities can access the 
information; and decryption is the process of decoding 
the information.  

 
Risks 
Risks are the combination of the probability of an 
event and its consequence. Risks, such as the threat, 
vulnerability, impact, and attack work against the 
security goals; where the threat exploits the 
vulnerability and causes unwanted incident or attack 
such as information modification, system hacking, 
theft, and deleted files. Vulnerability is a weakness of 
the organization or system which can be exploited by 
threat such as a lack of access control. Impact 
describes the business assets level by negating security 
criteria such as a loss of process integrity and IS assets 
level, such as component fail
ure and loss of customer 
is the potential negative consequence of the risk which 
can harm the business and IS assets when the threat is 
47954796 accomplished. Attack is any attempt to expose, 
destroy, modify, steal, or gain unauthorized access to 
or make unauthorized use of the business and IS assets. 
Modelling IS security level (Part 2) is divided into 
five different IS development stages: early 
requirements stage, late
 requirements stage, 
architecture design stage, detailed design stage and 
implementation stage, as shown in figure 2. 
The early requirements stage focuses on 
understanding the problems by studying the setting of  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the existing organizations. In this stage, the business 
environment and assets are identified and the IS 
security goals and constraints are derived. Therefore, 
the organization model is the output of this stage. The 
late requirements stage focuses on modelling the “to
-
be” security model by adding and analysing security 
requirements and constrain
ts. The architectural design 
stage focuse
s on defining the system’s global 
architecture, dividing the existi
ng actors into sub-actors 
and linking them to the security goals as the second 
level in this stage [9]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Own 
Modelling IT Environment Level 
 
Technology Manager 
 
System Behavior 
Business Process 
System Behavior Analysis
 
Use Case
 
Modelling Information System (IS) Security Level 
 
Business Assets 
 
Knowledge
 
Information
 
Process
 
People
 
Information System Assets 
 
Software
 
People
 
Hardware
 
Network
 
Support 
Constraints 
 
Authorized
 
Fail
 
Success
 
Unauthorized
 
Constraint of 
Security Goals 
 
Availability
 
Integrity
 
Secrecy
 
Reliability
 
Constraint 
of 
Constraint of 
Security Techniques 
 
Safeguard
 
Access
 
Control
 
Encryption
 
Decryption
 
Maps 
into 
Solves 
Risks 
 
Vulnerability
 
Threat
 
Impact
 
Attack
 
Reduce 
Work Against 
Figure1: Secured Business PM Framework Approach. 
47964797  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Modelling IS Security Level
 
The detailed design stage focuses on defining the 
architecture elements that have been defined in the 
previous stages in more detail in inputs, outputs, 
controls and security aspects. The UML sequence 
diagram for the actor inter
action diagram is used. 
Furthermore, after extracting the system requirements 
using the UML sequence diagram, the UML state chart 
diagram is generated. In the implementation stage, the 
UML class diagram is generated as the first step for the 
Java coding.  
3.1.1
 
Early Requirements Stage 
The early requirements stage focuses on 
understanding the problems by studying the setting of 
an existing organization. There are two main steps in 
this stage. In the first s
tep, the business environment 
and assets are identified, while the IS security goals 
and constraints are derived in the second step. In other 
words, step 1 is where the BPs can be modelled by 
using the 
i*
 modelling language and, thus, the security 
requirements can be linked within it whereas step 2 
defines the IS security goals and how to link them 
within the BPs. Therefore, the organization model is 
the output of this stage. 

 
Defining the Business Environment and 
Assets Step 
Business assets are anything which have an 
economic value to the organization such as 
information, process, knowledge, and people. They are 
the central in the realization of the organization’s 
business goals and objectives. Technical plans and 
structural calculation process are example of business 
assets. It is important to protect the business assets to 
ensure the survival of the or
ganization. In this step, the 
business environment and assets are defined using 
i*
 
modelling. Firstly, business managers and system users 
have to explain their existing BPs, outline using 
descriptive words the problem
s, and the requirements 
and changes that have been found. Then, business 
analysts analyse the model an
d pass it to the business 
and system modellers who follow this procedure. 

 
Deriving Information System Security 
Goals and Constraints Step 
After deciding which BPs need to be implemented 
and all BP assets are defined, the IS security goals need 
to be derived and defined to protect the proposed BP 
assets. Firstly, business analysts have to check the 
model BP and describe what BP activities have to be 
secured according to the business managers and system 
user’s requirements and explain any problems which 
were identified in their existing systems. For example, 
customer information must be secure to ensure 
customer privacy, and the relationship between the 
purchase department and manufacturer actors must be 
secure and access to the data warehouse must be 
secure. The next step is that the IS security goals and 
constraints are derived using the 
i*
 model.  
The literature shows that several methodologies can 
be used to protect the BP assets such as availability, 
secrecy and integrity. “Availability” indicates the 
usability and accessibility of the BP assets upon a 
request from the business authorities. “Secrecy”, which 
is also referred to as “confidentiality”, identifies that 
information will neither be disclosed nor available to 
unauthorized entities, authorities, processes or 
Modelling Information System (IS) Security Level
 
 
Late Requirements Stage
 
 
Modelling the “To
-
Be” Security Model by Adding 
and Analysing the Security Requirements & 
Constraints Step
 
Early Requirements Stage
 
 
Defining Business Environment & Assets Step
 
Deriving IS Security Goals & Constraints Step
 
Architecture Design Stage
 
 
Dividing Existing Actors into Sub-Actors & Linked 
them to Security Goals Step
 
Implementation Stage 
 
Generating UML Class Diagram as the First Step for 
Java Code Step
 
Detailed Design Stage
 
 
Using the UML Sequence Graphical Diagram for 
Actor Interaction Diagrams Step
 
Generating Final IS Requirements & Development 
Using UML State Chart Diagram Step
 
47974798 individuals. “Integrity” identifies the completeness and 
accuracy of the BP assets [17]. 
After defining the BP, the IS security goals have to 
be inserted into the BP. At this level, the IS security 
goals confirm the definition of the organization’s soft 
goals in the 
i*
 modelling language. 
3.1.2
 
Late Requirements Stage 
The functional, non-functional and security 
requirements of the system 
“to
-
be” are described in the 
late requirements stage. The “to
-
be” system introduces 
one or a set of actors that 
have a set of dependencies 
with other organizational actors identified in the early 
requirements stage. Thus, the late requirements stage 
focuse
s on modelling the “to
-
be” security model by 
adding and analysing the security mechanisms or 
techniques, such as access control, safeguard, 
encryption and decryption used to reduce the risks 
affect the business and 
IS assets and solve the 
constraints or restrictions; 
where the access control is 
the selective restriction of access to the information by 
authorized persons or entities
 only; safeguard is the 
procedures or mechanisms to protect against the threat, 
limit the information security incident impact, decrease 
the vulnerability and remove incidents, such as anti-
virus software, backup or digital signatures (ensure the 
integrity and authentication of information); encryption 
is the process of encoding the information in such way 
that the hackers cannot read it while only authorized 
person and entities can access the information; and 
decryption is the process of decoding the information.  
In this stage, the security techniques are used to 
confirm that all the business managers’ and system 
users’ requiremen
ts have been met. For example, the 
recovery or backup techniques could be used to ensure 
the data availability. Also, the digital signature or 
password pin could be used to ensure the authorization. 
3.1.3
 
Architectural Design Stage 
In the architectural design st
age, the existing actors 
are divided into sub-actors and linked them to the 
security goals. For example, the “ensure data 
availability” and “ensure data privacy” goals are linked 
to the “availability manager” and “privacy manager” 
internal actors, respecti
vely. Furthermore, the “ensure 
data integrity” goal is linked to “integrity verification 
manager” actor, which is linked to the “check data 
integrity” task, whereas the “check authorization” goal 
is linked to “access control manager” actor which is 
linked 
to the “access control” task.
 
3.1.4
 
Detailed Design Stage 
The detailed design stage focuses on defining the 
architecture elements being defined in the previous 
stages in more detail in relation to inputs, outputs, 
controls and security. In other words, developers 
identify the actors’ interactio
ns in detail throughout the 
detailed design stage, taking the security-related 
aspects derived from previo
us stages into account.  
This stage contains 2 steps: (1) using the UML 
sequence graphical diagram for the actor interaction 
diagram; and (2) generating the final IS requirements 
and development using the UM
L state chart diagram.  

 
Using UML Sequence Graphical 
Diagram for the Actor Interaction 
Diagram Step 
Sequence diagram shows the flow of events. It 
consists of objects represented in the usual way (as 
named rectangles with the name underlined), messages 
represented as solid-line arrows, and time represented 
as a vertical progression. The UML enables the user to 
expand the field of view and shows how an object 
interacts with other objects. In this expanded field of 
view, we have included an important dimension time. 
The key idea here is that the interactions among objects 
take place in a specified sequence, and the sequence 
takes time to go from beginning to the end. Extending 
downward from each object is a dashed line called the 
object's lifeline. Along the lifeline is a narrow 
rectangle called activation. The activation represents an 
execution of an operation the object carries out. The 
length of the rectangle signifies the activation's 
duration where duration and time in general are 
represented in a rough and ordinal way. This means 
that each dash in a lifeline usually does not stand for a 
specific unit of time but is intended to give a general 
sense of duration. 
Guidelines to Translate i* 
Model Technique to UML 
Sequence Graphica
l Diagram 
In order to make the proposed secured business PM 
more understandable, we identify several guidelines 
that need to be followed to translate the 
i*
 model 
techniques used in the previous stages to UML 
sequence graphical diagram as follows:  
Each actor in the 
i*
 model technique is mapped as 
the object lifeline on the UML sequence diagram. Each 
goal in the 
i*
 model technique is mapped as the 
message to associate between objects on the UML 
sequence diagram. Each security goal or task in the 
i*
 
model technique is mapped as the message to associate 
objects on the UML sequence diagram.  

 
Generating Final IS Requirements & 
Development Using UML State Chart 
Diagram Step 
State chart diagram captures the changes. It 
presents the states of an object that appear along with 
the transitions between the states and shows the 
starting point and endpoint of a sequence of state 
changes. The state chart diagrams show the flow of 
events and change of states fr
om one state to another. It 
allows the system analysts and modellers to modify 
47984799 any requirement package at any state chart stages. It 
has several fundamental UML symbols. For example, 
the icon for a state is a r
ounded rectangle, and the 
symbol for a transition is a solid line with an 
arrowhead. A solid
 circle stands for the starting point 
of a sequence of states, and a bull's-eye represents the 
endpoint. 
In this step, the final IS requirements and 
development is generated using the UML state chart 
diagram. This generated UML state chart diagram 
gives a precise picture of the system requirements, and 
it passes into the implementation stage. At this stage, 
the secured BP is completed, analysed, modelled and 
developed, and is ready 
to develop the UML class 
diagram for implementation. 
Guidelines to Translate i* model Technique to UML 
State Chart Diagram 
In order to make the proposed secured business PM 
more understandable, we identify several guidelines 
that need to be followed to translate the 
i*
 model 
techniques used in the previous stages to UML state 
chart diagram as follows:  
Each actor in the 
i*
 model technique is mapped as 
the state on the UML state chart diagram. In other 
words, each object in the UML sequence diagram is 
mapped as the state on the UML state chart diagram.  
Each goal in the 
i*
 model technique is mapped as 
the association between states on the UML state chart 
diagram. In other words, 
each message or association 
in the UML sequence diagram is mapped as the 
association on the UML state chart diagram.   
 Each security goal or task in the 
i*
 model 
technique is mapped as the 
message to associate states 
on the UML state chart diagram.  
3.1.5
 
Implementation Stage 
In the implementation stage, the UML class 
diagram is generated as the first step for the Java 
coding. Also, it helps on the analysis side too. It enable 
IS analysts and modellers to talk to clients in the 
clients' terminology and, thus, stimulate the clients to 
reveal important details about 
the problem to solve it.  
At this stage, the secured BP is completed, 
analysed, modelled and develo
ped, and is ready to be 
implemented using one of different implementation 
languages, such as Java, C++, and C. Before starting 
the implantation, the classes have to be checked. If 
there is any error or anythi
ng need to be changed, the 
model is sent back to the 
IS analysts and modellers. 
Otherwise, the model is implemented and it has to be 
tested, simulated and run in a similar environment 
before use in the real business environment. 
Guidelines to Translate i* Model Technique to UML 
Class Diagram 
In order to make the proposed secured business PM 
more understandable, we identify several guidelines 
that need to be followed to translate the 
i*
 model 
techniques used in the previous stages to UML class 
diagram as follows:  
Each actor in the 
i*
 model technique is mapped as 
the class on the UML class diagram. In other words, 
each state in the UML state ch
art diagram is mapped as 
the class on the UML class diagram. Each dependency 
between two actors in the 
i*
 model technique is 
mapped as the association between these match two 
classes on the UML class diagram. Each goal in the 
i*
 
model technique is mapped as the class operation on 
the UML class diagram. In other words, each 
association in the UML state ch
art diagram is mapped 
as the operation of the main class on the UML class 
diagram. Each security goal or task in the 
i*
 model 
technique is mapped as the class operation on the UML 
class diagram.  
3.1.6
 
Stages Summary 
In summary, as guidelines for the users to follow, 
this secured business PM framework has several steps 
to be followed. Firstly, business managers and system 
users have to explain their 
existing BPs, outline the 
problems that have been found, as well as the 
requirements and changes using descriptive words.  
Then, the users have to follow stage 1: early 
requirements stage. The business analysts analyse the 
BP and pass it to the busine
ss and system modellers. In 
the first stage, the users have to define the BP activities 
as it is in the business environment and try to 
reengineer the BP using 
i*
 model technique; where the 
person and departments, such as customer, head 
officer, account office and selling department are 
considered as an actors, wh
ile activities such as place 
order, make payment, and check payment are 
considered as goal. The seco
nd step is that the users 
have to analyse the BP activ
ities to consider and ensure 
those BP activities which could be at risk and must be 
secured. For example, the customer information must 
be secure to ensure customer privacy. Thus, the users 
should derive and map the system goals, such as 
integrity and availability into each activity considered 
in the previous analysis step using 
i*
 model technique 
where the security goal, such as integrity, availability 
and reliability are considered as 
the soft goal. Soft goal 
dependency is quite different to hard goal dependency. 
The soft goals refer to goals where there are no 
straightforward criteria to decide whether the condition 
has been met or not.  
In the second stage: late requirement stage, the 
users should map the security mechanisms and 
techniques, such as encryption, decryption, and access 
control for each security goals defined and derived in 
stage 1 in order to ensure these security goals, where 
these security mechanisms and techniques are 
considered as tasks in the 
i*
 model. The task 
47994800 dependency is used when any activities are performed 
by the organizational actors. For example, the backup 
procedure and recovery security mechanisms can be 
used to ensure the data availability. Furthermore, 
encrypt and decrypt data mech
anisms can be used to 
ensure the data privacy.     
In the third stage, the architectural design stage, as 
there are many security goals derived and defined in 
business PM. There are many security mechanisms and 
techniques that have been used in the system, each of 
these security goals and security mechanisms and 
techniques has to be related into one actor who will 
take the full responsibility to manage and control it. 
For example, in order to en
sure the data integrity, the 
data availability and the data pr
ivacy, three new actors 
named as integrity manager, availability manager, and 
privacy manager are defined. 
In the fourth stage, the detailed design stage, 
architecture elements that have been defined in the 
previous stages will be defined in more detail in 
relation to inputs, outputs, controls and security. In 
order to do so, there are two steps that have to be 
followed. Firstly, the UML sequence diagram is used 
to model the actor interaction between the system 
actors. There are some steps ne
eded to be considered in 
order to generate the UML sequence diagram. For 
example, each actor in the 
i*
 model technique is 
mapped as the object life line on the UML sequence 
diagram. Furthermore, each goal, security goal or task 
in the 
i*
 model technique is mapped as the message to 
associate between objects on 
UML sequence diagram.  
Secondly, the final IS requirements and 
development is generated using the UML state chart 
diagram. There are some 
steps that need to be 
considered in order to ge
nerate the UML state chart 
diagram. For example, each actor in the 
i*
 model 
technique is mapped as the state on the UML state 
chart diagram. In addition, each goal in the 
i*
 model 
technique is mapped as the association between states 
on the UML state chart diagram. Each security goal or 
task in the 
i*
 model technique is mapped as the 
message to associate betwee
n states on the UML state 
chart diagram. This generated UML state chart 
diagram gives an accurate picture of the system 
requirements. It is sent to the IS developers, who will 
check this model, for implementation. If there is 
anything needed to be changed 
or there is an error, they 
send it back to the IS analysts and modellers to modify. 
Otherwise, model will be pass into the implementation 
stage. At this stage, th
e secured BP is completed, 
analysed, modelled and developed, and is ready to 
develop class diagram for 
implementation purpose. 
In the last stage, the implementation stage, the 
UML class diagram is generated as the first step for the 
Java coding. There are some steps that need to be 
considered to generate the UML class diagram. For 
example, each actor in the 
i*
 model technique is 
mapped as the class on the UML class diagram. 
Moreover, each dependency between two actors in the 
i*
 model technique is mapped as the association 
between these match two classes on the UML class 
diagram. Each goal, security goal, or task in the 
i*
 
model technique is mapped as the class operation on 
the UML class diagram. At this stage, the secured BP 
is completed, analysed, mod
elled, and developed, and 
is ready to be implemented using one of different 
implementation languages such as Java, C++, and C. 
Before starting the implantation, the classes have to be 
checked. If there is any error or anything that needs to 
be changed, the model is sent back to the IS analysts 
and modellers. Otherwise, the model is implemented 
and it has to be tested, simulated, and run in similar 
environment before used in 
real business environment.  
4.
 
Conclusion & Implications   
Security must be considered throughout the entire 
business development process and requirements 
specifications should be identified. In this paper, we 
presented an integrated security and IS engineering 
approach throughout all the software development 
process stages by using the 
i*
 language in order to 
solve the second challenge: cr
eating a secured business 
PM. We have divided our proposed framework into 
two separate parts: modelling the information 
technology system, and modelling the IS security.  
Modelling IS security consists of five major stages: 
(1) early requirements stage; (2) late requirements 
stage; (3) architectural design
 stage; (4) detailed design 
stage; and (5) implementati
on stage. In the early 
requirements stage, the business environment and 
assets are identified and the IS security goals and 
constraints are derived, whereas in the late 
requirements stage, the “to
-
be” security model is 
modelled by adding and analysing the security 
requirements and constrain
ts. Furthermore, in the 
architectural design stage, 
the existing actors are 
divided into sub-actors and the security goals are 
linked. The detailed design stage where the 
architecture elements are defined in more detail 
contains two steps: (1) using the UML sequence 
graphical diagram for actor 
interaction diagrams; and 
(2) generating the final IS requirements and 
development using UML sta
te chart diagram. In the 
implementation stage, the UML class diagram is 
generated as the first step for the Java coding. 
The results show that considering security IS goals 
in all system development process can have a positive 
influence on system implementation and better meet 
business expectations. 
Two major implications can be derived from this 
paper for IS developers 
and business organizations. 
48004801 First, for IS developers, the paper shows how system 
security goals can be derived from the business 
environment and defined during the whole system 
development process which leads an improved system. 
Second, for the business organization, it can increase 
customer confidence and trust which can lead to an 
increase in the company’s profit.
 
However, because of the paper page limitation, the 
paper has one limitation; we have not validated our 
proposed framework within any existing business 
process as a case study. 
References  
 
[1]
 
ABURUB, F., ODEH, M. & BEESON, I. (2007). 
Modelling non-functional requirements of business 
processes. Information and Software Technology, 49(12), 
1162-1171. 
[2]
 
ALOTAIBI, Y. & LIU, F. (2012). A New Framework to 
Model a Secure E-Commer
ce System. International 
Journal of Social and Human Sciences, 6 (6), 162-168. 
[3]
 
ALOTAIBI, Y. & LIU, F. (2012). How to Model a 
Secure Information System (IS): A Case Study. 
International Journal of Information and Education 
Technology 2 (2), 94-102. 
[4]
 
ALOTAIBI, Y. & LIU, F. (2012). Business Process 
Modelling Towards Derivation of Information 
Technology Goals. In: 45th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Science (HICSS), 4-7 Jan. 2012, 
Maui, Hawaii, US. 4307-4315. 
[5]
 
ALOTAIBI, Y. and LIU, F. (2012)
. “A Novel 
Framework to Model a Secure Information System (IS)
”, 
2012 International Conference on Information and 
Computer Applications (ICICA 2012). Hong Kong. 
IPCSIT, 24, IACSIT Press, Singapore, pp 84-89. 
[6]
 
ALOTAIBI, Y. & LIU, F. (2013). Average Waiting Time 
of Customers in a New Queue System with Different 
Classes. Business Process Mana
gement Journal, 19 (1), 
146-168. 
[7]
 
ALOTAIBI, Y. & LIU, F. (2013). Business Process 
Modelling towards Derive and Implement IT Goals. 
8th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and 
Applications (ICIEA 2013), 19-21 June 2013, 
Melbourne, Australia. 1739 
–
 1744 
[8]
 
ALOTAIBI, Y. & LIU, F. (2014). An Empirical Study of 
a Novel Managing Customer 
Power Model and Business 
Performance in the Mobile Service Industry. Business 
Process Management Journal, 20 (6), 816-843. 
[9]
 
ALOTAIBI, Y. & LIU, 
F. (2014). A Novel Secure 
Business Process Mode
lling Approach and its Impact on 
Business Performance. Information Sciences. 2014 (277), 
375-395.  
[10]
 
ALOTAIBI, Y. (
2014). Business process modelling 
challenges and solutions: a literature review. Journal of 
Intelligent Manufacturing: 1-23. 
[11]
 
BASIN, D., CLAVEL, M., DOSER, J. & EGEA, 
M. (2009). Automated analysis of security-design 
models. Information and Software Technology, 51(5), 
815-831. 
[12]
 
CHUNG, L. & NIXON, B. A. (1995). Dealing with 
non-functional requirements: three experimental studies 
of a process-oriented approach. Proceedings of the 17th 
international conference on Software engineering (ICSE). 
Seattle, Washington, USA: ACM. 25-37.  
[13]
 
D'AUBETERRE, F., SINGH, R. & IYER, L. 
(2008). Secure activity reso
urce coordination: empirical 
evidence of enhanced security awareness in designing 
secure business processes. European Journal of 
Information Systems, 17(5), 528-542. 
[14]
 
GIORGINI, P., MASSACCI, F., MYLOPOULOS, 
J. & ZANNONE, N. 
(2006). Requirements engineering 
for trust management: model, methodology, and 
reasoning. International Journal of Information Security, 
5(4), 257-274. 
[15]
 
IYER, L., D'AUBETERRE, F. & SINGH, R. 
(2008). A semantic approach to secure collaborative 
inter-organizational eBusin
ess processes (SSCIOBP). 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 9(3), 
233
–
269. 
[16]
 
JÜRJENS, J. (2
001). Towards Development of 
Secure Systems Using UMLsec Fundamental 
Approaches to Software Engineering. In: Proceedings of 
4th International Conference Jo
int European Conferences 
on Theory and Practice of Software (ETAPS 2001), April 
2
–
6, 2001. Genova, Italy. 187-200. 
[17]
 
LI, N., GROSOF, B. N. & FEIGENBAUM, J. 
(2003). Delegation logic: A logic-based approach to 
distributed authorization. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., 
6(1), 128-171. 
[18]
 
MAYER, N., DUBOIS, E. & RIFAUT, A. (2007). 
Requirements Engineering for Improving Business/IT 
Alignment in Security Risk Management Methods 
Enterprise Interoperability II. Springer London. 15-26. 
[19]
 
MCDERMOTT, J. & FOX, C. (1999). Using 
Abuse Case Models for Secu
rity Requirements Analysis. 
Proceedings of the 15th Annual Computer Security 
Applications Conference. IEEE. 55-64. 
[20]
 
RODRÍGUEZ, A., FERNÁNDEZ-MEDINA, E., 
TRUJILLO, J. & PIATTINI, M. (2011). Secure business 
process model specification through a UML 2.0 activity 
diagram profile. Decision Support Systems, 51(3), 446-
465. 
[21]
 
RODRÍGUEZ, A., GUZMÁN, I. G.-R. D., 
FERNÁNDEZ-MEDINA, E. & PIATTINI, M. (2010). 
Semi-formal transformation of secure business processes 
into analysis class and use case models: An MDA 
approach. Information and Software Technology, 52(9), 
945-971. 
[22]
 
SINDRE, G. & OPDAHL, A. L. (2005). Eliciting 
security requirements with misuse cases. Requir. Eng., 
10(1), 34-44. 
[23]
 
STAHL, B. C., DOHERTY, N. F. & SHAW, M. 
(2012). Information security policies in the UK 
healthcare sector: a critical evaluation. Information 
Systems Journal, 22(1), 77-94. 
[24]
 
STREMBECK, M. & M
ENDLING, J. 
(2011). 
Modeling process-related RBAC models with extended 
UML activity models. Information and Software 
Technology, 53(5), 456-483. 
 
48014802