 Scrum Practice Mitigation of Global Software Development  
Coordination Challenges: A Distinctive Advantage?
 
 
Paul L. Bannerman 
NICTA and UNSW, Australia 
paul.bannerman@nicta.com.au
  
Emam Hossain 
UNSW and NICTA, Australia 
emam.hossain@nicta.com.au
  
Ross Jeffery 
NICTA and UNSW, Australia 
ross.jeffery@nicta.com.au
 
 
 
Abstract
 
Global software development is a major trend in 
software engineering. Practitioners are increasingly 
trying Agile methods in distri
buted projects to tap into 
the benefits experienced by
 co-located teams. This 
paper considers the issue by examining whether Scrum 
practices, used in four global software development 
projects to leverage the bene
fits of Agile methods over 
traditional software engineering methods, provided 
any distinctive advantage 
in mitigating coordination 
challenges. Four temporal, geographical and socio-
cultural distance-based coordination challenges and 
seven scrum practices are identified from the 
literature. The cases are analyzed
 for evidence of use 
of the Scrum practices to 
mitigate each challenge and 
whether the mitigation 
mechanisms employed relate to 
any distinctive characteristics of the Scrum method. 
While some mechanisms used were common to other/ 
traditional methods, it was 
found that Scrum offers a 
distinctive advantage in mitigating geographical and 
socio-cultural but not temporal distance-based GSD 
coordination challenges. Implications are discussed. 
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Software development methods continue to evolve. 
The most recent major trend, in Agile methods, 
appears to be having a positive impact on software 
project outcomes. For example, the latest Standish 
Group industry survey attributes an improvement in 
project performance to an increase in ‘agile projects’ 
(growing at 22% per annum) and a decrease in 
‘Waterfall’ development proj
ects (growing at just 1% 
per annum) [18].  
However, the context of software engineering is 
also changing, taking on increased complexity in 
pursuit of cost efficiencies, improved product quality 
and speed to market. Distributed and global software 
development (GSD) is a notable example of this. GSD 
is software development that is dispersed across two or 
more locations that are separated by national or 
continental borders. GSD can
 offer benefits to the 
onshore organization of access to qualified and skilled 
resources at a lower cost, proximity to markets, access 
to local knowledge, and flexibility in responding to 
diverse local opportun
ities [8]. However, GSD also 
brings particular challenges that are not present (or not 
as significant) in trad
itional co-located software 
development projects. In pa
rticular, GSD typically 
involves stakeholders located in different time zones 
and geographic locations, from different national and 
organizational cultures, using 
different and, at times, 
unreliable technologies to 
collaborate. Such temporal, 
geographical and socio-cultural distances can result in 
significant comm
unication, coordination and control 
challenges that need to be overcome for the benefits of 
GSD to be realized [9]. 
Agile methods such as Scrum are increasingly 
being applied in GSD to 
leverage the benefits of both 
methods. Agile methods promise benefits of handling 
requirements changes throughout the development 
lifecycle; extensive collaboration between customers 
and developers; and early and 
frequent delivery of 
products [1]. However, Ag
ile methods typically 
assume a project context that allows close interaction 
between team members. Indeed, one of the principles 
behind the 
Agile Manifesto
 is that face-to-face 
conversation is the most efficient and effective method 
of sharing information in a development team [4]. This 
presents a significant problem 
in GSD. Development 
teams and/or team members can be spread around the 
globe. Overcoming temporal, geographical and socio-
cultural distance-based comm
unication, coordination 
and control challenges in such
 context sets significant 
hurdles to overcome to reali
se the benefits of Agile 
methods in GSD. 
To investigate this issue, and
 examine the ability of 
Agile methods to be effectively deployed in GSD 
projects (in comparison 
to traditional software 
engineering methods), this paper empirically examines 
four case studies in which Scrum practices were 
adopted and used. In each case, the project manager 
sought to leverag
e the benefits of the Scrum method 
over the traditional methods previously used to gain 
improved visibility of 
project activities and improved 
2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.51253092012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.5125309 stakeholder collaboration, trust, team awareness and 
shared understanding. Of the GSD communication, 
coordination and control challenges commonly referred 
to in the literature, the study focused on examining the 
use of Scrum practices to mitigate GSD 
coordination
 
challenges. This approach contains the scope of the 
study and focuses on a significant issue (coordination) 
in managing dispersed developers that appears to 
receive more attention in the literature than the other 
two categories. Four temporal, geographical and socio-
cultural distance-based c
oordination challenges were 
identified from the literature alo
ng with seven scrum 
practices typically used in GSD. These two dimensions 
(GSD coordination challenges and Scrum practices) 
formed the axes of a tabular research framework which 
was then populated, via 
qualitative case study analysis 
of the four cases, with mitig
ation mechanisms used in 
the cases. These mechanisms were then examined for 
their relative specificity to the Scrum method to 
determine whether the Scrum practices made a 
distinctive contribution to mitigating the GSD 
coordination challenges studi
ed. The testimony of key 
case study informants on the perceived benefits of 
using Scrum practices over the traditional methods 
previously used is also considered. 
Empirical investigation 
of the use of Scrum 
practices in GSD is under-rep
resented in the literature 
[10]. Most current pu
blished studies are industrial 
experience reports. Consequently, this paper makes 
two main contribu
tions to knowledge. First, an 
empirical study of the use of Scrum practices in GSD, 
and; second, a critical investigation of the distinctive 
contribution (or otherwise) of Scrum practices in 
managing important GSD challenges. 
The paper is structured as follows. The next section 
briefly reviews prior related research, before the 
research method is described. Section 4 then describes 
the case studies and key findings on the use of Scrum 
practices; Section 5 analyzes these findings, and; 
Section 6 highlights the results. The findings are then 
discussed and implications and conclusion drawn from 
the study. 
 
2. Related research 
 
This section reviews the 
literature on GSD challenges 
and the use of Scrum practices in GSD. 
 
2.1. GSD challenges 
 
There is a growing body 
of literature that focuses 
on challenges in GSD. Communication, coordination 
and control challenges are recognized to arise due to 
temporal, geographic, and socio-cultural distances 
encountered in GSD [3]. 
Temporal distance
, a measure of the dislocation in 
time between two people 
wishing to interact [2], may 
create communication issues such 
as reduced hours of 
collaboration, difficu
lties in holding synchronous 
meetings, and response delays [2]. As a result, GSD 
coordination processes may be significantly affected 
[3]. 
Geographic distance
, a measure of the effort 
required to visit another person’s home site [2], makes 
communication difficult becau
se of the reduced ability 
to hold face-to-face meetings [1]. Lack of face-to-face 
meetings reduces informal contact which can lead to a 
lack of critical task awareness, “teamness” and reduced 
trust [1] [7] [15]. A 
fundamental prob
lem in GSD is 
that many of the coordination mechanisms that work in 
a collocated setting are absent or disrupted [14]. 
Socio-
cultural distance
,
 
a measure of a person’s under-
standing of another’s values and normative practices 
[2], may create issues relatin
g to inconsistent work 
practices, different perceptions of authority, and lack of 
mechanisms for creating shared understanding and 
avoiding misunderstandin
gs and reduced cooperation 
[1] [3] [5] [13] [16]. 
Other recognized issues that may arise in GSD 
relate to collaboration, group awareness, project and 
process management and support, risk management, 
and knowledge management [12]. 
Several GSD issues frameworks and models exist 
in the literature (for example, [2] [3] [6]). A recent 
systematic literature rev
iew identified twelve 
communication, coordination and control challenges 
resulting from temporal, 
geographical and socio-
cultural distances [11]. 
The four coordination 
challenges, which are the focus of this paper, are: 
Increased coordination costs (due to temporal 
distance)
: The effect of time zone differences can be so 
great that project coordination complexity and costs 
increase. 
Reduced informal contact can lead to lack of 
critical task awareness (due 
to geographical 
distance)
: Due to geographical dispersion, lack of 
close interaction between developers may reduce team 
awareness. 
Inconsistent work practices can impinge on 
effective coordination (due to socio-cultural 
distance)
: Due to developers being located in different 
countries, there may be differences in national culture, 
language, motivation and work ethics that can impede 
effective project coordination.
 
Reduced cooperation ar
ising from misunderstand-
ings (due to so
cio-cultural distance)
: Similarly, team 
member cooperation might be reduced due to cultural 
and language differences creat
ing misunderstandings. 
 
53105310 2.2. Scrum practices in GSD 
 
Scrum is an iterative and 
incremental Agile project 
management approach comprising a range of common 
practices. Seven Scrum practices are identified by [16] 
that might typically be used 
in GSD, namely: Backlog, 
Sprint Planning, Sprint
, Daily Scrum, Scrum of 
Scrums, Sprint Review (or Demo), and Retrospective. 
These practices largely depend on close interactions 
between developers, business stakeholders and 
customers. Indeed, it is claimed that a major reason for 
the success of Scrum is the co
llocation of development 
team members [1]. This 
interaction is difficult to 
achieve in GSD. However, regardless of apparent 
differences between the underl
ying principles of Scrum 
and distributed development
 approaches, there is a 
growing interest in investigating the use of Scrum 
practices for GSD to realize the 
benefits of this Agile 
method [10]. For example, an empirical study found 
that using Scrum practices in GSD improved 
communication, trust, motivation and product quality 
[16]. Furthermore, industrial
 experience suggests that 
using Scrum practices promotes communication and 
collaboration, ensu
res frequent delivery of product, and 
provides an opportun
ity to reduce some GSD 
challenges [20]. 
However, empirical st
udies on the use of Scrum 
practices in GSD are under-represented in the research 
literature; most are industrial exp
erience reports [10]. 
So far, empirical studies have focused on establishing 
the feasibility of using
 Scrum practices in GSD (e.g., 
[16] [17] [19] [20]). The present study aims to extend 
this knowledge base by examining the distinctiveness 
of the contribution of the seven Scrum practices 
(identified by [16], above) in mitigating the four GSD 
coordination challenges (iden
tified by [11], also above) 
in multiple case studies in 
which the project manager 
sought to overcome limitat
ions previously encountered 
in using traditional development methods in GSD 
projects. In particular, these related
 to poor visibility of 
the dispersed project activities and problems in 
establishing and maintaining 
stakeholder 
collaboration, 
trust, team awareness and shared understanding. 
 
3. Research method 
 
Qualitative case study research was chosen as the 
method, following Yin’s guidelines [21], to provide 
access to a rich and deep dataset on how Scrum is used 
in practice to mitigate GSD co
ordination challenges. A 
case study protocol was prepared to guide the study 
process, which was trialed 
in a pilot case study. 
For the main study, companies were selected 
opportunistically (via i
ndustry contacts), that were 
engaged in GSD and had chosen to use Scrum 
practices to overcome limitations experienced 
previously in using traditional methods. Four projects 
were chosen involving industrial, software engineering 
and telecommunications applications from three 
internationally known corporati
ons (Table 1). At the 
request of the companies, pseudonyms are used to 
protect the privacy of the study participants. 
Table 1: Case Studies
 
Project 
(Company No.) 
Product 
Onshore 
Country 
PaperSys (1) Paper mill quality control 
Finland 
EnergySys (1) Energy production control 
ToolSoft (2) Collaboration software Australia 
TestSoft (3) Telecom test platform Finland 
The primary data collecti
on method was interviews, 
supplemented and triangulated
 by qualitative data from 
documentation, direct observ
ation, informal discussion 
and artifacts (such as screenshots of tools used). 
Fifteen semi-structured in
terviews were conducted, 
each lasting 1-2 hours. Eleven interviews were face-to-
face and four were conducted over Skype. Informants 
spanned multiple roles (development manager, product 
owner, project manager, Scrum master, architect, 
developer). Interviews were recorded, transcribed and 
verified by key informants. All data was loaded into 
and analyzed using NVivo (a qualitative data 
management and analysis soft
ware tool that enables 
related data from multiple sources to be interlinked). 
Within-case analysis examined each case for 
evidence of how each Scrum practice was used and 
whether its use mitigated any of the four GSD 
coordination challenges. Cross-case analysis compared 
practice usage and mitigatio
n mechanisms across the 
four cases to identify 
similarities and/or differences. 
Summary descriptions of mitigation mechanisms were 
prepared for each practice, within each case, for each 
GSD coordination challenge. These were then analyzed 
for evidence of distinctiveness to the Scrum method. 
 
4. Case studies 
 
The contextual characteristics of the cases are 
summarized in Table 2. Each case was found to 
experience the temporal, geographical and socio-
cultural distance-based coordination challenges 
identified in the literature. Each 
case was also found to 
adapt its project structure and processes, including its 
use of Scrum practices, to suit the circumstances of the 
project. These adaptations served 
to mitigate the 
coordination (and other) GSD challenges faced by the 
projects. The use of Scrum practices is summarized, 
following, for each project case. 
53115311 Table 2: Summary of case contextual characteristics 
Contextual Factors PaperSys 
EnergySys ToolSoft TestSoft 
Project-specific
: 
Contract nature 
Product domain 
Requirements changes 
 
Offshore contractor 
Automation industry 
Moderate 
 
Offshore contractor 
Automation industry 
Moderate 
 
Intra-organizational 
Collaboration software 
Moderate 
 
Intra-organizational 
Telecommunications 
Low 
Team-Specific
: 
Team size 
 
Distributed sites 
Experience 
 
10 (4 onshore; 6 
offshore) 
4 (3 offshore) 
Onshore: high; 
Offshore: mostly high 
 
11 (4 onshore; 7 
offshore) 
2 (1 offshore) 
Onshore: high; 
Offshore: mostly low 
 
15 (11 onshore; 4 
offshore) 
2 (1 offshore) 
Onshore: high; 
Offshore: low 
 
15 (1 onshore; 14 
offshore) 
4 (3 offshore) 
Onshore: high; 
Offshore: Varied 
Distance
: 
Temporal 
Geographical 
 
Socio-cultural 
 
Moderate (up to 5 hrs) 
Moderate (no direct 
flights) 
High 
 
Low (1 hour) 
Moderate (no direct 
flights) 
High 
 
High (up to 19 hours) 
High (no direct 
flights) 
Low 
 
High (up to 9.5 hours) 
High (no direct 
flights) 
High 
 
 
4.1. Case 1: PaperSys 
 
The project operated as a single Scrum, distributed 
across two onshore- and offs
hore-based organizations. 
At the start of the project, th
e offshore team visited the 
onshore site for training and familiarization. 
Since the domain and product knowledge was 
based onshore, the product 
Backlog
 was developed and 
updated onshore, but the sprint backlog was developed 
and maintained by the 
offshore team. Backlogs were 
stored centrally and accessed via globally accessible 
software tools. 
Sprint Planning
 comprised three meetings: a joint 
‘goal introduction’ meeting held online; an offshore 
team sprint planning mee
ting, and; a joint ‘plan 
introduction’ online meeting 
to validate the offshore 
team’s sprint plan. 
Sprints
 were four weeks in duration. 
The offshore team held traditional 
Daily Scrum
 
meetings, online (the onshore team did not participate 
because its main focus was on project specifications). 
Since the teams operated as a single Scrum, a 
Scrum of 
Scrums
 meeting was not necessary. However, onshore 
and offshore ‘Scrum masters’ held a weekly status 
meeting as a proxy Scrum of Scrums. 
Since the project was producing code for a product 
line that had to be centrally tested and integrated, the 
Sprint Review
 was adapted, with offshore code being 
released to an onshore tester for acceptance testing. 
Retrospective
 review meetings were held during early 
Sprints but discontinued because the Scrum model was 
working effectively and any issues or changes could be 
handled through the other meetings. 
Unless otherwise stated, online meetings were held 
via Live Meeting for joint 
onshore/offshore meetings 
and Skype for offshore team meetings. Meeting times 
were synchronized between the four sites. Dispersed 
team members could communicate with each other 
whenever needed via Office Communications Server 
(OCS), telephone or email. 
Overall, stakeholders were 
satisfied with the Scrum 
method compared to the prev
ious plan-driven method. 
Because they had met their counterparts in the other 
country, team members found the communication tools 
to be sufficient means for 
interaction and 
collaboration, 
and less expensive and tim
e-consuming than travel. 
The adapted Scrum model 
worked well for the parties, 
enabling each to focus on its own areas of expertise, 
with quick access for issue discussion and resolution if 
needed but, otherwise, with minimal disruption in 
achieving delivery goals. The Scrum meeting regime 
was found to improve coordination, team awareness 
and socio-cultural understandi
ng between individuals 
in each country. Also, the short release cycle and 
frequent interaction helped to overcome the offshore 
team’s lack of domain knowledge. Reviewing activities 
and achievements on weekly (Scrum master status 
meetings) and monthly (end of Sprint code acceptance 
testing) cycles provided high project visibility and the 
opportunity to resynch
ronize if necessary. It also 
engendered confidence and trust in the partnership.
 
 
4.2. Case 2: EnergySys 
 
This project was from a di
fferent business division 
of the same company as PaperSys. EnergySys operated 
as a single project and team
 but held separate onshore 
and offshore Scrums. 
The onshore-based product 
owner and architects 
maintained the product 
Backlog
 while the offshore 
team developed and maintained their sprint backlog 
53125312 (the onshore team did not maintain a sprint backlog). 
Initially Team Foundation Server (TFS) was used for 
both but, mid-project, they had to change to a new 
company standard, Lotus Notes. 
Similarly to PaperSys, 
an online Sprint pre-
planning meeting was held with the project manager/ 
product owner, followed by a local offshore 
Sprint 
Planning
 meeting, but no post-pl
anning confirmation 
meeting was held. However, the pre-planning meeting 
was recorded for later replay
 by offshore team 
members, if needed, and onshore stakeholders could be 
contacted at any time via OCS or other tools, as 
necessary. 
Sprints
 were 1.5 weeks in duration. 
Only the offshore team held a 
Daily Scrum
, which 
was co-located, but a formal joint 
Sprint Review
 was 
held, online via OCS and Live Meeting, at the end of 
each Sprint. The 
Scrum of Scrums
 and 
Retrospective
 
practices were not used. However, ideas flowed freely 
within the team, exchanged via email and other 
communication mechanisms. Also, with the short 
sprint cycle, the other mee
tings reinforced coordination 
and resolution of issues
 and misunderstandings. 
Compared to PaperSys, EnergySys struggled with 
low domain knowledge and experience in the offshore 
team, communication issues and problems transferring 
to Lotus Notes and its pro
ject repository. However, the 
short Sprint cycle adopted 
helped to identify issues so 
that they could be addressed 
early before significant 
downstream damage was 
done to the project. 
 
4.3. Case 3: ToolSoft 
 
The project operated as a single development team 
and worked on a single commercial product marketed 
by the company. However, to minimize dependencies 
and maximize delivery frequency, it was divided into 
four onshore sub-teams in Sy
dney and one offshore 
sub-team in USA, segmented on a product architecture 
or feature basis. Each sub-team had its own sub-goals, 
backlog and nominated team coordinator. Product and 
sub-team 
Backlogs
 were maintained in an issue 
tracking tool (another of the company’s products). 
Sprints
 were two-weeks long, to increase delivery, 
but 
Sprint Planning
 meetings were held weekly, one at 
the start of the Sprin
t and one in the middle, to review 
and revise the product road 
map, prioritize the product 
Backlog, select and co
nfirm what would be done in the 
coming week in each sub-team and estimate the work 
effort. Only the sub-team coordinators participated in 
these meetings, with the project manager. Video 
conferencing was used so that onshore and offshore 
participants could see each other’s face. These weekly 
meetings also served as 
Scrum of Scrums
 meetings, in 
which any cross-team issues and dependencies were 
discussed and resolved. 
Due to time zone differences, separate onshore and 
offshore 
Daily Scrum
 meetings were held, and two 
onshore meetings were held to enable each member of 
the four sub-teams to sp
eak. An offshore 
representative 
participated in the onshore Daily Scrums via Skype. 
Furthermore, two onshore and offshore team members 
were selected each week to talk via telephone or online 
chat about what each other was doing. 
Sprint Reviews
 were merged with the weekly 
meetings as both planning 
and review meetings. Code 
produced by each team was 
reviewed by another sub-
team before being sent to a separate QA team for 
testing and integration in
to the next product release. 
QA team members could participate in daily or weekly 
meetings to provide feedback, as necessary. 
Onshore and offshore 
Retrospectives
 were held 
separately every four weeks because two weeks was 
found to be too frequent for the number of problems 
encountered. Meeting results were 
posted on the 
project wiki for info
rmation and discussion. 
Scrum was considered to 
be highly effective for the 
purposes of the project and given the distribution of 
resources across two countries. As the project manager 
explained, “with Waterfall, you don’t know if anything 
has been done for months; with Scrum, you know in a 
matter of weeks. The best thing about Scrum is project 
visibility – you have to de
liver every two to four weeks 
for inclusion in a release so it is very visible if you 
don’t. Also, you don’t have to start all processes at 
once; you can progressively add them at each cycle, as 
a piloting/learning exercise”. Furthermore, “having a 
distributed development team
, especially on the other 
side of the world, makes the project more complicated, 
but our ‘divide and conquer’ approach of sub-teams, 
and rationalizing participation in meetings, makes it 
possible to still have good visibility over the project at 
the same time as maintaini
ng a focus on delivery.”
 
 
4.4. Case 4: TestSoft 
 
This project involved two offshore teams: the main 
(but less-experienced) development team located at 
one site in Brazil, and a small
er European team located 
in Germany and India. These teams ran separate 
Scrums but used the same Sprint cycle. The ‘onshore’ 
domain knowledge-based site was in Finland. 
The product 
Backlog
 was maintained centrally by 
the product owner/project manager, in conjunction 
with the Scrum masters of the two development teams, 
and the sprint backlogs and burndown charts were 
maintained separately by each Scrum team. In each 
case, the tool used was ScrumWorks. 
Sprints
 were two weeks long. 
Sprint Planning
 
involved a pre-planning meeting between the product 
owner/project manager and the two Scrum masters. 
53135313 This was followed by separate 
local Sprint planning 
meetings (the Brazilian team meeting was co-located 
and the European team meeting was distributed, held 
via teleconference). 
Separate 
Daily Scrum
 meetings were held every 
second day, via teleconference, by the European team 
(because there were only three people in that team), 
and daily in Brazil. Onshore personnel were not 
involved in either meeting. 
At the end of each Sprint, each team held its own 
separate 
Sprint Review
/
Retrospective
 meeting, without 
onshore involvement. The results of these meetings 
were posted on the project wiki for the benefit of other 
project stakeholders. 
Two additional teleconferenc
e meetings were held: 
a twice weekly de facto 
Scrum of Scrums
 management 
status meeting involving 
the product owner/project 
manager, Scrum masters and, sometimes, customers, 
and; a biweekly architectural/technical meeting 
involving both Scru
m teams (this was the only regular 
joint meeting of both development teams). 
Team members occasionally travelled to another 
site for joint workshops or to
 work with another team 
on a Sprint to support knowledge dissemination and 
familiarization across the teams. 
Informants believed th
at Scrum was effective in the 
project. It enabled them to overcome many problems 
encountered with the prev
ious plan-driven method. 
Scrum enabled frequent delivery of working software 
and increased project visib
ility. Furthermore, the 
project manager was able to 
incrementally adjust the 
plan according to Sprint 
outcomes. Scrum also helped 
reduce overwork, improved team collaboration and 
created trust between team members. However, issues 
remained to be resolved, 
particularly relating to limited 
Scrum and product domain knowledge in Brazil and 
unreliable communications with Brazil and India. 
 
5. Case study analysis 
 
Analysis proceeded as follows. For each project 
case (within-case analysis), a statement was prepared, 
for each practice used, on how the practice mitigated 
each of the four GSD coordination challenges. This 
resulted in a table of 28 (7 x 4) statements per case. 
The statements were then categorized. Each 
statement was examined and found to match one or 
more of eight categories of mitigation mechanism, 
described in Table 3. Note that categories M1 to M4 
involve various mechanisms
 which, combined with a 
Scrum practice, have the effect of mitigating various 
distance-based GSD coordination challenges. For 
example, M2 and M3 are communication mechanisms 
that are enabled by information and communication 
technology (ICT) tools such as videoconferencing or a 
wiki. Similarly, M1 adjusts 
working hours to enable a 
meeting to be held and M4
 reduces distance barriers 
through visits to another site. By contrast, M5 to M8 
represent characteristics of various Scrum practices 
themselves (frequent comm
unication, iteration, review, 
planning) that mitigate GSD challenges, particularly 
around the Sprint cycle. 
In categorizing the statements, it was found that 
primary and secondary me
chanisms applied to most 
practices. For example, to 
mitigate the temporal 
distance challenge, Scrum meeting practices typically 
synchronized work hours (M1) as the primary 
mechanism, to enable an online meeting to be held 
(M2), as the secondary mechanism. The statements 
were coded with the secondary mechanism(s) in 
parentheses (i.e., as M1 (M2)). 
The mitigation mechanisms for each practice were 
then examined across the four cases (cross-case 
analysis) and a summary statement was prepared and 
categorized representing the intersection of the four 
cases. This yielded a summary table of mechanisms 
used by the four cases for each practice to mitigate 
each of the four distance-based GSD challenges. Table 
4 represents the results summarized by mitigation 
mechanism category (the individual statements are 
withheld due to space limitations)
1
 
Working down each row of Table 4, the GSD 
coordination challenge
s were mitigated as follows: 
Temporal Challenge: Increased coordination 
costs
.
 
Consistently, the Scrum meeting practices 
mitigated this temporal distance-based challenge by 
arranging a suitable common time between team 
members (and any other rele
vant project stakeholders) 
(M1) to hold an online meeting via an ICT-mediated 
synchronous communication 
tool (M2). In some cases 
for Retrospectives, individual Scrum teams met in 
isolation of the whole proje
ct stakeholder group (but 
still online if the team was distri
buted) and posted their 
results on the project wiki for the advice of other 
stakeholders (M3). The Backlog practice (not a 
meeting practice) similarly
 employed globally 
accessible ICT-mediated asynchronous communication 
tools (M3) to maintain and update task details on 
product and sprint backlogs
 and burndown charts (this 
was consistent for all four challenges so will not be 
repeated for the other challenges). These mechanisms 
enabled the projects to mitigate the effects of time zone 
differences and thereby co
ntain coordination costs 
(ignoring communications costs that are common to 
GSD, such as channel and tool costs). As a practice, 
Sprints did not feature in 
mitigating this challenge. 
                                                
 
1
 
The detailed intermediate and final analysis tables are available 
from the first author by request.
 
53145314 Table 3: GSD coordination challenge mitigation mechanism categories 
Category ID Description 
Synchronized work 
hours 
M1 
Increase overlapping working hours between sites to enable synchronous communication for 
meetings; for example, adjust working hours at sites to create some overlap or participate in 
meetings from home 
ICT-mediated 
synchronous 
communication 
M2 
Practices that enable synchronous formal or informal communication between teams; for 
example, use individual or conference phone calls, teleconference, video conference, web 
conference, or application 
ICT-mediated 
asynchronous 
communication 
M3 
Practices that enable asynchronous communication between team members; for example, 
email, Instant Messaging, or Wiki 
Visit M4 
Face-to-face meeting made possible by travelling between sites. Two main kinds: seeding 
visits to build relationships, and; maintaining visits to sustain relationships 
Frequent (or improved) 
communication 
M5 
Enable frequent formal and informal communication among team members through tools 
and/or face-to-face meetings 
Iteration M6 
Activities that involve cyclical repetition enable multiple incremental opportunities to 
monitor progress and resolve issues 
Review M7 
Formal or informal activities that enable reflection on prior activities, assessment of 
completed work, and the opportunity for stakeholders to provide feedback to the teams 
Planning M8 
Activities that establish the scope of work, resourcing, scheduling, and the processes to be 
employed 
 
Table 4: Summary of case mitigation mechanisms by category 
Scrum Practices 
Coordination Challenges 
Backlog 
Sprint 
Planning 
Sprint 
Daily 
Scrum 
Scrum of 
Scrums 
Sprint 
Review 
Retro-
spective 
Increased coordination cost 
(Temporal) 
M3 M1 (M2)  M1 (M2) M1 (M2) M1 (M2) M1, M3 
(M2) 
Reduced informal contact can lead 
to lack of critical task awareness 
(Geographical) 
M3 M2 (M1) M5, M6, 
M7, M8 
(M5, M7) 
M2 (M1) M2 (M1) M3, M7 
(M1, M2, 
M3) 
M2, M3 
(M1) 
Inconsistent work practices can 
impinge on effe
ctive coordination 
(Socio-cultural) 
M3 M5 (M1, 
M2) 
M6 M5 (M1, 
M2) 
M5 (M1, 
M2) 
M5, M7, 
(M1, M2, 
M3) 
M5 (M1, 
M2, M3) 
Reduced cooperation arising from 
misunderstandings (Socio-cultural) 
M3 M3, M4, 
M5 (M1, 
M2, M7) 
M4, M5, 
M6, M7, 
M8 (M5, 
M6, M7) 
M5 (M1, 
M2) 
M5 (M1, 
M2) 
M5, M7 
(M1, M2, 
M3) 
M3 
 
 
Geographical Challenge: Reduced informal 
contact can lead to lack
 of critical task awareness
. 
Scrum meeting practices were mostly consistent in 
mitigating this geographi
cal distance-based challenge 
by holding online meetings, enabled mostly by ICT-
mediated synchronous co
mmunication tools (M2). 
Some Retrospectives also used ICT-mediated 
asynchronous communication tools (M3) to post 
results on the project wiki. In the case of Sprint 
Reviews, these mechanisms were also variously used 
but it was more the review function of this practice that 
mitigated the challenge than the meeting 
per se
 (M7). 
Finally, the fundamental characteristics of Sprints in 
fostering frequent communication (M5), iteration 
(M6), review (M7) and planning (M8) significantly 
contributed to mitigati
ng this challenge. Overall, these 
mechanisms mitigated the reduced informal contact 
imposed by the geographical
 dispersion of the project 
teams by ensuring project-wide understanding and 
awareness of critical tasks. 
Socio-cultural Challeng
e: Inconsistent work 
practices can impinge on effective coordination
.
 
Socio-cultural differences can bring entrenched 
divergent behavior patterns to projects that can be 
difficult to harmonize. As evidenced in the cases 
studied, one of the great benefits of the Scrum method 
is that it provides a consistent set of practices, mostly 
around meetings, that can avoid or counter negative 
53155315 impacts on project coordina
tion arising from socio-
cultural differences. The Scrum meeting practices were 
mostly consistent in mitig
ating this socio-cultural 
distance-based challenge via the frequency of 
communication enabled by these meetings (M5) and 
repetitive iteration of Sprint-related activities (M6), 
variously enabled by online meetings and offline 
communication (M1, M2 and M3). These mechanisms 
provided a consistency
 of practice that substantially 
avoided coordination issues resulting from divergent 
socio-cultural behaviors. 
Socio-cultural Challenge: Reduced cooperation 
arising from misunderstandings
.
 
Finally, culture and 
language differences, in particular, can easily lead to 
misunderstandings and/or 
offense, alienating people 
and resulting in issues of cooperation in projects. 
Again, the Scrum meeting practices were mostly 
consistent in mitigating 
this socio-cultural distance-
based challenge by the frequent communication 
associated with these meetings (M5), variously enabled 
by online meetings and offline communication (M1, 
M2 and M3) and, on limited occasions, inter-site visits 
(M4). In the case of Sprint
 Reviews, these mediating 
mechanisms were also variously used but it was more 
the review function itself (M7) and the frequency of its 
practice (M5) that mitigated the challenge, rather than 
the meeting 
per se
. In Retrospectives, posting the 
results on the project wiki
 and eliciting a response by 
other team members if misunderstandings were 
detected, both via ICT-mediated asynchronous 
communication tools (M3), 
mitigated the challenge. 
These mechanisms enabled misunderstandings to be 
identified and resolved early, avoiding flow-on impacts 
on project cooperation and coordination. 
 
6. Results 
 
The key findings from the preceding analysis are as 
follows.
 
First, the 
temporal distance
 challenge, whereby 
developers operated in different time zones, was 
typically mitigated by synchronizing work hours to 
arrange a time when all parties could meet online. 
However, where the time zone difference was too great 
to make meeting time synchron
ization practical, the 
Scrum model was adapted to minimize the need for 
online meetings involving all team members. 
Second, the 
geographical distance
 challenge, 
which prevented interaction through physical presence, 
was typically mitigated by 
ICT-mediated synchronous 
communication tool-based meetings and, in some 
cases, with support from ICT-mediated asynchronous 
communication tools such as wikis. However, the 
fundamental characteristics of sprints (M5 to M8) also 
significantly contributed to 
mitigating this challenge by 
maintaining task awareness, de
spite reduced informal 
contact, through the constan
t cycle of interactions. 
Third, the 
socio-cultural distance
 challenges, 
reflecting different norms, values and national 
perspectives, were typically mi
tigated by the frequency 
of communication enabled by Scrum-related meeting 
practices – sometimes supported
 by recording meetings 
for later replay, posting meeting results on a project 
wiki and/or inter-site visits – and the inherent 
characteristics of those practices of ongoing iterative 
review and planning (that is, M5 to M8). These 
meetings enforced common work practices on the 
multi-cultural participants and provided frequent 
checkpoints to ensure shared understanding and 
ongoing collaborative cooperation throughout the 
project.
 
In sum, in the case studies examined, temporal 
distance was mitigated by synch
ronizing work hours to 
hold meetings or by structuring the project to limit the 
need for synchronized meetings; geographical distance 
was mitigated by communicating online via ICT-
mediated tools and iterative sprint-based interactions, 
and; socio-cultural distance was 
similarly mitigated by 
the characteristics inherent in Scrum practices of 
frequent tight iterations and
 interactions, enabled by 
ICT-mediated communications. 
Considering the distinctiveness of these mitigation 
mechanisms, the first (temporal distance) mitigation 
mechanism is clearly not specific 
to the Scrum method. 
Any management method used for GSD could 
synchronize working hours to arrange suitable meeting 
times. Consequently, based on the cases studied, 
Scrum 
offers no distinctive advantage in
 mitigating the effects 
of temporal distance on co
ordination in GSD projects
.
 
Second, for geographical
 distance, two types of 
mitigation mechanism were found. First, ICT-mediated 
synchronous communication (o
nline meetings), is also 
not specific to Scrum. It coul
d be used with any GSD 
management method. However, the value of this 
mechanism in facilitating co
ordination 
was enhanced 
when used in conjunction with the Scrum method 
because of the high proportion of meeting practices 
inherent to, and characterizing, Scrum. The cases 
suggest that the frequency of communication, iterative 
nature, and inherent focus on planning and review of 
Scrum meeting practices significantly contributed to 
mitigating the geograp
hical distance-based GSD 
challenge (by providing 
many rich opportunities for 
interaction, thereby increasing task
 awareness)
. On this 
basis, 
the Scrum model does make a distinctive 
contribution to mitigating th
e effects of geographical 
distance on coordination in GSD projects.
 
Finally, the socio-cultural distance mitigation 
mechanisms stemmed directly and distinctively from 
the inherent iterative, incremental, time-boxed 
53165316 characteristics of Scrum. The 
frequently iterated Sprint 
cycle of plan, build and review provides an ideal 
mechanism for maintaining cohesion between socio-
culturally diverse teams and 
identifying and
 resolving 
misunderstandings early, thereby minimizing 
downstream impacts. As an integrated package, these 
features are typically not characteristic of other 
development management methods. Therefore, based 
on the case studies, 
the Scrum model has a distinctive 
advantage in mitigating the effects of socio-cultural 
distance on coordination in GSD projects.
 
 
7. Discussion 
 
This paper has aimed to make two main 
contributions to knowledge. First
, an empirical study of 
the use of Scrum practices in GSD (to help overcome a 
gap in empirical research), and; second, a critical study 
of the distinctive cont
ribution of Scrum practices in 
overcoming important GSD coordination challenges. 
While some mechanisms used are commonly available 
to other/traditional methods, it was found that Scrum 
offers a distinctive advantage in mitigating 
geographical and socio-cul
tural but not temporal 
distance-based GSD coordination challenges. 
The study has validity threats and limitations. 
Considering validity threats, reliability was enhanced 
by multiple design techniques, including using a case 
study protocol; conducting a 
pilot case study; using at 
least two researchers to con
duct interviews, code and 
analyze the data, and; using NVivo as a database for 
management and analysis of case data. Internal validity 
was enhanced by triangulating
 data from multiple types 
of data and multiple sour
ces within type, and supported 
by a high degree for consist
ency in findings across the 
four case projects. With resp
ect to external validity, 
four cases are indicative but not necessarily fully 
representative. Therefore, no claims are made that the 
findings generalise, statistically, to other settings, only 
that they generalize to emergent theory on how Scrum 
practices mitigate GSD coordination challenges. 
With respect to limitations, first, only four of the 
twelve GSD challenges identified 
from the literature by 
[11] were examined. Others remai
n to be investigated. 
Also, other GSD challenges may exist in practice that 
have not yet been iden
tified in the literature. Second, 
the study focused on the Scrum practices, rather than 
the tools and mechanisms that mediate the challenge 
mitigation. Third, the study 
did not directly compare 
Scrum practices with traditional 
development methods 
in mitigating these coordination challenges. Rather, it 
chose projects in which proj
ect managers were seeking 
to gain benefits from the use of Agile/Scrum over the 
previous traditional method
s that they had used. 
Fourth, project contextual factors were found to 
influence how Scrum was tailo
red to fit the project 
context. The influence of these factors was not directly 
controlled or systematically 
examined in this study. 
Finally, as implied above, 
further validation is needed, 
from other case studies and 
other research methods, to 
further substantiate the conclusions. 
The study has implications for research and 
practice. First, for both research and practice, the study 
strongly suggests that view
ing Agile methods such as 
Scrum as only a method for managing co-located 
projects imposes an unnecessary and artificial 
constraint on the method. Through the enablement of 
ICT-mediated communication tools and other 
mechanisms, Scrum brings many of its inherent 
benefits to GSD 
and
 overcomes many of the inherent 
challenges of GSD. Second, for research, the findings 
summarized in Table 4 contribut
e to an emergent body 
of knowledge on the use of Scrum practices in GSD. 
Third, the findings provide focus for future research by 
highlighting the distinctiv
e advantages (and otherwise) 
of the Scrum method in GSD. 
For practice, the findings summarized in Table 4 
have great utility in informing business, IT and project 
managers considering using (or already trialing) Scrum 
in GSD on how Scrum practices can be effectively 
deployed and common problems that might be 
encountered.  
For future research, each of the above limitations 
represents areas for future investigation. In particular, 
the study points to an 
opportunity to further research 
the contingency drivers that shape the adaptation of the 
Scrum method in GSD contexts and the decisions 
available in practice for manage
rs to make in tailoring 
Scrum-based GSD projects. 
 
8. Conclusion 
 
As software development becomes more dispersed 
globally, to take advantage of lower-cost resources and 
skills wherever they 
are located, new 
opportunities and 
challenges arise for applying new and traditional 
software engineering and development management 
methods. This study has focu
sed on four projects in 
which managers sought to leverage the benefits of 
Agile/Scrum methods in the GSD context and found 
distinctive benefits over the traditional plan-driven 
methods they had previously used. This is a welcomed 
though unexpected finding for a software development 
method based on assumptions of close interactions 
between developers and othe
r project stakeholders. 
However, advances in inform
ation and communication 
technologies, and other mechanisms, have enabled the 
temporal and geographical distances challenging GSD 
to be substantially mitigated, largely independent of 
the method used. The real contribution of this study, 
53175317 however, is to show 
that the distinctive characteristics 
of the Scrum method can benefit distributed as well as 
co-located software development projects by 
mitigating geographical 
and socio-cultural distance-
based coordination GSD challenges. For the projects 
managers in the cases studied, this was something the 
previous traditional methods struggled to do. 
 
9. Acknowledgments 
 
NICTA is funded by the Australian Government 
via the Department of Broadband, Communications & 
Digital Economy and the Au
stralian Research Council 
through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.
 
 
10. References 
 
[1]
 
P. Abrahamsson O., Salo, J. Ronkainen & J. Warsta, 
Agile Software Development Methods: Review and 
Analysis, Technical Report # 408, VTT Publications, 
Espoo, 2002. 
[2]
 
P. Ågerfalk, B. Fitzgerald, H. Holmström, B. Lings, B. 
Lundell, & E. O'Conchuir, “A Framework for 
Considering Opportunities and Threats in Distributed 
Software Development”, in Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Distributed Software 
Development, 2005, pp. 47-61. 
[3]
 
P. Ågerfalk, & B. Fitzgerald, “Flexible and Distributed 
Software Processes: Old Petunias in New Bowls?” 
Communication of the ACM, 49(10), 2006, pp. 27-34. 
[4]
 
Agile Manifesto. “Principles behind the Agile 
Manifesto”, 
http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html
, 
and “Manifesto for Agile Software Development”, 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org
), accessed June, 2011. 
[5]
 
E. Carmel, Global Software Teams: Collaborating 
Across Borders and Time Zones, Prentice-Hall, NJ, 
2009. 
[6]
 
D. Damian & D. Zowghi, “Requirements Engineering 
Challenges in Multi-Site Software Development 
Organizations”, Requirements Engineering Journal, 
8(1), 2003, pp. 149-160 
[7]
 
M. Hansen & H. Baggesen, “From CMMI and Isolation 
to Scrum, Agile, Lean and Collaboration”, in 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference, 
2009, pp. 283-288. 
[8]
 
J. Herbsleb & D. Moitra, “Global Software 
Development”, IEEE Software, 18(2), 2001 pp.16-20. 
[9]
 
H. Holmström, B. Fitzgerald, P. Ågerfalk, & E. Ó 
Conchúir, “Agile Practices Reduce Distance in Global 
Software Development”, Information Systems 
Management
, 
23(3), 2006, pp. 7-18. 
[10]
 
E. Hossain, A. Babar & H. Paik, “Using Scrum in 
Global Software Development: A Systematic Literature 
Review”, in Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Global Software Engineering, 2009, pp. 175-184. 
[11]
 
E. Hossain, P.L. Bannerm
an & R Jeffery, “Scrum 
Practices in Global Software Development: A Research 
Framework”, in Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Product Focused Development and 
Process Improvement (PROFES 2011), Springer-Verlag, 
LNCS 6759, 2011, pp. 88-102. 
[12]
 
M. Jimenez, M. Piattini & A. Vizcaino, “Challenges and 
Improvements in Distributed Software development: A 
Systematic Review”, 
Advances in Software Engineering
, 
Article ID 710971, 2009, pp. 1-14, accessed 16 May 
2011
http://www.hindawi.com/journals/ase/2009/710971
.htm
. 
[13]
 
S. Krishna, S. Sahay, & G. Walsham, “Managing Cross-
Cultural Issues in Global Software Outsourcing”, 
Communication of the ACM, 47(4), 2004, pp. 44-47. 
[14]
 
C. Kussmaul, R. Jack & B. Sponsler, “Outsourcing and 
Offshoring with Agility: A Case Study”, in Proceedings 
of XP/Agile Universe, 2004, pp. 147-154. 
[15]
 
N. Moe & D. Šmite, “Understanding a Lack of Trust in 
Global Software Teams: A Multiple-Case Study”, 
Software Process Improvement and Practice 13(3), 
2008, pp. 217-231. 
[16]
 
M. Paasivaara, S. Durasie
wicz & C. Lassenius, “Using 
Scrum in a Globally Distributed Project: A Case Study”, 
Software Process Improvement and Practice, 13(6), 
2008, pp. 527-544. 
[17]
 
M. Paasivaara, S. Durasie
wicz & C. Lassenius, “Using 
Scrum in Distributed Agile Development: A Multiple 
Case Study”, in Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Global Software Engineering, 2009, pp. 
195-204. 
[18]
 
Standish. CHAOS Manifesto: The Laws of CHAOS and 
the CHAOS 100 Best PM Practices, The Standish Group 
International Inc., Boston, 2011. 
[19]
 
J. Sutherland, A. Viktorov, J. Blount & N. Puntikov, 
“Distributed Scrum: Agile Project Management with 
Outsourced Development Teams”, in Proceedings of the 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS’40), 2007, pp. 1-10. 
[20]
 
J. Sutherland, G. Schoonheim & M. Rijk, “Fully 
Distributed Scrum: Replacing Local Productivity and 
Quality with Offshore Teams”, in Proceedings of the 
Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences 
(HICSS ’42), 2009, pp. 1-8. 
[21]
 
R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods; 
Fourth Edition, Sage, Thousand Oaks, 2009. 
 
53185318