 All-Out Organizational Scrum as an Innovation Value Chain 
  Brent Barton, CSM, CST 
CTO, SolutionsIQ, Inc. 
 bbarton@solutionsiq.com
   
  Abstract
 When Scrum extends beyond software development 
into the organization, Agile techniques, notably Scrum, 
provide a built-in innovation process.  There is more to 
innovation than coming up with good ideas.  
Innovating involves capitalizing on well implemented 

ideas.  Implementing good ideas involves risk and 

consequently should be managed carefully. 
Scrum effectively implements Lean methods into 
organizations by providing si
mple yet effective tools 
and techniques.  These t
ools and techniques extend 
beyond software.  Unfortunately, because of Scrum
s success and roots in software project management, the 

language of Scrum is software-centric.  This paper 

describes the Scrum language from a business 

perspective so when Scrum extends into the 
organization, innovation in the form of value creation 
is a natural by-product. 
Two companies are in the 
process of implementing 
organizational Scrums, one a professional services 

organization and the other, an Internet-based product 

company. The description of all-out Scrum in this 
paper is based on these efforts. 
   Creating Customer Value 

 Staying in business in today
s global economy 
requires conducting business in a way customers 
consider valuable.  With so much competition and 
increased pressure to deliver customer value quickly, 
the ability to innovate is paramount. 
All-out Organizational Scrum provides an 
innovation value chain by implementing transparency 

across the organization, managing the idea process, 

using short Sprint cycles to evaluate the output of the 
cycles, encouraging frequent releases (diffusion) and 
removing obstacles in priority order.  The obstacles are 

waste in the organization that are being removed which 
leans out the organization. 
 2. Scrum in eighty-seven words 
 Scrum is an Agile process that allows us to focus on 
delivering the highest business value in the shortest 
time. It allows us to rapidly and repeatedly inspect 
actual working software every two weeks to one 
month.  The business sets the priorities. Our teams self-

manage to determine the best way to deliver the 

highest priority features.  Every two weeks to a month 
anyone can see real working software and decide to 
release it as is or continue to enhance for another two 
weeks to a month. [1] 
 3. Scrum as a Lean implementation 

 Though the roots of Scrum were partially based on 
the study of Lean Companies by Takeuchi and Nonaka, 
Scrum wasn
t specifically called 
Lean.
 [2] The 
connections lie in the study of complex adaptive 

systems. [3] Many organizations who have modified 
their software development system based on Scrum 
consider their work a Lean implementation.   
Even in its simplest state, Scrum uses a lean 
Pull
 technique to smooth the flow through the system and 

prevent overloading.  This pull system exists in the 
process of Sprint Planning where the team is 
empowered to select only the amount of work it can 

reasonably take on. In a Sprint, the team is expected to 

take on the accountability to do everything it can to 

complete the Sprint plan on time with high quality. 
Scrum also implements a process for eliminating 
Muda, or waste. [4] A Scrum team is encouraged to 
identify impediments.  When they cannot remove the 
impediments themselves, the ScrumMaster works to 
remove them or help the organization understand and 

eliminate them in priority order.  These impediments 

can be categorized into various types of waste.   This 
continuous pursuit of perfection through removal of 
waste is called Kaizen [5].  Waste in most 
organizations consists primarily of: excess inventory, 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20091978-0-7695-3450-3/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE work-in-progress, delay, multi-tasking and over-
production.   
The lean systems inherent in Scrum help focus 
organizations on value.  Value in lean terms is defined 
as, a capability provided to a customer at the right 
time at an appropriate price, as defined in each case by 

the customer.
 [6].  4. Scrum as an innovation process 

 Innovation is the art of developing a new product, 
service or process based upon a new idea.  Innovation 
is the physical form of the idea
a new product, 
service or process that you can use to make money. [7] 

In today
s global economy innovation is the lifeblood 
of any organization.  
Innovation is 
a creative idea that is realized.
[8] 
Thus, only implemented ideas where customers find 
value in them can be called an innovation.  The process 
of 
Customer Value Creation
 [9] is defined by SRI 
International.  SRI describes a champion, someone 

who evangelizes and works the idea into a coherent 

vision and ultimately (we hope) into an innovation.   
Another important component of innovation is the 
continual refinement and synthesis of ideas.   
The Post-it Note story provides a good example of 
innovation. An employee of 3M, Art Fry was a 

member if his church's choir and was frustrated by the 
fact that the slips of paper he used to mark hymns 
repeatedly fell out of his hymnal. What he needed was 
a sticky bookmark that did not harm the book. He 

knew of a new adhesive being developed by Spence 

Silver at 3M and realized that perhaps, just perhaps it 

could solve his problem. It did but only after five years 

of additional research and development. The Post-it 
Note was finally launched in 1980 and was an instant 
success. There are now more than 1,000 varieties of it 

on the market and together, they generate hundreds of 

millions of dollars in annual sales. After a 40-year 
career at 3M, Fry retired. "If we discover something, 

we have a chance to stop and look at it. This is very 
important because lots of things are discovered and 
passed by because everybody's too busy." [10] 
  The Innovation Value Chain [11] describes an 
integrated flow: Idea Generation, Idea Conversion, and 
Idea Diffusion.   
Viewing innovation as an end-to-end 
process
 requires transparency and a highly effective 
decision process that helps stakeholders at all levels to 

influence the process without increasing the churn 
within the organization. 
Creating breakthrough technologies creates 
influences that can set directions for decades or even 
centuries.  Strategies for innovation that are similar to 
Scrum have been applied throughout history.  For 
example, Fillippo Brunelleschi (Florence, 1377-1446) 
became known as the 
renewer of Roman masonry 
work
 and is credited with starting the architectural 
renaissance that lasted hundreds of years.  His harmony 
and economy required him to invent and implement 

many new technologies and processes to accomplish 

his great architectural feats of large open space without 

armature. Brunelleschi employed constant 
searching-
studies of simple things
 to accomplish breakthrough 
innovations. [12] 
 Scrum constantly searches to simplify complex 
things
 by iteratively studying small segments of a 
thing
 and making it simpler by helping it become 
well-understood.  As understanding increases, we 
adapt our plans to reflect this new knowledge.  This 
ability to inspect and adapt is the essence of empirical 
process control methods upon which Scrum is based 

[13].  Further, Scrum accommodates the innovation 

process of separating ideas with great potential from 

those that are challenging and exciting, but lack the 

ability to become or cont
ribute to great products and 
services.  Scrum accomplishes this selection and 
filtering process by using frequent, formal reviews 

where judgment is based upon the potential value 

available against a standard of shippable quality. 
 5. Innovation adds risk to organizations 
 It is important to realize that while the payoffs can 
be great, being innovative means taking risks.  Since 

more ideas are often filtered than fully realized, 
uncertainty is a tangible risk.  Even if it works, will it 

be what a customer wants? In today
s date-driven 
environment unexpected delays have high risk.  
Unexpected costs may render the potential benefits 
moot.   
Scrum manages risk for innovation.  Scrum asks 
one to prioritize work based on business value and risk 

so risk is not ignored until it is too late.  The standard 

of shippable quality at each review forces an 
assessment against this standard so the gaps help 
identify additional yet-to-be-identified risks.    
Scrum helps manage the risk of innovation by 
providing tangible, high-quality feedback based on the 

most important information needed to make good 
decisions.  Planning meetings are timeboxed so they do 
not result in analysis paralysis.  The transparency of 
impediment management and waste removal along 

with continually evaluating progress against a 

deployment standard acquires the right kind of 
information so overall risk is reduced. 
 6. Comparing organizational Scrum and 
software development  
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20092  Whether Scrum is used to ship a piece of software 
or used for the improvement of an organizational 

system, constant 
searching-studies of simple things
 is what Scrum does well.  Organizations seek a 
competitive edge and this edge often involves complex 

systems and technologies.  To prevent descending into 
an unmanageable state, the organization must 

constantly achieve simplicity in these systems, and in 
the processes used to create these systems. 
For software, the end of each Sprint (also known as 
an iteration) results in a potentially shippable 

increment of software.  For other disciplines, this may 

not have a parallel.  This is the key to reducing 

confusion with the Scrum language for organizational 

Scrum.  
Potentially shippable increments
 do not 
always make sense for all business entities.   
 7. Removing Scrum language conflicts 

when Scrum is used as an organizational 

process 

 Scrum is extremely simple.  Whether Scrum is 
being used to plan a wedding or build software, the 

language is similar until we have to answer the 

question, 
What are we producing?
  Table 1: 
Language alternatives for non-software Scrums
 provides some simple language to construct a lexicon 
for the output of Scrums.   
 Table 1: Language alternatives for  
non-software Scrums
 Agile and 
Scrum 

Language for 
Software 
Language alternatives for  
non-software Scrums 
Software 
• Business initiative 
• Business process 
• Product 
• Value-increasing activity 
Potentially 
Shippable 
Software 
• Potential business initiative 
rollout 
• Potentially deployable 
business process  
• Potentially releasable product 
• Potentially implementable 
business value 
Release 
• Release 
• Deployment 
• Rollout 
Definition of 
Done 
• Quality standard 
• Completeness checklist 
Acceptance 
• Acceptance criteria 
Criteria 
• Conditions of satisfaction 
• Change management plan 
 As an example, when we state needs like, 
As a 
frequent business traveler I want a simpler way to 
capture and submit my expenses quickly so I can save 
time without having to delegate this to an 

administrator
 our potentially implementable business 
value is clear.  This example assumes that reducing the 

traveler
s administrative overhead will boost the 
amount of value-increasing activity that can be created 
without adding additional overhead elsewhere.  In one 
Sprint, we might have several ideas to accomplish this 
value-increasing activity.  A reasonable 
definition of 
done
 could be: high level estimate of cost to 
implement and maintain the new process, time to file a 
typical
 expense report, and options available for 
when and where expense reports could be filed. Each 
option, or potentially implementable business process, 

is an idea that could become innovative and remove a 

lot of waste.  Sprint 2 could be comparisons of the best 
candidates based on costs and benefits.  This filtering 
of options could yield a winner (or no winner-keep the 
old system) by the end of Sprint 2.  Deployment may 

need a change management plan.  If this were 

discussed at Sprint 2 Planning whether it made sense to 

include this in the acceptance criteria, a rollout could 

start right away.  Otherwise, another Sprint might be 
needed to achieve a releasable state and roll this out.  
Retrospectives would help improve how this kind of 

business initiative could be improved upon next time.   
Like Scrum for software, there needs to be a way to 
prioritize this work so the organization does not get 

overloaded.  The responsible party for prioritization is 
the Product Owner.  When there are many Scrum 
teams, a special kind of meeting is needed that matches 
the heartbeat and rhythm of the Scrum cycles to make 
sure inspect and adapt processes are working.  This 

meeting is called the Meta-Scrum. 
 8. Prioritization using the Meta-Scrum 

meeting 

 In the Meta-Scrum, consensus regarding the 
priorities, and changes to priorities, gets confirmed.  
The Product Backlog contains the priorities.  
Roadmaps representing desired outcomes are 

compared to the current plan.  In an environment of 
many Scrum teams, competing priorities emerge.  The 
purpose of the meeting is to resolve these conflicts in 
this meeting.  When this happens, the ability to filter 
ideas becomes an organizational capability.  Waste is 

removed through teams that are innovating internally 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20093 while other teams are able to create new products and 
services.  
Conducting a Meta-Scrum requires a strong initial 
launch to set expectations.  Responsible and 
accountable persons must attend this meeting and be 
prepared to make decisions or defer authority to the 

attendees of the meeting.  This meeting should occur 

every week or two.  A person who must miss a meeting 
for legitimate reasons regains influence the next week 
when he returns.   This rule is critical to the success of 
the Meta-Scrum.  Short meeting intervals also help 

prevent the need for back-channel or side-channel 

decisions that are more appropriately contained in the 

Meta-Scrum.  A Big Visible Chart or handouts of the 

Roadmap should always be available along with 
prioritized backlogs with release plans.  Discussions 
are centered on changes to the roadmaps and release 

plans.  Obstacles and impediments are raised and 

action plans captured.  Decisions are documented and 

notes published.  It is useful when attendees include 

team representatives as observers to increase 
transparency. [14] 
  9. Organizational Scrum in Professional 

Services 

 Scrum is a great simplifier.  People often have the 
energy to start something simple.  In our first 
organization, company A, a software technology 
professional services company, Scrum with XP has 
been the official method for software development for 
four years.  The most valuable organizational transfer 

of learning into other parts of the organization during 
these years has been Scrum and 
Big Visible Charts.
 The physical nature of these information radiators 
generates interest in all parts of the company.  It 
changes the way people converse and consider their 

work.  Discussions ensue and others identify 

techniques for inspection an
d adaptation in their own 
parts of the organization, helping seed change.  One 
goal is to seek and 
find small changes that have big 
improvements.
  This helps us choose valuable 
mechanisms over 
process for the sake of process.
 An 
example of this is in recruiting. [15] A need to bridge 
communication between sales and recruiting caused 
the creation of a task board that was based on a Scrum 
task board and a Kanban board.  It is physically sized 
to signal a full bin and has a 
board worthy
 state each 
item must pass to be allowed to go on the board.  

Organizational reports contain metrics on board worthy 

and non-board worthy requisitions separately.  Daily 

meetings were abandoned for spontaneous pull-based 
discussions.  They seem to take place in front of the 
board often. 
The company has a daily meeting at the end of each 
day where the leadership meets to address impediments 
identified by anyone in the company.  The meeting is 

called 
The Daily Triage.
 It is an open meeting so 
anyone can come meet and discuss issues with senior 

management.  Rather than force tool usage, anyone 

who has an impediment can log it or join the meeting 
to discuss it.  If the impediment still exists by the end 
of the meeting it gets logged into the system for further 
handling until resolution. 
Most corporate initiatives are captured in backlogs 
and prioritized.  The biggest issue with this company is 

the plethora of ideas.  Scrum helps lean this out by 
prioritizing work through this enterprise product 
backlog [16].  It helps th
e organization to learn the 
discipline to stop doing things that are ultimately 
distracting so the really good ideas can become 

innovations.  
 Table 2: The Scrum language used in 
Company A 
The Daily 
Triage 
Daily Impediment management of 
waste and risk 
Product 

Backlog 
The product backlog is used for 
prioritization of every team.   
Daily Scrum All software teams and most 
departments have these.  The 
President likes having Daily 
Scrums with leadership.  Some call 

this a stand up and others call it a 

daily meeting.  The organization is 

good about keeping these to 15 
minutes. 
Big Visible 
Charts 
These are on almost every wall in 
the company.  They include task 
boards, burndown charts, 

impediment lists and team working 

agreements.   
Task Boards Recruiting has a Task Board that 
incorporates some Kanban elements 
Most Scrum teams in development 
and marketing use Task Boards to 

manage Sprints though some prefer 

to use software tools 
 Sprint Planning, Reviews and Retrospectives are 
held with the many software teams but these are less 
frequent with non-software, non-project based teams. 
It is worth noting several 
lean for office
 events 
yielded plans for improving value streams but no direct 

value has yet to be implemented from this effort.  

Scrum naturally adopted lean principles with greater 

impact.  It is important to understand lean concepts and 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20094 value propositions in order to help optimize Scrum 
implementations. 
 10. Organizational Scrum in a Product 
Company 
Company B is an Internet-based product company.  
They had a division who had been very successful 

delivering software using Scrum for two years.  The 

executive team wanted to improve its organizational 

focus and decided to form themselves into a Scrum 

team named 
Team Velocity (v-Team for short).
  The 
objectives were: Gain visibility into the organization, 
connect people to the business, enable organizational 
alignment, get employee commitment, hold 
accountable, increase speed to market, focus growth, 

increase transparency, simplify and guide 

opportunities.   
This company uses: Agile chartering, five levels of 
planning [17], daily meetings.  Sprint planning is fairly 
short.  Product backlog is prioritized and estimated 

upon entry on a two dimensional backlog representing 

size and priority.  Sprint reviews to the business are 
monthly via an all-company meeting 
Executives attend every Sprint Review every two 
weeks.  Mid-Sprint, each Product Owner meets with 

the executive team so the Product Owner can make 

sure there is stakeholder consensus.  Each Product 

owner has an executive sponsor that is part of 
Team 
Velocity.
 There are significant numbers of executive 
discussions and decisions that would be inappropriate 

to share with the entire organization.  Except for these, 

the organization executes using Scrum. 
 Table 3: The Scrum language used in 
Company B 
Daily v-Team 
meeting 
Team Velocity meets daily 
Agile Charter Include Jim Highsmith
s Tradeoff 
Matrix.  Jointly created with input 

from executives, Product Owner 
and team. 
Product 
Roadmap 
Provides high level view of the 
targeted releases. 
Product 

Backlog 
The product backlog is used for 
prioritization of every team.   
Daily Scrum All software, operations teams and 
departments have these.   
Big Visible 

Charts 
These are on almost every wall in 
every conference room, most of 

which have become Scrum team 
rooms.  Overlooking the lake, v-
Team Velocity looks through its 
task board and product backlog.   
Task Boards Scrum teams in use Task Boards to 
manage Sprints though some prefer 

to use software tools. 
Mid Sprint 

Product Owner 
Reviews  
A great time to ensure there is still 
consensus on the plans.  This has 
migrated from a release plan review 
to a roadmap review to keep the 
detail more appropriate. 
 For the v-Team, the output of their first Sprint 
launched five Scrum teams.  After four Sprints, the v-
Team had a multi-Sprint retrospective.  They found the 
optimization opportunities in their company provide 
for true servant leadership at the highest levels of the 

organization.  Transparency in the v-Team helps them 

focus and they find the mutual accountability a healthy 

forcing function.  As one of the executives said, 
We 
absolutely made the right decision to run our company 
this way.
  11. Conclusion 

 Scrum is a simple framework that provides the 
transparency to take advantage of the lean principles of 

pull systems
 and removing waste.  When applied to 
the organization and not just software development 
departments, an improved innovation value chain 
emerges.  Innovation not only applies to parts of the 

organization it entirety.  Companies A and B are 
finding increased value by extending Scrum beyond 

the development teams 
 12. References      
[1] 
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/scrumdevelopment/message/1

7284 

 [2] Takeuchi and Nonaka, 
The New, New Product 
Development Game, Harvard Business Review, 1986 

 
[3] J. Sutherland, 
Is it Lean or is it Scrum?
, http://jeffsutherland.com/scrum/2007/11/is-it-scrum-or-
lean.html
, 2007 
 
[4] Ohno, T., Toyota Production System: Beyond Large 

Scale Production, Productivity Press, New York, NY, 1988 
 [5] Liker, J., The Toyota Way, McGraw-Hill, New York, 

NY, 2004 

 [6] Womack, J.P. and Jones, T.J., Lean Thinking, Free Press 
Publications, New York, 1996 

 
[7] Gorman, T., Innovation, F+W Publications, Avon, MA, 
2007. 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20095 [8] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Innovation. 
 
[9] Carlson C. and Wilmot W., Innovation: The Five 
Disciplines for Creating What Customers Want, Crown 
Publishing Group, New York, NY, 2006. 

 
[10] M.T. Hansen and J. Birkinshaw, 
The Innovation Value 
Chain
, Harvard Business Review, June 2007. 
 
[11] Morris, R., 
From 
acorns
 of ideas to 
oak trees
 of 
business success
, http://www.amazon.com/review/R1V6GI73D4EDX
, 2008 
 
[12] Prager, F. D. and Scalglia, G. Brunelleschi: Studies of 

His Technologies and Inventions, MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, 1970. 
 
[13] Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M., Agile Software 

Development with Scrum, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 2002. 
  [14] B. Barton, 
Establishing and Maintaining Top to 
Bottom Transparency Using the Meta-Scrum
, http://www.agilejournal.com/content/view/629/111/
, 2007. 
 
 [15] D. Anderson, 
Agile Directions
, http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Agile-Directions-David-
Anderson
, video, min 4:00, 2008 
 
[16] Schwaber, K., Enterprise Scrum, Microsoft Press, 
Redmond, WA, 2007. 
 
[17] H. Smits, 
Scaling Agile Processes: Five Levels of 
Planning
, http://www.agilejournal.com/articles/articles/scaling-agile-
processes:-five-levels-ofplanning.html
,   
 
  Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20096