 Toward an Understanding of Preference for Agile Software Development 
Methods from a Personality Theory Perspective 
Dave Bishop 
California Baptist University 
dabishop@calbaptist.edu 
Amit Deokar 
Dakota State University 
amit.deokar@dsu.edu
Abstract
 
This paper presents the results of an exploratory 
research study that investigates factors contributing 
to preference for the agile software development 
approaches.  The initial exploration revolves around 
the Five Factor Model of personality and the premise 
that these personality factors provide a partial 
explanation of preference for an agile approach. A 
survey instrument for measuring the preference for 
agile methods was developed and validated. The 
results from the quantitative data collected from the 
survey study indicate that three out of the five 
personality factors from the Five Factor Model show 
a correlation with above average preference for agile 
methods. These factors are extraversion, openness 
and neuroticism. The first two have a positive 
relationship with agile preference while neuroticism 
(emotional instability) has a negative relationship 
with agile methodology preference. To further 
investigate the results, an exploratory factor analysis 
was performed on the data, which identified three 
factors that may also contribute to a preference for 
agile methods. 
1. Introduction  
Agile methods are a rapidly growing means of 
developing software.  As of 2011 in the U.S. about 
40% of companies were using agile [1].  In a 2009 
Forrester Research report, West and Grant find that 
about 30% of software developers in the sample of 
over 1,000 software developers are using some form 
of agile methods [2].There is also a growing 
literature base related to agile methods in software 
development [3] with ample room for continued 
study [4, 5].  Not only is agile significant in business 
and academia, it holds important considerations for 
management.  This study is an initial exploration into 
factors that correlate with agile methods preference.  
As more organizations adopt agile methods on 
increasing numbers of projects, it will be important 
for management to understand practitioner 
preferences and take these into consideration to 
ensure smooth and effective adoption and diffusion 
strategies.  
As organizations seek to find more efficient 
means to develop software many are turning to agile 
methods as a way to reduce costs, speed products to 
market and deal with rapidly changing customer and 
business requirements [3, 6].  Dyba and Dingsoyr [3]
note the limited theoretical base utilized in agile 
research indicating a need for additional empirical 
based studies that generate and confirm theories 
related to agile methods. Balijepally et al. [5]
encourage studies of agile methods with regard to 
personality traits, particularly studies utilizing the 
Five Factor Model of personality.   
In this article we investigate the role that 
personality plays in regard to preference for agile 
methods.  We focus on the Five Factor Model (FFM) 
[7, 8] personality model to determine if there is a 
correlation between the five personality traits and 
preference for agile methods among software 
developers.  The key research questions are:  What 
are the factors that contribute to preference for (or 
against) adoption and use of agile methods? How do 
we measure a developer’s preference for agile 
software development methods? From a theoretical 
standpoint we use FFM personality theory and the 
literature on agile methods as a starting point to 
explore potential factors associated with agile 
preference.  From a practical standpoint it will be 
valuable to understand if agile preference is 
significantly influenced by personality.  Management 
can use this information to assist with organizational 
adoption of agile methods and integration of new and 
existing software development staff members who 
may not have experience with or preference for the 
agile approach to software development. This paper 
represents a pilot study into the factors that influence 
preference for agile software development methods.   
The paper is organized as follows.  First a review 
of the relevant literature related to agile methods and 
personality studies in relation to software 
development will be presented. It will then describe 
the theoretical research model and its 
operationalization. Following this will be a 
discussion of the data collection process and 
subsequent data analysis.  Finally the paper will 
finish with some concluding remarks concerning the 
results of the study and future research directions. 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5834749 2. Literature Review  
2.1. Agile and Traditional Approaches 
Over the last decade two decidedly different 
approaches to software development have emerged. 
The traditional approach is characterized by terms 
like waterfall, sequential, or even spiral development.
These approaches are often called “plan
-
based” or 
“plan
-
driven” in the literature 
[6] with an emphasis 
on big design upfront (BDUF) [9].  They emphasize 
planning, sequential execution, documentation, 
specific roles and predictability [5, 6].
Philosophically, traditional approaches have sought 
to impose order and control on the software 
development effort [10]. 
In contrast to the traditional approaches are agile 
methodologies.  Rather than control and prediction, 
agile methods seek to react and adapt [11].  Agile 
methods have their roots in the 1990s culminating in 
a manifesto developed in 2001 which stated the 
essential concepts at the heart of agile methods.  The 
manifesto lists a set of twelve guiding principles 
developed by the Agile Alliance [12].  Among the 
emphasis in the twelve principles are the beliefs that 
working software is a priority over documentation, 
early and frequent delivery of working software is a 
priority, daily collaboration between users and 
developers, trust in the front line workers (business 
and technical), face-to-face communication is better 
than written documents, progress is measured by 
working software, consistent pacing rather than 
periodic heroic efforts, emergent rather than 
prescriptive design/architecture, reflective team 
adjustments [12]. The enduring value and importance 
of the principles found in the Agile Manifesto is 
confirmed by a recent study performed by W
illiams 
[13]. 
Clearly the two approaches have very different 
orientations, agile takes an iterative approach 
compared to the big bang release approach of 
traditional methods.  Part of the motivation behind 
this research is to investigate the possibility that an 
individual’s personality may influence their 
preference for one or the other software development 
methodologies. 
2.2.Personality Theory and Software 
Development 
Studies have suggested that there is a significant 
difference in regard to personality traits in the United 
States between the population at large and engineers 
including software engineers [14].  A variation on 
this theme was done to show a relationship between 
the Meyers-Briggs Type Indicators (MBTI) 
personality traits and specific roles used in traditional 
plan-driven software engineering [15].  Capretz [16]
also compared software engineer MBTI personality 
traits with all other engineer personality traits and 
found them to be very similar and distinct from the 
distributions in the general population.  Similar work 
has been done among the Cuban software engineer 
populatio
n [17]. 
A concrete implementation of agile principles is 
eXtreme Programming (XP).  One of the practices of 
XP is that programmers work in pairs to mutually 
understand and solve problems while development 
the software.  This practice is called pair-
programming. A recent study used the MBTI 
assessment to investigate the relationship between 
personality types of programmers participating in 
pair programming and cohesiveness in the team 
environment [18]. 
In addition to MBTI based studies, some 
personality/software engineering studies have been 
performed using the Five Factor Model [19].  The 
Five Factor Model uses the following traits openness 
(O), Conscientiousness (C), Extraversion (E), 
Agreeableness (A), and Neuroticism (N).  In their 
paper, the authors illustrate using the 
conscientiousness characteristic to evaluate 
preference for working alone or in groups as an 
illustration of the types of studies that can and should 
be done using this personality based approach.  The 
authors call for more empirical and personality based 
studies to be published in the software engineering 
domain. 
There have been numerous studies published in 
relation to team and peer-programming situations 
utilizing personality traits.  Agile methods emphasize 
people, relationships and teamwork, so it makes 
sense that a variety of studies have been published in 
this area.  Some studies use the Five Factor Model 
previously mentioned and a very closely related 
model called the Big Five model.  For example, an 
empirical study was performed using the Five Factor 
Model to identify relationships between the five 
personality traits and autonomy, interdependency, 
cohesion and conflict within the team [20]. 
Balijepally et al. [5], argue for the use of the Five 
Factor Model (FFM) as a psychometric tool for 
understanding agile team dynamics and call for more 
studies using FFM in Information Systems research. 
One operationalization of the Five Factor Model is 
through the International Personality Item Pool 
Representation, otherwise known as the IPIP 
instrument, which is freely available online [5].
4750 Another implementation of the Five Factor Model is 
the Big Five Inventory survey instrument [8]. 
Given this background of research in personality 
theory and information systems, along with the call 
for additional research, the current study is designed 
to explore the possible relationship between 
personality traits and preference for agile methods.  
3. Research Model  
The proposed theoretical model, as shown in 
Figure 1, is an attempt to relate personality type 
theory to preference for agile methods.  Along these 
lines, it is posited that four of the five factors in the 
FFMwill have a positive correlation with the agile 
preference dependent construct.  The neuroticism 
trait, on the other hand, is posited to have a negative 
correlation with agile preference due to the anti-
social implications of this trait.  We base this 
framework on the socio-technical emphasis of the 
agile method compared to the technical focused plan-
based approach as described in Section 2. We further 
elaborate on the theoretical rationale below. 
Figure 1. Research Model 
Extraversion can be contrasted with introversion. 
It
is a measure of an individual’s energy and 
willingness to engage with people and the world 
around them. The Five Factor Model is a hierarchical 
model and extraversion is composed of elements like 
gregariousness, assertiveness, activity, excitement-
seeking, positive emotions and warmth [7].  
Individuals scoring high on extraversion have high 
sociability. 
Table 1 - Agile preference principles 
Principle 
Agile Principle Description
P1
Our highest priority is to satisfy the 
customer through early and continuous 
delivery of valuable software.
P2
Welcome changing requirements, even 
late in development. Agile processes 
harness change for the customer’s 
competitive advantage.
P3
Business people and developers must 
work together daily throughout the 
project.
P4
The most efficient and effective method 
of conveying information to and within 
a development team is face
-to-
face 
conversation.
P5
Working software is the primary 
measure of progress.
P6
Agile processes promote sustainable 
development. The sponsors, developers, 
and users should be able to maintain a 
constant pace indefinitely.
P7
The best architectures, requirements, 
and designs emerge from self-
organizing teams.
P8
At regular intervals, the team reflects on 
how to become more effective, then 
tunes and adjusts its behavior 
accordingly.
P9
Deliver working software frequently, 
from a couple of weeks to a couple of 
months, with a preference to the shorter 
timescale.Deemed redundant to P1.
P10
Build projects around motivated 
individuals. Give them the environment 
and supportthey need, and trust them to 
get the job done.Deemed universally 
desirable.
P11
Continuous attention to technical 
excellence and good design enhances 
agility.Deemed universally desirable.
P12
Simplicity--the art of maximizing the 
amount of work not do
ne--
is essential.
Deemed universally desirable.
The agile principles labeled P3, P4, P7 and P8 all 
have a social orientation.  These agile principles 
emphasize face-to-face communication between both 
technical and non-technical project members.  In 
addition they emphasize coordinated group activities 
like self-organizing and improvement through group 
reflection all of which put a premium on social 
interaction. 
Based on the preceding information, it is 
hypothesized that those with a higher preference for 
agile will show higher extraversion than those with 
lower preference for agile which leads to the first 
hypothesis: 

H1 
–
 Extraversion is higher among those 
with a preference for agile 
Neuroticism is a measure of a person’s tendency 
toward unpleasant emotions like anger, anxiety, 
depression or vulnerability.  A higher score on this 
measure indicates greater emotional instability.Sub-
scales like anxiety, hostility, self-consciousness and 
vulnerability [7] all contribute to an anti-social bias 
4751 for individuals scoring highly on the neuroticism 
measure.
Based on the previously argued social nature of 
agile methods it and the decidedly anti-social 
characterization presented by neuroticism it is 
hypothesized that this measure has a negative 
relationship with agile preference.  The higher an 
individual’s neuroticism score the less likely they are 
to prefer agile methods. This leads to hypothesis 
number two: 

H2 
–
 Neuroticism is lower among those 
with an agile preference 
Openness to experience can be described as the 
propensity of an individual to appreciate a variety of 
experiences with a preference for novelty and 
intellectual curiosity. Openness to experience is a 
composite of characteristics like curiosity, 
imagination, and a wide variety of interests [7].
Openness aligns well with Agile’s adaptive and 
action oriented posture.  Agile is an action oriented 
approach involving an emphasis on delivery of 
working software rather than static documents and 
interactive engagement with a variety of people 
throughout the project. Consequently, it is anticipated
that high scores on this variable will correlate with 
preference for agile methods leading to hypothesis 
number three: 

H3 
–
 Openness to experience will be higher 
among those with an agile preference 
Agreeableness is consistent with cooperation with 
others and compassion for others.  It is also 
consistent with a high degree of trust and helpfulness. 
Sub-scales on this dimension are trust, 
straightforwardness, altruism, compliance, modesty, 
and tender-mindedness [7].  Although not as decisive 
as the previous characteristics, these still present 
themselves as attributes that appear congruent with a 
team oriented methodology with a heavy emphasis on 
face-to-face communication.Therefore the theory 
models this characteristic as having a positive 
correlation with agile preference. 

H4 
–
 Agreeableness will be higher among 
those with an agile preference 
Conscientiousness is a trait related to self-
discipline with the aim for achievement as measured 
by external expectations. The contrasting trait is lack 
of direction.  Conscientiousness breaks down into 
traits like competence, orderliness, dutifulness and 
deliberativeness [7].  Conscientiousness does not 
present a definitive relationship to agile methods, but 
characteristics such as competence and thoroughness 
along with self-discipline encourage the inclusion of 
this attribute as a having a positive correlation with 
preference for agile methods.   

H5 
–
 Conscientiousness will be higher 
among those with an agile preference 
In summary, the model is composed of three 
positive factors that are expected to positively 
correlate with agile preference and one factor 
expected to have a negative correlation with agile 
preference.  This is primarily based on the social 
nature of agile compared with the technical and 
artifact focus of plan-based traditional approaches. 
4. Research Methodology 
A survey research methodology was utilized to 
test the research hypotheses.  The survey was 
implemented in an online web-based format and was 
made up of both personality trait items and agile 
preference items.  230 responses were r
eceived of 
which 195 were usable.  Participants ranged from 
large publically traded companies, state government 
employees and university students.  Participation was 
solicited using email as well as web forum postings. 
4.1 Survey Instrument 
In order to operationalize the theoretical 
constructs two instruments were utilized.  First an 
established set of scales called the Big Five Inventory 
[8] were used to measure personality traits along the 
dimensions of the Five Factor Model.  For the 
measure of agile preference no instrument was found 
in the literature so one was developed.  The Big Five 
Inventory (BFI) is designed to be a relatively short 
assessment of personality traits utilizing 44 items [7].  
There are longer implementations of the Five Factor 
Model available but the BFI was chosen since it has a 
high reliability with fewer questions allowing for a 
higher completion rate by participants.  The survey 
instrument and scoring instructions are freely 
available online. 
Since no agile preference instrument was 
discovered through the literature review, a new 
instrument was developed. The instrument is based 
on the 12 principles of the Agile Manifesto [12].
This approach was selected because the agile 
principles provided a convenient framework for the 
construction of the survey instrument and due to their 
continuing relevance in the industry [13].  Future 
research will rely on more robust academic 
definitions and constructs [21, 22].The concept is to 
create a set of scales with a multi-item approach to 
measure the preference for each principle.  Prior to 
embarking on creating the items analysis was done to 
ensure the relevancy and appropriateness of each 
principle as a measure of agile preference. Two 
principals were deemed essentially redundant; the 
first and third statement of the agile manifesto 
4752 principles both communicated the desire to deliver 
software frequently so the study combined those two 
principles when constructing the preference 
instrument.  There were also three other principle 
statements that were determined to be universally 
desirable by all methodologies and software 
developers and therefore did not provide 
discrimination or differentiation between agile 
methods and any other methods.  These principles 
consisted of the desire to involve motivated people 
on a project; to deliver technical excellence in the 
solution; and to minimize the work done (or 
maximize the work not done).  Since these were 
considered not to be unique to agile software 
development methods we chose to eliminate them 
from the survey since we assumed all developers 
would find these attractive regardless of their 
preferred software methodology. 
This left a total of eight principles by which 
preference will be measured.  The approach taken is 
that if there is high affinity with these principles then 
there is significant preference for agile methods.  We 
list the working definitions for the principles in Table 
1 which are derived from the Agile Manifesto [12]. 
With the discriminating principles we then 
developed phrasing for each item. Originally ten 
potential items were developed for each of the eight 
scales associated with the eight principles.  In terms 
of content validity, we presented the items to a panel 
of experts composed of two software engineering 
practitioners and three academic specialists from the 
field of Information Systems.  The panel was asked 
to categorize item statements as any one of the eight 
agile principles or as a non-agile principle.  An 
example of the expert panel questionnaire form is 
shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 2 - Expert Panel Questionnaire 
The results of the panel’s categorizations were 
evaluated and those items with the highest inter-rater 
reliability were selected as candidates for the survey 
instrument.  Additional analysis was performed to 
eliminate or reword items that indicated bias.  After 
these two steps the resulting survey instrument 
contained five items per principle (see appendix). 
A summative scales approach was employed for 
the survey.  Summated scales assist in overcoming 
measurement errors through the use of multiple 
indicators and provide the ability to represent 
multiple aspects of a concept in a single measure 
[23].  Each question had dichotomous completion 
options, one completion being agile in nature, the 
other non-agile. This design was chosen since it is 
congruent with the MBTI form of questions and the 
authors felt it would be better to present a consistent 
format of questions. During data collection the MBTI 
was dropped from the study and the preference 
question form was not reworked.  Future research 
will switch to the more familiar Likert scales.  If the 
agile completion was selected that item was scored as 
a one.  If the non-agile completion was selected then 
that item was scored as a zero.  The score for each 
principle was the sum of the five items associated 
with that principle resulting in a maximum of 5 for a 
single principle and a minimum of zero.  The total 
agile preference was the sum of scores for all eight 
principles.  Given this scoring approach the 
maximum total agile preference score was 40 and the 
minimum agile preference score was zero. 
Due to the use of a dichotomous completion 
approach traditional convergence measures like 
confirmatory factor analysis were not appropriate.  
Instead to provide an assessment of item convergence 
on principles we considered that if a participant 
consistently answered all five questions that would be 
a good indication of convergence of the indicators on 
the appropriate principle.  To accomplish this we 
considered the number of participants scoring zero, 
one, four or five (two and three were considered 
neutral or ambiguous) for a particular principle 
indicating that they consistently chose completion 
options resulting in decisive preference or lack of 
preference for that principle.  If a subject scored a 
two or three on a particular principle then the line of 
questions did not result in a consistent score and thus 
did not indicate convergence. It is recognized that 
this is an unconventional approach, but was chosen 
because of the simplicity involved in the 
dichotomous scale. In the future studies, we plan to 
evaluate the possibility of using the Likert scaling, 
which will allow for a more traditional assessment of 
convergent and discriminant validity. In lieu of the 
more traditional evaluation, we utilized the 
previously mentioned approach and found that each 
principle had better than 50% zero/one or four/five 
scores demonstrating consistency in the constructs. 
Table 2 - Score Consistency Per Participant 
N=195
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
Count of 
decisive 
123
108
116
142
99
116
109
137
4753 response
s
% of 
decisive 
response
s
63
55
59
73
51
59
56
70
4.2 Data Collection 
The combined survey instruments were 
implemented in an online web-based format.  In this 
way, the survey was made available to participants 
regardless of location. The first web page of the 
survey was the agile preference component.  When 
the participant clicked the next button their 
preference responses were saved and then they could 
complete the Big Five Inventory items.  There was 
some mortality where participants completed the 
preference but did not complete the BFI questions.  
These incomplete responses were not included in the 
final data analysis. 
Electronic mail, forum postings and in-class 
opportunities were utilized to recruit participants.  
These included two medium to large sized 
technology focused companies.  Contacts at these 
two companies were provided with an invitation to 
forward to their colleagues within the respective 
companies. In addition a state government software 
development division allowed a department wide 
email invitation to be sent
 to all 120 employees.  A 
final source for participants was at a university where 
one of the authors is an instructor.  The justification 
for utilizing students in the research is that the focus 
is on personality traits as a predictor of agile 
preference.  Therefore significant programming 
experience is not crucial since we are actually 
investigating personality rather than other factors. 
Multiple sections of an introductory information 
systems course were invited to participate as well as 
students from a section of introduction to 
programming.  All students were shown the same 20 
minute video overview of agile methods and plan-
based approaches to software development as 
background information.  In addition to the corporate, 
government and student recruitment sources, requests 
for participation were posted in two online forums 
–
Yahoo’s XP group and LinkedIn’s Scrum 
Practitioner group. 
These solicitations resulted in 230 respondents of 
which 195 were complete and used in the data 
analysis. 142 of the participants were students while 
the remaining 53 were from industry and 
government.  There were no missing values in the 
195 responses. 
5. Data Analysis  
5.1.Sample Characteristics 
Total agile preference scores range from a low of 
4 to a high of 40, the mean of the total agile 
preference scores is 24.554 and the standard 
deviation is 7.032. 
Four of the five factor personality values deviated 
less than 10% from the national averages for the 24 
to 30 year old U.S. population.  The exception is on 
the neuroticism dimension in which the sample was 
18% lower than the national average indicating above 
average emotional stability in the sample.The 
following data analyses used SAS Enterprise Guide 
4.2 as the statistical tool. 
5.2.Hypotheses Testing 
One aspect of the data analysis focuses on the use 
of t-tests to detect differences between the means of 
those participants with above average preference for 
agile methods compared to those with below average 
preference. The variables were tested for normality 
by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and found to not 
differ significantly from the normal distribution (p < 
0.01 for all variables) [10].  The 195 responses were 
classified as either high preference if their total agile 
preference score was above the mean (24.554) and 
low preference if their total agile score was less than 
the mean. There are 90 responses in the high 
preference classification and 105 in the low 
preference classification.  Five separate t- tests were 
performed one each between total preference and the 
five personality dimensions.  The results and impact 
on the hypotheses are shown in Table 2. 
Table 3 
–
 t-Test results 
Personality Dimension
p-Value
Hypothesis 
Confirmed?
H1 -Extraversion
0.032
*
Yes
H2 -Agreeableness
0.173
No
H3 -Conscientiousness
0.308
No
H4 -Neuroticism
0.092
**
Yes
H5 -Openness
0.049
*
Yes
*   alpha 0.05
** alpha 0.10
The data confirms three of the five hypotheses.  
Not surprisingly extraversion has a correlation with 
agile preference.  As mentioned previously this is 
4754 expected due to the highly social nature of agile 
methods. In addition openness is also supported as 
having a positive correlation with agile preference.  
Agile attracts those with curiosity and an action 
orientation.  Part of openness is having 
unconventional values.  It will be interesting to see if 
openness continues to have a positive correlation as 
agile methods become more widespread and 
conventional over time or if this correlation is due to 
the novelty of agile in today’s software development 
culture.  Neuroticism is also confirmed as having a 
negative relationship with agile preference.  This is 
expected and attributed to the anti-social 
characteristics of emotional instability. 
The two factors that where the null hypothesis 
could not be ruled out are agreeableness and 
conscientiousness.  The lack of correlation for 
conscientiousness is understandable.  The facets for 
this factor lean toward orderliness, dutifulness and 
striving for achievement [7].  All of these line up well 
with traditional methodologies and are somewhat 
contrary to the exploratory and adaptive nature of 
agile methods.  Embracing change late in a project 
can be disruptive which could be discouraging to 
someone seeking order.  Agreeableness may not be 
well aligned with the need for self-organization and 
improvement through group reflection which may 
require introspection and some degree of 
disagreement before resolution can be achieved.  This 
disharmony, although temporary, may be 
uncomfortable for those who score highly on this 
measure. 
5.3.Exploratory Factor Analysis 
An Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) was 
performed on the sample data. The following analysis 
includes the entire 195 responses. Hair et al. [24]
make a number of recommendations regarding 
Exploratory Factor Analysis.   These include having 
5 times the number of observations as the number of 
variables.  In this case we have eight preference 
variables so the minimum number of observations is 
40.  Our data includes 195 observations and therefore 
satisfies the minimum observation requirements.  
Kaiser’s Measur
e of Sampling Adequacy was 0.704 
overall and each of the variables exceeded the 
recommended 0.50 threshold.  Latent Root Analysis 
of the resulting factors indicated that three factors 
exceeded the 1.0 Eigenvalue minimum threshold and 
therefore were retained. This is illustrated in the scree 
plot shown in Figure 3. 
Figure 3 - EFA Scree Plot 
  
Figure 4 - Exploratory factor analysis 
The results indicated three significant factors 
emerging from the data.  The last row in figure 4 is 
the interpretation of these factors based on 
synthesizing the associated variables for each factor.   
Social orientation captures the nature of the four agile 
principles associated with factor one.  Each of the 
principles involves some type of interpersonal 
interaction. Factor two involves delivery of software 
either as the measure of progress or as a risk 
reduction and feedback mechanism.  It also indicates 
an orientation toward activity rather than static 
artifacts. The third factor consisted of only a single 
agile principle related to sustainable effort 
demonstrating the desirability of being able to 
maintain a steady pace over the long haul and 
avoiding continuously extreme workloads. 
Consideration was given to performing the EFA 
on only the professional responses and excluding the 
student responses. The line of reasoning was that 
Variables
Factor 1Factor 2Factor 3Communality
P3 - Work together 
daily
0.778
0.679
P4 - Face-to-face 
conversation
0.673
0.572
P7 - Self-organizing 
teams
0.640
0.656
P8 - Self-reflection 
based tuning
0.625
0.517
P5 - Working 
software measures 
progress
0.649
0.692
P1 - Early and 
continuous delivery 
of valuable software
0.607
0.692
P6 - Sustainable 
development
0.8510.872
Interpretation
Social 
Orientation
Delivery or 
Action 
Orientation
Sustainability
4755 professionals may exhibit different factors due to 
their practical field experience compared to the 
academic experience of the students. But a 
comparison was performed on the two sets of data 
(professional and student) and the same latent factors 
were identified with both data sets.  Consequently the 
EFA utilized the complete set of data without 
distinction. 
6. Discussion 
The results demonstrate that some personality 
characteristics play a part in preference for agile 
methods.  The data supports a positive relationship 
between extraversion and agile preference as well as 
openness and agile preference.  The data also indicate 
a negative relationship between neuroticism and agile 
preference.  But the results were not significant 
enough to account for a substantial amount of 
variability in total agile preference based solely on 
the Five Factor Model of personality as indicated by 
the unsuccessful multiple regression model. 
An interesting implication arises out of the 
finding that personality does not completely explain 
an individual’s preference for agile methods.  If 
personality completely explained preference then the 
ability to modify preference would require modifying 
personality.  Since personality isn’t the exclusive 
factor this leaves opportunity for identifying 
additional factors of influence in preference.  Once 
those additional factors are identified then programs 
can be designed to manipulate preference leveraging 
the additional factors.  A second practical implication 
is that there is some correlation between extraversion, 
openness and neuroticism which means management 
and future research can take these personality 
characteristics into consideration when designing 
future programs involving agile preference. 
7.Conclusion 
This study explored the role of personality theory 
in preference for agile methods.  The results suggest 
that there is significant correlation between three of 
the five traits in the Five Factor Model of personality. 
The study also identifies three additional factors 
through an exploratory factor analysis that may 
correlate with agile preference. Social orientation, 
action orientation and a desire for sustainably paced 
software development emerged from the EFA. 
Future research will be directed toward creating 
and validating a Likert scale based agile preference 
instrument.  An instrument based on Likert scales and 
conventionally validated will provide confidence for 
future exploration of agile preference and will be a 
useful contribution to the body of knowledge.  
Another direction will be to develop acomprehensive 
literature review and execute a qualitative study to 
identify relevant theories and additional preference 
factors with the goal of creating a theoretical model 
of antecedents to agile method preference and an 
associated quantitative study to confirm the proposed 
model.As agile methods continue their widespread 
adoption understanding individual software 
developer preferences and there drivers will be a 
valuable management tool. 
8. References  
[1] Glaiel, F., Moulton, A., and Madnick, S., "Agile Project 
Dynamics: A System Dynamics Investigation of Agile 
Software Development Methods", 2013,  
[2] West, D., Grant, T., Gerush, M., and D’silva, D., "Agile 
Development: Mainstream Adoption Has Changed 
Agility", Forrester Research, 2010,  
[3] Dyba, T., and Dingsoyr, T., "Empirical Studies of Agile 
Software Development: A Systematic Review", 
Information and Software Technology, 50(9-10), 2008, pp. 
833-859. 
[4] Dingsoyr, T., Dyba, T., and Abrahamsson, P., "A 
Preliminary Roadmap for Empirical Research on Agile 
Software Development", IEEE, 2008, pp. 83-94. 
[5] Balijepally, V.G., Mahapatra, R.K., and Nerur, S.P., 
"Assessing Personality Profiles of Software Developers in 
Agile Development Teams", Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems, 18(1), 2006, pp. 4. 
[6] Boehm, B., and Turner, R., "Balancing Agility and 
Discipline: Evaluating and Integrating Agile and Plan-
Driven Methods", IEEE, 2004, pp. 718-719. 
[7] John, O.P., and Srivastava, S., "The Big Five Trait 
Taxonomy: History, Measurement, and Theoretical 
Perspectives", Handbook of personality: Theory and 
research, 2(1999, pp. 102-138. 
[8] John, O.P., Naumann, L.P., and Soto, C.J., "Paradigm 
Shift to the Integrative Big Five Trait Taxonomy", 
Handbook of personality: Theory and research, 2008, pp. 
114-158. 
[9] Fowler, M., "Is Design Dead?", SOFTWARE 
DEVELOPMENT-SAN FRANCISCO-,9(4), 2001, pp. 42-
47. 
[10] Bonner, N.A., "Predicting Leadership Success in Agile 
Environments: An Inquiring Systems Approach", Academy 
of Information and Management Sciences Journal, 13(2), 
2010.  
4756 [11] Cockburn, A., and Highsmith, J., "Agile Software 
Development: The People Factor", IEEE Computer, 34(11), 
2001, pp. 131-133. 
[12] http://www.agilealliance.org, accessed February 22, 
2012. 
[13] Williams, L., "What Agile Teams Think of Agile 
Principles", Communications of the ACM, 55(4), 2012, pp. 
71-76. 
[14] Capretz, L.F., and Ahmed, F., "Making Sense of 
Software Development and Personality Types", IT 
Professional, 12(1), 2010, pp. 6-13. 
[15] Capretz, L.F., "Personality Types in Software 
Engineering", International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 58(2), 2003, pp. 207-214. 
[16] Capretz, L.F., "Are Software Engineers Really 
Engineers?", World Transactions on Engineering and 
Technology Education, 1(2), 2002, pp. 233-235. 
[17] Varona, D., Capretz, L.F., and Piñero, Y., "Personality 
Types of Cuban Software Developers", Global Journal of 
Engineering Education, 13(2), 2011,  
[18] Karn, J., Syed-Abdullah, S., Cowling, A., and 
Holcombe, M., "A Study into the Effects of Personality 
Type and Methodology on Cohesion in Software 
Engineering Teams", Behaviour & Information 
Technology, 26(2), 2007, pp. 99-111. 
[19] Feldt, R., Torkar, R., Angelis, L., and Samuelsson, M., 
"Towards Individualized Software Engineering: Empirical 
Studies Should Collect Psychometrics", Proceedings of the 
2008 international workshop on Cooperative and human 
aspects of software engineering, 2008, pp. 49-52. 
[20] Acuña, S.T., Gómez, M.N., and De Lara, J., 
"Empirical Study of How Personality, Team Processes and 
Task Characteristics Relate to Satisfaction and Software 
Quality", ACM, Kaiserslautern, Germany, 2008, pp. 291-
293. 
[21] Conboy, K., 
"Agility from First Principles: 
Reconstructing the Concept of Agility in Information 
Systems Development", Information Systems Research, 
20(3), 2009, pp. 329-354. 
[22] Sarker, S., and Sarker, S., "Exploring Agility in 
Distributed Information Systems Development Teams: An 
Interpretive Study in an Offshoring Context", Information 
Systems Research, 20(3), 2009, pp. 440-461. 
[23] Trochim, W.M.K., The Research Methods Knowledge 
Base, Atomic Dog, Third edn,  Mason, OH,  2008. 
[24] Hair, B., "Multivariate Data Analysis", Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2006. 
Appendix 
Table 4 - Preference Survey Instrument 
Question
Completion Option
To satisfy the client, I like to
o
adapt to changing requirements
o
know that the requirements are firm and then build the program
I prefer to get my information
o
by using documents and diagrams
o
by face-to-face communication
I’d rather
o
build all the features and make sure they work well together before releasing the software
o
build small pieces of the total product, release it and then build more
I prefer
o
working with the software users on a daily basis
o
working with written specifications and documents
I believe customer satisfaction is best
achieved by
o
using Gantt charts to demonstrate how we are meeting their requirements
o
providing software every month to provide them new working features
I believe the best way to manage 
requirements is to
o
put a stake in the ground by freezing requirementschanges and then complete the software
o
let the system requester make requirements changes at any point in the development process
I feel team efficiency and effectiveness is 
essential to
o
so the team should regularly evaluate their practices and brainstorm ways to improve
o
so a good project manager is needed to consistently improve the team’s performance
I think the best form of communication for 
software development is
o
through written records of requirements and validation tests
o
accomplished by people talking face-to-face
I feel there are many ways to measure 
progress
o
but delivering working software is the best way
o
but estimated task completion percentage is the best way
It is important to
o
follow the recommendations from the project leader for group effectiveness
o
reflect together as a group on how to become more effective
I believe architecture, requirements and 
design should be
o
developed by the team based on their internal cooperation and self-organization
o
assigned by the project manager to theappropriate skilled individuals on a team
Whenever possible, discussions about 
requirements, design and implementation 
should take place
o
through face-to-face conversations
o
through documented specifications
I’d rather
o
work in waves with periods of intensity and periods of slower pace
o
work at a constant pace over the long haul
4757 I believe customers are pleased when
o
they get the final product with all the features included even if it takes a while to complete
o
they receive early and frequent releases that include new features
I think progress is extremely difficult to 
measure so
o
the best information comes from measuring how much of the software is delivered and 
working
o
the best information comes from calculating the percentage complete based on individual 
tasks
I feel the best way to improve team 
performance is to
o
allow the team to reflect and then self-adjust their practices
o
periodically engage the project leader to evaluate practices and make improvement proposals
I enjoy
o
working in longer phases and delivering a finished product
o
smaller, frequent delivery of software even though not all features are implemented
I believe changes to the requirements 
mean
o
that the customer will have competitive advantage in the market and should be welcomed
o
that there will be significant rework and should be avoided
Given the pace of business today I believe
o
it is essential that software development scheduling keep a sustainable pace to provide benefit 
into the future
o
it is inevitable that there will be long working hours to complete projects and teams mays 
suffer burnout
I think to become more effective
o
periodically the team should reflect on their practices and adjust their behavior in agreed 
upon areas
o
periodically project leadership and management experts should review team practices and 
make appropriate suggestions for improvement
I like it when
o
there are clearly defined roles
o
the team organizes itself and roles are fluid
I'm persuaded that our team’s top priority 
should be to
o
incrementally and regularly deliver software to satisfy our customers
o
stay on schedule and complete critical path tasks to meet the project goals
I believe teams work better when
o
a project leader directs the work based on roles and the needs of the project
o
the team self-organizes by making group decisions on how work should proceed
My experience tells me face-to-face 
communication
o
is often not practical so alternatives are equally preferred for pragmatic reasons
o
should be the preferred method of communication on a software development project
I am convinced that team functioning is 
important for successful project execution
o
so relationships and roles should evolve internally within each team
o
therefore structure is significant and a competent leader should assign roles
o
I believe the best time to get new 
requirements is
o
at the beginning of the project when they can be incorporated into the design easily
o
whenever the customer sees value in the new requirement, we will adapt appropriately
I know burnout is a serious problem in 
software 
development so
o
care must be given to not overwork developers to meet deadlines
o
focus on those developers with stamina and heroic capabilities and build your team around 
them
History tells me in order to get the 
architecture, requirements and design right
o
teams should be allowed to self-organize
o
assignment of staff to appropriate roles is essential
I like
o
using the delivered software as a measure of progress
o
completing my assigned tasks and using that to measure progress toward the overall goal
I like it when business users
o
engage with the whole development team
o
work with the systems analysts to define requirements
Given the choice
o
I’d rather meet periodically, get the user’s needs in writing, and then create the software to 
meet their needs
o
I like daily 
interaction with the people who will be using the software to make sure I know 
what they want
I like it when
o
changes occur, it means the customer is getting what they need
o
user requirements are signed off and finalized before any software is written
Ibelieve software developers are a 
valuable resource so their
o
skills should be maximized by working overtime to meet project goals
o
daily hours should be controlled such that they can work continuously, year after year
I think software development project 
progress is best measured by
o
tracking task completion against a formal project plan
o
delivering working software incrementally to the users
When working on software development 
projects I like to
o
push to meet a big delivery goal, take a breather and then doit all over again
o
keep a consistent level of productivity that I can maintain year around, year after year
My experience tells me software is best 
developed when
o
developers work directly with business people daily
o
only the trained analysts deal with business people
I believe teams should
o
brainstorm together on ways to improve performance on a regular basis
o
submit anonymous suggestions to management on how to be more productive
I believe face to face
o
communication is difficult and therefore should be minimized
o
is the preferred method of communication because it is effective
I think it is best if
o
requirements are gathered from business users and are only re-engaged when the 
functionality is ready to be tested
o
business folks and developers interact almost daily to ensure requirements are met
The best measure of progress is
o
The best measure of progress is
o
the percentage of tasks complete on the project plan
4758