 Applying evaluations while building the artifact -  
Experiences from the development of process model complexity metrics 
Daniel Braunnagel 
University of Regensburg 
daniel.braunnagel@uni-r.de 
Susanne Leist 
University of Regensburg 
susanne.leist@uni-r.de 
 
 
Abstract 
The Design Science Research method is decisive 
for the quality of the resultin
g solution. Thus, many 
discussions focus the evalua
tion of the solution at the 
end of the Design Science cycle. But design, imple-
mentation and evaluation of artifacts are laborious 
and need to be repeated if the artifact does not meet 
the evaluation criteria. Thus
, recent works have pro-
posed to conduct additional 
evaluations early in the 
Design Science process to po
ssibly reduce the number 
of repetitions of the researc
h process. However, such 
early evaluations may also be an unnecessary burden. 
Therefore, this work presen
ts a case where these addi-
tional evaluations are app
lied ex-post in a practical 
research project which dev
eloped process model com-
plexity metrics and the outcomes 
are compared. Once 
compared, benefits and limita
tions of early evalua-
tions are discussed. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
The application of Design 
Science Research (DSR) 
in Information Systems Research is currently an often 
discussed topic. Especiall
y researchers are interested 
in improving the rigorous application of the method 
(cf. [1
–
3]). Many publications in DSR focus on the 
evaluation of the artifact. They define techniques or 
criteria to prove whether the developed artifact meets 
defined requirements and can be considered an opti-
mal or adequate solution for the problem. Occasion-
ally, researchers essentially 
follow a search process to 
find an effective solution for a problem. This search 
process forces them to co
nduct the build and evalua-
tion phases in many iterations as the developed artifact 
has to be evaluated to identify whether the problem is 
solved [1]. If the proof fails, a new solution has to be 
developed, which will be evaluated again to see if it is 
more satisfying or optimal. This is referred to as the 
design cycle [1, 4]. 
For the aim of reducing the number of design cy-
cles, a promising approach could be to focus on the 
Build phase and identify techniques or criteria to sup-
port the development of an
 optimal or at least satisfy-
ing solution. On the other hand, identifying and using 
these techniques or criteria is time consuming and only 
few researchers have been dealing with the definition, 
application or usefulness of such approaches to im-
prove the build phase.  
Against this background, th
e aim of the paper is to 
investigate in how far such an effort in the build phase 
can contribute to the development of the artifact and 
e.g. can reduce the number of design cycles.  
We do so at hand of a design science (DS) project, 
which was previously conducted in the traditional 
way. For the current work, we repeat the build phase 
with the aid of evaluation techniques and discuss the 
impact techniques and criteria to support the develop-
ment in the build phase have in this case. 
In the previous DS project, we developed so called 
coupling metrics. They are us
ed to assist process mod-
elers with guidance about the quality of the models. 
The perspective of coupling evaluates the under-
standability in particular. (cf. [5]) 
For our evaluation at hand, this particular DS pro-
ject is especially interesting. First, since the metrics 
are fully formalized and can be described within a pa-
per, the influence which the different methods have on 
the artifact can be discovered clearly.Further, the de-
velopment of the metrics is complex and the current 
research provides little guidan
ce for design decisions, 
because of which the results of evaluations are not 
foreseeable during the build phase. 
Sonnenberg and 
vom Brocke
[3]call this situation the emergent nature 
of knowledge in DS projects, because of which they 
propose to evaluate early an
d often along the DS pro-
cess (cf. [3]). And since we had recently built the met-
rics with a traditional build and evaluate approach, we 
were highly interestedif andhow the results differ
with another evaluation strategy.
The structure of our paper is as follows. Section 2 
explains the basics, which comprise the Design Sci-
ence and coupling metrics. Section 3 presents the 
methodology which we followed originally, the meth-
odology which includes the additional early evaluation 
2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.55144232016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.5514424 activities and the corresponding evaluation criteria. In 
section 4 we explain how the evaluation was con-
ducted in detail, as well as its result. Section 5 dis-
cusses the implications of performing additional, early 
evaluations and section 
6 concludes our work. 
2. Basics and related work 
2.1 Design Science 
The design science paradigm seeks for the en-
hancement of human and organizational capabilities 
by creating new and innovative artifacts. Emanating 
from engineering and the sciences of the artificial [6], 
it is concerned with the design, development, imple-
mentation, and use of socio-technical systems in or-
ganizational contexts. Design
 scientists produce and 
apply the knowledge about tasks or situations in order 
to create effective artifacts
 [7]. Thus, DSR is funda-
mentally a problem solving paradigm. A challenge in 
design science results from the fact that an artifact’s 
performance depends on the environment in which it 
is used. An incomplete understanding of the environ-
ment can lead to inappropriately designed artifacts [7]. 
In consequence, the evaluation of the designed arti-
facts is particularly important. 
Currently a variety of different approaches for the 
conduct of design science research can be found (cf. 
[8]), which all describe a pr
ocess organized in the two 
phases build and evaluate (cf.
 [3, 9]). As a prominent 
example, 
Peffers et al.
 developed an approach which 
represents the synthesis of design science processes 
from IS and other disciplines and comprises six steps: 
(1) identify problem & motivate, (2) define objectives 
of a solution, (3) design & development, (4) demon-
stration, (5) evaluation, and (6) communication of the 
results (see Table 1) [10]. 
Whereas the first three steps are part of the build 
phase of the design science research method, the last 
three steps are assigned to the evaluation phase. The 
build phase is especially in design science projects of 
great importance and researchers spend much time on 
designing and constructing the artifact [3]. Accord-
ingly, many publications on design projects lay their 
focus on the build phase, while the evaluation phase is 
often either neglected or on
ly described as an evalua-
tion concept. Only a minority of these publications do 
in fact evaluate the develope
d artifact [11]. A possible 
explanation for the high emphasis on building an arti-
fact could be that it is a less satisfying duty for re-
searchers to check whether all their efforts to 
strengthen the applicability and usefulness during the 
construction of the artifact does actually hold truth 
value during its evaluation [3].  
In addition, many publications discuss the use of 
the design science research method theoretically, 
mostly without focusing a specific DS project (e.g. [1, 
12, 13]. In these publications, the main question is how 
to conduct the design scien
ce research process more 
rigorously in order to provide guidance for the re-
searchers. In contrast to practical publications of ap-
plied design science projects, theoretical works often 
emphasize the evaluation phase (e.g. [2]) and intro-
duce several methods and 
techniques for evaluation 
(cf. [8, 14]). E.g. 
Venable et al. 
[14] present an evalu-
ation framework, assisting 
a DS researcher in the se-
lection of methods for ex an
te and ex post 
evaluations. 
They provide detailed guidance for the evaluations 
themselves, though without alignment with current 
DSR processes. (cf. [2]) Also, only few theoretical 
publications focus on the construction of the artifact 
(cf. [15]). Since the practical publications are neces-
sarily case specific, only rather rudimental guidance is 
provided for the Build phase, and almost none of these 
publications consider the diff
erent types of artifacts 
[11]. The best known publications for the build phase 
are the following. 
•
Vaishnavi and Kuechler
 [16] define patterns for 
techniques that can be applied
 to support the construc-
tion of the artifact. Similarly, 
Sonnenberg and vom 
Brocke
 [3] describe patterns wh
ich are used to evalu-
ate the results of different steps during the build and 
evaluation phase of a design science project. 
•
Some authors define activities or guidelines which 
describe in more detail tasks 
to conduct in the build 
phase (e.g. [1, 9, 17]) 
•
Other authors define requirements an artifact has to 
meet, which should already be considered during the 
construction of the artifact (e.g. [12, 18]). 
•
Gericke
 suggests approaches to support the con-
struction for three artifact types [19]. 
•
Sein et al
 [20] developed an approach which con-
ducts the activities during the Build and Evaluate 
phase concurrently to immediately reflect the progress 
achieved and to trigger artifact revisions early within 
a design process. 
2.2 Coupling Metrics 
The subject of the DS project upon which we con-
duct the analysis is the development of so called “Cou-
pling Metrics” which are used to 
support business pro-
cess modeling in assessing and managing the quality 
of process models [21]. Coupling does not only evalu-
ate the quality of single process models, there is a 
strong focus on interdependencies between models as 
well. Further, many operationalizations of coupling 
can be calculated automatically. This is an obligatory 
44244425 prerequisite for the use in 
practice, which frequently 
encompass a very high number of process models [22].  
Coupling in process management was preceded by 
coupling in software engineering. There, it was recog-
nized as an indicator for the complexity of conceptual 
models. As such, the indicator is used to predict areas 
of high complexity, since the complexity of a system 
is known to cause implementation errors. Thus, cou-
pling in conceptual models in software engineering is 
assessed with the intention to avoid errors in the con-
ceptual stage, prior to their implementation when it is 
more difficult and expensiv
e to correct them. [21] 
In process management, the means to measure cou-
pling in conceptual process 
models are based on trans-
ferring knowledge from software engineering to pro-
cess modelling (cf. [5, 21, 23, 24]). For example, 
Vanderfeesten et al.
 [21] introduce the concept as orig-
inating in software engineering: “Coupling is meas-
ured by the number of interconnections among mod-
ules. Coupling is a measure for the strength of associ-
ation established by the interconnections from one 
module of a design to another. The degree of coupling 
depends on how complicated the connections are and 
on the typ
e of connections.”
 Thus, coupling is meas-
urable and the measurement uses modules and inter-
connections as input. Further, the measurement indi-
cates complexity (cf. [21]). As such, the measurement 
is again conducted with the 
intention to identify areas 
of high complexity in conceptual process models. Just 
as in software engineering, it is expected that highly 
complex processes lead to errors during their imple-
mentation. Further, due to their formalized descrip-
tion, the metrics can be computed automatically with-
out user intervention [5]. They thus extend the cur-
rently existing means to measure and control the qual-
ity of conceptual models in business process manage-
ment. 
2.3 Development of Coupling Metrics 
To make the concept of coupling available for end 
users, we transferred coup
ling metrics from the soft-
ware engineering domain and specified them for the 
use in process models (cf. [5, 24]). In order to guide 
the transfer, we followed the activities of the Design 
Science Research (DSR) method. Therefore, DSR 
supports the development of
 our coupling metrics for 
process models and additionally helps to ensure the 
applicability and usefulness of the developed metrics. 
From a DS perspective, our artifacts are the met-
rics’ implementation in a process modeling environ-
ment, where they are suppos
ed to assist process mod-
elers in creating models th
at are easier to understand 
for a user. The metrics measure the complexity of pro-
cess models providing guidance to improve the mod-
els, for which, however, the metrics need to be easily 
accessible and provide useful
 information. The respec-
tive quality of the metrics is regularly gained through 
an evaluation in a practical settin
g, e.g. in a case study, 
and serves to re-design, re-implement and re-evaluate 
the artifact, which, however, is laborious and expen-
sive. To reduce the number of design cycles, an ex-
ante evaluation as proposed by 
Sonnenberg and vom 
Brocke
 [3] seems promising to prevent potential de-
sign flaws which would otherwise surface either dur-
ing the construction or, worse, during the practical 
evaluation. 
3. Methodology  
3.1 DSR methods 
The well-known methods to conduct Design Sci-
ence Research have general similarities [17].Table 1
shows a comparison of prominent DSR methods, 
adapted from 
Fischer and Gregor
 [17] where they 
identified similar steps, ar
ranged the methods accord-
ingly and derived an idealized research model for DSR 
[17].While we can assume a general sequence of steps 
in the DSR process, we omitted returns for reasons of 
clarity. While some of the authors defined returns for 
their DSR process, the trigger was not always obvious. 
In this work, however, the focus are returns due to the 
result of an evaluation and it can be assumed that in 
every method the result of an
 evaluation can be a rea-
son to repeat the previous steps in  a DSR cycle. 
For our purpose, Table 1 highlights the evaluation 
steps of each method and also includes the DSR 
method by 
Sonnenberg and vom Brocke 
[3]. It can 
clearly be seen that while the currently prominent 
methods propose to explicitly evaluate the artifact only 
at the end of one cycle, the latter method proposes to 
evaluate after each step to
 avoid causes of repetition 
beforehand.  
Our investigation aims to contribute to the discus-
sion whether early evaluations in the build phase are 
beneficial or superfluous. To provide practical in-
sights, we repeat a previous DS project in which we 
followed the Build and Evaluate approach. Now, we 
perform the Build phase with early evaluation activi-
ties in addition and compare results. This allows us to 
show whether in this case the gains, both in the quality 
of the solution and in the reduced DS cycles out-
weighed the additional evaluation effort, or not. 
3.2 Previous procedure 
The focus of our paper is not the evaluation of ap-
proaches for the Build phase in general. Instead, we 
44254426 44264427 The first systematically manifested feedback on the ar-
tifact is expect
ed after the “Design & Development” 
and “Demonstration” steps. In the preceding steps, 
reasons to reconsider the d
esign of the artifact in spe-
cial or the method in general surface only by coinci-
denceand not due to a systematic assessment.
3.3 Applying theDSR Evaluation pattern 
In order to assist research
ers in their DS projects, 
Sonnenberg and vom Brocke 
[3]propose the so called 
“General DSR Evaluation P
attern”. The pattern is a 
high level description of a DS process, which takes 
into account the emergent nature of DS artifacts by in-
troducing additional evaluation steps. In detail, the de-
scribed process consists of the four DS activities 
“Identify problem”, “Design”, “Construct”, and “Use” 
each of which is followed by an evaluation activity 
“Eval1” to “Eval4”. Depending on their position in the 
pattern relative to the constr
uction activity, they are 
considered Ex-Ante or Ex
-Post evaluations.(cf. [3])
The evaluation activities of the general DSR Eval-
uation Pattern are d
escribed in more detail by separate 
patterns. There, Eval1, which follows the identifica-
tion of the problem, is termed Justify. It serves to show 
that the current DS project is a meaningful one. Next 
to its objective, the descrip
tion of the evaluation activ-
ity also shows possible method
s to do so, e.g. an asser-
tion, a literature review or a review of practitioner ini-
tiatives. (cf. [3]) 
The second evaluation activity of the process, 
Eval2, follows the design activity. It is meant to eval-
uate the design and to show that the design can bear a 
possible solution of the DS problem. Possible methods 
of this activity are an assertion, a mathematical proof,
or logical reasoning, etc. (cf. [3]) 
The Ex-Post evaluation activities follow the con-
struction of the artifact as well as its use. Eval3, per-
formed after the construction, is meant to initially 
demonstrate the artifact, e.g. by a prototype demon-
stration or experiment. Eval4
 evaluates the artifact in 
its environment to show that it is practically useful, 
e.g. with a case study or a field experiment. (cf. [3]) 
Comparing our previous 
procedure and the Evalu-
ation Pattern by 
Sonnenberg and vom Brocke 
[3],Ta-
ble 1 shows which additional steps we performed ex-
post when we repeatedly developed the metrics with 
the new method. 
(1)We started with the identification of the problem, 
which led us to the same problem statement as the pre-
vious DS project had. 
(2)Second, the pattern sugges
ts to evaluate the identi-
fied problem, by means of e.g. a literature review. To 
do so, we use the review method by 
Cooper 
[28], pro-
posing five steps to specify a systematic conduct of the 
review.Starting with the problem statement and the 
search criteria, the method lead us to the same review 
we had conducted for the previous DS project. This 
review gave us feedback on a potential solution, we 
consider this early evaluation done. In fact, the litera-
ture we found underlined the relevance of the problem 
we identified once again and also provided feedback 
about the objectives because of which we focused on 
fully automatized metrics. 
(3)Third, the pattern suggest
s to design the artifact.
Since, up to this point, we had no additional 
knowledge with respect to design decisions, we came 
up with the same metrics as in our previous DS project. 
(4)Fourth, after the design, the pattern proposes an-
other evaluation, Eval2, by me
ans of e.g. an assertion. 
However,originally we did not evaluate the design of 
our artifact (Eval2) before we implemented a proto-
type of the metrics. Thus, we do so in the following. 
(5)-(8) Following the Eval2, the pattern suggests to 
construct the artifact. To do 
so, it is planned to imple-
ment the metrics in a pr
ocess modelling software 
where they are accessible fo
r modelers in their daily 
work. This implementation does then require an addi-
tional evaluation (6), before the use phase (7) and its 
evaluation (8), which provides feedback for further 
problems. These steps are subject for future work, 
which depends on the results of the early evaluations 
(2) and (4). 
To analyze the benefit of early evaluations in the 
build phase,we instantiated the general DSR evalua-
tion pattern. Thus, we performed the additional Eval2.
It is to our benefit that the experiences from a long his-
tory of research on complexity metrics for conceptual 
models is documented in software engineering by 
Weyuker
 [33]. We could thus base our informed argu-
ment (cf. [3]) on extensive previous knowledge and 
benefit from the rigorous documentation of prescrip-
tive knowledge on previous 
instantiations of the DSS 
methodology. 
3.4 Evaluation criteria 
To evaluate the design of our artifact (Eval2), we 
adapted the criteria by 
Weyuker
 [33] for process mod-
els,a set of desirable proper
ties of complexity metrics 
in relation to their calculation: 
P1:
 A metric should not rate all models equally 
complex, regardless of differences in their content. 
The notion behind this property is that if one metric 
assigns the same level of co
mplexity to each and every 
process model, it has no value to a user. Further, such 
a metric would contradict both our intuition and our 
empirical knowledge that differences in the complex-
ity of process models do exist. 
44274428 P2:
 A metric should not divide all models in only 
a few complexity classes. 
This property extends 
P1
.If a metric assigns e.g. 
only two or three different classes of complexity to 
process models of each and 
every size and shape, this 
is only of limited value to a user. Such metrics would 
not be suitable to prioritize a 
large set of models to be 
reworked, as many models of highly different com-
plexity would be assigned the same class. 
P3:
 A metric should allow for different models 
with equal complexity. 
To explain this property, let us imagine a metric 
violating this property.It would assign a unique degree 
of complexity to each model, leading to an order of 
absolutely all possible proces
s models. Since different 
processes lead to different models, this would imply 
that most processes cannot be modelled in a simple 
fashion. This is unrealistic. A sufficiently high degree
of abstraction would lead to a simple model, which 
would still differ albeit only by the names of the nodes. 
Here, we preclude the case of infinite decimal places, 
as in practical settings users would most probably ig-
nore very small differences anyway and thus assume 
different models to have equal complexity. 
P4:
 A metric should allow for different models 
with the same semantic with different complexity. 
The same process can be displayed in models 
which differ, despite having an equal level of detail 
and same information. Such a case can be devised by 
decomposing process models 
or aggregating functions 
differently. Different decompositions of the same pro-
cess can lead to different degrees of complexity as is 
shown in empirical work (cf. [34]) 
P5:
 A metric should be monotone, thus the com-
plexity of two concatenated models cannot be lower 
than the complexity of either of the two individually. 
Complexity, as a property of the artifact, can fur-
ther be disaggregated into the number of elements and 
their connections. Thus, if the number of elements in-
creases, the complexity of 
a model will increase as 
well. Further, experience has shown that if one com-
bines two previously sepa
rated processes into one 
common model, especially when done poorly, a reader 
will be even more overwhelmed. 
P6:
 A metric should account for that two models 
with the same complexity may interact with a third 
model in different ways and thus have different com-
plexities if concatenated. 
Again, mind the decomposition of process models.
If the concatenation is performed upon sub-models of 
a process model, it makes a difference if, otherwise 
identical, models are e.g. eit
her attached to the end of 
the parent model or if the concatenation extends an al-
ready complex branching structure. 
P7:
 A metric should account that permutations of 
one model may lead to different complexities. 
This property reflects the motivation to decompose 
process models in the first p
lace. If a process model is 
both very detailed with an extensive branching struc-
ture and very large, its complexity may challenge a 
reader. Therefore, modelers 
may break the model into 
parts with different decomposition. Overall, this will 
not change the model, but only permute its nodes over 
different parts. The resulting degree of complexity, 
however, depends on the actual decomposition. It is 
not hard to imagine, that a decomposition that tears 
apart closely related parts of
 a process model will in-
crease the overall complexity (cf. [35]) 
P8:
 A metric should result in the same complexity 
if models are renamed. 
We cannot make up a case where the naming of a 
process model increases or decreases its complexity. 
P9:
 A metric should allow that the complexity of 
two models united is more than the sum of the individ-
ual models. 
Imagine that processes with previously separated 
resources are joined into one common process. This 
will introduce interaction between the processes due to 
shared resources which did not exist before. Thus, the 
coupling encompasses not only the sum of the two 
models but also the newly introduced connections. 
P10:
 A metric should not allow for the complexity 
of two united models to be lower than the sum of indi-
vidual models. 
This property extends 
P5
, complexity is consid-
ered the result of elements and their connections. As-
suming that by uniting two models the resulting num-
ber of nodes equals at least the sum of the individual 
numbers, the complexity of two models united cannot 
be lower than the sum of the individual ones. 
We use these criteria to conduct the evaluation of
our metrics’ design, which was not part of our previ-
ous methodology.  
3.5 Selected metrics 
A short description of the metrics upon which the 
evaluation is done can be found in the following. 
Coupling of a module
 This metric uses infor-
mation theory to quantify the amount of information 
in the model graph within a sub model. An exceed-
ingly high amount of information is expected to corre-
late with a decreased understanding and indicate com-
plexity.[5, 24, 36]
Intramodule Coupling of a mod-
ule
This metric quantifies the amount of information 
as well, but does so upon the graph of arcs which con-
nect sub models instead of the model graph itself. [5, 
24, 36]
CBO 
The argumentation behind the CBO 
44284429 metric is that sub models with a high number of con-
nections are suspect of mo
re external influence with 
unpredictable behaviour and are thus more difficult to 
understand. Therefore, the metric counts the connec-
tions a model has with other 
models to assess this form 
of complexity.[5, 24, 30]
RFC
The RFC metric ex-
tends the CBO metric. Here, the metric further asses 
the size of a model by the 
number of functions.Braun-
nagel 2013 #2855}[5, 30]
Direct Coupling
For the 
Direct Coupling metric, co
mplexity is the result of 
connections between models in relation to the number 
of functions. [5, 24, 31]
Indirect Coupling
The Indi-
rect Coupling metric extends Direct Coupling over 
transitive connections. Thus, the strength of the con-
nections between two randomly chosen submodels is 
calculated. [5, 24, 31]
Total Coupling 
The Total Cou-
pling metric aggregates the prior over all sub models 
to indicate the overall comple
xity of a set of models.
[5, 24, 31]
Process Coupling 
Itsobjective is the de-
lineation of functions that are executed in one block. 
Since overly large work units
 render processes inflex-
ible and overly small work un
its increase the number 
of handovers, making processes failure-prone, the bal-
anced delineation of functions in a workflow is a 
means for its improvement. For this metric, a function 
is large if it refers to many information elements and 
functions are coupled if they share a common infor-
mation element. [5, 24, 37]
4. Evaluation 
In the following, for the purpose of illustration, we 
discuss the properties with one of the metrics, and Ta-
ble 2 shows the result for the remaining metrics. For 
more information readers may refer to [5] to verify our 
application of the properties onto all metrics. 
4.1 Exemplary application 
The 
Process Coupling
 metric was originally in-
vented by [37]. It compares
 different process designs 
regarding the alignment of tasks in functions in a pro-
cess. As the dependence between two functions due to 
shared information increases 
the number of handovers 
and possible failures, the m
etric calculates the fraction 
of functions which depend on the same information. 
We adapted the artifacts to the information elements 
and the functions in a business process. Thus, itis cal-
culated as follows: 







)





|

|

|

|
−1)
,||>1
0,
If the set of functions (F) in a process model is 
greater than 1, then the degree of coupling (k) is cal-
culated by the quotient of the sum of connected func-
tion pairs (f
x
, f
y
) to all possible function pairs ( |F|*(|F|-
1) ). 








1, 
(


,˘
ˇ
)
˙



,˘
ˇ

˙






0,
A pair of functions (fx, fy) is connected, if there is 
an arc (fx,ii) between the function fx and the infor-
mation element ii and an arc (fy, ii) between the func-
tion fy and the information element ii in the set of arcs 
A. Originally, the authors argue that with a high degree 
of shared information elements, a workflow becomes 
less flexible. We argue, that 
this principle applies to 
business process modelling as well. Evaluating our de-
sign against the previous 
ten properties might present 
further insight into whether the implementation of the 
metric is a worthy pursuit. 
Regarding 
P1
 and 
P2
, it can be easily seen that the 
ratio of connected to all func
tion pairs is different for 
models with either a different number of functions, 
connected functions, or both. Also, since there is no 
syntactical limit to the number of functions in a pro-
cess model, the number of
 possible coupling degrees 
is unlimited within the range of [0, 1] as well. Thus, 
the properties 
P1
 and 
P2
 are fulfilled by the metric.
P3
, different models with equal complexity, is ful-
filled as well. Since the metric refers only to the num-
ber of functions and information elements, but not to 
their semantic, one may easily replace the actual ele-
ments, and thus create new models with the same com-
plexity. Also, one may alter further nodes or the size 
of a model. As long as the ratio of connected and un-
connected function pairs remains constant, all differ-
ent models have the same degree of complexity.  
The metric was originally created to assist compa-
nies in creating flexible pr
ocesses by aligning tasks 
Table 2:Measures and properties
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
Coupling of a module
[5, 24, 36]
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Intramodule Coupling of a module
[5, 24, 36]
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
RFC 
[5, 24, 30]
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
CBO 
[5, 24, 30]
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Direct Coupling 
[5, 24, 31]
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Indirect Coupling 
[5, 24, 31]
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Total Coupling 
[5, 24, 31]
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Process Coupling 
[5, 24, 37]
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
44294430 differently. Aggregating tasks into functions in such a 
fashion that collects those tasks which require the 
same information elements leads to processes with a 
low degree of 
Process Coupling
, notwithstanding that 
another composition of the same process might lead to 
another degree of coupling. Thus, 
P4
 is fulfilled. 
P5
, two models together may not be less complex 
than any of the individual ones, is violated due to the 
scaling. For two models, with the one model having 
coupled function pairs, and the second one not having 
coupled functions, the resulting 
Process Coupling
Degree will be lower than that of the first model. In 
fact, the current construction of the metric tempts a 
user to create larger proce
ss models (i.e. include more 
functions) to reduce the degree of 
Process Coupling
.
Thus, the alignment of functions and information ele-
ments remains unchanged, even though it was identi-
fied as a source of inflexib
ility in the first place. The 
solution therefore is to omit the scaling by |F|*(|F|-1). 
This alternation would not violate the previous condi-
tions, for the same reasons as before. 
Regardless of whether we omit the scaling or not, 
P6
 is fulfilled by the metric. If a model is joined with 
one of two other models, it may or may not happen that 
functions from both models share information ele-
ments and that thus the number of paired functions in-
crease for more than the ad
ditional model. Therefore, 
further interaction may affect the metric value, de-
pending on whether this scenario happens or not. 
The original intention of the metric was to point 
out the alignment of functions and information ele-
ments leading to the lowest sh
aring of information el-
ements, thus encouraging process designer to permute 
functions and information elements in such a way as 
to reduce 
Process Coupling
. Thus, 
P7
, a metric 
should account that permutations lead to different 
complexities, is fulfilled. 
The same can be said for 
P8
. Since the name of the 
process is not considered 
in the calculation, it does not 
change the coupling value. 
The 
Process Coupling
 metric allows for the com-
plexity of two models united 
to exceed the sum of the 
individual models (
P9
) if the scaling is omitted. This 
can be shown by example, when two models are joined 
which share common information elements, the num-
ber of function pairs may rise beyond the sum of the 
pairs. If the scaling is still done, the calculated value 
will either decrease or remain unchanged, which ap-
pears counter-intuitive to us. 
As a consequence of the scaling, the metric as orig-
inally presented systematically violates 
P10
. If two 
models are united, the degree of 
Process Coupling
will either decrease or remain the same. Again, as a 
solution, one may omit the scaling in (2). 
4.2 Result 
The above discussion has shown that our current 
design of the 
Process Coupling
 metric cannot fulfill 
three of the desirable proper
ties. They are all related to 
the scaling of the original design which causes a side 
effect that we did not anticipate. Originally, the metric 
was supposed to aid a practitioner in evaluating his 
process design, regarding dependencies among func-
tions which result from shared resources. A lower met-
ric value is supposed to in
dicate a better design regard-
ing the resource coupling of functions which indicates 
a higher flexibility in the process’ execution since 
fewer functions depend on each other due to shared in-
formation. However, due to the scaling, a lower metric 
value can also be achieved by e.g. merging different 
models or otherwise by introducing additional func-
tions without any link to a resource. As a result, the 
number of coupled functions would not decrease and 
the actual flexibility of a process would not improve. 
Instead, the model would either be filled with irrele-
vant information or merged unnecessarily. In any case, 
its understandability would be
 degraded. To avoid this 
side effect, we alter the metric by omitting the scaling. 
Table 2shows the performance of the metrics in 
our current design regarding
 the desirable properties. 
Our adaption of the Process Coupling metric violates 
the desirable properties 
P5
,
P9
and 
P10
due to a scal-
ing function and so do the metrics 
Direct Coupling, 
Indirect Coupling
, Total Coupling 
and
Conceptual 
Coupling
.
The evaluation framework by 
Venable et al.
 [14] 
distinguishes between natur
alistic evaluations (e.g. ac-
tion research) and formalistic evaluations (e.g. criteria 
based). The latter are gener
ally less costly. Following 
the method of 
Sonnenberg and vom Brocke 
[3], we 
performed a formal (criteria 
based) evaluation after the 
design step, prior to the mo
re costly evaluations, and 
identified potential design issues. 
In our original research method, we had planned to 
evaluate this design in a laboratory experiment and a 
practical setting. We suspec
t that the design issue 
would have surfaced in the latter evaluation, too but 
would have triggered another design cycle in addition.
Thus, the altered design would have required another 
costly evaluation, both in a laboratory and a practical 
setting. 
Of course the early evaluation cannot guarantee 
that every design flaw was uncovered, and thus no fur-
ther cycles are necessary. However, it will ease the 
identification of the causes 
to fail the practical evalua-
tion, since less issues will cause less confusing inter-
play. 
44304431 5.Discussion
The DSR method of 
Sonnenberg and vom Brocke
suggests two additional eval
uation activities for each 
phase of the general Build and Evaluation phases [3]. 
Especially the two evaluations in the Build phase 
(Eval1 and Eval2) seem to be an interesting and novel 
recommendation. The aim of our paper was to investi-
gate in how far the evaluation of the artifact during the 
Build phase can contribute to the quality of the re-
search by reducing the number of cycles in the whole 
DS project. On the one hand, the conduct of additional 
evaluation activities during the Build phase should 
generally contribute to the quality of the artifact. On 
the other hand, additional evaluation activities are time 
consuming and the required effort must be adequate 
regarding the gains in quality. 
Sonnenberg and vom Brocke
 suggest a first evalu-
ation after the problem iden
tification which is meant 
to ensure that a meaningful design science research 
problem and a meaningful statement is formulated [3].
In our research project, Eval1 was based on a literature 
review. The review served not only as proof of rele-
vance for the problem, but also for the refinement of 
the problem definition. We identified that coupling is 
especially relevant for process architectures because 
automatically computable coupling metrics are of 
great help for the design an
d development of process 
models in a process architecture. 
The second evaluation activ
ity (Eval2) serves to 
show that an artifact desi
gn provides the solution to 
the stated problem as well as to ensure the solution’s 
quality. The object of this evaluation is the artifact as 
a concept and not the finished solution. We did not 
evaluate the concept of our artifact in our primary in-
vestigation (see section 3.2). Therefore the emphasis 
in our investigation was on examining the contribution 
of Eval2. To perform our evaluation, we instantiated 
the 
“Assertion” pattern and presen
ted an informed ar-
gument with all metrics as concepts and criteria in the 
form of desirable properties, which we found in litera-
ture. As a result, we identified four metrics which were 
not able to meet all desirable properties. We could 
show that the original design which neglects the miss-
ing properties would have misled practitioners. The 
metrics indicated improvements which actually de-
graded the models. Originally, the metrics gave e.g. a 
better rating to a model if 
it was inflated with unnec-
essary information and the source of harmful coupling 
remained unaltered. Such a model would be more dif-
ficult to read, implement or maintain and generally 
more difficult to use. To avoid this effect, we altered 
the metric by omitting the scaling. Therefore, the ben-
efit of conducting Eval2 was twofold: we did not im-
plement misleading metrics and thus saved time other-
wise spent on needless implementation efforts. In ad-
dition we could further improve these four metrics in 
an early phase and eliminate their defects.  
All in all, we could demonstrate with our investi-
gation that the application of Eval2 reduced the cycle 
time of our research project, and we improved the 
quality of the artifact at an early stage during the de-
sign science project. Further, we are certain that in our 
case the additional evaluation was more efficient in 
comparison to additional evaluation and implementa-
tion cycles. However, this was much due to the easily 
available evaluation criteria in our project. If 
Weyuker 
[33] had not documented the experiences from dec-
ades of metric development, the efforts to find appli-
cable evaluation criteria or 
apply another evaluation 
technique would have been 
larger and they might pos-
sibly even have outweighed the additional implemen-
tation cycles. In summary, despite our promising re-
sults, we cannot declare the early evaluations in the 
Build phase to be generally reasonable for all DS pro-
jects, but we do argue that early evaluations of the con-
cept are generally a worthwhile consideration. As we 
have shown in our case, they can spare DS cycles and 
improve the concept and thus the solution, as well. 
Also, as experience from software engineering shows, 
resolving issues in an early phase of the SE cycle (e.g. 
during the analysis phase) is less time-consuming and 
cost-intensive than later e.g. during implementation.
(cf. [3]).
6. Conclusion 
Our paper deals with the application of the DS 
methodology by 
Sonnenberg and vom Brocke
[3], 
resp. withthe application of early evaluations in the 
build phase. In comparison to traditional DS ap-
proaches, this puts particular
 emphasis on the evalua-
tion after each step of the DS method.The additional 
evaluations can be either su
perfluous or helpful to un-
cover pitfalls which otherwise enforce additional DS 
cycles. Thus, we compare the procedure of one of our 
research projects where we 
follow a traditional DS ap-
proach with a procedure includingearly evaluations in 
the build phase.
In our case, the additional evaluation uncovered, 
and also helped to mitigate, design flaws that would 
have forced us to repeat the laborious evaluation in the 
organization, had they remained undiscovered. The ef-
fort of the additional evaluation profits from the avail-
ability of evaluation criteria. We benefited from ready-
to-use criteria from complexity metrics development. 
Thus, we encourage the research community to docu-
ment prescriptive knowledge (cf. [38]) as support for 
DS projects. 
44314432 As stated, the evaluation of
 the developed artifact 
is missing in many publications about DS projects (cf. 
[11]). This has been discussed in literature, too (cf. 
[3]). Apart from the differen
t possible explanations to 
this observation, this under
lines the necessity to apply 
the evaluation patterns for the Build phase, as they pro-
vide the possibility to assert the artifact
’s concept and 
to show its usefulness and superiority. 
7. References
  
[1] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design 
Science in Information Systems Research,” MISQ, vol. 
28, 
no. 1, pp. 75
–
105, 2004. 
[2] J. Pries-Heje, R. L. Baskerville, and J. R. Venable, 
“Strategies for Design Science Research Evaluation,” in 
Proc. o. 16th ECIS, 2008, pp. 255
–
266. 
[3] C. Sonnenberg and J. Vom Brocke, “Evaluation Pat-
terns for Design Scienc
e Research Artefacts,” 
CCIS 286
Springer, 2012, pp. 71
–
83. 
[4] A. R. Hevner and S. Chatterjee, “Design Science Re-
search Frameworks,”
 ISIS 22, Springer, 2010, pp. 23
–
31. 
[5] D. Braunnagel, F. Johannsen, and S. Leist, “Coupling 
and process modelling,” in
 Modellierung 201, pp. 121
–
137. 
[6] H. A. Simon, The sciences of the artificial, 3rd ed. 
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2008. 
[7] S. T. March and G. F. Smith, “Design and natural sci-
ence research on information technology,” Decision Sup-
port Systems, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 251
–
266, 1995. 
[8] E. Klecun and T. Cornford, “A critical approach to 
evaluation,” Eur J Inf Syst, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 229–
243, 
2005. 
[9] P. Offermann, O. Levina, M. Schönherr, and U. Bub, 
“Outline of a design science research process,” in Proc. 
o. 
4th DESRIST, New York: ACM Press, 2009, p. 7. 
[10] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M. Rothenberger, and S. 
Chatterjee, “A Design Science Research Methodology for 
Information Systems Research,” JMIS, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 
45
–
77, 2007. 
[11] P. Griesberger, “Develo
ping the Evaluation of a Pat-
tern-
Based Approach for Business Process Improvement,” 
Proc. o. DESRIST 2014, Springer, pp. 225
–
240. 
[12] S. Gregor and D. Jones, “The Anatomy of a Design 
Theory,” JAIS, vol. 8, no. 5, p. 2, 2007.
[13] J. Pries-Heje and R. Baske
rville, “The Design Theory 
Nexus,” MISQ, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 731–
755, 2008. 
[14] J. R. Venable, J. Pries-
Heje, and R. L. Baskerville, “A 
Comprehensive Framework for Evaluation in Design Sci-
ence Research,” in Proc. of DESRIST 2012, pp. 423–
438. 
[15] J. Pries-
Heje, R. Baskerville, and J. Venable, “Soft 
D
esign Science Research,” in
 DESRIST 2007, pp. 18
–
38. 
[16] V. Vaishnavi and W. Kuechler, Design science re-
search methods and patterns. Boca Raton: Auerbach, 2007. 
[17] C. Fischer and S. D. Gregor, “Forms of Reasoning in 
the Design Science Research Process,” in 
Proc. o. 
DESRIST 2011, pp. 17
–
31. 
[18] J. Iivari, “A Paradigmatic Analysis of Information 
Systems As a Design Science,” SJIS, vol. 19, no. 2, p. 5, 
2007. 
[19]
A. Gericke, “Konstruktion situativer Artefakte,” Dis-
sertation, Universität St. Gallen, 2009. 
[20] M. K. Sein, O. Henfridsson, S. Purao, M. Rossi, and 
R. Lindgren, “Action Design Research,” MISQ, vol. 35, no. 
1, pp. 37
–
56, 2011. 
[21] I. T. Vanderfeesten, J. Cardoso, J. Mendling, H. A. 
Reijers, and W. M. P. van de
r Aalst, “Quality Metrics for 
Business Process Models,” 
BPM and workflow handbook
,
L. Fischer, Ed, USA: Future Strategies, 2007, pp. 179
–
191. 
[22] M. Malinova, H. Leopold, and J. Mendling, “An Em-
pirical Investigation on the Design of Process Architec-
tures,” in Int. Conf. on Wirtschaftsinformatik, 2013.
[23] W. Khlif, L. Makni, N. Zaaboub, and H. Ben-Abdalla, 
“Quality metrics for business process modeling,” in Proc
. 
o. 9th WSEAS Int. Conf. on ACS, 2009, pp. 195
–
200. 
[24] D. Braunnagel and F. Johannsen, “Coupling Metrics 
for EPC 
Models,” in Int. Conf. on Wirtschaftsinformatik:
2013, pp. 1797
–
1811. 
[2
5] Nunamaker, Jay, F, Jr, “Systems developement in in-
formation systems research,” JMIS, vol. 7, no. 3, pp
. 89
–
106, 1990. 
[26] H. Takeda, P. Veerkamp, T. Tomiyama, and H. Yoshi-
kawa, “Modeling Design Process,” AI Magazine, vol. 11, 
no. 4, pp. 37
–
48, 1990. 
[27] B. Kuechler and V. Vaishnavi, “On theory develop-
ment in design science research,” Eur J Inf Syst, vol.
 17, 
no. 5, pp. 489
–
504, 2008. 
[28] H. Cooper, Synthesizing research, SAGE, 2006. 
[29] R. L. Flood and E. R. Carson, Dealing with complex-
ity, 2nd ed. New York: Plenum Press, 1993. 
[30] G. Gui and P. D. Scott, “New Coupling and Cohesion 
Metrics for Evaluation of Software Component Reusabil-
ity,” in 9th Int. Conf. for Young Computer Scientists, Los 
Alamitos, USA: IEEE, 2008, pp. 1181
–
1186. 
[31] S. R. Chidamber and C. F. Kemerer, “A Metrics Suite 
for Object Oriented Design,” IEEE Trans. Software Eng, 
vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 476
–
493, 1994. 
[33] E. J. Weyuker, “Evaluating software complexity 
measures,” IEEE Trans. Software Eng, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 
1357
–
1365, 1988. 
[34] F. Johannsen, S. Leist, and D. Braunnagel, “Testing 
the Impact of Wand and Weber's Decomposition Model on 
Pr
ocess Model Understandability,”, 
ICIS, 2014. 
[35] S. Zugal, “Applying Cognitive Psychology for Im-
proving the Creation, Understanding and Maintenance of 
Business Process Models,” Dissertation, University of Inns-
bruck, 2013. 
[36] E. B. Allen, T. M. 
Khoshgoftaar, and Y. Chen, “Meas-
uring Coupling and Cohesion of Software Modules,” in 7th 
Int. Software Metrics Symposium. 2001. 
[37] I. T. Vanderfeesten, H. A.
 Reijers, and W. M. P. van 
der Aalst, “Evaluating workflow process designs using co-
hesion and 
coupling metrics,” Computers in industry, vol. 
59, no. 5, pp. 420
–
437, 2008. 
[38] C. Sonnenberg and J. Vom Brocke, “Evaluations in the 
Science of the Ar
tificial,” in Proc. of DESRIST 
2012, pp. 
381
–
397. 
44324433