 How Extreme does Extreme Programming Have to be?  Adapting XP 
Practices to Large-scale Projects
Lan Cao 
Georgia State University  
lcao@cis.gsu.eduKannan Mohan Baruch College kannan_mohan@baruch. 
cuny.eduPeng Xu, Balasubramaniam 
Ramesh 
Georgia State University 
pxu/bramesh@cis.gsu.edu
Abstract 
The need to develop software at Internet speed and 
accommodate changes during the entire software 

development life cycle has made lightweight or agile 

development methodologies like Extreme 

Programming popular.  However, such methodologies 
have been considered to be beneficial for small and 
medium sized projects, with small teams.  In this 

research, based on a case study in an organization that 

develops large-scale, complex software using a 

modified form of extreme programming, we highlight 
the key differences between agile principles proposed 
in prior literature and the agile practices that are 

suitable for large-scale, complex software 

development.  Based on these differences, we propose 

general guidelines on tailoring agile development 

methodologies to make them suitable for the 
development of large,  complex software systems . 
1.Introduction 
Organizations increasingly face a rapidly 
changing business and technological environment. In 

such a dynamic environment, traditional software 

development approaches which assume that all 

requirements can be anticipated at the beginning of 
projects and will remain stable are unlikely to be 
successful. The inability to continuously evolve the 

software to be in alignment with changing 

requirements means being unresponsive to business 

conditions, which leads to business failure [10]. Agile 
software development approaches such as Extreme 
Programming (XP), Crystal methods, Lean 
Development, Scrum, and Adaptive Software 

Development (ASD), have been  proposed to deal with 

today’s turbulent business and technological  
environment. 
The goal of Agile Methods is to allow an 
organization to be able to deliver quickly and change 

quickly. [1, 5, 10].  The proposed agile practices in 

software development vary, but they share the 

common characteristics such as iterative development, 
working in frequent consultation with the customer, 
and having small and frequent releases. [1] One of the 

widely used agile methodologies is Extreme 

Programming (XP), a software development approach 

that advocates rapid iterations, rigorously tested code 
and working closely with end users [3, 4]. XP has 
been successfully adopted in some small software 

projects [13, 17]. 
Proponents of XP claim that using this method 
brings advantages over conventional processes, 

including lower management overhead, higher team 
productivity, happier customers and shorter release 
cycles. However the applicability of agile approaches 

is constrained by several factors such as project size 
and type, experience level of project personnel, and 

access to committed customers. Boehm [5] argues that 
agile methods are difficult to scale up to large projects 
because of the lack of sufficient architecture planning, 
over-focusing on early results and low levels of test 

coverage. It is also recommended that agile methods 

not be used in mission-critical software development.  

However, in the current dynamic business 

environments, agility is also needed for large projects 
that face the same issues addressed by agile 
methodologies such as changing environment, 

ambiguous user requirements, and time pressure. 
Software development organizations are under intense 
pressure to deliver products rapidly, but with high 
levels of quality assurance. Approaches that can 
deliver just agility or are only plan-driven focusing on 

quality can’t meet these needs. The ability to achieve 

and quality is required now more than ever [5].   
Agile methods cannot be adopted directly for 
large, complex projects due to the lack of up-front 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE1
 design and documentation [15]. However, most 
experts agree that agile methodology and traditional 
approaches are philosophically compatible [16]. For 
example, XP practices have been mapped to SW-
CMM model that usually is considered appropriate for 
large-scale projects or organizations [14]. Efforts have 
been made to tailor XP methodology for large, 

complex projects to achieve faster development cycle 

times [8, 16]. Besides these case studies, principals or 
guidelines on how to adopt agile methodology for 
large-scale, complex projects have not been proposed 

in the literature. In this research, based on a case study 

in an organization that develops large-scale, complex 

software using a modified form of extreme 

programming, we identify agile practices that are 
suitable for large-scale, complex software 
development.  These practices are also compared with 

agile principles proposed in prior literature. Based on 
the comparison, we argue that these agile practices 
provide a general guideline on tailoring agile 

development methodologies to make them suitable for 
large and complex projects.   
2.Agile software development 
methodologies and large-scale projects 
Traditional approaches emphasize the importance 
of project plans and documentations, trying to control 

unexpected changes. However, major changes in 
requirements, scope and technology are out of the 
control of development teams. The question often is 
not how to minimize changes in a project but how to 
better handle inevitable changes throughout its life 

cycle [10]. Agile methods respond to this expectation 

by adopting strategies designed to reduce the cost of 
change throughout a project.   
The highest priority in agile methodologies is 
satisfying the customer through early and continuous 

delivery of valuable software [1]. Agile methodologies 

accommodate changing requirements, and anticipate 

them even late in development. Strategies such as 
delivering working software frequently, reliance on 
face-to-face communication, closely working with 

customers, and keeping designs simple, are used to 

mitigate the risks caused by changes. These 

methodologies emphasize a fair amount of planning.  
More value on the planning 
process
 is placed than the 
resulting 
documentation
 [5]. The tacit knowledge 
embodied in development teams is heavily relied on. 

These methods work best when team size is small and 
customers are dedicated to projects.  
Several agile methodologies have been developed 
with the above objectives. They include Extreme 
Programming (XP), Crystal methods, Lean 
Development, Scrum, Adaptive Software 

Development (ASD). Among these, Extreme 
Programming (XP) is the most widely used. XP is a 
lightweight methodology that dispenses with much of 

the usual application development process, such as 
lengthy requirements definition and extensive 

documentation.  It emphasizes on keeping 

development teams small and the code simple [4]. The 
XP life cycle has four basic activities: coding, testing, 
listening, and designing [14]. XP improves a software 

project in four essential ways: communication, 

simplicity, feedback, and courage. It encourages 

continual communications with customers and teams, 

maintaining simplicity, providing frequent feedback 
via testing, and dealing with problems proactively 
[14]. Twelve core practices are proposed to achieve 

these goals 
1.XP practices focus on maximizing 
communication and enhancing team-work. Managers, 
customers, and developers are all part of a team 
dedicated to delivering quality software. 
Communication barriers between developers and 
customers are removed by having customers work 

with developers onsite. Daily stand-up meetings and 
pair programming enhance project communication 
among team members, while lowering overhead. 
Extensive communication and quick feedback help 

build trust between customers and developers [12].   
XP also empowers developers by enhancing their 
sense of project control [13]. By adopting XP, 

developers know where their project is heading and 
whether it is delayed. Furthermore, constant testing 
makes the programmers more aware of how well the 
code meets its expected functionalities. This 
knowledge improved the programmers’ motivation.  
Though software projects can benefit from agile 
methodologies, not all projects can directly adopt 
them. Characteristics of large, complex projects make 
it difficult to use agile methodologies directly. Large-
scale, complex systems face three major issues: the 
thin spread of application domain knowledge, 

fluctuating and conflicting requirements, and 
communication and coordination breakdowns [7]. 
First, deep-application knowledge from development 

team, required by large-scale, complex projects, is 
thinly spread through many software development 
staff. Such distributed knowledge must be integrated. 

Substantial design effort has to be spent in 
coordinating a common understanding of both the 
application domain and of how the system should 

perform. Second, the lack of application knowledge of 
                                                          
1http://www.computerworld.com/softwaretopics/software/appdev/stor
y/0,10801,66192,00.html
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE2
 developers and a variety of events such as changing 
business goals and policies may cause fluctuating and 
conflicting requirements in large, complex projects.  
Third, a large number of groups have to coordinate 
their activities and share information during software 
development. Extensive effort needs to be spent 
defining terms, coordinating representational 

conventions, and creating channels for the flow of 

information. 
Agile methodologies lack up-front design and 
investment in life-cycle architecture, and rely 

primarily on tacit knowledge of individuals and 

informal communication. All these practices can cause 

high risks. For example, teams may make 

irrecoverable architectural mistakes due to the lack of 
appropriate design. Customers to whom the developers 
have easy access to may not have enough knowledge 

of the requirements. Informal communication may not 
be effective when dealing with a large number of 
stakeholders and vast amounts of information that are 

characteristic of large projects. Traditional software 
development approaches, that are plan-driven, reduce 
these risks by a variety of strategies such as investing 

in life-cycle architecture, documenting necessary 

details, using formal external reviews, relying on 

strong leadership etc. 
However, large-scale, complex projects also face 
dynamic change in project requirements and time-to-

market pressure. Studies show that agile methods can 

be mapped to SW-CMM models, which is considered 
a traditional guidance model for software development 
process [14, 16]. To mitigate the risks in time-to-
market and changing requirements, efforts have been 
made to adopt XP in large-scale projects, with mixed 

results. Elssamadisy [8] and Reifer [16] report on the 

large projects that try to adopt the XP methodology. 
These studies show that some practices from agile 
methodologies, such as iterative development, 
frequent testing and feedback, small release, and 
refactoring, are suitable for large projects. However, 

some practices, such as standing-meetings and the use 

of metaphors to describe system architectures, are not 

appropriate. It is found that without an overall design, 
it is difficult to maintain a big picture of the project as 
the systems grow. The communication between 

developers is also problematic when a large number of 

stakeholders are included. Current literature does not 

provide any guidance on how to tailor agile 

methodologies for large-scale, complex projects. In 
this research, a case study is conducted, from which a 
set of practices on how to adopt an agile methodology 

for large projects is proposed. 
3.Agile practices for large-scale, complex 
Projects 
We are currently conducting a case study with a 
large software development organization (called 

FinApp hereafter) developing large-scale, complex 
corporate financial applications.  In this paper, we 
present initial insights gained from this study. 
3.1.Case description 
FinApp is involved in the development of a 
complex enterprise system that provides financial 
services to banks, insurance companies, loans and 

brokerages. The project includes more than 1,000 

business objects in six different categories. There are 

22 developers working on this project. The project 
team started with a modified XP approach. 
Specifically, a subset of XP practices has been 
modified for use in this project. The project had 

successfully delivered several applications before 

FinApp was merged with another large organization.  
3.2.Need for agile approach 
FinApp had recognized the key role that certain XP 
practices could play, when modified appropriately, in 

developing their complex financial systems.  The 
sensitive and mission critical nature of the enterprise 
system, in the views of critical stakeholders, well 

defined and enforced its processes. However, there is 

growing recognition that lack of agility makes it 

difficult to make changes to accommodate evolving 

requirements. Also, solely relying on formal 
communication causes problems in understanding and 
communication within the development team. 
In the following sections, we discuss how FinApp 
has tailored XP practices to suit their development 

environment, and how these practices conform to agile 

principles described in the literature. 
3.3.Tailoring XP for large and complex 
project 
The business domain for FinApp is relatively 
mature and stable. The application, by nature requires 

high level of reliability, security, as well as quality.  
“The difference is what we got here is an enterprise 
application and that is what drove everything… We 
have an extremely modified version of XP exactly 
because we have enterprise application”, 
says a 
project manager at FinApp.  The enterprise application 

requires a sound abstract design that can be applied to 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE3
 different applications. The system architects spent six 
months in developing business architecture and system 
infrastructure.  
Finapp is a “huge” application, with 7,000 program 
files all together. Beyond the size, the application 
involved corporate cash management, which is a very 
complex domain. Security is critical and quality is the 

focus of development effort. Even though users 

requirements change over time there is a basic pattern 
for business objects in the application domain. Based 
on these considerations and restrictions of the project, 

FinApp took a cautious agile approach by tailoring XP 

practices. 
3.3.1.Designing up front. 
XP de-emphasizes up 
front design because it is claimed that everything is 
changing. Instead, a “metaphor” is used to describe the 
basic elements and relationships of the application 

(Beck 2000).  However, for complex, large-scale 

projects upfront architectural design is considered to be 

essential.  In the FinApp project, upfront architectural 

design is both possible and necessary.
First, the banking environment is relative stable and 
the system can be described by a few typical business 

patterns. The project manager states, 
“…So it turns out 
that there is a fundamental pattern for this part, there 

is a fundamental pattern for this part, there is a 
fundamental pattern for this part. It turns out there are 
6 or 8 patterns that covers most of the system“.   
Second, for complex and mission critical 
applications like a banking system, the use of best 
practices such as flexible architectures and design 

patterns is important.  Upfront stable architectural 
design results in a strong backbone that could support 
several services built on top of it.   
For a mission-critical application, upfront design 
makes sure that the system meets security and 

reliability requirements. “
They (the customers) have to 
make sure they don’t have a pension plan built on any 
one of them, you know, so it has to be totally secure, 
totally documented and very clear from upfront
”.Customers need to ensure that the developers have not 

built a feature into the system to siphon out or divert 

money.  So all the design and source code are delivered 
to the banks.  
Upfront architectural design reduces the 
development time for new functionalities. Each new 

functionally is based on the infrastructure backbone 

and design patterns drawn from Gamma et al [9]. With 
this approach, the time and effort for implementing 
new functionalities are much reduced when compared 

to developing from scratch. “…
 each time we get a new 
service …, what I am doing is mapping the pattern. 

There is no need to technical specs. …we don’t have to 
do detail technical specs because we were following 
established patterns.”
  FinAPP project established new 
services based on the existing services and design 
patterns. For example, an application can be readily 
configured to satisfy clients in the finance industry in 

different countries, instead of developing custom 

solutions. 
Early architectural design also reduces developers 
training time thereby mitigating the costs of brining 
someone new on board.  A project manager at FinApp 
comments: “
What I can do, on any given day, is to 
unfold all the teams and put new people in them, I can 

have people who start on Monday and be productive 
on Thursday. Where most organizations take six 
months I can actually have… because you talk the bank 
pattern in a day and a half, and on Thursday you can 
create your own based on the patterns
”Upfront design helps control the costs of change. 
For large projects, the changes made to the system in 
response to change requests or for fixing errors cause 
unintended consequences and weaken the system over 
time. Design patterns are used to control the damage of 
changes by mechanisms such as centralized 

exceptional handling.  
Upfront design provides the developers with a 
clearer understanding of the entire system and helps 
them understand how several services can fit into the 
backbone architecture.  XP assumes that most stories 

are independent [4], however, it was found to be untrue 

in large and complex projects.  Taber and Fowler [19] 

also reported that, as a system grows, it becomes more 

and more difficult to maintain a big picture of all the 
implemented functionality and how they all worked 
together.  Architectural design becomes even more 
important for complex, large-scale applications 

because developers and analysts miss the connections 

and dependencies between stories as the application 

size and complexity grow [18].  An alternative to this 
could be having a design that evolves with the process 
instead of a complete upfront backbone design [11].  
Such evolving design is seen to have the problem of 

tight coupling between the persistence layer and 

business layer, which makes it difficult to refactor the 
code after several months of development. FinaApp 
avoided this problem by having a detailed, upfront, 

stable architecture.  It uses stable and standard 

interfaces, and patterns across the board.  With the 

infrastructure backbone, new services can just be 

plugged in, following established design patterns.  
3.3.2.Short release cycles with layered approach. 
Short (2 to 4 week) release cycles and continuous 
integration are touted as one of the highlights of agile 

software development methodologies like extreme 

programming.  For large-scale and complex projects, 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE4
 this is still seen as a relevant principle, with 
adaptations. “
Because everythingis ambiguous… What 
do customers want? Well, if you give me exactly what 
they want, they are gong to look at it and say, that’s 
neat, can you do this, I want something different. I 
mean programming change is normal, adding the 
sophisticated understanding and ambiguity is inherent 

in the situation… So to me, you have to have this 

collaborative on-going rapid development cycle, short 
release.”
 The upfront structural design of the backbone 
typically takes longer.  At FinApp, the architectural 

design took around 6 months. The layered approach, 

similar to XP short release practices, delivered end-to 
end functionalities that can go to production at the end 
of each short iteration. This practice differs from XP in 
that  the duration of the iterations are not fixed, but are 

based on the nature of the layers and tasks. 
A FinApp project manager, commenting on the 
need for this adaptation, states: 
“If you are doing 
layered deliverables, if we are late, we still got some 
stuff that works, rather than to say I don't have 
anything that works
.”  The focus is on getting 
production code that supports functionalities end-to-
end rather than developing heavily integrated modules. 
3.3.3.Surrogate customer engagement. 
The ideal 
customer for XP is an on-site customer who is also an 
end-user and has the ability, knowledge and courage 

for making decisions. Customer involvement is a key 
factor for XP project success. However, in reality, such 
access to customers is often difficult. In large-scale 

projects, the problem is amplified as the complexity of 
the application domain is often beyond the experience 
or expertise of a small number of customers as well as 

the developers.  The scope of software development 

expands to include a variety of stakeholders. The 
composition of development teams becomes more 
diverse, involving users and management from 
throughout the organization.  Another problem is that 
accessible customers are often not the end users of the 

system.
At FinApp, the real customers are banks and the 
end users of banks or other financial organizations. The 
customers are not readily available to the development 
team.  Though it is difficult to have an ideal customer 
involved, the degree of customer involvement is 

considered very important for development at FinApp.  

“We don't have access to a real customer.  So a true 
onsite customer and the stories, they weren't an option.  
”, says a project manager at FinApp.  The customers 
are surrogated by product managers or business 

analysts, who have direct contacts with customers.  
Product managers meet with the development team 

almost everyday to discuss changes in requirements 
and to make decisions on development options. Such a 
practice led to better project outcomes when compared 

to projects that had infrequent customer engagement.  
“The most successful case I had was with automated 
clearing where I actually got the product manager to 

attend the meeting every morning at 10 am ….  Any 

developer who had an issue or a problem attended. So 

what we did there was negotiated, problem-solved, 

modified the requirements, modified the spec, there 
really was a collaborative XP type of process where in 
the consultation with our onsite customer in this case. 

So that worked out great”, 
says the project manager at 
FinApp.  There is a clear need for continuous customer 
engagement in large-scale, complex projects. When 
direct access to customers is not feasible, the use of 
surrogate customers who are domain experts appears a 
reasonable compromise. 
3.3.4.Flexible pair programming. 
Although pair 
programming is seen as a good practice, it is not 

considered to be realistic in all situations [8].  In 

FinaApp, pair programming is used in a flexible way.  
Only analysis, design, test case development, and unit 
testing are done in pairs. Developers do try to code in 

pairs and most of them return to solo coding.  This is 

inherently tied to the personality of the developers.  
The level of pairing is customized to suit to the nature 
of the developers and the nature of the tasks that they 
perform.  A project manager at FinApp comments on 

this need to tailor the practices to suit the 

organizational culture as follows, 
“I am not going to 
insist people share the monitor.  That's just dictatorial.  
I guess a lot of the developers that I hired here have 
hacker personnel.  They really want to code.” 
 This 
issue of flexible pairing is intimately related to 
motivating the developers and keeping their morale 

high.  Sharing the same monitor and keyboard is also 

seen as a flexible aspect that works better when left as 

a choice to the developers.
The benefits of pair programming are also 
appropriately recognized.  Pair programming is seen 
to: 
•Reduce development time - Developers in pairs 
work faster as reported in FinApp Project. 
According to a project manager, two developers 
working together in a project finishes the project 

in roughly 80% time that would have taken if they 
were assigned separately. 
“I can say that with 
confidence because I have scheduled them both 

way“.
 The communication between two 
developers makes the communication 
documentation and management unnecessary.   
•Reduce training time - The developers learn from 
each other since developers with different level of 

experience and skills are paired together. 
“You are 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE5
 always mentoring or being mentored”
. “what I 
can do, on any given day, is to unfold all the teams 
and put new people in them, I can have people 
who start on Monday and be productive on 
Thursday. Where most organizations take six 
month”, 
claims a FinApp project manager.  
•Improve quality of code - Communication across 
developers is seen as an essential factor that 

reduces inconsistencies and defects during 
development.  A project manager at FinApp says, 
“Because there's really synergy and one of the 
biggest things is the communication where the two 
developers have to convince each other that they 

know what they are going to build before they 

build them.  And what the typical developer does is 
half understands an idea and is trying to work it 
out.  Whereas if you actually have to write the test 

cases first and explain it to somebody and get 

somebody to buy it, they'll pick up the 

inconsistencies and the holes.  That to me is 
probably the biggest plus in the whole thing.” 
This 
also relates to the issue of collective ownership.  

Pair programming increases the knowledge spread 

across developers in the team, thereby enabling 
any developer to tackle almost any problem 
related to the system.  Continuous rotation of 
developer pairs facilitates such collective 
ownership.  
“It was task oriented, but I pretty 
much made sure that I arranged the tasks so that 

nobody will, no team will work together for more 

than 6 weeks and there was an average of 2 

week”, s
ays a project manager.  Such rotation 
facilitates developer learning and enhances the 
sense of collective ownership. 
•Create a collaborative and supportive environment 
- Developers always have somebody to look for 

help in a paired setting. Moreover, these pairs 
work with teams of pairs and there's always a 
network of people to talk to and learn from. By 
doing this, a supportive and collaborative 
environment is created.  
3.3.5.Identifying and managing developers. 
FinApp considers the hiring process to be highly 
related to the success of its agile practices.  Developers 
who can recognize the importance of pattern-based 
development and providing standard interfaces across 
the system are seen as key to successfully projects.  

Developers’ knowledge about architectural design and 

design patterns is seen as critical. Approximately only 
15% of the applicants are considered to be qualified for 
this project environment.
Upholding developer morale is also seen as key to 
successful project outcomes.  At FinApp, it is believed 

that motivated developers are better performers.  
Hence, incentive schemes and flexibility initiatives 
focus on motivating developers.  
“It created an 
environment we have zero turnover”.  
The FinApp 
project manager proceeds to comment that: 
“…Respecting their contribution, and not reducing 

them to cogs on the machine.  And I see what happens 

when you are going to say to reduce your developers to 

just cogs.  They are terrible. They are unhappy and the 

only people you get are bad people”
.  Flexible working 
hours, remote working, focus on results rather than 
micro-management, are seen as key factors that affect 

developer morale and motivation.   
3.3.6.Reuse with forward refactoring. 
Pattern-
based and interface-based development approach 

facilitates reuse to a considerable extent.  Refactoring 
is seen as a key technique to enhance reuse across 
functionalities.  However, refactoring here may take on 
form different from what is defined in XP practices. In 
XP, refactoring is a practice that improves the design 

of the code without changing the functionalities of the 

program. Repeated code is removed, code is 
reorganized and cleaned, common lines of code are 
abstracted out into separated classes. In FinApp 

project, instead of changing existing code,  “forward 

refactoring” is largely used. “Forward refactoring” is 

an approach to develop new features by reusing 
existing code instead of developing new solutions. 
Existing services are untouched, new services are 

developed based on existing ones. For example, a 

project manager in FinApp comments: 
“So what we 
did was starting with the account transfer that already 

been built. We refactor forward. What we did was we 
took the account transfer and say ‘ok now we are 
going to build wire transfer… You built it in XP, you 

built once to satisfy your current need, then you get a 

new set of requirements, you overlaid them and find 
out that these are the part that stays the same. This is 
the part that changes. So this is where I have to insert 
my design patterns in order to isolate change from 
static”.  
Existing design and code is refactored forward 
to include new functions.  In summary, in typical XP 

practices, refactoring is a way to improve the design 
and making the system more robust, in FinApp, 
refactoring is seen as a technique for reuse with the 
support of the upfront architectural design. The 
architecture is designed in such a manner that it is not 

restricted to just banks.  It can be tailored to be used in 

any financial institution.
3.3.7.Controlled empowerment --organizational 
structure. Project managers at FinApp consider deep 
hierarchical organizational structure to result in 

unresponsive environments with high inertia.  A 

project manager at FinApp notes: 
“What we had in 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE6
 terms of XP, first of all, we didn’t have layers and 
layers of management. I just hate those layers of 
middle management. It is the worst thing about our 
occupation. We got rid of those…we got an extremely
fast, extremely responsive, extremely flexible 
environment”.  
Decentralizing development-oriented 
decision-making is seen as critical for a successful 

agile practice.  
“From my point of view, the concept of 
XP, a lot of them come from OO management --push 
decision making down, to invoke productivities, 
empower the people who are actually doing the work. 

Part of that was: not to insist that they share a 

monitor.”
The empowerment is controlled in an elegant 
manner through the committed use of standard 
interfaces and design patterns.  The developers cannot 
stray away from a standard approach to solving the 

problems at hand.  
3.4.Beyond XP practices - interesting 
findings  
In summary, at FinApp, concept of patterns and up 
front design, a layered deliverables approach, and pair 
programming are seen as the most important practices 

for developing large-scale, complex applications.  In 

addition, our study identifies some interesting practices 

that are different from but not necessarily inconsistent 

with XP principles. 
3.4.1.Impact of up front design on other 
practices. 
According to XP practices, big upfront 
design is not appropriate to embrace frequent changes. 

However, it is interesting to find that in this case that 

upfront architectural design actually supports other 

agile practices such as pair programming, refactoring 
and short release.
The benefits of pair programming are realized with 
the support of design patterns. The patterns predefined 
the structure of the system and foster understanding of 
the whole project. Based on the deep understanding 

and standard patterns, communication between 
developers is more efficient. Further, design patterns 
also eliminate the need for detailed documentation and 

layered management. This helps reduce the 

development time and supports rapid development. 
Most importantly, the knowledge transfer between 
pairs is largely enhanced by the design patterns. New 
people are always paired with someone who knows the 

patterns. A project manager put it this way: 
“…I can 
have (new) people who start on Monday and be 

productive on Thursday … because you talk the bank 
pattern in a day and a half, and on Thursday you can 
create your own based on the patterns. … two weeks 
we can cover all patterns.”
The benefit of reuse by refactoring in FinApp is 
also supported by the design patterns. In FinApp, since 

all functions are developed followed the design 
patterns, existing functions are largely reused to build 
new functions. “
To me, XP and design patterns are all 
the same things, and refactoring.” 
3.4.2.Management support and organizational 
culture.The FinApp case shows that management 
support is critical for successful adoption of an agile 
software development approach.  FinApp has been 
very successful in delivering quality products on 

schedule and within budget until the company merged 

with another big traditional banking company. The 

new organization values structured procedures, formal 

and detailed documentation and hierarchical 
management more than agility. “… 
there are these 
concepts that if I have enough procedures, If I have 
details on my procedures, then everything is going to 
be taken care of. We don’t have to worry about it.  But 

it is simply not true that at certain point, the 

procedures get so heavy weight.
”   The change in 
organizational culture resulted in the termination of the 
use of agile approach. Detailed documentation was 

required.  The attempted reversal from a lightweight to 

heavyweight methodology is resulting in lack of 

communication among the stakeholders and thereby 
increases number of defects due to misinterpretation. 
4.Agile Principles vs. Practices for 
Large-scale and Complex Software 

Development 
Based on a discovery colloquium, Baskerville et al 
[2]have described a set of agile development 
principles (Table 2).  Also, based on a study of 
software development practices in multiple U.S. 

Internet software development companies, they have 

identified a set of Internet speed development 
practices.  They compare the agile principles to 

traditional software development 
principles
, and with 
Internet speed software development 
practices
.  They 
observe that 
‘each of the Internet speed development 
practices come together to enact each of the agile 

principles’
.  They also compare the practices and 
principles that were identified by their study with the 
principles proposed in the agile manifesto 
(www.agilealliance.com
), which characterizes the 
values of agile methods and how agile methods 

distinguish themselves from traditional methods. 
Modified XP practices, while successful at FinApp, 
are aimed at providing agility within the constraints of 

a large project. These practices still are guided by the 
agile principles.  Table 3 shows the mapping between 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE7
 Modified XP practices followed to develop large-scale, 
complex projects and agile principles that are proposed 
by Baskerville et al.  [2].   
Table 2: Agile Principles (Adopted from Baskerville 
et al  2003) 
No. Agile Principles 
1 Accept multiple valid approaches
2 Accommodate requirements change 
3 Engage the customer 
4 Build on successful experience 
5 Develop good teamwork 
6 Effective software development conforms to 
project environment constraints 
7 Prepare for unexpected consequences from 
innovation in software processes 
Table 3: Comparing Modified XP Practices in 
Large Projects and Agile Principles  
Agile Practices for Complex, 
Large-scale projects 
Agile 
Principles Designing upfront 1, 4, 6 
Short release cycles with layered 

approach 
2Surrogate customer engagement 3 
Flexible pair programming 1, 5 
Identifying and managing developers 4, 5 
Reuse with refactoring 4 
Flatter hierarchies with controlled 
empowerment 
7From table 3 we can see that most of the agile 
practices identified in FinApp case fit well with the 

agile principles. This match, on one hand, illustrates 
the appropriateness of these practices. On the other 
hand, it also suggests the appropriateness of following 

agile principles in large complex projects.  
Practice 1: Designing upfront. 
Insteadof adopting 
the whole set of XP practices, FinApp used a 

“modified XP” approach. It combines designing 
upfront with agile practices such as short release, pair 
programming, and refactoring. This practice follows 

principle 1
 “accept multiple valid approaches”. This 
practice matches with 
principle 6
 too. Use of multiple 
approaches, on the other hand, results from constraints 

of the environment. FinApp is large in scope, complex 

in functionality and mission critical in nature. 

Development of this kind of system requires a 

carefully designed architecture. 
Practice 2: Short Release cycles with a layered 
approach. 
FinApp delivers end-to-end functionalities 
in each short iteration. By doing that, the system 
continuously accommodates requirements changes 
(Principle2
). The delivered functionalities suit the 
customer need rather than focusing on documenting 

detailed specifications. 
Practice 3:Surrogate customer engagement. 
This practice is a modified version of an XP practice --
on site customer. This practice follows the agile 
principle 3
 “Engage the customer”. FinApp cannot 
access its real customer, instead, it uses product 

managers as a surrogate.  
Practice 4: Flexible pair programming.
Following agile 
principle 5
 which is to “develop good 
team work”, flexible pair programming is used in 
FinApp. This practice is a modified version of XP 
“Pair programming” practice. Contrary to “always 

paired” in XP, in FinApp, developers are paired in 

analysis, design and testing. Coding is done by solo 
programming. The combination of solo programming 
and pair programming (
Principle 1
) overcomes some 
shortfalls of pair programming (e.g., developer’s 

resistance), while still benefiting from it where 

feasible.  
Practice 5: Identifying and managing 
developers. 
Peoplefactor is more important in agile 
development than in traditional development [6]. 
FinApp team emphasized choosing the right people for 
the team and created a collaborative environment to 

support teamwork (
Principle 5
). Developers’ 
knowledge and experiences on different aspects of a 
project are greatly valued (
principle 4
).Practice 6: Reuse with forward refactoring.  
This practice maps to the principle of building on 
successful experience.  Refactoring is used as a 

technique to enhance reuse.  Agile methodologies like 

XP do not emphasize development forreuse.They 
place a priority on speed, responsiveness and 
improvisation [2].  Developers usually focus only on 

their current need instead of building components for 

later reuse. However, for a large project like FinApp, 

development of upfront architectural design and use of 
design patterns are critical. Functionalities of the 
system are developed based on design patterns. Also, 

modules that have been developed to handle specific 

functionalities are refactored and made generic enough 
so that they can be tailored to handle different 
functionalities.  By doing this, code can be reused to 
speed up development. This approach shows that reuse 
does not actually conflict with the agile approach and 

should be included in agile principles for large-scale 

projects.   
Practice 7: Flatter hierarchies with controlled 
empowerment.
 In FinApp, layers of management are 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE8
 replaced by a slimmer organization that improves 
communications between stakeholders and increases 
productivity. Developers are empowered to make their 
own decisions. On the other side, for a large and 
mission-critical application, the empowerment might 
cause unexpected consequences such as 
incompatibilities among the development process and 

products produced by different developers. . FinApp 

took several steps to deal with this issue (
Principle 7
).The upfront architecture design and design patterns are 
used to standardize development. For example, 

exception handling is centralized to control potential 

damages resulting from changes that are necessary. No 

agile principle deals organizational structures. 

However, it is found in our study that organizational 
issues are very important to the successful adoption of 
agile approaches.  
5.Conclusion
Given the need to develop software at Internet 
speed, to accommodate changes in requirements, 

lightweight methodologies are becoming increasingly 
important.  However, such methodologies cannot be 
applied readily to every project.  They have to be 

tailored to suit the nature of the system and the 

development environment.  This is especially true for 

large-scale, complex, and enterprise systems.  Based 

on the initial findings from a case study, we have 
proposed a set of agile practices that have been tailored 
to be suitable for large-scale, complex projects.  We 
have compared these tailored practices with agile 

principles that were proposed prior research.  Creating 

a stable architectural design upfront is recognized as 
the striking difference between the agile practices for 
large-scale projects and agile principles.  
This research has several implications to theory and 
practice.  The guidelines for tailoring agile practices 

proposed in this research can help software 

development organizations that are considering the 

adoption of agile development methodologies.  This 
research emphasizes the importance of using a cautious 
approach to adopting lightweight methodologies, 
ensuring their suitability and identifying different 
aspects of the methodologies like XP that may not be 

suitable under particular circumstances.  We also 
highlight the applicability of agile development 
principles to large-scale, complex projects.  Typically, 

XP has been considered to be useful only for small and 
medium sized projects with small team sizes.  

However, we suggest that even large-scale, complex 
projects can benefit from adapting XP to suit to their 
environments.   
Future research will focus on identifying theoretical 
underpinnings of such lightweight methodologies and 
provide theoretical bases for tailoring such approaches.  
Further case studies should be conducted to refine our 

findings and to identif
y specific characteristics of 
projects that should be carefully considered while 
tailoring development methodologies, and how those 

characteristics can impact development methodologies. 
6.References 
[1]Manifesto for Agile Software Development. 2001, Agile 
Alliance:  
[2]R. Baskerville, B. Ramesh, L. Levine, J. Pries-Heje, and 
S. Slaughter, "Is Internet-Speed Software Development 

Different?," 
IEEE Software
, vol. Sep, 2003.  
[3]K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change
, Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[4]K. Beck and M. Fowler, 
Planning Extreme Programming
,New York, NY: Addison Wesley Longman, 2001. 
[5]B. Boehm, "Get Ready for Agile Methods, with Care," 
IEEE Computer
, vol. 35, no. 1, 2002, pp. 64-69. 
[6]A. Cockburn and J. Highsmith, "Agile Software 
Development: The People Factor," 
IEEE Computer
, vol. 
Nov, 2001.  
[7]B. Curtis, H. Krasner, and N. Iscoe, "A Field Study of the 
Software Design Process for Large Systems," 

Communications of the ACM
, vol. 31, no. 11, 1988.  
[8]A. Elssamadisy, "XP On A Large Project – A Developer’s 
View," in 
Proceedings of XP/Agile Universe
, Raleigh, NC, 
2001. 
[9]E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, 
Design 
Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software
,Addison-Wesley, 1995. 
[10]J. Highsmith and A. Cockburn, "Agile Software 
Development: The Business of  Innovation," 
IEEE 
Computer
, vol. 34, no. 9, 2001.  
[11]J. Little, "Up-Front Design Versus Evolutionary Design 
in Denali’s Persistence Layer," in 
Proceedings of XP/Agile 
Universe
, Raleigh, NC, 2001. 
[12]R.C. Martin, "eXtreme Programming Development 
through Dialog," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 18, no. 6, 2001.  
[13]O. Murru, R. Deias, and G. Mugheddu, "Assessing XP at 
a European Internet Company," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 20, no. 
3, 2003.  
[14]M.C. Paulk, "Extreme Programming from a CMM 
Perspective," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 18, no. 6, 2001.  
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE9
 [15]J. Rasmusson, "Introducing XP into Greenfield Projects: 
Lessons Learned," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 20, no. 3, 2003.  
[16]D.J. Reifer, "XP and the CMM," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 20, 
no. 3, 2003.  
[17]B. Rumpe and A. Schr der, "Quantitative Survey on 
Extreme Programming Project," in 
Proceedings of XP2002
,2002. 
[18]G. Schalliol, "Challenges for Analysts on a Large XP 
Project," in 
Proceedings of XP/Agile Universe
, Raleigh, NC, 
2001. 
[19]C. Taber and M. Fowler, "An Iteration in the Life of an 
XP Project," 
Cutter IT Journal
, vol. 13, no. 11, 2000. 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20040-7695-2056-1/04 $17.00 (C) 2004 IEEE10
