  1     INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR SMALL 
HOLDER AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS: 
THE MERCOSUR ONION™S 
INFORMATION NET
  Gustavo Matocq                          Esteban Tapella                        Carlos Cattaneo 
              Business Manager,               Former  General Coordinator         Business National Manager 
  Programa Social Agropecuario      Programa Social Agropecuario    Programa Social  Agropecuario 

              San Juan, Argentina.                      San Juan, Argentina.             Buenos Aires, Argentina 
               
psa@unsj.edu.ar
                                
etapella@iname.com
                     
ccatta@sagyp.mecon.gov.ar 
  This report has been written based on the work of 
ﬁMercosur Onion´s Information Netﬂ  which is being 
developed by all its participants since March 9
th, 1998
  ABSTRACT 
 Arrangement of an adequate price's information of 
agricultural products  that are cultivated by small 

farmers constitute  a key element to facilitate commercial 

operations, improving their incomes. So, it's necessary  to 

develop an agile, dynamical and transparent  information 

mechanism, in order to link producers, buyers,  technical, 

and public organizations,  between themself and others.   
 These elements were had in account to implement 
MERCOSUR Onion's Information Net. It  was started in 

1998 by  the Agricultural Social Program (PSA)  and 
INTA in San Juan's province (Argentina). Today, there 
are more of   20 representative  of public and private 
institutions of various South American countries that 

participate in it. The main aim of the experience  was the 

articulation of  an information net-system which linked 

the agents who participate in producing and marketing  

the products,  in order to have information to permit 

every actors  knowing  at all times the situation of the 

product's markets.
      Ideas, interpretations and conclusions of this document, 
are author™s own, and they aren™t necessary Programa 
Social Agropecuario™s criterions 

   1) Introduction.  
 Improvement of all  aspects linked to the information 
of markets of the products of the small farmers is a key 

element to optimize taking of  decisions regarding the 

commercial canalization of the same ones. It™s possible to 
give by this way elements for producers and technicians 
to work with them to optimize the taking of decisions to  
operate in more advantageous commercialization 

channels, or, in their defect, to improve the operative ones 
in the traditionally used channels.  
 
Particularly important it is the knowledge of the prices 
that are paid in field  to the producers by habitual buyers 
(wholesalers, middlemen, etc.); this kind of  information 
is very difficult to obtain, and little diffused too, contrary 

to the prices of the product in wholesalers markets,  data 

that are frequently published in newspapers, specialized 

publications, either in their traditional form (paper), or 

more recently, through the respective pages of Internet.  
 
Information that is of utility for the small producer 
should act like a base of comparison to obtain in the 
diverse markets elements that becomes a guide in turn for 
the future planning of the production.  
 Gathering the information, two obstacles appear: the 
truthfulness of the same one and the scarce articulation 

among the sources. Although these provide in many cases 

of good information, many times we find 
  2 difficulties starting from their dispersion and the scarce 
linking of what happens at the same time in the most 

important markets with what happens simultaneously in 

the main producers areas. 
  
All these elements have been kept in mind to take the 
activity that we point out in this report : the ﬁMercosur 
Onion™s Information Netﬂ task that, in the Agricultural 
Social Programm™s (PSA) ambit, is developed by 
Provincial Unit of San Juan's-PSA. PSA is developed by 
the Secretary of Agriculture, Livestock, Food and 
Fisheries of the Argentine Republic (SAGPyA) and 
promoves, among other activities, the development of 

actions to improve economic and social conditions of 

peasants, small producers and farmers. PSA tries too of 

obtainning  a better relation between these groups and 

the market, through the facilitation of its access of its 

production
.  Basically, the objective was the articulation of an 
information system that links to the interested parts: 
producers, merchants, and technicians, with the purpose 
of having information of quality and with a such 
frequency to allow us s to know in all moment the 

situation of the market of a product, onion in this case. 
    
 2) Onion production in San Juan™s 
province  and the lacks of commercial 

information. 
 The onion is a production that is characterized by 
showing oscillations marked in its rates among a season 
and other, inside oneself campaign in relatively brief 
lapses of time. 
 Although with differences  for the magnitude of the 
variations, this behavior is presented so much with the 

prices in field of the main producers area of the country 

like in the markets of destination of its productions 

(mainly, Brazil).  
 
The main areas of onion production in the Argentina 
are located in the provinces of  Buenos Aires, San Juan, 
Mendoza and Santiago del Estero. Buenos Aires is  the 
biggest producer with a near participation of 50% of the 

national total, and it covers the period of March to 
September. San Juan's province,  with 15%, of  total, 
has an offer that embraces the whole year.  In this 

province,  onion is the most important horticultural 
cultivation. The implanted total surface reached in the 
campaign 97/98 to 4.174 hectares, of which 1.935 
correspond to the department of Jáchal. It fits to 

highlight that the onion production in the valley of 

Jáchal is an activity that comes carrying out for more 
than 50 years. However, in the last years the market of 
the product suffered big transformations that impacted 
in the competitiveness of the product of the region 
(Dirección de Mercados de Productos No Tradicionales, 
op. cit). 
 
During last years, the most important change in the 
demand is the conformation of the MERCOSUR that 

allowed the development from an important and 

growing flow of Argentinean exports to Brazil was. 
Although the neighboring country traditionally cared 
onion from the Argentina, the conformation of the 
regional block allowed to reach  récords, with more than 
300.000 TM of onion exported to this market (Pechuán, 
A., op. cit.).  
 
The commercial exchange of onion inside the 
MERCOSUR is developed mainly between Brazil and 

Argentina, and in smaller measure, Uruguay and 

Paraguay. This exchange has been increased flagrantly 

starting from the decade of the 90, motivated by the 

necessity of the Brazilian market and the immediate 
reaction of the sector productive Argentinean to cover 
this demand. Practically the total cared by the countries 
members of this Market comes from the exchange 
among the same ones, being highly the Argentina the 
country exporter inside the MERCOSUR and Brazil its 
inverse one.  
 One of the central problems that should make front 
the medium and small producers is the scarce 
information about prices. Sometimes, it also happens a 

difference  among the time in receiving the information 

and the changes that can take place in that lapse, for 
what can be outdated when counting on her. 
 Difficulties exist to get the appropriate information. 
In general, the sources are dispersed, barely organized 
among them and it is not generally linked at the same 
time to the more important markets with what happens 

simultaneously in the main producers area, supplying of 
them. 
 The lack of the appropriate information by  the 
producers, in the moments that   they should make 

decisions take them to make errors that reduce their 

scanty gain margins. Then, there is a necessity to 

orchestrate a system of information to link  the 

interested parts: producers, buyers,  technicians, public 

organisms, among others.  
      
 
 
 
 
 
   3 Commercialization of onion in Jáchal.
   The knowledge of traditional markets mechanisms in 
Jáchal Valley, the main onion area in San Juan, could 

be a valious indicator to recognize th importance of a 
tool as Onion™s Net.  
 Regarding Jáchal™s situation, PSA-San Juan and the 
Agency of INTA in that place consigns that  ﬁthe onion 
production in Jáchal is one of the most important 
economic activities in the department, and it is carried 

out by numerous small producers, for which it 

represents its main source of revenues. These producers 

find it more and more difficult to adapt to the 

characteristics that present the markets. 
 
In general, commercial operative in Jáchal is carried 
out traditionally through middlemen that acquire the 
onion heaped in conservation structures known as 
ﬁwhales.ﬂ This operator  takes charge of the tasks of 
having pocketed, habitually carried out to field, and of 
the distribution of the product until the definitive buyers. 
For the producer, the advantage of this system is its 

simplicity, added to the fact that it needs  to finance the 

packing expenses and commercialization. The most 

serious difficulty that presents this operative  is that it 

doesn't allow any control degree on the commercial 

administration and it prevents to develop new 

commercial strategies.  
 This structure of operation of the commercialization 
is functional in a context of ﬁstable marketﬂ, but it 

shows its limitations in years of production excess and 
depressed prices. In these cases, the producer 
practically is forced ﬁto surrenderﬂ their merchandise 

to tiny values. In many cases, it doesn't not even suit to 
harvest.  
      With the conformation of the first groups of the PSA 

and Cambio Rural (a programm developed by INTA, 

destinated to farmers and medium-size producers) in the 
area, toward 1994, it became evident the necessity to 
give answer to the demand of the producers. In the first 
stages it was necessary to define with more precision 

the characteristics of the demand, being detected the 
necessity to have better information on the behavior of 
the market of the product. The concern outlined by the 

producers in this topic motivated the conformation of 
support teams in the commercial topics, to generate 
actions in order to have a good level of commercial to 
allow the technicians to offer an appropriate 

commercial advice to the groups.ﬂ (PSA San Juan Œ 

AER INTA Jáchal, op. cit.)
      
   3) Emergence of Onion™s Information 
Net.  
 The idea of a system of information of onion prices 
was of  the engineers Gustavo Matocq (PSA San Juan), 
Alfredo Estévez (AER Jáchal INTA) and Arturo 
Pechuán (AER Pocito INTA). The finality  was to bring 

San Juan´s producers an instrument to get better prices 
in markets for their onion production.  
 
 The objectives to reach were: 
 - To have information of quality and with a such 
frequency to allow to know in all moment the situation 

in the main markets. 
 - To have for each one of the production areas the 
prices in field, paid to the producers. 
 - To know the state of the cultivations along their 
cycle or even during the post-harvest. 
 - To estimate the implanted surfaces and the yields 
waited in each one of the producers area, previous to the 
harvest. 
 
- To predict the behavior of the prices of the onion in 
the main markets of the region. 
 
- To link interested people (producers, buyers, 
technicians, public organisms, among other) in the 
problem of this cultivation.  
 - To diffuse information linked to this cultivation, 
e.g.: general news, technical topics, regulations, 
seminars, congresses, etc. 
 
 
In a first stage the general characteristics of the 
operation of this system were delineated in net form, 

such as type of information to receive, frequency with 

which it should arrive to the place where it would be 

analyzed and rhythm with which the circular would be 
emitted. 
 Mrs Mabel Pereyra, (Undersecretary of Economic 
Programming, province of Mendoza), Mrs. Laura 
Marún and Miss Elida Hidalgo (both of Cambio Rural  
Programm),   also participate in this information system 

since the beginning of the net. 
 Later on the first contacts, many technicians linked to 
the  sector knew the initiative and were interested to 

participate in it. An extremely important incorporation 

was  the Engineer Guido Boeing (of the ICEPA, of 
Santa Catarina, Brazil), for the quality of the given 
information, besides the importance that has this country 
as destination of export of the onion.  
  4  Central activity of the Net is  the elaboration and 
electronic distribution (by e-mail) of a weekly bulletin 

with information of the main wholesalers markets of 

MERCOSUR, prices at level of the producer for each 

one of the areas, marketed volumes and inform of state 

of the cultivations of each area producer. This bulletins 
are elaborated by Eng Gustavo Matocq and Eng Arturo 
Pechuan. Starting from the first bulletins, they were 
incorporating other professionals of the country and of 
the exterior (Brazil and Uruguay) conforming a group at 
the present time of about 20 professionals and their 
respective institutions and organisms of ownership 

linked through the Net (Refer to Participants of 

Mercosur Onion™s Information Net). 
 For a correct operation of the Net of Information of 
Onion, the quality of the information that is sent as its 

continuity, constitutes key aspects.   
 Basically, the Net offers specific information on the 
following aspects:  
  1 -Weekly information of the main concentration 
markets in MERCOSUR countries.  
 It includes prices in the markets of Buenos Aires, 
Córdoba and recently Santa Fe, in Argentina, besides 

the main centers of Brazil and Uruguay.  
  2 - Weekly information of the prices paid in the 
main areas of onion production.
  This information is raised through producers in each 
area, that is obtained by technicians and institutions 

linked to this activity. The information includes the 

conditions  in which the operation is made (quality, 

packing, etc.) to be able to compare the data later on. 

The information should be the most detailed possible, 

for example when prices are indicated, it™s necessary to 

consign caliber, quality, origin, among others elements. 
  3 - Surface and state of the cultivations and stock in 
each producer area. 
 Once adjusted the details, the first circular was sent 
in March 9
th, 1998. At this moment (June 2000,) more 
than 120 Bulletins were submitted uninterrumped,  
mainly with a weekly frecquency.  A reproduction of 
one of those circular ones is shown in the Annex 1. 
 
It interests to highlight the presence in the Net of two 
key sources of information:  
 a) the related to the offer, represented by the prices 
that register in the main producers area of the 

Argentina and  
 b) all that happens in the market Brazilian, main 
destination of the Argentinian exports of this 

product.  
 Favorable results that are obtained with the operation 
of the Net are possible in significant form by the 
disposition of this information week to week, through 
the real engagement of all Net™s participants.  
 
 
 4) Achievements and difficulties in the 
operation of the Net.  
 Not much more than two years  of Net™s initiation, 
we can count significant achievements, and also some 
difficulties that can end up limiting in the future a to 
work effective.  
 The main achievements are: 
 - The Net allows to have information of quality with 
a such frequency to allow to know, practically in all 

moment,  the situation in the main region™s markets. 
 
- It makes possible to have for the main production 
areas the prices in field, paid to the producers, in way of 

being able to link them with the prices quoted in the 
destination markets. 
 - We can obtain information about  the general state 
of the cultivations along their cycle or even during the 
post-harvest for the main producers area, for example of 
the climatic conditions that can affect them, intense 

rains, hails, etc.. 
 
- The knowledge of  implanted surfaces and the 
yields waited in each one of the producers areas, 

previous to the harvest.  
 - Bonds settle down among many people interested in 
the problem of this cultivation (producers, buyers, 
technicians, public organisms, among other)  
 - Onion™s Net constitutes a vehicle for the diffusion 
of information linked to the revenues of onion of third 

countries, congresses, seminars, new regulations, etc. 
We must mention that Onion™s Net was presented 
during  ﬁXI Brazilian National Seminar of Onionﬂ, 
carried out in Ituporanga, Santa Catarina, Brazil, in 

March, 1999. In that event, was included the word 

ﬁMERCOSURﬂ at his tittle.  
     5 There are diffculties, too;  some of these are:  
 
- Insufficient data are sometimes observed about the 
volumes marketed in the different places. 
 
- The prediction capacity should be improved, in way 
of foreseeing with more precision what can happen in 
the future. 
      - There is an apparent necessity to have periodic 
information of the exit of trucks of each producer 
province, in order to know the physical movement of 
merchandise to evaluate the level of demand of the  

different markets and the evolution of the stocks in each 

one of the areas. 
 
- It is necessary to have information of other markets 
in Argentina, (Rosario, Tucumán) and in other countries 

of the MERCOSUR, as Paraguay. 
   5) Projection of the Net towards the 
future.  
  Starting from the sustained operation of the ﬁOnion´s 
Netﬂ,  it is possible, to delineate with more precision the 

future actions.  
 
Consolidation of the Net will allow, in first term, to 
improve the received information, and in second place, 

to enlarge the same one. There are many  topics that 
would be appropriate to incorporate, among those that 
stand out: 
 - the regulations in Custom™s matters. 
 - phytosanitary regulations, as in  origin areas and 
destination,  
 - information about input systems, logistics, 
packaging, and services of transport 
 - articulation modalities among offer and it 
demands, commercial documentation, juridical 
aspects,  etc.  
 - information about  commercial opportunities.  
 At the same time, Onion™s Net  constitutes an 
excellent example to attempt, to take the experience 
ahead with other products of importance in the economy 
of the small farmers and peasants  
 
The Net is becoming the embryo of Commercial 
Information Net, to connect all the units of the Program 
with other companies, organisms and institutions linked 
to the thematic and operative commercial. This will 
serve as a base to think in  the future in the possibility of 
constituting Centers of commercial Information at 
national, regional and provincial level, in order to 

centralize information of utility for commercialization 

actions.  These Centers would act as reporters, 

processors, and distributors of market information that, 

for their characteristics of specificity, accessibility or 

cost, could make convenient a handling of this nature. 
 Also, the conformation of a System of Identification 
and diffusion of commercial opportunities, constitutes 
another goal to reach.  This implies the diffusion of 
those possibilities of short purchase term and sale of 
products in the local, provincial, regional or national 

markets, as well as of all information that could be of 

uttility could for the concretion of future business 

among interested actors.  
  
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
  
DECONINCK, LUCAS (1996):
 ﬁRedes y bases de datos 
sobre comercialización agropecuariaﬂ, in 
RURALTER, Revista 
de Desarrollo Rural Alternativo, ﬁCampesinos y mercado: 

desafíos actuales de la comercialización asociativa
ﬂ, No. 15, 
págs. 29-48,  CICDA, La Paz, Bolivia, 1996. 
 DIRECCION  DE MERCADOS DE PRODUCTOS NO 
TRADICIONALES (SAGPYA) (1998):
 Situación y 
perspectivas de mercados para la cebolla fresca. 

  PECHUAN, ARTURO  (1998):
 La producción de cebolla 
temprana en San Juan
.   PSA SAN JUAN Œ AER INTA JACHAL (1998):
 La 
comercialización actual de cebolla en Jáchal. 
Mimeo. 
 RED DE INFORMACIÓN DE CEBOLLA DEL 
MERCOSUR  (1998) : 
Boletines de la Red  de Información 
de Cebolla del MERCOSUR, Vol I,  1998, San Juan. 
 RED DE INFORMACIÓN DE CEBOLLA DEL 
MERCOSUR  (1999) : 
Boletines de la Red  de Información 
de Cebolla del MERCOSUR, Vol II,,  1999, San Juan
.  RED DE INFORMACIÓN DE CEBOLLA DEL 
MERCOSUR  (2000) : 
Boletines de la Red de Información de 
Cebolla del MERCOSUR,, year  2000, San Juan. 
    
 
 
 
 
    
   6 ANNEX 1: 
 REPRODUCTION OF A CIRCULAR OF 
ﬁTHE MERCOSUR™S INFORMATION NETﬂ 
  MERCOSUR™S ONION 
INFORMATION NET 
 CIRCULAR NO. 74 
 San Juan, August 6
th, 1999 
  
 Table of Contents
   
1) Prices in field 

2) Prices in Markets 

3) List´s participants 

   1) Prices in field 
 Origin 
Prices ($) 
Observations 
San Juan, 
Tulúm 
Valley 
0,50 Œ 0,70 Valenciana 
San Juan, 
Jáchal 
0,50 Œ 0,60 Valenciana 
South of 
Buenos 
Aires 
0,50 Œ 0,70 Valenciana 
Río Negro 0,50 Valenciana 
 References:
  Values correspond to onion™s necessary 
quantity to complet a bag of 25 kg, paid to the 

producers in ﬁwhalesﬂ. 
 Values written in green represent increases 
with relationship to  prices informed in the last 
previous circular. Values in 
red 
indicate 
descens, while when they are in  
black, 
it 
means that changes have not taken place.  
 In Tulúm Valley, the scarce activity is 
continnuing, and prices stay in values of the 
last week, $ 0,50 Œ0,70 for bag in operations of 

counted or 30 days. 
 Eng. Adriana Koninjnenburg and Leticia 
Tamburo, from Río Negro, inform that the 
market doesn™t register big variations. In 

general, they are being carried out operations 

for internal market to $ 1,50 for finshed bag. 

The export hasn™t had a lot of mobility. Seed 
estimates aren™t still for the next campaign, but 
it™s not observed that there is a loto of prepared 

earth.  Completing the information of the first 
semester of expenditures of the protected 

region to the south of Colorado™s River, 

including areas of production of the south from 
Buenos Aires and Río Negro, we present the 
following table: 
 
 Onion™s Protected region 
Volume  destinated to export and internal 

market     (In Tons) 
  TOTAL 
Wholesaler 
Deposit 
27.177 
Packing shed 61 
Industry 217 
Middleman 29 
Wholesaler 
Markets 
38.019 
Retailer 973 
Produccer 60 
Supermarket 2.198 
General total 
68.733 
  Onion™s Protected region 
Volume  destinated to export and internal, 
by container type (In Tons) 
 
  TOTAL 
BIN 68 
Bag (10 KG) 1.290 
Bag (20 KG) 135.333 
Bag ( 25 KG) 93.629 
Box (25 KG) 39 
Wood cage 11 
Others 2.721 
General total  
233.091 
  2) Prices in markets 
 Corresponding to 2-6 August, 1999, week. All 
values are without IVA and they are for 25 kg 

bag.  
 In MCBA (Buenos Aires Central Market) 
there aren™t observed variations regard to the 
maximum and minima prices, relationed last 

week
  7 .Market 
Type 
 Price 
($) 
 Origin 
Quality 
Gauge 
Observations 
  Máx. 
Middle 
Mín. 
    Córdoba  
 3.50 3.25 3.00 
   Price:  26/7 
Santa Fe  Valcat 
 3.50   
1º  Price: 28/7 
Rawson (San 
Juan)  
Valcat 
3.00  3.50 
San. 
Juan. 
1º Middle Prices of the last 
week 
Guaymall
én Mendoza  
Valcat 
 2.75  
Mza.   Prices of the last 
week 
MCBA  Valcat 
1.50 1.20 1.00 
Mza 2
º Little  
 Valcat 
3.00 2.60 2.00 
Mza 2
º Middle  
 Valcat 
3.50 2.80 2.00 
Bs As 2
º Middle  
  Coments about
 Córdoba™s market
, by Elida 
Hidalgo and Laura  Mar
ún: Prices of  onion in the 
Cordona market for this week are of $3,00 - $3,50 
the bag of Valenciana of 2
ª quality.  The onion is 
quoting very little in the market as consequence of 

the great quantity and mainly the bad quality, since 

most is sprouted. People have also been observed 

distributing onion in truck for different Cordoba
™s towns. Most of  the onion that enters to this market 

is coming from San Juan and Mendoza, 

approximately 5% comes from the South of Bs. For 

next weeks the entrance onion of better quality of 
Santiago del Estero is expected.  
 In the 
market of Santa Fe
 the onion bag was sold 
at  $ 3.00 (minimum)  and $ 3,50 (maximum)and it 

presents an increase of the order of a weight for bag 
with regard to the previous week.  
 In the Model Market of Uruguay, inform sent 
by Engs. Fernando Gemelli and. Rub
én Barboza, consigns that between 19
th and 23th 
July, the onion commercialization in the Model 
Market was averaged by one flowing 
placement, although the rates didn't present 
modifications with regarding last week. Also 
the offer in this month  registers similar 
behavior with regard to last month of June. An 

excellent change is appreciated with regard to 

the quality average of the offer, which is 
inferior to that of the month of June, in fact 
they are very few departures which could be 

classified as extra quality or special 
 
 
 REVENUES OF DRY ONION TO THE MODEL 
MARKET (MONTEVIDEO, ROU) 
 Weeks of July 
19-23/7 
  12-16/7 
   05-9/7 
Revenues (kgs) 195,388 171,956 180,537 
Weekly variation (%)

   13.6 -4.8 
 Weeks of June 
21-25/6 
14-18/6 
7-11/6 
Revenues (kgs) 185.602 89.280 130.304 
Weekly variation (%)
   42,4 45,9 
  Reference prices (U$S7kg) at the end of the present 
week were:.  
 - national onion of first quality:   U$S 0.28 - 0.32 
. imported onion (Argentina) : U$$ 0.32 - 0.36 
. imported onion (Chile) : U$S 0.30 - 0.34  
 
    
 
    
        8   
  Eng.  Guido Boeing (ICEPA, Brazil) sends the 
following report
1:  Inicialmente, gostaria de dar as boas-vindas 
às colegas Eve    I
ñiguez de Santiago del Estero e Adriana 
Van Konijnenburg e Leticia Tambuco de Rio Negro, 
à Rede de Informa
ção de Cebola do Mercosul e 
cumpriment
á-las publicamente pelas excelentes mat
érias 
disponibilizadas. 
 
Tenho absoluta certeza que a equipe da Rede foi 
extremamente beneficiada pela incorpora
ção das 
colegas ao grupo. Qui
ça, possamos enriquecer cada vez 
mais nosso informativo, diminuir as diferen
ças 
existentes entre os nossos pa
íses e promover o bem-estar 
da classe ceboleira do Mercosul. 
 
 Em anexo, as informa
ções dispon
íveis para a Rede. 
 PRE
ÇOS APRESENTAM-SE EM BAIXA
  Os trabalhos de transplante de mudas na Regi
ão Sul 
do país continuam dentro do cronograma previsto. As 
condi
ções clim
áticas t
êm sido favor
áveis para a 
execução dessa tarefa, assim como para o 
desenvolvimento das mudas que se apresentam com 

índice de doen
ças abaixo do verificado em anos 
anteriores.  
 
No Estado de S
ão Paulo e nas Regi
ões produtoras do 
Nordeste (Pernambuco e Bahia), intensificam-se as 

operações de colheita, que dever
ão permanecer bastante 
fortes at
é o final do pr
óximo m
ês.      
    
 
    
   
                                                            
 1 The report is in its original language (Portuguese), as it is in 
the original version of Bulletin. 
 A normaliza
ção do transporte redovi
ário no Brasil 
permitiu a recomposi
ção dos estoques e determinou 
mudan
ças no comportamento da comercializa
ção da 
cebola. O mercado voltou a operar com grande 
movimenta
ção do produto e pre
ços e recuo em 
praticamente todos os grandes centros de consumo do 
país. 
 Do total da oferta que se registra na Capital de S
ão Paulo, estima-se que 70% seja formado de bulbo 

provenientes do Brasil (origin
ários principalmente das 
regiões produtoras de Monte Alto e S
ão Jos
é do Rio 
Pardo/SP) e 30% constitu
ídos de produto importado da 
Argentina. 
 
Na comercializa
ção paralela da Pracinha, na capital 
paulista, de acordo com informa
ções da Bolsa de 
Cereais, os pre
ços de venda situam-se de 
R$ 4,50 a R$ 
5,50/sc
 de 20 quilos para o produto nacional e de 
R$ 7,00 a R$ 8,00/sc
 para a cebola importada. 
  Nas principais centrais de abastecimento do Norte, 
Nordeste e Centro-Sul do  Pa
ís, os valores de venda 
situam-se conforme quadro a seguir. 
  9   CEBOLA - PREÇOS NO MERCADO ATACADISTA DO BRASIL 
(R$/sc de 20 quilos) 
PRAÇA 
NÍVEIS DE PREÇO 
PROCEDÊNCIA 
 Mínimo 
M.Comum 
Máximo 
 Porto Alegre 
5,00 7,00 9,00 
Nacional 
 7,00 8,00 9,00 
Importada 
Florian
ópolis 
4,00 6,00 7,00 
Nacional 
 8,00 9,00 10,00 
Importada 
Curitiba 
6,50 7,00 7,50 
Nacional 
 8,00 8,50 9,00 
Importada 
Campinas 
8,00 9,00 10,00 
Nacional 
 10,00 11,00 12,00 
Importada 
São Paulo 
5,44 6,09 6,44 
Nac/SP (gra
úda) 
(Ceagesp) 
5,44 6,09 6,44 
Nac/SP (m
édia) 
 4,44 4,44 5,44 
Nac/SP (mi
úda) 
 5,00 6,00 7,00 
Nac/MG(grau/med) 
 4,00 4,50 5,00 
Nac/MG (mi
úda)  8,00 9,00 9,00 
Importada (gra
úda) 
 8,00 9,00 9,00 
Importada (m
édia) 
 7,00 7,00 8,00 
Importada (mi
úda) 
Rio de Janeiro 
5,00 6,00 6,00 
Nacional 
 8,00 8,00 9,00 
Importada 
Brasília 
6,00 7,00 8,00 
Nacional 
 10,00 10,00 11,00 
Importada 
Belo Horizonte 
4,00 5,00 6,00 
Nacional 
 8,00 8,00 9,00 
Importada 
Salvador 
3,50 3,50 4,00 
Nacional 
 7,00 8,00 9,00 
Importada 
Recife 
4,00 4,00 5,00 
Nacional 
 5,00 6,00 7,00 
Importada 
Belém 7,00 7,00 8,00 
Nacional 
 13,00 13,00 13,00 
Importada 
FONTE: Ceasas dos Estados. 
ELABORA
ÇÃO: Instituto Cepa/SC. 
   10Preços do dia 5/8/99
. Cota
ção do D
ólar: 1 US$ = R$ 1,85 
OBS:Verde = 
Aumento
;  Vermelho
 = 
Redu
ção;  Preto = 
S/mudan
ça.     3) Participants of MERCOSUR Onion
™s Information Net.  
   Nombre 
Instituci
ón Ciudad/Provincia 
País Eng. Arturo Pechu
án AER INTA Pocito Pocito, Province of San 
Juan 
Argentina 
Lic. Elida Hidalgo Programa Cambio Rural Province of San Juan  Argentina 
Lic. Laura Mar
ún Programa Cambio Rural Province of San Juan  Argentina 
Eng. Alfredo Estevez AER INTA J
áchal J
áchal, Province of San 
Juan  
Argentina 
Eng. Pablo Itzcovich External Trade Direction Villarino County, province 
of Buenos Aires 
Argentina 
Eng. Nancy Mabel 
Pereyra 
Undersecretary of 
Economic Programming 
Province of Mendoza Argentina 
Eng. Fernando Fern
ández INTA Santiago del Estero Santiago del Estero Argentina 
Lic. Sila Mugnani Statistics and Census 
Office 
Province of San Juan Argentina 
Eng. Gustavo Matocq PSA San Juan Province of San Juan Argentina 
Eng. Carlos Larocca Direction of Non-
Traditional Products, 
SAGPyA 
Buenos Aires Argentina 
Eng. Jos
é Posse Direction of Non-
Traditional Products, 

SAGPyA 
Buenos Aires Argentina 
Eng. Adriana Van 
Koninjnenburg 
INTA R
ío Negro Low 
Valley 
Río Negro Argentina 
Eng. Adriana Tamburo INTA R
ío Negro Low 
Valley 
Río Negro Argentina 
Lic. Mabel Las Heras EEA INTA Salta Province of Salta Argentina 
Eng. Rosa Mintzer EEA INTA Salta Province of Salta Argentina 
Eng. Guido Boeing ICEPA Santa Catarina State Brazil 
Eng. Rossana Catie 
Bueno 
ICEPA Santa Catarina State Brazil 
Eng. Fernando Gemelli Montevideo Market Model Montevideo Uruguay 
 