    Bridge Methods:  Using a Balanced Project Practice Portfolio to Integrate 
Agile and Formal Process Methodologies  
  Stephen J. Cohen  William H. Money 
Microsoft Corporation      The George Washington University 
  Abstract 
 This paper examines the non-linear nature of 
progress on software projects. It asserts that this 

uneven accomplishment stems from the continuous 
need to drive value quickly in response to a project 

manager or owner perceiving that a project is failing, 

near failure, or a least that the owning organization is 
loosing value
 from either poor process or poor 
organizational choices of tools and development 

methods.   
It describes how using a balanced project practice 
portfolio to integrate agile and formal process 
methodologies can theoretically reduce the observed 
variance in project productivity caused by poorly 
applied or poorly selected 
best practices
.   
Finally, it proposes a methodology that uses 
expected practice performance and combinations of 
practices to; 
identify missing practices, 

off-set poorly applied practices, and  
assess the quantity and types of practices required to 
smooth and optimize project performance 
outcomes.  
 1. Introduction:  Using a portfolio of 
practices to integrate agile and formal 

practices 
 Principles and practices of Agile are rapidly, but un-
intentionally being combined into a generic 
portfolio 
of practices
 (called by different names) similar to 
processes and practices already accepted in the 
formal/traditional development methodologies. This is 

confusing to the developers in the field, project and 
program managers, and all but the truly informed or 

involved. The general practitioners and managers 

typically view Agile in an optimistic light as a highly 
streamlined and adaptive delivery methodology or in 
the more pessimistic view as a messy, confusing, ill 
defined, and rigor adverse excuse for failing to deliver 
in a predictable and measurable way.  
Practices, viewed as traditional or standard methods 
of acting, are key to this method of improving project 
performance. Practices are postulated to have attributes 
that make them more or less effective under varying 
project conditions (e.g., stag
e of development, scale, 
expertise, staff experience, etc.). The resultant effects 

of implementing practices are therefore not predictable, 

always uniform, or always positive for a project. Case 

descriptions of the associated consequences of 
implementing specific practices as measured through 
cost benefits, performance, and risk mitigation results 

are widely varying. One can conclude that great 

practices 
 best practices as described in surveys - do 
not always result in project success. Most practitioners 
would concur that the most carefully documented, 
commonly measured projects in terms of software 

developed, defects fixed, time to task completion, and 

time to delivery do not reflect the impact of one or 

several specific practices, but depicts the effects of 

combinations or practices for the project at the moment 
of the measurement.  
However, it is likely that some percentage of the 
progress on a project is attributable to a practice or 

combination of practices. Of concern is how much, and 

under what conditions was the project
s success 
measure attributable to the specific practice performed. 
Further are some practices highly useful (resulting in 
great results), and other perhaps negatively associated 
under a given situation, with the overall 

accomplishment? This paper proposes a method that 

identifies the practices, assembles of groups of 

practices, and measures outcomes (via practitioner 
survey) to enable managers to implement selective 
practices in response to changing project conditions 

and increase the likelihood of overall project success.  
This conceptualization of the work performed in a 
project environment as small units of activity or 
practices follows the thinking and frameworks that 
have been found in the reengineering, process 
innovation, and process redesign field for 

approximately 15 years. [9][13] That literature focuses 
on measured groups of activities that are established to 
produce and output for a customer or market as a 
process. A process will order the activities by time and 
location; set start and end dates, and identify inputs and 

outputs. The process (by de
finition) represents a pre-
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20091978-0-7695-3450-3/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE    determined way that work is structured. We contend 
that the software development 
field
 and practitioners 
do not yet have broad and strong agreement on the 
practices / components of successful projects (required 
activities in the process literatures), nor do they agree 

fully on the unique sequences, durations, inputs or 

outputs for the practices (and process designers might 

agree for a process composed of a number of 

activities). Without careful development of the 
practices and understanding about how the practices 
are combined (structured) and how they may 
permissibly vary when placed in use, it will be difficult 
to advance the field. Ongoing disagreements about the 

definition of Agile and specific practices might even 

prove to be detrimental, and obscure developing a 
more complete understanding of precisely why Agile 
(under a specific situation or implemented in a unique 
way) contributes to success while it may not have the 

same results in a another circumstance. 
This analytical and object approach to breaking 
projects down into practices and examining individual 
effects leads to a number of associated research 
assumptions. First, it is assumed that project practices 

themselves will have measurable and individual 

outcome results that will vary under different 

conditions for situations. Secondly, the outcome results 
will be measureable and quantifiable in terms of their 
productivity. Finally, the results of several practices 

will be able to be combined to determine the objective 
results of a practice or groups of practices.  
With measurement data, one may develop and test 
hypotheses that enable the software development field 
to demonstrate more definitively which project 
practices performed in projects (groups of specific 

practices following a required structure) can contribute 

highly to a projects success. Further, one may 

empirically measure and offer strong research evidence 

that supports anecdotal or testimonial data regarding 
the effectiveness of specific Agile or Formal practices. 
High quality data will enable quantifiable tests of what 

is believed about specific practices
 contribution to 
results in the form of standard hypothesis.  
For example, we believe that various practices can 
be combined to produce better project outcomes. We 
hypothesize that the standard deviations (of the 

outcome measures of practice
s effectiveness) in a 
specific situation will be less than the average of the 

standard deviations of the practices separately. 

Secondly, we hypothesize that practices may or may 
not co-vary with respect to their effectiveness, and that 
practices with a smaller covariance between two 
practices will prove to be ineffective, 
incompatible
 or not synchronized with respect to inputs, timing, or 

structure. This will be shown in the smaller the 

variances from a predicted baseline. Data such as this 
would enable managers to make informed decision and 
choices using a model that shows combined standard 

deviations and co- variances. By choosing carefully, a 
manager might well address a large risk or even a 
really bad entrenched practice (that is mandated or 

required for some reporting or organizational purpose) 

with a carefully selected off-setting practice or set of 

practices.  
We can speculate that research may ultimately 
enable more advanced questions to be addressed 
regarding the possible existence of underlying 

constructs that support the use of Agile (or Formal) 

practices. For example, related literatures have enabled 

academics and practitioners to understand the 

constructs that are determinants of the acceptance of 
technology and conditions that can limit its 
introduction in organizations. Similar research of 

projects and practices may aid in determining if there 

are underlying constructs (technical, social, political, or 

economic effects; beliefs; perceptions, etc.) that 

support or limit the ability of an organization to 
employ specific practices successfully and how to 
address the limits or enhance positive situations.  
The broad benefit to managers from closely 
examining practices is clear. Many different concurrent 

negative situations (loss of time, costs too high, no 
progress, business opportunity loss, and growing 
technical risk) can be addressed, but not all at the same 

time or in the same way. The concept explored herein 

is analogous to the medical treatment processes which 

readily recognize that patients (in this instance 

projects) have co-morbidity conditions, and that it 
greatly matters exactly what is treated.  (Co-morbidity 
describes the effect of all other diseases an individual 
patient might have other than a primary disease of 

interest.) 
 2.  Bridge: the development environment 
 The authors have previously described a Bridge [25] 
development environment that 1) deals well with 
changing requirements because of its focus on low 

level and iterative development and testing; 2) meets 
the traditional schedule and control demands for 
management reporting well because the iterative 
development efforts by mapping to traditional 

milestones; and 3) generates performance metrics that 
report progress against defined objectives.  
This paper extends the original work by providing a 
more detailed examination of the Formal and Agile 
practices and processes that are co-implemented in 
software development programs. The objective is to 
ensure that critical processes deliver results (working 

systems), and that creating and maintaining the proper 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20092    mix of Agile and formal practices will deliver more 
consistent results and correct for variance from a 

projects baseline goals more effectively than strict 
adherence to prescriptive Agile or formal processes.   
Formal and Agile methodologies both have their 
own principles and prescriptive versions of best 
practices each intended to drive continuous progress 
and do so as efficiently as possible.  The Bridge 

method draws practices from both to create a malleable 
portfolio of practices unique to the specific project at 
hand.  Additionally, the Bridge method separates the 
initial practice portfolio, constructed to achieve and 
maintain a predicted baseline, from the on-going 

portfolio of practices which is continuously reviewed 

and modified to address issues arising from 
unpredicted events, issues resulting as a side effect 
from another practice, and the inevitable changes 
discovered during solution development. 
Principles and practices taken from Formal 
development processes such as CMMI [6],  PRINCE2 
[25] , Rational Unified Process [14], Waterfall, [20], 
Spiral [4], Dynamic Systems Development 
Methodology [8], and Agile processes including Agile 

Modeling [12], Agile Data [1], Crystal Methods [7], 

eXtreme Programming [24],  and Scrum [21] contain 

approximately 300 discrete practices and 75 stated 
principles.  Some clearly overlap; 
 XP 
small releases 
CMMI Pilot process and 
technology improvements 
to select which ones to 
implement 
PRINCE2 
Work Packages 
Scrum Sprint Goals 
Agile Manifesto  
continuous delivery of 
valuable software 
Spiral  refining prototypes 
Dynamic Systems 
Development 
Method 
Prototype refinement 
RUP Demonstrate value 
iteratively 
 
while other are uniquely stated as an integral part of 
their development process. 
 XP 
Pair Programming 
CMMI Staged Audits 
PRINCE2 
Giving Ad Hoc Direction 
Scrum Burn Down Charting 
Agile Manifesto  
harness change for the 
customer's competitive 
advantage 
Spiral  the entire project can be 
aborted if the risk is 

deemed too great 
Dynamic Systems 
Development 
Method 
MoSCoW - Must Should 
Could Would  
RUP Elevate the level of 
abstraction 
 
The Bridge methodology seeks to empirically 
combine practices to match the project context, and 

further to specify more concisely when a practice 

might be more or less useful 
 and what might be the 
expected outcome.  Frequently data and project 
direction of this nature is only available after project 

have been completed, and mangers conduct a 
hot 
wash
 or lessons learned session to determine how to 
proceed with the next project. 
 3. Practice risk-reward indices 
 As was previously postulated, the Agile practices are 
generally high risk / high reward while formal 
practices are generally low risk and low reward where 

reward is; significant contribution to delivery, reduced 
cost to develop, and increased effectiveness in tasking.  
Bridge combines Agile and formal practices to 
effectively 
offset
 negative results and reduce 
variations from a predicted baseline.  This is important 

because of the costs in time and dollars required to 

correct a variance from the projects baseline is directly 
proportionate to the magnitude and duration of the 
variance. 
The figure 1 below illustrates the dampening effect 
of executing covariant practices across a projects 

lifecycle as compared to the more traditional sequential 
practice approach. 
  Figure 1: Covariant versus Sequential 
practices over time 
 This is accomplished by creating classes of practices 
which group practices by their weighted risk and 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20093    reward ratio for each phase of the SDLC.  Each 
practice for each phase has 1 to n possible risks and 

rewards.  Each is assigned an estimated value on a 
scale of -10 to 10 where -10 would lead to complete 
program failure and 10 would directly contribute to 

program success.  For example; Active stakeholder 

participation Risks are valued;  
 Active stakeholder participation
risk descriptionRisk MinRisk MaxRisk MinRisk Max
wrong stakeholder-5-10-5-6
insufficent influence0-30-3
insufficent participation-2-5-2-5
AnalysisRequirements
  While it
s rewards are valued; 
Active stakeholder participation
reward descriptionRisk MinRisk MaxRisk MinRisk Max
represents business vision1539

provides political clout5757
directs financilal fullfilment of projec
t510510
supports project management decis
o5757AnalysisRequirements
  We calculate the median value or the risks and 
rewards minimums and maximums then the results of 
each are averaged to generate the minimum and 
maximum reward and risk indexes.   
 risk minrisk maxreward minreward maxRisk IndexReward Index
-2-557-3.56
Requirements
Active stakeholder participation
  risk minrisk maxreward minreward maxindex minindex max
-2-558-3.56.5
Analysis
Active stakeholder participation
  In this example Active stakeholder participation has 
a risk index of -3.5 and a reward index of 6 in the 
Analysis phase and -3.5 and to 6.5 during the 

Requirements phase.  Taken with the average, Figure 2 
illustrates the shifting impact, positively and negatively 
the Active Stakeholder participation practice can have 
over during each phase of the products development.   
  Figure 2: Active Stakeholder risk-reward 
ranges by phase 
 Applying a consistent scale can illustrate the 
comparative impact of each practice.  Practices sharing 
similar values can be grouped into classes of practices 
and potentially allows us to show how a program can 

set its baseline risk threshold and, based on that choice, 

create a balanced portfolio of practices which respects 

the defined risk threshold. When identifying specific 

practices for a given projects portfolio some practices 
can be rejected based on class, index range, or both to 
effectively remove them from the total list of viable 
practices.  This simplifies the adoption and use of only 
those practices that meet the risk threshold and reduces 

the volatility of the program while keeping it aligned 

with baseline schedule and budget.   
  Figure 3: Requirement Phase practices 
 Figure 3 shows a variety of Requirements phase 
practices from several Agile and Formal 

methodologies.  The shadded area covering -2 to +2 

highlights the limited average risk reward indexes 

reducing the practice selection to a more realistic few.  

Using Time-boxing has the potential for high return 
but done poorly can be quite damaging (for example, 
potentially stopping without discovering key 

requirements).  If, for the sake of this example, the 

time-box is too short and poorly managed you can 

improve the likelihood of high quality results by 

adding Workshops.  Workshops allow you to maintain 
the time-box while increasing the audience and 
reducing the cycle times between source and feedback 
and correction.  Workshops however have a very low 
risk reward indices.  By comparison, using the simplest 

tool has a high reward and low risk indices.   
If you have a -6 (bad) time-box, a +1.5 (good but not 
great) workshop and a +6 (good) use of tools you 
effective reverse the issues created by the time-box to a 
+.5 or essentially break-even.  Even if you had merely 

average results; -1.5 time-box, +.38 workshops, and 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20094    +1.5 use of simple tools you would be +.38 from your 
baseline. 
  Figure 4: Example offsetting practices 
 Practices group in to classes 
• Leadership
 • Team cohesion
 • Communication
 • Skills
 • Tools
 • Complexity
 • Quality
 • Process (rigor)
 • Repeatable (reusable)
 • Definition
 Initial project practice portfolio
s need to identify a 
diverse set of practices balanced for each phase of the 
software development lifecycle.  During each phase the 

portfolio needs to be reviewed whenever possible to 
ensure issues, whether external, discovered, or internal, 
are being addressed by the covariant class.  These 

challenge the traditional response to seek change 
within the class if not within the very practice 

associated with the issue. 
Consider a project struggling with the Skills class 
practice Plan for knowledge and skills needed to 
perform the project.
  Once a deficiency in the 
execution of this practice is identified a common 

approach to address it would be to either attempt to 

better execute the practice, in this case that would 
mean sending resources to training, or at least seek to 
implement another skills class practice such as the 

bringing in ringers
 Both skills practices have 
significant average risks that would combine with the 
existing risk increasing the variance from the intended 

baseline of the project.  It is unreasonable to believe a 
project having Skills class issues will not end up on the 
high risk side of another Skills practice.  By using one 
or more practices from other classes such as Process or 
Repeatability they will reduce the need to attempt a 

high risk Skills practice.  Instead a moderate risk 
practice such as 
strict promotion from dev to test
 and 
reuse before building
 will, by their covariant nature 
(Skills increase is offset by Process decreases and 

Skills decreases are offset by many reusing the work of 
few skilled), offset the Skills issue. 
The authors conducted a literature survey to develop 
a list of practices potentially in use that can be included 

in a use survey. The literature review of practices 
available for use was drawn from the 37 established 
SDLCs.[17] It includes well known schools of thought 
such as Agile, Waterfall, and CMMI, as well as some 
lesser known software development philosophies such 

as Cowboy coding, Hollywood principle, and Worse-

is-better.  The individual risks and rewards examples in 

this paper, as well as their weighting are currently 

estimates (researcher best guesses).  They are provided 
for illustration purposes. 
 4.  Research methodology 
 The researchers are engaged in a two part strategy to 
advance the understanding of Agile and Formal 
practices, and their combination through the Bridge 
approach. First, the researchers are submitting the list 

and the 400 definitions of the practices to a panel of  

12 industry  leaders to obtain standardized definitions, 

remove overlap in the practices (create new smaller 

unit practices where overlaps are identified, and 
remove duplicate practices and/or identify the practices 
holding multiple recogn
ized/accepted names.  
Secondly, the researchers will distribute a survey to 
1200 IT Architects. The survey asks for project data 

associating the employment of a practice that has 

delivered or been very closely associated with specific 
and quantified project outcomes. A survey research 
methodology will be used to ascertain practice 

existence/usage and the practice
s perceived 
contribution to the organization
s objective of 
developing a system in a highly compressed time 

frame while still meeting the functional requirements; 
of the system users. 
Research data will be collected through a voluntary 
and anonymous survey posted on the internet.  The 
survey will be made accessible to the software project 

community and directed toward personnel in 
organizations developing or having developed systems 
with Agile or Formal project practices. Potential 

survey respondents will access the survey from their 

desktop computers.  The survey will be posted for a 

period of about three weeks. An e-mail 

encouraging/inviting survey response will be 
promulgated to all candidate respondents.  A hyperlink 
shortcut
 to the web-survey will be embedded in the 
email inviting/encouraging survey participation.  
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20095    The survey includes a very included a limited 
number of demographic items, some contextual items, 

and provisions for discretionary respondent comments.  
Respondent survey inputs will be recorded 
electronically in a data base available only to the 

researchers, and no mechanism will be available to 

trace survey inputs to individual respondents.      
Standard statistical procedures will be employed to 
examine the association between measures of success 
and specific practices. In addition, the researchers will 
examine the degree to which hypothesized 
propositions/relationships are supported by the 
collected survey data.  Statistical procedures/methods 

will include simple and multiple linear regression, 

analysis of variance, and correlation analysis.   
The basic structure and methodology of the research 
embodies several essentially implicit assumptions 
including: respondents will be engaged in or will 

actually have worked on projects involving the 

practices; and that voluntary survey inputs reflect their 

candid/objective individual perceptions. All inputs will 
be weighted equally in data analysis, assuming that the 
responders possess equivalent understanding of 

practices and organizational results.   
  5. Analogy to financial sector analysis 
 The concept of a managed portfolio, as well as a 
portfolio manager is commonplace within the financial 

sector. Portfolios contain a mix of investments each 

with its own risks and historical records of return.  A 

common approach is to diversify a financial portfolio 

in such a way as to minimize risk and maximize return.  
One of the more modern portfolio management schools 
of thought, the efficient frontier [3], expands on the 

basic diversification concept by back testing various 

classes of stocks and identifying combinations which 

effectively cancel out fluctuations in market returns.  In 

essence the efficient frontier approach seeks to find 
two asset classes having a very small if not negative 
covariance.  The result is a reduced standard deviation 

within the portfolio which combines them thereby 

reducing the risk and increasing their return. 
 Figure 5: Efficient Frontier Risk - Return [19] 
 Much like financial assets within the financial 
market, project practices are a holistic set of activities 

interacting with each other, and driven by both natural 
and governed forces.  No project practice is truly 
independent of the others.  Determining estimates of 

effort and cost (CMMI [6] is impacted by the 

effectiveness of Stakeholder participation (Agile [3]).  

Both are affected by Time-boxing (Dynamic Systems 

Development Method [8]) which in turn is affected by 
choosing to prove it with code (Agile Modeling [12].  
Changing the mix of just these 4 practices will likely 

result in changes to schedule and cost which ultimately 

equates to increasing or reducing project risk.  In the 

financial sector, the natural forces; Supply and 

Demand and the governed forces; regulation and 
controls have extensive records of influence, albeit 
nondeterministic, on the market.  Similarly projects 

have the natural forces of Time, Skill, Quality, and 
Scope and governed forces of Organization, 

Communication, Team Cohesion, and Leadership.   
Left alone a natural order will determine the quality of 
a projects solution as well as the likelihood of it 
delivering on-time and within budget. 
The efficient frontiers core value; seeking to offset 
one class of assets with another, is necessary to address 

the systemic and unavoidable risks inherent in a given 
class of assets.  The same is true for applying offsetting 
practices to a project portfolio.  A simple example 

exists in the common practice of using new 

technologies to leverage advances exposed by the new 

technology.  Inherent in this practice is the risk of 

increasing required training to aid inexperienced teams 
to use the new technology as well as the risk associated 
with being an early adopter (will the new technology 

actually deliver, how will it interact with other 
technologies never before paired with it, etc
). 
Instead of absorbing the risks they can be offset by 

applying the practices of Bringing in Ringers and avoid 
educating during production (Project Recovery).  This 
illustrates using practices from the Skills Class to 

offset a practice from the Tools class. 
A notable failing in this analogy lays in the 
noticeable absence of project practice historical 
performance data. The financial sector has been 
collecting and analyzing very fine grained performance 

data since its inception.  The formal community has 

many metrics but few approach the completeness or 

consistency necessary [15] and the Agile community 

has produce even less than the formal practitioners 
[19].  Another, potentially more significant variant 
from the financial model is the limit of external forces.  

The financial market has become an all encompassing 

worldwide entity while projects are vastly smaller, and 

bound by corporate or organization limits.  
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20096    This analogy is helpful in restating the initially 
proposed hypothesis using the concepts of expected 

risks or potential for reward. The individual practices 
may be viewed as having estimable risk/reward values 
that vary under conditions/situations within a given 

project. Thus, a portfolio of practices (using this risk-

return concept) can be constructed whose covariance 

will offset the disruptive forces applied to a project 

when a necessary practice is implemented.    
The authors argue that managers and developers 
select processes carefully, and via a balanced project 
practice portfolio learn how to address a large risk or 
even a really bad entrenched practice with a carefully 

selected offsetting practice or set of practices. 
 We seek to identify such activities, codify them, and 
further explain why they are successful. 
 6. Standard Risk-Reward Benefits 
 Bridging Agile and Formal practices has, for most, 
been more a philosophical exercise than an empirical 
or practical one to date.  This Project practice portfolio 
approach is intended to create a concrete 

implementation of the Bridge.  The Bridge proposes a 

middle ground where Agile practices are freely 

combined with formal practices.  The Project Practice 

portfolio further details how all practices, without 
regard for original school of thought or methodology, 
can be independently valued and classified.  The 

resulting values represent an initial set for distribution, 

discussion, and revision. 
The perceived valuation of the application of a 
practice in the eyes of the project participants will also 
be assessed by asking respondents for their view 
toward the practice on a scale that uses two bi-polar 

words (semantic differential). The initial analysis will 
use risk and reward in these questions. The goals of 
these questions will be to ascertain the attitude or 

disposition of the responders to the specific practices. 
This analysis can be helpful in possibly determining if 
certain practices are being avoided for unknown 
reasons, if agreement is generally being given (positive 
bias), and if responses tend to be influenced by 

perceptions that positive self reporting is attributable to 
a perceived socially desirable connotation that the 
responder wishes to receive from indicating success or 

usage of a specific practice. 
   Causes project failureAssures project success
-10-8-6-4-20246810
 Figure 6: Survey Scale 
 Risk is assumed to always be negative and can result 
from a failure to implement, a failure to implement 

well, a failure to implement completely, or even a 
failure to stop implementing a practice.  Reward is 
assumed to always be positive and is the result of 

partial implementation or strict adherence resulting in 
something that moves the project closer to delivering a 
solution to users. 
Creating a complete portfolio of practices that are 
being applied to a project makes it possible to identify 
areas that have not been addressed well.    This is most 

clearly evidenced when a phase or activity has no 
practices.  More likely than a complete absence of 
practices is a phase or activity that seems to rely on the 

successful execution of only high risk, high return 

practices.  Besides the obvious indication of a project 

in jeopardy taking wild risks in the hope of beating all 

the odds, project constraints might be driving poor 
management decisions which will manifest in practice 
selection and execution.  Systematic (such as 

perceptions of risk reward) and routine review of 
current practice quality provides another feedback loop 
and opportunity to re-balance the portfolio. 
For example a common scenario is a large multi-
technology solution has decided to use iterative 
development (Agile [16]), daily scrums (scrum), and 

continuous builds (XP [22]).  After multiple iterations 

progress seems by most measures to be slowing.  The 

builds are far less than daily, and the users involved are 
increasingly dissatisfied with the product.  Being 
iterative means the project practice portfolio should be 

a mix of practices from all phases.  In this case, you 

find unit testing (DSDM [8]) as the only test phase 

practice and no practices from the deployment phase 

(MSF [18]).  While conducting retrospectives (scrum 
[13]) has been declared, it has been deferred after 
several iterations that ran long, and many of the 

prototypes (spiral [4]) parts have been left as-is without 

being accepted by any process to ensure completeness 

(spiral [4]). 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20097     Figure 7: Evaluating a practice portfolio 
 Figure 7 above depicts the current practices with a 
low or negative average index and a set of offsetting 
practices with a predominately 1 to 2 index, more than 
enough to return the project o its baseline. 
 7. FBI Virtual Case File (VCF) Example 
 For research and example purposes, we have applied 
the Project Practice Portfolios and the Bridge method 
analysis to a failed past project (FBI Virtual Case File) 
that is still being pursued due to its critical value to the 

owning agency. [5] [26] [9] The Virtual Case File 

(VCF) project is a useful example of where best 

practices inappropriately applied or applied too late in 
a project have resulted in major deficiencies.  
The VCF was to be the final portion of Trilogy, a  3 
part enterprise IT upgrade including new computers, 

network infrastructure and collaborative case 

management system designed for tracking criminal 

cases. The case information system was to have been 
designed to enable case data sharing and searching. It 
was intended to replace what was widely and publicly 

described as an outdated paper-based records system 

that relied on keyword searches, mainframe 

technology, and did not support what is commonplace 

in today
s computing environments; graphics, photos, 
or scanned items. All of these 
special features
 were to 
have been included according to a House investigations 

and inspector general report.  The report placed 
responsibility for the overall failure and estimated loss 
of $104 million with the FBI, not its contractor SAIC. 
[5]. The problems was summarized as: management 
turn-over; 36 design changes to the contract; 400 

testing problems identified by the government and not 

delivered to the contractor; and the widely criticized 
execution of a $17 million pilot test after the decision 
had already been accepted that the delivered system 

would be discarded. [5]  
It is rather easy to observe that some practices were 
being applied without fully realizing their value.  
Testing, usually a high value, low risk practice, failed 

to achieve project transparency and seems to have 

allowed quality to be schedule if not politically driven.  

The VCF;s apparent intent to 
launch all of the 
software at once
[9], typically evidence of a waterfall 
process, lacked the necessary validation of artifacts at 

the end of the phase, and then using the results of the 

validation as input for the next phase. Instead there was 
a (presumably failed) attempt to deploy the entire 
system at once and delay end-to-end debugging until 
the system was in production.[26] This insight is 
specifically called out by the formal assessment 

conducted by a review team from the National 

Research council (NCR) composed of more than a 

dozen independent scientists, researchers and industry 

representatives. They concluded: that the rollout was 
poorly planned; agents would not be able to take cases 
to the field for reference; common features 

(bookmarking and histories) were missing; sorting was 
not functioning; and the launch was planned as an all at 

one time event with limited testing (and no backup 
plan) that could possibly have led to very large 
disruptions of work. [9] 
The FBI is now engaged in a second try at 
developing the required technology with a new systems 

and software program called Sentinel that is designed 

for collaboration, sharing information between agents, 
and indexing to enable searches for people, places, and 
events. [26] They have adopted several specific 

practices in an attempt to limit repeating the issues 

from the earlier VCF project.  The Waterfall has been 

replaced with an incremental approach consisting of 

four phases, each with a number of smaller segments.  
Exemplifying 
application of lessons learned
, Buy 
before Build
, incrementally constructing useful 
segments
,  and 
Doing the hard stuff first
, the 
Sentinel project has reduced its risk and increased its 

project practice portfolios
 overall index presumably to 
offset some of the legacy practices that remain a 
negative risk value. 
Reported progress is not all positive, and 
requirements were scaled back on the first phase with 

57 requirements being shifted to phase 2. However, 
measurement data are being derived in a more timely 
fashion. The September 2007 report noted that the 
project was about $4.4 million over budget, and that 

the work for the first phase took 14 months instead of 
the planned 12 months.  No explanation was given for 
the report in the EVM data that the contract was within 
budget on the project. [25]  Hindsight would imply that 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20098    a balanced and more formal analysis of practice 
adoption, implementation, and ongoing usage might 

have suggested practice outcome metrics to "watch" 
closely, and that the more recently implemented 
practices in place today be adopted much earlier in the 

life cycle of this project.   
 We are only able to speculate from the limited 
second and third hand data available on this public 
project. Many practices were performed that might 
have been considered appropriate during the first four 
years of the project. The continued (restarted) project is 
clearly employing a number of different and changed 

practices, and reporting on the results of these practices 

in a much more complete and systematic fashion.  
 8.  Future work 
 Project Practice Portfolios and the Bridge method 
can be used to measure past projects and capture future 

projects in a consistent way that will further the 
industry.   
It is our intent to expand and improve the estimated 
dataset by engaging the individual practice 

communities and the industry at large.  We have 

published the list of software development 

philosophies, their methods and practices, and the 
individual practice index values to a wiki at 
ProjectPracticePortfolio.org.  
We are soliciting each of 
the represented communities to review and update the 
lists and their values.   
The resulting improved data will be consolidated and 
combined with research findings. It will be made 
available our next report on individual practices and 
practice combinations.  It is our expectations that 
having a persistent public source of individual and 

combination practice values with lower the bar for 

projects to incorporate project practice portfolios into 
their software development lifecycle. 
 9. References 
 [1]
 Agile Data Home Page.
 AmbySoft. 9 30, 2007. 
http://www.agiledata.org/ (accessed 6 12, 2008). 
 [2]
 Ambler, Scott. "Survey Says...Agile Has Crossed 
the Chasm Examining the effectiveness of agile 

practices." 
Dr. Dobb's Portal: THe world of Software 
Develpoment.
 Think Services. July 2, 2008. 
http://www.ddj.com/architect/200001986 (accessed 6 
12, 2008). 
 [3]
 Bernstein, William J. 
Efficient Frontier: An Online 
Journal of Practical Asset Allocation.
 2008.  
 [4]
 http://www.efficientfrontier.com/ef/index.shtml 
(accessed 6 12, 2008). 

[5]
 Boehm, Barry W. "A Spiral Model of Software 
Development and Enhancement." (IEEE Computer) 21, 
no. 5 (1988). 
 [6]
 Carlstrom, Gregg. "FBI reports progress in second 
try at case management software system ." 
FederalTimes.com.
 1 30, 2008. 
http://www.federaltimes.com/index.php?S=3342889 

(accessed 5 28, 2008). 
 [7]
 Chrissis, Konrad, and Shrum. 
CMMI Second 
Edition, Guidlines for Process Integration and Product 

Improvement.
 Boston Ma.: Pearson Eduation, Inc., 
2007. 
 [8]
 Cockburn, Alistair. 
Crystal Clear: A Human-
Powered Methodology for Small Teams.
 Addison-
Wesley Professional, 2004. 
 [9]
 Cohen, Stephen and  Money,William. "
Bridge 
Methods: Complementary Steps Integrating Agile 
Development Tools & Methods
 with Formal Process 
Methodologies
." Waikoloa, Hawaii: Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2008. 
 [10]
 Davenport, T. H. 
Process Innovation.
 Boston, 
Massachusetts: Havard Business School Press, 1993. 
 [11]
 Effective Practices for Modeling and 
Documentation.
 AmbySoft. 5 24, 2008. 
http://www.agilemodeling.com/ (accessed 6 12, 2008). 
 [12]
 Eggen, D., Washington Post Staff Writer. "FBI 
pushed ahead with troubled software." 
WashingtonPost.com.
 Washington Post. June 6, 2005. 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-

dyn/content/article/2005/06/05/AR2005060501213.html 

(accessed 6 12, 2008). 
 [13]
 Gloger, Boris. 
Scrum Delivers.
 Scrum Alliance, 
Inc. . 5 15, 2006. 

http://www.scrumalliance.org/articles/22-scrum-delivers 
(accessed 6 12, 2008). 
 [14]
 Jacobson, I., Booch, G., Rumbaugh, J. 
The unified 
software development process.
 Reading Ma: Addison-
Wesley, 1999. 
 [15]
 Jones, Capers. 
Applied Software Measurement: 
Global Analysis of Produciton and Quality.
 McGraw-
Hill, 2008. 
[16]
 Larman, Craig. 
Agile and Iterative Development.
 Prentice Hall, 2003. 
 [17]
 List of software development philosophies.
 June 6, 
2008. 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_software_develop

ment_philosophies (accessed June 12, 2008). 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20099    [18]
 Microsoft. "MSF Resource Kit." 
Microsoft 
TechNet.
 Microsoft. 2003. 
http://download.microsoft.com/download/3/a/6/3a6b762
4-da2a-4883-a413-
99281adadff3/MSF_v3_Overview%20Whitepaper.pdf 

(accessed 6 12, 2008). 
 [19]
 MoneyChimp. "The Efficient Frontier and 
Portfolio Diversification." 
Money Chimp.
 MoneyChimp. 
1997. 

http://www.moneychimp.com/articles/risk/efficient_fron
tier.htm (accessed 6 12, 2008). 
 [20]
 Royce, Winston. "Managing the development of 
large software." Proceedings of IEEE WESCON , 1970. 
 [21]
 SCRUM Alliance.
 SCRUM Alliance. 2008. 
http://www.scrumalliance.org/ (accessed 6 12, 2008). 
 [22]
 Stapleton, Jennifer. 
DSDM
Dynamic Systems 
Development Method.
 Essex, England: Addison-
Wesley, 1996. 
 [23]
 Tenner, A.R., and I.J. DeTorro. 
Process Redesign.
 Reading, Massachusetts: Addison Wesley Longman, 

Inc., 1997. 
 [24]
 The Rules and Practices of Extreme Programming.
 Don Wells. 1999. 

http://www.extremeprogramming.org/rules.html 

(accessed 6 12, 2008). 
 [25]
 Venning, Great Britain. Office of Government 
Comm and Chris. 
Managing Portfolios of Change (with 
MSP for Programmes and PRINCE2 for Projects).
 Stationery Office, 2007. 
 [26]
 Wells, Don. 
Integrate Often.
 ExtremePrograming.org. 1997. 

http://www.extremeprogramming.org/rules/integrateofte
n.html (accessed 6 12, 2008). 
 [27]
 Witte, Dan Eggen and Griff. "The FBI's Upgrade 
That Wasn't." 
WashingtonPost.com.
 Washington Post. 8 
18, 2006. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/article/2006/08/17/AR2006081701485.html 

(accessed 5 20, 2008). 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200910