   Bridge Methods:  Complementary St
eps Integrating Agile Development 
Tools & Methods with Formal Process Methodologies 
          Stephen J. Cohen           William H. Money 
Microsoft Corporation        The George Washington University 
 
 Abstract 
 
This paper describes a ﬁBridgeﬂ method for 
successfully integrating Agile concepts with 
traditionally linear and sequential software 
development lifecycles. A software development and 

management environment is constructed to serve 
project oversight, management control, and team 
planning and task scheduling needs. The new method 

and environment enable project stakeholders to 
acquire a clear and constructive understanding of each 

other™s activities.  The method is neither a tentative 

step toward Agile nor a ‚maturing™ of an already Agile 

environment.  Instead the Bridge is a complementary 

destination methodology incorporating the techniques 

from both Agile and Formal methods that have proven 
effective in large, complex software delivery 
environments.  The method and environment are 
assessed within a large enterprise integration and 
software development project, and refined using an 

Action research methodology. This work advances the 

thinking about Agile™s usefulness and its ability to 

effectively address multiple stakeholder needs for large 

enterprise development projects.   
 1. Introduction: Defining the problem 
space 
 Many organizations apply linear sequential software 
development models traditionally following a classic 
life cycle or waterfall model to control software 
development projects, develop task plans, assign 
responsibility, staff the work, and carefully manage 
budgets. The overall status of projects are then driven 

by a managerially understood and accepted milestone 

reporting process that supports performance reporting 
lauded by project managers, and required by 

organizationally approved and adopted management 

standards. The actual development work processes are 

similarly driven through progressive engineering 

phases broadly grouped into   requirements analysis, 

modeling, design, coding, testing, and 
implementation/supporting categories. [12] 
Management has adopted this phased method and its 
associated processes and control framework for many 
reasons. One obvious factor promoting the adoption is 
the existence of public and historically available well 

known standards and guidelines based on ISO 9001 

such as ISO/IEC 12207 and ISO/IEC 15288. The 

readily available management frameworks match the 

standards and are widely disseminated. They are 
mandated for adoption on many government projects 
where MIL-STD-498 and MIL-STD-499B/ANSI/EIA-

632 are predetermined as the system and software 

development implementation framework, and SEI 

CMMI to level 3 as the key processes. Finally, they are 

frequently supported by formalized organizational 

policies that dictate that tailored SEI CMM level 3 (or 

higher) processes be utilized on enterprise projects. 
However, there are well researched difficulties with 
this single model of representing both development 

and management tasks. The literature indicates that 
users often modify or discover their requirements as 
organizations grow, evolve and meet specific user 

needs. [6][11] Changes may not overly stress 
developers who will readily modify their work ﬁon-the-

flyﬂ and substitute new tools and work steps needed to 

complete a project while appropriately adjusting their 

time and schedules to achieve performance objectives. 

Such changes frequently require major modifications 
to many portions of the formal documentation, work 

plan changes, and skip or modify traditionally 

described development processes thereby creating 

havoc with the entrenched project description. da Silva 
and da Cunha [10] characterize this as a paradox of 
trying to reconcile Agile methods with the formality 

and structures of the management processes. They 

described their work in one organization to develop a 

process (methodology) to manage evolving 
requirements by tailoring the development practices 

based upon selected portions of eXtreme 

Programming, Adaptive Software Development, and 

Scrum. The approach they describe is tailored for use 

when unstable requirements of the customer are major 

factors in the development of the system.   Their 
methodology has four phases. They are: 
 Requirements Phase; 
Dedicated to project 
preparation and specification of high-level 

requirements. 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20081530-1605/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE1   Design, Engineering and Validation Phase. 
Where 
development occurs iteratively. 
Acceptance Phase.
 Where acceptance tests are 
performed by the customer before closure. 
Operations and Maintenance Phase.
 Eventual 
bugs and fixes are addressed in this phase. [10] 
 Following da Silva and da Cunha™s methodology, 
these phases are implemented using milestone 

meetings where key tasks and objectives are validated, 

and where it is determined if the project is ready to 

move to the next phase.  
A number of other authors have addressed this 
known conflict and difficulty associated with 

implementing philosophically Agile processes inside 

of programs requiring these inherently traditional and 

process driven methodologies. [5][7][9] This paper 

describes a hybrid ﬁBridgeﬂ technique for software 
design and development that expands on the tools, 
processes, and steps required to bridge the gap. The 

Bridge approach is highly useful because it ensures 

that the organization will be able to obtain the 

predictability, transparency, and consistency that the 

clearly understood traditional processes promise to 

large complex programs. The over-sight provided by 

the traditional model is required to minimize project 

risk while creating an environment in which the 

process follows the workers, not the other way around.  

Agile and traditional methods are synergistic when 
used to create multiple supporting and hypothetically 
self-validating views of the process appropriate to the 

perspective of the observer.  External governing 

entities and project stakeholders can rely on the large 

traditional process milestones, structured periodic 

reviews, and comparative metrics that have 

traditionally been applied to form opinions of project 

completeness, quality, and overall status. At the same 

time, program management can use a more detailed set 

of measures which combine the derived metrics from 

the Agile processes with the more Formal practice of 

managing trends against a known baseline such as Six 
Sigma. [14] Lastly, the project teams can use the 
immediate feedback loops aligned with Agile methods 

to reduce time to market and increase product quality. 
The problem addressed by the presence of different 
models is one that involves clearly communicating and 

developing a shared understanding of the different 

purposes of each view of the project by all of the 

involved parties. The problem is summarized in an 

analogy published by Loren Eiseley. [8]  Eiseley™s 

example describes a lesson he says he learned from a 
spider. The spider lived in her web, a universe that she 
understood and one in which she felt and knew all that 
could happen ﬁ–the tug of wind, the fall of a raindrop, 

the flutter of a trapped moth's wing.ﬂ Eiseley describes 
how he used a pencil to move her web, and observed 
the inaction of the spider since the movement was not a 

familiar one that could be comprehended and well 

understood like the struggle of a captured prey. He 

indicates that the pencil point is ﬁ– an intrusion into 

this universeﬂ without precedent.  The spider 
understood the spider™s universe, and the intrusion was 
simply not explainable. This model applies broadly to 

the difficulties of achieving a shared vision and strong 

communication between the groups of Agile 

programmers and engineers, project managers, and 

stakeholders. Neither sees the web of the other well, 

and the requirements of each are foreign in purpose 

without readily mapped relationships. The 

communication difficulty becomes particularly acute 

with management™s legitimate authoritative demand 

that the Agile steps and methods somehow be 

forcefully mapped into traditional planning and 
reporting channels. The authors hypothesize that the 
bridge methodology can aid the different users greatly 

by creating an understanding of the different purposes 

of each perspective, and providing a strong shared 

mapping at tasks and subtask levels that reduces 

confusion during large enterprise project execution.  
The approach described in this paper incorporates 
concepts elucidated by Ambler [2] that stress  

stakeholder involvement (and achieving better  

understand by stakeholder of the agile process, 

feedback, working (tested) functionality, change 
acceptance (by the developers), test driven 
development, flexible development teams, and 

adaptable incremental development. It is also important 

to note that many typical agile practices are not 

included in this particular implementation of the 

Bridge Œ light weight tools, fully self managing teams, 

dumping documents and just good enough documents 

[neither is acceptable in this organizational 

environment with intensive QA]. Thus, the agility of 

Bridge is that it approaches but does not exactly model 

the four values defined by the Agile Alliance. [1] 
 2. Research Methodology 
 An Action research methodology was used to 
expand and tailor the basic Bridge framework to the 
specific enterprise development project described in 
this paper. This choice of methods was dictated by the 
organization™s objective of developing a system in a 
highly compressed time frame, and meeting the 

functional requirements of the system users. The 

stakeholders (members of a large government 
organization) sought immediate development results 

and clear outcomes measured against the sequential 

and traditional waterfall methodology milestones, as 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20082   well as rapid delivery of a robust and complex project. 
The project was complex in that it integrated a number 

of enterprise tools, developed a large amount of custom 

software, included approximately 125 full time project 

members (including contractors), and represented the 

largest single development project for  the 
organization.   
The user requirements addressed all aspects of the 
large project, and necessitated that significant changes 
occur at one time to develop the system using an Agile 

approach while still formally meeting all traditional 

milestones. Therefore, Action research seemed an 

appropriate methodology for this effort. This is 

consistent with Baskerville™s [3] observation that 

Action researchers believe that complex social systems 

cannot be reduced, they must be considered as whole 

entities.  Consequently, the best methodology for 

studying processes in these systems is to introduce 
changes and observe the results of these changes.   
Susman and Evered [13] define Action research as 
consisting of five phases, all of which were included in 
the tailoring and implementation of the Bridge 

methodology.  These consist of Diagnosing, Action 

Planning, Action Taking, Evaluating and Specifying 

Learning.  These processes are iterated in a spiral type 

methodology. [13] 
Baskerville [3] suggests that the ideal domain for 
Action research is one where the researcher is actively 

involved, where the knowledge obtained can be 
immediately applied, and where theory and practice are 
linked.  In this Bridge project, those requirements are 

met since the work resulted in a cyclical process 

described by Susman & Evered [13], where new 

theories and practices were injected into the Bridge 

process during each iteration of the project. 
The introduction of the Bridge methodology to the 
project and the participants occurred over a six week 

period. In the first planning phase (about two weeks) of 

the project™s conversion to the Bridge methodology, 

the technical leader, and the team leaders held a series 

of meetings to determine project status, define 
objectives, discuss requirements, and share the 
differences between the expected project results and 

current performance. Previous work and actual results 

were examined, and perceived barriers to successful 

software development were identified.  
The overall development status was recognized and 
agreed to by all. Stakeholders, managers, support staff, 

analysts, and developers concurred that many project 

milestones were not being accomplished. There was 

wide spread but unvoiced acceptance that the 
development process was unlikely to be successful 
within the established project deliverable dates. These 
perceived problems and responsibility for the project 

difficulties were broadly describes as being attributable 
to the size and maturity of the organization (large, 
formalized, and not accustomed to rapid development), 

differing perception of executive guidance, lack of 

clarity of requirements, confusion over milestones, and 

changing requirements. All agreed (and reports 

showed) that major formal project milestones 
regarding project design work, documentation, and 
deliverables were either missed or significantly behind 

schedule.  
The second phase of the Agile project initiation 
(two weeks) plan was prepared and implemented by 

the technical project manager to complete the 

documentation requirements and reviews required to 

achieve the missed formal documentation and review 

milestones. Concurrently, work began to subdivide the 

development effort into ﬁchunksﬂ that logically defined 

the project that would include all major products, 

specific functionality, and the framework for 
developing the project code. Finally, an assessment 
was made of the development teams™ skills, and a 

search was begun to identify additional key technical 

staff (5-8 people) with the necessary expertise with the 

technologies to be used on the project. 
The final stage of the initiation executed the formal 
reviews, delivered documentation, reorganized the 

teams and began Agile development following the 

Bridge process and methodology described below. 

(This work was extended by approximately one week 

due to ﬁsuccessesﬂ and the holidays that occurred 
during this time period.)  
At the end of each two week period, the activities 
were evaluated, and data collected was analyzed to 
determine if the processes put in place earlier were 

successful, and whether additional changes were 

required to the structure or the development effort. The 

processes used, seemed to realistically follow the 

iterative Diagnosis, Action Planning, Action 

Implementation, Evaluation and Learning steps needed 

to enable the group to focus on the longer term 

strategic goal of developing the system (using the 

Bridge methodology and Agile components previously 
described). 
The Agile development process formally began 
approximately 7 weeks after its introduction to the 
project. The development and evolution of the Bridge 

methodology are discussed in detail below.  
 3. Bridge: the Development Environment 
 The overall Bridge development environment has 
three critical characteristics. First, it is Agile and deals 
well with changing requirements because of its focus 
on low level and iterative development and testing. 

Secondly, it meets the traditional reporting as well as 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20083   the schedule and control demands of management 
because the iterative development efforts can be 

mapped to traditional milestones, and because they 

generate performance metrics that report progress 

against defined objectives.  
This paper argues that Bridge is Agile in that it 
implements agile concepts. Although these are not yet 

widely researched and published as measurement 

scales documented in the software methodology 

literature, they have been recognized and researched in 

a related manufacturing field. [29] Zhang and Sharifti 

assessed the underlying dimensions of agile 

capabilities with factor analysis and canonical 

discriminant analysis. Their 
taxonomy provides 
analytical evidence that there are three types of agility 
(in the manufacturing industries studied). The agilities 
stress differently the underlying concepts that make up 
agility (as a complex concept) and are: (1) the ability to 
satisfy and be close to customers, (2) the capability to 
thrive in changes that may be anticipated, and (3) the 
ability to cope with unanticipated changes. The value 
of the work in the manufacturing industry is to enhance 
competitive strategies so companies can tailor their 
approaches to the environments they face. 
  This paper further postulates that there may be 
multiple ways to be more (or less) Agile in software 
development, that the underlying concepts can be used 

strategically to deliver results (working systems), and 
that developers must recognize the environmental and 
organizational drivers of specific agile tools and 

techniques that are more (or less) useful. The specific 

mapping and linkages bridging the Agile process and 

the traditional method are found in four important 

areas. 
First, requirements are determined early in the 
process and are stabilized at a high level throughout the 

life of the project. [Note; they will be mapped to 

specific development work during the development 

build processes, but this does not need to happen early 

in the process.] Secondly, major milestone deliverables 
associated with the traditional methodologies are 
produced and maintained. This includes the 

requirements reviews, system design specification, test 

plans, test readiness review, code deliveries, etc...  

Thirdly, Formal measurable and observable metrics 

traditionally used to proactively identify variances 

from intended baselines are supported in addition to 

trend data which provides a means of comparing 

project activities against known historical patterns.  

Finally, Formal methods tend to centralize risk 

management and hold upper level management 
responsible for preventing or mediating the identified 
risks while Agile methods leverage their rapid response 

times to reactively manage risks discovered 

opportunistically.  Bridge methods drive all levels of 
the program into active participation in risk 
management early, often and continuously. 
 Table 1. Build and traditional mapping 
 Strong Mappings 
Unique Views 
Primary 
User View 
Requirements 
 Manager 
Major Milestones 
 Manager 
Deliverables 
 Manager 
 Build Iterations 
Developer 
Performance 
metrics - tests 
 Manager & 

Developer 
Build Performance 
 Developer 
 3.1 Requirements 
 
The first stage is requirements gathering and 
analysis. Traditional methods seek to capture and 
document a complete understanding of the problem 
space as possible.  The closer to 100% complete the 

less likely a discovered requirement will later derail the 

work in progress.  Contrary to popular belief, Agile 

methods work well in this proactive requirement 
analysis phase.  Light weight tools such as Use Cases, 

UML models, and boxes-and-lines architecture as well 

as highly cohesive customer involvement with the 
entire project team, not just the business analyst, 
provide the opportunity to create sets of self-validating 

models where any discovery made by one is quickly 

translated into the others.  The three significant 
variances from the traditional and formal methods are: 
1) Agile™s early aggressive publication of products 

(and test results), and 2) Agile™s willingness to be 

wrong and correct the defects identified via review in 

the next iteration. The third major difference is Agile™s 

intention and ability to continue the requirements 

gathering and analysis process beyond the traditional 
requirements review milestones (throughout 
development and test) right up to final user acceptance.  

The hybrid Bridge process leverages the Agile 

differences when compared to the traditional 

methodology by: 1) reducing planned requirements 

identification and specification time; 2) initiating the 

iterative development process based on a Bridge daily 

cycle earlier in the project™s life; and 3) shortening 

Quality Assurance and Acceptance testing phases more 

than the traditional Formal methods alone would have 

allowed because significant testing occurs during each 

daily cycle. 
Bridging at the very beginning of the Software 
Development Lifecycle (SDLC) creates an 

environment of trust among the entire team.  

Stakeholders and oversight teams are directly involved 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20084   in the requirements discovery and validating process 
leading up to the definition of program scope. Program 

scope creep may therefore be monitored and formally 

approved (and time / budget adjusted appropriately) or 

disapproved. Instead of waiting for the program to 

surreptitiously report a creep or newly discovered 
need, the executives have the project SME™s approach 
them to discuss Use Cases created from interviews 

conducted across the user population. Executives can 

thereby directly effect the course of activities well 

before the team spends an extensive amount of time 

decomposing, planning, estimating, and scheduling 

work for which there is no approved time and budget. 
Similarly the team at the very lowest levels acquires 
knowledge in equal parts of the strategic direction set 

by the executives and the activities of the business 

users.  Integrated teams including all of the roles; 

Program Leadership (PM) , Subject-Matter-Experts 
(SME), Test,  Analyst, IV&V, Quality Assurance 
(QA), Development (Dev), Tech Writers, Security 

(Sec) and Project Leads (PjM), having equal access to 

all of the information early in the process and provides 

each community a chance to bring their perspective to 

the table. 
Consider a Use Case describing a simple activity 
such as ﬁMonitor an Accountﬂ for a bank.  The initial 

Use Case describes a single actor, a Cashier, requesting 

a view of a customer™s account.  The PM might want 

information about min, max, and mean balances on a 
monthly basis; the Cashiers just want the current state 
and last transaction information; and the Security team 

levies a demand of complete auditability.  Providing a 

lightweight Use Case early allows each of these 

perspectives the opportunity to judge the transaction™s 

data completeness, identify missing user objectives and 

elements, or suggest a completely new (and highly 

valid) user requirement. The Testers and Developers 

can immediately add their perspectives thereby feeding 

testability and complexity back to the team.  Taken 

together, with all of the users advancing their 

perspectives by reviewing, revising, and assessing, 
each use case increases in both detail and accuracy. In 
addition, this process identifies and resolves potential 

issues very early in the lifecycle resulting ultimately in 

reduced cost and time to system delivery and 

implementation. 
Having involved everyone in identifying most, but 
not all, of the detailed requirements reduces overall 

risk.  The Bridge methodology trades the promise of 

completeness usually associated with traditional and 

formal requirements gathering for more broadly 
reviewed requirements, and additional time between 
requirements acceptance and user acceptance. When 
contrasted with traditional approaches the value is 

significant.  More time adds both slack and 
management reserve to the development schedule.  
Traditional approaches can produce recurring reports 

and manage with little variance being shown against 

the original plan, thus serving program oversight and 

front office alike.  The lack of detailed requirements 

will be simply tracked as a ﬁriskﬂ and mitigated by 
something akin to ongoing analyst activities.  Agile 
approaches will leverage the time a bit differently. The 

integrated teams will break the program into smaller 

units of work.  This might be phases comprised of 

releases and releases defined by iterations.  Each 

iteration is very short, but still remains a complete 

lifecycle.  This continues to keep the team focused on 

the delivery of product. However, the Agile approach 

may struggle meeting the needs of the executives 

without encumbering the team.   
Bridging parts from both Formal and Agile practices 
creates an environment of complete transparency 
serving the oversight and executive offices, the front 
office and program management, and the product 

teams equally.  Three things are required to be a 

successful Bridge across these perspectives: 
• Reduced communication time between any two 
participants,
 • a level of rigor that provides predictability and 
measures of progress, and  
• an equal focus on ﬁon-timeﬂ delivery and quality.
 All three can be achieved in a project ruled by 
entropy.  Projects with entropy will have highly 
flexible if not chaotic activities within rigorously 
defined and stable time and objective (functional 
performance) boundaries. This environment is created 

through the Daily Cycle.   
 3.2 Development Methodology: the Daily Cycle 
 The Daily Cycle begins as soon as the requirements, 
Use Cases, models, and other analytical artifacts are 
made available to the team.  The problem, as it is 
presently described and understood, is broken into a 

loose set of parts aligning with the known Use Cases.  

The parts are bounded by the architecture and 

sequenced based on technical requirements, business 
requirements, and priorities fed back from the user 

community.  The broad team is presented a subset of 

parts to do.  They are given a chance to form self-

managing teams around each part comprised of 

representatives from each role.  If the right mix of roles 

is not available for a given part of the solution then 
either a resource filling that roles perspective is tasked 
across solution parts or that part is knowingly delayed 

(introducing risk) until the appropriate resources 

become available.  The newly formed teams are 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20085   provided all of the known information including 
architecture, design, and requirements documents and 

the cycle begins. 
 
Figure 1 below depicts the complete cycle. 

  ŁSmoke Test
ŁFunctional

ŁRegression
ŁSeverity

ŁAssign

ŁPromote
ŁCompile

ŁDeploy

ŁInstall
ŁStub

ŁDebug

ŁUnit Test
Develop
Build
Test
Triage
 Figure 1. The Daily Cycle 
  3.3 Rosetta Stone Views 
 The net result is visually depicted as a cross-process 
Rosetta stone.  (see figure 2) Each community sees the 
project in a language they are accustomed to side by 
side with the languages of the other community.  The 

development team members see the detailed build 

results that help them overcome integration issues, and 

test results as defects assigned to them by the triage 
process.  The project management team obtains the 

critical metrics needed to measure the development 

team™s productivity, product quality, and performance 
against the predicted iteration and project development 
baseline. Oversight and program management can 

readily monitor progress toward milestones and 

delivery against budget.  Ensuring total transparency 
by presenting the work status, metrics, and work 
products associated with every community side-by-side 

greatly improves understanding among the 

communities. 
 3.4 Development Processes 
      Development is comprised of Coding, 
Debugging, Unit Test, and Source Control processes.  
These are highly coupled non-sequential activities 
illustrated in figure 2 below. 
Beginning with Development; the team, after 
reviewing the provided documents, works to refine the 

requirements created during project initiation and 
approved during a Critical Design Review process.  
Traditionally lengthy searches to clarify requirements 

are dramatically reduced within and across empowered 

development teams. This occurs because of direct 

access to all roles and particularly those with Subject 

Matter Expertise. 
   Figure 2. Development  
 Initial development activities are focused on 
ﬁstubbing outﬂ the working product. This exercise 
drives the teams to work with, and more importantly 

for each other. The teams need to actively negotiate 

across team boundaries, each deal creating an interface 
contract between the consumer and provider.  This is 
entropy at a much lower level. After the teams come to 
agreement they must each trust the other to maintain a 

stable set of interfaces which are implemented and 

complied into the first build.  An important secondary 

effect of this activity is the development of testable 

goals. The Test role embedded in each team 

incorporates the original requirements, additional 

information discovered during investigation and the 

negotiated needs of the teams they integrate with into a 

single set of Boolean testable requirements. The 

testable requirements are used by the developers to 
create unit tests for their piece of the solution and are 
integrated into the overall solution test suite. 
Subsequent code development evolves from logic-
less returns, to hard-coded dummy data returns, to its 

more substantive fully feature state, supporting 

production code.  Incrementally fleshing out the details 

of each business feature as a team improves cohesion 

across roles.  Feature teams, which on larger programs 

are likely to engage multiple development teams with 

multiple cross cutting activities, have clear and 

deliverable goals.  This clarity and ownership tends to 

enhance a sense of pride in delivery and personal 
responsibility for product quality.  As each feature 
nears completion, the team producing the feature must 

Unit test their part or parts.  This is the first of several 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20086   opportunities to ensure completeness and quality but 
its value must be kept in context.  Developer Unit 

Tests only verify that the developer has built what the 

developer believed he/she should build.  Only 

independent tests by the test team will ensure the 

overall quality and completeness of the solution. 
 Measures 
• Progress is measured by number of use cases and 
requirements remaining
 • Quality is measured by unit tests passed and static 
code analysis 
• Efficiency is measured by mean time to close defects
 Measure 
Before 
After 
use cases/requirements 
 remaining
 Š 58/58* 
unit tests passed
 Š 310/200** 
mean time to close 
defects
 Š 2.3 days
 * There were no use cases, user stories or narratives in the 
formal effort.  The Bridge produced 68 Use cases of which 
58 were in scope during this phase.  All 58 were delivered. 
** There were no unit test or test plans produced during 
the formal effort.  The Bridge produced 310 unit tests with 
steps matching the details identified as necessary to pas the 
requirements they mapped to.
  3.5 Build 
 Critical to the Agile development approach is a very 
stable Build/Deploy/Install process (collectively 
referred to as the Build) and process acceptance by the 
development team of Build ﬁsoftware controlﬂ that is 

essentially external to the developers. The process is 

initiated when any of the development teams believes 

its source code is ready to be added to the Build. It then 
checks the source for the component, the unit test, and 
necessary readme updates into the source control 
system, and informs the build master who will ensure it 

is included in the next release. 
This is the first of several push/pull hand-offs. In 
large programs the developers do not know, and 

generally do not need to know, all of the contributing 
teams and their status relative to the next release, and 
by rule, the developers should never push their code 

directly into the Build.  The Build process is, or more 

specifically the role of Build Master is, as program 

activities go, lonely, difficult, critical, and the easiest to 

point at when ﬁbad thingsﬂ happen.  Maintaining 
version control, synchronizing dependant parts, and 
chasing down teams whose contribution has caused the 

Build to break are but a few never ending tasks for the 

Build Master. 
This role is intentionally isolated from both 
Development and Test; the Build process creates a 

clean-room for the transformation of development 

outputs into deployable pieces.  The build process must 

independently compile each and every component of 

the solution to eliminate any external dependencies that 
might have been added, intentionally or 
unintentionally, by the developer on their local 

machine. Next, the newly built pi
eces are moved from 
the output directories in the Build environment to their 

prospective target devices in a Development LAN. 

Once deployed, the Build Master installs the various 

pieces on their target device or devices.  The more a 

solution leverages Commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) 

software to fill out portions of their solution the more 

complex the Build process becomes. Each vendor™s 

server, tool, or technology has its own unique 

deployment and installation requirements, and the 
Build process is only successful when all parts are 
properly running on the target devices. [It should be 

noted that few managers have a complete appreciation 

for the complexity and difficulty of software enterprise 

builds until they are able to personally observe hours 
and days of laboratory build delays when developers 

have reported that ﬁthey are finished and their code is 

functioning correctly.ﬂ]   
 Measures 
• Progress is measured for the Build as either Pass or 
Fail 
• Quality is measured by the number of issues directly 
related to deployment and installation of the solution 

to each target environment 
• Efficiency is measured by the total time beginning 
with a compile intended to be the next release and 

ends when that version of the solution is available to 
test.
 Measure 
Before 
After 
Build Pass/Fail 
Š 162/178* 
Likelihood of Build Pass 
Š 65%  Deployment defects 
Š 11 ** Time Build to test 
Š 4 hours *** 
* There were no Builds or compiled code created during 
the Formal effort.  The Bridge Builds began very poorly 
becoming more consistently successful over time. 
** The Bridge has averaged 11 defects per build/test cycle 
that are directly attributable to deployment and installation.  
This number has been falling as hardware configurations, and 

installation documentation has improved. 
*** Time from Build to Test includes automated compile 
and test, deploying to a staging environment for developer 

smoke testing, creating media, logging and versioning, and 
deployment into the test environment.
 Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20087   3.6 Testing 
 
Once the Build has installed all of the parts onto the 
Development LAN, the authors are notified to ﬁsmoke 
testﬂ (verify that what they thought they completed was 
correctly included) their code.  While not the most 

rigorous or conclusive test process, the Smoke Test is a 

critical activity to both the Daily Cycle and the overall 

product quality.  This may be the first and only time 

the developers get a true integration test for this 
particular release of the solution. It will frequently 

expose interface and configuration issues otherwise 

invisible to an individual development team member.   
 Having passed the smoke tests the Build Master 
either deploys and installs the versioned components 
onto the Test LAN directly or creates installation 
media for the test team to perform an independent 
install.  Much like the Build environment the Test 

environment is nearly sterile.  The devices are 

frequently wiped and restored to a well known base 

image.  Test rules are very strict. Only the Test team 

and system administrators have access. Any effort by a 

developer to ﬁfixﬂ a release which is blocking test is 

strictly prohibited in the test environment. 
Initial releases to Test are intentionally incomplete.  
However as first class members of the development 

team the Testers have a detailed understanding of the 
solution before it reaches their test environment.  They 
are responsible for creating the initial test plans 

defining the release scope for the developers and need 

to test each and every release as though it were 

complete.  Defects identified are assigned one of five 

severities; 
• Severity 1 defects cause complete solution failure 
stopping all tests.  These require immediate attention 

by all. (Sev 1) 
• Severity 2 defects block some test plans.  These are 

serious defects and are the top priority of each 

assignee. (Sev 2) 
• Severity 3 defects are not blocking and are  
characterized as causing the test plan to return an 
unpredicted result.  These constitute the vast 

majority of defects found.  (Sev 3) 
• Severity 4 defects do not prevent the proper 

operation of the solution but should be addressed if 

possible. (Sev 4) 
• NT defects are Not Testable in the current Build.
  Releases tend to have a predicable flow associated 
with defects.  Initially, many of the testable features 
will create NT defects with subsequent releases 
shifting to few NTs, a few Sev 2™s, and mostly Sev 3 
defects.  As the releases stabilize there will be no Sev 
1, 2, or NT defects and all of the Sev 3 defects will be 

either resolved or a work-around identified. 
It is critical that the test and development teams 
work closely together. During planning sessions the 

test team provides the perspective necessary to frame 
the work into Boolean testable components. This is 
translated into the tests to be passed as developer unit 

tests prior to submission to integration testing.  This 

reduces developer injected scope creep, provides an 

open forum for SMEs to provide additional detailed 

information as part of a just-in-time design activity, 

and the team leads can identify and escalate integration 

issues quickly and early. 
The working relationship can be assessed by first 
monitoring the velocity of each team. Velocity is 

defined as the teams™ average time required to produce 

high quality, complete units of functionality. Clarity as 
a result of the tester/developer/SME relationship 
results in a significant increase in that teams velocity.  

Ongoing effectiveness can be monitored with day over 

day tracking of Active, Resolved, and Closed defects.  

A balanced team will maintain a consistent flow of 

new Active, to developer Resolved, then finally tester 

Closed defects. 
 Measures 
• Progress is measured as a function of coverage.  The 
percentage of all Use Cases and for each Use Case 

the percentage of test cases executed.  
• Quality is measured by monitoring the number of 

defects returned for definition over time and test 

coverage over time 
• Efficiency is the total time required by the test team 
to fully execute all tests 
 Measure 
Before 
After 
Coverage Tests  
automatic & manual 
Š 105/205* 
Defects requiring 
definition 
Š 4%  Time required to test 
Š 2.5 days 
* There was no testing during the Formal effort.  The 
Bridge effort has yet to fully automate all tests. 
 Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20088   3.7 Triage 
 Figure 3: Triage 
 Defects identified by the test team in the current 
build are continuously added to the teams™ defect 
tracking system as ‚Active™.  The Defect tracking 
system is a shared repository visible to all team 

members and is the sole input to the Triage process.  

The primary objective of the Triage process is to 
review and allocate defects to the appropriate team 

member.  In most Agile environments this task would 

be done in near real time as developers identify a 

defect. They would either immediately resolve the 

defect or create a new unit test, and address the defect 

as a component of achieving a unit test. More 

traditional Formal approaches would have periodic 
reviews of Test results (multiple defects) presented to 
team management who would assign the issues to team 

members.  Triage plays a broader role in a Bridged 

environment. In addition to providing a forum to 

assign tasks to developers, Triage creates an 

opportunity to; 
 • escalate defects to the Change Control Board,  
• expose each defect to Quality Assurance, IV&V, 
Tech Writer, Usability, and Development  
• ensure sev 1 defects are escalated immediately to 

key development resources 
• generate management reports from near real time 
metrics 
Measures 
• Progress is measured by the percentage of Active 
defects assigned.  Anything less than 100% requires 

immediate attention. 
• Quality is measured by tracking the number of 

defects requiring re-assignment and clarification. 
• Efficient Triage meetings should be one hour or less.   
 Measure 
Before 
After 
% Active defects 
assigned 
Š 100% Defects requiring re-
assignment 
Š 20%  Average Triage Time 
Š 35 minutes 
 4. Value Proposition for this Bridge 
Process 
 This work used a Bridge process to manage and 
develop a large software system.  The benefits are very 
strong, as shown in the table below. 
 Process Feature and Benefit Table 
Requirements 
Avoids differing views & 
incorporation of new and 
creeping requirements  
Daily cycle Promotes working prototypes, 
rapid corrections, iterative  
testing, and feedback 
Rosetta Stone Views 
Management, Developer and 
stakeholder process visibility  
Development 

Processes 
Provides immediate feedback 

loops for developers and 

Subject Matter Experts.  
Build 
Ensures ‚clean™ and repeatable 
product creation  
Testing Provides immediate feedback 
loops for testers and Subject 

Matter Experts.  
Triage 
Generates trusted metrics and 
increases current state-of-the-
program visibility.  
 5. Conditions and Limitations 
 
A number of different factors appear to be important 
to this Bridge approach. 
First, tools must be available to provide: shared 
source code repository; build/deploy/install 
automation; collaborative environment for defect 

tracking; real-time test reporting; and collaborative 

communication within and across teams. The tools 
used in the project described in this research are show 
in the table below.  
 Tool Usage 
source code repository Team Foundation Server 
Build / Deploy / Install  
Microsoft Installer 
packages (msi) and 
custom scripts 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20089   defect tracking Serena Team Track 
Real Time Test reporting 
Serena Team Track  
Collaborative 
communication  
Email, Instant Messaging, 

SharePoint, Telephone 
 6. Acceptance 
 Applying Bridge methods was a significant change 
to all levels of the enterprise and while well received at 
the top and middle levels of the organization there 
were some notable exceptions within the lower levels.  

Front office management enjoyed the rapid feedback 
loop and quickly adopted Bridge practices.  Middle and 
line managers were initially resistant as their traditional 

levels of influence were diminished and control moved 
down to the teams and individuals.  Most but not all 

middle and line manager remained broad participants 

on the various teams and became key players enjoying 

the more intimate interaction across previously isolated 

organizations.  Last, of the 53 people who were team 

members (Developers, Testers, QA, Usability, and 
SMEs) only 4 remain resistant to the Bridge approach. 
 7. Conclusions 
 The authors have presented a methodology that 
successfully integrated Agile with traditionally linear 
and sequential software development lifecycles using 
da Silva and da Cunha™s process [10]. The 

methodology (Bridge) assembles a software and 
management environment serving multiple 
organizational purposes including project oversight, 

management control, and team planning and task 
scheduling. The new methodology and environment 

enables all project stakeholders to acquire a clear and 

constructive understanding of each other™s activities. 

The methodology is tailored within the enterprise 

integration and software development project described 

in this paper, and implemented using meetings where 
key tasks required by project iterations are agreed to, 
and where it is determined that the project is ready to 

begin the next iteration of the system.  
In the next phase of this work, the researchers will 
examine several hypotheses that have been advanced to 

ﬁexplainﬂ the success of the Bridge methods. The 

objective of the work is to determine the extent, 

importance, and process through which the Bridge 

method introduces the ﬁmultiple supporting and self-

validating views of the development processﬂ 

appropriate to the perspective of the observer.  In 

addition, the researchers seek to determine the process 

and extent to which the Bridge methodology aids the 

different users by creating a ﬁmutual understanding of 
the different purposes of each perspective (traditional 
and Agile),ﬂ and the extent to which the Bridge 
methodology supports the development of a ﬁshared 

mappingﬂ at task and subtask levels which reduces 

confusion during large enterprise project execution.  
 8. References 
 [1]
 Alliance, Agile. ﬁ
Manifesto for Agile Softwareﬂ. 
Development.
 http://www.agilemanifesto.org/ (accessed 
September 2007). 
[2]
 Ambler, S. W., ﬁThe Agility Quotientﬂ, 
Software 
Development; 13 (1)
,  (January 2005), pp. 52-53. 
[3]
 Baskerville, R. L., "Investigating Information Systems 
with Action Research", 
Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems, 2(19,.
 October, 
1999. 
[4]
 Baskerville, R. L., & Wood-Harper, A. T., ﬁA critical 

perspective on action research as a method for 

information systems researchﬂ, 
Journal of Information 
Technology,
 1996, pp. 235-246. 
[5]
 Boehm, B, and Turner, R., 
Balancing Agility and 
Discipline Œ A Guide for the Perplexed.
 Boston: 
Addison Wesley, Person Education, 2004. 
[6]
 Boehm, B., ﬁRequirements that Handle IKIWISI, 
COTS, and Rapid Changeﬂ, 
Computer, IEEE
, 2000, pp. 
99-102. 
[7]
 Cockburn, A., 
Surviving Object-Oriented Projects. The 
Agile Software Development Series.
 Boston: AddisonŒ
Wesley, Person Education, 1998. 
[8]
 Eiseley, L., 
"The Hidden Teacher", in the Unexpected 
Universe.
 1964-69: Harcourt, Brace Jovanovich. 
[9]
 Hull, E., Jackson, K., Dick, J., 
Requirements 
Engineering Œ second edition.
 Springer, 2004. 
[10]
 J. G. A. O. Basto da Silva, and P. R. da Cunha., 
ﬁReconciling the irreconcilable? A software 

development approach that combines Agile with 
Formalﬂ, 
Proceedings of the 39th International 
Conference on System Sciences ,
 2006. 
[11]
 Larman, C., 
Agile & Iterative Development Œ A 
Manager™s Guide. Agile software Development Series.
 Addison Wesley, 2004. 
[12]
 Pressman, R. S., 
Software Engineering.
 New York: 
McGraw Hill, 2001. 
[13]
 Susman, G. I., & Evered, R. D., ﬁAn Assessment of the 

Scientific Merits of Action Researchﬂ, 
Administrative 
Science Quarterly, 23(4)
, December, 1978: pp. 582-603. 
[14]
 Waxer, C., 
ﬁSix Sigma-What is Six Sigma?ﬂ.
 www.isixsigma.com/sixsigma/six_sigma.asp (accessed 
June 2007). 
  Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200810