 Change-Impact driven 
Agile Architecting
Jessica Díaz, Jennifer Pérez, Juan Garbajosa, Agustín Yagüe
Technical University of Madrid (UPM
) - Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
CITSEM, Systems & Software T
echnology Group (SYST), E.U. 
Informática, Madrid, Spain
{jdiaz,jenifer.perez,jgs}@eui.upm.es, agustin.yague@upm.es
Abstract
Software architecture is akey factor to scale up
Agile Software Development (ASD) in large software-
intensive systems.Currently, software architectures 
are more often approached through mechanisms that 
enableto incrementally design and evolve software 
architectures (aka. agile architecting). Agile 
architecting should be a light-weight decision-making 
process, which could be achieved by providing 
knowledge to assist agile architects in reasoning about 
changes. This paper presents the novel solution of 
using change-impact knowledge as the main driver for 
agile architecting. The solution consists of a Change 
Impact Analysis technique and a set of models to assist 
agile architects in the change (decision-making) 
process by retrieving the change-impact architectural 
knowledge resulting fromadding or changing features 
iteration after iteration.To validate our approach, we 
have put our solution into practice by running a 
project of a metering management system in electric 
power networks in an i-smart software factory.
1. Introduction 
Software architectureis ak
ey factor to scale up
Agile Software Development (ASD) in large software-
intensive systems. Several works propose the 
coexistence of software 
architectures and ASD [1]
[3][5][13][14][19], and a fewapproaches present 
successfulcases of 
agile architecture
[18]or 
iterative 
architecture
[8]. Agile architecturecandefined as
ﬁthe
one that developswith the sy
stem, and includes only 
features that are necessary 
for the current iteration or 
deliveryﬂ
[8]. However, how to perform this iterative 
architecture refinement is still achallenge [1]. This 
challenge is addressed in this paper.
Aligning fruitfully software architectures and ASD 
requires leveraging the inh
erent qualities of software 
architectures (e.g. abst
raction, communication,
analysis) while complying withagile principles(e.g. 
open to change). This alignmentcan be achieved as 
longas practitionersare able to count onmechanisms 
for enabling:(i)Incremental design of features, i.e.
flexibleconstruction ofthe architectureby adding 
small increments
1
. (ii) Accommodation of new features 
or customizations onexistingfeatures. We refer to both 
of them as 
agile architecting
, because although 
conceptually different, require the same mechanisms to 
carry them out. The reasonis that, in both cases, these 
mechanismsmust be able to cope with change,though 
in thefirstcase the change is planned (feature 
increment),and in thesecondcasethe change is 
unplanned (feature evolution).  
It would be highly convenient and desirable that the 
mechanisms for enabling agile architecting would 
assist and guide agile architects, specifically in (i) the 
decision-makingprocess of implementingchanges in 
each agile iteration, and (ii)
 the maintenance of the 
architecture integrity, i.e. 
the preservation of earlier 
architectural design decisions iteration after iteration. 
Regarding the former, the knowledgeabout the effects 
of a change upon the arch
itecture provides architects 
with information that can be advantageously deployed 
to reason about how and where to implement that 
change. It also allows architects to makebetter 
evolutiondecisionsbased on risks, cost or viability of 
the change. Regarding the latter, the continuous 
processof architecting should never result in the 
software degradation as a consequenceof intentionally 
or accidentally viol
ation of earlier 
design decisionsor 
constraints.In this sense, agile architectsneed 
knowledgeabout dependencies between design 
decisions, constraints, trad
eoffs, etc., which can assist 
them in countering or even avoiding several well-
known negativeeffects of softwareevolution such as 
architectural erosion and degradation[25]. 
This paper presentsthe novel solution of using 
change-impact
architectural knowledgeas the main 
driver for agile architecting. This solution provides 
agile architects with knowledgeto(i)assist and guide 
them inthe 
change (decision-making) process
, and   
1
An increment is often smaller than a featureprominent or 
distinctive user-visible characteris
ticorquality of a software system.
2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.12747782013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.1274780 (ii) favor the preservation of
 the architecture integrity 
during theiterative architecting process.
This 
knowledge results from analyzing the impact that 
changes —feature increm
ent and/or evolution— 
introduce into the architecture,iteration after iteration 
in an agile process.The solution consists of a
Change
Impact Analysis
(CIA)techniqueand modeling 
artifacts for: (i) documenting architectural knowledge 
—the design decisions and rationale driving the 
iterative architecture solution—, and (ii) tracing 
architecturally significant feat
ures with their realization 
in the architecture.These 
modelsare traversed using 
the proposedCIA technique to retrieve the 
architectural design d
ecisions and architectural
components and connectionsthatare impactedas a 
consequenceof changingfeatures. This solution is 
implemented in a modeling frameworkcalled FPLA
2
. 
The novelty of thispaper is to prove how the output 
from a CIA technique can be effectivelyusedto assist 
and guide agile software architecting. This CIA 
techniquewasdeployed in the agile method Scrum 
[29]and built on the results from previous works 
[23][11]that provide flexible mechanismsto design 
iteratively and incrementally software architectures.
To empirically validate our approach we have 
conducted a case study in an
 i-smart software factory, 
combining both academica
nd industry efforts. The 
results show that our approach for agile architecting is 
viable in an industry project in the energy power 
networks domain, and effectivelyassists and guides 
architects in the tasks of
 making-decisions about 
changes and maintainingthe architecture integrity.
The structureof the pape
ris asfollows: Section2
describesthe background.Section3discusses related
work. Section 4presents the CIA technique, and 
supporting mechanisms, which drive agile architecting 
in the Scrumprocess. Section 5describes the case 
study. Finally, conclusions and further work are 
presented in Section 6.
2. Background 
2.1 Agile Architecting
The role of software arch
itecture in ASD has been a 
highly controversialissue in the last few years. There 
are many advocatesfor and opponents against giving 
to architectures the importanceinASD that ithasin
other development approaches. Advocatesof the 
architecture’skeyrole in the software process have 
their doubts about the scalabilityof any development 
approach that does not pay sufficient attention to 
2
 It is
available
onhttps://syst.eui.upm.es/FPLA/home
architecture [1], specially for achievingquality goals 
when developing large-scale software-intensive
systems. In fact, Cockburn
 [10]showed some data 
about the unfeasibility of using agile methods in large 
size projectsand life-critical systems. The reason is 
that the benefits of software architectureare missing 
and agile teams completely depend on tacit knowledge.
The work of Falessiet al. [14]found that agile 
practitionersperceive software architectureas relevant 
on the basis of aspects such ascommunication and 
understanding of software systems, rationalization of 
previous design decisions, documentation of rationale 
necessary toevaluate design alternatives,scaling of 
agile practices to large projects, documentation of 
points of flexibility within the system to support future 
requirements, and system planningand budgeting.
On the contrary, hard opponents perceive the effort
in architecture aswasted effort, equating it with big 
upfront (BDUF) —a bad thing-leading to massive 
documentationand implementation of 
you ain™t gonna
need it
features [1]. A common 
belief within the agile 
community is that 
ﬁIf you are sufficiently agile, you 
don™t need an architecture Š you can always refactor 
it on the flyﬂ
[10]. However,Kruc
htenstates that 
architectural refactoring 
often becomes prohibitively 
costly very quickly if certain considerations have been 
neglected early in the process(excerpted from[13]). 
Kruchten[19]and Booch[5], among others, propose 
the iterative and incremental evolution of the 
architecture to reduce the bi
g upfrontdesign and keep 
the system in sync with changing conditions. 
2.2 Change Impact Analysis
Change impact analysis (CIA) determines the 
potential effects upon a system resultingfrom a 
proposed change[2]. CIA can be usedto predict the 
effects of a changebeforeit is implemented, possibly
giving an estimateof the effort/cost to implement the 
change [27], aswell asthe potential risk involved in 
making thechange [21]. This analysis can be then used 
to make better evolutiondecisions such as whether or 
not the change should be carried out based on 
economic viability of software evolutionor other risks 
such as degradationof softwa
re systems. In fact, there 
is an extensive work in CIA to support software 
evolution [7][9], although Mens at al. [21]identified
change impact as one of the future challenges 
(timeframe of 2015 and beyond).
3. Related Work
Advocatesof abalancebetweenarchitectureand 
agility propose that the architecture emerges gradually
iterationafter iteration,as a result of successive small 
47794781 refactoring[1][5][19][22]. Most of these approaches 
invest in a first architectur
e —zero-featurerelease [4]; 
i.e. 
ﬁgetting an architecture sufficiently right early 
without necessarilyresorting to big upfront 
designﬂ
[19]. Thismeans that it will take longer to get 
to code, i.e. in a zero-featur
e release the architecture is 
in place but no user-visible
features are deliveredto the 
customer [22]. Conversely, other authors believe in 
continuous architectural refactoring
starting on 
simplicity and flexibility[5]. 
This paper does not focus on identifying whether it 
is better to invest in a first architecture or to rely on 
continuous architecturalrefactoring.This paper 
presents the mechanismsto haveflexibilityat the time 
of defining software architecturesand change-impact
knowledgein order to support the change decision-
makingprocess and preserve
 architecture integrity. 
Change impactanalysis has not been previously
applied to agile architectingas we propose in this 
paper. Moreover, it is not only novel the fact of 
applying change-impact knowledge to drive agile 
architecting. The CIA technique that we use in this 
papercovers several of the lacks of current CIA 
approaches. Most CIA appr
oaches analyze the source
codeand few approaches do 
the architecture [30][16]. 
Even fewer approaches considerarchitectural
knowledge,that is design decisionsand rationale 
driving the architecture solution, to aid change impact
analysis [31]. To cope w
ith these lack
s,a previous 
work [11]defineda CIA technique in the domain of 
Software Product Lines (SPL [26]). As discussed in 
Section 4, agile architects
can takeadvantageof this 
technique to support the change decision-making
process and try to preserve the architecture integrity.
4. Agile architecting guided by change 
impact
This paper presents CIA as the main driver for agile 
architecting. To that end, we have defineda CIA 
technique, supported by architecturalmodels, that 
assists architects during the agile architectingprocess. 
These models promote communication between 
individualsand agile teams working on the system, and 
support (semi-)automatically
reasoning over
 the space 
of architectural knowledge. Theyare described below.
4.1 Flexible-PLA Metamodel
Our solution is supportedby the definition of 
software architectures co
nformsto the Flexible-PLA
Metamodel [24]. It was defined in a previouswork to 
explicitly specify the architectures that realize SPL. 
This metamodel and their underlying concepts allow 
one to iteratively and incrementallyconstruct and 
evolve software architectures based on two properties 
that they provide: flexibility and adaptability[23][12]. 
The main concept underlying Flexible-PLA 
Metamodel is the concept of Plastic Partial Component 
(PPC [24]). The PPC concept was originally defined 
for specifying variability inside components.The 
variability of a PPC is specified using 
variability 
points
, which hook fragmentsof code to the PPC 
known as
variants
, and 
weavings
which specify where 
and when extending thePPCs using the variants (see 
Figure 1.a). As variability facilitates the planned 
evolutionarysoftware development [15], agile 
architectscan take advantage 
of the PPC primitives for 
incrementally and iteratively refine the architectural 
componentsthat composea
working architecture
3
[23]. The PPC variability mechanism is the backbone 
to support incremental development of architectural 
components through the incomplete specification of 
components, and their extensionby hooking new 
variants. As a result, working architectures can be 
incrementallyand iterativelydesigned and evolved in 
each iteration by weaving/u
nweaving extensions, 
and/or by modifying the architecture configuration 
through optional compone
nts and connectors.
Figure1.a) Flexible-PLA model & b) PLAK model
4.2 PLAK Metamodel
The documentation of architectural knowledge 
(AK) supports the rationalization of architectural
decisions taken during the solution design. The 
rationalization of early designdecision may help to 
evolve the architecture while preserving its integrity. 
3
The one that is delivered after each iteration, together the 
working product, as a result of 
the agile arch
itecting process.
47804782 The main types of AK are the design decisions driving 
the architecture solution, their dependencies and 
rationale. We have previouslydefined the concept of 
Product-Line Architectural Knowledge
which is 
formalized through the PLAKMetamodel[11]. This 
paper extendsthe PLAK Metamodel and their 
modeling primitives (rationale, constraints, 
assumptions, etc. [11]) to capture the knowledge of 
adding feature increments or 
changing fea
tures in each 
agile iteration. This extension consists of the following 
primitives:

Closeddesign decisions
(ClosedDDs) are 
completely closed (or bound) in agiven iteration and 
support the realization of thosefeaturesthat can be 
completedin one iteration and that architects 
considered unchanging in time.

Open design decisions
(Open DDs) are intentionally
left open (or delayed) and support the realization of 
those features that cannot be completed in one 
iteration and that architects plan to complete iteration 
after iteration (see the design decision with the open 
lock of Figure 1.b).Open DDs consist of a set of 
optional design decisions.

Optional design decisions
(OptionalDDs) support
each of theincrementsof an Open DD (see the 
optional design decision of Figure 1.b).

Alternativedesign decisions
(AlternativeDDs) 
support the alternativerealization ofClosed and 
Open DDs, respectively.
These four types of DDs offer a completesupport 
for documenting the knowledge derived from the agile 
architecting process. The PLAK Metamodel supports 
the documentation of flexible and adaptive 
architectures through d
ecisions which can be 
intentionallyleft delayed, and later closed in following 
iterations. 
DDs completely or partially realize features, 
affecting multiple architecturalcomponents and 
connectors, and often become intimately intertwined 
with other DDs [6]. In this regard, the PLAK 
Metamodelsupports dependencies between DDs and 
traceability between features a
nd their realization into 
architectures.Traceability links
 are created aroundthe 
DDin such away that they turn into the links between 
feature and architecturemodels. Additionally, the 
PLAK Metamodeldefines the
linkage rules
that 
comprise the semantics tobridge the gap between 
feature and archit
ecture primitives.
4.3CIA Technique
Changes in features impact the system architecture 
and can lead to ripple-effects which are not obvious to 
detect. In this work, we adapt the CIA technique that 
we previously defined for 
SPL [11], to analyze the 
impact of adding or changing features in eachiteration 
of the agile life-cycle. This CIA techniqueconsistsof a 
traceability-based algorithm
and a 
rule-based 
inference engine,
which traverse Flexible-PLA and 
PLAKmodels (seeSection 4.1and 4.2, respectively) 
based on a set of traceability links and propagation 
rules. The process, that this CIA technique implements, 
consists of two main steps described below:
(1) Given a changein features (adding, deleting or 
updating), the 
traceability-based algorithm
determines 
(i) the 
first-order
design decisions that are involved 
with the feature to be changed, (ii) the 
n-order
DDs
that depend on the first-order DDs, and (iii) the first-
order architecturalelements
 (PPCs, components, and 
connectors) that are involved in each (first and n-order)
DD. The algorithmtraverses the traceability links that 
bridge features and architecturalelements, and the 
dependency relationships between design decisions.
(2) Givena change in the 
workingarchitecture that 
realizesthe change in features, the 
rule-based 
inference engine
fires propagationrules to obtain the 
changepropagationin the working architecture. 
Namely,when a modificationover theworking 
architecture is applied to, propagation rules are fired to 
simulate the effects on the rest of the working 
architecture. We thereby obtain the 
n-order
architectural elements that 
are impacted by the change.
As previously mentioned in Section 4.1and 4.2, 
this paper relies on the use of the concept of variability 
to iteratively and incrementallyconstruct/evolve
software architectures, as long asthis variability is 
documented and traced through Open and Optional 
DDs. The CIA technique described within this section, 
fits perfectly the needs of analyzing the impact of agile 
architecting, as it traver
ses Flexible-PLA and PLAK 
underlyingconcepts which support architectural 
variability. The output of the CIA technique provides 
change-impact architectural knowledge that may be 
useful for reasoningabouta proposed change in 
features and guidingthe 
change decision-making
process, as well as may help to preserve the 
architecture integrity iterati
on after iteration of the 
agile life-cycle.
4.4 Agile Architecting process
Our solution of using CIA asthe main driver for 
agile architectingis deployedinthe agile method 
Scrum [29]. Figure 2 shows a tailored Scrum 
development process in which agile architecting is 
consideredas a keyactivity 
to prepare the iteration 
(aka. sprint). Briefly, the process is described below. 
47814783 Figure2.A tailored Scrum with Agile architecting
The first step consists ofcapturing the requirements 
of the 
Product Owner
from the product vision 
(features).Features may be decomposed into alist of 
user stories
(US) known as
product backlog
. Then, US 
are prioritized, based on business value,and assigned 
to 
sprints
. Scrum implements an iterative lifecycle 
based on these sprints. Sprintsstart with
sprint 
planning meeting
in which the Product Owner and 
Team plan together what has to be done. In this 
tailored Scrum, the 
agile architecting
tasks are 
developed in conjunction with the sprint planning 
meetings (see Figure 2). The abovementioned 
modeling artifacts and the CIA technique drive agile 
architectsas follows:

The Flexible-PLA Metamodelprovides agile 
architects with primitives to iteratively and 
incrementallyconstruct and evolve 
working 
architectures
. Changes are realized by using the 
extensionmechanismofPPCs or/and changing the 
architecture configuration.

The PLAK Metamodel provides agile architects with 
primitivesto documentdesign decisions,
dependencies,constraints, trad
eoffs, etc. as well as to 
trace features towo
rking architectures. 

The CIA technique is applied to the 
working 
architecture 
ofthe previous sprint (except for the 
first sprint). It provides agile architects with the 
change-impact knowledge resultingfrom the changes 
plannedfor the sprint. From the impacted 
componentsand connections,the architects can 
reason about where and how implementing that 
change.From the impacted
design decisions,the 
architects are awareof the e
ffects of that change over 
previous constraints, tradeo
ffs, risks, and hence they 
have knowledge to preserve the architecture integrity.
As a result of this tailoring, agile architects interact 
with the rest of the team in planning the features to be 
done by tracking architectural concerns —constraints,
risks, viability,etc.—and balancing them with 
businesspriorities. The output of sprint planning
meetings consists of:the 
sprint backlog
and tasks that 
must be performed to achieve the sprint goal, and the 
working architecturemodels (Flexible-PLA and PLAK 
models) tobe implemented during the sprint(see 
Figure2). At the e
nd of each sprint, a 
working product
and a 
working architecture
are delivered. In the sprint 
reviewmeeting
the Product Owner assesses the 
working product to validate that US were met or 
introduce changesinto the US. 
5. Case study 
Withthe purposeofvalidating our approachfor
agile architecting, we have conducteda case study
within a project in an experimental i-smart software 
factory (iSSF) [20]. Follow
ing subsections briefly 
introduce some information about the environmentfor
conductingthe casestudy, i.e. the iSSF, and describe
the casestudy according to the guidelines for 
conductingand reportingcase study research in 
software engineering of Runeson & Höst [28]. 
5.1 Context: Running Environment
The iSSF is a software engineering research and 
education setting in close cooperation with the top 
industrial and research collaborators in Europe [20]. 
IndraSoftware Labs
4
leads this initiative at the 
corporatelevel in Spain in conjunction with the 
Technical University of Madrid (UPM). The iSSF 
facility continuously runs projects in eight-seven week 
cycles. In this case study we focusedin a project to 
develop a 
meteringmanagement system in electric 
4
http://www.indracompany.com/en
47824784 power networks
. In total, 10 people participated in the 
case study: four developers, two product owners, one 
scrum master (who performs both the tasks of the 
Scrum master and the tasks of an architect at part- 
time), one full-time archit
ect and two observers. The 
observers had access to all project informationand 
collaborated directly with product owners and fellow 
team members.
5.2 Research questions 
The goal of the case studyis to search evidencein
order to answerthe following two research questions: 
RQ1
: Is the CIA algorithm effective in locating the 
impacted architecturaldesign decisions and elements 
resultingfrom a proposed change in features? 
RQ2
: 
Does the CIA algorithm assist and guide agile teams in
reasoning about the changes and preserving the 
architecture integrity while agile architecting?
To answer RQ1the architects analyzed change
impactas follows: First, architects manually analyzed 
change impactwithoutthe CIA technique and the 
supporting models that this paper presented. Then, the 
architects analyzed change 
impactwith the assistance 
of the FPLA modeling framework that implements the 
CIAalgorithmand the Flexible-PLA and PLAK 
primitives. This procedure allowed to verify if the CIA 
algorithm had determined
 impacts thatarchitects 
manually did not, or vice versa if the architects had 
manually determinedimpacts that the CIA technique 
did not. From this procedure, it is possible to definethe 
dependent variable for quantitatively measuring RQ5: 
the percentage of impactsthat the CIA algorithm 
automatically determines that arenot manually 
determinedby architects. The potential independent
variable that might have an influence on thedependent 
variable is the total number impacts that exist given the 
proposed change(s)and the architects experience.
To answer RQ2two prop
ertieswere measured: the 
assistance and the guidance 
in making decisionsabout 
the changesand in maintainingthe architecture
integrity during the iterati
ons ofan agile process. 
These properties are hard to measure and especially 
hard to quantify. Therefor
e,they are estimatedby 
qualitatively analyzing a questioner that architects 
filled and commentsexpressed by the architects while 
they were realizing the architecture.
5.3Data collection
The collection methods used
 to gather quantitative 
and qualitative data are described as follows: 

Observation. Two observersattendthe agile 
architecting, planningandreview meetingswhichare 
video recorded, transcribed, and analyzed.

Interview.The architects are interviewed following a 
questionnaireopen to the discussion. These 
interviewsare video recorded,transcribed,and 
analyzedusing the 
constant comparison method
[17]. 

Archival data. The informationabout the project is 
collected in Redmine
5
. 

Analysis of work artifacts. 
The data of Flexible-PLA 
and PLAK modelsgenerated with the FPLA
framework, the CIA algorithm running also under 
FPLA, and the code under subversion
6
are gathered.

Metrics. The metrics captured by Sonar
7
are collected
at the end of each sprint.
5.4. Analysis procedure
In this case study, both quantitativeand qualitative 
analysis were usedto examinethe data gathered.For 
quantitative data, this case study uses analysis of 
descriptivestatistics. As qualitativedatais typically 
less precise than quantitativedata, itis important to use 
triangulation
to increasethe precisionof the study. 
There are several types of triangulation [28], e.g.
methodological, data source. The three typesof 
triangulation wereusedin this case study. 
5.5. Case study description
The case study consists of a projectto develop a 
metering management system in electric power 
networks. The metering managementsystem is part a 
larger ITEAproject called 
Intelligent Monitoring of 
Power NETworks
(IMPONET
8
) that focuseson
supportingcomplex and advanced requirements in 
energy management, specificallyelectric power 
networks. IMPONET aimsfor(i) continuous 
monitoring and bi-directional communication with 
customers to promote sustainability, and (ii)prevention
ofcongestions,faults, and peak loads in real-time. The 
meteringmanagement system captures and manages 
meter data from a huge numbe
r of distributed energy 
resources.Theoverview of the systemfunctionality is 
as follows: 

Meter capturing
: integrates all meter capturing 
processes that collect meter data at substations.

Meter processing
: performoperations forvalidating
meter dataaccording to av
alidation formulaand 
calculatingthe optimal vectorfor a measuring point. 

Meter providing
. It defines the interfacewithclient 
systems toprovide exchangingdata (e.g. billing and 
settlements, energy demand forecast, etc). 
5
Redmine is web-based project ma
nagement and bug-tracking tool. 
6 
Subversion is an open source version control system.
7 
Sonar is an open platform 
to manage code quality.
8
http://innovationenergy.org/imponet/
47834785 5.6. Case execution
The agile architectingprocess wasperformed as 
described in Section 4.4. Due to space reasons, we 
focus on the features and 
working architectures which 
were realized in five sprint
s (over eight sprints). These 
features are described as follows:

F1_Meter reading
consists of reading meteringdata 
associated to differentener
gy resources, periods 
(quarterly, hourly, daily and monthly) and dates. 
Metering data is provided by text files.

F2_Meter storing
consists of alarge data store 
running over an object-or
iented NoSQL database
(
Big Data Oracle
running over 
BerkeleyDB)
. 

F3_Meterdata access
consists ofthe initial data 
loading of historicalmetering data ofone month, and 
query of these data. Both loading and querying 
require toleverage a high performance through the 
use of clustering technologies (
Apache Hadoop
).

F4_Meter data process
includes the algorithms for 
validatingraw and optimaldata, as well as 
calculatingthe optimal vector (integrated processing) 
of raw and optimal data. 

F5_Graphicalinterface
consists of the interface that
providesthe query of metering data.
These features were progressivelydecomposed into 
US and the backlogwas created. S
print1
focused on 
implementing feature F2 (M
eter storing), i.e.the 
installation and configurationof the database manager 
(Berkeley DB),and several conceptualproofs were 
realized to createand accessto the database(see 
component 
DBManager
and 
DD001
in Figure 3).
Sprint 2
focused on implementing features F1 (Meter 
reading) and F3 (Meter da
ta access). Atthis time, the 
working architectureof Sprint 1was in too early of a
stage that the CIA algorithm did not provide any 
relevant result that could have assisted architectsinthe 
decision-makingprocess ofadding these features.
Figure 3 shows the working architecture resulting from
Srpint 2:
Thecomponent 
MeterCapturer
implements 
the reading textfiles of metering data and processing
the previously read data to 
form pair of key/value. The 
PPCs 
DataLoader
and
DataQuery
implement data 
loading and data query, respectively. As the 
functionalitiesfor data loading and data query could 
not be completely implemented in this sprint, and
increments in following sprints could refine these 
components, the architects decided toimplement them 
using PPCs. The design decision 
DD002
keeps the 
rationale behindreading metering data in pairs of 
key/value. Finally, between 
DD002
and 
DD001
there 
is a dependency that keeps the relation between the 
need of reading data in pairskey/value and the use of 
the database manager 
BerkeleyDB
. 
Sprint 3
focused 
on completing F3 and implementingF4 (Meter data 
process). The CIAretrieved
 the design decisionsand 
components which could have been impacted as a 
consequence of adding the 
newfeatures on the current 
working archhe working architecture 
fr
om Sprint2 (see Figure3): the PPCs 
DataQuery
and 
DataLoader
. Figure 4 shows the working architecture 
resulting from Sprint 3:The extension
Hadoop
MAP/REDUCE
implements the operations for 
clustering and distributingwork around a cluster in 
order to improve the pe
rformance for data accessing 
(dataloading and data query). The PPCs 
DataLoader
and 
DataQuery
were extended withthis functionality 
through the variability point clustering (see Figure 4). 
The designdecision 
DD005
keeps the rationale behind 
clustering as well as a dependency with thedesign
decision 
DD001
(see Figure 4). Finally, the PPC 
MeterProcessor
implementsinitial operations over raw 
and optimal data to calculate the optimal vector. As the
functionality formeter processing could not be 
completely implemented in this sprintand increments 
in following sprints might refine this component, the 
architects decidedto implement it using a PPC(see 
Figure 4). 
Sprint 4
focused on completing F4.The 
CIAretrieved the design decisionsand components 
which could have been impacted as a consequence of 
adding this incrementon the current working 
working
 architecture from Sprint
3 (see Figure4): the PPC 
MeterProcessor
. Then, the 
working architecturefrom Sprint 3, specifically the 
PPC 
MeterProcessor
, was extended with the 
algorithms forvalidatingmetering data and calculating 
optimal vectors. Finally, 
Sprint 5
focused on 
implementfeature F5. This 
feature has no a priori 
dependencies with others, so the CIA algorithm did not 
retrieve any impact.
5.7Analysis and interpretation
Quantitative and qualitative analysis was used to 
examine the data gatheredas 
described in Section 5.3. 
The research questions RQ1 
and RQ2 are answered as 
follows:
RQ1
: Is the CIA algorithm effective in locating the 
impacted architectural desi
gn decisions and elements 
resulting from a proposed change in requirements?
In 
Sprints 3 and 4, the CIA algorithm is 100% effective in 
locating the design decisions and components which 
are impacted by the feature incrementsthat are planned 
during the sprint planning meetings.The complexity of 
the working architectures resulting from these first 
sprints is relatively low, in such awaythatthe 
architects also determined 100% of the impacted 
design decisions and components.
47844786 Figure 3. Sprint 2 (Flexible-PLA & PLAK models)
Figure 4. Sprint 3 (Flexible-PLA & PLAK models)
At that time, the project continued for more four 
sprintsbut two members of the Scrumteam were 
substituted
9.
In Sprint 6, the product owner required the 
following conceptual proof: achangeof the database
managerwith the aim of evaluating the performance of 
other solutions. Specifically, the product owner 
decided to evaluate 
Oracle Real Application Clusters
(RAC
10
) over 
Oracle 11g
. The architects ran the CIA
algorithm to traverse the architectural model of Sprint 
5 and retrievethe design decisionsand components
which could havebeen impactedby this feature
9
One architect and one developer
10
 C
lustering and high availability in Oracle db environments
change. The algorithm retrie
ved five impacts: the PPCs 
DataLoader
and 
DataQuery
, the variability point
clustering
, and the components 
DBManager
and 
MeterCapturer
(seerow 2, Sprint 6of Table 1). In this
retrieval, two dependencies
 between architectural 
design decisions participate in the propagation of the 
change (see dependencies between 
DD005
and 
DD001
, 
and 
DD002
and 
DD001
inFigure 4). The manual 
analysis performedby the architectsdid not determine
the propagation of the change. This is due to the fact 
that the dependencies betweenthe 
DD005
and 
DD002
with 
DD001
became hidden for the new architect, so 
that they only found that three components could have 
been impacted(see row 3, Sprint 6of Table 1).
47854787 Therefore, the CIA algorithm automaticallyretrieved 
two components which were notmanuallydetermined 
by architects. Namely,the percentage of impacts that 
the CIA algorithm automaticallydetermined and that 
were not manually determined by the architects, is 
40%. Hence, the 40% of DDs and components, which 
are impacted by the change
, would havestayed hidden 
if the CIA algorithm had not workedeffectively. 
Table 1. Change-impact results
Sprint 3Sprint 4Sprint 5Sprint 6
Total number 
of impacts
2 1 0 5 
CIA algorithm100%100%100%100%
Manual CIA100%100%100%60%
RQ2
: Do PLAK and the CIA algorithmassist and 
guide agile team in reasoning about the changes and 
preserving the architecture integrity while agile 
architecting?
Analyzing the interviewsto the 
architects, the following excerpts can behighlighted: 
<<The use of PLAK models was particularlyuseful to 
understand the system during staff turnover that took 
place betweenSprints 4 and 5>><<Withoutthe 
knowledge provided by the PLAK model and the CIA 
algorithm, it would be extremely difficult to reason 
about the impact of changingthe database 
manager>><<It’s likely that several components had 
remained unchanged […] we had quite likely 
implementedthe necessaryfunctionality in other or 
new components,sothe former would had had “dead 
code”>><<Deadcode is an indicator ofbad 
smell>><<This bad smell could have been identified 
after we had implementedthe change by analyzing the 
dashboard of sonarpla
tform>><<By usingPLAK 
modelsand the CIA algorithm we were able to
proactively determineallthe impactsand to avoidthis 
softwaredegradation>><<wetook previousdesign
decisionsinto 
accountamongwhich there were 
dependencies>><<itdid a
llow usto maintain the 
architecture integrity>>. These excerptsput in 
evidence that ourapproach for agile architecting
assisted and guided thearchitects in the decision-
making process about changes and in the tasks of 
maintaining the architectur
e integrity iteration after 
iterationof this Scrum development. 
5.8Evaluation of validity and limitation
Case studies are qualitative in nature. The objective 
judgment of the collected dataof this kind is not 
possible.To improve the internal validity of the results 
presented,the independent variables that could 
influence this case study have been identifiedas 
follows: The architect experience has a great influence.
Thishas been reduced becausethe expertiseof the two 
architects who participate in the casestudy is very 
different (1 year vs. 7 years). However, the influence 
of project's size and architecture's complexity cannot 
be reduced due to the inherent nature of case studies,
which normally focus on one project. Additionally, we 
have used triangulationof source data to increase the 
reliability of the results.Inthis regard, interviews were 
individually conducted with the two architects, 
althoughseveral questions were asked in a group 
setting to encourage discussion. However,the major 
limitation in casestudy research is concerning to 
external validity, i.e.“the generality of the results with 
respectto a specificpopulation” [17], as only one case 
is studied. In return, case studies allow one to evaluate
a phenomenon, a model, or a 
process in a real setting. 
Thisis something important insoftware engineering in 
which a multitude of external factor may affect to the 
validationresults, and that other techniques such as 
formal experiments, although they permitreplication 
and generalization, do not consider as theyare 
conducting under controlledsettings.
6CONCLUSIONS
This paper presentsa novel solution to drive agile 
architecting. Our solutionassists and guides agile 
architects in the decision- 
makingprocess at the time 
of adding or changingfeatures by: (i)tracking the 
effects of changes upon the architecture —components 
and connections which are impacted by the changes—, 
and (ii) analyzing architectural concernssuch as 
dependencieswith earlier design decisions, rationale, 
constraints, risks, etc. which
 are also impacted by the 
changes. This analysis enab
les the preservation of the 
software architecture,as long as it helps to reduce the 
risk of unexpected conse
quences of changes. The 
analysis is instrumented by a CIA technique and 
deployed in the Scrum method.
The viability of our approach is proved by acase
study which has beenrun in an experimental laboratory 
called i-Smart Software Fa
ctory. It combines both 
academic and industry 
efforts in R&D, being 
remarkable the facilities for trackingthe projects’ 
progress. The case study puts our solution into practice 
within the agile developmentof ametering 
management system in the electric power networks 
domain. The results prove that (i) the CIA algorithm is 
effective in locating the impact resulting from a
change,and (ii)this change-impact helps architectsto 
takebetter decisions,especially when architectural
knowledgemay be lost or vaporizedas aresult of a
staff turnover. Hence,the casestudy proved that the 
CIA algorithm determined 40% of impacts more than 
architects manuallydetermined. These promising
47864788 results did not interfere with other agile practices and 
did not incur a big upfront design, making the agile 
construction and evolution of architecturepossible. 
One of the main conclusions 
of thisresearch is that 
agile architectingis feasible 
so that ASD can be scaled 
up to large and complex software-intensive systems.
As future work, we are improvingthe FPLA
framework, so that itcan semi-automaticallygenerate 
code by using 
model-to-text
transformations.
Its aim is 
to link architecture and co
de. The traceabilitybetween 
architecture and implementation may avoid another 
common problemin ASD when code drifts so far apart 
that it makes it much easier to erode thesoftware 
system architecture.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work reportedin here hasbeenpartially 
sponsored by the Spanishfund
(INNOSEP TIN2009-
13849, IMPONET TSI-020400-2010-103, i-SSF IPT-
430000-2010-038)
and UPM (Technical University of 
Madrid) under their Researcher Trainingprogram.
10. References 
[1]P. Abrahamsson,M. Babar, 
and P. Kruchten,“Agility and 
architecture: Can they coexist?” Soft
ware, IEEE, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 
16–22, 2010.
[2]R. S. Arnold, Software Change
 Impact Analysis.Los Alamitos, 
CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1996.
[3]M. A. Babar and P. Abrahamsson, “Architecture-centric 
methods and agile approaches,” 
in Agile Processes in Software 
Engineering and Extreme Programming(XP), 2008, pp. 242–243.
[4]K. Beck, Extreme Programmi
ng Explained: Embrace Change. 
2nd ed. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004.
[5]G. Booch, “The defenestr
ation ofsuperfluous architectural 
accoutrements,” Keynote Software ArchitectureChallenges in the 
21st Century, USC, June 2009.
[6]J. Bosch, “Softwarearchitecture: 
The next step,” in Software 
Architecture, ser. LNCS, vol. 
3047.Springer, 2004, pp. 194–199.
[7]C.-Y. Chen and P.-C. Chen, “A
 holistic approach to managing 
software change impact,” J. Syst. 
Softw., vol. 82, no. 12, pp. 2051–
2067, 2009.
[8]H. Chivers, R. F. Paige, and X. Ge, “Agile security using an 
incremental security 
architecture,” in Pro
ceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Extreme Programming,ser. LNCS.
Springer, 2005, pp. 57–65.
[9]H. Cho, J. Gray, Y. Cai, S.
 Wong, and T. Xie, Model-Driven 
Domain Analysis and Software 
Development: Architectures and 
Functions. IGI Global, 2011, ch. 
Model-Driven Impact Analysis of 
Software Product Lines, pp. 275–303.
[10]A. Cockburn,Agile Software 
Development. The Cooperative
Game. Second Edition.Addison-
Wesley Professional, 2006.
[11]J. Díaz, J. Pérez, J. Garbajo
sa,and A. Wolf, “Change impact 
analysis in product-line 
architectures,” in Pro
ceedings of the 5th 
European Conference on Sof
tware Architecture,LNCS, vol. 6903.
Springer, 2011, pp. 114–129.
[12]J. Díaz, J. Pérez, J. Garbajosa
, and A. Wolf, “A process for 
documenting variability design rati
onale of flexible and adaptive 
PLAs,” in On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems: OTM 2011 
Workshops, ser. LNCS, vol.7046.Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 
2011, pp. 612–621.
[13]H. Erdogmus, “Architecture me
ets agility,” Software, IEEE, vol. 
26, no. 5, pp. 2–4, 2009.
[14]D. Falessi, et al., “Peacef
ulcoexistence: Agile developer
perspectives on software 
architecture,” Software,
 IEEE, vol. 27, no. 
2, pp. 23–25, 2010.
[15]M. Galster and P. Avgeriou,“
Handling variability in software 
architecture: Problems and implications
,” in Proceedings of the 9th 
WICSA ’11, 2011, pp. 171–180.
[16]M. O. Hassan, L. Deruelle, a
nd H. Basson, “A knowledge-based 
system for change impact anal
ysis on software architecture,” in 
Proceedings of Fourth Intern
ational Conference on Research 
Challenges in Information Science, 2010, pp. 545–556.
[17]U. van Heesch, P. Avgeriou,
and R. Hilliard, “A documentation 
frame- work for arch
itecture decisions,” Journal of Systemsand 
Software, vol. 85, no.
 4, pp. 795–820, 2012.
[18]T.
Ihme and P. Abrahamsson,“Agile architecting: The use of 
architectural patterns in mobile java
 applications,” Int. J.of Agile 
Manufacturing, vol. 8, 
no. 2, pp. 97–112, 2005.
[19]P. Kruchten, “Software 
architectureand agile software 
development an oxymoron?”Ke
ynote Softwar
e Architecture 
Challenges in the 21st Century, USC, June 2009.
[20]J. L. Martin, A. Yagüe, E. G
onzalez, and J. Garbajosa, “Making 
software factory truly 
global: the s
mart softwar
e factory project,” in 
Software Factory Ma
gazine.Available on 
http://www.softwarefactory.cc/magazine
F. Fagerholm, Ed., March 2010, p. 19.
[21]T. Mens, S. Demeyer, and T. Mens, “Introductionand roadmap: 
History and challenges of software evolution,” in Software 
Evolution.Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 1–11.
[22]R. L. Nord and J. E. Tomay
ko, “Software architecture-centric 
methods and agile development,” IEEE Softw., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 
47–53, 2006.
[23]J. Pérez,J. Díaz, J. Garbajosa,and P. P. Alarcón, “Flexible 
working architectures: Agile 
architectingusing PPCs,” in 
Proceedings of the 4th Eu
ropeanConference on Software
Architecture, LNCS, vol. 6285. Spri
nger-Verlag, 2010, pp. 102–117. 
[24]J. Pérez, J. Díaz,C. C. Soria,
 and J. Garbajosa, “Plastic partial 
components: A solution to support variability in architectural 
components,” in Proceedings of
 the Joint WICSA/ECSA.IEEE 
Computer Society Press,2009, pp. 221–230.
[25]D. E. Perry and A. L. Wolf, 
“Foundations for the study of 
software architecture,”SI
GSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes, vol. 17, no. 4, 
pp. 40–52, 1992.
[26]K. Pohl, G. Bckle, and F.
 Linden, Software Product Line 
Engineering: Foundations, Prin
ciplesand Techniques. Springer, 
Germany, 2005.
[27]J.Ramil and M. Lehman, “Met
rics of software evolution as 
effort predictors - a case study,”
 in Software Maintenance, 2000. 
Proceedings. InternationalConfe
rence on, 2000, pp. 163–172.
[28]P. Runeson and M. Höst, “Guidelinesfor conductingand 
reporting case study research in 
software engineering,” Empirical 
Software Engineer- ing, vol. 14, pp. 
131–164, 2009.
[29]K. Schwaber and M. Beedle,
 Agile Software Development with 
Scrum.Prentice-Hall, 2002.
[30]A. Tang, A. Nicholson, Y. Jin, and J.Han, “Using bayesian
belief networksfor changeimpact an
alysis in architecture design,”J. 
Syst. Softw., vol. 80, pp. 127–148, 2007.
[31]A. Tang, Y. Jin,
 and J. Han, “A rationale-based architecture 
model for design traceabilityand reas
oning,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 80, 
pp. 918–934, 2007.
47874789