 Strategic Alignment and the Implemen
tation of a Knowledge Management 
System: A Social Repres
entation Perspective 
 Alina Dulipovici 
HEC Montreal 
 alina.dulipovici@hec.ca
   Daniel Robey 
Georgia State University 
drobey@gsu.edu
    Abstract 
In today™s highly competitive environment many 
organizations want to reuse existing organizational 
knowledge to derive business value more effectively and 

efficiently. They seek to rely on strategically aligned 
knowledge management systems (KMS) to improve their 
organizational agility. They underestimate, however, the 

challenges associated with the implementation of such 

systems. Prior studies have shown that social interactions 

may influence the users™ perceptions and response to the 

implementation of a new information system. Based on an 
interpretive case study, this paper examines the 
implementation of a KMS and how social interactions 

among four groups of users shaped not only the 

implementation process but also the alignment of the 

KMS with organizational strategy. Adopting a social 

representation lens, we are able to study how the groups 
develop different cognitive views of the KMS being 
implemented that ultimately lead to a strategic 

misalignment. Implications for research and practice are 

then discussed. 
  1. Introduction  Knowledge management systems (KMS) are a type of 
information systems (IS) that allow organizations to better 
leverage their intellectual assets. By enabling the storage 

and retrieval of information about projects, clients, and 

other business issues, KMS permit the reuse of 
knowledge acquired and contributed by organizational 
members. KMS are ﬁpeople orientedﬂ to the extent that 

their effective use depends upon voluntary contributions 

to KMS knowledge bases and to a set of users who value 

those codified contributions [2, 7]. In some domains, 

consultancy for instance, the consultants™ knowledge and 
experience are the firm™s ﬁproductﬂ. In other domains, the 
employees™ knowledge and experience support the quest 

for organizational efficiency and effectiveness. Thus, the 

use of a KMS to store and reuse organizational 

knowledge becomes essential in order to manage these 

assets and to sustain organizational agility. It is little 
wonder that organizational spending for KMS has reached 

significant levels: over $73 billion in US [10]. 
Nevertheless, there are still important gaps that 
warrant further research. For example, prior research in 
strategic management has shown that the alignment of the 
business strategy with the IS strategy leads to higher 

organizational performance [3]. A strategically aligned 

KMS, therefore, would support the intellectual resources 

necessary to achieve an organization™s strategic 

objectives. However, the response to a KMS 
implementation may be hindered by user perceptions and 
socially constructed understandings of the KMS as well 

as the organization™s objectives [15]. Unexpected 

outcomes may especially result from the implementation 

of KMS because their use depends upon subjective 

understandings of knowledge, strategy and the system 
itself, even for a strategically aligned system. It is thus 
necessary to further explore the ﬁless rational but highly 

influential elementsﬂ [15, p. 55] emerging during the 

KMS implementation process. To demystify these less 

rational elements, we pose the research question: 
How do 
social interactions shape the strategic alignment of a 
knowledge management system during implementation? 
 We examine the implementation of a KMS in a 
government agency providing IT consulting services to 
other government agencies. Although motivated by the 

practical benefits and challenges associated with the 
implementation of a strategically aligned KMS, this 
research ultimately seeks to make a theoretical 

contribution. By acknowledging the importance of social 

context in the production of knowledge and the use of a 

KMS, this paper shows that, through social interactions, 

organizational actors represent the KMS in different ways 
and that these representations shape the use and 
acceptance of the new KMS, thus influencing the 

implementation process and ultimately strategic 

alignment. Following the recommendations of previous 

studies on knowledge management [14, 15], the 

theoretical lens chosen (here, the social representation 
lens [11]) and the data analysis focus simultaneously on 
the individual and group levels of analysis because 

individual knowledge originates within the context of 

actors™ symbolic worlds and cannot be detached, stored, 

and moved to other contexts without social 
2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.54940622012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.5494062  reinterpretation. The findings also contribute to the IS 
alignment literature by showing how the implementation 

of a KMS can lead to misalignment, failing to support 
organizational goals and to sustain business agility. 
In the following, we first present the theoretical 
concepts of KMS alignment and social representation. 
Our method section presents the research site and the 

research design. The results provide detailed evidence of 

the social representations created about the new KMS. 
Our discussion draws on these results to explain how 
social interactions may lead to the emergence of different 

social representations of the KMS and how these 

differences influence alignment. The implications for both 

research and practice are then discussed. 
 2. Theoretical background 
 2.1. Conceptualization of KMS alignment 
 Given its direct impact on organizational performance, 
IS alignment is a chief concern for practitioners [9]. IS 
alignment is generally defined as the degree of fit and 

integration among an organization™s business strategy, IS 

strategy, business structure (or business processes), and 

IT structure (or IT infrastructure) [3, 6]. Thus, IS 

alignment is not fixed in time, but rather a dynamic 
concept moving through periods of high and low 
alignment. High IS alignment implies a degree of fit and 

integration among the four components that is perceived 

to be at a level, where both the IT function and the IS 

strategy effectively support the organization™s business 
goals. Low IS alignment implies a degree of fit and 
integration among the four components where one or 

several business goals are not supported appropriately by 

the IS strategy or the IT function. Periods of low 

alignment are followed by a revolutionary change, which 

helps the organization to move on its evolutionary path 
and adjust to new elements in its environment [16].  
Achieving alignment is contingent upon several 
factors, such as communication, collaboration, IT metrics, 
IS/IT governance, human resources, and technologies [9]. 

These contingency factors may influence either the 

strategic dimension of alignment (between business and 
IS strategies) or the structural dimension of alignment 
(between business and IT structures). Therefore, even if 

an IS project is initially aligned with regard to the 

strategic dimension, the overall IS alignment may 

decrease if the structural dimension is misaligned. Such 

conditions of misalignment may lead to failed IS 
implementation projects [4]. Formal business and IS 
strategies are implemented at the upper levels of the 

organizational hierarchy, while the implementation 

projects are executed at lower levels.  
As with any other IS, KMS need to be strategically 
and structurally aligned with the organization™s business 
strategy in order to lead to increased organizational 

performance. However, as contingency factors, the social 

and cultural aspects are far more significant in the case of 
KMS [3]. The social dimension refers to the degree to 
which organizational actors understand the organizational 

goals and use the KMS to support these goals [15]. The 

cultural dimension refers to the degree to which KMS 

alignment is culturally supported within the organization 

by appropriate values, norms, informal structures, and 
incentives, among others [15]. Despite their role as either 
an enabler or a disabler of KMS alignment, the social and 

cultural dimensions have received little attention in the 

knowledge management literature. The theoretical lens of 

social representations, which is presented next, allows us 

to examine these two organizational contingencies during 
the implementation of a KMS. 
 2.2. Socially representing the use of KMS 
 Using a KMS is more than just performing an IT-
mediated task. It is a contextually dependent activity, and 
the use of a KMS may not only change the associated 
work practices but also the nature of the work itself, given 

the complex interactions between social and material 

practices [8]. Therefore, adopting a practice lens is 

recommended in order to attain a more in-depth view [13, 

15]. With this assumption in mind, we chose the social 
representation lens [11], which presents several 
similarities with the practice lens but, through the process 

of representing, social representations emphasize the 

dialectics between representer and represented [17]. The 

practice lens is thus enriched with more detailed insights. 
The main premise is that individuals create a 
representation of something (object, idea, concept, etc.) or 

someone (individual, group, etc.) to construct a cognitive 

framework for the interpretation of reality. The 

representation acts as ﬁa means of transferring what 

disturbs us, what threatens our universe, [...] to a context 

where the unusual becomes usual, where the unknown 
can be included in an acknowledged categoryﬂ [12, p.26]. 
However, an individual™s thoughts do not form in 

isolation, but are based on collectively shared images of 

objects. Thus, the social representation is built on the 

common understanding of an object, idea or concept and 
embodies ﬁthe ensemble of thoughts and feelings being 
expressed in verbal and overt behaviorﬂ
 [19, p.96] of a 
social group. Social representations are both the product 

of the interpretation process and the process itself. 
Let™s suppose Anne and John form a group of two 
individuals. Anne asks John to pass the quill used to write 
a specific manuscript. If John does not know the meaning 
of the term 
quill
, he will mentally represent this concept 
based on known elements (e.g., a device for writing) as 

well as images of concepts from the same category (e.g., 

pen, pencil, ballpoint, marker). The ensemble of thoughts 
40634063  and feelings composing the initial representation of a quill 
(which is in fact a pen made from a bird™s feather) might 

be far from the truth. John may, for instance, initially 
think of a quill as a weapon shed by a porcupine and 
therefore not understand Anne™s request. Through John™s 

social interactions with Anne, the initial representation is 

constantly adjusted so that, gradually, it denotes John™s 

social representation of a quill as a writing instrument.  
Any representation is characterized by three elements: 
the object that is represented (the quill), the individual 

who builds the representation (John), and the group to 

which this individual belongs (in our example, the group 

composed of Anne and John). Given social interactions 

among the members of the group, both the process of 

creating a social representation and the social 
representation itself are in constant evolution. The 
group™s pressure and opinions, social negotiation, or 

collective sensemaking shape the representation and 

influence its form over time (see Figure 1). 
 Figure 1: The ﬁToblerone modelﬂ - a simplified view 
of social representations [adapted from 1] 
 
This evolutionary process materializes through 
anchoring and objectification [12]. Anchoring involves 
naming and classifying novel objects according to an 
existing system of thought (the quill as a writing device). 

Objectification strengthens the classification and makes 

the object tangible by associating it with images, material 

examples, models or verbal metaphors. For a group, the 

anchoring system is rooted in the historical (past 
experiences, future goals and aspirations), cultural 
(common background), and social context of the group
 
[19]. Therefore, all members of the group use roughly the 

same vocabulary to construct a common understanding. 

But the objectification represents the personal 
interpretation of each member so it may include elements 
peripheral to the group™s common understanding. As a 

result, anchoring and objectification are complementary 

to one another: anchoring promotes stability or the status 

quo, while objectification promotes change [11]. In terms 

of operationalization, social representations manifest 
themselves in communication and behavior (formal and 
informal). More precisely, Moscovici [12] refers to 

communicative genres (e.g. diffusion, propagation, 

propaganda, conversation) that are mutually 

interdependent with social thinking: they develop based 

on social thinking and they shape social thinking.  
In summary, the theory of social representation is 
appropriate for this study because it focuses on social 

interactions by examining the dynamic interdependence 
among thinking, communicating, and acting. Anchoring 
and objectification are key to creating and re-creating 

social representations. Together with communicative 

genres, they allow researchers to characterize the 

common understanding of a group.  
 3. Method 
 This research is conducted as an interpretive case 
study focusing on the subjective reports of users™ 
perceptions about KMS and their influence on the 

strategic alignment of the KMS. The subjective and 

context-dependent nature of knowledge implies that 

interpretations of reality depend on individuals™ thoughts 
and feelings and on other influences that may operate 
within the social context. Therefore, this section describes 

our methodological choices given the social and 

organizational context of our research site.  
 3.1. Research site 
 The research site (herein called 
IT Projects Authority
 or ITPA) is a state government agency in the United 
States. Established in 2000 by the state Governor, ITPA 
provides IT consulting services to the other state agencies. 
Its mission is to create a more efficient and responsive 

government through the innovative use of technology.  
 Figure 2: ITPA organizational chart (extract) 
 Figure 2 shows an extract of ITPA™s organizational 
structure: a 12-member board of directors, an executive 

director, and three divisions (Finance, Project Planning, 

and Operations). ITPA™s internal IT department is under 

direct supervision of the Finance division. The IT 
department is responsible for all the IT projects within 
ITPA (i.e. internal IT projects). The Project Planning 

division is responsible for initiating and planning IT 
40644064  projects with other state agencies (i.e. external IT 
projects). Once the external projects get to the execution 

phase, they are transferred to the Operations division. 
Within this division, the Projects Management group is 
responsible for the project management side of the 

external projects and the Solutions Development group 

leads their technical development and deployment. 
 3.2. Case study design 
 
The social representation approach offers not only 
conceptual richness, but also methodological direction [1, 
5]. Therefore, we purposely chose ITPA because it was 
introducing a new KMS as a result of its strategic IS 

alignment process. The new system was a multi-user 

networking system based on Microsoft Project Server 

combined with Microsoft SharePoint Server (hereafter 

Project/SharePoint). The system allowed ITPA™s project 
teams to record project details, information about clients, 
and information about project management tools and 

methodologies. The system also generated reports of 

aggregated data and provided access to project 

deliverables. The use of this system required that tacit 

knowledge be codified and stored in a web-based 
repository rather than transmitted orally (which was the 
customary practice before the implementation of the new 

system). For this reason, Project/SharePoint was a major 

technological change for this organization.  
Given the size of the organization (over 500 
employees) and the great number of IT projects 
conducted at ITPA, we asked the top management team to 
suggest a set of relatively similar projects for which we 

could examine the implementation of Project/SharePoint 

in detail. The recommendation was the Enterprise 

Integration (EI) program, which was a collection of over 
20 external projects (some in progress, others already 
completed) that all sought to deploy a unified IT 

infrastructure across groups of state agencies.  
The investigation of social representations is 
considered more informative when natural groups are 

studied. Bauer and Gaskel [1] characterize a natural group 
by the presence of common interests (or a common 
project) and a collective memory. After examining the 

modes and media of representations at ITPA, as 

recommended by Bauer and Gaskell [1], we found that 

ﬁproject groupingsﬂ proved to be weak forms due to the 

temporal nature of the projects and the matrix structure of 
the organization. However, groupings based on divisional 
affiliation proved to be strong because members shared 

experiences, activities, interests, and had self-referential 

identities [1]. Respondents from the EI program perceived 

themselves as members of one of four groups: 
EI-
External
 (EI members from the Project Planning division 
or the ﬁexternalﬂ group as they called themselves), 
EI-Operations (EI members from the Projects Management 
group or the ﬁoperationsﬂ group), 
EI-Developers
 (EI members from the Solution Development group or the 

ﬁdevelopersﬂ), and 
EI-Internal
 (EI members from the 
internal IT department or the ﬁinternalﬂ group). The data 

analysis focused on these four natural groups. 
3.3. Data collection and data analysis procedures 
 Data collection began in November 2006. By January 
2007, Project/SharePoint was already in production in the 
Finance division, and the two other divisions were 
expected to gradually embark by May 2007. Due to 
technical problems, the implementation project 

accumulated delays and the go-live dates were postponed. 

Given the precarious financial situation of ITPA, a sudden 

change in the business strategy took place in May 2007 Œ 

the implementation of Project/SharePoint was temporally 
suspended and work on most EI projects was stalled. 
Several members left the agency and those who stayed 

were more concerned about their jobs than about using 

the KMS. An example of the magnitude of the 

organizational restructuring is the major downsizing 
planned for the following year: from over 500 employees 
to just 80. In this context, we felt we had to leave the field 

in order to protect the data we already had from these 

unrelated events that changed the groups™ composition. 

Fortunately, the data already collected was rich enough to 

study the social representations at three key moments 
(before implementation, after training, and before the 
restructuring) during the six months spent at ITPA.  
Multiple data sources and collection methods are 
needed in order to capture the complexity of social 

representations. First, social representations materialize 

through different modes (behavior, individual cognition, 
informal and formal communicative genres) and media 
(movement, words, visual images and non-linguistic 

sounds) [1]. Our focus is not the social representation 
per 
se, but the anchoring and the objectification of 
Project/SharePoint. Second, a thorough understanding of 

the alignment of the KMS may also transpire from 
documents, organizational routines, business processes, 
organizational practices, and norms. Thus, we used 

interviews, non-participant observation, and documents 

(see Table 1). The first author conducted interviews with 

key informants from each group. The interviews included 
questions pertaining to the KMS (specifically the 
implementation process, use practices, content, and other 

perceptions), and to KMS alignment. Some of the issues 

that were unclear based on interviews and observations 

were verified in informal discussions with small groups of 

informants. The first author also observed and wrote field 
notes on regular activities, meetings, working sessions, 
and training sessions. Documents such as organizational 

charts, strategic plans, business plans, the list of 

organizational goals and newsletters were used in order to 

better understand the KMS alignment process, the 
40654065  organizational context, and the social representations as 
materialized in formal communications. Other documents 

used such as project documentation, project checklists, 
white papers, internal memos, and PowerPoint handouts 
proved to be especially useful
 because they helped us to 
better understand the type of knowledge that needed to be 

shared via Project/SharePoint. The various data sources 

and data collection methods allowed us to identify and 

examine similarities and differences across groups [1]. 
 Table 1: Data collection methods 
Research 
methods 
Informants 
Modes 
of SR Medium
of SR Goal 
Interviews 
(23 semi-
structured 

interviews) 
Project 

Managers, 

Group 

members, 
Organiza-
tional level 

manager, 

IT Support 
group 
Individual 
cognition 
Words, 

conversa-

tions  
Use of the 

KMS; SR 

of the 
KMS; 
Alignment 
of the 
KMS 
Non 
participant 
observation 
Project 
Managers, 
Group 
members,  

Organiza-

tional level 
managers 
Habitual 
behavior; 
Informal 
communi-

cation 
Behavior 

and rituals;
Conversa-
tions during 

meetings 

and work-
shops; 
Unofficial 

symbols 
Verify 

unclear 
issues 
about the 
use of the 

KMS and 
the IS 
alignment 
Group 

interviews 
(4-5 informants at 
a time)
 Project 

Managers, 

Group 
members,  
Organiza-

tional level 

managers 
Informal 

communi-

cation 
Conversa-

tions at 

business 
gatherings 
SR of the 
KMS; 

Alignment 
of the KMS 
Use of 

documents 
Organiza-

tional 

documents 

and trade 
press  
Formal 
communi-

cation 
Official 

documents 

and 
symbols, 
news 
articles 
Use of the 

KMS; 

Alignment 

of the KMS 
Legend: SR = social representation 
 Some data sources produced data at the individual 
level (for example, interviews), while other sources 

produced data at the group and the organizational levels 

(for example, group interviews and organizational 

memos). Following guidance from other studies on KMS 
[14, 15], the data analysis focuses simultaneously on the 
individual and group levels of analysis because 

knowledge originates within the context of actors™ 

symbolic worlds and cannot be detached, stored, and 

moved to other contexts without social reinterpretation.  
 The first step of the data analysis was detailed coding. 
The first author performed the initial coding of the 

transcripts and the documents, following an open coding 
process. For the other steps of the data analysis, both 

authors were actively involved. NVivo software was used 

to manage and organize the codes (see Table 2).
  Table 2: Categories and examples of codes 
Categories Examples 
of codes 
Anchoring: past  
Common background, prior 
experience 
Anchoring: 
organizational context  
Values and norms 
Anchoring: future  Goals and aspirations 
Objectification Images, metaphors and symbols, 
behavior patterns 
KMS alignment Business strategy, IS strategy, 
business structure, IT structure  
Implementation project Objectives, events, system usage 
Social interactions Type, objective, content 
 5. Results  5.1. IS alignment and KMS alignment 
 Although ITPA does not have any competitors, the 
Governor™s office monitors ITPA™s spending and 
provides guiding principles so that ITPA can support the 

statewide goals. Then, ITPA™s upper management 

develops a list of strategies for each business function 

(e.g. IS, Marketing, Operations, etc.) accompanied by 
specific action items. Leadership groups refine the action 
items, which act as baseline for each operational plan. In 

2001, the state Governor established IT-based cross-

agency sharing of information as a statewide goal. The 

traditional ﬁsiloedﬂ data of each agency represented a 

significant barrier to providing efficient services to 
citizens and employees. Integrating the IT infrastructure 
would build consensus across state agencies, save money, 

and increase the quality of services offered. For example, 

criminal justice activities would benefit from real-time 

access to data from state law enforcement agencies, the 
courts, the Department of Corrections, and the Board of 
Pardons and Paroles. ITPA was mandated to promote a 

collaborative IT environment across agencies and to 

support its execution. The EI program was then created.  
The projects under the EI program had a major 
challenge because most of the agencies were hesitant to 
lose ownership of the data to be shared. Therefore, ITPA 
decided to use its own departments to demonstrate that 

collaboration was possible across ITPA™s divisions (IT 

Strategic Plan, 2004). ITPA™s own divisions functioned in 

silos and cross-sharing was minimal. The projects 

undertaken at ITPA (especially the EI projects) had many 
similarities and the project teams were eager to share their 
expertise and to avoid reinventing the wheel when faced 

with similar problems. Better collaboration would also 

improve ITPA™s work practices and contribute to sustain 
40664066  ITPA™s expertise in IT project management and 
technology development (IT Strategic Plan, 2004). 
To better align the IS strategy with the IT 
infrastructure, executive managers decided to formalize 

the use of the shared driv
e as the main electronic 
repository. Project teams were required to use the shared 

drives to store and share all project-related information 

and knowledge: project deliverables, contact information, 

meeting minutes, lessons-learned databases, diagrams 
(e.g., organizational charts, project charts, technical 
diagrams, etc.), memos, white papers, roadmaps, and any 

other project-related document. However, the shared 

drive was not very effective as a knowledge repository 

because it could not deal with version control and 

redundancy, among other deficiencies. As a result, few EI 
employees changed their work practices to include 
knowledge management activities using the shared drives. 
Interpreting the inefficient use of the shared-drives as 
a technological misalignment, ITPA implemented in 2005 

a more conventional solution, Microsoft SharePoint 

Services (hereafter SharePoint). At ITPA, SharePoint was 
configured to provide key functionalities that the shared 
drives did not have, such as: document versions, check-in 

and check-out of documents, alerts when changes were 

made, task monitoring, forums, and instant messaging. 

Given these benefits, SharePoint was expected to replace 
all the other tools for knowledge management tasks. But, 
despite the potential benefits of SharePoint, the project 

teams complained that the standard structure was too 

broad and vague and the access to the SharePoint sites 

was limited for security reasons. Gradually, project teams 

went back to their pre-SharePoint work practices for 
knowledge management activities. In 2006, ITPA decided 
to further readjust the technological misalignment by 

replacing SharePoint with another solution, 

Project/SharePoint [IT Strategic Plan, 2007].  
In summary, business strategy was the main driver 
behind ITPA™s technological transformation. The 
alignment process supported the business strategy by 
implementing an IS strategy and then seeking to put in 

play the appropriate IT infrastructure. Executive 

managers provided technology vision. However, social 

contingencies influenced the implementation of the KMS. 
The organization kept introducing different KMS that 
failed to reach their strategic objectives. Next we describe 

the KMS implementation.  

 5.2. Social representations of Project/SharePoint 
 EI-External:
 the EI-External members were certified 
project managers (i.e. PMP
®) who talked highly about 
knowledge management and its role for the EI projects: 
ﬁWe need to know what others are doing because we may 
be able to help each other. They may have something that 
we need and vice-versa
ﬂ (Program Lead).  
The EI-External members were quick adopters of all 
the tools supporting knowledge management activities. 

However, expectations on how to use these tools differed 
based on previous experiences with these tools. For 
example, the Program Coordinator was initially excited to 

work again on SharePoint. She pictured in her mind the 

structure of the new SharePoint sites, based on her 

experience at her previous job. She later admitted that 

those visualizations were very different from her current 
usage of SharePoint. She knew the tool had the 
functionalities to impose a structure that would fit the 

program™s needs, but the way in which the site was 

configured by the IT department forced people to find 

alternative solutions (e.g. shared drive, email, phone). The 

most common alternative solution was to put documents 
on both the SharePoint site and the shared drive. This 
solution complied with the formal requirement to have all 

the documentation on SharePoint, while allowing the EI 

members to create their own structure on the shared drive. 
EI-External members became so used to this double-
entry practice that they could not imagine the use of a 
single KMS, such as Project/SharePoint. When they heard 
about the implementation of Project/SharePoint, they 

hesitated because they perceived this system as yet 

another tool to be used in parallel with the existing tools. 

After a few training sessions, a mix of doubt and 
excitement emerged as illustrated by one of the project 
managers: 
ﬁ[Project/SharePoint] is supposed to provide 
a lot of details about the project and therefore 

automatically or magically pull it out for you so that 

everything is consistent. That 
is what we want. [...] I™ve 
seen the details in the training about how it is supposed to 
work and how I am supposed to enter the details about 
the projects I™m managing but I haven™t seen the magical 

product yet.
ﬂ (Project Manager) 
Despite the advantages of Project/SharePoint, the 
transition from a mix of tools to a single, integrated 

system was still a major source of disbelief for the 
members of this group. On the one hand, they felt 
frustrated and dissatisfied with having too many 

knowledge management tools that could do the same task. 

ﬁPeople have that desire to share and they feel frustrated 
because they could do it better. [...] They feel that there is 
no platform or opportunity or place for sharing 
knowledge and make a difference
ﬂ (Executive Project 
Manager). On the other hand, every time a new 

knowledge management tool was introduced, they used 

that tool in conjunction with the other tools. When the 

major restructuring occurred, Project/SharePoint was still 
not accepted as the main KMS for the EI-External group. 
Even those members who used it regularly perceived it as 

ﬁa fancy note-keeping program
ﬂ (EI Program Manager). 
Table 3 summarizes the key findings regarding the 

anchoring and the objectification of Project/SharePoint 

within EI-External. 
40674067  Table 3: EI-External: summary of the findings 
Anchoring Objectification 
Experience, background, 
values and norms 
Goals and 
aspirations 
Representative 
images, metaphors, 
behavior patterns 
- Certified project 
management skills and 
expertise  
- Various expectations 
for KMS based on 
previous experiences 
- Adjust the KMS to their 
KM practices and not 
the opposite => use of 
several KM tools 
concomitantly 
- Desire to 
use a 
better 
platform 

for KM 
activities 
- T0 : another KM 
tool to be used in 
parallel with the 

other KM tools 
- T1 : a magical 
product 
- T2 : a fancy note-
keeping program 
Legend: T
0 = beginning of the implementation process in 
this group; T
1 = after the six training sessions; T
2 = right 
before the major organizational restructuring. 
 EI-Operations
: The EI-Operations group members 
were seasoned project managers, with an average of more 
than fifteen years of hands-on expertise. A few members 
were certified project managers. However, their prior 

experience with IT-based KMS was very limited. To 

communicate and collaborate with the other groups, they 

preferred meetings and telephone. ﬁ
Going out and looking 
at somebody else™s SharePoint site and trying to go 

through that to see if there is something that I can use, I 

don™t have time to do that. I™ll go to that project manager 

and ask him. That™s also where meetings come into play 

because we talk about ‚by the way, we™re doing this™ and 

someone else says ‚we did that too™.ﬂ 
(Project Manager). 
As a result, KMS were not used effectively within the 

group. Looking for documents on the shared drives was a 

real challenge, as they were seen as ﬁ
900-plus gigabytes 
of information [about] everything and everybody
ﬂ (Unit 
Director). SharePoint was used by only one project 

manager who wished to comply with the norms 
established for the EI program: ﬁ
To make sure that we are 
following the guidelines [of the EI program], the 
SharePoint site is where everything is available. My 

upper team, that I report to, will go to SharePoint 
and they will see what™s going on. But I am still managing my 
resources on a more personal 
level, instead of relying on 
them to go to SharePoint to pull things down. I know they 
do not always remember to go to SharePoint. So I send 

things directly to my resourcesﬂ
 (Project Manager). 
Despite the limited use of the existing KMS, the EI-
Operations group was eager to use Project/SharePoint 
even if it required less oral sharing and more 
documenting. They were especially excited about the idea 

that everyone from ITPA would embark on the new 

platform. Project/SharePoint was viewed as overcoming 

problems they had experienced with the shared drives: 

ﬁMy vision is that we take 
those things that everyone 
needs Œstandards, policies, procedures Œ we put them in a 

common library within [Project/SharePoint] that has 

some version control, acces
s control, and an approval 
process. When I go look for a policy or standard, I know 

that the one I™m looking at is current, is approved, is the 

right version for me to see, and I have access to it. Right 

now, on the shared drive, that™s not trueﬂ
 (Unit Director).  
Like their colleagues in the EI-External group, EI-
Operations members were skeptical about changing their 
knowledge sharing practice: ﬁ
I think [Project/SharePoint] 
will help us, but a lot of times we rely on tools to do the 
work for us and we don™t put enough energy and time into 

processes and into the behind the scenes stuff that allow 

tools to work for usﬂ
 (Project Manager). Table 4 
summarizes the key findings regarding the anchoring and 
objectification of Project/SharePoint. 
Table 4: EI-Operations: summary of the findings 
Anchoring Objectification 
Experience, 
background, values 
and norms 
Goals and 
aspirations 
Representative 
images, metaphors,
behavior patterns 
- Hands-on project 
management 
expertise 
- Limited prior 
experience with IT-

based KMS 
- Limited conversion 
from tacit to explicit 
knowledge 
- Strong preference 
for face-to-face and 
informal sharing 
- Compliance with the 
norms for the EI 

program 
- Efficient 
document 

collaboration 
- A common 
KMS for 

everybody at 

ITPA 
- T0 : Project/ 
SharePoint will 

have everything 

that the shared-
drive doesn™t have 
- T1 : Using a KMS 
is time consuming 
but it™s worth the 
effort if everybody 
else is doing it 
- T2 : Project/ 
SharePoint will 
help us but it won™t do the work 

for us 
Legend: T
0 = beginning of the implementation process in 
this group; T
1 = after the six training sessions; T
2 = right 
before the major organizational restructuring. 
 EI-Developers
: The EI-Developers were responsible 
for deploying and supporting the technological solutions 

of all EI projects. On a daily basis, they used several tools 
to support their knowledge management tasks: shared 
drives, email, instant messaging, and web-based 

repositories for technical documents. The main tool was 

the shared drive; the others were used for very specific 

needs. A SharePoint site had been set up for them but 
moving all the documents from the shared drive was 
considered of low priority and the site was not used at all.  
As the owners of the technical documentation 
necessary for all the EI projects, the EI-Developers group 

had had a strong identity, tied to their cultural norms to 

document and share technical knowledge. Their use of the 
shared drive was extremely effective as they created their 
own organizing structure and their own system of alerts 

for version control. On the one hand, the group size was 
40684068  relatively small (around six people plus external 
consultants who temporally joined the team), while on the 

other hand the opportunity for reuse was so palpable that 
it was possible to measure it in dollars and time saved. In 
this sense, the team leader noted: ﬁ
It is the whole culture 
from square one: whatever we have we share so that 

everyone [in our group] can get to it and read it. [–] If 

you don™t want phone calls at 3AM from someone 

working on it, you™d better documentﬂ 
(Team Leader). 
After attending the mandatory training sessions for 
Project/SharePoint, the EI-Developers members found the 

features of the new KMS very useful for the group™s 

needs. Nevertheless, they were concerned about the 

transition, which they perceived to be too costly and time-

consuming: ﬁ
It™s not reasonable for us, but down the 
road, when things slow down, absolutely, it can be very 

valuable. We™re just not ready for it
ﬂ (Unit Director). 
They lacked motivation because ﬁ
everything that 
SharePoint or Project/SharePoint does we can do it on 

the shared drive
ﬂ (Business Analyst). Table 5 summarizes 
the key findings regarding the EI-Developers group™s 
anchoring and objectification of Project/SharePoint. 
Table 5: EI-Developers: summary of the findings 
Anchoring Objectification 
Experience, 
background, values 
and norms 
Goals and 
aspirations 
Representative 
images, metaphors, 
behavior patterns 
- Technical skills 
- Culture to 
document 
technical 
knowledge for 
reuse 
- Strong preference 
for codifying and 

sharing knowledge 
- Switching from 
shared-drive to 
another KMS was 

a low priority for 

the group™s 
managers 
- Better documentation 

for more 
efficient 

knowledge 
reuse 
- Didn™t want 
another KMS 
- T0 : What Project/ 
SharePoint does 
we can do it on 

the shared drive 
- T1 : Project/ 
SharePoint has 

useful features 
- T2 : Project/ 
SharePoint can be 
valuable but we™re 
not ready to switch
Legend: T
0 = beginning of the implementation process in 
this group; T
1 = after the six training sessions; T
2 = right 
before the major organizational restructuring. 
 EI-Internal
: Members from the EI-Internal group 
were involved in only one EI project. This project team 
was composed exclusively of members from the internal 

IT department. For an EI project that was considered an 

external project, it was unusual to have a team from the 

IT department. The main reason was resource availability.  
The EI-Internal group had a strong project 
management background and most of its members were 

certified project managers who overtly supported 

knowledge management activities. Although the members 
of this group had access to Project/SharePoint, for this 

particular project, they chose not to replace their use of 

the shared drive. The project 
was considered too close to 
completion to make the transitions to SharePoint and 

Project/SharePoint worthwhile. ﬁ
The project had been 
going on for over a year. Everybody was used to the 

shared drive, which worked fine. We were on a tight 

schedule and [another KMS] would not have added value 

at that time.
ﬂ (Project Manager).
 In reality, the project 
ended more than a year after the implementation of 

SharePoint and about three months after the 

implementation of Project/SharePoint in their department.  
Given the small size of the team (around 10 people), 
sharing documents on the shared drive was manageable. 

Informal sharing of tacit knowledge also took place 
regularly within the group at the weekly status meetings, 
at ad-hoc trouble-shooting meetings, and with other 

colleagues from this department. Collaboration with the 

other EI groups was limited to sending status reports to 

the Program Manager by email. Table 6 summarizes the 

key findings regarding the anchoring and objectification 
of Project/SharePoint within the EI-Internal group. 
Table 6: EI-Internal: summary of the findings 
Anchoring Objectification 
Experience, 
background, values 
and norms 
Goals and 
aspirations 
Representative 
images, metaphors, 
behavior patterns 
- Certified project 
management skills 
and expertise 
- The project 
manager 

considered the 

switch from 
shared-drive to 
another KMS 

useless 
- Not 

Applicable 

(this EI 

project was 
an exception 
according to 

the norms 

and rules at 

ITPA) - T0 : Shared drive is 
good enough (EI 

project will soon be 

completed) 
- T1 : Shared drive is 
good enough (EI 

project will soon be 

completed) 
- T2 : Not Applicable 
(EI project already 

completed)
 Legend: T
0 = beginning of the implementation process in 
this group; T
1 = after the six training sessions; T
2 = right 
before the major organizational restructuring. 
 5. Discussion 
 We undertook this research to examine how social 
interactions shape the strategic alignment of a KMS being 

implemented. We adopted a social representation lens, 

which is recommended when new situations emerge (such 

as the implementation of a significantly different KMS) 

and the paths of different groups cross as they try to make 

sense of the unfamiliar situation [1]. The implementation 
of the new KMS was not a ﬁrevolutionary changeﬂ [cf. 
16] for ITPA but it created nonetheless a context of 

unfamiliarity. The technology Œ here the 

Project/SharePoint system Œ became a ﬁsocial object of 

the community for the purpose of behaving and 
40694069  communicatingﬂ [11, p.251]. However, given significant 
differences in the anchoring process, each group™s 

collective sensemaking and social negotiation shaped the 
social representations of Project/SharePoint differently. 
Based on each group™s past experiences and 
knowledge about a KMS, common skills, future goals and 
aspirations, Project/SharePoint became associated with 

different images and meanings. Through social 

interactions among the group™s members, the anchoring 
and objectification mechanisms (see Tables 3-6) led to the 
development of a social representation of Project/ 

SharePoint, at specific points in time (T
1, T2 and T
3). While we acknowledge some peripheral individuals in 

each group, we focused the data analysis on the common 

objectification or the core representation for each group 
and how this representation evolved in time from T
1 to T
3. The social representations influenced how each group 
talked about the new system and its implementation, how 

it interpreted new knowledge about the system, how it 

created its social identity, how it communicated with the 

other groups, and how it justified its actions regarding the 
use of the new system. For example, as shown in table 4, 
the EI-Operations group aspired to share their knowledge 

efficiently, but their limited expertise with KMS and their 

strong preference for oral sharing led to a social 

representation of Project/SharePoint that was clearly 
different from that of the other groups.  
The patterns of evolution are neither ‚good™ nor ‚bad™ 
[18]. They simply correspond to the various social 
representations across the EI groups. At the beginning of 

the implementation, prior experiences and the common 

background played a dominant role in shaping the groups™ 
representations. Later, the mandatory training sessions 
(which focused exclusively on KMS use) added a positive 

spin to the groups™ social representations. Images, such as 

ﬁmagical productﬂ, useful features, or a system worth the 

effort, were associated with the new system being 

implemented. However, after using the system (EI-
External) or after waiting impatiently for the go-live (EI-
Operations), the social representations of Project/ 

SharePoint changed again. For example, the common 

understanding of the EI-External group shifted from 

ﬁmagical productﬂ to ﬁfancy-note keeping programﬂ. As a 
result, we see different degrees of use and adoption of the 
KMS: from barely any use at all (EI-Developers) to rather 

regular use (EI-External). Some groups used the KMS 

more efficiently than others; some groups modified their 

work practices more than others to include the new KMS. 
From an alignment point of view, as the use of 
Project/SharePoint failed to converge toward a common 

understanding across the EI groups, the initial strategic 

alignment was no longer sustainable. ITPA focused 

primarily on external issues (business strategy and IS 

strategy) and underestimated the importance of a 

structural alignment [6]. Thus, a misalignment gradually 
emerged between the business domain and the IS domain. 

Only by examining this phenomenon from different 

perspectives (for example, external vs. internal) or levels 
(group vs. individual) [15] can we gain a clearer 
understanding of the social representations affecting IS 

alignment. This explains why on the surface the KMS 

seemed well aligned with the organization™s strategy and, 

yet at the subunit level, the KMS was met with various 

forms of resistance. In the end, the implementation 
project was interpreted as a good effort to improve 
knowledge management work practices, but it was 

insufficient to maintain its strategic alignment. Hence, 

both executive managers and project teams lost interest in 

the KMS when the business strategy drastically changed. 

Despite the massive layoff and the need to limit 
knowledge spillovers in such situations, Project/ 
SharePoint was not perceived as a necessary piece of the 

IT infrastructure supporting the new strategy.  
Another key finding is the difficulty to examine IS 
alignment if we treat the KMS holistically [16]. As also 

found by Ravishankar et al. [15], the degree of alignment 
(or misalignment) varied across groups. Adopting a 
group-level analysis allowed us to examine these 

differences. We are therefore able to infer that the 

technological change did not trigger an improvement of 

the corresponding business practices (as it was initially 
intended) because some of the groups at ITPA continued 
to use their own approaches. Hence, KMS alignment 

depends not only on an appropriate IT infrastructure, but 

also on having a common representation of the system 

being implemented that is harmonized across groups.  
These findings are summarized in the form of the 
following propositions: 
P1. 
Social representations influence group 
interpretations of a KMS, a group™s social identity, its 

communication with other groups, and its justification 

regarding the use of a KMS
.  P2. 
Social representations change over the course of 
KMS implementation in response to group background, 

such as training and hands-on experience
. P3. 
Differences in social representations of KMS 
among groups result in strategic misalignment
. P4. 
Shifts in organizational strategy threaten strategic 
alignment by altering social representations of a KMS as 

unnecessary to new strategic initiatives
.  6. Conclusions 
 This research presented a social representation angle 
linking KMS implementation to KMS alignment. We 

studied four groups during the implementation of a KMS 

that was initially strategically aligned. Our findings 

showed that the social interactions among the groups' 
members facilitated the development of different social 
representations that ultimately led to a misalignment. 
40704070  Our study is limited due to its focus on a single public 
agency. It is thus difficult to compare our results with 
other studies of KMS implementation that use 
quantitative methods. Qualitative studies like ours are not 
designed with such comparisons in mind. Moreover, 

comparison with other qualitative studies is limited 

because of the novel use of social representation 

framework for analyzing strategic alignment. Most 

studies of alignment use theories drawn from strategic 
management, which focus more on top management 
decision making than KMS user interpretations. Rather 

than risk direct comparisons across incommensurate 

studies, we limit our contribution to the generation of 

local insights into KMS alignment within a single setting. 
Despite this limitation, our study has implications for 
both research and practice. First, it offers a novel 

approach to investigate a perennial organizational 

struggle: IS alignment. The social representation lens is 

less concerned with judging the success or failure of IS 

implementation projects and more concerned with 

explaining the degree of system use. Thus, we were able 
to capture how social interactions within and among the 
groups studied shaped KMS alignment.  
Second, this research builds on prior studies on IS 
alignment and IS implementation. Examining the 

relationship between these two themes raises new 
methodological issues as some of the constructs are at the 
group level, while others are at the individual level. 

Hence, it is essential to adopt a multi-level theoretical 

framework. By doing so, our study has empirically shown 

how the ﬁless rational but highly influentialﬂ [15] social 

contingencies shape the relationship between KMS 
alignment and KMS implementation. Future research 
could identify other forms of influence applying other 

multi-level theoretical frameworks. 
With respect to practitioners, our results emphasize 
the role played by social representations in facilitating (or 

impeding) IS implementation and adoption. Opposing 
forces act on individuals™ representations and both 
‚stability™ and ‚change™ elements influence how the 

individuals™ representations form and evolve over time. 

Rather than push for a technology-driven change, 

practitioners should understand how groups™ anchor their 
social representations and objectification mechanisms 
guide their behavior. Change toward alignment can then 

proceed with more realistic assumptions and expectations. 
 7. References 
 [1] M. W. Bauer and G. Gaskell, "Towards a Paradigm for 
Research on Social Representations," 
Journal for the Theory of 
Social Behaviour, 
vol. 29, pp. 163-186, 1999. 
[2] W. F. Boh, "Mechanisms for Sharing Knowledge in Project-

Based Organizations," 
Information and Organization, 
vol. 17, 
pp. 27-58, 2007. 
[3] Y. E. Chan and B. H. Reich, "It Alignment: What Have We 

Learned?," 
Journal of Information Technology, 
vol. 22, pp. 297-
315, 2007. 
[4] S. W. Floyd and B. Woolridge, "Path Analysis of the 
Relationship between Competitive Strategy, Information 

Technology, and Financial Performance," 
Journal of 
Management Information Systems, 
vol. 7, pp. 47-64, 1990. 
[5] U. Gal and N. Berente, "A Social Representations 

Perspective on Information Systems Implementation: 

Rethinking the Concept of ﬁFramesﬂ," 
Information Technology 
& People, 
vol. 21, pp. 133 - 154, 2008. 
[6] J. C. Henderson and N. Venkatraman, "Strategic Alignment: 

Leveraging Information Technology for Transforming 

Organizations," 
IBM Systems Journal, 
vol. 32, pp. 4-16, 1993. 
[7] E. M. Kamhawi, "The Three Tiers Architecture of 
Knowledge Flow and Management Activities," 
Information and 
Organization, 
vol. 20, pp. 169-186, 2010. 
[8] P. M. Leonardi and S. R. Barley, "Materiality and Change: 
Challenges to Building Better Theory About Technology and 
Organizing," 
Information and Organization, 
vol. 18, pp. 159-
176 2008. 
[9] J. Luftman and T. Ben-Zvi, "Key Issues for It Executives 

2009: Difficult Economy's Impact on It," 
MIS Quarterly 
Executive, 
vol. 9, pp. 49-59, 2010. 
[10] M. McGreevy. (2007, February 26, 2010). Amr Research 

Finds Spending on Knowledge Management Will Hit $73b in 

2007. 
AMR Research
. Available: 
http://www.advmfg.com/Content/View.asp?pmillid=20768
 [11] S. Moscovici, "Attitudes and Opinions," 
Annual Review of 
Psychology, 
vol. 14, pp. 231-260, 1963. 
[12] S. Moscovici, "The Phenomenon of Social 
Representations," in 
Social Representations: European Studies 
in Social Psychology
, R. M. Farr and S. Moscovici, Eds., ed 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984, pp. 3-70. 
[13] W. Orlikowski, "Using Technology and Constituting 

Structures: A Practice Lens for Studying Technology in 
Organizations," 
Organization Science, 
vol. 11, p. 404, 2000. 
[14] N. R. Quigley, P. E. Tesluk, E. A. Locke, and K. M. Bartol, 
"A Multilevel Investigation of the Motivational Mechanisms 

Underlying Knowledge Sharing and Performance," 
Organization Science, 
vol. 18, pp. 71-88, 2007. 
[15] M. N. Ravishankar, S. L. Pan, and D. E. Leidner, 
"Examining the Strategic Alignment and Implementation 

Success of a Kms: A Subculture-Based Multilevel Analysis," 
Information Systems Research, 
vol. 22, pp. 39-59, 2011. 
[16] R. Sabherwal, R. Hirschheim, and T. Goles, "The 
Dynamics of Alignment: Insights from a Punctuated 

Equilibrium Model," 
Organization Science, 
vol. 12, pp. 179-
197, 2001. 

[17] E. Vaast, R. J. Boland, E. Davidson, S. D. Pawlowski, and 

U. Schultze, "Investigating The "Knowledge" In Knowledge 

Management: A Social Representations Perspective," 
Communications of the Association for the Information Systems, 
vol. 17, pp. 314-340, 2006. 

[18] E. Vaast and G. Walsham, "Representations and Actions: 

The Transformation of Work Practices with It Use," 
Information 
and Organization, 
vol. 15, pp. 65-89, 2005. 

[19] W. Wagner, G. Duveen, R. Farr, S. Jovchelovitch, F. 

Lorenzi-Cioldi, I. Marková, and D. Rose, "Theory and Method 

of Social Representations," 
Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 
vol. 2, pp. 95-125, 1999.  
40714071