 Embracing or Constraining Change:  An Exploration of Methodologies for 
Maintaining Software 
   Dana Edberg Polina Ivanova 
University of Nevada, Reno University of Nevada, Reno 
dte@unr.edu
 ivanovapolina@hotmail.com
    Abstract
 This study uses a grounded theory research method 
to explore how IT professionals define and select a 
methodology to maintain existing software.  The 
findings contribute to a better understanding of how 
standard methodologies are applied in software 
practice and the critical fact
ors used by professionals 
when choosing an appropriate methodology for 
software maintenance activities. This research 
underscores the need for incorporating the full 

software life cycle in information systems development 
research as well as highlighting the need for more 
comprehensive education in software methodologies.  
1. Introduction  Many studies champion using a standard process as 
a way to create better quality software that meets 
customer expectations and is delivered on-time and 

within budget [14,17,20,32].  Prior research has 
documented the use and relative effectiveness of 
applying standard processes to initial software 

development [17,20,28], but studies have shown that 
software development professionals are reluctant to use 
standard processes on an ongoing basis to complete 

their work [3,6,21]. To better understand this 

reluctance, current research has used qualitative 

research methods helping researchers study how 
software development professionals incorporate, 
change and improve their software processes 

[10,24,35] .   
While current research is developing a richer view 
of how software development professionals use 

processes, the focus is mainly on the initial creation 
and implementation of a software product, rather than 
the entire life cycle of development that is the 

responsibility of software development professionals.   

We have very limited understanding of how software 

development professionals use processes to support the 

ongoing evolution of a software product. 
Software differs from other engineering products 
because it is comparatively malleable; software can be 

changed to incorporate new requirements.  If the 

fundamental nature of software is that it can be 

changed, then the work performed by software 
development professionals must incorporate and reflect 
that change.  And in ﬁreal life,ﬂ it does. Several 
investigations have surveyed the amount of software 
maintenance taking place in organizations, showing 
much variation in the amount of effort and costs 
associated with software maintenance [2].  In the trade 

press, the rule of thumb is that about 70-80% of the 

overall systems development budget supports 

maintenance activities [16]. Thus, the majority of work 

performed by software development personnel is 
related to maintaining software, rather than creating it. 
Research into development processes, on the other 
hand, has put most of its resources into exploring 
initial development rather than ongoing software 

maintenance [25].  While it could be argued that the 
processes used to conduct new development are similar 
to those necessary to support the long term 

maintenance of software, there are also distinct 

differences.  Research has shown that the 

characteristics of software maintenance differ from 

new development based on the scheduling of activities, 
the types of activities that must be performed, and the 
scope of knowledge necessary to complete those 

activities [31].   
The purpose of this research is to expand our 
knowledge of the processes used to maintain existing 

software products.  We want to understand the relative 
use of a standard process by software development 
professionals during software maintenance activities, 

how a software developer views/defines a standard 

process and the factors considered when making a 

choice of process. In order to achieve that 

understanding, we used a grounded theory approach to 
design our study, guide data collection, and analyze the 
results.     
The next two sections of this paper define software 
maintenance and processes/methodology from existing 

literature.  Section 4 explains our research approach, 
while section 5 describes and analyzes our findings.  
Finally, section 6 presents the implications of our study 

for research and education of future systems 

development professionals. 

 2. Software Maintenance and Evolution  
 Software maintenance is defined in IEEE Standard 
1219 as: ﬁThe modification of a software product after 

delivery to correct faults, to improve performance or 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201111530-1605/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE other attributes, or to adap
t the product to a modified 
environment.ﬂ  Some authors question the use of the 
term ﬁmaintenanceﬂ as an effective description of all 
the activities revolving around software after it has 
been installed [1,7,14].   These authors suggest that the 
term ﬁmaintenanceﬂ carries with it connotations of 

errors, and the repair of errors, and is thus an 

inaccurate description of those activities placed under 

the maintenance umbrella. Research shows that the 
vast majority of software maintenance is to adapt 
software to a changing environment by enhancing 

functionality, applying new technology, and meeting 

the needs of new users [2]. The term ﬁsoftware 

evolutionﬂ is becoming more frequently used as a way 

to better describe the ongoing development effort 
necessary to keep a software application effective for 
its intended purpose [7,27,28].    
Some authors are calling for a more comprehensive 
inclusion of software evolution and believe that all 

development and engineering research must 

incorporate the reality of ongoing software changes as 
part of the research framework [29].  There is 
increasing awareness in software engineering research 

that software evolution and development should be 

viewed together, rather than attempting to separate the 

functions [11].   
 3. Software Processes/Methodologies  
 Much thought has been put into the terminology 
surrounding the area of software development [22].  
Following that work, we use the term ﬁmethodologyﬂ 
to include the guiding principles, values, concepts, 
phases, and tasks used to guide the participants in the 
act of developing and maintaining software.  
Substantial research effort over decades has gone 
into defining, examining, and evaluating the processes 

used to develop software [i.e. 13,20,32].  Much of the 
initial effort created normative models based on 
minimal fieldwork and an engineering paradigm.  It 

was assumed that those idealized models would 

improve the effectiveness of the process.  
After much work was done to clarify and delineate 
methodologies used for software development that 

showed success in improving the overall software 

development process [18,20] some researchers found 

that relatively few software development professionals 

were willing to incorporate those standard 

methodologies into their personal daily activities [21].  
It was also found that professionals were capable of 
misrepresenting to themselves and others their actual 

level of use of methodologies [30].  As a result, 

additional research was conducted to better understand 

why some process improvement efforts succeeded and 

others failed [3].  This additional research 
demonstrated that software development is a complex 
social, technical, organizational, and personal task. 
Current research is now delving into more extensive 
and detailed fieldwork-based studies of all aspects of 
the process [10,19,23,28,35].   
Research into software maintenance processes is 
trying to better understand the methodologies that are 

most effective for the ongoing maintenance of software 

[1,7,14,26,33].  However, this research into 
maintenance is adopting the original approach used 
with research into initial software development of: (1) 

defining a normative model; (2) testing it in a limited 

production environment; and (3) extrapolating its 

potential success.  This approach does not take into 

account fully what has already been learned about the 
complexity of the development process.  This approach 
does not consider how methodologies are selected and 

adapted by software development/maintenance 

professionals.    
We believe that another way to study software 
maintenance methods is to explore as directly as 
possible those professionals who are performing the 
work.  Our goal is to contribute to the understanding of 

how professionals maintain existing software.      
       
4. Research Approach  
 Our study develops theory about whether a  
software methodology is used by IT professionals to 

perform software maintenance and also how and why 

that methodology might be chosen.  This study seeks to 

better understand the relative use of software 

methodologies during software maintenance.  We were 
especially interested in understanding the factors that 
affected the use and choice of methodology and what 

those factors meant to IT professionals.  
This study is based on the interpretive research 
assumption that reality is a social construction by both 

the human actors and the researchers who are 
observing those actors [36].  This study uses an 
adapted version of grounded theory referred to as 

ﬁconstructivistﬂ grounded theory [8].  According to 

Charmaz [8, p.130], ﬁconstructivists study 
how Œ and 
sometimes 
why
 Œ participants construct meanings and 
actions in specific situations.ﬂ  But the resulting theory 

produced ﬁ
depends
 on the researcher™s view; it does 
not and cannot stand outside of it.ﬂ Thus, it is 

important to understand the relevant background of the 

researchers to evaluate the results of this study.  We 

have performed software maintenance activities within 
organizations, and as self-employed software 
consultants.  We are familiar with software 

development methodologies, have taught 

methodologies, and have used both standard  and 

adapted methodologies for software maintenance.     
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20112 4.1. Data collection  
  Data were collected through semi-structured face-

to-face and online interviews.  The face-to-face 

interviews occurred in real-time, while the online 

interviews consisted of text-based answers to pre-

defined questions, with some limited back-and-forth 
responses between interviewer and interviewee for 
further clarification of answers. Face-to-face 

interviews lasted between .5 and 1.5 hours.  The face-

to-face interviewees were selected to expand/enhance 

the emerging categories, while the online respondents 
were self-selected, based upon their interest in the topic 
under discussion.     

 Data collection occurred over a two year time 

period (2007-2009).  Data gathering and analysis were 

performed iteratively, as recommended in the 

methodology literature [8,12,34] in order to better 
understand the meaning of the data and to identify 
what additional data were required to expand 

understanding of the concepts.   

 Six face-to-face interviews were performed to start 

the study and begin to establish categories for further 

analysis.  An initial interview protocol was used for the 
first interviews.  The interview questions were 
enhanced based on the results of those initial 

interviews so that more detailed information might be 

gleaned from the interviewees.  After conducting 16 

face-to-face interviews, we then posted the most 

relevant questions online.  32 online responders were 
included in the analysis.  The interview questions were 
enhanced and refined.  An additional 5 face-to-face 
interviews completed the study.  In total, there were 21 

face-to-face interviews and 32 online interviews 

conducted for this study.       
 4.2. Interviewee characteristics  
 While the focus of this study was not the 
interviewees or their organizations, we did gather some 
data about their characteristics to better understand the 

context of the answers received. Since the focus of this 
study is maintaining software after initial 
implementation, we selected interviewees with 

experience both doing and managing maintenance 

activities.  Unlike prior studies [10] we interviewed 

both developers and managers, but focused primarily 

on developers. Interviewees ranged from 5 to 38 years 
of experience with software maintenance as IT 
professionals. Table 1 summarizes some additional 

characteristics of the interviewees. 
Face-to-face interviews were performed at four 
different organizations.  Table 2 provides some 
information about the organizations.   
 Table 1. Characteristics of Interviewees
  Characteristic
Face-to-Face Interviewees 
Online 
Interviewees 
Working in U.S. 
100% 45% 
Working outside of U.S. 
0% 55% 
Working in a small 
organization  
(< 100 employees) 
0% 22% 
Working in a medium 
organization 
 (>100 and < 7000 
employees) 
15% 53% 
Working in a large 

organization 
(> 7000 employees) 
85% 25% 
At a Management Level 
20% 50% 
 Two of the organizations produced software for 
sale (IT is the primary product for those two 
organizations) while the other two organizations 

produced products and/or services other than 

information technology.  All four organizations are 
operating in a volatile external environment. ORG3 
and ORG4 were experiencing layoffs, while ORG1 and 

ORG2 were facing strong competition, a highly 

dynamic technical environment, and a rapidly changing 

customer base.  While ORG1 remained highly 

profitable during that time, ORG2 was suffering 
financial cutbacks and a decrease in overall market 
share. 
Table 2. Characteristics of Organizations
 ORG1ORG2 ORG3 ORG4approx # 
employees 
135,000 8,000 5,000 2,500 
Type  software 
develop. 
software 
develop 
manu-

facturing 
county 

gov™t 
Maintenance 
Types 
enhance 

adapt 
enhance 

adapt 
correct 

adapt 
correct 

enhance 
Industry for profit for profit for profit non profit 
Scope Inter-
national 
Inter-
national 
Inter-

national 
U.S. only 
4.3. Software characteristics 
Past research [33] has hypothesized that different 
types of software may require different types of 
software development and maintenance methodologies. 
While we attempted to find diversity in our 
interviewees and the organizations for which they 
worked, we did not wish to expand our results into 

potentially confounding differences between software 

types.  Our data collection focused on interviewees 

responsible for maintaining business process-oriented 
software.  For example, our interviewees maintain 
software that handles such business processes as 

payroll, inventory control, employee scheduling, 

business intelligence analysis and reporting, budgeting, 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20113 and housing assessment evaluation.  Our interviewees 
do not maintain embedded software, or software with a 

critical real-time component su
ch as traffic control or 
software that directly controls the real-time operation 
of machinery.   
4.4. Data analysis  
The units of analysis for this research were the core 
concepts under investigation.  These concepts were the 
relative use of a methodology during software 

maintenance activities, the choice of software 
maintenance methodology, and the factors considered 
when making that choice. 
Data were analyzed using a five stage process [8]:  
(1) Transcription:  Interviews
 that were recorded were 
transcribed, interviews that were not recorded were 

reviewed and notes were typed, online interviews were 

collected; (2) Initial coding:  Reviewed and coded all 

transcripts line-by-line with general codes reflecting 
interviewees thoughts and actions;  (3) Focused 
coding:  Reviewed initial codes and developed more 

conceptual codes that reflected the intent of the initial 

codes; (4) Theoretical coding:  Identified how the 

conceptual codes related to each other; (5) Theoretical 

memoing:  Created concep
tual memos presenting how 
the theoretical codes might be portrayed as descriptive, 

explanatory and potentially predictive theory.   
To understand the beginning processes of data 
analysis, Figure 1 presents a segment of an interviewee 

transcript with the initial and focused codes. 
4.5. Analytical constraints
 Our analysis of the data collected, and the resulting 
interpretation is not presented as an ﬁobjectiveﬂ 

rendering of reality.  We construct an explanation of 

the concepts that emerged from the interviews from a 

perspective that includes our own backgrounds and 

previous knowledge of software maintenance 
processes.  For this study, we followed the guidelines 
for grounded theory research of keeping an ﬁopen 

mind, not an empty headﬂ [12].    
5. Findings Œ Description and Analysis 
 Part of the research process was developing a 
shared vocabulary with interviewees.  As discussed 

earlier, software maintenance is a general term used to 
cover all changes made to software after it is initially 
placed into a production environment.  This term was 

refined during the interview process.    Interviewees 

modifying a software product for sale defined 
maintenance as all activities between major releases of 
a product.  A major release of a product (even if the 

product was already in production) was considered 

ﬁnew developmentﬂ by those interviewees.  

Maintenance for those interviewees included 

incremental changes required to correct defects, adapt 
to regulatory environments, or enhance functionality of 
the software.  Interviewees using software to support 

internal organizational processes viewed maintenance 

as all work performed after initial implementation.  If a 
Initial Coding
 Focused Coding
 Online Respondent Excerpt
 (O12, medium, U.S. only)
 Using existing knowledge of methodology 
Using learned knowledge of methodology 
Acquiring knowledge of methodology 
Designing an organizational structure to fit 
the method 
Using a method reinforces the  
organizational structure 
Entrenching method in thinking 
Coping with change:  world is moving faster 
than work  
Triggering change because of  mediocre 
results 
Finding a path for changing methods 
Professional knowledge 
Educational knowledge 
Method reinforcement 
Organizational 
reinforcement of method 
Institutionalization of 
method 
Entrenchment 
Speed of change/speed of  
development 
Trigger of change 
Path for change
    We have a mix of traditional / waterfall 
techniques and agile techniques. Waterfall is 
used largely because that's what most people 
learned either in college or on-the-job over 
many years.
 Waterfall has clearly been 
institutionalized - that is
, jobs are specifically 
created to fit into the waterfall cycle
: Business 
Analysts do requirements, Systems Analysts do 
Design, Developers do coding, Testers do 
testing, and so on. So this is very well 
entrenched
 in our thinking. But the following 
phrase changed many things within our 
organization, and led us to agile: "the world is 
moving faster than we work".
  Waterfall generates mediocre results
, at best, 
and we know that. There has to be a better 

way. Many of us are finding agile is a better 
way. But the path to agile is extremely 
difficult.
Figure 1.  Sample Data Coding Œ Initial and Focused Codes 
 Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20114 software product was purchased, rathe
rin-house, it was considered ﬁmainte
nand refine new releases of the product. 
Interviewees used the terms ﬁpro
cﬁmethodology,ﬂ ﬁframework,ﬂ and 
approachﬂ interchangeably throughout 

For the interviewees, these terms e
nguiding principles (either implicitl
ydefined), steps, rules, guideline
sdocumentation used and produced 
dmaintenance activities.  
 Interviewees frequently differe
nmethodology and ﬁtechniques,ﬂ howe
vwas usually defined as a specific way 

particular goal, such as Fagan Inspect
isoftware testing standards or paired 
pfacilitate combining the coding and rev
 The remaining sub-sections disc
uincluding a definition of the types o
fused for maintenance, an e
xexperimentation with methodologies, t
hof a methodology during maintenance
,used to select a methodology 

maintenance.   
5.1. Definition of methodology  
Interviewees seldom referred direct
lname for a methodology.  They ofte
ngeneral methodologies for softwa
rtermed as follows:  Traditional/water
fvs. Iterative/agile/lightweight. They c
methodologies they used most o
fdistinction of ﬁheavyweightﬂ vs. ﬁ
ﬁwaterfallﬂ vs. ﬁagileﬂ.  
  Heavyweight Meth
o  Core 
Concepts 
 • Bring order to chaos
• Value repeatability 
• Value project mana
g• Follow a plan 
Steps 
 • Pre-defined 
• Linear with clear fe
e• Perform sequentiall
yGuidelines 
 • Work with custome
rpossibly not at all if 
• Determine requirem
edevelopment 
• Gain agreement on 
r• Freeze requirements 
• Create comprehensi
v•  Separate tasks by f
uTechniques 
 • Modeling (DFD, E
R• Project managemen
tcheck-lists, milesto
n• Project repository  
Figurr than developed 
nanceﬂ to install 
      
cess,ﬂ ﬁmethod,ﬂ 
ﬁmaintenance 
our discussions.  
ncompassed the 
y or explicitly 
s, tools, and 
during software 
ntiated between 
ver. A technique 
to accomplish a 
ions for creating 
programming to 
view activities.  
uss our findings, 
f methodologies 
xami
nation of 
he relative usage 
, and the factors 
for software 
ly to a partic
ular 
n contrasted two 
re maintenance 
fall/heavyweight 
haracterized the 
ften using the 
lightweightﬂ or  
 Figure 2 depicts the two 
methodologies as determined 
Interviewees most often refe
rmethodologies as ﬁtwo end 
point
srangeﬂ rather than a Boolean-type 
interviewees referenced the Agil
ecore values of the lightweight me
tprovided their own take on thos
value for lightweight was to ac
cThe core values for a heavyweig
hmore variable, but tended to focus 

define specifications in order to 

process.            
Many techniques were consid
eamong methodologies.  For ex
aprogramming was associated 
lightweight methodologies, Faga
nused with lightweight and heavyw
eWhile existing literature referenc

methodology [22], respondents te
ntechnique to be used within eit
hlightweight methodologies.   
After a group of face-to-face i
nusing the terms ﬁagileﬂ and ﬁ
winterviews and with our onli
ndefinitional purposes, so we may 
the delineation of those two gene
rthe minds of some of our inter
vrespondents consistently discusse
dsimilarities in heavyweight 
methodologies and referenced the 

than distinct points. 
The concept of a continuum o
fsupported by interviewee comme
nodology (Waterfall)
Lightweight Methodol
o gement 
• Accommodate and  respond to  ch
a• Value creating working software 
q• Spend time creating rather than pl
aedback loops 
y • Not pre-defined 
• Iterative 
• Concurrent 
r early in project, or 
not necessar
y ents before proceeding to 
requirements 
early in project 
ve documentatio
n unctio
n • Avoid excessive planning becaus
eprobably change 
• Work with customer as available 
d• Continue determining requiremen
t• Create minimal documentation - 
uthe project 
• A single individual may do multi
pthe process 
RD, UML) 
t techniques (Gantt charts, 
nes) 
• Paired programming 
• Extremely rapid prototyping in sp
r• Minimal modeling  
re 2.  Continuum of Methodolo
giesgeneral types of 
from our data.   
rred to the two 
s on a continuu
m or 
of difference.  Some 
e Manifesto for the 
thodology, but most 
e values.  The key 
commodate change.  
ht methodology were 
on the desire to pre-
better manage the 
ered interchangeable 
ample, while paired 
exclusively with 
n Inspections were 
eight methodologies.  
es prototyping as a 
nded to view it as a 
her heavyweight or 
nterviews, we began 
waterfallﬂ in other 
ne respondents for 
have contributed to 
ral methodologies in 
viewees.  However, 
d the differences and 
and lightweight 
ﬁcontinuumﬂ rather 
f methodologies was 
nts about 
ﬁchoosing 
ogy (Agile)
 ange 
quickly  
anning  
 the plan will 
during project 
ts during project 
sually at the end of 
le (or all) tasks in 
rints 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20115 the best from any place on the line,ﬂ ﬁwe have a mix of 
heavyweight and lightweight techniques,ﬂ ﬁthere is a 
spectrum and no team falls entirely on one 
methodology,ﬂ ﬁwe don™t use a strict anything because 
we like to take the best from allﬂ. 
In contrasting Scrum 
(a lightweight development methodology [15]) with a 
waterfall methodology, one interviewee said: 
ﬁHow 
are you going to write the software infrastructure, get 
your database right, and then get some infrastructure 
in place in time for your first iteration?  You can™t. So, 
then you have to structure your development approach 
differently–Scrum refers to the first release as 
ﬁiteration zero,ﬂ but that™s just language to hide the 
fact that Scrum needs help from traditional software 
processes.ﬂ  
5.2. Experimentation with methodology  
As reported in the literature [10,28] the 
interviewees use ﬁtrial and errorﬂ to devise an 
appropriate maintenance process.  They combine pair 
programming without any other agile practices, adopt 
very short delivery cycles with traditional waterfall 
phases, and apply project management documentation 
standards to extremely rapid prototyping.   
ﬁWaterScrumﬂ is an example of a process 
developed through trial and error in one of the 
organizations in the study (ORG1).  This methodology 
is a hybrid between the waterfall and agile 
methodologies.  In this hybrid, design definition and 
requirements are established using a waterfall-like 
approach, but the actual coding is performed using 
Scrum.  Teams in ORG1 mix and match components 
from waterfall and Scrum to create different 
combinations depending on the requirements of the 
project and the expertise of the team.  ORG1 uses a 
hybrid approach because management pushes for 
documentation and defined milestones associated with 
a waterfall methodology, while the software 
professionals want to use the short sprints and 
extremely rapid prototyping that are part of Scrum.  
One of the online interviewees reinforced the 
experiences of interviewees from ORG1 by stating that 
ﬁwe experiment a lot.  We invented our own 
methodology for software maintenance planning 
throughout the company, called Big Scrum.ﬂ
  Another 
online interviewee stated 
ﬁWe looked at our company 
culture, learned about what was out there, and meshed 
the two (heavyweight and lightweight methodologies) 
together.ﬂ
  Another interviewee pointed out: 
ﬁI learned how to 
develop software in college, but we didn™t do any 
maintenance.  The methodology they taught me in 
school never quite fit what I do in maintenance, so I 
had to make my own.ﬂ
   
5.3. Relative use of methodology  
Defining the relative use of a particular 
methodology or fixed process was difficult because 
some interviewees hesitated to discuss how much they 
used the organization™s pre-defined process.  Those 
interviewees who worked in an organization that left 
the choice of a methodology to the individual were 
willing to discuss their relative use, while those who 
worked in organizations where it was a management 
choice were more circumspect.   
Interviewees from ORG1 used a computer program 
to help them decide which methodology to use for a 
particular project.  In addition, they have a whole team 
dedicated to help other teams select a methodology and 
then facilitate its use. Many members of that 
organization stated that the methodology selected by 
the computer program and/or methodology team was 
helpful, but that all facets of the selected methodology 
may not be applicable to a particular project, so 
individuals elected to modify the methodology without 
informing management.  
 ORG2 is ISO certified and the processes used are 
critical to maintaining certification.  Interviewees were 
somewhat unwilling to discuss their actual application 
of the standard processes.  It was implied that it is 
relatively easy to document the use of a process after 
work is completed, making it appear that a process was 
followed fully.  It was also implied that the relative 
quality of the product obtained from using the standard 
processes was not affected, so the processes appeared 
to the interviewees as 
ﬁbureaucratic steps.ﬂ
     The vast majority of interviewees believed that they 
are using a process to perform software maintenance 
activities.  According to one interviewee from ORG2:  
ﬁManagement tells us which methodology to use for a 
particular project, but no one has time to sit over your 
shoulder and watch how you work–I always use a 
process, but it changes from project to project 
depending on what I need–I learned methods in 
school, I™ve been doing this for 12 years, I read what™s 
new, and I make processes that actually work...That™s 
what I use.ﬂ 
Almost all interviewees felt very strongly that they 
applied a ﬁprocessﬂ to their software maintenance 
work, but many hesitated to brand it an actual 
ﬁmethodology.ﬂ  It appeared that the term 
ﬁmethodologyﬂ required more stringent requirements 
(i.e. tools, templates, clear steps) than was 
incorporated in their personally defined processes.  
But the interviewees believed quite adamantly that 
they followed a personally defined process to maintain 
software.  
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20116 Existing literature has identified a number of 
factors that might affect the selection of an appropriate 
methodology [5,9,11].  Our findings are that while the 
interviewees mentioned a large number of factors, 
there were just a few very strong and discernible 
factors that dictated the actu
al choice and/or refinement 
of methodology.   
For example, interviewees stated that the size of a 
company, size of a project team, and size of a software 
product affected methodology choice. However, how 
size influences choice was unclear. While some 
interviewees said that large projects had to be 
structured with more documentation as dictated by 
heavyweight methodologies, others believed that large 
projects and groups were best sub-divided into smaller 
groups and then executed with lightweight 
methodologies.  Some interviewees working for large 
companies stated that their organization had to use 
heavyweight methodologies to cope with managerial 
bureaucracy, while other interviewees stated that their 
large companies had to use lightweight methodologies 
to remain nimble and able to compete with other, 
smaller organizations.  While size was often 
mentioned, it was not clear how size actually affected 
methodology choice.  It appeared that other factors, 
such as organizational structure or personal expertise 
were influential, and size was a surrogate that 
temporarily hid those other factors. 
The three primary factors dictating choice of 
methodology for software maintenance are depicted in 
Figure 3 and described below. 
5.4.1. Change Factors
. Existing literature prescribes 
the use of lightweight methodologies to incorporate 
flexibility in the maintenance process [5,9,15].  The 
interviewees frequently mentioned the importance of 
environment, product and requirement change as a 
critical factor for choosing a methodology.  They 
emphasized how often the environment (technical, 
governmental, managerial) changes, as well as how 
often users/clients change their minds about the 
functionality of a given product.  They stressed the 
need for a flexible methodology that would help them 
cope with the immense amount of change brought by 
every new project.   
Many lauded the inherent flexibility of lightweight 
methodologies and the avoidance of unnecessary 
planning and documentation. They commented that 
products were delivered more quickly using 
lightweight methodologies.  They thought that the 
transparent processes and people centric focus of 
lightweight methodologies worked best in the highly 
dynamic environment of software maintenance.  
But as absolutely critical as it is for software 
professionals to cope with change, that factor does not 
have a clear and consistent affect on the choice of 
methodology for software maintenance activities.  
Some interviewees dreaded too much flexibility and 
spoke about how freezing the requirements at a defined 
period of time in the heavyweight methodologies 
helped them cope with change.  Others stated that the 
project management documentation affiliated in their 
minds with heavyweight methodologies helped 
customers better understand the importance of not 
changing requirements at the last minute.  Some stated 
that the lightweight methodologies were a 
ﬁnightmareﬂ 
because they provided too much 
flexibility in the eyes of their customers.  They 
commented that the endless rapid cycle iterations 
encouraged more change until 
ﬁwe run out of money, 
patience, and time–and finally get to stop changing 
everything.ﬂ
   While change itself does not yield an easily 
dichotomous evaluation (more change, use lightweight 
methodologies; less change use heavyweight), it does 
affect the choice of a methodology.  Change factors are 
mediated by the perception of the developer, as 
depicted on Figure 3.  It is how the developer views the 
factors of change that yields a more consistent 
methodological choice.  As stated by an interviewee 
from ORG4: 
ﬁYou wouldn™t think that much changes 
in county government, but you™d be wrong. We grow, 
we need new processes, we have new management who 
want new reports–It all depends on how you think 
about change. I embrace change. I love it Œ it makes 
Figure 3.  Methodology Choice Model 
5.4. Factors affecting the selection of a 
methodology for maintenance 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20117 my job new. I love to work with my clients to give them 
new reports and new information.  It makes them 

happy and it makes me a hero Œ I get to be a hero all 
the time by just adding new data or a new screen.ﬂ 
Contrast that with another interviewee from the 
same organization: ﬁ
I have to freeze specifications as 
quickly as possible or my clients take advantage of 
me...  Each time I have to change something it™s like 

looking at another wart in my code. Some of my 
systems are just a big pile of warts.ﬂ 
Those developers who embrace change prefer the 
collaboration and communication that accompanies 
lightweight methodologies, while those who constrain 

change either choose heavyweight methodologies, or 

modify the process to obtain better control over 
ﬁspuriousﬂ
 requests.  
Coping with ambiguity is related to change for the 
people we interviewed.  Ambiguous requirements for 
maintenance requests are the norm, not the exception, 

for our interviewees.  The reason we list ambiguity on 

the model is that the interviewees felt very strongly 
that lightweight methodologies are most appropriate in 
situations with ambiguous specifications.  The 

interviewees felt that it was better to create a working 

model as quickly as possible when specifications for 

maintenance are ambiguous.  They stated that 
documentation and written specifications were of little 
help in nailing down specifications; that users/clients 

are best able to define what they need/want from an 
application if they can see a working model of that 

application.  Thus, lightweight methodologies, with 

their focus on getting something working quickly, were 
more appropriate when the product specifications are 
ambiguous. 
5.4.2. Developer Factors
. Software development and 
maintenance is considered a knowledge based task 
frequently performed autonomously by people who are 

treated as professionals within their organizations [4].  
As noted earlier, many software development 
professionals work without direct supervision; they are 
trusted to perform their work as they deem appropriate.  

Past research has shown that developers may modify a 

methodology without publicizing that information 
throughout the organization [30].  
Our research found that developers ultimately 
choose how they will maintain an application.  
Management or process certification may dictate that a 

certain methodology be used, but the level of 

adherence to that methodology is at the discretion or 
manipulation of the developer.   
We found that our interviewees had consistent 
factors they considered when selecting a methodology.  
Their initial training (either through formal education 

or job training) was critical.  Many interviewees 

referred to their initial education as 
ﬁthe core of my 
approach,ﬂ ﬁthe basis of my processes,ﬂ 
or ﬁmy 
fundamental knowledge.ﬂ
  This initial knowledge 
and/or training was the lens used to view and modify 
new methodologies.  Those with initial training in a 
particular type of methodology continued selecting that 
methodology.  Interviewees with a formal education in 

methodology tended to shy away from declaring their 

current processes as a true ﬁmethodologyﬂ and 

preferred to discuss their general approach to 
maintenance. 
Another key factor related to the developer was the 
relative enjoyment of collaboration with the 
users/clients of the system.  Many interviewees 

discussed the need to collaborate more closely with 

users/clients when using lightweight methodologies. 
Those developers who found satisfaction working 
more closely with users/clients embraced lightweight 

methodologies. They felt that more frequent meetings 

and shorter cycle times helped them gain greater 

understanding of the application domain and ultimate 

use of the application.  On the other hand, many 
interviewees stated that they prefer lightweight 
methodologies, but then explained how they ﬁavoidﬂ 

having to actually participate in meetings with those 

users/clients.  A frequent modification to lightweight 

methodologies was the attempt to freeze requirements 
at a relatively early point in the process.   
Finally, a key developer factor was the need to stay 
current or appear to be current.  Many interviewees 
discussed the need to 
ﬁbe in fashion,ﬂ
 ﬁto look 
current,ﬂ 
and not 
ﬁappear to be dated.ﬂ
   5.4.3. Organizational Factors
. Organizational factors 
had a two-way relationship with choice of 
methodology.  While these factors do have a strong 
relationship with the choice of methodology, it also 

appears that the choice of methodology influences the 

factors themselves.  For example, the waterfall 

methodology divides tasks by function, such as 
ﬁanalysis,ﬂ ﬁcoding,ﬂ and ﬁtesting.ﬂ Some 
organizations follow this structure by creating 
positions, groups, or departments that reflect those 

tasks, such as a ﬁbusiness analystﬂ position or ﬁquality 

assuranceﬂ group.  The people who fill those positions 
or staff those groups then specialize in those tasks as 
dictated by the methodology.  To adopt an agile 
methodology, the people would need to fill multiple 

roles concurrently, since agile methodologies 

frequently guide an individual to perform analytical, 

design, coding, and testing tasks concurrently during a 
given iteration.  If an individual specializes in 
completing only one of those tasks, and the 
organizational design reinforces that specialization, it 

may be very difficult to adopt any other approach.  

Thus, while the choice of methodology may have 

initially influenced the organizational design, the 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20118 organizational design institutionalizes the original 
methodology.   
We found that four organization cultural factors 
also play key roles in the choice of methodology:  The 
level of trust among colleagues and management; the 
level of empowerment of individual developers, the 

level of interest in collaboration among colleagues; and 

the relative communication with users/clients. The 

level of trust and empowerment are related to each 
other.  According to an interviewee, to use an agile 
methodology, 
ﬁmanagement must trust the developer 
and allow him/her to assume the risk/responsibility 

that comes with being the ﬁdeciderﬂ and at the same 

time the developer must be ready to assume that 

risk/responsibility.ﬂ 
Another strong cultural factor was the level of 
interest in collaboration among colleagues.  Some agile 

methodologies and techniques encourage more 

frequent interactions among development personnel 

[15].  Organizations structured for more autonomous 

work (i.e. siloed areas for specific  tasks) are better 
designed for heavyweight methodologies, while those 
organizations that support greater cross collaboration 

among groups are more conducive to lightweight 

methodologies.  In addition, relative levels of 

collaboration may also be a personal preference on the 
part of IT personnel. Those who enjoy collaborating 
with their colleagues may prefer lightweight 

methodologies, while those who like to work alone or 
avoid the inevitable conflict that arises during 

collaboration and communication may find the 

required meetings onerous.   
Finally, the relative communication level with 
users/clients is a critical cultural factor.  If the 

organization does not encourage or force 

communication between users/clients and developers, 

then a methodology more skewed towards the 

heavyweight side of the continuum is chosen.  It was 
remarked that 
ﬁ–a maintenance project may not be 
considered important enough to allow you frequent 
access to the client and good communication–is 

needed for continuous integration, testing, etc.ﬂ
  As 
mentioned previously, the most frequent modification 
to lightweight methodologies was to reduce the amount 
of time spent communicating with users/clients by 
freezing specifications as quickly as possible.  While 

some of the interviewees enjoyed working directly 

with users/clients, it was definitely a minority 

viewpoint.   
5.5. Summary of findings 
This study found that software maintenance 
professionals believe they are using personally defined 
and created processes to maintain software. They find 
it distasteful that someone would consider what they 
do to be ad-hoc, unplanned or ill-defined; while they 
might not use an organization-defined process, they are 

following a process. They place their personal process 
on a continuum of methodologies that range from 
heavyweight (waterfall) to lightweight (agile).  
Software maintenance professionals create their 

methodology based on their attitude towards change 

and how best to cope with change, their previous 

knowledge and training in software development, 
organizational culture, and the structure/management 
hierarchy of the organization.    
6. Implications for research and education  
This study explored how people responsible for 
maintaining business-oriented software select and use 
methodologies to guide their work.  Applying the 

lessons learned from current studies in initial software 
development [9,10,19,24] we used a qualitative 
research method to better understand the issues 

confronted by those who are actually performing 

software maintenance activities, rather than relying 

exclusively on a management perspective of those 
activities. We found that initial answers given by 
interviewees to questions frequently required more 

explanation and description to better understand the 

meanings attributed to give
n words.  Creating a shared 
vocabulary in software development would surely help 

us avoid confusion in both research and practice. 
Our research demonstrated that education and 
training are critical to those developing and 

maintaining software.  People use what they learn 

initially, so teaching methodology is as important as 

teaching technology if standard processes yield better 

outcomes. In addition, we need to incorporate 
maintenance tasks more fully into the curriculum in 
order to reflect the activities that are performed in the 

ﬁreal world.ﬂ  Finally, if organizations change to 

accommodate lightweight methodologies, people may 

be performing more diverse tasks requiring both 

comprehensive technical and domain knowledge to 
remain competitive in the job market.                   
7. References  
[1]
 April, A., et al., "
Software Maintenance Maturity 
Model: The Software Maintenance Process Model",
 Journal of Software Maintenance & Evolution: Research 
& Practice, 
17(3), 2005, pp. 197-223. 
[2]
 April, A. and A. Abran, 
Software Maintenance 
Management:  Evaluation and Continuous 
Improvement,
 IEEE Computer Society Press, 2008. 
[3]
 Baddoo, N. and T. Hall, "
De-Motivators for Software 
Process Improvement: An Analysis of Practitioners' 
Views",
 Journal of Systems and Software, 
66(1),  2003, 
pp. 23-33. 
[4]
 Beecham, S., et al., "
Motivation in Software 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20119 Engineering: A Systematic Literature Reviewﬂ,
 Information and Software Technology, 
50(9), 2008, pp. 
860-878. 
[5]
 Boehm, B. and R. Turner, "
Management Challenges to 
Implementing Agile Processes in Traditional 
Development Organizationsﬂ,
 IEEE Software, 
22(5), 
2005, pp. 30-39. 
[6]
 Borjesson, A. and L. Mathiassen, "
Successful Process 
Implementationﬂ,
 IEEE Software, 
21(4), 2004, pp. 36-
44. 
[7]
 Chapin, N., et al., "
Types of Software Evolution and 
Software Maintenanceﬂ,
 Journal of Software 
Maintenance and Evolution Research and Practice, 

13(1), 2001, pp. 3-30. 
[8]
 Charmaz, K., 
Constructing Grounded Theory:  A 
Practical Guide through Qualitative Analysis,
 Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 2006. 
[9]
 Chow, T. and D.-B. Cao, "
A Survey Study of Critical 
Success Factors in Agile Software Projectsﬂ,
 Journal of 
Systems and Software, 
81(6), 2008, pp. 961-971. 
[10]
 Coleman, G. and R. O'Connor, "
Investigating Software 
Process in Practice: A Grounded Theory Perspectiveﬂ,
 Journal of Systems and Software, 
81(5), 2008, pp. 772-
784. 
[11] Davern, M.J. and C.L. Wilkin, "
Evolving Innovations 
through Design and Use",
 Communications of the 
ACM, 
51(12),  2008, pp. 133-137.
 [12]
 Dey, I., 
Grounding Grounded Theory:  Guidelines for 
Qualitative Inquiry,
 Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 
1999. 
[13]
 Diaz, M. and J. Sligo, "
How Software Process 
Improvement Helped Motorolaﬂ,
 IEEE Software, 1997. 
14(5), pp. 75-81. 
[14]
 Donzelli, PP., 
Tailoring the Software Maintenance 
Process to Better Support Complex Systems Evolution 
Projects
, Journal of Software Maintenance & Evolution: 
Research & Practice, 2003. pp. 27-40. 
[15]
 Dybå, T. and T. Dingsøyr, "
Empirical Studies of Agile 
Software Development: A Systematic Review",
 Information and Software Technology, 
50(9-10), 2008, 
pp. 833-859. 
[16]
 Evans, B., "
Global CIO:  Hewlett-Packard Attacks 
Innovation Gridlock T
hat's Killing CIOs",
 InformationWeek, May 10, 2010. 
[17]
 Green, G.C., A.R. Hevner, and R. Webb Collins, "
The 
Impacts of Quality and Prod
uctivity Perceptions on the 
Use of Software Process Improvement Innovationsﬂ,
 Information and Software Technology, 
47(8), 2005, pp. 
543-553. 
[18]
 Guerrero, F. and Y. Eterovic, "
Adopting the Sw-Cmm in 
a Small It Organizationﬂ,
 IEEE Software, 
21(4), 2004, 
pp. 29-35. 
[19]
 Hansen, B.H. and K. Kautz. "
Grounded Theory Applied 
- Studying Information Systems Development 
Methodologies in Practiceﬂ,
 38th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2005. 
[20]
 Humphrey, W.S., T.R. Snyder, and R.R. Willis, 
"Software Process Improvement at Hughes Aircraftﬂ,
 IEEE Software, 
8(4), 1991, pp. 11-23. 
[21]
 Humphrey, W.S., "
Why Don't They Practice What We 
Preach?"
 Annals of Software Engineering, 
6(1), 1998, 
pp. 201-222. 
[22]
 Iivari, J., R. Hirschheim, and H.K. Klein, 
A Dynamic 
Framework for Classifying Information Systems 

Development Met
hodologies and Approaches
, Journal 
of Management Information Systems, 
17(3), 2000, pp. 
179-218. 
[23]
 Iversen, J.H., L. Mathiassen, and PP.A. Nielsen, 

Managing Risk in Software Process Improvement: An 

Action Research Approach
, MIS Quarterly, 2004, pp. 
395-433. 
[24]
 Kautz, K. and PP.A. Nielsen, "
Understanding the 
Implementation of Software Process Improvement 

Innovations in Softw
are Organizationsﬂ,
 Information 
Systems Journal, 
14(1), 2004, pp. 3-22. 
[25]
 Kemerer, C.F. and S. Slaughter, "
An Empirical 
Approach to Studying Software Evolutionﬂ,
 IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering, 
25(4), 1999, pp. 
493-509. 
[26]
 Kitchenham, B.A., et al., "
Towards an Ontology of 
Software Maintenanceﬂ,
 Journal of Software 
Maintenance and Evolution Research and Practice, 

1999. 
11: pp. 365-389. 
[27]
 Lehman, M.M. and J.F. Ramil, "
Software Evolution and 
Software Evolution Processesﬂ,
 Annals of Software 
Engineering, 
14(1), 2002, pp. 275-309. 
[28] MacCormack, A., et al., "
Trade-Offs between 
Productivity and Quality in Selecting Software 
Development Practicesﬂ,
 IEEE Software, 
20(5), 2003, 
pp. 78-85.
 [29]
 Mens, T., "
History and Challenges of Software 
Evolution"
, in Software Evolution
, T. Mens and S. 
Demeyer (Editors), 2008, Springer. 
[30]
 Nandhakumar, J. and D.E. Avison, "
The Fiction of 
Methodological D
evelopment:  A Field Study of 
Information Systems Developmentﬂ,
 Information 
Technology and People, 
12(2), 1999, pp. 176-191. 
[31]
 Polo, M., M. Piattini, and F. Ruiz, "
Using a Qualitative 
Research Method for Building a Software Maintenance 
Methodologyﬂ,
 Software: Practice and Experience, 
32(13), 2002, pp. 1239-1260. 
[32]
 Rombach, D., et al., "
Teaching Disciplined Software 
Developmentﬂ,
 Journal of Systems and Software, 
81(5), 
2008, pp. 747-763. 
[33]
 Ruiz, F., et al., "
An Ontology for the Management of 
Software Maintenance Projectsﬂ,
 International Journal 
of Software Engineering & Knowledge Engineering, 
14, 2004, pp. 323-349. 
[34]
 Urquhart, C., H. Lehmann, and M.D. Myers, "
Putting the 'Theory' Back into Grounded Theory: Guidelines for 
Grounded Theory Studies in Information Systemsﬂ,
 Information Systems Journal, 2009 (pre-paper 
publication).  
[35]
 Vavpotic, D. and M. Bajec, "
An Approach for 
Concurrent Evaluation of Technical and Social Aspects 
of Software Development Methodologiesﬂ,
 Information 
and Software Technology, 
51(2), 2009, pp. 528-545. 
[36]
 Walsham, G., "
Interpretive Case Studies in Is 
Researchﬂ ,
European Journal of Information Systems, 
4(2), 1995, pp. 74-81.
 Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201110