 Guiding Flexibilit
y Investment in Agile Architecting
Carlos Fernández-Sánchez, Jessica Díaz, Jennifer Pérez, Juan Garbajosa
Technical University ofMadrid (UPM), CITSEM, E.U. Informática, Madrid, Spain
{carlos.fernandez, yesica.diaz}@upm.es, {jenifer-perez, jgs}@eui.upm.es
Abstract
Agile software development 
pursues to deal with 
continuous change. But software product architectures 
without enough flexi
bility can restri
ct how products 
cope with change.However, 
designing for flexibility 
often entails high costs and risk that comes with the 
assumption that change will happen. Actually, in soft-
ware architecture the flexibility investment decision 
making problem has become challenging. This paper 
presents a process to assist architects in MAKing dEci-
sions about Flexibility inves
tment in Software Archi-
tecture (MAKEFlexi). MAKE
Flexi is based on tech-
nical debt and real options approaches. Technical debt 
allows for estimating the additional cost derived from 
the lack of flexibility in software architectures, where-
as the real options valuation allows for estimating the 
value of the flexibility that a design option could pro-
vide. MAKEFlexi has been applied to an industry pro-
ject for smart grids to assist architects in making deci-
sions about designing for flexi
bility to vary data stor-
age technologies.
1. Introduction  
Turbulence in the current business climate makes 
change inevitable if a company is to remain competi-
tive. Change adoption is part of the business environ-
ment, and the capacity to res
pond to this situation by 
harnessing change, rather than avoiding it, is especially 
critical in the software industry[11]. Therefore, a key 
issue for software companies 
is that their people and 
the software products they produce must be open to 
change.Agile values aim ﬁto respond to change over 
following a planﬂ[4]. However, such kind of flexibility 
in the process could be insufficientif our software 
products are not open to change.Software architecture 
is one of the main drivers in software product devel-
opment and evolution since it is considered to be the 
bridge between requirements and implementation [26].
The software architecture of products open to change 
must be ready for change, so that architecting can be 
aligned with the welcome to changeagile principle. 
That has motivated a growing recognition of the im-
portance of having a good architecture design in agile 
software development [1]. 
Software architecture can be considered as a set of 
architectural design decisi
ons[5]. These decisions are 
based on information that is current at the time the 
decisions are made, howeverdecisions makers can also 
consider possible futurechanges. Increasing flexibility 
is one of the decision drivers for coping with change in 
software architecture [6]. Flexibility is defined as the 
ability to deal with changes that can be anticipated or 
expected [7]i.e., changes that can come or not come 
with some probability over some period of time.
De-
signing for flexibility
involves the design of an archi-
tecture that facilitates change [6], usually by defining 
variation points [7]. Therefore, flexibility is an im-
portant factor for success because it may reducethe 
product development time and the cost of incorporating 
expected changes into the bus
iness over the lifetime of 
the software.
However, making the software architecture flexible 
often entails high costs in terms of time and effort[30];
it also entails a risk associated with the assumption that 
change will happen. This means that designing for 
flexibilityis an investment in a trade-offbetween 
short-term costs versus longer-term benefits. In this 
regard, it is necessary to evaluate when the Return on 
Investment (ROI) of designing for flexibility would be 
positive. Toward that end, it would be desirable tohave 
models that allow one to decide whether or not it is 
profitable to invest in designing forflexibility at any 
given time. In this paper, we refer to ﬁinvest in flexibil-
ityﬂ as the design/refactoring ofarchitecture in order to 
addvariation points tosupport expected changes.
This paper presents a process to obtain a decision
tree model that assists architects in MAKing dEcisions 
about investments in design for Flexibility (which we 
refer to as MAKEFlexi); i.e., MAKEFlexi assists archi-
tects in deciding when to invest (or not) in flexibility to 
support expected changes. MAKEFlexi is based on 
technical debt [33]and real options [16] approaches. 
Technical debt makes the cost of quality weaknesses in 
software visible. Specifically, MAKEFlexi uses tech-
nical debt to make visible the additionalcost derived 
from the lack of flexibility to accommodate expected 
changes over some period of time. In addition to debt, 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5904807 it is necessary to consider the value thatflexibility 
could provide toarchitecture design solutions to ac-
commodate expected changes. In this regard, MAKE-
Flexi usesthe real options valuation [16]to estimate 
this value as a function of 
the (i) uncertainty or proba-
bility that changes could happen, and (ii) the period of 
time in which the need to introduce changes could 
happen. This value is used to decide ifto invest in 
flexibility, and when to do so. This means that, de-
pending on the expected changes, it could be more 
profitable to delay the investment in flexibilityŠi.e., 
take technical debtŠor invest in flexibility in order to 
pay offthe debt.
We have appliedthe MAKEFlexi process in a joint 
project with industry in the area of power networks 
grids. The resulting decision tree model has effectively 
guided architects in the tasks of making decisions 
about flexibility.
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 
describes the background upon which the MAKEFlexi 
process is based. Section 3 describes MAKEFlexi. 
Section 4 presents the case study in which the process 
has been validated. Section 5 discusses related work. 
Finally, conclusions and further work are presented in 
Section 6.
2. Background  
This section describes the two approaches upon which 
MAKEFlexi is based: technical debt and real options.
2.1. Technical debt 
Technical debt is a metaphor that refers to the con-
sequences of weak software development. It was first 
introduced by Cunningham [9]. This metaphor has 
been used during the past several years as a means of 
making the intrinsic cost of internal quality weaknesses 
visible in software. Quality weaknesses in softwarecan 
be reworked to reduce this debt. A review of the litera-
ture about technical debt shows that it has several di-
mensions [33]: 
† Code debt: technical debt that manifests in the form 
of poorly written code.
† Design and architectural debt: technical debt caused 
by shortcuts and shortcomings in design and architec-
ture.
† Environmental debt: technical debt that manifests in 
the environment of an application; i.e., development 
processes, hardware, infrastructure, and supporting 
applications.
† Knowledge distribution and documentation debt: 
technical debt caused by lack of knowledge transmis-
sion or the absence of well written documentation.
† Testing debt: technical debt in the form of insuffi-
cient automated tests resulting in a waste of time due 
to the use of manual tests. Insufficient test coverage 
is another way to incur testing debt.
All these dimensions are managed by analyzing 
technical debt items, also known as instances [14].We 
will use the term item in this paper. A technical debt 
item represents an ﬁincomplete taskﬂ or a task that is 
not perfectly performedand one that might cause prob-
lems in the future. These are considered to be quality 
weaknesses. Two main concepts are widely used to 
make technical debt itemsvisible: 
principal
and 
inter-
est
[10]. Principal is thecost of eliminatingŠor reduc-
ingŠthe impact of a technical debt item at a given 
time in a software system, whereas interest is the recur-
ring cost of not eliminating a technical debt item over 
some period of time.
This paper focuses on architectural debt, i.e., tech-
nical debt caused by the result of sub-optimal upfront 
architecture design solutions, or solutions that become 
sub-optimal as technologies andpatterns become su-
perseded [33]. An example of architectural debt item is 
an immature design architecture solution that could 
cause future additional cost when the system has to 
grow or be changed. The principal of this technical 
debt item can be estimated as the cost of improving the 
design by increasing software architecture flexibility 
(e.g., the cost of refactoring the software architecture to 
enable change), whereas the 
interest is the additional 
cost derived from the lack of flexibility (e.g., the addi-
tional cost of implementing changes if the software 
architecture has not been previously designed to be 
open to changes).
2.2 Real options
Real options valuation is a technique that arises 
from financial options valu
ation. ﬁA financial option 
gives the holder of the option the right to do some-
thing, but the holder does not have to exercise that 
rightﬂ [16]. Financial options valuation assesses the 
value of those options. Real options valuation is an 
extension of financial options
 that uses financial valua-
tion methods to assess capital investment opportunities 
in real assets under uncertain
ty [16];that is, to estimate 
the value of options to determine whether or not to 
make the investment. Real options valuation has been 
successfully applied to solvesoftware engineering 
problems [2][12][15][23]and has beenpreviously 
proposed to manage technical debt[6]. This paper uses 
a similar approach to make decisions but about flexi-
bilityin software architecture. 
Real options valuation is based on the estimation of 
t
he investment value evolution over some period of 
time by using probabilistic mathematical methods. 
4808 Therefore, the real options approach makes use of es-
timated values, such as the investment cost, the value 
added by the investment, and probabilities of invest-
ment evolution, as inputs. In
 this regard, the real op-
tions approach considers the uncertainty of that evolu-
tion as well as the period of time in order to exercise 
the investment option. Estimated values and uncertain-
ty are mainly obtained fromthe experts™ opinion and 
fromhistorical data.
There are different kinds of real options [16]. The 
MAKEFlexi process focuses on the expansion option, 
i.e., an option to make further investments and increase 
the output if conditions are favorable, specifically, 
investments to improve the architecture of a software 
system. In addition, it is im
portant to mention that the 
MAKEFlexi process uses 
the decision tree method
[32]
to assess the value of real options. As anexample, 
Figure 1graphically shows the estimation of the value 
of an option by using a decision tree. The option is the 
investment in improving the flexibility of a software 
architecture to deal with a 
set of expected changes. 
Specifically, the software product has to undergo two 
expected changes over some period of time, and its 
software architecture should
 be ready to deal with 
those changes. 
The decision tree method consists of two main 
steps.The first step involves the construction of a tree 
that represents (i) the evolution of the software product 
due to expected changesover some period of time, and 
(ii) the decisions as to whether or not to invest in pre-
paring the architecture to accommodate the expected 
changes. Figure 1shows the decision tree over a two-
month period. This tree is 
characterized by three kinds 
on nodes: decision nodes, change nodes, and end 
nodes. 
Decision nodes
,which arerepresented by rec-
tanglesin Figure 1, are points where a decision on 
architecture has to be made. 
Change nodes
,which are
represented by circlesinFigure 1, are points where 
expected changes of the software product could come. 
Finally, 
end nodes
,which arerepresented by triangles
inFigure 1, show the final state of the software product 
after analyzing all possible scenarios resulting from the 
expected changes that may or may not occur and deci-
sions that may or may not be made. These nodes make 
up the branches of decision trees that have an associat-
ed probability (e.g., the proba
bility used in this exam-
ple is 0.33 for all branches, 
which in this example is 
assumed that is given by the opinions of experts; see
Figure 1).
The second step in this process consists of the as-
sessment of the value of th
e option (i.e., the value of 
the option of investing in flexibility). The value of the 
option is the 
investment™s exp
ected net value
. This 
investment™s expected net value is computed by fold-
ing back the decision tree, starting with the end nodes 
and moving toward the root. This step is composed of 
two activities. The first activity consists of estimating 
the net value of end nodes (triangles)Ši.e., the value 
of the software product after implementing the ex-
pected changes of the branch under analysis minus the 
cost of implementing those changes. For example, in
Figure 1considering that experts have estimated that 
the value added by an expected change is •10K, the 
cost of investing in flexibility is 2K, the cost of change 
with a previous investment in flexibility is 3K, and the 
cost of a change without a previous investment in flex-
ibility is 6K (see the Figure
 1caption, the end node 
marked with A has a net value of •12K [= (•20K = 
10K * 2 changes) Œ 2K  Œ (6K = 3K * 2 changes)],
while the end node marked with B has a net value of 
•8K [= (•20K = 10K * 2 changes) Œ (12K = 6K*2 
changes)]. The second activity consists of estimating 
the expected net value of the decision nodes and the 
change nodes. The estimation of the decision nodes 
(rectangles) consists of selecting the branch with the 
highest net value, while the estimation of the change 
nodes (circles) is the sum 
of the net value of the 
branches weighted by its probability. For example, in
Figure 1the decision node marked with C has a net 
value of 5K = max (5K; 4K) while the change node 
marked with D has an expected netvalue of •4290 = 
(8K*0.33) + (5K*0.33) + (0*0.33). This activity ends 
by estimating the value of the root of the tree (a deci-
sion node). This value is used to decide whether or not 
to invest in flexibility, and 
when to do so. 
In this par-
ticular example, the value of the root is •4950 = max 
(•4950; •4290). This means that the best decision is to 
invest in flexibility from month 1and not to delay the 
decision. 
Figure 1. Decision tree used to analy
ze the option of 
investing in flexibility 
in software architecture
4809 3. The MAKEFlexi Process  
This section presents the MAKEFlexi process used 
to obtain a decision tree m
odel to make decisions re-
garding flexibility investment insoftware architecture. 
MAKEFlexi is performed as a part of the Backlog 
grooming sessions[18]. Backlog grooming sessions
giveagile teams the opportunity to look further into the 
future of the product, and can alertthem to technical 
challenges.The process consists of a set of steps to
create a model, based on decision trees to estimate 
when to design for flexibility.Each step is described as 
follows.
† 
Step 1:
Analysis of expected changes. In this step, 
the architect identifies the 
expected changes that are 
to be supported through flex
ibility. In addition to the 
expected changes, it is necessary to determine: (i) the 
time frame in which the expected changes could hap-
pen, (ii) the probability th
at the expected changes 
could happen, and (iii) the value added by imple-
menting the expected changes.This information has 
to be provided by experts.Depending on the ex-
pected changes different actors can be implied in the 
estimation of the probability of change. If the chang-
es will depend on new contracts, then the responsible 
of such contracts will be who has the information. If 
the changes will depend on the adoption of a new 
technology, then the responsible of such technical 
decision will be who knows the needed information. 
Therefore, this probability of change will be subjec-
tive. Also, it is possible to use historical data about 
similar expected changes to estimate how often 
changes are made in the software. 
† 
Step 2:
Design of alternative ar
chitecture solutions to 
support the expected changes. In this step, architects 
propose alternatives with different degrees of flexi-
bility (i.e., different amounts of investment) that are 
to be analyzed.
† 
Step 3:
Estimation of technical debt for each one of 
the alternatives. The goal of estimating technical debt 
is to calculate the cost of implementing or not im-
plementing the flexibility. To estimate the technical 
debt we use the concepts of principal and interest. In 
this case the principal of a technical debt item de-
rived from the lack of flexibility is the cost of im-
proving flexibility, usually through the definition of 
variation points. To estimate the principal it is neces-
sary to detect the weaknesses in the system. Static 
code analysis has been successfully used for that 
task. For example, tools such as Sonar
(http://www.sonarsource.org/) and PMD
(http://pmd.sourceforge.net/)
can detect architecture 
anti-patterns in software projects. Knowing the 
weaknesses, experts can estimate the cost of solving 
them by applying commonly usedcost estimation 
techniques such as COCOMO or Function Point.The 
interest of a technical debt item derived from lack of 
flexibility is the additional cost of implementing the 
expected changesŠadditional Cost of Change 
(CoC)Šif the item is not previously eliminated; i.e., 
if the software architecture 
is not flexible enough to 
introduce the change. However, estimating this inter-
est is not easy because there is no reference for an 
ideal CoC; i.e., a solution with zero interest (see ideal 
solution line inFigure 2). Th
e interest of an architec-
ture design solution is the difference between the 
CoC of the ideal solution and the CoC of the alterna-
tives (see ﬁaﬂ and ﬁa + bﬂ inFigure 2). Since the CoC
of the ideal solution cannot be easily estimated, it is 
possible to use the comparison between the CoC of 
the different software architecture alternatives(see 
ﬁbﬂ inFigure 2). Therefore, the MAKEFlexi process 
uses the CoC for estimating the interest of the differ-
ent alternatives of change for architectural support. 
Knowing the current architecture anti-patterns in the 
project, historical data can beused to compare the 
effort needed to change components implementing 
anti-patterns, withthe effo
rt needed to changecom-
ponents without such weaknesses. If historical data 
are available, it is possible 
to estimate the difference 
between the needed effort to perform changes in 
component with anti-patterns and component without 
them. As a result, the different alternatives can be 
compared when choosing which option is the most 
profitable.Finally, Step 2 and Step 3 canbe per-
formediteratively in order to architects can propose 
architectures that solve the weaknesses detected in 
Step 3.
† 
Step 4:
Construction of the decision tree. Inthis step
the architect performsthe construction of a tree that 
represents the evolution of the software system due to 
expected changes, such as the tree shown inFigure 1.
To do that,the following inputs are used: 
Figure 2. Technical debt interest
4810 he expected changes, th
eir probability, the time 
frame, and the value that these changes add to the 
software product under analysis (Step 1).
lternative design architecture solutions(Step 2).
The constraints imposed 
by deadlines, resources, 
and development time need
ed to implement the ex-
pected changes and prepar
e the architecture to sup-
port the expected changes (i.e., designing for flexi-
bility). This means that alternatives that cannot be 
performed in the time frame, given suchcon-
straints, are notconsidered in the decision tree. For 
example, inFigure 1an end node marked with B 
has been modeled to represent a scenario in which 
sufficient time is not allotted to both invest in flexi-
bility and implement the expected changes. 
The construction of the decision tree requires one to 
determine the decision nodes, change nodes, and end 
nodes.
† 
Step 5:
Assessment of the expected net value of the 
flexibility investment option. To make this assess-
ment,the followinginputs are used: 
he estimations of the prin
cipal and the interest of 
each of the alternative architecture design solutions 
(see Step 3). 
he decision tree (see Step 4).
In this step the model computes the investment™s ex-
pected net value by foldin
g back the decision tree, 
starting with the end nodes and moving toward the 
root (see Section 2.2). This computation consists of: 
(i) estimating the net value 
of the end nodes, and (ii) 
estimating the expected net value of the decision 
nodes and the change nodes, until arriving at the root 
node.
† 
Step 6:
Make the decision. Finally, the final decision 
is the investment option with the higher than ex-
pected net value from the root node. The value of the 
root node is used to decide whether or not to invest in 
flexibility, and whento do so.In this regard, it is 
possible that the model suggests delaying the deci-
sion until more information is available.
4. Case Study 
A case study was conducted to provide empirical 
evidence that validates that it is feasible to use the 
MAKEFlexi process to guide flexibility investment in 
software architecture in an industry project.Case study 
research is a technique that consists of the investigation 
of contemporary phenomena in their natural context to 
search for evidence, gain understanding, or test theo-
ries by primarilyusing qu
alitative analysis [27]. In 
addition, we provide in this sectionguidance for how 
to use the MAKEFlexi process so it can be reproduced 
in other projects. 
The case study was conducted in an experimental i-
smart software factory (iSSF) [20]. The iSSF is a soft-
ware engineering research and education setting uti-
lized by the top industrial an
d research collaborators in 
Europe [20]. Indra Software La
bs leads this initiative at 
the corporate level in Spain in conjunction with the 
Technical University of Madrid. The case study was 
performed within a project to develop a family of me-
tering data management systems in electric power net-
works for smart grids [21], called Optimeter. This pro-
ject was developed using Scrummethodology[28].
This project is part of two EuropeanITEA2 projects: 
IMPONET
1
and NEMO & CODED
2
. 
The following section presents the case study based 
on the guidelines for reporting case study research in 
software engineering by Runeson et al.
3
[27]. 
4.1. Case study description 
Smart grids require the abil
ity to manage different
resources, from renewal or traditional energy producers 
to energy consumers. The case study performed on the 
Optimeter project consisted of the development of a 
family of software systems that manage meter data 
from a huge number of these resources. A metering 
management system captures meter data from teleme-
tering systems or batch processes, loads these data into 
a database, supports data querying and processing, and 
provides these data to other systems for billing, fore-
casting, or purchasing. The customer stated that the 
high performance of data access and storage was es-
sential to the success of the product. In order to man-
age meter data with high performance, it was necessary 
to evaluate several of the 
large data storagetechnolo-
gies available in the market (seeTable 1).
The Optimeter project started with a proof-of-
concept to evaluate Oracle Big Data (see data storage
technology 1 inTable 1). Over a one-month period
(twosprints, each sprint implied two weeks), the team 
developed a product that implemented a solution based 
on the data storagetechnology Oracle Big Data. Figure 
3.a. shows the architecture that had arisen over that 
productdevelopment. At that time, the architects need-
ed to decide whether or not to invest in flexibility in 
order to support the variation of the data storagetech-
nology, i.e., to support a family of products that sup-
port the different variants regarding the data storage
technology. This is due to there was a level of uncer-
tainty regarding a future ch
ange of the data storage
technology to satisfy the restrictions ofdata accessing 
1
http://innovationenergy.org/imponet/
2
http://innovationenergy.org/nemocoded/
3
Not all the information of the report is described in this paper due 
to space limitations.
4811 performance (see data storagetechnologies 2-4 inTa-
ble 1). In this regard, the architects considered the fol-
lowing expected-change scenarios: the possibility of 
varying one, two, or the three additional data storage
technologies, as shown inTable 1. At that moment, the 
customer did not know how many of these candidate 
data storagetechnologies had to be evaluated in terms 
of theperformance of massive data loading and query-
ing; nor did the customer know what other business 
and commercial matters needed
 to be considered. Due 
to this uncertainty, it was necessary to obtain infor-
mation about the ROI for preparing the architecture in 
order to vary the data storagetechnology (i.e., the val-
ue-generating power of flexibility).
4.2. Case study execution
During Optimeter execu
tion, the MAKEFlexi pro-
cess was applied as follows:
Step 1:
Analysis of the expected changes. The ex-
pected change in the family of metering management 
systems under analysis is the variation of the data stor-
agetechnology (Table 1). Hence, the family of meter-
ing management systems will implement three, two, 
one, or none of the data storagetechnologies variants. 
The time frame in which the expected change can hap-
pen is three months (the Optimeter project lastedfour 
months, but one month had already been spent on im-
plementing a solution based on the data storagetech-
nology 1, seeTable 1). The probability of the ex-
pected-change scenarios was estimated on the basis of 
thecustomer™s knowledge. This knowledge was based 
on technical, business, and strategic factors, and be-
cause they have the last word about which technologies 
have to been supported.Th
e probabilities can
 be seen 
in Figure 4. Finally, the value added by implementing 
each data storagetechnology variant was assessed by 
the customers. Therefore, customers estimated the 
value of each data storagetechnology that the family
was able to support as •60,000. This value correspond-
ed with the customer™s utility of having a family that 
allows them to vary the data storagetechnology for 
different data access performance requirements.
Step 2:
Design of alternative architecture solutions 
to support the expected changes. To provide the soft-
ware architecture of Figure 3.a. with the flexibility that 
facilitates the variation of the data storagetechnology, 
the architects proposed an alternative design architec-
ture solution (see Figure 3.b). This architecture makes 
ready the software product to
 be flexible through two 
points of variation to support the four data storage
technologies shown inTable 1. Because a data storage
technology is composed of a data manager and a clus-
tering framework, these variation points are defined 
through (i) three optional components that implement 
the data managers, and (ii) 
a Plastic Partial Component 
[24], i.e., a special type of component that can define 
variability points inside components, that implements 
the clustering frameworks.These components have 
been successfully applied in previous agile projects.
Step 3:
Estimation of technical debt for each one of 
the alternatives. The principal, as defined in Section 3, 
is the cost of providing the architecture of Figure 3.a 
with the flexibility that facilitates the variation of the 
data storagetechnology (i.e., the cost of implementing 
the variation points shown in Figure 3.b). Additionally, 
PMD was used to detect current weaknesses (searching 
anti-patterns that have negative impact on flexibility) 
giving a total of one GodClass and 10 different cou-
pling problems. The teamestimated theeffortof im-
plement the new architecturethat finally was valued at
•22,000. However, if no investment in flexibility is 
made, then this cost is •0. 
The interest, as defined in 
Section 3, is the additional CoC of supporting a data 
storagetechnology variation derived from the lack of 
flexibility. The CoC was estimated in terms the de-
pendencies and the coupling among the components
that are affected by the expected variation. Dependen-
cies were obtained from Sonarand theproblems that 
were detected using PMDand, in terms of effort, they 
were estimated by the development teamthat already 
known the architecture and they have been working in 
the project the previous month. The CoC of the archi-
tecture of Figure 3
.a was •29,500 for each data stora
ge
technology that was to be supported by the Optimeter 
family, while the CoC of the architecture of Figure 3.b 
is •15,000 for each data storagetechnology. Therefore, 
the difference in CoC between the two alternatives was 
•14,500 (i.e., the difference between •29,500 and 
•15,000).
Figure 3. Flexibility investme
nt option in the Opti-
meter project
4812 Table 1. Evaluation of large storagetechnologies for 
metering management systems
Data storage 
technology 1
Data storage
technology 2
Data stor-
agetechnol-
ogy 3
Data storage
technology 4
Oracle 
NoSQL
Hadoop
Hibernate
EHCache
Oracle 11g
Oracle RAC
Hibernate
Oracle 
Coherence
Oracle RAC
EHCache
HBase, Pig, 
Hive
Hadoop
HDFS
Step 4:
Construction of the decision tree. The deci-
sion tree shown in Figure 4represents the evolution of 
the Optimeter family due to the expected variation of 
the data storagetechnology. While we have shortened 
the decision tree, it still shows all the relevant infor-
mation. Concretely, branches that start in node E have 
been simplified to reduce the size ofFigure 4.It is 
necessary to highlightthat the three analyzed months 
are labeled as month 2, month 3, and month 4, because 
the project started one month before this analysis was 
performed (see Section 4.1). As this tree represents, the 
decision of investing in flexibility could be made at
different moments through the decision nodes. Specifi-
cally, it was possible to invest in flexibility in month 2 
and month 3 (see nodes A-D in Figure 4). The tree 
shows the expected-change scenarios in which the 
three data storagetechnology variants may be or may 
be not required (see nodes E-J in Figure 4); it also 
shows the probability that these expected-change sce-
narios may or may not occur (see the arrowheads of 
outputlines from nodes E-J). Finally, the tree repre-
sents the final possible situations as a consequence of 
the combinations of decisions and changes (see trian-
gles in Figure 4). For example, the end node K repre-
sents the implementation of the three variations of data 
storagetechnology with a probability of 0.1, given the 
change node E, and as a consequence of deciding on 
ﬁinvesting in flexibilityﬂ in the decision node A. 
Step 5:
Assessment of the expected net value of the 
flexibility investment option. In this step, net value is 
calculated as described in 
Section 3.As a result, the 
decision tree construction has beencompleted and 
reflects all of the possibilities that could unfold over 
time and shows the choices that should be made at 
each decision node.Table 2details some results of 
nodes of Figure 4. 
Step 6:
Make the decision. The final decision was 
made on the basis of the expectednet value obtained 
for the analyzed scenarios (see decision node A in 
Figure 4). The decision tree in
dicates that it is better to 
not invest in flexibility in month 2 because the value of 
node marked with F is higher thanthe value of node E; 
and therefore is more profitable to delay the investment 
because the uncertainty could decrease in month 3 (see 
Figure 4). This result is du
e to the value gainedfrom 
waiting for more information about the project. That is, 
waiting to resolve uncertainties before deciding wheth-
er or not to invest.
4.3. Analysis, interpretation, and conclusions 
During the development of
 Optimeter, the MAKE-
Flexi process guided architects in deciding about when 
it is more profitable to inve
st in flexibility to support 
the variation of the three data storagetechnologies 
shown inTable 1. Therefore, after the execution of the 
case study, we can conclude that, in anindustrial pro-
ject, the MAKEFlexi process is a feasible way to make 
decisions about flexibility investments.
Several points about the feasibility of the study are 
detailed as follows: First, we have pursued a simplifi-
cation of the analysis to gain an understanding of the 
MAKEFlexi process. This simplification has been 
achieved by estimating the value added by each new 
technology with the same value. Second, the estimation 
of the value added by the data storagetechnologies was 
facilitated by the experts™ know-how. Finally, we have 
selected a case study wherethe expected change was 
well-defined. As a result, the CoC could be easily es-
timated in terms of coupling and dependencies.
MAKEFlexi successfully assists architects inrea-
soningand explainingthe motivation of decisions, as it 
provides a qualitative baseline for reasoning. Obvious-
ly, this baseline is based in estimations; the more pre-
cise are estimations, the more precise will be the con-
clusions from reasoning. The estimations used in the 
case study are mainly subjective. But it should be high-
lighted that they are inte
nded to support qualitative 
reasoning, not quantitative; thereforethey should be 
simply shown the right trend.
Table 2. Examples of decision tree nodes
NodesNet valueValue description
K 
(end node)
•113K
113K = 180K Œ22K Œ45K
Where: 

180K is the value added by three 
variants= •60K*3

22K is the cost of investment in flexi-
bility

45K is the cost of change with a 
previous investment in flexibil-
ity=•15K*3
B
(decision node)
•68K68K = max(68K;61K)
G
(change node)
•53,15053,150 =  (68K*0.67)+(23K*0.33)
A
(root node)
•47,14547,145=max(54,500;47,145)
4813 Figure 4. Possible scenarios analyzed
4.4. Evaluation of validity 
To improve the internal validity of the results pre-
sented, the independent variables that could influence 
this case study have been identified as follows: the 
architects™ experience, the influence of the project™s 
size, the architecture™s complexity, and finally the 
complexity of the possible expected-change scenari-
os, which cannot be reduced due to the inherent na-
ture of case studies, which normally focus on one 
project. In particular, we have reduced the complexi-
ty of scenarios to guarantee the understandability of 
the case study by using the same value to estimate the 
value added by each data storagetechnology. How-
ever, if we had estimated the value added by each 
data storagetechnology with different values, the 
expected-change scenarios would have been more 
complex, and consequently the scenario would be 
more difficult to be understood.Finally, it is im-
portant to emphasize that if the expected changes are 
not well-scoped, then it would be difficult to estimate 
the CoC.
However, the major limitation in the case study 
research concerns external validity because only one 
case has beenstudied. In return, case studies allow 
one to evaluate a phenomenon, a model, or a process 
in a real setting. This is important in software engi-
neering in which a multitude of external factors may 
affect the validation results, and where other tech-
niques, such as formal experiments, are not consid-
ered to be conducted under controlled settings, even 
though formal experiments permit replication and 
generalization.
5.Related Work
In the literature, several works about technical debt
and the application of real options valuation to soft-
ware engineering can be found.
Baldwin and Clark use the real options approach 
to assess the value of design options created by mod-
4814 ularity[3]. These options have value because they 
allow designers to indepe
ndently investigate and 
replace designs. This work has been used in valuing 
modularity in object-oriented and aspect-oriented 
designs by Sullivan et al. [31]and Lopes and Bajra-
charya [19]. However, they do not use real options 
valuation to analyze the profitability of investments 
in flexibility. 
It is important to emphasize that the literature 
notes that decision trees have been proposed as a 
suitable method to assess the value of real options in 
software [13]. However, the works of Ozkaya et al. 
[23], Bahsoon and Emmerich[2], and Gustavsson 
and Axelsson [15]do not use this method. Ozkaya et 
al. assess the value of different architectural patterns 
and consider the ma
intainability and availability of 
the system. The implementations of some specific 
patterns are the real options. They use maintenance 
cost similarly we use cost of change. Additionally, 
they use the binomial valuation method as a way to 
assess the value of the options. However, binomial 
valuation restrict how the asset valueŠin this paper 
the asset is the investmentŠ can evolve by using a 
lognormal distribution [8]. This restricts the change 
scenarios, existing in a software project, whichcan 
be represented. In contrast, decision trees can be 
easily adapted to represent more change scenarios. 
Bahsoon and Emmerich propose the real options 
approach to evaluate architecturesin terms of their 
stability [2]. This approach makes the assumption of 
a fixed expiration date; the decision as to whether or 
not to execute the option can only be made at the end 
of the evaluation time. Based on this assumption, 
they use Black-Scholes valuation method, which is 
not suitable for assessing the possibility of executing 
an option at any moment of the analysis time period 
Finally, Gustavsson and Axelssonuse real options 
valuation to take into account the value of flexibility 
in automotive system design [15]. Gustavsson and 
Axelsson use the binomial valuation method because 
it has an estimated volatility (volatility is a percent-
age that represents how the value of the investment 
can increase or decrease over the analyzed period of 
time). Decision trees can be used instead of volatility, 
which allows one to represent the possible situations 
that can happen (e.g., using the knowledge and expe-
rience of stakeholder and developers) during the ana-
lyzed period of time.
On the other hand, Erdogmus [12]uses decision 
trees to assess the value of the option of being able to 
continue a project or abandon it with iterative pro-
cesses in opposition to a sequential process. Heuses 
decision trees to show the differences related to flex-
ibility between the iterative development process and 
the sequential development process (i.e., Erdogmus™ 
work is based on development process flexibility, but 
not on software product flexibility).
With regard to technical debt, several studies pro-
pose means to estimate the interest and/or principal 
of technical debt [10][14][22].The use of real op-
tions valuation with technical debt has been suggest-
ed previously [17][29]. Specifically, MAKEFlexi 
presents a solution that uses real options based on 
decision trees and technical debt to deal with the 
flexibility investment decision making problem. The 
MAKEFlexi solution is a process that uses real op-
tions valuation to estimate the value of flexibility 
investment options andit usestechnical debtto esti-
mate the cost of the different degrees of flexibility 
provided by alternative architecture design solutions.
6. Conclusion  
This paper has presentedthe MAKEFlexi process. 
Itprovides a solution for the flexibility investment 
decision making problem in agile architecting.The 
process help architects to 
create models to decide 
whether to invest or not in flexibility, and when to do 
it, i.e., when is more profitable to delay the flexibility 
investmentŠi.e. take technical debtŠor to invest in 
flexibility to manage the debt.Therefore, architects 
can make design decisions about flexibility based on 
economic considerations.
MAKEFlexi helps select the architecture design 
solution with the highest ROI of design for flexibility 
over the time frame under analysis. This decision 
takes into account the potential long-term benefit of 
flexibility, the short-term cost of each alternative 
architecture design solutionas well as the uncertainty 
that the changes finally will not happen.Our experi-
ence in applying MAKEFlexi in the industrial project 
OPTIMETER was really satisfactory. MAKEFlexi 
allowed us to delay the decision of investing in flexi-
bility at the second month of the project, so that we 
obtained a higher ROI. Additionally, we plan to eval-
uate the MAKEFlexi process in more case studies to 
reinforce that the process is feasible in other projects, 
and to determine in which situation is more profitable 
its application.
As future work, we plan
 to automate the MAKE-
Flexi process by developing a tool or extending one 
of the existing tools that support Real Options valua-
tion. Also it would be interesting to enrich the 
MAKEFlexi process with the storage and mining of 
architectural knowledge in order to be used as histor-
ical data. In long-term, we plan to integrate this tool 
with an architecture modeling framework with deci-
sion and architectural knowledge support in order to 
improve the design decision-making process.
4815 Acknowledgements  
The work reported in here has been partially spon-
sored by the Spanish fund: IMPONET (ITEA 2 
09030, TSI-02400-2010-10
3), iSSF (IP
T-430000-
2010-038), NEMO&CODED (ITEA2 08022, IDI-
20110864) and ENERGOS (CEN-20091048) and 
UPM (Researcher Training program).
References 
[1]Babar, M. A. & Abrahamsson, P.:Architecture-centric 
methods and agile approaches. In Agile Processes in Soft-
ware Engineering and Extreme Programming,(2008) 
[2]Bahsoon, R., Emmerich, W.: Evaluating Architectural 
Stability with Real Options Theory. In: 20th IEEE ICSM,
pp. 443-447 (2004)
[3] Baldwin, C. Y., Clark, K. B.: Design Rules: The Power 
of Modularity, MIT Press, (2000)
[4]Beck, K., et all, Manifesto for Agile Software Devel-
opment Manifestofor Agile Software Development, (2001)
[5]Bosch, J.: Software architecture: The next step. In: 
Software Architecture Lecture Notes in ComputerScience 
Volume 3047, pp. 194-199 (2004)
[6] Brown, N. et al,Managing technical debt in software-
reliant systems. In Proceedings of the FSE/SDP workshop 
on Future of software engineering research, (2010
[7]Clements et al.: Documenting Software Architectures: 
Views and Beyond, Addison-Wesley Professional (2010) 
[8]Cox, J.C., Ross, S.A., Rubinstein, M.: Option pricing: A 
simplified approach, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol-
ume 7, Issue 3, Pages 229-263 (1979)
[9]Cunningham, W.: The WyCash Portfolio Management 
System. In: OOPSLA ™92 Addendum to the Pro
ceeding on 
Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages, and 
Applications, pp. 29-30 (1992)
[10]Curtis, B., Sappidi, J., 
Szynkarski, A.: Estimating the 
Principal of an Application™s Technical Debt. IEEE Soft-
ware. Volume 29, issue 6, pp. 34-42 (2012)
[11]Dutta, S., Bibao-Osorio, B.: The Global Information 
Technology Report: Living in a Hyperconnected World. 
Technical report, INSEAD, World Economic Forum (2012)
[12]Erdogmus, H.: The Economic Impact of Learning and 
Flexibility on Process Decisions. IEEE Softw., volume 22, 
no. 6, pp. 76-83 (2005)
[13]Erdogmus, H., Favaro, J., Halling, M.: Valuation of 
Software Initiatives Under Unce
rtainty: Concepts, Issues, 
and Techniques. In: Value-Based Software Engineering. 
Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 39Œ66 (2006)
[14]Guo, Y., Seaman, C.: A Portfolio Approach to Tech-
nical Debt Management. In: Second International Work-
shop on Managing Technical Debt, pp. 31-34 (2011)
[15]Gustavsson, H., Axelsson, J.: Evaluating Flexibility in 
Embedded Automotive Product Lines Using Real Options. 
In: 12th SPLC, pp. 235-242 ( 2008)
[16]Hull, J.C.: Options, Futures, and other Derivatives, 7th 
ed. Pearson Prentice Hall (2008)
[17]Kruchten, P., Nord R. L., Ozkaya, I.: Technical Debt: 
From Metaphor to Theory and Practice. IEEE Software. 
Volume 29, issue 6, pp. 18-21 (2012)
[18]Lengwell, D.: Agile Software Requirements: Lean 
Requirements Practices forTeams, Programs, and the En-
terprise, Adisson-Wesley, 2010
[19]Lopes, C. V., Bajracharya, S. K., An analysis of modu-
larity in aspect oriented design. In: 4th international confer-
ence on Aspect-oriented software development. (2005)
[20]Martin, J.L., Yagüe, A., Gonzalez, E., Garbajosa, J.: 
Making Software Factory Truly Global: The Smart Soft-
ware Factory Project. Software Factory Magazine, 2010
[21]Massoud Amin, S.; Wollenberg, B.F.: Toward a Smart 
Grid: Power Delivery for the 21st Century. Power and 
Energy Magazine, IEEE, volume 3, no. 5, pp. 34-41 (2005)
[22]Nubroho, A., Visser, J., Kuipers, T.: An empirical 
model of technical debt and interest. In: Second Interna-
tional Workshop on Managing Technical Debt (2011)
[23]Ozkaya, I., Kazman, R., Klein, M.: Quality-Attribute-
Based Economic Valuation of Architectural Patterns. 
Technical report, SEI(2007)
[24]Perez, J., Diaz, J., Costa-Soria, C., Garbajosa, J.: Plas-
tic Partial Components: A Solution to Support Variability 
in Architectural Components. In: Joint WICSA/ECSA, 
IEEE Computer Society Press, pp. 221Œ230 (2009)
[25]J. Perez, J. Diaz, J. Garbajosa, P. P. Alarcon, Flexible 
Working Architectures: Agile Architecting using PPCs, in: 
4th European Conference on Software Architecture  (2010)
[26]Perry, D., Wolf A., Foundations for the Study of Soft-
ware Architecture. ACM Software Engineering Notes, Vol. 
17, No. 4, pp. 40-52, (1992)  
[27]Runeson, P., Host, M., Rainer, A., Regnell, B.: Case 
Study Research in Software Engineering: Guidelines and 
Examples. John Wiley & Sons (2012)
[28]Schwaber, K., Beedle, M.: Agile Software Develop-
mentwith Scrum. Prentice-Hall (2002)
[29]Seaman, C., et al.: Using Technical Debt Data in Deci-
sionMaking; Potential Decision Approaches. In: Interna-
tional Workshop on Managing Technical Debt, (2012)
[30]Smith, P. G.: Flexible Product Development: Building 
Agility for Changing Market
s, ed. Jossey-Bass, (2007) 
[31]Sullivan, K. J., Griswold, W. G., Cai, Y., Hallen, B.: 
The structure and value of modularity in software design,
ICSE, pp. 99-108, (2001)
[32]Tockey, S.: Return on Software: Maximizing the Re-
turn on Your Software Investment, Addison-Wesley Pro-
fessional (2004)
[33]Tom, E., Aurum, A., Vidgen, R.: An Exploration of 
Technical Debt. Journal of Systems and Software. Availa-
ble online (2013)
4816