 A Case Study: Introducing eXtreme Programming in a US Government 
System Development Project 
 Ann Fruhling¹, Patrick McDonald¹, Christopher Dunbar² 
¹University of Nebraska at Omaha,²FGM, Inc. 
afruhling@unomaha.edu
, pmmcdonald@unomaha.edu, dunbar@fgm.com 
  Abstract  
      
The US Military™s ability to meet its mission 
critical requirements calls for increased agility 
in its information technology development 
process. The purpose of this case study is to 
better understand how agile principles, 
specifically eXtreme Programming (XP) 

practices, can be effectively introduced and 

implemented into government organizations that 

have historically embraced the plan-driven 
traditional software development environment.  
In particular, we studied the eXtreme 
Programming process to develop a new 

capability for USSTRATCOM™s premier 

knowledge management system, SKIWeb.  There 

were several lessons learned that will assist 

practitioners in future implementations of XP 
and new research questions emerged that 
suggest further study.          
  1. Introduction  

      Rapidly changing operational requirements 
and a subsequent growing need for a leaner U.S. 

military force have both government leaders and 
defense contractors seeking faster and better 
ways of getting critical information and decision-

making tools into the hands of decision makers. 

This has led to a strategy of decentralization of 

information, a key component of which has 
become the migration toward net-centric, 

service-oriented architectures (SOA) for military 

information systems [11].  While this type of 
infrastructure seems well suited to the task of 
supporting emergent requirements, the linear 

nature and high-density documentation required 

by plan-driven software development methods 
traditionally employed by the military typically 
do not [1].  Attempts to address this drawback 

have come in the form of spiral development 

approaches that essentially break the traditional 

waterfall method down into smaller iterations 

based on risk or priority of functionality [13]. 
     More recently, Agile software development 

methods (i.e.  eXtreme Programming [3], Scrum 
[7,17]) have aimed to further streamline the 
development process and bring significant 

improvements such as timely delivery of 

required functionality.  Agile styles also purport 

to embrace changing or unclear requirements 

while promoting user and developer interaction 

[4]. 

     While the use of methods, like eXtreme 

Programming (XP) exist in government and 

military environments, they have yet to reach 

their potential.  Still, today, traditional plan-
driven methods are the mainstay, partly because 
they are considered by some to have less risk and 

they support CMMI level-5 certification [2].  

(Most DoD projects are required by law to be 

CMMI level-3 compliant.)  Also, plan-driven 

methods are more consistent with the 
hierarchical structured military culture.  Never-

the-less, there is a noticeable movement towards 

agile approaches.   

     The purpose of this paper is to better 

understand how XP practices can be effectively 
introduced and implemented into government 
organizations that have historically embraced the 
plan-driven traditional software development 

environment.  We present a case study and the 
lessons learned where a defense contractor 

implemented an XP development process pilot, 

referred to as Phase 1, to develop a new 

capability for U.S. Strategic Command™s 

(USSTRATCOM™s) premier knowledge 
management system, SKIWeb.  The paper is 

structured as follows.  We begin with 

background information on USSTRATCOM and 
SKIWeb, the U.S. military™s call for more agility 
in its system development processes, and an 

overview of Agile methods and XP practices.  

Next, we discuss our research method and the 

Phase 1 introduction and implementation of the 

XP process.   Subsequently, we present the 

survey results and participants feedback from the 

interviews.  Lastly, we conclude with a 

discussion of the lessons learned. 
  Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20081530-1605 2008 U.S. Government Work Not Protected by U.S. Copyright1 2. Background 
 2.1. USSTRATCOM and SKIWeb
  USSTRATCOM, headquartered at Offutt Air 
Force Base, Nebraska, is a unified command 
comprised of members from all four branches of 
the U.S. military.  Its role in the armed services 
is as a ﬁglobal integrator,ﬂ with responsibilities 

including information operations, strategic 

warning and missile defense, and global 

command and control functions [14].     
SKIWeb, or the Strategic Knowledge Integration 

website, is an event tracking and blogging tool 

used at USSTRATCOM.  Its purpose is to 
facilitate the sharing of information regarding 
military and world events between members of 

the strategic command and intelligence 

communities [10].  
   SKIWeb represents a significant paradigm 
shift in military operations in that everyone in or 

associated with the command can access and use 
the system, creating direct lines of 
communications between the lowest ranking 

specialist and the highest-ranking commander. 

The intent of the system is to capitalize on the 
idea that everyone in the command may have 
some insight or information that can be used to 
accomplish USSTRATCOM missions more 

effectively.   

 SKIWeb is one of many ﬁCommand and 

Controlﬂ systems at USSTRATCOM.  The 

Command and Control Software Engineering 

and Support project known as C2SES is 
supported by a team of external contractors.   
 2.2. Agile Methods and Government 
Contracting
  
     The term ‚agility™ is a key attribute when 

describing how to measure a military unit™s 

ability to meet varying sets of mission 

requirements.  Agility in the context of the 

military attribute is the ability to quickly adapt 

and adjust to changing conditions.   According to 

US Defense Department CIO John G. Grimes, 

ﬁ–succeeding in the new strategic environment 

requires levels of responsiveness and agility 

never before demanded of our forces.  The U.S. 
Defense Department must transform from its 
historical emphasis on ships, guns, tanks and 

planes to a focus on information, knowledge, and 

actionable intelligence.ﬂ [8] SKIWeb is one 

example of the kind of system envisioned by 

Secretary Grimes.  Migration towards 
information-based warfare, combined with a 

need for greater agility stemming from rapidly 

changing requirements, calls for change in the 

way military information systems are developed.   

 2.3. Overview of Agile Software Development 
and eXtreme Programming 

      The Agile method encompasses a set of 

principles stressing valuation of early and 

continuous delivery of functionality, 

collaboration, and responsiveness to change over 

heavy documentation, negotiation, and plan-
driven project management [4].  On one hand, 

some claim that this is in direct contrast with 

traditional plan-driven development models and 

is essentially ﬁundisciplined hackingﬂ [12], and 

on the other hand, others argue that Agile 
methods™ focus on short delivery cycles and 
continuous refinement [3.4] and therefore, Agile 

methods are as rigorous as plan-driven 

approaches.   The Agile Manifesto points out 
that formal planning and documentation are still 

essential, but should be pared down to the 

essentials in creating environments that are more 

responsive to change [9].   

     The Agile method adopted for the SKIWeb 
project at USSTRATCOM is eXtreme 

Programming (XP).  XP focuses on the 
application of ﬁprogramming techniques, 
communication, and teamwork,ﬂ and utilizes a 

core set of twelve principles [3]. The twelve 

principles are: Incremental Planning, Small 

Releases, Simple Design, Test-first 

Development, Refactoring, Pair Programming, 

Collective Ownership, Continuous Integration, 

Sustainable Pace, On-Site Customer, Uniform 

Coding Standard, and System Metaphor.  They 

are further described in the XP Phase 1 section. 

 3. Research Method  
 This research represents a single descriptive 
case study.  We chose a descriptive case study, 
because it is particularly well suited to support 
learning by answering ‚how™ and ‚why™ 
questions [15]. Case studies often explain the 

reasons for a problem, the background of a 

situation, what happened, and why. 

     We gathered data from a variety of sources 
during the study.  We attended team meetings, 

reviewed meeting minutes, prepared a post-

implementation evaluation survey and 

interviewed all key stakeholders involved in the 
XP project.  The roles of the researchers were 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20082 both observer and mentor.   
 4. XP Phase 1  
      The intention of Phase 1 was to pilot an XP 

process to implement a new SKIWeb system 
capability.  At the end of the pilot, the project 
team would review the process, make 
adjustments and continue phasing in the XP 
development process across the project team.   
Two experienced developers, a development 
team lead, and a government functional manager 
(customer) were initially assigned to the XP 

project.   Later in the XP project, a Human 

Factors Engineer (HFE) was included.  The 

developers were responsible for designing and 

building the actual end product.  The 

development team lead was the direct supervisor 
of the developers and was responsible for the XP 
process facilitation.  The government functional 
manager was the main end-user community 
representative.   In the context of this project, the 

HFE was responsible for the design of the user 

interface and developing story boards for new 

capabilities.  Also, two project managers (a 

software engineering team manager and the 

software development team manager) and a 

project documentation coordinator attended most 

of the weekly meetings.   All participants on the 

XP project were external contractors with the 

exception of the government functional manager.    
At the initiation of Phase 1, the XP team was 
given training on the general goals of Agile 

methods and detailed information on the 

practices of XP in particular.  One of the 

researchers met with the XP team weekly to 

observe, discuss issues and provide guidance. In 

addition, one of the developers had previous 

experience using XP practices. 

     At the conclusion of Phase 1, the researchers 

met with all the key stakeholders to debrief the 

XP process. The meetings with the key 
stakeholders were divided according to their role 
in Phase 1.  In other words, the researchers met 

with the developers and lead developers, the 

user, the HFE, and the management in four 

separate meetings.  Evaluation surveys were 

distributed and compiled.  The researchers also 

analyzed notes and observations during Phase 1.   
Phase 1 began August 7, 2006 and ended 
October 25, 2006.  Four ﬁdropsﬂ or iterations of 

new capabilities software were completed.   It 

was intended for the  the  drops to occur every 

two weeks, however, due to holidays, vacations, 
production problems,  and other enterprise-wide 
constraints some drops occurred at three week 
intervals.  
 The XP developers sat next to each other in 

the same cubicle.  Each developer had her own 

computer, however there was room for the two 

of them to sit together and work on the same 
computer.  The development team lead sat across 
the aisle.  The functional government manager 

had an office in the same building and floor.   

Both of the developers were new hires in the past 

year.  The development team lead was a new hire 
a few weeks before the XP pilot.  The 

government functional manager had been with 

the project team for over a year and had a good 

understanding of the system.  The HFE was 

located on a different floor in the same building.   

Most of the time, the developers and usually the 

team lead met with the user collaborator on a 
daily basis and sometimes more than once a day 
if needed.  Throughout the pilot, the project team 

met on a weekly basis to assess the XP process 

and discuss issues.  The researcher participated 

in these weekly meetings. Status reports on the 

progress of the development effort were also 

reported to the government officials at other 

weekly meetings.  

     The two managers, for the entire development 

project team, thoughtfully considered which 

enhancement capability would be the best 
candidate for the XP pilot process.  The main 
task that was selected for the project was to 

implement an advanced search capability for 

SKIWeb.   After the two developers for the XP 

team were told which new capability would be 

assigned to the XP project they did some initial 

planning and divided the capability into subtasks 

that they thought could be accomplished in the 

two week cycles.   The four subtasks were 1) 

Implement ﬁand-or-notﬂ search functionality; 

modify GUI for aesthetics, 2) Implement free 

text search when creating User Defined Event 
Logs, 3) Enhance Advanced Search filter 
capability; and 4) Implement advanced search 

for Add Related Events capability.  During the 

third week of Phase 1 an additional subtask 

surfaced which was to revise the existing GUI, 

and therefore, the HFE was requested to become 

involved in the XP process and fifth subtask was 

added. 

     During Phase 1, the researchers made the 

following observations. 1) Developers and the 

government functional manager, referred to as 
the ﬁuser collaboratorﬂ, had competing work 
assignments which interrupted the work flow.  2) 

The user collaborator had a search capability in 

mind that the developers did not currently have 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20083 all the technical expertise to implement, so the 
developers had to learn new technologies during 

the task.  3) The user collaborator went on 
vacation when the XP team was ramping up and 
gaining momentum.  There was a back-up user 

collaborator assigned during his absence.  4) 
Several internal C2SES communication issues 
surfaced and had to be addressed during Phase 1. 

5) The HFE was not an initial participant of the 
XP pilot team.   
 5. Findings  
     The findings from this case were formulated 
from several sources which include the 
researchers™ observations, weekly status 
meetings, interviews and surveys.   
After the interviews with the participants in 
the XP project were completed, the researcher 
asked each stakeholder (including the HFE) to 

complete a survey.  The intention of the survey 

was to further document the feedback and use 
the data as a future benchmark.  Seven of the 

eight individuals returned the survey.  Three 

respondents did not answer all the questions and 

were therefore they were not used in the 
statistical analysis. 
The three individuals who did not fully complete 
the survey were not directly involved in the day-
to-day process.  The one individual who did not 
return the survey was a ﬁback upﬂ user 

collaborator.  The survey asked basic 

demographic questions such as role in the 

organization, years of IT experience, and 

experience with agile software development 
process.  Open-ended questions were asked 
about team communication, XP task selection, 

and suggestions on future changes and 

improvements to the process.  T survey also 

asked the individual™s perception of the level of 

management support and the su
ccess of Phase 1.  
The first page of the survey included a 
description of each of the practices.  (These were 

explained in the training at the onset of the 

project.)  The definitions given for each of the 
practices are presented in Table 1.  

Survey questions that were directly related to the 
twelve agile practices addressed two areas.  First, 
we asked the respondent to indicate the usage 

amount of each of the XP practices during Phase 
1.  A score of 1 indicated the practice was not 

implemented and a score of 7 indicates that the 

practice was fully utilized. An average of the 

responses and the standard deviation are 

reported, however, the statistical validity is 

limited due to the small sample size.  The results 

are shown in Table 2.          
   
  Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20084        
        
Table 2 Œ Extent of Implementation 
Practice 
Avg 
StDev 
On-site Customer 
6.2 0.8 
Small Releases 
6.0 0.0 
Sustainable Pace 
6.0 0.8 
Incremental Planning  
/ Planning Game 
5.8 0.4 
Coding Standards 
5.5 1.0 
Simple Design 
4.8 0.5 
Collective Code Ownership 
4.5 2.6 
Refactoring 
4.0 1.8 
Continuous Integration 
3.7 2.3 
System Metaphor 
3.6 1.8 
Test-Driven Programming 
1.8 1.0 
Pair Programming 
1.0 0.0 
   Table 1 Œ Extreme Programming Practices [3]. [6] 
Practice 
Practice Overview 
Incremental Planning 
Also ﬁPlanning Game.ﬂ  Work is planned in chunks, with the on-site 

customer playing a large part in requirements determination and work 

prioritization 
Small Releases 
Development team puts core functions into production early and then 

builds upon them using feedback from users and customer collaborator 
Simple Design 
Simple and small pieces of design allow frequent changes to be made as 

necessary. 
Test-first Development 
Writing and running unit tests as code is written to make sure the 
system is working properly.  Frequent user acceptance tests to ensure 
the system is fulfilling user requirements. 
Refactoring 
A technique used to improve code without altering functionality.  

Focuses on simple, clean, non-repeating code that can be easily 

changed. 
Pair Programming 
Two programmers developing production code at the same time on one 

machine. 
Collective Ownership 
Everyone owns all of the code, allowing necessary changes to be made 

by anyone at any time. 
Continuous Integration 
Integrating changes as they are complete to detect system failures as 

soon as possible. 
Sustainable Pace 
Developers keep a normal work schedule to remain productive, and 

interested in the project. 
On-site Customer 
An on-site customer available for requirements clarification and 

business decisions that should not be made by the 

Developer 
Uniform Coding 

Standard 
Coding standards (language, formatting, syntax) agreed upon by the 

team at the start of a project.  Facilitates communication and ease of 
development. 
System Metaphor 
An over-arching description of the system™s functionality, purpose, and 
conventions,  providing customers and developers with common ground 

on which they can stand 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20085     The results show that the XP principles On-site 
Customer, Small Releases, and Sustainable Pace 
were the most used practices.  On the other hand, 

Test-Driven Programming and Pair 
Programming were essentially not used at all.  
Also, there was the broad range of responses for 
Collective Code Ownership, Continuous 

Integration, Refactoring, and System Metaphor 

     which is evident from the standard deviation. 
Second, we asked each respondent to rate 
their perception of the importance of each XP 
practice to the success of the project. Table 3 
presents the results.  A rating of one indicates 
that the practice was perceived to be not 

important at all and 7 rating indicates that the 
practice was extremely important. 
Table 3 Œ Importance of Practice to Success of Phase 1 
Practice 
Avg 
StDev 
Incremental Planning / Planning Game
6.4
 0.5
 On-site Customer 
6.2
 0.4
 Small Releases 
6.2
 0.8
 Continuous Integration 
6.0
 0.8
 Sustainable Pace 
5.5
 0.6
 Collective Code Ownership 
5.5
 1.3
 Test-Driven Programming 
5.3
 1.5
 Coding Standards 
5.0
 0.8
 Simple Design 
5.0
 1.4
 Refactoring 
4.8
 1.5
 System Metaphor 
4.2
 1.6
 Pair Programming 
1.8
 1.5
      The high average scores and low standard 
deviations suggest overwhelming support from 

the majority of the project team for Incremental 
Planning, On-site Customer, Small Releases, and 
Continuous Integration.  Pair programming was 
rated as not being very important.    
     
The USSTRATCOM environment may 
provide insights as to why the respondents 
indicated XP practices were or were not fully 
adopted and also why some XP practices were 
rated more important than others.  For example, 

in the current environment, the team appeared to 

have already gravitated toward three of the agile 

practices without formally recognizing them as 
such.  For instance, the researcher observed that 

Small Releases, Sustainable Pace, and On-Site 
Customer were already in place as a matter of 
course, though perhaps not to the extent 

specified in XP. However, once recognized, 

these were indicated in the survey as being fully 

adopted.    Small releases were practiced as 
enhancement work done on the SKIWeb system 
is typically organized into chunks by 

functionality and then prioritized by senior 

leadership.  Contract work is normally held to a 

limited number of hours per week with no 

overtime which supports a sustainable pace.    

The on-site customer practice was implemented 
as regular contact with the customer is required 
to approve work done and set goals for the next 

iteration.  That said, perhaps the biggest 

questions surround the practices that were not 

readily adopted.   
   Only one XP practice was given a low rating 
both in terms of usage and importance Œ Pair 

Programming.  This is partly attributable to the 

fact that at the introduction and training meetings 
for the Phase 1 the developers openly stated their 

reluctance to follow the pair programming  

process as defined by the XP process.   The 

developer that was the most vocal was the one 
who had past XP experience.  She had already 

made her mind up that she wasn™t willing to do 

this and the team lead did not challenge her 
comment probably because he was still new to 
the team.  The two developers assigned to Phase 

1 did state they worked closely on the tasks, 

sometimes independently and sometimes they 

worked together to solve logic and coding 
problems.  Because the project team lead did not 
enforce the XP pair programming practice, it was 

neither used nor deemed important.  

     Table 4 compares the two survey results. 

Table 4 shows that there are disparities between 

the attributed importance of some of the XP 

practices and the extent to which they were used 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20086 by the project team.  To measure this, the 
average importance rating was subtracted from 

the usage rating; a negative delta indicates that 
the practice was perceived to have more 
importance than was placed upon it during Phase 

1, and a positive delta suggests the practice was 
less important than the emphasis placed upon it, 
with the distance from zero indicating the 

relative magnitude.    
  
 Table 4 Œ Usage / Importance Comparison  
Practice
 Usage
 Importance
 Delta
 Test-Driven Programming 1.8 5.3 -3.5 
Continuous Integration 3.7 6.0 -2.3 
Collective Code Ownership 4.5 5.5 -1.0 
Refactoring 4.0 4.8 -0.8 
Pair Programming 1.0 1.8 -0.8 
Incremental Planning / Planning Game 5.8 6.4 -0.6 
System Metaphor 3.6 4.2 -0.6 
Simple Design 4.8 5.0 -0.3 
Small Releases 6.0 6.2 -0.2 
On-site Customer 6.2 6.2 0.0 
Sustainable Pace 6.0 5.5 0.5 
Coding Standards 5.5 5.0 0.5 
      In other words, of the twelve practices, Test-

Driven Programming and Continuous Integration 
of code stood out as being perceived to be 
important but rarely used, whereas Sustainable 

Pace and Coding Standards were considered to 

be slightly less important than the emphasis 

placed on them.   A possible reason why Test-
Driven Programming may have been ranked 

high, but rarely used is because the project team  

has a designated tester for quality assurance.  

Therefore, they relied on this person to do the 

testing and were not in the habit of writing 
explicit test cases upfront.  Management may 
have viewed this as redundant effort.   

     The results of Continuous Integration may be 

due to the type of task selected.  Since the new 

search capability had well-defined boundaries 

the developers did not encounter the opportunity 

to perform continuous integration.  As for 

Sustainable Pace, there was not a change in the 

number of hours the developers worked per 

week.  In fact, team members seldom have to 

work overtime as reported by the project 
manager, regardless of the development 
methodology used.  Currently, the team does not 

strictly enforce all Coding Standards, so, this 

may be why it was perceived as unimportant, yet 

the developers on the XP team expressed their 
dissatisfaction with the lack of enforcement of 
coding standards in the overall project and 

independently instituted a higher level of 

standards among the two of them. The response 

from the developers may have been a way for 
them to express their concern and get 
management™s attention as they knew the results 
were going to be presented to those who could 
enforce changes.  
 In addition to the measurements discussed 

above, key stakeholders also provided responses 

to open-ended survey questions and participated 

in companion interviews to discuss their 

experiences with Phase 1, with the underlying 
questions being an assessment on how the XP 

process went, what issues arose,  the lessons 

learned, and what changes should be considered 

for Phase 2.  Reported issues were generally 
consistent between respondents, and fell into 
themes of Management, Communication, 
Planning, and the XP Principles.   
 6.  Discussion and Lessons Learned 
 6.1. Management 
      
One common response from the post-process 
interviews was that the XP team spent too much 
time working on unrelated tasks that caused 
considerable distraction and time away from 
doing their work on the XP tasks.  This impacted 

the success of Phase 1.  The survey result that 

measured the perceived success of the Phase 1 

was an average rating of 4.8 (1-low and 7- high) 

and a standard deviation of .8.  In the 
USSTRATCOM contracting environment, it is 

not uncommon for development teams to be 

actively participating in multiple projects 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20087 simultaneously and even for team members to be 
assigned to multiple projects with different 

teams.  This was the case with the team 
participating in the Phase 1.  Occasionally, there 
were competing priorities that interrupted work 

flow.  This sometimes made it difficult to instill 
any sort of daily routine for the project team. 
Several members indicated that more 

management involvement was needed in order to 
keep the team functioning and on track.   

     Also, Phase 1 took place during the summer 

when several of the other IT developers not on 

the XP pilot went on vacation which required the 

XP developers to cover for them.  In addition, 

the project team supported the maintenance of 
SKIWeb as well as new enhancements.  One of 
the developers on the XP team had to work on a 

critical production problem in the middle of 
Phase 1.  Although, it was recommended at the 
onset of Phase 1 that the developers involved 

should only focus on the XP tasks.  This 

stipulation became impossible as Phase 1 

progressed.     

     Another issue that caused problems was 

scope creep.  About the third week of Phase 1 it 

was determined that the user interface would 

need considerable changes and it would be 

helpful to have HFE involvement.  The HFE was 

not available to assist in the timely manner that 
the XP team needed.  Further, this person 
seemed to be reluctant to participate in the XP 

process.  Perhaps, partly due to the perception 

that the XP process was infringing on the HFE™s 

current job responsibility as the chief designer of  

all the user interface modifications.  Also the 

HFE was not included in the initial task selection 

discussion and was not integrated into  the XP 

Pilot team originally.  
In summary, there are three key findings that 
resulted from stakeholders™ feedback and 

researchers™ observations.  First, the XP team 
must work on only XP tasks and not be pulled 
off for other tasks.  This is important so that they 

are able to focus on the tasks at hand and to 

deliver the new capabilities in iterative cycles 

and on schedule.   The XP project team did meet 

the deadlines, but there was an increased amount 

of stress to do so.  Second, if management agrees 

to additional requirements (which is 

understandable) that cause substantial scope 

creep, for example the major redesign of the user 

interface, then the expectations of what will be 
delivered in the future iterations needs to be re-
prioritized and adjusted.   Lastly, the HFE and 

other technical experts need to be available to 

accommodate the needs of the XP developers in 
a timely manner and as needed.   Management 
should include technical experts in the discussion 

of task selection and project initiation. 
 6.2. Communication 

      The most frequent point made by 
interviewees was the importance of timely, 
complete, and accurate communication among 

the development project team.   This was 

especially relevant between the developers and 

the HFE.  There were times, when e-mails were 

sent and not answered quickly enough, meetings 
were scheduled and not everyone was available 
to attend.   Therefore, decisions were made, but 

not always completely and accurately 

communicated to everyone.  Perhaps, the reason 

why so much emphasis was placed on 

communication was that in the XP environment, 
communication is key.  One survey response 
provided the insight that s/he perceived there was 

resistance to change from the traditional 

hierarchical communication to the more 

collaborative style used in XP.   
Further clarification is also needed on the 
process of involving technical experts (i.e. HFEs, 

DBAs, Security experts, etc.) and then 

communicating the expectations to the technical 

experts by their management.  Suggestions 

included explicitly setting ground rules for 

communications (i.e. response time, availability 

for meetings, etc.) and defining an internal issue 

resolution process before embarking on the next 

Phase of the XP process roll-out.   
On the other hand, there was a consensus on 
the satisfaction with the communication 
improvements gained between the Government 
and the Contractor through the introduction of 

the user collaborator.  From the researcher™s 

observations and the feedback in the interviews, 

the communication process was only an  issue 

among the internal technical staff.  And in fact, 

the communication between the technical staff 

and the user collaborator increased both in depth 

and breadth.  The user collaborator interacted 

with more technical staff members than in the 

past and more frequently.  The main lesson 
learned is that there needs to be timely, accurate 
and complete communications among the team 

members, management, and the user collaborator 

to effectively and successfully introduce agile 

methods.   This is explicitly stated as a key 

component of agile methods and this study only 

further demonstrates the importance and value of 

communication.  Further, it is important that the 

team lead have the expertise and time to 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20088 champion the project on a daily and sometimes 
hourly basis to facilitate the communication 

process. 
 6.3. Planning 
      
A few individuals raised issues regarding the 
appropriateness of the task selected for Phase 1.  
Since SKIWeb is a system that is already in use, 
most, if not all, of the software development 
tasks are enhancements to add new functionality 

or address problems with existing segments.  In 

this case, the task was the addition of a new 

search capability.  The IT managers who 

identified this new capability recognized that 
technical Oracle expertise would be needed and 

this was taken into account on the selection of 

the developers.  However, the developers quickly 

realized they did not have the depth of technical 

expertise to quickly implement the requested 
search algorithms using Oracle.  Thus, a 
significant portion of their productive time had 
to be dedicated to learning advanced features of 

Oracle and at the same time maintaining 

responsibility for progress.  This created extra 

stress and reluctance on fully designing the new 

features as the user collaborator envisioned.  The 

lesson learned is that it is important to assess the 

technical expertise of the developers and 

evaluate if they have the skill set for the tasks 

assigned.  
     Another issue that arose was the XP team 
composition and the barriers encountered when it 

became clear that certain user interface system 

designs would need HFE support.  The HFE was 

not originally considered a key stakeholder in the 

initial XP project charter.   This decision was 

discussed; still, as the managers understood the 

requirement they did not expect the search 

capability to impact the user interface to the level 

that it required HFE involvement. This 

assumption did not hold true and as the user 
collaborator and developers worked on the 
second iteration, new ideas on improvements to 

the user interface design became apparent and 

interaction with the HFE became necessary.  The 

HFE was reluctant to get involved since s/he was 

not included in the initial XP pilot team.  This 

caused problems and miscommunication that 

could have been avoided.  The lesson learned is 

that there needs to be a thorough understanding 

of the impact and boundaries of the selected XP 

tasks and the roles and expectations of the 

technical experts need to be clearly defined and 
understood by everyone.  Thus, the technical 
experts should always be considered key 
stakeholders.     

 6.4. XP Principles 
      
As indicated in the survey responses, 
Incremental Planning received high marks for 
both importance and usage.   However, feedback 
from the companion interviews and responses to 
open-ended survey questions suggested a need 

for improvement.  For example, half the 

respondents indicated a need to spend more time 

on requirements determination and systems 
engineering before handing the project over to 
the XP team.  While this seems directly at odds 

with the principles and practices of XP, it might 

also be interpreted as the lack of recognition of 

the differences between XP and the plan-driven 

development approach.  Thus, this suggests there 

needs to more in-depth Agile/XP training prior 
to execution the next phase of the XP process 
and additional mentoring and team lead 

oversight during Phase 2.    

     In the end, small-scale Incremental Planning 
was generally well-received, and verbal 
responses from the government customers 

indicated an overall sense that the XP pilot had 

sped up the deployment of new features and 

capabilities without introducing additional re-

work or defects.   In fact, the customer received 

smaller increments of new features every two to 

three weeks, instead of having to wait the usual 

6-8 week intervals for the entire enhancement.    

 Although there were no quantitative results 

captured, it was the perception of the 

development team lead that the end product 
produced by the XP team was of a better quality, 
had fewer defects, and better met customers™ 

needs.   

 7. Conclusion 
      
In summary, there were several lessons 
learned and contributions from this case study.  
The lessons learned centered around the 
importance of team member communication, 
understanding the XP practices and processes, 

and on-going management involvement and 

planning.   
The main limitation of this study is that the 
results focus on one organization at one point in 
time and therefore, they can not be generalized.  

In addition, the small sample size limits the 

amount of interpretation that can be made from 

the survey statistics.   Never the less, this study 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20089 makes an insightful contribution to XP 
practitioners, especially those involved in 

government and military installations.  
Practitioners can incorporate the lessons learned 
in their planning and implementation of XP 

development team projects.  Further research is 
needed for us to better understand the tradeoffs 
in risk and value between traditional and agile 

development approaches in government and 
military environments. [2]. 

 8.  Acknowledgements 
      The researchers would like to thank 
USSTRATCOM and Mr. Richard Corbin for 

their support on this research and the opportunity 
to work with the C2SES project team. 
 9. References 
 [1] Alleman, G, Henderson M., Seggelke R. "Making 
Agile Development Work in a Government 

Contracting Environment - Measuring velocity with 
Earned Value," adc, p. 114,  Agile Development 
Conference (ADC '03),  2003. 

 
[2] Armstrong, D. Interview, USSTRATCOM, 

December 16, 2006. 

 
[3] Beck, K.  Extreme Programming Explained.  

Boston: Addison_Wesley, 2000. 

 [4] Beck, et al.  ﬁManifesto for Agile Software 
Development.ﬂ 2001. Agile Alliance. 

http://www.agilemanifesto.org
  [5] Boehm, B. and Turner, M. "Management 

Challenges to Implementing Agile Processes in 

Traditional Development Organizations." IEEE 
Software 22.5 (2005) 30-39. 
 [6] Cao, L., Mohan, K., Xu,P., and Ramesh, B. ﬁHow 
Extreme does Programming Have to be? Adapting XP 

Practices to Large-scale Projects,ﬂ In 37th Hawaii 

International Conference on System Sciences, January 

2004. 

 
[7] Cockburn, A.  Agile Software Development.  
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 2001. 
 
[8] Grimes, John G. ﬁWhich Emerging Technology 

Will Have The Biggest Impact on Your Organization 

in the Future?ﬂ Signal, AFCEA™s International 

Journal.  September 2006. 

[9] Highsmith, J., 2001.  ﬁHistory: The Agile 

Manifesto.ﬂ Manifesto for Agile Software 
Development.  
http://agilemanifesto.org/history.org
  [10] Kehler, Robert C., Lt General, USAF.  Address to 
the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics 

Association. Washington, D.C., 16 June 2006. 
Transcript: 

http://www.stratcom.mil/Spch&test/CD_AFCEA
_16Jun06.html
  [11] ﬁNet-Centric Checklist, Version 2.1.3. May 12, 

2004.ﬂ Retrieved June 3rd, 2006 from 

http://www.defenselink.mil/nii/org/cio/doc/NetCentric
_Checklist_v2-1-3_May12.doc 

 
[12] Paulk, Mark. "Extreme Programming from a 
CMM Perspective." IEEE Software Nov./Dec. 2001: 
19-26. 

 
[13] Potok, T. E. ﬁExtensions to the spiral model to 

support joint development of complex software 

systems,ﬂ Proceedings of the 30th Annual Southeast 

Regional Conference. April 1992. 

 [14] U.S. Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM).  
ﬁUS Strategic Command History.ﬂ 

 http://www.stratcom.mil/about-ch.html
  [15] Yin, R.K. Case Study Research: Design and 

Methods, Sage Publications.  Newbury Park. 1984. 

     
 
 Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200810