 Measuring the Impact of Scrum on Pr
oduct Development at Adobe Systems 
  Peter Green 
Adobe Systems 
peterg@adobe.com 
  Abstract
 Over the past several years scrum has grown to 
become the most commonly used product 
development method at Adobe Systems. Large 
desktop software products like Premiere Pro and 
After Effects, Platform tools like Adobe AIR, and 
Software as a Service products like Acrobat Connect 

and Omniture SiteCatalyst are using scrum to 
become more effective at delivering the right 
solutions to customers with higher quality. This 

paper discusses the methods 
Adobe Systems is putting 
in place to measure the impact scrum has had on 

these teams. 
  1. Introduction   Moving to a new software development process 
often comes with the promise of highly productive 
teams, better software quality, and products that are 

better fit for customers. While there is ample 
evidence that agile processes such as Scrum and XP 
result in such benefits [2], there can be multiple 
challenges in attempting to measure and analyze the 
results within a working business. Agile methods 

emphasize individual conversations over tracked 

documents, self-management, rapid response to 

change, and working software as the primary metric 

[3]. Given this environment, it is often difficult to 
gather meaningful metrics describing the before state 
versus the current state, and hence to use data to 

quantify the changes the intuitive sense of 

improvement that teams may feel is in place using the 

new methods. 
In 2005, two teams at Adobe Systems began 
using scrum [4]. Today, over 1/3 of the company™s 

developers are using scrum, and it is the most 

common development methodology in use at Adobe. 

As the process has grown at the company, we have 

attempted to put a few measurements in place to back 

up the sense that the process is working.  
There are three measurement areas that we 
predicted would provide good indicators of the effect 

of scrum on a specific project: 1) subjective ratings 

by scrum practitioners of how the process has 

affected them and how well their team is doing the 

process, gathered through a semi-annual survey, 2) 

defect data, such as defect counts, deferral rates, and 
cycle-to-cycle defect curve information, gathered 
from defect management systems, and 3) Net 

Promoter Scores [1], gathered from prerelease 

customer surveys. While we would prefer to use 

customer satisfaction ratings from the products in the 

field, such data is not available for the most recent 
releases.  
In attempting to measure these three areas, we 
found that there was a lack of data in at least one of 
the three areas for most teams. This made it very 

difficult to correlate across the teams to identify key 

drivers for successful scrum adoption. Additionally, 
only moderate correlation between specific scrum 
practice adherence and high customer 

satisfaction/low defect rates may indicate that there 
are important drivers of success that don™t fall into 
one of the three measurement areas. The paper will 
discuss the data available in the three measurement 
areas, what steps we are taking to remedy the lack of 

data in key areas for future adopters of scrum at 

Adobe, and what conclusions we are able to draw 

based on the more limited data set we have available 

today. 
 1.1 Sample 
set 
 Table 1.1 below demonstrates the challenge faced 
in comparing the three measurement areas across 

multiple product teams. For the purposes of this 

paper, the team names are redacted and replaced with 

generic terms to protect the teams™ identity, but the 
generic names are used consistently throughout the 
paper (team 1 is always team 1) We have 26 teams 

that have data in at least one of the three categories. 

Of those 26, 25 have data from the scrum survey, 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201111530-1605/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE nine have defect data, and three have customer 
satisfaction data. 
 2. Scrum 
survey  

 Within the agile community, there is much 
discussion of what it means to actually be ﬁdoing 
scrumﬂ. There have been a few attempts to create a 

test to determine how well teams have adhered to the 
principles of scrum (see Nokia Test/Scrum But Test 
[5]), but we have found these tests to be inadequate 

for our needs. 
In order to better ascertain how well teams are 
implementing the process, we chose to create a more 

comprehensive survey than what we found in use in 

the community at the time. While other industry 

thought leaders have since produced similar surveys 

[6], we have decided to continue to use the Adobe 
Scrum Survey rather than change to the standard 
surveys and lose the ability to track improvement in 

specific areas. The Adobe Scrum Survey is 

administered semi-annually. The most recent version 

of the survey had 220 respondents from 25 different 
development teams.  
The first section of the survey measures 
respondents™ opinion of scrum™s effectiveness as a 
process for their team (Scrum Effectiveness section). 

The second section is a scrum scorecard where 

respondents are asked to rate several areas of 
standard scrum process rules to ascertain how well 
the teams are implementing scrum (Scrum Scorecard 

section).  
The survey consists of statements that 
respondents are asked to rate their agreement with on 
a scale of one to ten. There are a total of 50 
statements across the various categories, yielding a 
maximum score of 500. The highest cumulative 
actual team score in the most recent survey was from 

Team 6, with a score of 391, representing an average 

agreement of 7.818 out of 10 across all questions. We 

can use Team 6™s score to ﬁgrade on a curveﬂ, 
applying a coefficient to the other team™s scores that 
normalize them to a scale where the Team 6 is equal 
to 100%. Table 2.0 shows the scores of all teams with 

these data points. 
 Table 2.0: Cumulative, average, and 
normalized scores for Adobe Scrum Survey:
 Team   Score Average Normalized 
Team 6 390.9 7.818 
100% 
Team 12 388.9 7.778 
99% 
Team 11 387.7 7.753 
99% 
Team 22 371.4 7.428 
95% 
Team 10 364.77.293 
93% 
Team 23 360.57.209 
92% 
Team 20 359.77.193 
92% 
Team 1 355.87.115 
91% 
Team 21 351.87.036 
90% 
Team 17 350.27.003 
90% 
Team 5 349.56.989 
89% 
Team 24 344.76.894 
88% 
Team 4 343.06.859 
88% 
Team 13 333.16.662 
85% 
Team 7 329.96.597 
84% 
Team 19 329.36.586 
84% 
Team 25 329.06.580 
84% 
Team 14 319.96.396 
82% 
Team 18 311.06.221 
80% 
Team 15 302.76.053 
77% 
Team 16 296.35.925 
76% 
Team 2 294.25.884 
75% 
Team 3 290.75.814 
74% 
Team 8 284.65.692 
73% 
Team 9 229.74.593 
59% 
 Chart 2.0: Cumulative Survey Scores per 
team, ranked highest to lowest and graphed:
   In analyzing the data from the survey, we found it 
beneficial to examine average scores per question and 

area, as a baseline for how the company is doing as a 

whole, as well as to examine teams whose scores 
were among the best at the company, as a way to 
show individual teams what was a potential target 

score at the company. Additionally, we can use these 

two categories (average and high) to correlate 

specific metrics, either correlating specific survey 

questions or general survey categories between 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20112 average teams and high teams, as well as correlating 
survey data with data in the defect and customer 

satisfaction areas 
To determine which scores to use in the ﬁhighﬂ 
category, we took the top 5 teams in the cumulative 

survey scores and provide their answers as a guide 

post for what was possible. Since the top 5 represent 

25% of all responding teams, they are referred to in 

the tables at Top Quartile, sometimes abbreviated as 
Top Q. 
  2.1. Scrum 
effectiveness 
section 
  In the Scrum Effectiveness section of the survey, 
respondents are asked to rate how strongly they agree 
with several aspirational statements related to project 
goals on a scale of 0-10. In all categories, teams saw 
some improvements after moving to scrum. When we 
narrow the results to those teams that scored in the 

top 25% on the Scrum Scorecard section, we see 

much stronger effectiveness:  
 Avg. 
Top Q 
The quality of our software has 
improved since implementing scrum. 
6.44 7.57 
The communication on our team has 
improved since implementing scrum. 
7.03 8.35 
We deliver a better product to our 
customers since implementing scrum. 
6.37 7.81 
I have a better work/life balance since 

our team implemented scrum. 
5.11 5.96 
My job allows me to put my skills and 

talents to good use. 
6.31 7.44 
 In addition to the aspirational statements, 
respondents were asked two general impression 
questions. The first is a Net Promoter Score question 
for the process (How likely are you to recommend 
scrum to friends or colleag
ues?), the second is a 
question borrowed from Yahoo scrum surveys: ﬁIf 

the question were solely up to you, would you 

continue using scrum on your project?ﬂ  
 Avg. 
Top 
Quartile 
Net Promoter Score -3 44 
Would use if up to you (% Yes)? 80% 100% 
 Note the high correlation between satisfaction 
with the results of scrum and doing the scrum process 
well. It is unclear from the data whether the 
Scorecard data has a causal relationship upon the 
Effectiveness data, or whether the causation is 

reversed or simply similarly symptomatic of other 

factors such as effective leadership or strong team 

members. However, from the data we can conclude 
that Adobe teams that effectively do scrum have the 
viewpoint that their quality, communication, product 
fitness, and work life balance are significantly 

improved as a result. 
 2.2. Scrum 
scorecard 
section 
  In the Scrum Scorecard section of the survey, 
respondents are asked to rate how strongly they agree 
with several aspirational statements related to 

effective implantation of scrum on a scale of 0-10. 
This section serves both to provide overall trends and 
to provide feedback to individual teams that they can 

utilize in their retrospectives. This section is divided 

into major areas of the process: Discipline & 

Improvement, Product Owner, Scrum Master, Scrum 
Team, Sprints, Agile Best Practices, and Agile 
Values. Let us examine these by category. In the 

results below, we show the Adobe Average score, the 

score of those respondents whose cumulative scores 

were in the top quartile overall, and the delta between 

the two. This allows us to identify what key areas 
good scrum teams do really well at when compared 
to average scrum teams. 
The first sub-area of the scorecard asks 
respondents to rate two high level statements. The 

first statement, simply asking if respondents feel that 

their teams follow the rules, is interesting, as 
individuals will have a wide variance in what their 
understanding of the rules might be. However, it does 

provide valuable information since team trust is 

significantly hampered when team members don™t 

feel that they follow their own rules, regardless of 
their understanding of what those rules might be. 
The second statement is key to the survey as one 
of the main pillars of scrum is continuous 
improvement. If teams see low scores on this 

question, it would indicate a significant gap in how 

effectively they were doing scrum. 
  The Product Owner section of the Scorecard 
highlights an area in need of improvement at the 

company. Note that even teams in the top 25% have 

lower scores in this section than most other sections, 

and that with the exception of the velocity question, 
have significantly lower deltas than in other sections: 
Statement 
AvgTop 
Q  Discipline, Improvement Category 
6.567.901.34
Our team adheres to the rules of 
scrum 
6.247.401.16
In general, our scrum implementation 

is improving over time 
6.888.401.52
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20113  The Scrum Master section of the Scrum 
Scorecard shows higher scores than other areas, 
indicating that teams are generally satisfied with how 
the Scrum Master role is being fulfilled. In this 
category there were smaller deltas between the 
average teams and the best teams. Unlike the Product 

Owner section, the scores were universally good as 

opposed to universally poor: 
 
The Scrum Team section is also among the 
highest scores of any of the Scorecard sections. 
Adobe has traditionally had strong teams in place, so 
this is not a surprising result. Notice the significant 

delta between average and top teams in the area of 

team ownership of the sprint burndown artifact. 
 
The Sprints sub-area has relatively high scores as 
well. A few interesting standouts are the strict 

adherence to sprint boundaries and a clear and 

respected definition of done. Any project can choose 

to fix either the date or the scope but not both (on 

short iterations, adding resources has no benefit or a 
negative impact) [7]. Scrum literature recommends 
dropping scope so that the scrum teams can establish 

a rhythm [8]. Notice that the successful scrum teams 

are very disciplined in th
is area compared to the 
average scrum team, indicating that a willingness to 

slip a date may be indicative of a larger leadership 
issue on the team. Also, notice the large deltas in the 
two Definition of Done statements, indicating that 

teams that clarify and adhere to a definition of done 

for the items completed in a sprint is a strong factor 

in the overall success of scrum for those teams: 
 Statement 
Avg Top 
Q  Product Owner Category 
6.00 6.840.84
 There is no question as to who the 
product owner is on my team. 
6.96 7.320.36
 The product owner inspires the team 
with their vision and goals for our 
product and the current release. 
5.87 6.710.84
 The product owner keeps the product 
backlog well groomed, prioritized, 

and organized 
5.59 6.480.89
 The product owner clearly 
communicates the priority and goals 

of items in the product backlog 
during sprint planning 
6.14 7.211.07
 The product owner is readily 
available to answer questions as they 
arise during the sprint. 
6.7 6.880.18
 We use team velocity to determine 
the probable scope or release date of 

our current release 
4.74 6.421.68
 Statement 
Avg Top 
Q  Scrum Master 
7.06 8.020.96
 Our Scrum Master has a good 
understanding of the theory and rules 

of scrum. 
7.48 8.240.76
 Our Scrum Master helps us be more 
productive as a team 
7.11 8.131.02
 Our Scrum Master keeps the daily 
scrum meeting brief and on topic 
7.03 8.051.02
 Our Scrum Master helps us stay on 
track to meet our commitments for the 

sprint 
7.09 7.980.89
 Our Scrum Master makes sure that 
impediments are raised and resolved 

quickly 
7.3 7.920.62
 Our Scrum Master shields the team 
from external influences during the 
sprint 
6.41 7.681.27
 Our Scrum Master leads the team to 
improve our processes and teamwork 
during meetings like the daily scrum 
and sprint retrospectives 
7.02 8.181.16
Statement 
AvgTop 
Q  Scrum Team 
6.988.011.03
Our scrum team is cross functional, 
or in other words, includes the 

various skill sets (UX, Dev, QE, Etc.) 
required to deliver a potentially 
shippable increment each sprint 
7.346.88-0.46
Our scrum team decides how much 
work to commit to in a single sprint 
7.848.901.06
Our scrum team keeps the sprint 

backlog up to date and accurate 

throughout the sprint 
6.436.920.49
The sprint burndown chart is a 

valuable tool for our scrum team to 

help us know if we™re on track for 
meeting our sprint commitments 
5.857.972.12
Our scrum team™s daily scrum 
meeting is a valuable use of my time 
6.938.381.45
Our scrum team regularly makes 

team decisions without needing to 

escalate to management. 
7.048.411.37
Our managers trust the scrum team to 

do the right thing in the sprint 
6.998.161.17
Members of our scrum team work 

together to solve problems rather than 

trying to solve them on their own 
7.398.461.07
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20114  Statement 
Avg Top 
Q  Sprints 
6.97 8.221.25
 Our team uses sprints that are 30 
calendar days or less. 
9.07 10.000.93
 At sprint planning meetings, all of 
our team members actively 
participate in the discussion on how 
to decompose product backlog items 
into the sprint backlog 
7.49 8.601.11
 Our team never slips the date of a 
sprint review in order to finish a 
backlog item 
7.27 8.801.53
 Our team has agreed to a ﬁdefinition 
of doneﬂ for everything that is 

demonstrated at a sprint review 
6.64 8.131.49
 Items that don™t meet the definition 
of done are always put back on the 

product backlog and never 
demonstrated at the sprint review. 
6.04 7.061.02
 Our definition of done challenges us 
to improve the quality of our 
software 
6.59 8.351.76
 The primary activity of our sprint 
review meeting is the demonstration 

of working software 
6.68 7.660.98
 Sprint retrospective meetings result 
in specific changes to improve 

things in the next sprint 
6.6 7.951.35
 Recommended changes from the 
retrospective are regularly 

implemented 
6.33 7.421.09
 The Agile Best Practices sub-area attempts to 
narrow our results to three types of team: those using 

scrum alone, those using scrum with other agile 
practices, or those using agile practices but not 
scrum. The teams that scored high on the remainder 

of the section were significantly better at two areas 

than the average team: Planning Poker and Story 

Points. A very surprising result is that the best scrum 
teams scored significantly lower than the average 
scrum teams in the areas of Continuous Integration 

and automated test coverage, while still outscoring 

the average teams when rating their own product 

quality. This is the only area of the survey where we 

found negative deltas like these: 
 
 
 
 
 
  2.3. Scrum survey 
conclusions
  The scrum survey™s primary goal is to help teams 
measure their own process and effectiveness. Several 
teams take advantage of the data by comparing their 
scores to previous iterations of the survey and 
comparing their team™s score to Adobe averages and 

top teams. These teams take advantage of Adobe™s 
internal scrum coaching resources to help them 
analyze the data, provide insight into possible 

changes to their process, and track progress over 

time. 
In addition to its value to individual teams, we use 
the data to examine larger trends at the company. We 

track the Net Promoter Score from iteration to 

iteration of the survey to assess overall effectiveness 

of scrum adoption by Adobe teams. We also use the 

individual categories as an indicator of areas that are 

in need of focus. For example, the low scores in the 
product owner category led to the creation of a 
Statement 
AvgTop 
Q  Agile Best Practices 
6.086.920.85
Our product backlog is made up 
primarily of user stories 
5.677.882.21
Stories/Features that are approaching 

implementation are decomposed into 

several very small vertical slices. 
5.727.531.81
Items in our product backlog are 

estimated in relative size using a unit 
such as Story Points 
6.638.742.11
Our team conducts a short release 
planning phase at the beginning of a 
release to agree on the vision, goals, 
initial product backlog, release 

estimates, etc. 
5.76.941.24
Our team uses a wide band Delphi 
estimation technique (such as 
planning poker) for release level 
estimates 
5.677.702.03
Our team uses early defect removal 
techniques such as peer reviews, pair 
programming, or Test Driven 
Development. 
6.237.281.05
Our team has specific quality 
improvement goals with metrics that 

are reviewed regularly 
5.545.950.40
Our team runs automated tests on 

every build that validate most of the 
functionality in the product 
6.593.86-2.73
Our team uses continuous integration 
6.956.44-0.51
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20115 training course tailored for product owners, a blog 
post by our internal traine
rs on the re
sponsibilities of 
the product owner, which was followed up by a good 
discussion on Adobe™s internal agile email 
distribution list.  
Finally, we can use the data to pinpoint areas that 
good scrum teams are doing a lot better than average 
scrum teams as potential areas of focus. The 10 

statements with the highest deltas are a great list of 
items for consideration in retrospectives and 
coaching visits as practices to consider doing or 

doing better. Many are not officially part of the 

scrum framework, but are other agile techniques that 

work well within the scrum framework. This may 

indicate that the teams in question have moved 
further along in the agile adoption curve, starting 
with scrum and adding other agile practices through 

inspection and adaptation, or that they began their 

agile adoption with other agile practices in place and 

when adding scrum as a framework around these 

practices, were able to move quickly to a more 
effective overall approach.  
 Ten Survey Statements with the highest delta 
between average and high performing scrum 

teams at Adobe Systems:
 Delta Statement 
2.21 Our product backlog is made up primarily 
of user stories 
2.12 The sprint burndown chart is a valuable tool 
for our scrum team to help us know if we™re 
on track for meeting our sprint 

commitments 
2.11 Items in our product backlog are estimated 
in relative size using a unit such as Story 

Points 
2.03 Our team uses a wide band Delphi 
estimation technique (such as planning 

poker) for release level estimates 
1.81 Stories/Features that are approaching 
implementation are decomposed into 

several very small vertical slices. 
1.76 Our definition of done challenges us to 
improve the quality of our software 
1.68 We use team velocity to determine the 
probable scope or release date of our 
current release 
1.53 Our team never slips the date of a sprint 
review in order to finish a backlog item 
1.52 In general, our scrum implementation is 
improving over time 
1.49 Our team has agreed to a ﬁdefinition of 
doneﬂ for everything that is demonstrated at 
a sprint review 
 3. Defect 
data 
 
Defect data at Adobe is collected from several 
defect tracking systems. Unfortunately, 2/3 of the 

teams that responded to the survey do not have data 
in these systems for one of three reasons. First, some 
were using a defect tracking system that did not feed 

into the Adobe corporate metrics portal. Second, 

some teams never setup the release dates in the 
system that allow for cycle-to-cycle comparisons pre 
and post scrum. Finally, some teams were building 

new ﬁ1.0ﬂ products with scrum, and were newly 

formed teams with no historical data to compare 

against. In addition to these challenges in drawing 

correlation, the project timelines of the teams 
measured in the survey range in length from 2 weeks 
to 18 months, so ﬁCycleﬂ has a very different 

meaning between these teams.  
The limited data renders any conclusions drawn 
by correlating the survey data with the defect data of 
dubious value. However, there are some interesting 
results that we can observe from those teams that are 

tracking defect data in these systems. 
Of the 25 teams that took the survey, eight had 
data in the tracking system. In addition, one team that 

adopted scrum had data in the system but did not take 
the scrum survey.  
For the purposes of this paper, we will describe 
three defect metrics used by most Adobe teams.  
The first is total defects found in system test, 
which we use to measure the quality of code being 
delivered to the system test process. As early defect 
removal techniques such as Test Driven 
Development, pair programming, and peer reviews 
are adopted, we expect the overall defects found 

during system test to drop as more defects are found 

early.  
The second metric is total defects deferred, which 
we have found is highly correlated to both the 
number of defects found in system test and the 
number of defects discovered by customers in the 

field. Therefore, the number of deferred defects is a 

good indicator of the level of quality experienced by 
customers.  
The third defect metric is the number of open 
defects on any given day of the release.  This metric 
is visualized using a chart showing the open defect 

curve for the current release compared to the same 

relative date in the release cycle before implementing 
scrum. This graphic is primarily useful for teams that 
have long release cycles, and tends to demonstrate 
how close to ﬁpotentially shippable softwareﬂ the 

team actually is at any given moment. A traditional 

waterfall type project with a model where defects are 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20116 fixed as late as possible in the release will have a 
steep defect curve as the project reaches its code 

complete or beta milestone, with a steep curve down 
towards zero. Using agile methodologies such as 
scrum, which have the goal of delivering high quality 
software on a frequent heartbeat, we should see a 

much gentler curve undulating up and down due to 

the short iterations during which the team is 

attempting to reach a state of potential releasability. 
We can measure peak-to-peak total open defects on 
these charts as a way to show the amount of 

improvement from cycle-to-cycle. 
 3.1. Defect 
rate 
improvements 
 All nine teams tracking cycle-to-cycle defect 
improvements are on relatively long release cycles 

(12-18 months), and use scrum to release to 
prerelease testers under Non-Disclosure Agreements 
at the end of each sprint. Seven of the nine teams saw 

improvements in all areas of defect rates after 
implementing scrum. One team saw improvements in 
two of the three areas, with a decline in the third. The 

one team that saw declines in all three areas, ﬁTeam 

8ﬂ, also had very low scores on the scrum survey 

(second to lowest). When taking the average 

improvement across the three defect areas, and 
comparing it to the scrum survey scores, we saw a 
relatively strong correlation: 
 Correlation between Defect Rate Improvements 

and Scrum Survey Cumulative scores. 
 We also examined several statements from the 
Scrum Scorecard section of the survey that we would 
expect would correlate to improved defect rates, and 
measured the actual correlation between high scores 
in these areas and greater improvement in defect 
rates. We expected to find that specific engineering 
practices would be the strongly correlated. What we 

actually found was the following in order of highest 
correlation (using R
2) to lowest:  
R2 Value 
0.52 The primary activity of our sprint review 
meeting is the demonstration of working 
software 
0.44 Our team never slips the date of a sprint review 
in order to finish a backlog item  
0.38 Our team has specific quality improvement goals 
with metrics that are reviewed regularly 
0.24 Our team has agreed to a ﬁdefinition of doneﬂ 
for everything that is demonstrated at a sprint 
review 
0.2 Items that don™t meet the definition of done are 
always put back on the product backlog and 

never demonstrated at the sprint review.  
0.03 Our team runs automated tests on every build 
that validate most of the functionality in the 
product 
-0.08 Our team uses continuous integration  
-0.63 Our team uses early defect removal techniques 
such as peer reviews, pair programming, or Test 

Driven Development. 
 We believe that the highly correlated items on this 
list are valid findings. However, as the correlation 

drops, and with personal experience working with 

these specific teams being measured, we believe the 
small sample size does not permit us to draw strong 
conclusions about the importance of engineering 

techniques and defect improvement. We are aware of 

other teams that are not represented by this data that 

would skew the correlations in the areas of agile 
engineering techniques higher than those in this 
sample set. In our recommendations for future scrum 

adopters at Adobe, this will be an area in which we 

hope to improve so that we have better statistical 

samples sizes in the future. 
The table below lists the nine teams tracking 
defect improvements before and after scrum 

implementation, in order of largest average 

improvement to lowest. For the Defects Found in 

Test metric, we used the following equation, where 
I represents the improvement percentage, 
D1 represents 
the total number of defects found in test during the 
pre-scrum cycle, and 
D2 represents the total number 
of defects found in test during the post-scrum cycle. 
We used similar equations for calculating percentage 

improvements in total deferred defects and peak open 

defects for the cycle. 
  I=1−(D2÷1)    Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20117   Percentage improvement in defect metrics 
categories after implementing scrum: 
 
Note that these metrics will tend to favor teams 
who were not doing particularly well in any of the 

measurement categories prior to implementing 
scrum. In at least one case, Team 25, the team 
already had very low defect numbers before 

implementing scrum, and so while their average 

improvement is not as extreme as some of the other 

teams, this does not necessarily indicate an area 

needing focus.  
 3.2. Cycle-to-cycle 
comparative 
defect 
graphs 
 
Below are the cycle-to-cycle defect graphs 
showing open defects at any given point in the given 
cycle. For each graph, the X axis represents total 
number of days prior to the final release build, and 
the Y axis represents total open defects on that date. 

For the purposes of this paper, we are representing 

the Total Defect rates as a percentage of the peak 

rates from the Pre-Scrum cycle. For example, if in the 
cycle before implementing scrum, a team™s peak 
open defect count was 200, and in the cycle after 

implementing scrum, the peak open defect count was 

100, these would be normalized so that the series line 

for Pre-Scrum showed a peak of 100% and the series 

line for Post-Scrum showed a peak of 50%. 
 Notice that none of the teams are maintaining the 
strictest definition of done, where the project is 

bouncing off of zero defects at each sprint boundary. 

Also notice that in nearly all cases, while the defect 

curve is less extreme after moving to scrum, the 

curve still suggests that the teams have not fully 
moved away from a waterfall cycle mentality, where 
an entire phase of the project is devoted to removing 
defects and not adding new functionality.  
One contributing factor to this shortcoming is that 
several teams that have adopted scrum are part of 
larger suite products with their own SDLC 

requirements. Due to these requirements, scrum 

teams are often required to adhere to a ﬁFeature 

Completeﬂ milestone weeks or months before the 

final release, where new features are not permitted to 
be developed without a hefty Engineering Change 
Order approval process. The teams are aware that 

they will need to stop developing features on that 

specific date, and that they will be allowed to remove 

defects after that date, and so you can see the natural 

result Œ quality drops as they attempt to squeeze in as 
much functionality prior to the deadline as possible, 
knowing they can ﬁclean up the messﬂ after the 

milestone passes. Thus, adhering to the ﬁold rulesﬂ of 

waterfall robs scrum of its efficacy as predicted by 

Eliyahu Goldratt in Beyond the Goal [9]. This is an 

area that the company is working hard to address in 
future cycles. 
The graphs for the three teams with the most 
significant improvements are presented to illustrate 
what Adobe™s best scrum teams are accomplishing: 
  Team Defects 
Found in 
Test Defects 
Deferred 
Peak Open 

Defects 
Average 

Improvement 
Team 5 97.00% 122.00% 187.00% 135.33%
Team 17 52.00% 52.80% 51.00% 51.93%
Team 1 38.40% 36.00% 80.00% 51.47%
Team 14 25.00% 25.00% 35.00% 28.33%
Team 3 16.00% 7.00% 47.00% 23.33%
Team 26 12.00% 41.70% 14.00% 22.57%
Team 8 5.00% 37.00% -16.00% 8.67%
Team 25 -13.00% -43.00% -9.00% -21.67%
Team Improvement in Net Promoter Score 
Team 1 +8 points
Team 17 +16 points
Team 26 +14 points
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20118  3.3. Defect conclusions 
 Though there is not as large a sample set of data 
to work with as in the survey area, there is still 

compelling evidence that a move to scrum has had a 
net positive impact on the total number of defects 
found in system test, the total number of defects 

deferred, and the peak defects per cycle, and that 

there is a rough correlation between defect 
improvements and high scores on the subjective 
scrum survey. Additionally, the specific scrum 

constraints of delivering working software at the end 

of each sprint, and working within strict time boxes, 

along with the management best practice of setting 

high level quality goals for a team, tend to be 
positively correlated to improved defect rates. 
 4. Customer satisfaction 
 While we had only eight teams with both Scrum 
Survey data and Defect Improvement data, we have 
even fewer with good Customer Satisfaction data, 
with three teams that have adopted scrum measuring 
Net Promoter Scores from customers for both the 
current cycle and the cycle before adopting scrum. 

Two of these three have data in all three areas, 

including scrum survey data and defect data, and one 

has NPS scores and defect data but not scrum survey 
data. With such a limited data set, we can draw few 
conclusions from the data. Inclusion in this paper is 

to serve as a snapshot of the current state of progress 

towards our goal of being able to measure and 

correlate all three areas.  
 Improvements in Net Promoter Score   after 
adopting scrum: 
  5. Conclusions and future use of this data  
 Through the measurement of subjective data from 
teams adopting scrum, the measurement of 
comparative defect data rates between pre-scrum 

adoption and post-scrum adoption product cycles, 

and the measurement of customer satisfaction 

through Net Promoter Scores, we have been able to 
draw a few key conclusions about the efficacy of 
scrum as a framework at Adobe Systems. 
There is a large spectrum of how effectively 
scrum has been adopted by teams across Adobe, from 
teams that are rating close to an average score of 
eight out of possible 10 on survey questions, all the 

way down to teams rating below five. By their own 

admission, some Adobe teams have adopted scrum in 

name only, not actually changing their processes and 
environments to support the key practices, artifacts, 
roles, and environment described by scrum™s original 
inventors and current thought leaders. On the other 

side of the spectrum, there are teams that are making 

great progress by applying the key tenets of scrum on 

their projects. We plan to use these successful scrum 
implementers as examples to other teams looking to 
adopt scrum, asking key leaders from these teams to 
help mentor leaders whose teams are just adopting 

the process. At the same time, we are working with 

teams that have lower scores to identify if these lower 

scores are preventing them or slowing them from 
delivering better products to their customers, and 
providing input and coaching to improve on key 

areas. 
In general, Adobe employees using scrum like the 
process, with 80% of all adopters saying that they 
would continue using scrum if the decision was 
solely up to them. For teams that are using it 

effectively, the individuals like the process even 

more, with100% of those that are on the Top Quartile 

saying they would continue to use it if the decision 

were up to them. 
Survey data is a useful tool for teams to use in 
retrospection activities. It also provides data on 

overall adoption trends at the company and areas in 

need of general improvement and focus for the scrum 

adoption community at Adobe. The semi-annual 

delivery of the survey allows teams to measure trends 
in areas of focus to ensure they are making progress. 
Data indicates that teams that do well at adopting 
scrum generally experience an improvement in three 
key areas of defect measurement. First, the total 

number of defects found in system test tends to go 
down for teams successfully adopting the process. A 
drop in defects found in system test, with other 

factors such as team size and cycle length remaining 

constant, indicates that quality processes have moved 

up stream from the quality assurance team to the 

software engineering team, where it is more efficient 
[10].  Next, the total defects deferred from a release 
had a strong correlation with both the total number of 

defects found in system test, and with how 
successfully the team had implemented scrum. We 
have found that deferred defects tend to be very 

strongly correlated to defects found by customers in 
Team Improvement in Net Promoter Score 
Team 1 +8 points
Team 17 +16 points
Team 26 +14 points
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20119 the field, so this particular metric is a good predictor 
of the perceived quality of the software we release. 

Finally, teams successfully implementing scrum tend 
to see a significant reduction in the peak number of 
open defects at any given point in the cycle. This has 
a few key advantages. First, it tends to mean 

decreased risk, as defect removal is one of the riskiest 

areas of software development, and the large 

mountain of defects faced by traditional software 
teams represents a mountain of unknowns. . Next, 
finding and removing defects earlier and more cost 

effectively leads to more productive teams as team 

members are free to develop new functionality 

without the added delays of having to work around 

broken areas of the code base. Finally, the much 
gentler slope of the defect curve tends to mean fewer 
deferrals will need to be made in order to ship the 

software, as one common way to reduce the large 

queue of defects is to defer defects that we would not 

normally be comfortable deferring just to make the 

date. 
Finally, a few teams have started measuring 
cycle-to-cycle Net Promoter Scores. We think that 

this is one of the purest measures of success as it is 

right at the source of our revenue. While there is very 

limited data in this area, all three teams measuring 
NPS saw a significant increase in their scores after 
adopting scrum.  
Adobe™s adoption of scrum has been a largely 
grass roots effort. There have been no executive level 
mandates to use the framework. Adobe has funded 

one full time trainer/coach, supporting the spreading 
of the scrum framework for teams that are interested 
in taking advantage of it. 
Adobe has grown rapidly through several 
acquisitions throughout its history. In the experience 
of the author, Adobe tends to take a hands-off 

approach when acquiring these companies, believing 
that imposing a single process or culture will 
decrease the newly acquired teams™ ability to deliver 
the solutions that made them valuable targets in the 

first place. This approach has many benefits that the 

company believes outweigh the drawbacks, but there 
are drawbacks. One such drawback is that different 
groups use vastly different development approaches 
with different measurements, making it difficult to 

draw conclusions across teams.  
As scrum adoption continues to grow from its 
current early adopter stage to the early majority stage, 
we will need to have more data to describe and 
indicate what is most important in implementing the 
framework as we move from influencing visionaries 

to pragmatists [11]. Our initial efforts in this area 

have yielded some promising indicators, but with 

limited statistic relevance due to lack of more data. In 
the future, we plan to apply the approach of 
measuring subjective impressions of the process, 

defect rate improvements, and customer satisfaction 
data as a standard practice for new adopters. As our 
training and coaching of new scrum team matures, 
we are seeing the need of spending more time with 

teams to get them successfully launched. Part of this 

increased involvement with new teams will include 

strong recommendations that they measure these 
three areas in order to determine the efficacy of their 
adoption. 
  [1] Reichheld, Frederick F.
, ﬁThe One Number You Need 
to Growﬂ,
 Harvard Business Review, Dec2003, Vol. 81 
Issue 12, p46-54. 
 
[2] Larman, Craig, Agile and Iterative Management: A 

Manager™s Guide, Addison-Wesley Professional, p63-100, 
August 21, 2003. 
 
[3] Beck, Kent, Beedle, Mike, van Bennekum, Arie, 

Cockburn, Alistair, Cunningh
am, Ward, Fowler, Martin, 
Grenning, James, Highsmith, Jim, Hunt, Andrew, Jeffries, 
Ron, Kern, Jon, Marick, Brian, Martin, Robert C., Mellor, 
Steve, Schwaber, Ken, Sutherland, Jeff, and Thomas, Dave, 

ﬁManifesto for Agile Software Developmentﬂ, February 13, 
2001, web, <http://www.agilemanifest.org>, August 1, 
2010.  
 
[4] Green, Peter, and Smith, Peter, ﬁScrum @ Adobeﬂ, 

Scrum Alliance, March 17, 2009, web, 
<http://www.scrumalliance.org/resources/612>. 
 
[5] Vode, Bas, and Sutherland, Jeff, ﬁScrum But– Testﬂ, 

June 28, 2009, web, <http://antoine.vernois.net/scrumbut/>. 
 [6] Cohn, Mike, and Ruben, Kenny, Comparative Agility, 

June 2007, web, <http://comparativeagility.com/>. 

 [7] Brooks, Fredrick P., ﬁThe Mythical Man Month: Essays 
on Software Engineering, 2
nd Editionﬂ, Addison Welsley, 
August 12, 1995, p16-21 
 [8] Scwhaber, Ken, and Sutherland, Jeff, ﬁThe Scrum 
Guideﬂ, February 2010, web, <http://www.Scrum.org>, 
p10. 

 [9] Goldratt, Eliyahu M., Beyond the Goal, Your Coach in 
a Box, September 1, 2005, audio. 

 
[10] Kaner, Cem, James Bach, and Bret Pettichord, 
ﬁLessons Learned in Software Testing: A Context-Driven 
Approachﬂ, Wiley. 2001 p4 

 
[11] Moore, Geoffrey A., Crossing the Chasm, Harper 
Business Essentials, 1991, p42-46.
 Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201110