  
 
Agile and Lean: Organizations, Products and Development 
 
Daniel R Greening, PhD 
Senex Rex 
dan@senexrex.com 
 
John Tripp, PhD 
Baylor University 
john_tripp@baylor.edu
 
 
Jeff Sutherland, PhD 
Scrum, Inc. 
jeff@scruminc.com 
 
Abstract
 
Agile and lean management
 practices (which we 
define broadly to include Sc
rum, XP, Lean Startup and 
other related approaches) roughly triple the success 
rate of software projects over traditional management 
approaches [1]. Despite these results, the software 
industry continues to st
art new projects using 
traditional approaches. Because software projects 
contribute so broadly to th
e human condition, research 
on agile methods may produce significant productivity 
gains. The impact extends beyond software; agile 
manufacturing [2] and agile organizational strategy [3] 
share many fundamentals with agile software. 
1.
 
Introduction 
The Agile/Lean mini-track explores agile methods 
and their effects on quality, speed and communication. 
We solicited research papers and experience reports 
that explored agile development, lean product 
management and agile/lean organizations.  
2.
 
Sessions 
At the HICSS conference, 
we divided the papers 
into themes. 
Agile transformation case studies
 appear in the 
first session. In “Transition of Software Maintenance 
Teams from Scrum to Kanban,” Ahmad et al. describe 
the motivation and outcome from teams adopting 
Kanban. In “Using Scrum in Outsourced Government 
Projects: An Action Research
,” Lima de Sousa et al. 
describe the use of pilot projects to introduce agility to 
a waterfall government organization. In “Adapting 
Agile in a Globally Distributed Software 
Development,”  Gupta and 
ManikReddy describe how 
they addressed the problems 
of distributed teams, and 
show agility measures changed over time. 
General agile frameworks and explorations
 
appear in the second session. In “Agile Base Patterns 
in the Agile Canon,” Greening offers a general 
framework for understanding agility and diagnosing 
problems. In “Kaizen C
ookbook: The Success Recipe 
for Continuous Learning a
nd Improvements,” Al-Baik 
and Miller define Kaizen and show how agility 
measures changed after teams adopted Kaizen 
practices. In “Towards DevOps in the Embedded 
Systems Domain: Why is It so Hard?” Lwakatare et al. 
describe the challenges that embedded systems 
designers face when adopting DevOps practices. 
Specific agile activities
 are studied in the third 
session. In “Pair Programmi
ng vs. Solo Programming: 
What Do We Know After 15 Years of Research,” 
Alves de Lima Salge et al
 provide a meta-statistical 
study of research papers, concluding that pair 
programming significantly improves product quality 
and slightly increases deve
lopment speed. In “Agile 
Big Data Analytics Development: An Architecture-
Centric Approach,” Chen et al. describe how agile can 
help design and develop big data analytics projects and 
departments. In “Seeking T
echnical Debt in Critical 
Software Development Project
s: An Exploratory Field 
Study,” Ghanbari uses grounded theory to understand 
the forces that lead to technical debt in software 
projects. 
The mini-track 
nominee for best paper and an 
open forum
 for discussing agile research challenges 
occupy the fourth session. In “Sensemaking and 
Complexity in Large-Scale Lean-Agile 
Transformation: A Case Study from Cisco,” Ken 
Powers describes how 200 employees perceive the 
impact of different impediments on agility, the 
progress of strategic initiatives and their organizational 
culture. In “Open Forum: Agile/Lean Research 
Challenges and Opportunities,” we discuss research 
opportunities and challenges. 
3.
 
References 
[1]
 
J. Johnson, 
CHAOS Report,
” Standish Group, 2011. 
[2]
 
R. Dubey, and A. Gunasekar
an. "Agile manufacturing: 
framework and its empirical validation." 
The 
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing 
Technology
 76.9-12 (2015): 2147-2157. 
[3]
 
C.A. Lengnick-Hall, and T.E. Beck. 
Resilience capacity 
and strategic agility: prerequisites for thriving in a 
dynamic environment
. UTSA, College of Business, 
2009. 
 
2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.66253582016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.6625359