 Adapting Agile in a Globally Distributed Software
Development
Rajeev Kumar Gupta, Prabhulinga Manikreddy
Siemens Technology and Services Private Limited
Bangalore, India
rajeevkumar.gupta@siemens.com
,
Prabhulinga@siemens.com
Abstract
.
This paper describes the journey of adapting Agile-Scrum in a
project, referred here as Global Configurator Project (GCP), where
the project members are distributed across locations in Germany,
India, and U.S.  Here, we will be discussing about the practices like
new taxonomy on scrum roles, scaling scrum with actually using
Scrum of scrums and evolving cross-functional multi-skilled and self-
managed feature team from silos components teams. This paper also
measures the impact of our practices on communication and
collaboration at the project level.
This paper will be useful for scrum masters, product owners, and
project managers while adapting Scrum.
I.I
NTRODUCTION
The GCP project started with the traditional Waterfall
approach.  The product™s first version was officially released
in 2008. In 2008, the product had only 10  end  users  and
currently  has  almost  4,000  end  users  in  U.S. In 2012, the
GCP project team adapted the Agile-Scrum approach with an
objective to have on time and stable delivery to the end users.
Background of GCP:
Project Organization:
Development happens majorly in India and some part of it in
Germany.  The development teams consist of seven to eight
members that include architects and developers. The U.S.
team consists of the product manager and the domain experts
and they are the interface between the development team and
end users.
Project    Roles:
GCP    had traditional software project development roles like
Project Manager (PM), Development Lead, Developers,
Architects, and Testers.
Technologies:
Initially, GCP was developed with client and server based
technologies. However, since the last couple of years, GCP is
targeting mobile platform with new technologies. GCP is a
complex project where few 
million lines of code have been
added in different techniques and languages since the last four
years.
Development Model:
GCP had an incremental build model in which the releases are
made over a period of one to three months. Teams follow all
the required quality processes and release the product to the
end users.  In case of any new defect identified in any of the
development or staging environments, patches are issued with
the defect fixes.
I.S
TRUCTURE OF THE
P
APER
One of the authors of this document has been a part of GCP
since 2005 and is presently working as a Project Manager. The
second author is working on GCP since 2010 and is currently
working as a Scrum Master. Both the authors have been an
integral part of the agile-scrum adaption journey and are
actively involved in evolving solutions to overcome the
challenges. Thus, this case study is based on the day-to-day
experiences of the GCP team members.
To assess the effectiveness of the solutions, the team members
of all the scrum teams including the product manager and the
domain experts were requested to determine the project status
using a questionnaire. These individual assessments enabled
the comparing of the situation in 2015 with 2012.
II.GCPA
GILE
P
RACTICES
1.Shared Agile Roles
Before Agile:
The teams were divided based on Modules and functional
flows. The teams did not have a big picture and used to defend
their functional flows and modules. The Development lead
was an expert in that respective area and used to lead the team,
give quantitative data about the team™s productivity to the
management and the Product Manager. The Development lead
used to get all the required requirement clarifications from
DESE™s (Domain Expert Support Engineer).
We had the Traditional waterfall roles that is, Project
Manager, Development leads, architects, developers, testers,
Product Manager, etc. Also, the Product Manager has
developed his team of domain experts. While adapting agile,
2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.66353592016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.6635360 the first challenge was to establish scrum roles as defined in
the Scrum Guide [9]. Existing roles and their responsibilities
are mentioned below.
Product Manager
:
 Product Manager was the final authority
for most of the actions/practices or requirements changes.
Product Manager was also interfacing with various
departments of his/her organization like Sales, Finance, etc. as
well as approving the budget for the offshore team. Product
Manager is also the reporting manager for domain experts and
used to delegate his responsibilities of driving development to
domain experts. Product Manager used to collaborate with
domain experts and users for the overall status update and
deciding the road map for GCP. Product managers had to
micro manage offshore development team for improving team
efficiency.
Project Manager
: The Project Manager was a spokesperson
for GCP and was the point of contact inside the organization
for GCP. The Project Manager also owned release deliverable,
updated project plan, monitored and controlled 
overall project
progress, and acted as an interface for communicating release
contents and discussing escalations with the product manager.
Project Manager was also reporting manager for Development
leads and architects. Project Manager used to guide the
Development leads for implementing best engineering
practices and ensured that they meet the entire milestone
defined in GCP.
Development lead
: The Development lead was leading one of
the offshore development team and was usually co-located
with the developers. As an exception, one of the Development
lead was not co-located with his development team and was
working remotely. His team was however very effectively
delivering the assigned tasks.
Development leads were technically very sound and were
usually experts of various components or workflows or
features. Development leads in GCP had the following
assignments:
i.Direct interface to Domain experts for the status
update, requirement engineering and discussing tasks
for his team.
ii.First point of contact to developers for any
clarification on technical topics, requirements, demos
or prioritization of tasks.
iii.
People management for developers like skill and
training planning and assigning tasks to individuals
.
Domain Experts
: The Domain experts were part of the
product manager™s team. As a Product Manager, domain
experts work from U.S and shared their complete time
mapping with users. They had three primary responsibilities:
i.Interface to users for any new requirements, any
technical support or training on new features.
ii.Interface to the development team at offshore
location for any new requirements, clarification,
reviewing and status update.
iii.Assigning tasks to the offshore team
Domain experts reported to the Product Manager and was
empowered to work with any one or more offshore
development teams.
Testers
: We had a separate testing team, and testers were part
of the testing team. Testers were managed by the Test lead and
the Test Manager.  Test Manager used to develop the testing
strategy and collaborated with the project manager for creating
the Test plan. The Test Lead used to assign testing tasks to
testers, monitor activities and update the testing status to
stakeholders. Testers used to execute the test cases manually,
though execution used to happen through test automation for
the new feature and defect verification & validation. Testers
used to wait until the software binaries and the list of changes
were made available to them. Till then, the testers were mostly
engaged in the verification and validation of previous software
package. The testing team used to interact only when
developers need steps to reproduce defects or when developers
give demo to testes or before tester starts verification and
validation.
Ref [9] defines three roles in any scrum team that is, dedicated
and full-time Scrum Master and Product Owner, cross-
functional and self-managed Development Team. These roles
were not mapped one-to-one with the traditional project roles
in GCP.
Due to this mismatch, the scrum team was facing difficulties
in the areas of prioritization, planning, requirements, and
coordination. This troubled responsibility distributions in the
scrum team resulted in poor impression in the minds of the
project team members.
After Agile
Shared OwnerShip: New Scrum Taxonomy
1)Shared Product Owner
:
From the traditional role
described above, we found that the three roles who were
sharing the responsibilities of a product owner were Product
Manager, Domain Experts and Development lead. Also, due to
the different time zones and non-availability, we shared
product owner with new roles like Part Product Owner and
Chief Product Owner. Refer Table 1 for Domain Experts and
Product Manager Role
.
Unlike a single product owner role suggested in Large-Scale
Scrum[LeSS], every scrum teams has a dedicated and full-
time available part product owner.
As time passed, it worked extremely well for us.
53605361 These roles are described below.
a)Part Product Owner (PPO):
Due to their domain expertise and knowledge about the
complete product and its architecture, Domain Experts were
the best to be the Part Product Owners. Due to different time
zones, domain experts were not coexisting with the developers
and were not available for team all the time, and hence we got
buy-in from Chief Product owner for sharing product
ownership between the Development leads and the Domain
experts. However final responsibilities of Return on
Investment (ROI) remains with the Domain Experts turned
Part Product Owner and Chief Product Owner. And hence
they played a partial role of product owners. Due to the
different time zones, the Part Product Owners could dedicate
only 20-25 percent of their time to the development teams.
The Scrum Team used this duration very effectively in
collaborating with the Part Product Owner.
b)Chief Product Owner (CPO):
The Product Manager has final authority for all product related
decisions.  All the essential features were discussed and
prioritized by the Product Manager. The Product Manager is
the person who sets goals for the team and coordinates the
team of Part Product Owners. Thus, Product Manager is the
Chief Product Owner. The Chief Product Owner is responsible
for ensuring that the Part Product Owners are responding to
the clarifications required for the requirement and
communicating the same timely to the development team.
This would avoid any unn
ecessary 
assumptions by the
development team.
2)Shared Scrum Master:
As described above, in waterfall model, we had two roles that
were sharing responsibilities similar to a scrum master, that is,
Project Manager and Development lead. Refer Table1 for Role
Mapping. Development leads are groomed as a Scrum Master,
one for each team. However, we had three challenges with the
role of a scrum master:
i.Development leads were also contributing towards
product ownership
ii.One of the Development lead was working remotely
with the development team. It leads to another
challenge of communication and collaboration.
iii.We required coordinator among scrum teams.
These challenges lead to develop a different taxonomy for
scrum master, i.e. Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner, Bi-
Scrum Master and Chief Scrum Master.
Table 1: Traditional Role Mapping with Scrum
Before Agile
After Agile
Domain Expert Support
Engineer (DESE)
Part Product Owner (PPO)
Development LeadScrum Master-cum- Part
Product Owner (SMPO)
Project 
Manager (PM)Chief Scrum Master (CSM)
Product ManagerChief Product Owner (CPO)
Developers, Architects
and Testers
Development Team
These roles are described below.
a)Scrum Master-cum-Part Product Owner (SMPO):
Scrum master cum part product owner has responsibilities like
guiding and coaching Scrum teams, resolving collaboration
and coordination issues and clarifying requirements but not for
prioritization or ranking issues. The responsibilities that
include prioritization, ranking and backlog grooming remained
with the Domain Experts turned Part Product Owner and Chief
Product Owner.
At any given day, both the part product owners for all the
scrum teams were required to be in agreement and get consent
from the either side.
 Scrum master cum Part Product Owner ensured that the teams
were aligned on prioritization and acceptance criteria.
b)Bi-Scrum Master(BSM):
Bi-Scrum Maser is co-located with the scrum team and mostly
responsible for facilitating Scrum ceremonies. Bi-Scrum
Master collaborates with the Scrum Master cum Part Product
Owner for addressing the impediments. Bi-Scrum Master also
shares the dashboard update with the Scrum Master cum Part
Product Owner.
c)Chief Scrum Master (CSM):
The Chief Scrum Master ensures that the project vision and
the ‚Big Picture™ are communicated to the scrum teams. The
Chief scrum master usually coordinates with the Scrum team
through the scrum of scrums and is responsible for
impediments in the project. The Chief Scrum Master also
represents the project in the organization.
Figure 1: Two types of new scrum teams in GCP
53615362 2.Developing Features Team
Before Agile
:
GCP had traditional team structure. Team members have been
practicing silos style of working for years. This is the reason
why we had many experts in the project. Team members were
experts in workflows and components and had a very long
experience of working in their workflows or components. This
situation advocated forming teams in silos. For example, all
the developers and architects working on client component
were grouped into two teams all the developers and architects
working on server component were grouped together to form
another team, and all the testers were grouped together as a
separate team. Name of these teams also had a similar
influence like client team, server team, and testing team.
Again, every team had several component experts. Component
experts were distributed in different countries.
GCP had several issues due to the components experts. Few of
these issues are mentioned below:
i.Team members are not available for development
even though all the team members have priority
assignment.
ii.Development team works on multiple less priority
tasks to get engaged with work.
iii.Delay in developing high priority requirements
together.
iv.Loss of knowledge and expertise in case of attrition.
GCP has a similar situation for the testing team. The testing
team gets development binaries for testing in bulk. They have
to complete testing in less duration than the estimated time
because the development phase has exceeded the estimated
development time. Testers were not much involved in all the
phases of the product development cycle starting from the
requirement analysis phase till the code development phase.
Testers were mostly busy in verifying and validating the
binaries from the previous release. The testing team hence had
to confirm the changes in hurry and multiple defects escaped
unidentified to the production.
Dependent Team
The Development lead used to support the team members in
taking a decision on their day to day activities. The team
members thus developed a dependency on the Development
lead. The team members were not able to make their day to
day decision on their own.
After Agile:
As advised in LeSS framework, we targeted to create a feature
team that is cross-functional, multi-skilled and self-managed..
1)Cross Functional Team:
As the first action, we restructured all the teams. New teams
had combination component experts from client and server
team. Each team has at least one expert tester. We renamed
teams like Team 1, Team 2, and Team 3, etc.
This was the first baby step towards developing a cross-
functional and multi-skilled team. We practiced this approach
for several sprints along with some best practices from other
agile methodologies. These are explained below:
a)Rewards and Recognition
At a project level, we awarded the teams who worked on
maximum number of new components and workflows, created
secondary or backup resources and actually used their slack
time by indulging in activities like increasing the percentage
of test cases automated, conducting knowledge sharing
sessions, etc.
b)Knowledge Sharing
Every sprint, every team was given a target to share at least
one of their team expertise with other team members. This
practice makes a huge impact on distributing knowledge and
breaking silos.
c)Pair Programming
It was not easy to get buy-in from every team member for pair
programming. However, we started with few developers for
pair programming and shown improvement in product quality
knowledge shared.
d)Test Automation
The Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner involved testing
team members in all the phases of development right from the
requirement analysis phase till the product development phase.
The testing team collaborates with the Part Product Owner and
the Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner to develop
acceptance case and automate them.
e)Slack Time
The Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner advised the team
to keep some time for every sprint as the slack time and use
this time in knowledge sharing, learning new components,
workflows, supporting tester for automation etc. We also used
the slack time for continuous improvement on domain
knowledge, learning new skills, automating legacy test cases,
improving code quality, addressing technical debts, etc.
It was difficult to get buy-in from the Chief Product Owner for
few of these practices like pair programming, slack time and
involving developer in developing test automation. We started
with a very small volume, shown improvement to the Chief
Product Owner, shared the best practices from the other agile
projects and eventually with an improvement in product
quality and faster delivery to the production, we got the
consent from the Chief Product Owner.
2)Self-Managed Team:
The Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner sets the
expectation to the team members for taking their decision with
available for support whenever required. She/he also
53625363 encouraged the team to support each other. Few practices that
helped in developing a self-managed team:
i.The Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner
encourages brainstorming and involved the team
members for decision-making.
ii.Respected advice and ideas from the team members
and get buy-in from team
iii.Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner ensured that
the team is not punished for any incorrect decision
and trained the team for taking a better decision in
the specific situations.
These practices helped to develop cross-functional and self-
managed feature team who was capable of developing any
requirement and take decision for their day to day activities by
themselves.
Figure 2: Team Formation in GCP Before and After Agile
3.Status Meetings to Ceremonies
Redefining roles, responsibilities, and team structure were not
enough to address issues hindering the product quality and
delivery schedule. We had to address collaboration and
communication issues that were also due to globally
distributed environment of the project.
Before Agile:
Meetings were scheduled only when there was a necessity
other than the timely status meetings set by the product owner.
Developers and testers were invited to very limited
discussions only when their need was felt.  Development lead
used to convey the developers about what needs to be done.
Since there was no direct access to the requirement source,
there was always miscommunication and delay in the
development.
Due to different time zones, decision making was delayed
causing various issues and concerns related to delivery and
customer satisfaction. The product manager raised concerns
about the lack of transparency in planning and workload
distribution in the development team. Eventually, the product
manager ended up micro-managing the development activities.
This lead to reduced team morale, increased communication
gaps, reduced trust, and less collaboration.
Weekly s
tatus meeting was a collaborative event among the
development leads, Product Manager, and DESEs but did not
involve the development team. This lead to communication
gaps between the development team and DESE, which
resulted in rework, schedule slippage, poor code quality due to
last minute changes. It also led to an increase in customer
complaints.
Refer [9] says that the daily stand up must be held with the
development team. But the project needed transparency at a
higher level too. Though distributed nature of the project was
a hurdle, we came up with new events so that we could have
everyone on the same page.
Defining new roles and responsibilities was not sufficient to
improve team collaboration. We required better collaboration
strategy like along with daily standup, we needed to improve
collaboration among stakeholders.
The defects and new development features used to assign to
development team by DESEs and Development lead, mostly
based on team and lead expertise.
We did not have any process defined for demo and getting
customer feedback. Also, the team was not sure on the point of
contact for requirement clarification, though development
leads used to clarify with their area of expertise.
 After Agile:
a)Daily Stand-up meeting:
The Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner schedules a daily
standup meeting. The Development team participates in this
meeting in the presence of the Scrum Master cum Part Product
Owner.
Since the Part Product Owner is not co-located with the
development team, a twenty minutes meeting is scheduled
between the Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner and the
Part Product Owner. The Scrum Master cum Part Product
Owner   uses a digital image of the scrum team dashboard to
demonstrate the progress. The Scrum Master cum Part Product
Owner shares all the status received from the team, which
answers the three questions mentioned in scrum guide [9], for
each of the task.  The Part Product Owner shares additional
information with Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner, for
example, if there is any critical topic/defect from end users or
change in priority.
This extension to daily Scrum ensures that the team is in the
right direction as per the customer‚s expectation. It also builds
collaboration between the Part Product Owner and Scrum
Master cum Part Product Owner to bring completeness to the
Product Owners role. Any concern from the team is
communicated to the Part Product Owner and is checked on a
daily basis.  The Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner
updates the critical topics that arise from the end user to the
team in the next day™s daily stand up.
53635364 b)Weekly Scrum of Scrums:
A thirty-minute weekly Scrum of Scrums is scheduled by the
Chief Scrum Master. The Chief Scrum Master and the Scrum
Master cum Part Product Owners are the participants. The
Scrum Master cum Part Product Owners answers the
following three questions:
1.Which are the sprint backlog tasks that the scrum
team completed since the last Scrum of Scrums?
2.Which are the sprint backlog tasks that the scrum
team is currently working on?
3.Are there any impediments that need support from
other Scrum teams?
This meeting not only brings transparency to the Chief Scrum
Master and the management, but it also allows the Chief
Scrum Master to address the communication and collaboration
issues among the teams.
c)Bi-Weekly Scrum of Scrums:
The Chief Product Owner schedules a sixty-minute bi-weekly
Scrum of Scrums. All the key stakeholders including all
Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner, Part Product Owner
and Chief Scrum Master, Release manager, etc are the
participants.  Scrum Master cum Part Product Owners and Part
Product Owners share the progress in development and
discuss product risk,   new changes requests from the
customer, etc.
This extension to the prescribed ceremonies helped in
ensuring quick decisions on critical new topics. This improved
confidence in the scrum teams that eventually contributed in
empowering the scrum team and thus build a high
performance team.
d)Backlog Grooming and Demos:
Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner sets up live meeting
for duration of 45 minutes every day. Part Product Owners,
Scrum Master cum Part Product Owners and the development
team were the participants. The Scrum team used this time for
demonstrating working software, requirements clarification,
and discussion. The Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner
used it effectively for backlog grooming.   Only the required
team members join this meeting.  The Part Product Owner
invites other participants like Chief Product Owner or key
stakeholders based on the need. This is a dedicated window
with overlapping time for both developers from India and
other parts of the world.
This collaborated event between the Scrum Team and the Part
Product Owner helped in addressing only the core issues
related to the features that the user is looking for. This also
increased the accuracy in converting the user requirements
into features. This time-boxed discussion elevated
communication and collaboration between the Part Product
Owner and the development team, which in turn built trust,
reduces guesswork, etc.
Figure 3: Scrum of Scrums in GCP
iv.MEASURINGIMPROVEMENTS
Survey on Communication and collaboration:
We are measuring the improvements in communication,
collaboration and building a high performance team based on
the response of the scrum team on a survey, which comprised
of two questionnaires. We asked a set of questions to the team
members and asked them to score on a scale of 1-5. 1 stands
for ﬁStrongly disagreeﬂ and 5 stands for ﬁStrongly agreeﬂ.
Each team member scored twice for each question, one for the
situation in 2012  when the transition happened to an agile
process and the other for the current situation (2
015).
Around 75% of the all the scrum teams participated in the
survey. We selected only those participants who have been in
GCP on or before 2012. Participants are among the
development team, all Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner,
Part Product Owner, Bi-Scrum Master, and Chief Scrum
Master. The average experience of the participants (in GCP) is
almost five years, and the total average working experience is
almost nine years. We shared questionnaire and collected
response to both the questionnaires anonymously.
Questionnaire 1:
Eight questions from Jean Tabaka [2]
1.
Self Organization
: Is your team self organizing, rather
than functioning in command and control (top-down
organization)?
2.
Empowered to make decision
: Is the team empowered to
discuss, evaluate and make decisions, rather than being
dictated to by Scrum Master cum Part Product Owner,
Chief Product Owner or anyone else?
3.
Belief in Vision and Success
: Do the team member
understand the pro
ject vision and goals and do they truly
believe that they can solve any problem to achieve any
goals as a team?
4.
Committed Team
: Are team members committed to
succeed as a team, rather than being committed to
individual success at any cost?
53645365 5.
Trust 
each other
: Does the team have the confidence to
continually work on improving their ability to act without
fear, anger or bullying?
6.
Participatory decision making
: Is the team engaged in
participatory decision making, rather than bending to
authoritarian decision, making or succumbing to decision
from others?
7.
Consensus Driven
: Are team decisions consensus driven,
rather than leader driven? Do team members share their
opinions freely and participate in the final decision?
8.
Constructive Disagreement
: Is the team able to negotiate
through a variety of alternatives and impacts surrounding
a decision, and craft the one that provides the best
outcomes?
Questionnaire 2:
 Nine questions from James Shore [1]
1.
Working with Guess
: Do programmers ever make
guesses rather than getting answers to questions?
2.
Information on Time
: Are programmers usually able to
start getting information (as opposed to sending a request
and waiting for a response) as soon as they discover their
need for it?
3.
Clear Communication
: Do team members generally
communicate without confusion?
4.
Trust Each Other
: Do nearly all team members trust each
other?
5.
I-Know-All-Peer
: Do team members generally know what
other team members are working on?
6.
Frequent Demo
: Does the team demonstrate its progress
to stakeholders at least once per month?
7.
Customer Satisfaction
: Are all important stakeholders
currently happy with the team's progress?
8.
Frequent Release
: Does the team provide a working
installation of its software to the stakeholders to try at
least once per month?
9.
Technical Ability
: Do all important stakeholders currently
trust the team's ability to deliver?
Team Response:
The average team score for each of the question is added in
Table 2 & 3 and plotted in the bar chart in Figure 4 & 5.
Table 2: Team Response on Questionnaire 1
QuestionnaireFY™12FY™15
ScoreScore
Self Organization
2.83.4
Empowered to make decision 2.63.6
Belief in Vision and Success3.23.9
Committed Team
3.63.9
Trust each other
3.14.1
Participatory decision making2.
4
4.0
Consensus Driven
2.83.
4
Constructive Disagreement2.83.2
Figure 4: Team Response Questionnaire 1
Table 3: Team Response on Questionnaire 2
Q. NoYR™12YR™15
ScoreScore
Working with Guess4.13.8
Information on Tim
e
3.13.
4
Clear Communication3.03.9
Trust Each Other
4.14.
4
I-Kno
w
-All Peer
1.74.1
Frequent Demo
1.94.7
Customer Satisfaction3.73.8
FrequentRelease
1.63.9
Technical Abilit
y
2.63.7
Figure 5: Team response on Questionnaire 2
Analysis of Team Responses from Questionnaire 1:
Better score on questions like ‚Self-Organization™,
‚Empowered to make decision™, ‚Participatory decision
making™, ‚Consensus Driven™ and ‚Constructive
Disagreement™ shows that the teams are motivated, self-
organized and independent in taking decisions. Overall, these
scores also shows that we improved in building a high
performance team.
53655366 Better score on ‚Belief in Vision and Success™, ‚Committed
Team™ and ‚Trust each other™ shows that we have improved in
collaboration and communication.
Analysis of Team Responses from Questionnaire 2:
Better score on ‚Working with Guess™, ‚Frequent Demo™,
‚Clear Communication™ and ‚Frequent release™ shows that we
have improved in collaboration and communication.  It also
displays our confidence during releases. It also highlights the
effective rapport that has been built with the Chief Product
Owner team who are an interface between the team and the
customer.
Better Score on ‚I-know-All-Peer™ and ‚Trust Each Other™
shows that we have improved in building a high performance
team. Scores on ﬁTechnical Abi
lityﬂ show that en
couragement
in Peer Programming, knowledge sharing sessions and
formation of feature teams has improved the technical ability
and confidence of the members.
v.SUMMARY
In this paper, we presented our key adaptions that has been
done while embracing Agile Scrum in legacy GCP. We
observed that these challenges were prominent in achieving
project success.
We demonstrated via this paper that adapting Scrum roles and
responsibilities worked for us. The role of a scrum master and
a product owner was shared among more than one person.
We used scrum of scrums and daily collaboration meetings
very effectively. This developed an excellent collaborative
atmosphere for communication. Sharing a daily digital image
of scrum board improved building trust and transparency and
helped to empower the scrum and team.
These practices helped us in collaboration, communication
and in building a high performance team, which is quite
visible fromself-assessment and the issue metrics.
Questionnaire from Jean Tabaka and James Shores is very
explanatory and we used them without any modification. The
issue metrics also shows how it has transformed on its own
and enhanced the user experience. It is also a privilege to
share that there has been considerable appreciation in
customer rating.
Finally, Scrum adaption and agility is a journey. We are
exploring on adapting new tools, different representation of
information radiators, electronics dashboard, etc. These tools
will help us further improve collaboration and communication.
References:
[1] http://www.jamesshore.com/Agile-Book/assess_your_agility.html
[2] Collaboration Explained: Facilitation S
kills for Software Project
Leaders (Agile Software Development Series) by Jean Tabaka
[3] PMI-ACP Exam Prep, Premier Edition: A Course in a Book for
Passing the PMI Agile Certified Practitioner (PMI-ACP) Exam by
Mike Griffiths
[4] http://www.agileconnection.com/article/innovation-scrum-
ceremonies-peer-feedback
[5]https://www.scrumalliance.org/community/articles/2014/july/7-
mistakes-during-the-daily-stand-up-meeting
[6]https://www.scrumalliance.org/community/articles/2014/septembe
r/innovation-of-scrum-board-with-wagon-wheel
[7]https://www.scrumalliance.org/community/articles/2014/october/
who-is-responsible-for-schedule-slippage
[8]http://www.agileconnection.com/article/mitigating-team-hazards-
without-typical-scrum-product-owner
[9]http://www.scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v1/scrum-guide-
us.pdf
[10]http://www.dsdm.org/
[11]http://www.extremeprogramming.org
[12] Agile Estimating and Planning by Mike Cohn
[13]http://
www.simplilearn.com/ag
ile-prioritization-techniques-
article
[14] http://www.LeSS.works
[15] http://www.disciplinedagiledelivery.com
[16] http://www.scaledagileframework.com
53665367