 New Software Development Paradigms and Possible Adoption for Security 
 Matthias Günter 
Swiss Federal Institute of 
Intellectual Property matthias.guenter@ipi.ch  Michael Gisler 
Swiss Federal Office of Information Technology, Systems and Telecommunication michael.gisler@bit.admin.ch Bianca von Bredow 
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Zurich bvonbred@ifi.unizh.ch   Abstract  
EGovernment would be a lot easier if it could be handled 

like eBusiness. Unfortunately there are organizational 

and legal obstacles that make it virtually impossible. The 

security level needed for public administrations is usually 

at the level of top private sector industries and service 

organizations like banks. In project management there 

has been a paradigm shift towards new methodologies for 

the development of software. This article studies some 

possibilities along the same lines with regard to security. 

We will use extreme programming (XP) as an example of 

the new software development paradigms. 

 
 1. Introduction1  ﬂAdding manpower to a late project makes it even 
laterﬂ, as the saying goes for projects The same holds true 

for security when the responsible team does not do its job 

properly. The situation gets even worse, because the real 

security level does not keep up with the security feeling. 

In this paper, we define security as follows: 
Computer security is the area concerned 

with all questions of the security of IT 

systems. Especially attacks must be 

prevented and physical events (e.g. like 

fire, water, earth quakes) must be handled 

and the biggest obstacles possible are to 

be put into the attackers™ way.[1]  
Therefore security has a lot to do with risk analysis, 
prevention and impact reduction. The definition on 

eGovernment is the following:  
EGovernment embraces in its function as 

regulating eGovernment the creation of 

the framework for an information society 

and, as participating eGovernment, the 

application of new IT and communication 
technologies by the
 public sector. [2] This paper will illustrate several critical issues in 
eGovernment and address approaches to handle them.  For 
                                                 1 This paper reflects the personal opinions of the authors. 
the purposes of this paper it is not necessary to distinguish 

G2G (government-to-government) and G2C (government-

to-citizen). Both front-office and back-office have 

software development ongoing. The specific security 

issues will vary, but can be addressed the same way. 

However, it focuses on the participating eGovernment part 

of the definition above. Many current projects - whether in 

eGovernment or eBusiness - have faced the following 

situation: 
The governmental body has already been using IT for 
a long time. 
There is an installed base of hosts around which the 
architecture was designed . 
The host security is rather high, but it was based on 
the assumption that the hosts would be isolated from 

public networks. 
Due to the fact that the governmental body has 
opened up client connections to the Internet, the 

internal network has grown enormously. 
The governmental body has a conservative 
technology strategy. 
The governmental body has installed a fire wall. 
So far the governmental body has been trying to cope 
with the regulations set out by the responsible 

administrative branches (dealing with security and 

other) of the government, while trying to reposition 

itself in new public management and to increase 

competitiveness. The security regulations are mainly 

regarded as being too tight, having nothing to do with 

reality , but instead  they reduce the effectiveness for 

service provision. 
A consultant is hired to analyse the situation, and he 
presents a paper about the necessity to create  a task 

force in order to draft a policy or a set of policies. 
A lot of stakeholders are ignored in the process, 
because there is no time or the stakeholders are 

thought of as being incapable of providing useful 

input. It is important to note that in public 

administrations a lot more people are involved in 

most activities. Therefore the range of stakeholders is 

wider than in the private sector. 
 The result: little has been done, and because of this 
many people have become angry, and the widest 

security gaps remain open (usually internal 

organisation problems are of this category that is 

underestimated the most). 
Often security is an issue that is unwillingly discussed 
(meaning with a too low priority), handled the wrong way 

or the solution possibilities are not followed to the end. A 

few more concepts must be briefly discussed in this paper. 

We will refer to security functions in different sections in 

this article.  
Security function  Š A part or parts of the 

TOE (target of evaluation) that have to be 

relied upon for enforcing a closely related 

subset of the rules originating from the 

TSP (TOE Security Policy). [3] 
Another important concept is that of stakeholders: 
Stakeholders are those who have an 

interest in a particular decision, either as 

individuals or representatives of a group). 

This includes people who influence a 

decision, or can influence it, as well as 

those affected by it. [4] 
The next important one is the definition of a system: 
A system is a collection of elements that 

are in relation to each other. A system is a 

system, because it consists of connected 

elements, that in certain ways form a 

whole. [5] 
An application is an information system (IS). This 
means that several applications may share the same 

information technology system (IT). 
For low to medium level security there are directly 
implementable solutions. In Switzerland there is the 

directive S.02 [6] and in Germany the 

Grundschutzhandbuch [7]. 
For more advanced and complete solutions the 
following two standards should be considered: 
The Common Criteria for Information Technology 
Security Evaluation 
And ISO 17799 Information technology Š Code of 
practice for information security management. 
These two standards are made for specialists and 
should only be applied under the right circumstances. 

They can be adapted to fit the method suggested in the 

following sections as starting point, guidance and check 

list.  
 2. What is special in eGovernment  
security? [8] 
 EGovernment is special because of the following facts: 
It is governed by different laws as compared to 
eBusiness. 
The big data pools of the administrations are an 
attractive goal for an attack and need the appropriate 

protection. 
The huge and distributed networks of the public 
administration offer a big attack region. 
Federalism and autonomy of different branches result 
in a heterogeneous and complex environment. 
It will be difficult enough to offer competitive 
(instead of merely paper) solutions without enforcing 

rigid security for citizens. 
The transactions and the processes of the 
administration are more closely monitored and must 

adhere to more regulations.  
It should be made clear that one of the goals of 
eGovernment must be to diminish the differences between 

eGovernment and eBusiness so that the total cost of 

ownership of eGovernment solutions decreases. 
The security issues can affect citizens (because it is 
often data about them) and on the other hand the agencies. 

The inability to pay or to do business has not the same 

importance as in normal business. However, the long-term 

storage of data can be affected. On a higher scale of 

escalation the possibility to react appropriately to external 

dangers (terrorism, war) must be maintained by the 

relevant parts of the government. 
 3. Can security be built in from the start? 
 
Security can certainly be ﬂbuiltﬂ into the minds of an 
organisation. The difficulties to change an inadequate 

culture [9] in a company are, however, very high and need 

a long time to be sorted out [10]. It is easier to work on 

technology, but it is impossible to overcome a glass 

ceiling level of security when the organisational aspects 

are not taken into account [11]. In some cases the problem 

of having to add the security issue last in a particular 

organisation (together with quality and performance) 

cannot be avoided as many applications are bought from 

the shelf and are not of the required standards to cope with 

the risks present in the environment of public 

administration. In a high security governmental 

environment this is even true for commercial operating 

systems [12,13]. Unfortunately the security architecture of 

most applications is neither modular nor does it offer a 

public, stable interface. Attempts in this direction are 

made, but still not satisfactory [14,15]. This may be one of 

the side-effects of the export restrictions of cryptographic 

software [16].  
 4. Integration of predefined security into an 
overall scheme 
 Most of the current systems have a security policy of 
their own. In a low to medium security environment it is 
 best to integrate the use of these building blocks. When 
high level security is needed, there will certainly be 

problems: 
The security framework of the applications/systems 
was too narrowly defined. 
There are no usable interfaces to integrate the security 
architectures. 
Both shortcomings are not really the result of bad 
design, but a design focused on something else besides the 

security of governmental bodies. A vendor can hardly be 

blamed for not having foreseen these problems. 
 5. Security is an aspect of management 
 
It has already been mentioned before that security is a 
‚people problem™. In each organisation the part dealing 

with people is the management. Therefore security is a 

management problem, more precisely, it is an 
aspect
 of 
management. It is a bad idea to separate aspects into 

different categories, security officers and quality officers 

have a low impact because the power is still and will still 

be exercised by the default hierarchy. It is absolutely 

necessary that each manager is instructed about the 

importance of security and has incorporated the security 

aspect into his management style. Also, here the gap 

between middle management and top management is 

important to keep in mind. Usually the middle 

management is most opposed to new security strategies as 

it must implement it and security is often (or is often seen) 

in conflict with the productivity goals. 

The most important security issues for the management to 

handle are: 
Alignment with other goals 
Homogeneity of usage 
Long lasting measures 
Feedback circles 
These are primarily soft factors, but in the end soft 
factors have a much greater impact.  
 6. Process-oriented view 
 
One or more anchors are needed to build security into 
an organisation so that security becomes a core value of 

these organisations. One organisational view which has 

become very popular is a process or a workflow-based 

view. When the organisation is constructed by 

ﬂorganisation follows process follows strategyﬂ, a process 

view on security comes in natural. The basic definition is: 
A business process is a collection of 

interrelated work tasks, initiated in 

response to an event that achieves a 

specific result for the customer of the 

process. [17]  
On the other hand: A workflow is characterised by the 
following attributes [18]:
  Several persons are involved in the execution of a 
work flow. 
A work flow consists of several tasks. 
The tasks of a work flow have a predefined structure 
to process matters related to an organisation. 
The handling of errors is predefined. 
There is an instance that coordinates the different 
tasks. 
During the execution of a work flow data is 
transferred and managed. 
Business processes can be seen as special cases of a 
workflow. Another view is to follow the life cycle of the 

applications as shown in figure 1 [19] . An example for an 

architecture centred security solution is shown in figure 2 

[20]. Balancing security and usability is one of the crucial 

points [21]. Especially when the security is added late in 

the life cycle of products [22], it will almost certainly 

affect productivity. Generally it is assumed that a graph as 

represented in figure 3 (a) is able to describe the 

connection. What is not realised is that at a certain level of 

annoyance the users will start to circumvent the security. 
Therefore the graph should be more like the 
presentation in figure 3 (b). 
Hard facts on this correlation cannot be found [23]. On 
the other hand a lot can be done without affecting the 

users or even doing the opposite, e.g. single-sign on, 

intrusion detection systems, re-organising the network, a 

better password policy, physical access restrictions to 

servers, a good network topology.  
 7. The top-down and strategy first approach 
 
This is the method most literature proposes. However, 
this approach has the same drawbacks as the old waterfall 

model [24]. A lot of paper is produced which makes a 

good impression on the top management. Usually several 

months (to years) are lost, while the biggest gaps remain 

still open. The produced paper is in most cases neither 

people-focused nor technology-focused. Usually from the 

point of view of strategy, a fast jump to conventional good 

practice is made. This also happens often in eGovernment 

in project management as shown by Teresa A. Pardo and 

Jochen H. Scholl [25]. Security policy documents 

incorporating this shortcut can be recognised by the fact 

that the level of abstraction is incoherent, i.e. that the 

length of passwords is mentioned on the same page as the 

need for security training for the staff. A first jump does 

not need to be bad with regard to security, but it affects 

the confidence in the process to some extent and for 

others creates a negative feeling to have followed a 

systematic approach (which they in fact have not).
  Figure 1: Security and the life cycle of applications 
    Figure 2: Security architecture model 
    Figure 3: (a) Assumed relation between usability and security (b) Probable relation between usability and 
security. 
 8. Integration into a bigger framework 
 Inter-organisational trust always causes problems, as 
the non-existence of a world wide certification authority 

framework shows. Many organisations seem to believe in 

the value of medieval castles, because in that very same 

way, they organise their defence for the information 

infrastructure. More advanced companies already use the 

fortress engineering of the 18
th century by building whole 
fortifications. State of the art systems should not trust their 

peers (trust is good, control is better). While some trust in 

the form of loyalty can be assumed within an organisation 

that has at least a physical location, a culture and one 

management; nevertheless a small amount of paranoia 

between organisations can be healthy. All data traversing 

the borders should be controlled again and the outside 

world should be mistrusted. In general this creates an 

extra amount of work, but it helps at the same time to 

reduce trouble with other problems like corrupt data and 

manipulation errors. It is strongly advised that in the case 

of an economically unbalanced situation the stronger 

partner does not force the smaller ones to conform, 

because in many cases the attack will come through the 

network of the bigger one (with more staff being 

responsible for 80% of the attacks) and the enforced 

security will not be incorporated. Security must be a group 

effort as was mentioned above. It needs only one grumpy 

stakeholder (person or organisation) to be weakened 

completely. 

 
 
 
 
 9. Extreme programming core practices and 
security 
 In this section we will discuss the connections with one 

well known exponent of the new paradigms: extreme 

programming is one of the various iterative methods for 

the development of software [26]. 
Extreme programming  (XP) is a compact 

method for the development of software in 

small to medium size teams whose work is 

dominated by vague or fast changing 

requirements. [27] 
The advantages of modern forms of software 
development have been shown in business. They are still 

quite uncommon in the governmental area. The paper 

wants to show, that - in the area of problems suitable for 

XP - XP can be used to create adequate software with 

adequate security levels. The XP process and metaphors  

can even be used/adapted for fast implementation of 

security (either technical or organisational) in an already 

installed environment. The rationale behind such a 

process is to incorporate security in the core development 

process and to get the benefits that XP and other 

adaptive/iterative strategies brought to software 

development also for the security area. 
Extreme programming uses four variables: time, cost, 
quality, functionality. For Extreme programming time is a 

constant. Security consists mainly of quality and 

functionality. Therefore it is a reasonable assumption to 

examine XP principles for security projects. In table 1 we  
 
 
 
 
  will discuss what happens if XP core practices are applied 
to security. Core practices are behaviour patterns that 

must be implemented to get XP going.  
 
 Table 1 uses the following notations: CO (comment), 
SE (security effects of applied XP), IM (used an XP 

analogue for security implementation), EGOV  (special 

eGovernment issue).  
 Core practice and rules Security adapted version 
Whole team: all the contributors to an XP 
project sit together as members of one team. The 

team must include a customer. 
CO: This is in some organisations hard to implement. However, it 
increases the productivity and gets projects working properly. 

SE: Better collaboration and better understanding will make the 

security training much more easy. 

IM: Security created by a team that has all the skills and involves the 

users and customers with each other will more likely succeed in the 

roll-out. 

EGOV: Public administration environments are a bit more defensive 

towards projects and teams. 
Planning Game: The planning game defines the 

next iteration™s goals in an adaptive manner with 

stories. Also the releases are planned that way. 

The process is rather straightforward. A full 

description can be found in the books of Kent 

Beck. [28] 
CO: The planning game is one of the more important concepts of 
extreme programming. It is very powerful in ensuring the dialogue.  

SE: The planning game creates the possibility to add security features 

in all the stories and give them the necessary priority. 

IM: The planning game is also powerful to prioritise the work of a 

security team. The top priorities can be dealt with immediately. The 

accompanying measures are implemented 100% during the next 

iterations. 

EGOV: This does not fit with some project methodologies used 

nowadays. The mind shift is not easy to implement. Fortunately 

successful planning games are easy to produce and help in convincing 

the other stakeholders. 
Small Releases: Many releases are produced due 

to the short iterations of 3-5 weeks. The focus is 

on 100% of the agreed functionality. 
CO: This upsets usually the whole roll-out process.  
SE: The high quality of the implemented features helps with the 

security.  

IM: The security levels increase fast. 
Customer Tests: The XP customer defines one 

or more automated acceptance tests for each 

feature. 
CO: A good test script is essential to assure the quality. 
SE: The improved quality and specifically defined security tests will 

help a great deal in ensuring the overall security goals. 

IM: Automated security tests (a test suite) can be implemented that 

way, e.g. the common criteria [29] or the functions of a different 

standard could be integrated in the same way. 
Simple Design: XP evolves software from 

simple designs to exactly the necessary 

complexity. Designing is integrated into the 

whole cycle. 
CO: This is contradictory to the traditional analysis first approach. XP 
assumes that the future cannot be really predicted. 

SE: The simpler a system the less errors it can contain. 

IM: Implementing the simple principles first and evolving the 

complexity later will help the stakeholders to become familiar with the 

security. 

EGOV: This principle is a paradigm shift for the normal process of 

public administrations. 
Pair Programming: At all times two 

programmers develop the code together. 
CO: This is one of the hardest principles to implement due to the 
resistance of about half the programmers.  

SE: The built-in quality check pair programming provides can be used 

also to check for better security. 

IM: The approach works also in the development of security. By 

means of bilateral 
questionin
g, each other™s 
possible 
gaps can be 
 Core practice and rules Security adapted version 
identified. It is already known as the four-eye principle. 
Test-Driven Development: First the tests are 
written and then the software. Unit tests run 

almost all the time and integration happens at 

least once a day. 
CO: An unconventional but powerful concept. 
SE: This goes well with standards like the Common Criteria. 

IM: This goes well with standards like the Common Criteria. 

EGOV: For high-security applications the test suite is developed by a 

different company or branch. 
Design Improvement: With Refactoring [30]. 

One of the goals of Extreme Programming is to 

keep the costs of re-factoring at a linear level. 
CO: Refactoring is a problem in the software world.   
SE: Refactoring could create a security problem, if the tests are not 

designed in a way to detect problems. 

IM: When the security processes and workflows are dealt with that 

way, it is assured that the awareness does not fade. 

EGOV: Due to the many stakeholders the requirements change more 

rapidly in eGovernment projects than in projects related to eBusiness. 

An easier refactoring therefore comes in handy. 
Continuous Integration: The system should be 

integrated at all times. 
CO: This needs a new development environment and an attitude of the 
programmers to follow it. 

SE: There is no specific value for security in that feature. 

IM: This cannot be really applied to the security implementation. 
Collective Code Ownership: Every programmer 

can change code everywhere. 
CO: Without pair programming this will remain merely an illusion. 
The unwillingness to touch other programmer™s code will, however, be 

diminished.  

SE:  The code gets simpler and better documented. This means that 

problematic areas are eliminated. 

IM: A deeper awareness of the overall scheme can be reached. 

EGOV: The knowledge is more distributed reducing the dependence 

on individual programmers. 
Coding standard: There is a coding standard and 

it is adhered to very strictly. 
CO: This is an old practice that works best. The enforcing is mainly a 
problem, especially when software engineering is not a core process of 

the company. 

SE: Also here quality and with it security improves. 

IM: This will mainly relate to documentations. It means that the 

documents will be understood. 

EGOV: Most branches of the administration are not really software 

factories. Therefore more elaborate work on good coding is certainly 

useful.  
Metaphor: Extreme programming teams develop 

a common vision of how the program works. 

These are simple evocative descriptions.  
CO: This is a simplification of the architecture part of other design 
methodologies. Some parts should remain in an architecture step/sub 

process. 

SE: Here quality and with it security improves as well. 

IM: Security must be sold to the users. Metaphors are a great means in 

achieving this.  

EGOV: The really needed common vision in security can be  

established that way more easily. 
Sustainable Pace: The teams work hard, but at a 

pace that can be sustained indefinitely. This 

means overtime is avoided whenever possible. 
CO: A good management practice. 
SE: Not really security relevant. 

IM: Not really security relevant. 
User stories are written. CO: These stories can replace ﬁuse casesﬂ in other methodologies. 
SE: The stories can have a negative security impact if the customer 

does not understand the security issues at hand and focuses on other 

aspects. 

IM: This is what security functions are about. Therefore the story 

principle can naturally be integrated in security design. 
Project velocity is measured. CO: It is im
portant to measure im
portant thin
gs and not to ﬁtortureﬂ 
 Core practice and rules Security adapted version 
the staff  (which is the standard perception when one is not very 
careful about it.). The purpose is to have feedback and to learn from it. 

SE: A better control over the process improves quality and 

functionality and therefore security. 

IM: Security always has to balance risk with cost. Measuring in shorter 

cycles may really help to improve the security per dollar. 
Move people around. CO:  People must believe in their project. Moving them around helps a 
great deal to achieve this. 

SE: No special impact. 

IM: Improves the effectiveness of the security team. 
A Stand-up meeting starts each day. CO: This is also a tried and tested practice that works out well. 
SE: Improves the focus of the team. 

IM: Improves the focus of the team. 
Fix XP when it breaks. CO: Kaize built directly into the process. 
SE: No special effect. 

IM: No special effect. 
Use CRC cards [31] for design sessions. CO: Ad hoc documentation. 
SE: No special effect. 

IM: Results in fast documentation. 
Create spike solutions to reduce risk. CO: Prototyping is known to be important to reduce the risk at the 
beginning. 

SE: Risk reduction. 

IM: A way to tackle the heavy security issues. 

EGOV: eGovernment is new. Therefore a lot of risks are involved. 

Spike solutions help to reduce the risks. 
No functionality is added at an early stage. CO: Solve the problems when they occur. Because nobody can 
imagine the future needs and problems, functionality to cope with 

these unknown needs will almost certainly not be necessary as the 

requirements change day by day. 

SE: This principle decreases the total project size and therefore 

increases security. 

IM: KISS is certainly also an issue to improve security in general. 

EGOV: Public administrations tend to go for general solutions. This 

principle is in conflict with the working method. 
Leave optimisation until last. CO: This should not prevent thinking about scaling up to a productive 
level at the end. 

SE: Improves quality over design size. 

IM: Cannot be applied. 
When a bug is found tests are created. CO: Prevents a bug from survive and happen again in the next rebuild. 
SE: Enhances quality. Fixes stay fixed. 

IM: This creates a sort of emergency response team. 
The score of acceptance tests is published. CO: Creates awareness and motivates the team. 
SE: Improves quality. 

IM: Creates awareness. 
Table 1: XP core practices and rules and relevancy/adaption for security 
 10. Drawbacks 
 Barry Boehm [32] made a comparison between 
traditional project management and extreme 

programming, showing when to use which methodology. 

In general the conclusions of the article can be applied to 

security as well. However, usually the team responsible  
 for creating the security is rather small and therefore more 

on the XP side. Another drawback is that XP does not 

focus on the interaction of the customer with his/her co-

workers in detail. In most cases therefore, ﬂless extreme 

programmingﬂ will be the path to follow.  
  11. Conclusions There are lessons to be learnt from iterative 
development that can be used in security development. 

Security engineers like to base their work on mathematical 

foundations. It should be mentioned that not even the best 

cryptographic algorithms used today are proven 

mathematically safe
 (In quantum computation this will 
become true [33]). The IT systems used in public 

administrations are complex [34] and for this reason a 

complete  analysis in advance without implementation and 

evolution is not possible. The adherence to standards is a 

good idea, but it should be used not as first aid, but as a 

long term project. The process as shown in figure 4 is 

adopted more frequently in order to obtain early results. 
The main goals of this process must be:  
Build security into the core and hearts in the end 
Improve the software development cycle 
Change procurement to include security 
Change project management priorities to include 
security (and quality) 
Security becomes more and more important, a fast 
reliable path to security is worth adding some new 

principles. 
 12. References 
  [1] R. Oppliger: Computersicherheit - eine Einführung, Vieweg 
1992, page 13 

[2]  M. Gisler: Einführung in die Begriffswelt des eGovernment, 

M. Gisler, D. Spahni. Egovernment: eine Standortbestimmung, 

Haupt, 2. Edition, 2001, page 16 

[3]  http://www.commoncriteria.org/faq/defin
itions.html 
[4] M. Günter, Sicherheit im eGovernment, to be published in 

the proceedings of the 2. eGovernment-Symposiums 
2001 [5] Haberfellner et al, Systems Engineering, Methodik und 

Praxis, Verlag Industrielle Organisation, 1999, page 5 

[6] 

http://www.isb.admin.ch/architektur/standards/inventar/deutsch/

p010/aktuell/p010-s02.html 

[7]  http://www.bsi.de/gshb/ 

[8] M. Günter, Sicherheit im eGovernment, to be published in 

the proceedings of the 2. eGovernment-Symposiums 
2001 [9]  http://sol.brunel.ac.uk/~jarvis/bola/culture/harrison.html 

[10]  http://litc.sbu.ac.uk/jcalt/conference.html 

[11]  http://www.sans.org/mistakes.htm 

[12] 

http://www.microsoft.com/wi
ndows2000/server/evaluation/news
/bulletins/win2kcomcrit.asp 

[13]  http://www.stosdarwin.org/projects/se-darwin/se-

darwin.html 

[14]  http://security.dstc.edu.au/projects/corba/ 

[¦5]  http://www.alphaworks.ibm.com/tech/xmlsecuritysuite 

[16]  http://www.epic.org/crypto/export_controls
/itar.html 
[17]  A. Sharp, P. McDermott: Workflow Modelling: Tools for 

Process Improvement and Application Development. Artech 

House, 2001, page 58 

[18]  S. Jablonski: Workflow-Management-Systeme: 

Modellierung und Architektur, Thomson Publ., 1995 
[19]  http://www.cert.org/archive/pdf
/lifecycle-models.pdf 
[20]  G. Bruce, R. Dempsey: Security in Distributed 

Computing,Hewlett-Packard Professional Books, 1996, page 48 

[21]  e.g. http://www.sysedco.com
/library/tech/0004.htm 
[22]  http://www.computer.org/internet/v
5n6/index.htm 
[23]http://interactive.sei.cmu.edu/news@sei/columns/the_archit

ect/2001/1q01/architect-1q01.pdf 

[24]  http://asd-

www.larc.nasa.gov/barkstrom/
public/The_Standard_Waterfall_
Model_For_Systems_Development.htm 

[25]  T. A. Pardo, J. H. Scholl, ﬂWalking Atop the Cliffs: 

Avoiding Failure and Reducing Risk in Large Scale E-

Government Projectsﬂ, presented at HICSS 35, Hawaii, 2001. 

[26]  http://www.extremeprogramming.org/rules
/iterative.html 
[27]  K. Beck: Extreme Programmierung, Addison-Wesley, 

2000, page xiii 

[28]  e.g. K. Beck, M. Fowler: Extreme Programming planen. 

Addison-Wesley, 2001 

[29]  Common Criteria for Information Technology Security 

Evaluation, Version 1.0, Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der 

Informationstechnik, 30. 1. 1996 

[30]  M. Fowler, ﬂRefactoring: Improving the Design of 

Existing Codeﬂ, Addison-Wesley, 1999 

[31]  http://members.aol.com/humansandt/techniques/crc.htm 

[32]  B. Boehm: Get Ready for Agile Methods with Care, 

Computer, 1/2002, page 64ff 

[33] http://www.aip.org/enews/physnews/
2000/split/pnu480-
1.htm 

[34]  A. Ninck et al: Systemik - Integrales Denken, Konzipieren 

und Realisieren, Verlag Industrielle Betriebe, 2nd edition, 1998, 

page 48ff 
   Figure 4: Suggested path for implementing 
security in a complex environment
  