 How to Include Users in the Development of Off-the-Shelf Software: A Case for Comple-
menting Participatory Design with Agile Development
 Christina Hansson, 
Blekinge Institute of  

Technology, Sweden 

christina.hansson@bth.se
  
 Yvonne Dittrich 
IT-University, Denmark 

ydi@itu.dk
  
 
 Dave Randall
 Manchester Metropolitan 

University, United King-

dom, 

D.Randall@mmu.ac.uk 
Abstract 
 This paper describes and discusses a non-traditional 
approach to participatory design, one which is combined 
with an agile-like software development process. In this 

case, the size of the company combined with a distributed 

population of users has a serious impact on the software 

development process. The small software company in our 

study resolves this problem with an unconventional 

amalgam of participatory design and agile processes 

which seems to suit their situation. By using different 
kinds of user participation the small software provider is 
able to keep in contact with users on a daily basis. Users 
convey requirements for new functionalities, give feed-
back and report errors. Users’ feedback and proposals 

form the basis for further development. The 
paper relates 
our observations to other research on participatory de-

sign in unconventional settings and discusses the condi-

tions under which agile software development can com-
plement participatory design. 
 1. Introduction 
 In this paper, we discuss the relevance of a ‘special 
case’ for Participatory Design (PD). The use of PD is one 

way to involve end-users in the development process. We 

try to show that PD can be complemented with an agile-
like software development process, in certain circum-
stances, to produce successful user participatory out-

comes. The term ‘agile-like’ is used in order to point out 

that the process is not a pure agile software process but 

shows similar characteristics. Our study was designed to 

evaluate the reasons for the evident success of a small 

software company selling, supporting and further devel-
oping a booking system mainly for the use of municipali-
ties and sports organisations. Idavall Data AB (Idavall), 
the company in question, is a small company in the south 

of Sweden consisting of six people.  
About 1300 users in roughly 300 customer organisa-
tions use the system that forms Idavall’s sole product. 

The company uses a range of methods: support calls, user 

meetings, courses, the web site and a newsletter to obtain 
feedback from their users concerning system limitations, 
faults, and proposals for future development. To be able 
to make use of the feedback and  
  change proposals in future development the company 
developed an agile-like development practice. Our atten-
tion was brought to the company fortuitously during a 

research project around e-government.
1 E-government is 
about providing public services and information with the 
aid of new technology, particularly the Internet. This 

research, when combined with several municipal inter-

ests, clearly indicated the importance of the co-

development of services, work practices and technology. 

[5, 6] Ongoing ‘design in use’, it further suggested, was 

best served by both flexible and adaptable software and 

flexible development processes. Often municipalities rely 
on off-the-shelf software as they cannot afford a custom-
made solution. This may be why our ongoing research 
seems to support the impression that small companies 

that provide partly custom-made off-the-shelf software 

often outrun larger software providers. These small com-

panies also often apply flexible development processes 

and a well-developed relationship to customers and users 

Agile software development processes, which are flexi-
ble, have a customer-centred approach but lack methods 
for incorporating real users into the process. By adding 

PD to the development process it is possible to comple-

ment agile software development to secure real users’ 
participation in the process and not only the customer’. 
Active user participation hopefully guarantees the users’ 

possibilities to influence the system. PD has to be further 

developed in such contexts and adapted to those circum-
stances. However, such methodological proposals have to 
be adapted to fit into the situation and circumstances at 

hand. 
This case study presents adapted and non-traditional 
PD practices and may be thought of as supporting argu-
ment concerning the value of PD but, if so, it is not PD 

‘by the book’. There are no clear political objectives 

evident in this collaboration, even if customer organisa-

tions could be characterised as having a ‘service’ ideol-
ogy. It would thus look much more like socio-technical’ 
systems or ‘proto‘ PD than any of the fully fledged, col-

lective resources’ oriented approaches. More 
                                               
 1 Design of IT in use - supportive technologies for public services
 (DitA), funded by the Swedish Agency for Innovation Systems VIN-
NOVA, April 2000 - December 2002 (project no. 2001-03659)..
 Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200610-7695-2507-5/06/$20.00 (C) 2006 IEEE importantly, the participation process itself cannot be 
characterised in terms of any of the orthodox treatments 
of ‘user involvement’. There is something ‘ad hoc’ about 
the various methods, they suggest and ‘extreme’ respon-

siveness insofar as different channels of communication 

are used as circumstances require and various responses 

quickly generated. Our article is a contribution to the 
field of participatory design in unconventional settings [9, 
12, 22] which questions whether some aspects of PD are 

appropriate in such contexts. Thus, the practices we ob-

served can help us to expand the toolbox of PD. The 

observations reported here not only provide an interesting 

contrast between ideal-typical and academic, approaches 

to PD, and ‘real world’, situationally driven, approaches, 
they also concern the relation between PD and software 
development. We provide a more nuanced view of what 
the relationship between PD and software development 

might be. We need to find methods where we can bridge 

the gap between PD and the more technical side of the 

software process. Combining an agile- or agile-like soft-

ware development process with PD might be a fruitful 

method. An agile-like development process, in this case, 

does not refer to any special agile method; it refers more 
to a non-traditional way of developing software inspired 
by the family of agile methods [4]. Especially small com-
panies could learn from this way of develoing software 
and services. 
We begin by briefly describing our fieldwork methods, 
outlining the situation at Idavall, the evolved methods 

they have developed for obtaining user feedback and the 

software development practice that evolved to accommo-
date user feedback and change proposals. We then dis-
cuss whether that practice can be regarded as participa-

tory design and briefly describe agile software develop-

ment. In the discussion, we identify methods and prac-

tices that might be transferable to other contexts and 

relate them to relevant research results in the discourses 
of participatory and agile software development.  
 2. Fieldwork Methods
  The research we describe here was mainly based on a 
pragmatic approach which we might loosely term 

‘evaluative ethnography’ and on interview and observa-

tion  
The fieldwork at Idavall began in January 2002. We 
visited Idavall regularly during the spring. Specific meth-

ods used included semi-structured and open-ended inter-

views, participatory observations at the company, field 

notes and analysis of documents. We also participated in 

a couple of user meetings and training courses. Video 

recordings were used to check and enrich our observa-
tions. In the fall 2003 we returned to Idavall in order to 
follow up our previous fieldwork.  

 2.1 The qualitative study 
 Qualitative research as we see it focuses on under-
standing how people work things out rather than on 
measuring their performance in accordance with abstract 
criteria. In other words, it does the work that Winch [23] 

demanded of social theory, i.e. it produces results which 

can be generalised in terms of the ‘rules’ that people use 

to get things done as opposed to the ‘causes’ which sup-

posedly determine their behaviour. The analysis and 

evaluation of the field material yields, in this sense, un-

derstandings which can be generalised about how people 

organize their practice. Rich descriptions – sometimes 

misunderstood as unscientific storytelling – should allow 

the readers to follow and, if necessary, argue the conclu-

sions [20]. 
 By using multiple ways of collecting data and combin-
ing different kinds of methods it is possible to support 
one finding with the help of others. We validated our 
impressions from the fieldwork by constantly referring 

back to, and cross-checking against various informants.  
The focus of the study was to understand how Idavall 
is able to accommodate the frequent changing require-
ments of its users and customers and how it was that 

distributed users were able to participate in the develop-

ment process. We were also interested in to what extent 
the users felt they could influence the development proc-
ess. This focus is mirrored by the structure of the present 

article as described above. 
  3. User participation in Idavall 
 Idavall was founded in 1987. In the early years, the 
company developed a number of different programs, but 

from 1991 they focused primarily on the booking system 

referred to here as FRI. Customers are widely dispersed, 

mainly in Sweden, but also in Finland and Norway. 
FRI is one of the most frequently used booking sys-
tems in Sweden. The most important customers are the 
Swedish municipalities, where a large number of differ-
ent municipal administrations use the booking system. 
The software has a web interface that complements the 

basic FRI. The booking system is responsible for the 

administration of invoices, admission control and subsi-

dies as well as for bookings. 
Idavall’s avowed objective is to keep contact with the 
users, and to let their feedback guide the future develop-
ment. The user in this case means the one who really uses 
the program, as distinguished from ‘customers’. Both the 

terms ‘customer’ and ‘user’ in this article are used in the 

same way with the contrast between those who pay and 
those who do the work in mind.  
FRI was designed at the outset for one specific user. 
Since then the user community has expanded dramati-

cally. This expansion has not altered the fundamental 
business concept employed at Idavall, which is to listen 
to users and develop the software in a way that continues 

to keep customers satisfied. Gary, one of the employees 

expresses his standpoint at a demonstration of FRI as 

follows: “The development is driven by our users not by 
ourselves”. In pursuance of this, representatives from 
Idavall meet their users through different kinds of activi-

ties. Following is a description of these different activi-
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20062 ties. This description forms the basis of coming discus-
sions. 

 3.1 User meetings 
 Every year about 8 to 10 meetings for users and cus-
tomers are held throughout Sweden, Norway and 

Finland. The meetings are informal, and their purpose is 
to disseminate news, discuss further development, and 
answer questions about the booking system. For the 

users, user meetings provide the opportunity to meet 

other users in the same area. User-meetings thus offer an 

opportunity to create networks that make it easier to get 

in touch with each other and thus co-operate around 

common questions or problems. Those who participate 
in user meetings think they are a good opportunity to 
learn new functions and meet other users and representa-
tives from Idavall. Those who do not participate think 

that they do not need to or that they do not have the 

time. Some prefer to have private teaching and support. 

One said “I do not want to listen to other users’ prob-

lems; and who is interested in listening to our prob-

lems?” 
Idavall’s representatives encourage users to present 
proposals for new functionality and to report errors. The 
following translation from the field is an example of 
such a user proposal. 
 Example 1 
A user wants to lengthen the text field of the 
bank account number in FRI because the last 

figures in the number disappear if the number 
is too long. He says that he has to write the 
number by hand on the invoice otherwise. He 

suggests that it should be possible to adjust 

this. Gary promises that this proposal will be 

implemented in the next release of FRI. Later 

he says that he knows that it ought to be an 
advantage to other customers as well and it 
will be easy to implement.  
 The above example shows a specific user suggestion 
and the promise associated with it. Further conversation 

with Gary elicited the view that, while it is important to 

respond to user needs, it is equally important to be hon-

est. He is particularly concerned not to make promises 

that cannot be kept and as a consequence, he seldom 

commits himself without first discussing with the devel-

opers. 
 3.2 Support 
 One of the most important parts of Idavall’s business 
philosophy is to offer a adequate, friendly and profes-

sional support. Users think that the support service pro-

vided is very good, they always get quick and personal 

help. Explanations of problems are easy to understand. 

In addition to the user meetings, user support offers one 

of the most important methods of keeping informed 
about users’ needs, wishes and proposals. Idavall claims 
that the objective is to talk to the user in exactly the 

same way that users normally talk, and avoiding techni-
cal jargon. No one, as one respondent said, ‘should feel 

stupid or crazy when calling Idavall for support’. Sup-

port is given Monday to Friday between 8 am and 12 

am. Everybody answers support calls, even the develop-

ers of the team. This in turn means that the developers 

receive first-hand feedback about problems with their 

product thereby removing a reporting problem. 
A call to the support service is initially generated 
when a problem arises. During the course of such calls, 

proposals for new functionalities often appear. The diffi-

culty of the users’ question can vary from a simple ques-
tion about how to change a booking to more difficult 
technical questions. Almost every phone call to the sup-

port service is logged in a text database. When someone 

calls in, the call taker at Idavall searches for the caller’s 
name in order to connect to the support history of this 
specific person.  The call taker can look up similar prob-

lems and solutions in the database. During, or directly 

after, each phone call the call taker inserts notes about 
the call. 
 3.3 Courses 
 FRI can easily be tailor-made to specific require-
ments. How it is used depends on the customer; a higher 

level of knowledge is required than for using Microsoft 

Windows and Office
tm. Idavall offers courses where the 
use of different parts of the booking system is discussed 

and taught. Users state that they consider it important to 
participate in courses. Besides learning about the book-
ing system, they suggest they also get to know other 
users, which in turn makes it easier to share knowledge, 

instance e.g. by calling and asking how other organiza-

tions adapt the program to a specific task. They also like 

to come to Idavall and meet the developers. ‘It becomes 

easier to call the support service when you know the 

face of a person’. Below is an example from a Web-
association course. 
 Example 2 
The leader of the course, Jason, who is one 
of the developers at Idavall, talks about func-

tionalities and shows how to do different set-

ups to make the application fit the uses re-
quirements. During the course the participants 
came up with proposals, one wanted, for ex-

ample, to have a text field to be able to fill in 

the phone number of the office in the register 

of the associations. Jason told the user that 
this had already been implemented and 
showed it to the user. Another wanted the text 

on the information page to be formulated dif-
ferently because the present formulation was a 
bit unclear. Jason discussed this proposal to-

gether with the other participants and agreed 

on a new formulation. Jason encourages users 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20063 to call him if they run into problems after the 
course.  
 4. The software development 
 The development of FRI is an ongoing process. The 
system is continually being improved to satisfy the ever-
evolving needs of users. How do the developers at Ida-
vall manage to make use of and accommodate all the 
error reports and change proposals from their users? 

Despite the absence of a formal development process, 

the process can be seen as two different cycles. The 

faster and smaller on-going development cycle where 

errors are corrected and minor improvements continually 

take place is highly flexible. In the larger and slower 

long-term development cycle, major improvements take 
place. These cycles run simultaneously throughout the 
year.  
Planned formal meetings where the development of 
the booking system is discussed are rare. Informal and 

spontaneous meetings are, on the other hand, very com-

mon. As everyone is located in the same place and only 

a few people are involved, it is easy to meet and talk 

when a problem or question arises. Coffee- and lunch 
breaks serve as important opportunities for common 
discussions. Spontaneous meetings in front of the com-

puter are used to solve implementation problems and 

discuss improvements.  
 4.1 Deciding what to do 
 Idavall, as we have seen, has a valuable ongoing dia-
logue with users via the support service, user-meetings, 

courses and similar activities. As mentioned earlier, it is 
through these activities that users present their change 
proposals. Before the implementation of new functional-

ity starts, the proposals are reviewed and informally 

ranked by the staff. Proposals are ranked according to 
their quality: Is the change generic? How would it affect 
other functionality? Is it useful for many users? And how 

cumbersome will it be to implement the change? Ted, one 

of the developers, said that he preferred to implement 
many smaller improvements rather than one large one 
because many smaller changes make a lot of people 

happy. As every developer also has contact with users 

and customers, their perspective is shared by many. 
 4.2 Daily ongoing development cycle 
 The focus here is on implementation of users’ propos-
als, refinements of existing functionalities, improvements 

in existing parts and correcting errors. Correcting errors 

has the highest priority. Programming takes place primar-

ily in the afternoons when the support service is closed. It 
takes between one and five weeks for a new version to be 
released on the website. A ‘What’s new’ description is 
published for each version which describes what kinds of 
changes have been implemented. This allows users to 
choose for themselves whether or not to download the 
most recent version. The system is designed so that not 

every change needs to be downloaded and installed. 

When a change is small only the program modules need 

to be updated; the database remains unchanged. The idea 

is that every user shall be able to download and install a 

new version without the help of a technician. However 

new versions are in most cases installed by a technician; 

this is often because FRI is hosted on a server..  
Once a year or when necessary, a major release is de-
livered. This is announced on the website and every user 

receives an e-mail. This updates the database and pro-

gram modules. All workstations must also be updated.  

 4.3 Long-term development cycle 
 The last major development took place in 1996, when 
a module was added that introduced steering number 

code locks throughout the system. Today a new 32-bit 

version of FRI, which will replace the present 16-bit 

version, is being developed by Ted. The development of 

this new version normally takes place when the smaller 

development cycles are relatively quiet. The new version 

will offer opportunities to add several new features, e.g. 

the automatic sending of an e-mail to confirm a booking. 
Today one must copy a confirmation and paste it into an 
external e-mail program before it can be sent. It is impos-
sible to implement some of the change proposals in the 
present software due to an outdated implementation tech-

nique. The new version will accommodate the new im-

provements. Some users think that the 16-bit version is a 

little old-fashioned and has some technical disadvantages. 
A beta-version is already available for users interested 
in testing it. These users give feedback; this influences 

the ongoing development. The old version of the software 

will be maintained and run parallel with the new version 

for an indefinite time. It is not clear when the new version 

will be released but there is a large demand for it. The 
length of the delay depends on how long it will take to 
produce a reliable version. As the maintenance and im-
provement of today’s version have priority, planning is 
difficult
.  5. How to understand Idavall’s practice 
 The method described above of interacting with users 
when it comes to the further development of the software 

and development process can be understood, we claim, as 

a combination of non-traditional PD and non-traditional 

software engineering. By non-traditional PD, we mean a 
form of PD that not take place in the form of organized 
workshops as part of a nicely cut development project. 
The software development process, we observed, is also 

different to the traditional way of developing software. 

However, this non-traditional method of involving users 

in the development process suits the situation at hand, 

and the software development process is necessary to 

accommodate the users’ feedback and change proposals. 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20064 We use our experiences of Idavall’s method of devel-
oping software and discuss how it is possible to combine 

PD and a more agile way of developing software to de-

velop and maintain a fruitful co-operation between devel-

opers and users. 
First, we discuss PD practices. Then we briefly de-
scribe agile software development and its background, 

and relate it to the development practices we observed. In 

the section that follows
, we discuss the central measures 
for taking in feedback and design proposals from a dis-

pread user community and for combining PD with an 

agile-like software development process; we also discuss 

to what these measures can be generalized.  
 5.1 An introduction to participatory design  
 PD is considered to be a Scandinavian approach to sys-
tem design that is strongly tied to thoughts and principles 
regarding democracy within the workplace. ‘This Scandi-
navian approach might be called a work-oriented design 
approach. Democratic participation and skill enhance-
ment – not only productivity and product quality – them-
selves considered ends for the design’. [7, p. 41]  
A traditional PD approach has two important character-
istics. The first is of a political nature, and deals with 

questions of workplace democracy and control over the 

workplace. PD has an explicit agenda for organizational 

and political change [14]. The second is of a technical 

nature, and states that the participation of skilful users in 
a development process contributes to successful design 
and high quality products. PD is a learning process where 
the user and the system developer, or the designer, learn 

from one another [7]. 
Traditionally, PD has a number of guiding principles, 
and a range of techniques that are applied in practice. The 

principles include the acknowledgement of diversity, 

ensuring the real impact of the participants’ viewpoints in 

the design process, mutual learning at all levels, separa-
tion of interest groups, and protection of participants. 
Methods include visiting work places, creating work 

scenarios, future workshops and organizational games, 
mockups and prototyping [22]. 
Tools and methods used in PD are to a large extent 
based on early projects concerned with developing meth-

ods for ‘participative analysis of relations between work 

and technology and strategies for union influence over 
technology projects run by managers and IT profession-
als’ [7, p. 174]. These tools and methods have a common 

goal: to provide users and designers with methods for 

connecting current and future work practices with visions 

of a future technology, by allowing access to the experi-

ences of both users and designers [7]. An objective for 
participating in the process of PD is that it gives the de-
signer new and better ways of gaining an understanding 
of the user’s everyday work practices. [21] Design pro-
fessionals need knowledge of the actual use context and 

employees need knowledge of possible technological 

options. These types of knowledge are developed most 
effectively through active cooperation between employ-
ees and designers. [14] 
 5.2 A non-traditional way of conducting partici-
patory design 
 That there is something likes user participation going 
on in the development of the booking system cannot be 

disputed, but it is carried out in a way which is non-

traditional way for PD. Users affect the development 

through user-meetings, technical support and courses, 
but they never actually participate in design activities 
like workshops or mock-up evaluation. Users feel that 
they have an opportunity to affect developments. Very 
few users express sentiments concerning Idavall’s re-

sponsiveness. What is going to be implemented is ulti-

mately determined by the developers at Idavall. User 

feedback is the key factor in the development process. 

The importance of user feedback is also recognised in 
PD literature. Developing software systems without 
listening to the users may be possible, but it is unlikely 

that such a system will live up to users’ requirements. 

Feedback is also needed during the entire life cycle of a 

system. It ensures that a system is continually improved 
and adapted to changing work practices. [14] 
Traditional PD methods do not fit into the situation 
described above since users are located at different work 
places all over Scandinavia and because the small size of 
the company precludes large-scale, dispersed user in-

volvement. A large and dispersed population of users, 

and the co-operative use of mock-ups and prototypes is 

likely to be outdated before they have even been pro-

duced. Moreover, small work places, companies or or-

ganisations do not always have the opportunity to carry 
out projects where users and designers can work to-
gether over a long period to develop a system uniquely 
suited to the tasks, practices and environments of its 
users. Instead, this company has evolved a tailored form 

of user participation which allows it to function and 

users’ needs still to be brought into the design process. 

[22] Such activities as user meetings, courses and the 

support service took over this role in the development 

process described. The present system takes the place of 
activities like prototyping and builds a base for further 
discussions and development. During discussions users 

come up with proposals based on the needs in the day-

to-day work situation. These proposals are used as input 
for forthcoming versions and part of the evolutionary 
development. The support service and courses work in a 

similar way.  
Toerpel, et al. [22] describe a similar case of a net-
worked organisation where traditional PD methods are 
not applicable. They recommend instead a continuous 

process of parallel experimentation and network-wide 

collection of experience, feedback, and integration into 

an overarching infrastructure consisting of a variety of 

local substructures when participants are not are able to 

meet for bigger design sessions, or when the infrastruc-

ture does not allow that. They believe that an ongoing 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20065 process of contributions and discussion in smaller 
groups will have a positive effect on the on-going devel-

opment of a system. The smaller groups they describe 

can be compared to what Fischer [8] called 
Communities 
of Interests
 (CoI). Another concept introduced by 
Fischer and Ostwald [9] is 
informed participation 
which 
can be regarded as an extension of PD. Informed partici-

pants work in different work places, but have same prob-

lems that are comparable to others in similar or different 

workplaces. A basic challenge facing the CoIs is the 

development of a shared understanding of the task at 

hand. New knowledge is constructed through discus-

sions and mutual learning. Participation shifts in such 

circumstances from designing a system to using and 
evolving it. User meetings and courses are activities that 
usually bring users together and help to develop CoIs.  
The measures taken by Idavall allow the users of the 
booking system to influence the development of the 
software and as such their individual working situation. 
We suggest that the traditional methods and tools for PD 

must be adapted to suit the employees and customers 

needs and practices in order to allow for user participa-
tion even, as in our case, in the development of off-the-
shelf software.   
However, our case also shows that the development 
process must complement user participation. There is an 

obvious need for flexible development processes that 

allow quick response to error reports and change pro-

posals. Below we discuss similarities between agile 
software development - a highly flexible methodology 
that implements a customer-centred approach - and the 
observed development practice.   

 5.3 An introduction to agile software develop-
ment 
 Agile software development can be seen as a reaction 
against too rigorous and bureaucratic development proc-

esses. In the early years of software development many 

organizations and companies developed software without 

any recall to a process model. This worked well as long 
as systems were small and not too complex. As programs 
grew in size and complexity, different methods were 
developed to make software development more predict-
able and efficient. Strong emphasis was put on the plan-

ning process. One of the best known methods is the wa-

terfall model that was first described in 1970 by Winston 
Royce. [18] The waterfall model emphasizes develop-
ment through sequential phases with predefined docu-

ments and milestones. The customer is only involved 

before the project starts and when it comes to testing the 
final product. The end-user is not mentioned at all. [18].  
Iterative process models have been developed to cope 
with the short comings of that model, especially when 

requirements of the software and its interaction with the 

environment cannot be defined in advance. (See [1] for 

an example.) To allow for a co-development of work 

practices and technology, Floyd et al developed an evolu-

tionary model for software development. [10] However, 
even today many practitioners and researchers applying 
and developing PD and use-oriented development accept 

that user participation should be limited to the ‘early 

phases’.[13]  
Agile software development has developed as a practi-
tioner’s answer to the software development models 

oriented towards control that are proposed by the main-

stream of software development. [4] Agile software de-

velopment is a methodology that aims to make software 

development more flexible and focuses on highly flexible 

environments with quickly changing requirements. [4] An 

emphasis is put on flexible planning that allows adapta-

tion to changes in business and technology. Agile soft-

ware development implements a highly customer-centred 
approach where the customer plays a central role during 
the design process. Projects involve customer feedback 

on a regular basis. The proponents of this method rec-

ommend close customer-developer co-operation and 
communication in a highly iterative, prototype-based 
process that provides early feedback on development 

efforts. The aim is to deliver working software on a regu-

lar basis, every couple of weeks or at least every couple 
of months. The working software is the primary measure 
of progress. [18] 
Discussions centred on agile development open pre-
pare the ground for reconsideration of the relationship 

between PD and software development. Rittenbruch et al. 

[17] used agile software development combined with 

participation of a dispersed user community. The early 
versions invited for highly qualified feedback to an inno-
vative application.  
In the light of the discussion centering on agile devel-
opment, the practices we observed at Idavall can be de-

scribed as agile development practice: Software is devel-

oped in small cycles. Idavall publishes about 20 revisions 

per year via its website. User feedback is collected via the 

support line and user meetings. The developers them-

selves take part in these activities. The change proposals 
are prioritised in accordance with their value they provide 
for users. Major re-factoring efforts take place alongside 

and through the smaller development cycles. Idavall’s 
example also shows that user participation cannot in 
always be organised independently of the development 

process: Without a quick reaction to error reports and 

improvement proposals, users would not have the confi-

dence that their feedback is taken seriously.   
The development practices at Idavall, as well as the 
project reported about in [17] also highlight that changes 

in the technical development process are not enough. If 

user involvement is taken seriously, the organization of 

user participation when combined with an agile process 

requires additional measures beyond those is proposed in 
the related literature. Developers, on the other hand, who 
use agile software development processes often lack a 
more thorough knowledge of the context and the users 
where the system will be implemented. In the literature 

cited above, the customer is represented by a person who 

may or may not have a sound understanding of the use 

context of the software. An obvious risk is that one repre-
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20066 sentative cannot sufficiently convey the users’ needs and 
requirements to the development team. 
Idavall has developed a practice which involves col-
lecting user feedback and change proposals to inform an 

agile-like software development practice that allows 

developers to react quickly and in a flexible manner. In 

the following section we discuss the tools and means 

used by Idavall to involve diverse and dispersed users in 

the agile development of the booking system and discuss 

their applicability in a wider context.  
 6. Making use of feedback and design pro-
posals from a dispersed user community  
 What can we learn from Idavall’s practice of combin-
ing agile development with participatory design? We 
identify four tools or methods. Firstly, Idavall’s support 

service is designed to be informal, friendly and encourag-

ing. Even developers take part in providing the service. 

Users do not only report problems and receive help, they 
also chat about possible improvements. Secondly, a data-
base is used to keep track of problems and develop a 

common resource for remedies; it is also used to keep 
track of change proposals. Thirdly, with the aid of 
courses, user meetings and a newsletter, the user commu-

nity provides Idavall with feedback and design input from 

experienced users. It is from this community that beta 

version testers are recruited. Fourthly, with an agile-like 

development process the developers can accommodate 

the users’ feedback and change proposals in a flexible 

way.  

 6.1 Using support as a channel for feedback and 
change proposals 
 Idavall uses the support service as an input for error 
reports, general feedback and change proposals. Accord-
ing to Idavall’s policy everybody, even the developers 
are involved in the support service. It is considered im-
portant that the developers know their users and to re-

ceive feedback and change proposals from those who 

actually use the software. The developers also have the 

opportunity to ask for clarifications and additional in-

formation. Errors can be corrected immediately, and the 
source of irritation is limited. The close relationship 
between developer and user allows the latter to feel 

comfortable in suggesting new features and complaining 

if necessary. Often, support calls generate proposals for 

new functionality. There might, for instance, be a wish 
for an extra text field to be added to be able to fill in a 
mobile phone number. Another proposal can be to in-

crease the opportunity to change different settings in the 
web application. Almost all proposals, errors and change 
requests are taken to the coffee table and discussed.  
The support service is widely used to generate error 
reports which will be handled by the maintenance de-

partment. Pool et al. [16] report on the deployment of 

support service knowledge to provide more comprehen-
sive input in the form of user stories for an agile mainte-
nance process. Having said this, the support service is 

seldom if ever used to generate input for further design 

and development. It might be possible to use this support 

service more systematically as a communication channel 

for involving users in the development process.   
 6.2 Using Customer Relationship Management 
tools to keep track of user feedback 
 To keep track of user feedback and change proposals, 
particularly where many people use the software, some 

kind of computer-based system is helpful. Idavall uses a 

database to store information about customers, users, and 

support calls. As every phone call is documented, the call 
taker can look up the version the user has installed and 
earlier problems reported from the same place. The log is 

also used to collect change proposals and other feedback 

when planning implementation work. 
Idavall’s database can be seen as a customer relation-
ship management tool. Customer Relationship Manage-
ment (CRM) is a concept used in the economic marketing 

area. The aim of CRM is to create a strong and lasting 
relation between supplier and customer. [2] Computer-
ized systems that manage customer relationship are 

commercially available. Marketing and sales departments 

are the main users of these systems.  
CRM tools may be used as complements to PD, espe-
cially when feedback from a great number of customers 

and users has to be taken care of. Idavall shows that the 

use of CRM methods and tools must be backed up by a 

commitment to react to error reports, feedback and 

change proposals. 
  6.3 Developing a user community 
 Idavall organises courses and user meetings, and dis-
tributes a newsletter. Users are encouraged to help each 

other and share knowledge about special ways of using 

the software. The mutual exchange and the way feedback 
is taken into account during future development allow a 
user community to grow. People are engaged in discuss-
ing possible future developments, and they allow the 

testing of early versions of the software when a long-term 

development cycle comes to a close. Users share the 

practice of using FRI, and they have a common interest in 

improving the software so that it adjusts to their develop-

ing needs. They can be regarded as a community of inter-

est, even if it is a dispersed one.  
Similar user communities can be observed in the com-
puter game industry. [11, 12] Expert users receive pre-
view versions of new developments and become involved 
in designing new features. As the computer gamers feel at 

ease with electronic communication, the establishment of 

a website virtual community seems sufficient.
2                                                 
 2 Virtual communities are digital intermediaries which can support 
continuous interaction between different social interest groups on the 
Internet or, for example, between software providers and users. [3] 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20067 In both cases, the commitment of the development or-
ganisation to take design proposals from the community 

into account when developing the software provides an 

important incentive for users to become involved.  
 6.4 Using an agile-like software development 
process 
 The processes and practices of Idavall closely resem-
ble those practices usually spoken of as agile software 

development. In small delivery cycles, developers focus 
on corrections and improvements; whereas redevelop-
ment takes place within a longer time frame. These de-
velopment practices allow developers to take into consid-
eration the feedback of the users. Users steer the devel-

opment even when they are not on site; requirements for 

new functionality are derived from the users’ feedback; 

prioritization of requirements takes place on the same 

basis; new code is tested and integrated on a daily base. 
Developers share a common coffee and lunch area and 
communication is very close. Informal discussions about 

design are a daily event. The deviation can be motivated 

through the specific situation at Idavall. The program is 

used by a widely dispersed and somewhat diverse group 
of customers and users. The development team is ex-
tremely small. 
Participatory design has been connected to evolution-
ary software processes that allowed for learning cycles 
which enable users to experience software in the early 

stages and give qualified feedback for further design. [10] 

Other researchers experienced and discussed the suitabil-

ity of agile development and especially extreme pro-

gramming when combined with participatory design. [17] 

However, as Rittenbruch et al. also discussed, agile soft-

ware development methods have to be adapted to fit 
participatory design. The Idavall case exemplifies how it 
is possible to use agile software development to comple-
ment PD. Here more empirical research and experience 
are needed. 
 7. Possible risks of this way of development  
 As proposed above, Idavall’s practices combine suc-
cessfully user participation with an agile-like software 

development process. Users are highly involved in the 

development process, and the developers can react 

quickly to new requirements. But the observant reader 
might wonder whether everything is really so unproblem-
atic. And of course, one can find problems; and the de-

velopment process has disadvantages and involves risks 

as well. These can have a serious impact on the develop-

ment process and cause problems. We see the following 

potential problems. 
The prioritization process is totally controlled by the 
developers at Idavall, users are only able to propose new 
functionality but have no impact on the process. In the 
end, only certain parts of the user community participate 

in the development process and thereby have an impact 

on the system. These users may not be typical users and 
are thus not representative. This is a potential problem 
since the wrong proposals may be implemented. This is 

the opposite of what happens in open source projects. In 

these projects new proposals are tested heavily by users 

before a new version is released. [15] 
The informality of the development practice and the 
fact that only six people are employed at Idavall makes 

the development process highly dependent on the indi-

vidual person, and thus vulnerable. Every employee has 

his or her own specialties and cannot be easily replaced. 

It takes a long time to learn how the different parts of a 

booking system are built up and how to support them. 

According to Gary, it takes about one year before you are 

able to give FRI support in a proper way and on your 
own. If someone falls ill for a long period there would be 
serious problems. Idavall is aware of this but is not able 

to hire more employees at the moment. Program develop-

ers at Idavall take care of support, develop the program, 
teach courses and participate in user meetings. To imple-
ment such a practice one must find employees who are 

able to rule out both the technical and social aspects of 

the work. It is difficult to find the right people for the job. 
Gary told us that the last time he had to find someone to 
employ who would fit into the company it took him more 

than one year. 
One last question is whether Idavall’s development 
process scales up regarding the size of the software, the 

size of the development team and the size of the user 

community. In any case, it provides an example of how 
use-oriented software development can take place, and as 
such provides a basis for the adaptation of PD, agile 
software development and the measures discussed in the 

previous section to other situations. 
 8. Conclusions
  Small companies in particular could learn from this 
way of using agile development processes and PD as a 

means of becoming more sensitive to customer and user 

requirements. They also could learn how to systemati-

cally gather user feedback and make use of it in the de-
velopment process.  
• The members of a dispersed user community have a 
major impact on a software development process. Us-
ers steer development in the sense that they give feed-
back on an existing program and make proposals for 

new functionality. This is made possible by the differ-

ent arrangements where users and developers regularly 

interact with each other, face-to face and by telephone. 

These arrangements serve not only to provide informa-
tion to the company, but also to generate a sense of im-
portance and value among users and customers in such 
a way that they generate a ‘community of interest’ by 
talking to each other and exchanging useful ideas.  
• The database – the CRM tool - also plays an important 
role in the development process by providing a starting 
point for the kinds of interaction mentioned above.  
• Traditional PD still focuses on the working place and 
the people who will use the new system, i.e. the users. 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20068 The more technical side of the development process is 
not taken into consideration sufficiently. It is important 

to understand the technical process to be able to fully 

accommodate PD and the technical side of software 

development. 
• Developers who use agile software development proc-
esses, on the other hand, often lack a more thorough 
knowledge of the users and the use context of the sys-
tem. The customer is represented by a person who may 
or may not have a sound understanding of the users and 
the use context of the software.  
• A combination of PD and agile-like software develop-
ment, where both user context and development issues 
are taken into consideration could stimulate the crea-

tion of a more comprehensive picture of how a user-

oriented software engineering process for off-the-shelf 

software could look.  
• An agile-like software development process makes 
development highly flexible and sensitive to the envi-
ronment in which the software is used. User feedback 
can be responded to at short notice. Flexible software 

and processes are of special interest in the area of e-

government where a lot of different end users, e.g. citi-

zens, administrators and local developers have diverse 

requirements and needs. The software is brought into 
line with customers’ and users’ needs. 
However, more empirical research and experience are 
needed to further understand and develop agile devel-
opment processes complementing PD. 

 9. Acknowledgments 
 Thanks are due to the users of FRI and members of 
staff at Idavall for their kind co-operation. A special 

thanks our colleagues for inspiring discussions. Also 

thanks to the E-participation project financed by the 

foundation of the savings bank Kronan and run by prof. 

Sara Eriksén, Blekinge Institute of Technology. 

 10. References 
 [1] Boehm, B. W. A Spiral Model of Software Development 
and Enhancement, 
IEEE Computer
, May, 1988 
 [2] Brown, S A. (ed.) 
Customer Relationship Management: A 
Stratecic Imperative in the World of E-Business
, Wiley, UK, 
2000  [3] Chang, A-M., Kannan, P.K., Whinston, A. B.  Electronic 

Communities as Intermediaries: The Issues and Economics. In: 
Proceedings of the 32
ndHawaii International Conference on 
System Science, 
IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, 
CA, 1999 
 [4] Cockburn, A. 
Agile software development, 
Addison-Wesley, 
Boston, 2002 

 [5] Dittrich, Y., Eriksén, S., Hansson, C. PD in the Wild: Evolv-
ing Practices of Design in Use. In: Binder, T., Gregory J., Wag-

ner I. (eds). 
Proceedings of the Participatory Design Confer-
ence,
 CPSR
, Malmö, Sweden, 2002 
[6] Dittrich, Y., Ekelin, A., Elovaara, P., Eriksén, S., Hansson, 
C. Making e-Government happen: Everyday co-development of 
services, citizenship and technology. In: 
Proceedings of the 36
th Hawaii International Conference on System Science, 
IEEE 
Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 2003 
 [7]Ehn, P. Scandinavian Design: On Participation and Skill. In: 
Schuler, D., Namioka, A. (eds.): 
Participatory Design: Princi-
ples and Practices,
 Hillsdale, New Jersey, 1993, pp. 41ff. 
 [8] Fischer, G. Communities of Interests: Learning through the 
Interaction of Multiple Knowledge Systems. 
24th Annual Infor-
mation System Research Seminar in Scandinavia (IRIS’24)
, Ulvik, Norway, 2001 
 [9] Fischer, G., Ostwald, J. Seeding, Evolutionary Growth, and 
Reseeding: Enriching Participatory Design with Informed Par-
ticipation. In: Binder T., Gregory J., Wagner I. (eds). 
Proceed-
ings of the Participatory Design Conference,
 CPSR, USA, 2002 
 [10] Floyd, Ch., Reisen, F. M., Schmidt, G. STEPS to Software 
Development with Users. In: Ghezzi G, Mc Dermid J. A. (eds). 
ESEC ‘89’
 Berlin, 1989 
 [11] Henfridsson, O., Holmström, H. Developing E-commerce 
in internetworked organizations: A case of customer involve-
ment throughout the computer gaming value chain. 
Database 
for Advances in Information Systems, vol:
 33,  
issue:
 4, 2002, 
 pp. 38-50 
 [12] Holmström, H. Virtual Communities as Platforms for 
Product Development: An Interpretive Case Study of Customer 
Involvement in Online Game Development.
In: 
Proceedings of 
ICIS 2001, 22nd International Conference on Information 
Systems
, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2001 
 [13 Kensing, F. Simonsen, J., Bødker, K. MUST - A method for 
Participatory Design. 
Human-Computer Interaction,
 Vol. 13, 
no. 2, 1998, pp. 167-198
   [14] Kensing, F., Blomberg, J. Participatory Design: Issues and 
Concerns. In: 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work
 7, 
Klu-
wer Academic Publishers, Netherlands, 1998, pp. 167-185. 
 [15] Locke, J. 
Open Source Solution for Small Business Prob-
lems,
 Charles River Media, Hingham, Massachusetts, US, 2004 
 [16] Pool, C. Huisman, J W.
 Using Extreme Programming in a 
maintenance Environment
, IEEE Software
, Vol. 18, no. 6, 2001, 
pp. 19-26,  

 [17] Rittenbruch, M., McEvan, G., Ward, N., Mansfiels T., 
Bartenstein, D. Extreme Participation – Moving Extreme Pro-
gramming Towards Participatory Design. In: Binder, T., Greg-
ory, J., Wagner, I. (eds).
 Proceedings of the Participatory De-
sign Conference,
 CPSR
, Malmö, Sweden, 2002 
 [18] Robert C. Martin Agile Development: Principles, Patterns, 
and Process. In Robert C. Martin 
Agile Processes
, Prentice Hall, 
2002. 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20069 [19] Royce, W. 
Software Project Management, A Unified 
Framework
, Addison-Wesley, USA, 1998 
 [20] Rönkkö, K, Lindeberg, O and Dittrich, Y, ‘Bad Practice’ or 
‘Bad Methods’. Are Software Engineering and Ethnographic 
Discourses Incompatible? In: 
2002 International Symposium on 
Empirical Software Engineering
 (ISESE 2002). 
 [21] Shuler, D., Namioka, A. (eds.). 
Participatory Design: 
Principles and Practices
, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hills-
dale, New Jersey, 1993. 
 [22] Toerpel, B., Wulf, V., Kahler, H. Participatory Organiza-
tional and Technological Innovation in Fragmented Work Envi-
ronments. In: Dittrich, Y., Floyd, C., Klichewski, R. (eds). 
Social Thinking – Software Practice, 
MIT Press, USA, 2002 
 [23] Winch, P. 
The Idea of a Social Science, 
Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, London, 1958 
      Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200610