   Agile principles and ethical conduct 
Ken H. Judy 
Simon and Schuster kjudy@computer.org 
  Abstract 
Software practitioners experience pressure to 
compromise their work and their reasonable care for 

others. Even as software becomes more beneficial, 

pervasive, and interconnected, the potential for 
unintended harm grows. Agile Software Development 
is an approach to building software systems that 

embodies a set of declared 
core principles. How do 
these principles align to an ethical standard of 

conduct? This paper attempts from an Agile 

Practitioner
s perspective to compare and contrast 
Agile Principles with other approaches to Software 
Ethics. It identifies areas of strong resonance and gaps 

that exist between the stat
ed Agile Principles and an 
explicit software code of ethical conduct. 
1. The potential for harm and for benefit 
Figure 1: Economist Cover, September 2007 
As our identities and activities become wed to 
software systems, developers have begun to affect our 

lives in ways and to degrees we hadn
t anticipated.  
In the discreet world of computing, there is no 
meaningful metric in which small change and small 

effects go hand in hand.
 - (Dijkstra 1989. p. 1400) 
 the normally predictable linkage between acts and their 
effects is severely skewed by the infusion of 

computing technology.
 [1] This is due in part to miniaturization, global 
interconnectivity and commoditization. More and more 

people have access to devices with more and more 

computational power. 
Thus while [integrated circuits] are a primary 
driver of complexity in modern day objects, they also 
enable the ability to shrink a frighteningly complex 

machine to the size of a cute little gum-drop
 There is 
no turning back to the age when large objects were 
complex and small objects were simple.
 [2] These underlying advances spur evolution in the 
software industry with new languages and frameworks 

and lower thresholds to creating complex systems. The 

worldwide software developer population is expected 
to grow to 19.5 million by 2010 from 14.5 million in 
2007. [3] 
The growing influence of software in our society is 
also driven by our transition from an industrial to a 

service economy. According to the US State 
Department, in 2006 67.8% of US GDP came from the 
services sector. The US maintains a $79.8B trade 
surplus in services while carrying an $800B trade 
deficit in manufactured goods. [4] 
So, as providing services through machine 
interfaces has become more achievable, our lives and 
our livelihoods have increasingly begun to revolve 
around those services.  
Figure 2. Identity on a Mobile Device  
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20091978-0-7695-3450-3/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE   This pervasiveness leads to indirect chains of cause 
and effect among systems. Dependencies may be 

intrinsic such as the linking of a retail shopping 
account to a credit card. Dependencies may be 
accidental. Credentials revealed on an entertainment 

website may unlock a bank account on another site. 
The cause of many such surprises seems clear: The 
systems involved are complex, involving interaction 

among and feedback between many parts. Any changes 
to such a system will cascade in ways that are difficult 
to predict; this is especially true when human actions 

are involved.
 [5] 
This creates opportunity for criminality by software 
developers and others who exploit software systems. 
11/9/2007 LOS ANGELES (Reuters) - 
A Los 
Angeles man on Friday admitted infecting 250,000 
computers and stealing the identities of thousands of 

people by wiretapping their communications and 

accessing their bank accounts.
 [6] 
In 2006, 36% of all complaints to the FTC were 
related to identity theft (246K incidents) another 11% 
to other online activities.
 [7] It also creates the potential for unintended harm by 
well-intentioned software practitioners. 
Every week hundreds of vulnerabilities are being 
reported in web applications, and are being actively 
exploited. The number of attempted attacks every day 
for some of the large web hosting farms range from 
hundreds of thousands to even millions.
 - SANS 
Institute [8] 
Software bugs, or errors, are so prevalent and so 
detrimental that they cost the U.S. economy an 
estimated $59.5 billion annually, or about 0.6 percent 
of the gross domestic product
 - 2002 NIST Study [9] 
The Information and Communications Technology 
sector accounts for nearly 2% of global greenhouse gas 
emissions, and that data centres account for 23% of the 
direct footprint of the sector.
 -- Gartner [10] 
Figure 3. Data Center 
In technology, size is no longer a predictable 
measure of consequence. Small contains great 
expressive power. Not only small tools but mundane 
and seemingly insignificant decisions about their 

implementation can have tremendous consequences. 
Software developers ought to be concerned with 
people and the world around them. As human beings, 

they should be determined to do more good in their 

lives than harm. Software developers need to consider 

the potential consequences of day to day decisions. 

This consideration is the domain of software ethics. 
2. Agile software development 
Agile software development encompasses several 
software project management and execution 
methodologies which evolved largely independently 
over the last twenty years. The originators and other 

advocates of these methodologies self-identify their 

practices as 
agile
 and are loosely associated through 
member organizations such as the Agile Alliance. 
Agile software development incorporates a wide 
range of influences from pre-existing iterative and 

evolutionary development methodologies, empirical 

process control, games theory, lean product 
development, and learning gleaned from highly 
productive software development teams.  
Some prominent Agile methodologies include: 

Adaptive Software Development ASD
 (Jim 
Highsmith) - incorporates experience in RAD and the 

fundamental view of software development groups as 
complex adaptive systems. [11] 
Crystal
 (Alistair Cockburn) - an array of 
approaches that add ceremony as criticality or scale 

increases. Emphasizes development as a cooperative 

game. [12] 
Extreme Programming XP
 (Kent Beck, Ward 
Cunningham, Ron Jeffries) - primarily a set of 
mutually supporting coding practices based on direct 

experience with the first XP team at DaimlerChrysler. 

[site] [13] 
Lean Software Development 
(Mary and Tom    
Poppendieck) - applies lean principles from the Toyota 
product system to software development. [14] 
Scrum
 (Ken Schwaber, Jeff Sutherland, Mike 
Beedle) - a management and control process influenced 

by academic research on Japanese product 

development and empirical process control.[15]  
3. Agile software development and the 
mushy stuff of values and culture 
We are uncovering better ways of developing 
software by doing it and helping others do it. Through 

this work we have come to value: Individuals and 

interactions over processes and tools. Working 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20092   software over comprehensive documentation. 
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation. 

Responding to change over following a plan.
 [16] 
What the originators of Agile practices held in 
common was a set of values they jointly published as 

the 
Manifesto for Agile Software Development
. The 
manifesto consists of a preamble and a list of twelve 

principles.  
Figure 4: An agile development team 
At the core, I believe Agile Methodologists are 
really about 
mushy
 stuff about delivering good 
products to customers by operating in an environment 

that does more than talk about 
people as our most 
important asset
 but actually 
acts as if people were 
the most important, and lose the word 
asset
. So in the 
final analysis, the meteoric rise of interest in and 
sometimes tremendous criticism of Agile 
Methodologies is about the mushy stuff of values and 
culture.
 -- Jim Highsmith [17] 
4. The principles behind the Agile 
Manifesto[18] 
Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer 
through early and continuous delivery of valuable 
software. 
Welcome changing requirements, even late in 
development. Agile processes harness change for the 

customer's competitive advantage. 
Deliver working software frequently, from a couple 
of weeks to a couple of months, with a preference to 
the shorter timescale. 
Business people and developers must work together 
daily throughout the project. 
Build projects around motivated individuals. Give 
them the environment and support they need, and trust 

them to get the job done. 
The most efficient and effective method of 
conveying information to and within a development 

team is face-to-face conversation. 
Working software is the primary measure of 
progress. 
Agile processes promote sustainable development. 
The sponsors, developers, and users should be able to 

maintain a constant pace indefinitely. 
Continuous attention to technical excellence and 
good design enhances agility. 
Simplicity--the art of maximizing the amount of 
work not done--is essential. 
The best architectures, requirements, and designs 
emerge from self-organizing teams. 
At regular intervals, the team reflects on how to 
become more effective, then tunes and adjusts its 
behavior accordingly. 
5. Existing approaches to software ethics 
Before discussing how Agile principles inform 
ethical decision making, it would be valuable to briefly 
review other systems of ethical thought in software. In 
particular, the craft model and the engineering 
approach to software ethics. 
5.1. The craft guild and reputation 
Advocates of the craft model of software 
development believe efficacy and quality arise from 
mastery and that the primary mode of learning is hands 
on supervised practice. 
What matters is that the people working in 
software development be skilled practitioners of their 

craft and that they are continually working to hone and 

improve their skills.
 [19] Under a craft system, learning is transferred hands 
on as one ascends through mentorship and experience 

from apprentice to journeyman to master craftsperson.  
For this model to exist in the typical software 
organization, radical changes need to occur in the 
industry. For example, the economics would have to 
change. Developers with few years of experience, i.e. 
apprentices, would need to be paid significantly less so 

that there would be fewer novices entering the field. 

This would create more appropriate ratios to allow 

mentoring from journeymen developers. 
Experience would need to garner greater respect in 
the workplace. Developers with a decade or more of 
experience and mastery of craft would need to be 

retained in greater numbers. They would have to be 
paid significantly more and would need the authority 

required to build craft shops around themselves. 

Software suppliers would need to be selected for work 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20093   based on personal recommendations and the 
reputations of the master craftspeople who head them. 
If such changes were pervasive, the impetus for 
ethical action would fall on the need to protect one
s reputation. 
Peer recognition and recommendations are 
the route to better software. When one developer 

recommends another, he is putting his own reputation 

on the line.
 [20] 
The problem with using the craft model as a guide 
for ethical behavior is that while reputation can be a 
strong incentive for personal standards it does not in 

and of itself inform what those standards should be nor 

does it expand the area of concern to broader 

stakeholders who, while affected by a developer
s decisions, are in no position to assign blame or affect 
reputation.  
5.2. Plan-driven software ethics 
A more systematic approach to addressing the 
moral dimensions of a practice is to professionalize. In 
the mid-nineteenth century, partly in response to the 
catastrophic failures of iron railway bridges, 
engineering 
began to apply the scientific method to 
structural problems, it moved away from purely 

aesthetic considerations and separated itself from 

architecture
 [21] 
Thus began what Samual Florman calls 
the golden 
age of engineering
. Before 1850 there had been fine engineers and 
many outstanding engineering works. But engineering 

itself had been rather a craft than a profession, relying 

more on common sense and time-honored experience 
than on the application of scientific principles, and 
lacking those essentials of true professionalism -- 

professional schools and professional societies.
 [22] In fact many advocates of this approach consider 
software development an emerging engineering 

profession. However, this question can be taken 
separately from a consideration of software 
development as profession. 
A profession has requirements for learning and 
training, a code of ethics imposing higher standards 
than normally tolerated in the marketplace
, a 
disciplinary system for those breaching the code, a 
primary emphasis on social responsibility, and 
licensing. [23] 
A code of ethics 
should instruct practitioners about 
the standards society expects them to meet, about what 

their peers should strive for, and about what to expect 

of one another. In addition, the code should also inform 
the public about the responsibilities that are important 
to the profession
 [24] 
Enforcing a code of ethics can serve and protect the 
public, provide guidance and inspiration, help 
practitioners arrive at shared standards, provide moral 
support and external validation for courageous 

decisions, educate and engender mutual understanding, 
provide deterrence and discipline and contribute to a 
discipline
s image in the larger society. [25] 
Software development has many existing codes of 
ethics. The IEEE has 
The Software Engineering Code 
of Ethics and Professional Practice
. The ACM has a 
Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
. The 
British Computer Society has a 
Society Code of 
Conduct
. The Australian Computer Society has a 
Code of Ethics
.  At their best, codes of ethics introduce 
consideration for a broad set of stakeholders some of 

whom are present in the software development 
lifecycle: ourselves, co-workers, customers and 
employers. A code of ethics also advocates for 

stakeholders who are rarely present in day to day 

decisions: peers in the industry, end users, the 

reputation of software developers in society, the 

general public, and systems affected by the aggregate 
results of our industry such as the global environment.  
Codes of ethics also delineate possible dilemmas a 
practitioner might encounter such as informed consent, 

safety and welfare, data integrity and representation, 
trade secrets, bribery, conflict of interest, 
accountability, and fairness. [26] 
Consideration of these additional factors does set a 
higher standard than normally tolerated in the 
marketplace.
 However, codes of ethics are in the end only 
artifacts. Like all other attempts to codify essential 
complexity they are in danger 
abstracting away the 
essence of the problem
.  One danger is that a code of ethics will over-
prescribe the software development lifecycle. For 
example, requiring upfront completeness in software 
design and specification.  
Software engineers shall commit themselves to 
making the analysis, specification, design, 
development, testing, and maintenance of software a 

respected profession. Software engineers shall 
approve software only if they have a well-founded 
belief that it
 meets specifications
 [27] 
As methodologies for software development 
continue to evolve, such language may quickly become 
archaic or controversial. 
Another danger is that while no document can 
capture the circumstances of even a small set of 
specific ethical dilemmas, a formally recognized and 
incomplete code lends itself to abuse and can be used 

to actually justify unethical action. 
Whatever the background, individuals may well be 
aware that acts they are about to perform do not meet 

the standards that society will consider to be 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20094   appropriate for moral behavior. An individual my 
nonetheless, feel impelled to act in the way that society 

will judge immoral by the more immediate pressures... 
In such circumstances, finding what looks like a moral 
code that 
does not condemn,
 the course of action in 
question can come as a great relief.
 [28] Therefore, a code of ethics for software 
development must acknowledge it
s incompleteness. It 
must serve as a reminder of an ongoing conversation 
within the software development community and with 
our broad set of stakeholders. It must be a living 

document evolving to address changes in our field.  
The agile approach to documentation is to think of 
it as 
a reminder to have a conversation with 
stakeholders
 [29]. A written code can help remind 
practitioners to encompass a larger set of concerns but 
it is participating in an ongoing conversation among 

their peers, with ethicists, and with those affected by 

software that will help developers address the specific 

day to day dilemmas of software ethics. 
6. Ethical gaps in the agile worldview 
The IEEE Computer Society and Association for 
Computing Machinery 
Software Engineering Code of 
Ethics and Professional Practice
 identifies eight areas 
of concern: the public, the client and employer, the 

product, judgement, management, profession, 

colleagues, and self. Within each of those areas they 
identify 5-15 detailed principles. These areas of 
concern represent the IEEE-CS and ACM
s attempt to 
capture the full range of software engineering ethical 

concerns. 
The Agile Manifesto consists of three four values 
which are embodied in twelve principles. A 
comparison between these twelve Agile principles and 
the IEEE-CS/ACM
 eight areas of ethical concern 
suggests gaps and overlaps between these two ethical 

world views. 
This, of course, does not imply that the original 
authors or current practitioners of Agile Software 
Development lack these values but simply that the 
original authors chose not to express them as part of 

their shared agenda.  
However, as documentation is a reminder to have a 
conversation with stakeholders, gaps in the Agile 
principles suggest stakeholders who may be under-
served, or at least, under-represented in the literature, 

discourse and practice of Agile Software Development. 
As a concession to dissensus between the drafters of 
both documents, requirements for documentation 

artifacts are omitted. This is because consideration of 
the value of artifacts is redundant to the vast majority 
of Agile literature and is beyond the scope of this 
paper.  The first table focuses on how the stated Agile 
Principles shore up an ethical world-view. It is 
organized around the IEEE-CS/ACM
s eight areas of 
concern. The second column lists which of the twelve 

Agile principles directly benefit that area of concern. 
Table 1. Areas of Concern/Agile Principles 
IEEE-CS/ACM 
Area of Concern 
Supporting 
Agile Manifesto 
Principle 
Public
Client
/Employer
continuous delivery 
welcome changing requirements 
working software 
work together 
Product
continuous delivery 
welcome changing requirements 
working software 
technical excellence 
simplicity 
Judgement
technical excellence 
simplicity 
self-organizing teams 
reflection 
Management
work together 
motivated individuals 
face-to-face conversation 
sustainable development 
self-organizing teams 
reflection 
Profession
sustainable development
technical excellence 
self-organizing teams 
reflection 
Colleagues
worktogether 
motivated individuals 
face-to-face conversation 
sustainable development 
self-organizing teams 
reflection 
Selfsustainable development
technical excellence 
self-organizing teams 
reflection 
  Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20095   The second table focuses on ethical gaps in the 
Agile world-view as contained in the Agile Manifesto. 

This table is also organized around the IEEE-
CS/ACM
s eight areas of concern. The second column 
focuses on the detailed principles the IEEE-CS/ACM. 

In particular, which of these detailed principles have no 
direct analog in the twelve principles of the Agile 

Manifesto. 
Table 2. Gaps in Stated Agile principles 
IEEE-CS/ACM 
Agile Manifesto 
Public 
Protect the public good.
 Disclose potential danger to the 
user, the public, or the 
environment 
 Consider issues of physical 
disabilities, allocation of 
resources, economic 
disadvantage and other factors 
that can diminish access to the 
benefits of software. 
 Volunteer 
Client/Employer 
 Product 
 Judgement 
Temper all technical judgments 
with human values. 
 Do not abet conflicts of interest. 
Management 
 Profession 
Avoid associations with unethical 
businesses and organizations 
 Report significant ethical 
violations 
Colleagues 
Encourage colleagues to adhere 
to ethical conduct. 
Self 
Improve their knowledge of 
relevant standards and the law 
 Avoid prejudice 
  7. Agile principles are a compelling but 
incomplete set of ethical concerns 
The Agile Principles represent a commitment to  
delivering business value, software quality, honesty, 
introspection, continuous improvement, humane work 
environments, empowered workers and customer 
collaboration. 
Their strength is with regard to behaviors the 
provide direct value to the customer, a sustainable 

pace, and team and individual excellence.. 
Agile Principles are silent on the responsibility of 
the software developer to the general well-being. This 
includes both things developer should avoid such as 

participating in actions that benefit customers and 

employers but potentially harm un-empowered and 

distant stakeholders. It also omits things developers 

should do such as volunteering, encouraging fair 
distribution of computing resources, and being aware 
of developers standing in law. 
Finally, Agile Principles don
t consider software 
developer
s responsibility for the conduct of software 
developers outside their immediate collaborative team. 
8. Expanding agile practice to consider 
broader ethical concerns 
The author of this paper has no clear formula for 
leveraging agile practices to build higher standards of 
conduct in software development organizations. 
However, several courses of action and further 
investigation should be pursued.  
 Research should be done on ethical dilemmas 
specific to Agile Software Development and on the 
contribution of Agile to ethical software development. 
 Thought leaders in the agile community should 
begin to discuss Agile values and principles as ethics. 
 Thought leaders in the agile community should 
acquire a more sophisticated understanding of the 
current investigations and theories of ethics and 
psychological and cognitive aspects of moral thinking.  
 Professional literature and active online 
community should expand the range of concerns to 

encompass more than business value, efficacy, and 
quality and should explicitly include obligations to end 
users, to society, and to the field of software 

development. 
 The agile community should take more 
responsibility for the actions of peers and champion 
examples of ethical behavior and censure examples of 
unethical behavior in our midst. 
 Agile practitioners should engage in a 
conversation with ethicists in the larger software 

development industry, in engineering and in academia. 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20096   Agile should continue the tradition of learning 
practices from other industries. Agile should also 

receive attention and credit for the contribution it is 
making to ethical, principled software development. 
 Agile practitioners with assistance from the larger  
software development and academic communities 

should adapt existing forums, techniques and language 

to safely discuss ongoing and real ethical dilemmas in 

a way that does not violate employee agreements or 
unnecessarily endanger job security. 
 Agile training curricula should include a survey of 
ethical concerns such as informed consent. To be agile 

should mean to be an informed an ethical practitioner. 
 Agile practitioners should apply existing agile 
practices of retrospection, user-centered design, 
participation of stakeholders to elicit broader ethical 

implications of decisions and projects in the field and 
document and share learning through experience 
reports.
 9. Conclusion 
We, the members of the IEEE, in recognition of 
the importance of our technologies in affecting the 
quality of life throughout the world, and in accepting a 
personal obligation to our profession, its members and 

the communities we serve, do hereby commit ourselves 
to the highest ethical and professional conduct
 [30] We, software practitioners experience pressure to 
compromise our work and our reasonable care for 
others.  
At the same time, the economy has become more 
and more bound to services delivered through software 
interfaces. Software systems are proliferating. 

Complexity is increasing. Inter-dependancy is 

increasing. People
s reliance on software systems is 
increasing. 
As software becomes more beneficial, more 
pervasive, and interconnected, our potential to harm 
grows. 
Agile practices are designed to navigate essential 
complexity. Their growing rate of adoption is based 

upon a founding set of ethical concerns, 
The mushy 
stuff of values and culture.
 The agile community itself 
provides a vital resource of seasoned peers with shared 
values. 
By their very nature, agile practices founded within 
a set of ethical principles makes a contribution to 

conduct in our field. This despite Agile Principles 

providing an incomplete ethical system. The 
conversation on ethical dilemmas is largely absent 
from an Agile context where they do not directly affect 

business value or teams. 
Nonetheless, by expanding the scope to encompass 
a broader range of ethical concerns, applying relevant 

Agile practices, and engaging peers in honest 
retrospection Agile can do more to educated 
developers of the highest ethical conduct. 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20097   10. References 
[1] Maner, W., 
Unique Ethical Problems in Information 
Technology
, Science and Engineering Ethics
, 2:2, April 
1996, pp. 137-54. 
[2] Maeda, J., 
The Laws of Simplicity
, The MIT Press, 
Cambridge, 2006. 
[3] InfoWorld, 
Software developer growth slows in North 
America
, [online] [cited June 6, 2008] 
http://www.infoworld.com/article/07/03/13/HNslowsoftdev_
1.html  
[4] U.S. Department of State's Bureau of International 
Information Programs, 
USA Economy in Brief
, [online] 
[cited June 6, 2008] 
http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/economy-in-

brief/page3.html 
[5] Joy, B., 
Why the future doesn
t need us
, Wired
, June 
2006. 
[6] 
Los Angeles man admits to infecting 250,000 
computers
, Reuters, 
November 9, 2007. 
[7] Anonymous, 
Identify Theft Victim Complaint Data 
January 1 - December 31, 2006,
 Federal Trade Commission, 
Washington D.C., Feb. 2007. 
[8] SANS, 
SANS Top-20 2007 Security Risks (2007 
Annual Update)
, [online] [cited November 11, 2007], 
http://www.sans.org/top20/#c1. 
[9] NIST, 
The Economic Impacts of Inadequate 
Infrastructure for Software Testing
, [online] [cited 
November 11, 2007], 
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n02-10.htm 
[10] Gartner, 
Gartner Estimates ICT Industry Accounts for 
2 Percent of Global CO2 Emissions
, [online] [cited 
November 11, 2007], 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=503867 
[11] Highsmith, J., 
Adaptive Software Development
, Dorset 
House Publishing, New York, 1999. 
[12] Cockburn A., 
Crystal Clear: A Human-Powered 
Methodology for Small Teams
, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 
2005. 
[13] Beck, K., 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change
, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2005. 
[14] 
Poppendieck
, M., and T. Poppendieck, 
Lean Software 
Development: An Agile Toolkit
, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 
2003. 
[15] Schwaber, K., and M. Beedle, 
Agile Software 
Development with Scrum
, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 2002. 
[16] Beck, K., Beedle, M., et, al.,. Principles Behind the 
Agile Manifesto. [Online] [Cited: June 6, 2007] 

http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html. 
[17] Highsmith, J., History: The Agile Manifesto. [Online] 
[Cited: June 6, 2007] http://agilemanifesto.org/history.html. 
[18] Beck, K., Beedle, M., et, al.,. Principles Behind the 
Agile Manifesto. [Online] [Cited: June 6, 2007] 
http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html. 
[19] McBreen, P., 
Software Craftsmanship
, Addison-Wesley, 
Boston, 2002. 
[20] ibid. 
[21] Petroski, H., 
To Engineer is Human, 
Vintage, New 
York, 1992, pg 62. 
[22] Florman, S., 
The Existential Pleasures of Engineering
, St. Martins Press, New York, 1994, pg 6. 
[23] McConnell, S., 
Professional Software Development: 
Shorter Schedules, Better Projects, Superior Products, 

Enhanced Careers
, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2004. 
[24] Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Professional 
Conduct, Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc 
and The Association of Computing Machinery, 1999. 
[25] Martin, M. and Schinzinger, R., 
Ethics in Engineering
, McGraw Hill, Boston, 2005, pg 8. 
[26] Baura, G. 
Engineering Ethics: An Industrial 
Perspective
, Elsevier Academic Press, Burlington VT, 2006. 
[27] Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Professional 
Conduct, Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc. 
and The Association of Computing Machinery, 1999. 
[28] Fairweather, N., 
No PAPA: Why Incomplete Codes of 
Ethics are Worse than None at All
, Ethics in the Age of 
Information Technology, 
Linkoping University Press, 2000. 
[29] Ambler, S., 
Usable UIs
, Dr. Dobbs Journal, February 1, 
2005.  
[30] Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Professional 
Conduct, Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc 

and The Association of Computing Machinery, 1999. 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20098