 Agile Values, Innovation and
the Shortage of Women Software Developers
Ken H. JudySimon & Schusterkjudy@computer.org
AbstractThe percentage of women software developers in the 
U.S. has declined from 42% in 1987 to less than 25% 
today. This is in a software/internet marketplace where 

women are online in equal numbers to men; directly or 

indirectly influence 61% of consumer electronics 

purchases; generate 58% of online dollars; and 

represent 42% of  active gamers. 
Women avoid careers in software due to hostile 
environments, unsustainable pace, diminished sense of 

purpose, disadvantages in pay, and lack of 

advancement, peers or mentors. Agile Software Development is founded upon values 
that challenge such dysfunction in order to build self-

organizing, collaborative and highly productive teams. 

In a high functioning Agile practice, developers 

engage each other, product owners and sponsors in a 

shared concern for quality, predictability and meeting 

the needs of end users.Can Agile values and practice drive changes in the 
workplace to better attract and retain women software 

developers?1.Introduction
Women are opting out of software jobs despite high 
demand for skilled developers. Women are also leaving 

mid-career in disproportionate numbers.This is a lost opportunity. Research conducted over 
twenty years on serially innovative companies shows 

that product teams representing the diversity of their 

customers have an advantage in developing products 

that appeal to those customers.Agile Software Development is greatly influenced 
by this research. Agile consists of many practices 

united by a set of principles and an ambition to change 

the software industry’s approach to building products. 
While the Agile community dwells on methods and 
tools, what fundamentally unites practitioners are a 

core set of principles reflected in the Agile Manifesto 

and distilled into the following values[1]: 
• Individuals and interactions over processes and tools

• Working software over comprehensive documentation
• Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
• Responding to change over following a plan Agile practices are tools. Agile principles give us 
practitioners the urgency, courage and insight to wield 

those tools toward a desired outcome. We will 

therefore create a workplace more tolerant and inviting 

to women if we recognize gender disparity as an 

impediment to our core Agile mission.
In this paper, we will demonstrate that gender 
disparity exists and that it is an impediment to product 

success. We will identify factors in the workplace that 

discourage parity. Finally, we will explain why Agile 

values of collaboration, craft, quality and delivery are a 

framework for addressing these factors.2.Women are underrepresented in CS
Women are less likely to aspire to a career in 
computing, less likely to pursue a degree in computer 

science (CS), and less likely to work as software 

developers. Those women who do make a career in 

high tech are far less likely to attain a leadership role 

and much more likely to leave mid-career.
According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics 
(BLS), women represent 46% of the workforce but 

only 30% of Information Technology (IT) workers and 

less than 25% of software developers. Over the last 

twenty years, the percentage of women developers has 

steadily declined. The disparity is worse in leadership. 

Women account for only 10% of executives in fortune 

500 computer companies[2].Figure 1. Women in the workforce[3]0%10%20%
30%
40%
50%19711976198119861991199620012006
Software DevelopersSystem Analysts2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.9252792012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.925279 2.1.Women are leaving mid-career
Women are leaving IT in larger numbers than men. 
56% of women leave mid-career across all technology 
occupations. 41% leave their careers in “high 

technology” compared to only 17% of men. Half of 

women leaving Science, Technology, Engineering and 

Math (STEM) careers leave the STEM sector 

completely[4].2.2.Women are not studying CS
Women are opting out of CS education in larger 
proportions than men. While men earning CS 

bachelor’s degrees between 1986 to 1995 dropped 

35%, the number of women in the same period 

dropped by 55%[5].Currently, the percentage of women studying CS in 
undergraduate and graduate schools is still falling[6]. 

This despite 1.3 times as many women attending and 

1.35 times as many women graduating from four year 

colleges (2003)[7]. By 2004 women accounted for less 

than 25% of CS bachelor degrees. This is not typical of 

STEM more generally where 49.2% of bachelor 

degrees go to women[8].Figure 2. Women obtaining CS degrees
2.3.Women are disinterested in programming
Young women are not interested in hard IT careers 
like computer programming. The 
Maryland Adolescent 
Development in Context Study
, a longitudinal study of 

1,482 adolescents conducted between 1991 and 2000 

shows women are less interested in CS careers than 

men overall. White women are more disenchanted 

compared to African Americans of both genders and 

white men. 62.2% of white women in the study 

indicated no interest in any IT-related career and were 
0%10.0%20.0%
30.0%
40.0%19711976198119861991199620012006
BS CS Gradsthe least likely to aspire to hard IT or pursue a degree 
in CS[9].Figure 3. IT career aspirations by group3.At what cost to the software industry?
The software world struggles with Diversity as it is. 
It's a problem for our profession, in that we lose access 

to talent, and it's a problem for many women who don't 

get the chance to develop a satisfying career in 

programming. The open-source world in general has 

even bigger issue, and the rails community perhaps 

more so – Martin Fowler
[10]3.1.The need to hire
In 2002, the U.S. software industry represented 
$200B in sales and by 2006 employed 2.2M software 

professionals[11]. 
The U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) considers IT 
to be “among the economy's largest and fastest sources 

of employment growth” having adding 616K jobs 

between 1994 and 2004 and projected to add, despite 

outsourcing, productivity gains and the recession, 

453K jobs through 2014[12].Whether there is a shortage of skilled domestic IT 
workers is a matter of debate entangled in arguments 

over quotas and off-shoring. J. Luftman of Stevens 

Institute of Technology, argues there is citing as 

evidence[13]:• McKinsey & Co. predicts demand for experienced 
IT professionals in the U.S. aged 35-45 will increase 

by 25% while the available pool will decrease by 15%. • 51% of senior executives participating in a 2007 
SIM survey cited "attracting, developing, and retaining 

IT professionals" as their top concern.
3.2.Aligning the domestic workforce
Regardless of whether we can address the demand 
for IT with foreign labor, the U.S. has an excess of 
0%10%20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%No ITHard ITMajor
black malewhite male     black femalewhite female52805280 domestic workers in non-growth sectors. 71% of U.S. 
workers are in jobs with low demand or an oversupply 

of eligible candidates[14].“America needs a world-class STEM workforce”–
John Holdren, President Obama’s science advisor and 

director of the White House Office of Science and 

Technology Policy
Government and industry leaders believe it is in our 
U.S. national interest to increase the pool of 

employable domestic IT workers. According to the 

DOL, the IT sector will grow to accommodate them.
3.3.The cost of attrition
In 2008, HR Management magazine calculated that 
replacing a worker costs on average 100-125% of an 

employee’s annual salary[15]. A mid-career software 

developer is highly compensated and, given the 

complexity of legacy codebases, possesses valuable 

institutional knowledge. Replacing her is expensive.How expensive? According to the BLS, there were 
588K[16] women employed as computer engineers in 

the United States (2006) with a median wage of $85K 

(2008)[17]. 56% of them leave. Retaining one-quarter 

of those women would represent a ten year value of 

82K experienced software developers retained at a 

savings of $8B to their employers.3.4.Lost opportunity in the software industry
3.4.1. Our customer is a woman. 
Women directly or 
indirectly influence 61% of U.S. consumer electronics 

purchases[18]. Men still spend more annually on 

average, $969 compared to $631 for women, but they 

often do so in consultation with their significant others.Women are 42% of active game players and 48% of 
frequent game purchasers. Women 18 and over are 

37% of game players whereas boys 17 and under are 

only 13%[19].Half (50.4%) of the internet population are women 
18 and over. They spend an average of 38 hours per 

month online in close parity with men. They spend 5% 

more time than men engaged in online social activities 

and their time spent on social networks is growing 

more rapidly. Women spend 20% more time on online 

shopping and account for 58% of internet buyers, 61% 

of internet transactions and 58% of internet dollars. 

They account for the majority of dollars spent online 

for apparel, media, home and living, toys, hobbies, 

video games and consoles. They account for 49% of 

the dollars spent on computers and electronics[20].In other sectors, companies as diverse as Home 
Depot, Best Buy, Kodak and Nike created or grew 

significant markets by shaping products and services 

around classes of women consumers[21].
3.4.2. Women are underserved. 
Software products are 
generally designed with no consideration for women as 
distinct user groups. In “Gender differences in Web 

Usability”, F. Spillars states, “
Gender as an audience 
sensitive criteria (differentiation) is barely present in 

North American technology product design (where it is 

much easier to do) let alone Web experiences
[22].”But there a statistical differences in how women 
perceive and use software. L. Xue, et.al. found 

differences in the ways men and women perceive and 

describe products. “
The results of this research have 

revealed female-oriented themes that should motivate 

product semiologists, sociologists, and design 

researchers to enlarge their views of pleasurable 

product design attributes and language for the 

genders[23].” This lack of consideration underserves women. 
Boston Consulting Group (BCG) highlights three ways 

companies fail. 
Poor product design
: failing to tailor 
products to women’s unique needs and challenges. 

Clumsy sales and marketing
: based on outdated images 

and stereotypes. 
Inability to provide meaningful hooks 
or differentiation
: considering women 

indistinguishable from the general customer population 

or thinking of them as one monolithic segment[24].In underserving women the industry perpetuates the 
sense that software is male. Moss et.al. state: “...
men 
had a statistically significant tendency to prefer home 

pages produced by men, and women those produced by 

women. This latter tendency was higher than the 

former[25].”This disadvantages women as both end users and 
content creators: “
We thoroughly analysed a number of 

randomly selected web designer software... most of 

them are typical masculine templates, which makes it 

difficult [for] women to design a feminine looking 

website. It can be one of the reasons of the masculine 

website hegemony on the web[26].”  Horvath et.al.
3.4.3. Potential for harm. 
Failure to adequately 
understand and address the needs of women may harm 

them in ways we cannot anticipate. Software systems 

are a fundamentally complex product that can produce 

unintended consequences.Women find the internet a more hostile space then 
men do. More women experience information overload 

on the internet (24% to 19%), are less confident in use 

of search engines (40% to 54%), and are more 

concerned about theft, fraud and privacy[27].“In the discreet world of computing, there is no 
meaningful metric in which small change and small 

effects go hand in hand.” - (Dijkstra 1989. p. 1400) ... 

the normally predictable linkage between acts and 

their effects is severely skewed by the infusion of 

computing technology[28].” In medicine, Doctors were slow to recognize how 
common heart disease is in women despite the 

mortality rate because, “So much of our understanding 

of the underpinnings of heart disease and heart attack, 

and the basis for our standard methods of diagnosis and 
52815281 treatment are the result of research conducted on 
men[29].” In another recent example, research found 

women require lower dosages of particular anti-

psychotic drugs. Not considering this subjected women 

to wide-scale overdosing and more frequent and 

serious side effects[30]. 
4.Why women are avoiding and, worse, 
leaving software development
The 
Athena 
Study by the Center for Work-Life 
Policy identifies “antigens” in STEM cultures. 
Hostile macho cultures
: 63% of women experience sexual 

harassment. 
Isolation: women are alone on teams with 
no mentors or sponsors. 
Mysterious career paths
: 40% 
of women feel stalled or stuck. 
Systems of risk and 
reward
: the “diving catch” culture disadvantages 

women who would rather prevent emergencies than 

save the day. 
Extreme work pressures
: unsustainable 
hours and stress[31].The 
Why So Few
 study by the American Association 
of University Women (AAUW)[32] adds that girls 

from a young age are more likely to 
doubt they can 
succeed in STEM careers. They believe certain STEM 

careers like software engineering do not have 
meaning or 
social purpose
. They have conflicting 
family 
responsibilities. 
Finally, they face
 gender biases
 such as those expressed by former Harvard University 

President, Larry Summers. This despite evidence that 

what cognitive differences exist statistically between 

genders can be negated with training or do not 

correlate to success in STEM. The Catalyst Study sponsored by IBM adds women 
find themselves excluded from special job 

assignments, don’t understand unwritten norms shared 

by men, and don’t fit the corporate image of a 

manager[33].J. Hunt challenges the causal significance of social 
factors highlighted in the studies above. She argues  

that disproportionate levels of attrition in STEM must 

be attributable to causes that are disproportionately 

reported by women in STEM careers. By analyzing a 

decade of national surveys of college graduates she 

concludes the only differentiated causes are lack of pay 

and advancement which she closely correlates to 

workplaces dominated by men[34].However, as stated earlier, representation in CS 
declined even as it improved in other areas of STEM 

with lower percentages of women in the field. In the 

last ten years, the percentage of women in Engineering 

has risen from 9.1% to 10.6% and women in Physics 

and Astronomy from 12.9% to 13.9%[35]. CS remains 

an outlier.
5.Agile Software Development
 Agile Software Development is a response to a 
perception of high failure rates in the software industry. 

It is also a reaction against high formality, plan-driven 

approaches to software construction on the one hand, 

and low formality, chaotic approaches on the other. 

Agile adherents associate both extremes with waste, 

low quality and burnout among software project 

participants.Agile actually encompasses many separate software 
management and execution methodologies formed 

independently over twenty-five years. Its practices 

incorporate influences from pre-existing iterative and 

evolutionary development methodologies, empirical 

process control, knowledge creation, games theory, 

lean manufacturing, and learning gleaned from highly 

productive teams.Ten years ago, prominent advocates of these 
practices came together to declare a shared 

commitment to a set of principles they call, The Agile 

Manifesto. Since then, they and an increasing number 

of others have self-identified as Agile.  Groups such as 

the Agile Alliance provide venues in which to discuss, 

debate teach and evangelize these principles and 

practices.5.1. Agile values
“At the core, I believe Agile Methodologists are 
really about ‘mushy’ stuff about delivering good 

products to customers by operating in an environment 

that does more than talk about ‘people as our most 

important asset’ but actually ‘acts’ as if people were 

the most important, and lose the word ‘asset’. So in the 

final analysis, the meteoric rise of interest in and 

sometimes tremendous criticism of Agile 

Methodologies is about the mushy stuff of values and 

culture.” – Jim Highsmith
[36]Agile principles form the basis for a normative 
standard of conduct informing how practitioners 

should behave towards work, peers, employers, 

customers and end users. It urges us to inspect our 

actions, confront impediments, and drive towards 

beneficial change even as we deliver valuable, high 

quality software.As Bob Martin describes it, “Most software 
development teams execute, but they don’t take care. 

We value execution, but we value craftsmanship 

more.” To emphasize his point he announced a desire 

to add an additional high-level value to the manifesto, 

“We value craftsmanship over crap.” Or more 

precisely, “We value craftsmanship over 

execution[37].”Alistair Cockburn believes a commitment to quality 
and craft is embodied in the manifesto as written 

suggesting that the problem is rather to remind 
52825282 practitioners to, “...value agile principles over the agile 
practices[38].”In championing different themes, contributors to the 
manifesto emphasize primacy of values over practices 

in different ways. Bob Martin demands craftsmanship. 

Jim Highsmith extolls collaboration. Martin Fowler 

advocates diversity. Jeff Sutherland calls for hyper-

productive, accountable teams. Ken Schwaber insists 

on individual integrity. Mary Poppendieck descries 

waste. Kent Beck argues for responsible development.
What these themes have in common is a challenge 
to practitioners to commit to more than success 

narrowly defined on a project or a particular job but to 

build a career addressing the real needs of people. To 

have pride our accomplishments and be proud of who 

we are as we attain them. Not simply to execute but to 

take care.So, in asking how agile practice might help reverse  
the flight of women from software development, we’ll 

follow Alistair Cockburn’s advice. Rather than ask, 

“What Agile practices address this problem?” We will 

ask, “What Agile principles demand we confront this 

problem?” 6.Agile values within the team context6.1.Team 
diversity, requisite variety and 
innovation. The writings of Nonaka and Takeuchi are the roots 
of the most widely adopted Agile process framework, 
Scrum[39]. Nonaka and Takeuchi emphasize that a 

team made of members with different backgrounds, 

perspectives and motivations is critical for 

organizational knowledge creation to take place[40]. 

Knowledge creation being the basis of repeatable 

innovation in companies.“...[A]n organization’s internal diversity must match 
the variety and complexity of the environment in order 

to deal with the challenges posed[41].”Successful software product teams test a product 
continually, developing prototypes quickly[42] and rely 

on shared tacit knowledge that customers cannot 

exactly or explicitly express[43]. In the classic 

Matsushita case study, it was an engineer’s visceral 

experience of baking that led to breakthroughs in Bread 
Maker design. Coincidentally, she was a woman[44].
This argues for diverse product teams with 
individual contributors that share tacit knowledge with 
customers who can express that understanding in the 

product through nonverbal means. Specific to this paper, women have different 
perceptions of software than men. Women are 

significant customers and influencers in the buying 

decision. It is competitive advantage to have women as 

individual contributors on the development team to 

collaborate and share their tacit knowledge.6.2. Sel
f-directed, performing teams - an 
antidote to the Geek culture and un-
written norms. “Alpha male techies have minimal social skills and 
can be awkward around women, but this awkwardness 
coexists with enormous arrogance[45].”
“The nub is that whatever the presenter may think, 
people were offended... It doesn't matter whether or not 

you think the slides were pornographic. The question is 

does the presenter, and the wider community, care that 

women feel disturbed, uncomfortable, marginalized 

and a little scared
[46].”At the heart of Agile principles is primacy of team, 
one of three roles in Scrum: 
“the skills that Team 
members share – that is, the skill of addressing a 

requirement and turning it into a usable product – tend 

to be more important than the ones that they do not. 

People who refuse to code because they are architects 

or designers are not good fits for Teams. Everyone 

chips in, even if that requires learning new skills or 

remembering old ones. There are no titles on Teams, 

and there are no exceptions to this rule. Teams do not 

contain sub-Teams dedicated to particular domains 

like testing or business analysis, either[47].” In a performing team each member relates to the 
other as equals. A principled Agile team will not 

tolerate a hostile environment towards a teammate or 

the business people upon which it depends for work. 

Through the sometimes conflict ridden process of team 

building, each member will come to tacitly understand 

and participate willingly in the un-written norms of 

behavior that define the team’s identity. The team will 

inspect its own behavior and continuously improve the 

social skills required to communicate. This is a 

requirement for trust and the kind of collaboration that 

leads to cohesion and self-direction.As Jeff Sutherland says, one of the secrets to a 
hyper productive team is: 
“Team members that share a 
sense of purpose, vision, and passion for their work. 

Teams that recognize that we are not simply individuals 

working in close proximity, but a team where we must 

all be engaged with one another’s work.  I tell teams 

looking to achieve amazing results that each member 

of the team must care as much about their neighbor’s 

work as they do their own[48].”Given the team and its management understands 
and champions this vision, they will find practices 

across the Agile methodologies to help them achieve 

the desired outcome. Chief among them:  keeping team 

size between 5-9 people, communal workspace, 

retrospection, group planning and estimation, and a 

shared iteration commitment. In listing techniques, we make no claim that 
applying these techniques will predictably and reliably 

build performing teams. Team performance requires 

shared vision, tough, honest conversations, sometimes 
52835283 tough management decisions and a functional mix of 
people. It requires courage and a willingness to change 

from all team members. So, the ultimate answer for the 

alpha male who breaks the cohesion of the team, is he 

either modifies his behavior or he is off the team.
6.3. Collective ownership - an antidote to 
heroics, exclusion from special job 
assignments, and marginalization to 

support roles. 
“Many SET cultures place a high value on risky 
behaviors: They celebrate heroic diving catches made 
at the eleventh hour to rescue a failing project. 

However, men and women are rewarded differently for 

taking risks, and women—who lack strong “buddies” 

and a cheerleading group—cannot bounce back if they 

dive and miss. In fact, even when they dive and catch, 

their lack of support means their effort often goes 

unnoticed. Finally, women are often pushed into the 

less flashy and less valued executor-type roles[49].”
Heroics are an anti-pattern to the principle of 
quality both for what happens to code produced in an 

emergency and for what is implied by a codebase that 

generates urgent, unplanned failures in the first place. 

Coding is an exercise in learning, creative problem 

solving and a careful balance of what delivers the best 

solution given the constraints of the moment and what 

will produce a versatile, maintainable solution for the 

long-term. The best adjective for quality code is 

elegant, the best solution tailored to the immediate 

needs executed in the simplest most expressive 

language. Elegant code is best produced by a developer 

motivated and focused but also alert, rational and 

rested.When developers work past endurance or under 
duress, they make mistakes -- they make expedient, 

flawed choices that vary from the established patterns 

of the larger codebase. They produce blocks of code 

which only one person understands or makes no 

coherent sense to anyone after the fact. They introduce 

bugs. A “hero” doesn’t have time to refactor or 

comment their code, care whether their solution 

performs, addresses unusual conditions, or how much 

time or effort it takes two months or two years later to 

change.All of this defeats a principle of self-directed teams 
called, collective ownership. 
“Collective Ownership 
encourages everyone to contribute new ideas to all 

segments of the project. Any developer can change any 

line of code to add functionality, fix bugs, improve 

designs or refactor. No one person becomes a bottle 

neck for changes[50].”Collective ownership is key to quality and 
delivering value. With it, team members are 

empowered to improve code as they go, allowing for 

pride in craft and a maintainable, adaptable code base. 
Without collective ownership, codebases slowly 

accrete work-arounds until they become entirely 

opaque and unmanageable. Changes that took days can 

take weeks and businesses become unable to deliver 

valuable enhancements to users.“Why don’t we just build the system right in the first 
place? Women are much better at preventive medicine. 

A Superman mentality is not necessarily productive; 

it’s just an easy fit for the men in the sector.” Because 

it is generally men who are making the promotion 

decisions, they recognize this behavior and reward 

it[51].”Collective ownership discourages the use of 
specialists which represent bottlenecks and opaque 

stores of tacit knowledge. The Scrum guide includes as 

the basic definition of team,
 “There are no titles on 
Teams, and there are no exceptions to this rule. Teams 

do not contain sub-Teams dedicated to particular 

domains like testing or business analysis, either[52].”So, a team that embraces Agile principles, should  
dismantle the culture of the “diving catch”. There 

should be no plum special assignments and no support 

roles that become the career dead ends that drive 

women from the occupation.A team intent on shoring up collective ownership 
should explore the engineering practices contained in 

Extreme Programming; pair programming, refactoring, 

frequent integration, unit testing and test-driven 

development[53].We should note that the challenge of marginal roles 
is not entirely addressed by Agile practice. Roles tend 

to proliferate in support of the team and product owner 

such as “Agile business analyst” and “product owner 

proxy”. Whenever principled organizations place staff 

in such roles, they should look upon it as an expedient 

to deal with dysfunctions in the organization. People in 

these roles should have a meaningful path to 

empowered product owner or member of the team. The 

support roles should eventually go away or be shared 

among product owners or the team. This may take 

years.6.4. Sustainable pace - an antidote for extreme 
work schedules. Traditional and startup software cultures celebrate 
long, hard hours crashing for a deadline. The modern 

global distribution of business requires communication 

and coordination with teams in vastly different time 

zones. While women can feel fulfilled and challenged 

by extreme work schedules, they lead to attrition from 

the industry[54] though not necessarily any more than 

for their male counterparts.Steve McConnell wrote that teams crashing for a 
deadline tend to “make it up” by extended recharge 

times afterwards. Long exhausting hours are another 

form of heroics and result in the same code quality and 
52845284 craft issues[55]. From a principled Agile perspective, 
this is an anti-pattern that undermines the goals of the 

practice. It leads to diminished quality, breaks team 

cohesion, removes transparency and interrupts 

predictable, regular delivery.
Agile teams strive for a sustainable pace; delivering 
quality, complete work at a committed but humane 

level of effort that they can maintain indefinitely. 

Sustainable pace enables an organization to plan by 

trending to completion on the iteration and the release 

level[56].6.5. Craftsmanship - an antidote for lack of 
meaning and social purpose. Women, more than their male counterparts, enter 
STEM out of passion for the work and a desire to 

contribute. “63% of female scientists working in the 

private sector have chosen to do what they do because 

of a desire to contribute to society’s health and well-

being; this compares with 51% of their male 

colleagues... 74% of women in technology love their 

jobs[57].”One of the main reasons young women are 
disinterested in computer science is belief that it offers 

no social benefit[58]. Agile principles elevate the status 

of individual contributors by connecting them to the 

vision of the product through collaboration with the 

product owner. In addition, the user experience 

advocacy of Jeff Patton is refining the value system to 

demand more respect and understanding of the end 

user. All this in the belief that loving your job and 

caring about the people who use the product should not 

be so unusual in software development. 6.6. Collaboration - an antidote for isolation.
The relative absence of peers, mentors and role 
models isolates women. Research indicates that the 

social aspect of Agile practice, particularly routine face 

to face meetings and pair programming reduces women 

developer’s sense of isolation and raises their 

satisfaction and confidence[59]. It also reduces feelings 

of internal competition and builds trust[60].Agile practice also brings developers into more 
routine contact with people from the business. This 

provides potential peer connection and mentorship 

from women in other roles such as product owners, 

stakeholders, and sponsors. As an example, at Oxygen 

Media in 2007-8, an initially all male Agile team, 

collaborated with their female CEO and Product 

Owner to develop an innovative product. As the team 

sought to add members, the work, the team and the 

product owner relationship contributed to recruiting 

and retaining talented and experienced women 

developers[61].7. Agile values in an enterprise context
As a development team matures into high-
performance, impediments become consistently rooted 

in the surrounding organization. Continuous 

improvement becomes an effort to instill values of 

accountability, transparency, craft, and delivery in the 

groups that feed the team work and address their 

logistical needs.An organization that embraces Agile values strives 
to manage the flow of all aspects of the business as 

predictably and responsively as the development 

organization. This aligns with the Nonaka and 

Takeuchi model of a serially innovative, knowledge 

creating company. A company can adopt the Scrum 

framework to manage core business functions. Scrum 

can even be applied to businesses that don’t produce 

software[62].Such an organization needs to examine its pay and 
incentives so they support collective performance. 

Traditional review and reward processes can be 

“teamicidal”. They encourage heroism, 

competitiveness and collaborative anti-patterns. More 

appropriate are incentives that reward team 

performance, and span of influence over span of 

control. The organization should move towards flatter, 

fairer org structures, rewarding workers without 

proliferating managers or creating side doors to 

advancement[63].Finally, a team-focused organization has a different 
definition management than a traditional hierarchical 

one. Rather than command and control, a manager 

becomes a facilitator and impediment remover. Nonaka 

and Takeuchi describe the “middle up down manager” 

who actively facilitates knowledge flow from senior 

executives to individual contributors. This is also the 

“servant leader” approach where a manager’s goal is to 

optimize the work environment so that individual 

contributors can perform at their best.Done well, this addresses some of the remaining 
factors that drive women from software development: 

unfair pay, unclear path to advancement and not fitting 

the corporate image of a manager.
But to really address isolation, the industry needs to 
make a specific commitment to be more supportive of 

women workers:i. Recruit a workforce that reflects the diversity of 
their customer base.ii. Train and develop their employees so that they 
continue to learn and advance in their craftiii. Connect their mission to a larger meaning and 
social purpose by anchoring strategic projects to a 

vision and the needs of customers.iv. Support their employees’ full range of interests 
and better balance work and family life.52855285 Fortunately, these changes benefit male employees 
as well and facilitate the requisite variety required to 
make the company more responsive to its customers.8. Academics and society
The shortage of women studying IT is the best 
researched aspect of the problem (Margolis). Industry 

focused studies (Athena) also cover issues within 

education. That said, the software industry must influence 
expectations and outcomes in education. School 

environments that discourage girls from pursuing 

computing are a significant factor in the low numbers 

of women entering the IT workforce.
Here, two factors we haven’t covered come into 
play: extrinsic gender bias and intrinsic doubt. Industry 

can help remedy this situation by recruiting qualified 

women undergraduates. This demonstrates to 

institutions the value in producing these applicants. 

Industry can also fund initiatives at all levels of 

education from girls math and science schools to 

scholarships, mentorship, special projects, after school 

programs and achievement prizes.The industry can also publicly recognize successful 
and innovative women and convey a fascination with 

their work. As an example, the World Science Festival 

features events with prominent engineers, scientists an 

technologists such as Sandra Magnus, Beth Shapiro, 

and Heather Knight[64]. Such role models increase 

girls confidence in their abilities in STEM.9.How values create change from small 
networks to large and back: BaAs described, impediments that discourage women 
pervade the software ecosystem: within development 

organizations,  enterprises, in education, and society. 

The approach Agile takes to removing impediments is 

incremental - inspect and adapt. Given that, how can 

Agile produce large order changes across and industry 

and society?To model this, we will utilize I. Nonaka’s concept of 
Ba, or “a shared context in motion, in which 

knowledge is shared, created and utilized[65].”Sectors that thrive off innovation do so by sharing 
knowledge across direct and extended-relationships 

among people. Each set of relationships exists within a 

physical or virtual space. Each of these spaces is Ba. 

Ba can be visualized as sets of overlapping circles each 

circle representing a network of people. Tacit and 

explicit knowledge is created and shared across Ba as 

people cycle transiently or move permanently from one 

set of relationships to another.
 Figure 4. Ba in the Software IndustryKnowledge workers in an industry locale interact 
within their local communities, universities, interest 

groups, their individual businesses and work groups. 

They graduate from school and change jobs. 

Companies are distributed across locales. Consultants 

travel among companies and conferences bring 

individuals together from across the industry.
In sharing, creating and synthesizing knowledge one 
Ba influences the other, fostering change on the small 

scale to the large and back. The broad adoption of 

Agile practices is itself an example of change 

occurring first within individuals and teams and then 

spreading across an industry. 
The challenge is whether mainstream Agile 
adoption is creating and sharing a tacit understanding 

of Agile principles or simply an explicit understanding 

of its practices. If the principles do not permeate this 

adoption curve, Agile will become just another toolkit  

and will not significantly change individual or 

organizational behavior.
If, however, Agile principles are embraced by the 
industry it will change the perception of the work 

culture and what it is to be a software developer. It will 

create a market for developers suited to that more 

collaborative, social way of working. Universities will 

adjust to provide that talent. Media focus on that 

success will celebrate new role models and the change 

will influence the larger culture. 
As discussed earlier, the primacy of values is on the 
minds of prominent Agile thought leaders.  It is infused 

in the Snowbird celebration “four things the 

community 
needs to do
 in the next 10 years”: demand 
technical 
excellence, promote 
individual change
 and lead 
organizational change
, organize 
knowledge and improve 
education, and maximize value across the
 entire process
[66].10.Conclusion
The shortage of women entering software 
development and disproportionate share of them 

leaving mid-career is real, measurable and well 

documented. While this has been true across STEM 
52865286 disciplines, the disparity has gotten worse in software 
development over the last 20 years. The resulting gender gap is a material burden to the 
software industry and a lost opportunity for a domestic 

workforce with a high percentage of workers stuck in 

low demand occupations.The relative absence of women in product teams 
contributes to software that under-serves women. 

While women are the equals of men in influencing 

consumer technology spend and in online activity they 

find male designed software user experiences less 

intuitive, the internet less safe, and more 

overwhelming.Therefore, the software industry needs to make a 
concerted effort to educate, recruit and retain women 

developers. Both for the additional resource they 

provide but also for the diversity of experience they 

bring to product development teams.This effort finds support in the principles underlying 
Agile Software Development, a movement built on 

values of collaboration, delivery, quality and craft. The 

challenge for the Agile movement is that the increasing 

popularity of its practices does not necessarily bring 

with it widespread embrace of its values. Agile values steel practitioners for the hard work of 
confronting impediments, incrementally nudging an 

organization towards a more collegial, sustainable, 

creative and productive workplace so that the 

organization can repeatedly create software of value to 

stakeholders and of real use to people. Success within teams has potential to shift the larger 
culture through iterative cycles of knowledge creation 

and sharing within companies, across enterprises, into 

academic institutions and the media. In this way principled Agile practice can instill a 
more social and engaged view of the software 

developer that will encourage girls to pursue computer 

science and help the industry recruit and retain larger 

numbers of talented women.11. References
[1] K. Beck, K. and M. Beedle. Principles Behind the Agile 
Manifesto. Internet: http://agilemanifesto.org. [Jun. 12, 2007]
[2] N. Zarrett and O. Malanchuk. “Examining the Gender Gap in IT by Race” in 
Women and IT. 
J. Chohoon and W. 

Aspray Ed. Cambridge, MA. The MIT Press, 2006, pp.55-88.
[3] C. Hayes. “The Incredible Shrinking Woman” in 
Gender Codes : Why Women Are Leaving Computing
. T. Misa, Ed. 
Hoboken, N.J. IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pg. 33.
[4] S. Hewlett and C. Luce,. “The Athena Factor.” 
Harvard 
Business Review, pp. 51, Jun. 2008.
[5] “Four Decades of STEM Degrees, 1966-2004: ‘The Devil 
is in the Details.’” CPST, Sep. 2006, pg. 3.
[6] C. Hayes. “The Incredible Shrinking Woman” in 
Gender Codes : Why Women Are Leaving Computing
. T. Misa, Ed. 

Hoboken, N.J. IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pg. 33.
[7] D. Francis. “Why Do Women Outnumber Men in 
College?”: http://khj.me/lkzjNW, [Jun. 12, 2011].
[8] “Four Decades of STEM Degrees, 1966-2004: ‘The Devil 
is in the Details.’” CPST, Sep. 2006, pg. 1.
[9] N. Zarrett and O. Malanchuk. “Examining the Gender Gap in IT by Race” in 
Women and IT. 
J. Chohoon and W. 

Aspray Ed. Cambridge, MA. The MIT Press, 2006, pp.55-88.
[10] A. Arora and A. Gambardella. “The Globalization of the 
Software Industry.” NBER, 2004, pg. 14-36.
[11] U.S. Department of Labor, “Employed persons by 
detailed occupation and sex, 2006 annual averages.” Internet: 

http://khj.me/lVJOj7 , [Jun. 12, 2011]
[12] U.S. Department of Labor, “High Growth Industry 
Profile Information Technology.” Internet: 
http://khj.me/m9m9Tm, Mar. 8, 2010 [Jun. 12, 2011]
[13] J. Luftman, “Yes, The Tech Skills Shortage Is Real.” 
Internet: http://khj.me/m3OoTU, Jan. 12, 2008 [Jun. 12, 
2011] 
[14] McKinsey Global Institute. Changing the Fortunes of America’s Workforce: A Human Capital Challenge
. Jun. 
2009, pg. 4. [15] J. Taylor, Jr. and G. Stern, “Becoming an Employee-
Centered Organization.” Internet: http://khj.me/mmH0zn, 

Apr. 1, 2010 [Jun. 12, 2011]
[16] ibid.
[17] Department of Labor, Women’s Bureau. “Women in 
High Tech Jobs” in 
Facts on Working Women
. Internet: http://
khj.me/ipzUPN. Jul. 2002 [Jun. 12, 2011]
[18] J. Booth and T. Herbert. “CE Retailing More or Less 
Different” in 
5 Technology Trends to Watch - 2008
. Dec 
2007, pg. 21. [19] Entertainment Software Association (ESA). "Essential 
Facts About the Computer and Video Game Industry." 

Internet: http://www.theesa.com/facts/, 2011 [Jun. 12 2011]
[20] L. Abraham and M. Mörn. “Women on the Web.” 
comScore, Inc., Jun. 2010, pp.2-17.[21] F. Warner. 
The Power of the Purse. New York, NY. 
Prentice Hall, Sep. 18, 2005.[22] F. Spillars. “Gender differences in Web Usability.” 
Internet: http://khj.me/lyukuw, Jul. 31 2010 [Jun. 12, 2011]
[23] L. Xue and C. Yen. “Towards Female Preferences in 
Design.” Int’l Journal of Design, vol.1 no. 3, pp.11-36, 2007
[24] M. Silverstein and K. Sayre. Women Want More. 
New York, NY. Harper Business, Sep. 8, 2009. pp. 81-100.
[25] G. Moss and R. Gunn. “Gender Differences in Website 
Design: Implications for Education.” Journal of Systemics, 
Cybernetics and Informatics, vol. 5. no. 6, pp. 38-43, 200752875287 [26] G. Horvath, G. Moss, R. Gunn and E. Vass. “Gender and 
Web Design Software.” Journal of Systemics, Cybernetics 

and Informatics, vol. 5. no. 6, pp. 22-27, 2007[27] D. Fallows. "How Women and Men Use the Internet." 
Pew Internet & American Life Project, Dec. 2005, pg. 42.
[28] Maner, W., “Unique Ethical Problems in Information 
Technology”, 
Science and Engineering Ethics, 2:2, April 
1996, pp. 137-54.[29] “WISE Study of Women and Heart Disease Yields 
Important Findings.” Internet: http://khj.me/mlVdQA, Jan. 
31, 2006 [Jun. 12, 2011]
[30] M. Seeman, M.D. “Gender Differences in the 
Prescribing of Antipsychotic Drugs”, 
American Psychiatric 
Association. Aug. 2004.
[31] S. Hewlett and C. Luce,. “The Athena Factor.” 
Harvard 
Business Review, pp. 38-49, Jun. 2008.
[32] C. Hill, C. Corbett, and A. Rose. “Why So Few: Women 
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.” 

Washington D.C. AAUW, Feb. 2010, pp.19-26.
[33] S. Dorward. “The Fight or Flight Moment: Understanding Why We Leave or Stay in Industry,” 

presented at IEEE WIE 2009.
[34] J. Hunt. “Why Do Women Leave Science and 
Engineering?” NBER Working Paper Series, vol. w15853, 

Mar. 2010.
[35] C. Hill, C. Corbett, and A. Rose. “Why So Few: Women 
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.” 

Washington D.C. AAUW, Feb. 2010, pg. 15.
[36] J. Highsmith, “History: The Agile Manifesto.” Internet: 
http://agilemanifesto.org/history.html. [Jun. 6, 2007]
[37] B. Martin. “Quintessence: The fifth element for the 
Agile Manifesto.” Internet: http://khj.me/iQdKJE, Aug. 14, 

2008 [Jun. 12, 2011]. 
[38] A. Cockburn. “The fifth element for the Agile Manifesto 
[Comment].” Internet: http://khj.me/kt3j6p, Aug. 8, 2008 

[Jun. 12, 2011]. 
[39] J. Sutherland. “Roots of Scrum: Takeuchi and Self-
Organizing Teams.” Internet: http://jeffsutherland.com, Mar. 

7, 2010 [Jun. 12, 2011]
[40] I. Nonaka and H Takeuchi. 
The Knowledge Creating 
Company. New York, NY. Oxford University, 1995, pg. 85.
[41] I. Nonaka and H Takeuchi. 
Hitotsubashi on Knowledge Management. Asia. John Wiley and Sons, 2004, pg. 79. 
[42] I. Nonaka and H Takeuchi. 
The Knowledge Creating 
Company. New York, NY. Oxford University, 1995, pg. 232.
[43] ibid. pg. 234
[44] ibid. pg. 106
[45] S. Hewlett and C. Luce,. “The Athena Factor.” 
Harvard 
Business Review, pp. 38-49, Jun. 2008. pg. 8.[46] M. Fowler. "SmutOnRails." Internet: http://
martinfowler.com/bliki/SmutOnRails.html, April 30, 2009 

[Nov. 15, 2009]
[47] K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland. “The Scrum Guide.” Internet: http://scrum.org, Feb. 2010 [Jun. 12, 2011]
[48] J. Sutherland. “The Secret Sauce to a Hyper-Productive 
Team” Internet: 
http://khj.me/lc78z0, Apr. 4, 2010 [Jun. 12 
2011]
[49] S. Hewlett and C. Luce. “The Athena Factor.” 
Harvard 
Business Review, pp. 38-49, Jun. 2008. pg. 30.
[50] D. Wells. “Extreme Programming: A Gentle 
Introduction.” Internet: http://extremeprogramming.org, Sep. 

28 2009 [Jun. 12 2011]
[51] S. Hewlett and C. Luce. “The Athena Factor.” 
Harvard 
Business Review, pp. 38-49, Jun. 2008. pg. 27.
[52] K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland. “The Scrum Guide.” Internet: http://scrum.org, Feb. 2010 [Jun. 12, 2011]
[53] D. Wells. “Extreme Programming: A Gentle 
Introduction.” Internet: http://extremeprogramming.org, Sep. 

28 2009 [Jun. 12 2011]
[54] S. Hewlett and C. Luce. “The Athena Factor.” 
Harvard 
Business Review, pp. 38-49, Jun. 2008. pg. 40.
[55] S. McConnell. Rapid Development. Seattle. Microsoft Press. 1996.[56] D. Wells. “Extreme Programming: A Gentle 
Introduction.” Internet: http://extremeprogramming.org, Sep. 

28 2009 [Jun. 12 2011]
[57] S. Hewlett and C. Luce. “The Athena Factor.” 
Harvard 
Business Review, pp. 38-49, Jun. 2008. pg. 4.
[58] “Four Decades of STEM Degrees, 1966-2004: ‘The Devil is in the Details.’” CPST, Sep. 2006.
[59] S. Berenson and K. Slaten. “Voices of women in a 
software engineering course” in JERIC, vol. 4.1, Mar. 2004.
[60] O. Hazzan and Y. Dubinsky. “Empower Gender 
Diversity with Agile Software Development” in 

Encyclopedia of Gender and Information Technology. 
E. 
Taugh, Ed. Hershey, PA: IGI-Global, 2006, pp 249-256.
[61] K. Judy and Ilio Krumins-Beens. “Great Scrums Need Great Product Owners. ” Proceedings of 41st HICSS, 2008.[62] J. Sutherland. “Scrum: It’s Not Just for Software 
Engineers!” Internet: http://khj.me/iZ4nla. [Jun. 12, 2011]
[63] M. Poppendieck. “Unjust Deserts.” in Better Software
, Jul. 2004, pp. 33-47.[64] “Cool Jobs.” Internet: http://worldsciencefestival.com/events/cool_jobs_2011, Jun. 4, 2011. [Jun. 12, 2011]
 [65] I. Nonaka and H Takeuchi. 
Hitotsubashi on Knowledge 
Management. Asia. John Wiley and Sons, 2004, pg. 108. 
[66] R. Martens. “#10yearsAgile and Snowbird 2011.” 
Internet: http://khj.me/jKntfl, Feb. 16, 2011 [Jun. 12, 2011]
52885288 For access to more content from the IEEE Computer Society, 
see computingnow.computer.org.
This article was featured in
Top articles, podcasts, and more.
computingnow.computer.org
