 Teaching Theories underlying Agile Methods in a Systems Development 
Course 
 
 
 
Adarsh Kumar Kakar 
Alabama State University 
akakar@alasu.edu 
 
 
Abstract
 
Presently Agile methods taugh
t in universities focus 
primarily on providing hand
s-on experience of the 
process of development but ig
nore the evolution of, and 
theories behind, the Agile practices.“Without theory 
we are just groping in chaos.” [8}. Knowing the ‘why” 
in addition to the “how” of Agile methods will help 
develop reflective skills and give students an edge as 
they transition to 
the rapidly evolving real world of 
Information Systems. In this article a set of relevant 
theories that can be included as a module in an Agile 
methods course curriculum is ou
tlined. An exposure to 
theories underlying Agile methods help students 
appreciate the relevance of the principles and 
practices of the Agile approach and develop authentic 
problem solving skills.  
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Both theoretical and exp
eriential knowledge are 
necessary preconditions for successful performance of 
one’s job. Theory and practice support each other in a 
way that includes an understanding of the rationale 
according to which tasks should be carried out and an 
understanding of the bounda
ry conditions of the given 
job [51]. Thus, knowledge that is useful at work 
includes the dimensions of both practical knowledge 
and theoretical understanding. Research on the 
development of expertise have emphasized that a 
combination of these dimensions is of fundamental 
importance [28]. 
Work-based learning in a laboratory environment 
by itself is not enough as business settings vary 
depending on people and context. Unless the students 
develop reflective skills they will not be able to apply 
the knowledge and skills developed in the classroom to 
the real world. Providing hands-on experiential 
knowledge of the process of development is not 
adequate to develop the self-regulative knowledge 
including metacognitive and reflective skills. Formal or 
theoretical knowledge is also essential.  
But this is easier said than
 done. In the absence of 
academic work the domain of Agile methods has 
remained largely atheoretical. There are no theories or 
models to provide guidan
ce only a set of principles and 
practices. As a result Agile method courses focus only 
on the narrow process/ practice perspective and fail to 
prepare students with the depth needed to solve real 
world problems. 
To fill the gap, this article traces the evolution of 
Agile methods and identifies the relevant theories that 
should be taught as a module in an Agile methods 
course. In the 
authors’ own experience, this provides 
students with a framework that allows them to make 
sense of their hands-on experience. They serve as a 
yardstick against which the learnings can be measured 
to determine what they are doing right and where they 
are going wrong. Students are then better equipped to 
apply learning at the work-place under various 
circumstances in the real world. 
 
2. Instruction Approach 
 
Agile methods represent a paradigm shift from 
traditional, plan-based approaches to software 
development [11]. For many decades research in 
software engineering was preoccupied with 
discovering ways to deliver faster, better, and cheaper 
software. The contributions of academicians include 
formal methods for measurement and standardization 
of the software process and a variety of tools and 
techniques to aid software development. However, in 
the last decade various suggestions for improvement 
have come from practitioners 
culminating in the Agile 
manifesto (http://agilema
nifesto.org/).  
The emerging principles and methods such as 
Extreme programming, Scrum, Crystal methodologies, 
Dynamic Software developm
ent method and Feature 
Driven Development were together labeled as agile 
software development. This new approach has had a 
huge impact on how software is developed worldwide 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.6104970 [11]. The increasing popu
larity of agile methods has 
made it imperative that they be taught at university 
level [18].  
Although not explicitly 
identified or stated, Agile 
methods are derived from concepts in manufacturing 
and are an amalgamation of theories from multiple 
disciplines. Thus the module introducing theories 
underlying the agile met
hods could begin with a 
comparison of how the evolution of Systems 
Development Methods (SDMs) mirrors those of other 
manufacturing paradigms. 
This will provide a context 
and a fresh perspective to 
students that will affirm their 
knowledge of SDMs in general and Agile methods in 
particular. Students will learn to appreciate how a 
popular theory or system 
is wholly upended [26] 
giving rise to new theories and paradigms. 
Additionally they will learn 
to actively reconstruct 
concepts of their own based on
 their appreciation of 
how new concepts emerge. 
Building on this 
foundation the in
structor can then 
explore theories underlying th
e Agile manifesto and its 
12 principles. The relevant concepts and theories that 
in the author’s experience are useful to the students are 
the job design theory, the marketing concept, socio-
technical system perspective, process control theory, 
the theory of emergence and approach-avoidance 
theory. The descriptions of the evolution of SDMs and 
the theories underling Agile methods provided in this 
article are illustrative and not exhaustive and are meant 
to provide the reader with an idea of what the 
suggested theory module of 
an Agile methods course 
should contain. 
 
3. Evolution of Agile Methods 
 
3.1. Craftsmanship and Code-and-fix 
 
In the 1950s, people wo
rking with computers had 
much in common with 
artists, artisans and craftsmen 
before the indu
strial revolution
 [17]. Formal methods 
of control such as division of labor and productivity 
norms were not yet developed. Like the crafts there 
was scope for creativity and independence. Skilled 
programmers like craftsmen had deep knowledge and 
understanding of their doma
in. They were able to get 
by with this approach to
 software development for two 
reasons. First, no better way
 had been developed, and 
second, software was not th
at complex. However the 
code-and-fix approach did not last long. As the use of 
software became ubiquitous and organizations relied 
on computers for their business operations, this laissez 
faire approach gave way to more disciplined methods.
 
By the mid-sixties, 
management wanted to bring 
computer work in line 
with other industrial activities, 
which essentially meant that they wanted programming 
to be part of a managed and controlled process 
[17].
 
 
3.2. Taylorism and Waterfall 
 
To accomplish this, software developers turned to a 
more than fifty year old paradigm, called "Scientific 
Management" [44]. Frederick 
Winslow Taylor [43, 44] 
introduced Scientific Man
agement with the aim of 
controlling every work activ
ity, from the simplest to 
the most complicated. Taylor's argument was that only 
by doing this could management have the desired 
control over productivity and quality. The methods 
suggested by Taylor were aimed at increasing 
specialization and standardization of work.  
As applied to software development, Scientific 
Management, led to the development of new Taylorist 
approaches such as the waterfall model and its variants. 
These methods promoted stron
g conformance to plan 
through upfront requiremen
ts gathering and systems 
design, programming standards, code inspections and 
productivity metrics. They 
also encourage strict 
Tayloristic division of labor and the use of role based 
teams of business analysts, system architects, 
programmers and testers
 [33]. 
Although a substantial im
provement over “code-
and-fix” approach, Taylorist
 methods have issues of 
addressing customers’ real business needs and keeping 
with the development sch
edules. Under conditions of 
rapidly evolving customer needs, the approach of full 
requirements definition, followed by
 a long gap before 
those requirements are delivered did not seem 
appropriate. With increasing problem complexity, 
changing scope and requir
ements, and evolving 
technologies, developers, over time, came to realize 
that software development 
projects using this approach 
would not go as well as planned.  
 
3.3. Agile and Lean Production 
 
Agile software development began, in the early 
1990s, as countermovement
 to the Taylorist software 
development processes like the Waterfall Model or the 
V-Model. 
Taylorist approaches are based on the 
principle that the 
first step in a product/ system 
solution is to comprehensively capture the full set of 
user requirements to address the business problem
 
[49]. This is followed 
by architectural and detailed 
design. Coding or construction is commenced only 
after confirmation of require
ment specification by the 
customer and completion and approval of architecture/ 
design. The customer is typica
lly involved 
at the stage 
of requirements gathering and the final stage of 
product acceptance. As a result the validation of the 
4971 product happens only at requi
rement gathering stage 
and at the end of the long development cycle. 
On the other hand agile projects work on minimum 
critical specification [
36]. Agile projects start with the 
smallest critical set of requ
irements to initiate the 
project. They work on the principle of developing 
working products in multiple iterations. 
Users review 
actual working product at 
demonstrations instead of 
paper reviews or review of
 prototypes done in plan-
driven methods 
[36]. These working products become 
the basis for further discussions and the team works 
towards delivering the busin
ess solution using the 
latest input from cust
omers, users, and other 
stakeholders. As the solution emerges through working 
products, the application design, architecture, and 
business priorities are contin
uously evaluated and 
refactored.                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Although introduced in 
2000s, the roots of Agile 
principles can be traced to the Lean and Agile 
manufacturing paradigms in
troduced in the 1980s and 
1990s respectively. Lean thinking originated on the 
shop-floors of Japanese manufacture
rs and in particular 
as a result of innovations 
at Toyota Mo
tor Corporation 
[35, 38, 42] resulting from a scarcity of resources and 
intense domestic competition 
in the Japanese market 
for automobiles. The 
innovations includ
ed the kanban 
method of pull production, the just-in-time (JIT) 
production system, autom
ated mistake proofing and 
high levels of participative employee problem-solving. 
The lean approach focused on creation of value by 
elimination of waste an
d represented an alternative 
model to that of capital-inten
sive mass production.  
Agile manufacturing is a 
further evolution of 
production methodology following Lean 
manufacturing. The term agile manufacturing can be 
traced back to the publication of the report 21st 
Century Manufacturing Ente
rprise Strategy [20]. The 
origins of the “agility movement” stems from US 
government concerns that domestic defence 
manufacturing capability would be diminished 
following the end of cold 
war in 1989. While the 
proposed definition of leanness 
is the maximisation of 
simplicity, quality and economy, agile manufacturing 
added flexibility and responsiv
eness to the definition. 
It seeks to achieve comp
etitiveness throu
gh rapid 
response and mass customization. Whereas lean 
methods offer consumers good quality products at low 
price by removing inve
ntory and waste from 
manufacturing agile manufacturing is a strategy for 
entering niche markets rapidly and being able to cater 
for specific needs of ever more demanding customers 
on an individual basis. 
The evolution of softwa
re development approaches 
and the corresponding manufacturing paradigms are 
summarized in Table 1 below:  
Table 1. Evolution of SDMs 
Manufacturing 
Paradigms 
Software Development 
Approaches 
Craftmanship Code 
and 
Fix 
Taylorism Plan-driven 
approaches 
such as Waterfall or V 
Model  
Lean/ Agile  
Manufacturing 
Agile Methods 
 
4. Theories 
 
4.1. Process Control Theory 
Industrial process control theory specifies two 
types of process control 
systems: defined processes and 
empirical processes [41]. De
fined processes are those 
which, given a certain set 
of inputs, and applying a 
certain set of controls, always attain a specified 
outcome and are repeatable. Th
e
y are referred to as 
white box systems, as the processes are well defined 
and understood. Empirical
 processes are black-box 
systems. These processes are complex and have 
unpredictable outcomes. The outcomes are not 
repeatable for a given set of inputs [41]. 
 Software is considered to be a black box system. 
There is uncertainty surro
unding the business 
requirements and technolo
gy. Applying defined 
process methodologies such as 
waterfall methodologies 
to unpredictable systems mi
ght not always work. In a 
defined process all the unkn
owns are expected to be 
solved up-front. However, the assumption made in 
waterfall methodologies that software development is a 
well understood process is often not true. Even with 
highly detailed upfront user interface designs, 
specifications and p
lans, the softwar
e produced often 
turns out different from what
 was originally intended.  
Agile approaches consider in-d
epth effort to fully 
understand the problem dom
ain wasteful. Uncertainty 
is not something that can be handled by up-front 
planning and design but needs processes that are more 
fluid. Excessive planning is like
 inventory on the shop 
floor. Not an asset 
but a liability. 
 
4.2. Marketing Concept 
 
Agile development approach brings the marketing 
concept into software engine
ering by emphasizing the 
primacy of addressing evolving customer 
requirements. Keith's [22] article, 
on the marketing 
concept illustrates the ad
option of the marketing 
concept in an applied 
setting. The intuitiv
e appeal of 
the concept and its successful application in practice 
played an important role in its acceptance. In the article 
Keith describes the Pillsbury Company's successful 
4972 evolution through three managerial phases, production, 
sales and finally reaching what he calls a marketing 
control phase.  
Customer focus is a core element of the marketing 
concept [40]. Theodore Levittt’s [29] seminal 
statement of the marketing concept argued that 
customer needs must be the central focus of the firm’s 
definition of its business purpose. 
Although the plan-drive
n approaches such as the 
waterfall model do emphasize that user requirements 
should be considered
 before the design and 
development stage, it is not well suited to 
accommodate requirement changes during its 
development cycle which may sometimes take a few 
years. This approach is appropriate when requirements 
are stable. However in today’s faced paced business 
context, the needs of customers evolve continuously in 
response to changes in environ
ment in which they 
operate. Software developers with customer focus aim 
to provide competitive adv
antage to their customers 
(one of the Agile principles) 
by acquiring the ability to 
address the customer dema
nds rapidly by developing 
working products in quick iterations and with minimal 
waste. Therefore the agile methods have more 
comprehensively embraced the market concept which 
is as relevant in today’s busi
ness as it was in the 1990s. 
 
4.3. Emergence 
 
Agile methodologists do not believe that a software 
application can be fully specified up-front as business 
requirements and technologies change rapidly during 
the course of s software development project. The true 
requirements should be allowed
 to “emerge” over time 
because what the customer initially thought they 
wanted gets refined as soft
ware develops. Thus in the 
interest of developing software products that are 
relevant to the business needs of the organization 
changing requirements should be welcomed even late 
in the development cycle. The short development 
iterations of Agile methods and customer evaluation of 
working software at each iteration provide the means 
for business requirements to emerge. The end result is 
delivering what the customer really wants in the face of 
constant change in the business environ
ment which the 
customer operates. 
 
4.4. Job Design Theory (adapted from [47]) 
 
A methodology is a systematic way of performing a 
task or doing work. Therefore it 
is logical to look at 
SDMs from the perspective of job design. It opens up 
avenues to vast existing 
literature on job design and 
makes them available to
 the newer discipline of 
software engineering.
 
The literature on job de
sign contrasts “Taylorist” 
jobs to the “Enriched” jobs.  Fredrick Taylor 
[44]
 
viewed job design as a 
scientific optimization problem, 
where industrial engineers study the production 
process and devise the most efficien
t way to break that 
process into individual, precisely defined tasks 
[48].
  
Typically, a Taylorist job
 is highly specialized, and 
workers are not encouraged to experiment, innovate, 
or otherwise vary the way that tasks are performed 
[48].
  
In the 1970’s, Richard Hackman, Edward Lawler 
and Greg Oldham suggested that Taylorist job design 
may not be optimal [13, 15, 
27, 39].  Enr
iched jobs 
motivate workers by encouraging them to innovate and 
learn. Motivated workers are known to demonstrate 
improved task performance 
and higher productivity. 
Firms therefore soon put 
this new approach into 
practice by redesigning jobs
, giving greater autonomy 
to the employees by adop
ting self managing teams and 
creating employee particip
ation programs like the 
quality circles.  
Among the various theories, the Hackman and 
Oldham (1976) Job Characteristics Model (Figure 1) is 
one of the most elaborate and widely accepted theories 
of job design [23]. It can be used effectively to explain 
the emerging trends and em
pirical observations in the 
domain of SDMs.  
 
     
                
   
Figure 1: The Job Characteristics Theory (JCT) 
(Reproduced from [15]) 
 
Job characteristics theory claims that an individual 
will be motivated to work when jobs are designed to 
satisfy three critical psychological states. These include 
(see Figure 1) the need: 
  
1. for performance feedback 
2. for meaningful work  
3. to be responsible for work outcomes  
4973 These critical psychological states are affected by 
the five characteristics of job which describe (see 
Figure 1):  
 
1. Skill Variety. The variety of skills required to carry 
out work. 
 2. Task Identity. The clearl
y visible an
d identifiable 
outcome of work. 
 3. Task Significance. The importance of the work 
output.  
4. Autonomy. The freedom give
n to the individual to 
perform the task. 
5. Feedback. The information given to the individual 
about the effectiveness of his performance.  
 
These critical psychological states affect the work 
performance job satisfaction and employee motivation 
(see Figure 1). When applied in
 the context of SDMs, 
the five characteristics of the m
odel can be used to 
characterize typical Agile a
nd Taylorist methods of 
software development (Figure 2). 
Taylorist software developm
ent methods demand 
less skill variety to accomplish tasks. Specialized 
teams are deployed for planning of lifecycle activities 
such as requirements gathering, design, construction, 
testing and specialized people handle each of these 
tasks.  The allocation of work specifies 
not only what is 
to be done but also how it is to be done and the time 
allowed for doing it
 [5]. This reduces the autonomy of 
employees and shifts the focus from individuals and 
their creative abilities to th
e processes themselves.  
On the other hand agile methods emphasize and 
value individuals and interactions over processes 
(http://agilemanifesto.org/). 
People issues are at the 
heart of the agile movement
 [2]. 
Agile methods are 
people-centric, recognizing the value competent people 
and their relationships bring to software development.
 
[36]. The agile team 
works by placing people 
physically closer, replacing documents with talking in 
person and conference rooms, thereby improving the 
team’s amicability and its sen
se of community [6].  
Tasks are not specialized to the degree of plan-driven 
methods. All team members are involved in coding, 
designing and testing thus 
increasing the skill variety 
needed to complete a task.  
Agile methods focus on developing working 
products rather than paper
 artifacts and components. 
This enhances task identity and task significance. 
Big 
upfront design plans and ext
ensive documentation are 
of little value to practitioners of agile methods.
 [37]. 
Important features of this approach include 
evolutionary delivery thr
ough short iterative cycles – 
of planning, action, reflec
tion – intense collaboration, 
self-organizing teams, and a hi
gh degree of developer 
discretion, providing the team members autonomy as 
well as quick feedback on the work accomplished. The 
agile paradigm empowers individuals through a focus 
on developing working products, ownership and 
shorter feedback cycles [2], satisfying the three 
psychological states of the job characteristics model, 
the need for meaningful work, the need to be 
responsible for work outcomes, and the need for 
performance feedback. This increases the motivating 
potential of work, as measured by the Motivating 
Potential Score (MPS), calculat
ed by using the formula 
[15]:  
 
resulting in higher team member morale, satisfaction 
and productivity. The di
fference between Agile 
methods and Tayloristics methods based on JCT is 
illustrated below: 
 
 
 
JCT is useful in explain
ing the relevance of various 
agile best practices. For example the benefits of Paired 
programming can be explained by the rapid feedback 
programmers working in pairs can provide to each 
other.
 
Developing working products in rapid iterative 
cycles enhance task identity
 and significance of the 
task completed.
 Developing whole, meaningful and 
working products make it easy for developers to 
identify with the ta
sks that are fulfilled
 compared to say 
requirements specification or prototyp
es of Taylorist 
methods.
 
In addition developi
ng working products 
enable meaningful and timely feedback from the users 
to the developers.
 
This in turn increases the motivating 
potential of team members and the resulting work 
outcomes in software developm
ent projects using agile 
methods. This is in direct contrast to the work 
approach, such as in Tayloristic methods, where 
developers are given a specification for parts of the 
solutions, and do not have full picture of the product 
this is being developed. 
 
 
 
4974 4.5. Approach-Avoidance Theory (Adapted 
from [49]) 
 
Motivation to continue or pull out from a project 
can be viewed as an approach avoidance conflict. In  
approach  avoidance theory,  
when  driving  forces  
that encourage 
persistence  outweigh restraining  
forces that  encourag
e  abandonment
  [3] people will 
be motivated to continue 
and complete the project. 
When restraining forces prevail over the driving forces 
people will withdraw.  These competing forces create a 
conflict over whether to continue or withdraw [32] 
impacting motivation of individuals and teams.   
Derived  from  approach  avoidance  theory,  the 
completion  effect, a driving force,  reflects  the  notion  
that  the 
motivation  to  achieve  a  goal  increases  as  
an individual  gets  cl
oser  to  that goal 
[4, 7].  The 
completion effect is consi
stent with  psychological 
research suggesting that  the  desire  to  achieve  task  
closure,  or completion, can 
 have  a  significant 
influence on behavior  [21].  Results from a series of 
experiments provide support 
for the completion effect 
[7, 12]. Specific evidence that the motive to complete a 
task gets stronger as one ge
ts closer to completion can 
be found in work by Lewin
 [30] whose hypothesis was 
supported in later empirical work [4, 24, 25, 34]. The 
motivation of individuals and team members increased 
as the desired goal moved within reach thereby 
overcoming the costs of persistence and increasing the 
probability of successful project outcomes. 
When the goal appears distant, uncertainty about 
project outcom
es builds up.
 
The cost of persistence, a 
restraining force, then gains primacy resulting in 
demotivated individuals and teams, user dissatisfaction 
and project delays. This is 
what happened in the classic 
case of London Stock Exchange which scrapped 
TAURUS an electronic share-transfer system. 
Despite 
work spanning a decade and 
investments estimated to 
be as high as 400 million pounds 
[9, 10].
 TAURUS was 
originally scheduled to be operational in 1989, but was 
abandoned in 1
993, when it bec
ame clear that the 
system was still several years from completion. 
A 
major factor in the decision to abandon the project was 
the state of project incompletion [9]. 
Agile Projects work on th
e principle of developing 
working products in multiple iterations. Users review 
actual working product at
 demonstrations instead of 
paper reviews or review of pr
ototypes in plan-driven 
methods.  At each iteration 
stakeholders of the project 
evaluate whether the wo
rking product has 
accomplished the desired goals.
 As a result project 
progress is visible and the ab
ility to decide what is to 
be done next is more complete, thus reducing 
uncertainty and giving stakeholders more confidence 
in the state of completion of
 the project. As the project 
moves progressively towards completion, the 
motivation of team members
, and users who form part 
of an extended team in Agile projects, keeps 
increasing. 
The team members and users gain 
momentum with increasing motivation, impelling them 
to continue to invest their efforts and accelerating them 
towards successful project completion.
   
 
4.6 Socio-Technical Systems Perspective 
 
Tavistock group’s study of 
English coal miner’s in 
the 1950s was a pioneering attempt to research self-
organizing teams from a socio-technical system 
perspective [46]. Self-Org
anizing teams are 
autonomous groups that respond
 to every day learning 
in making decisions. They exercise a democratic 
system of control called concertive control [31]. This is 
in stark contrast to 
the bureaucratic control which 
relies on hierarchy and rewards compliance [1]. Self-
organizing team’s use of concertive control enhances 
the ability of the team to respond
 to rapidly changing 
business conditions [31]. 
  Agile methodologies give development team the 
autonomy to self organize to determine the best way to 
get the job done. Team members neither have 
predetermined roles nor are required to execute 
outdated plans. Managers place a lot of trust and 
confidence in the entire team and promote face-to-face 
conversations among developers and between 
developers and the business people or customers. Team 
member reflect on what went right and how to become 
more effective during frequent review meetings and 
adjust their behavior accordingly. 
 
5. Contribution and Conclusion 
 
This article responds to a call for augmenting our 
knowledge of the theoretical bases of Agile methods 
[16, 45]. Software development is a complicated task 
consisting of technical, social and cognitive 
dimensions. Accordingly, the academia has a 
significant and non-trivial ro
le in the education of 
future software developers toward this multifaceted 
challenge [50]. In the author’s experience with 
teaching agile software development methods, it makes 
a big difference in the dept
h of understanding that 
students acquire when the theoretical aspects of agile 
are emphasized than when they are not. With 
theoretical insight student
s begin to understand why 
agile practices work and under what context.  
Accordingly this study 
suggests an outline of the 
theoretical component which should become an 
integral part of any agile
 system development course. 
The theoretical underpinnings of agile principles 
discussed in this article are summarized in Table 2.  
 
4975 Table 2. Theories underlying Agile principles 
Agile Principles Theories and Paradigms 
Our highest priority is to 
satisfy the customer 
through early and 
continuous delivery 
of valuable software.  
Agile Manufacturing 
(Early Delivery), JCT 
(Task Significance – 
Valuable Software), 
Marketing concept 
(Customer Satisfaction) 
Welcome changing 
requirements, even late in 
development. Agile 
processes harness change 
for the customer's 
competitive advantage.  
Agile manufacturing 
(Flexibility – welcome 
change), Marketing 
concept (Respond to 
changing customer 
requirements) 
Deliver working software 
frequently, from a couple 
of weeks to a couple of 
months, with a preference 
to the shorter timescale.  
Agile manufacturing 
(Speed), JCT (User 
Feedback), Completion 
Effect (Working 
Software) 
Business people and 
developers must work  
together daily throughout 
the project.  
Marketing concept 
(Customer Collaboration) 
Build projects around 
motivated individuals.  
Give them the 
environment and support 
they need, and trust them 
to get the job done.  
 JCT (Autonomy), Socio-
Technical perspective 
(Empowered Teams) 
The most efficient and 
effective method of  
conveying information to 
and within a development 
team is face-to-face 
conversation.  
 
Working software is the 
primary measure of 
progress.  
JCT (Task Identity), 
Completion Effect 
(Working software ) 
 
 
Agile processes promote 
sustainable development. 
The sponsors, developers, 
and users should be able 
to maintain a constant 
pace indefinitely.  
 
Continuous attention to 
technical excellence  
and good design enhances 
agility.  
Lean Manufacturing 
(Focus on Quality) 
Simplicity--the art of 
maximizing the amount  
of work not done--is 
essential. 
Lean Manufacturing 
(Simplicity, Make only 
what is pulled by the 
customer, 
The best architectures, 
requirements, and designs 
emerge from self-
organizing teams.  
Theory of Emergence 
(Designs Emerge), JCT 
(Autonomy), Socio-
Technical perspective 
(Self-Organizing teams)  
At regular intervals, the 
team reflects on how  
to become more effective, 
then tunes and adjusts its 
behavior accordingly.  
JCT (Job Feedback)  
 
6. References 
 
[1] Baker, J., “Tightening the iron cage: Concertive control in 
self-managing teams”, 
Administrative Science Quarterly
, 
38(3), 1993, pp. 408-437. 
 
[2] Boehm, B. and R. Turner, “Management challenges to 
implementing agile processes in traditional development 
organizations”, 
IEEE Software
, 22 (5), 2005, pp. 30–39. 
 
[3] Brockner, J. and J. Z. Rubin, The social psychology of 
entrapment in escalating conflicts, New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1985.  
 
[4] Brown, J. S., “Gradients of approach and avoidance 
responses and their relation to motivation”, 
Journal of 
Comparative and Physiological Psychology
, 41, 1948, pp. 
450-465. 
 
[5] Chau, T., Maurer, F. and G. Melnik, “Knowledge 
Sharing: Agile Methods vs. Tayloristic Methods”, IEEE 
International Workshops on Enabling Technologies: 
Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises (WETICE’03), 
Linz, Austria, 2003, pp. 302-308. 
 
[6] Cockburn, A. and J. Highsmith, “Agile Software 
Development: The People Factor”, 
Computer
, 2001, pp. 131-
133. 
 
[7] Conlon, D. E., Garland, H. “The role of project 
completion information in resource allocation decisions”, 
Academy of Management Journal
, 36, 1993, pp. 402–413. 
 
[8] Deming, W., Out of Crisis, Center for Advanced 
Engineering Study, Massachusetts Inst. of Technology, 
Cambridge, Mass, 1986. 
 
[9] Drummond, H., Escalation in decision making: The 
tragedy of TAURUS”, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 
1996. 
 
4976 [10] Duffy, M. “London’s embarrassing mistake”, 
Wall 
Street and Technology
, 10, 1993, pp. 38-43. 
 
[11] Dyba, T. and T. Dingsoyr, “Empirical Studies of Agile 
Software Development: A Systematic Review”, 
Information 
and Software Technology
, 50 (9-10), 2008, pp. 833-859. 
 
[12] Garland, H. and D. E. Conlon, “Too close to quit: The 
role of project completion in maintaining commitment”. 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology
, 28, 1998, pp. 2025–
2048. 
 
[13] Hackman, J.R. and E. E. Lawler, “Employee reactions to 
job characteristics”, 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
Monograph
, 55, 1971, pp. 259-286. 
 
[14] Hackman J.R. and G. R. Oldham, “The Job Diagnostic 
Survey: An instrument for the diagnosis of jobs and the 
evaluation of job redesign projects”, 
JSAS Catalog of 
Selected Documents in Psychology (Ms. No. 810)
, 4, 1974, 
pp. 148. 
 
[15] Hackman, J.R, and G. R. Qldham (1976) “Motivation 
Through the Design of Work: Test of a Theory”, 
Organizational Behavior and Human Resources
, 16 (2), 
1976, pp. 250-279. 
 
[16] Hamlet, D. and J. Maybee, The Engineering of 
Software, Addison Wesley, Boston, MA, 2001. 
 
[17] Hannemyr, G., “Technology and Pleasure: Considering 
Hacking Constructive”, 
First Monday
, 4, 1999, pp. 2. 
 
[18] Hazzan, O. and Y. Dubinsky, “Why Software 
Engineering Programs should teach Agile Software 
Development”, 
SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes
, 32 (2), 2007, 
pp. 1–3. 
 
[19] Highsmith, J. Agile Project Management: Creating 
Innovative Products, Addison-Weasley, USA, 2004.  
 
[20] Iacocca Institute. 21 st Century manufacturing strategy, 
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA. 
 
[21] Katz, D. and R. L. Kahn, The social psychology of 
organizations, New York: Wiley, 1966. 
 
[22] Keith, R. J., "The Marketing Revolution", Journal of 
Marketing, 24, (January),1960, pp. 35-38. 
 
[23] Kiggundu, M. N., “Task interdependence and the theory 
of job design”, 
Academy of Management Review,
 6, 1981, pp. 
499 –508. 
 
[24] Krech, D., “Measurement of Tension. Paper read at 
Symposium on Topological Psychology”, 
Bryn Mawr 
College, 1935. 
 
[25] Krech, D., Crutchfield, R. S., and N. Livson, Elements 
of psychology (2nd ed.), New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1969. 
 
[26] Kuhn, T., The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 
University of Chicago Press, 1962. 
 
[27] Lawler, E. E., Motivation in work organizations. 
Monterey, Calif.: Brooks/Cole, 1973. 
 
[28] Leinhardt, G., McCarthy, Y K. and J. Merriman, 
“Intergrating professional knowledge: The theory of practice 
and the practice of theory”, 
Learning and Instruction, 
5, 
1995, pp
. 401–408. 
 
[29] Levitt, T., The Marketing Imagination, New York: The 
Free Press, 1983. 
 
[30] Lewin, K.. A dynamic theory of personality. New York, 
NY: McGraw-Hill, 1935. 
 
[31] Lewin, K., Resolving Social Conflicts: Selected Papers 
on Group Dynamics, Harper and Row, New York, 1948. 
 
[32]
 Mann, J., “The Role of Project Escalation in Explaining 
Runaway Information Systems Development Projects: A 
Field Study”, 
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation
, Georgia State 
University, 1966. 
  
[33] Maurer,F. and G. Melnik, “What you always wanted to 
know about agile methods but did not dare to ask”, 
in: ICSE 
’05: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on 
Software Engineering, ACM Press
, New York, NY, USA, 
2005, pp. 731–732. 
 
[34] Miller, N. E., Experimental studies of conflict, 
In J. 
Hunt (Ed.), Personality and the behavior disorders
, 1, 421-
465). New York, NY: Ronald Press, 1944. 
 
[35] Monden, Y. The Toyota Production System, 
Productivity Press, Portland, OR, 1983. 
 
[36] Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R. and G. Mangalaraj, 
“Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies”, 
Communications of the ACM, 2005, pp. 72–78. 
 
[37] Nerur, S. and V. Balijepally (2007) “Theoretical 
reflections on agile development methodologies: the 
traditional goal of optimization and control is making way 
for learning and innovation”, 
Communications of the ACM
, 
50 (3), 2007, pp. 79-83. 
 
[38] Ohno, T., “The Toyota Production System: Beyond 
Large-Scale Production”, Productivity Press, Portland, OR, 
1988. 
 
[39] Porter, L. W., Lawler, E. E. and J. R. Hackman, 
Behavior in organizations.. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975. 
 
[40] Rosen, D.E., Schroeder, J.E. and E. F. Purinton, 
“Marketing High Tech Products: Lessons in Customer Focus 
from the Marketplace”, 
Academy of Market Science Review
, 
98(6), 1988. 
 
4977 [41] Schwaber, K., “Scrum Development Process”, 
presented 
at OOPSLA'95 Workshop on Business Object Design and 
Implementation, 
1995
. 
 
[42] Shingo, S., Study of the Toyota Production Systems, 
Japan Management Association, Tokyo, 1981. 
 
[43] Taylor, F. W. “Shop management”. (published as part of 
Scientific management), New York:Harper, 1947. 
 
[44] Taylor, F. W., “The principles of scientific 
management”, New York: Harper and Bros, 1911. 
 
[45] Tomayko J. and O. Hazzan, Human Aspects of Software 
Engineering, Hingham, MA: Charles River Media, 2004. 
 
[46] Trist, E., The evolution of socio-technical systems, 
Occasional paper, 1981. 
 
[47] Kakar, A. K. “A Theory of Software Development 
Methodologies”, in Proceedings of SAIS 2012 at Atlanta, 
2012. 
 
[48] Mohr, R. D. and Zoghi, C., “Is Job Enrichment really 
Enriching”, BLS Working papers, 2006. 
 
[49] Kakar, A. K. “What Motivates Team Members and 
Users of Agile Projects”, in Proceedings of SAIS 2013 at 
Savanaah, 2013. 
 
[50]
 Dubinsky, Y. and Hazzan, O. "A framework for  
teaching software development methods." 
Computer Science 
Education
 15 (4), 2005, pp. 275-296. 
 
[51] Fullan, M., Integrating theory and practice, Rethinking 
teacher education,
 1982
. 
 
  
 
 
4978