 Introduction to the Software Technology Track 
 
Rick Kazman 
University of Hawaii 
 kazman
@
hawaii.edu 
 
Gul Agha 
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
 agha
@
cs.uiuc.edu 
 
 
 
Welcome to the So
ftware Technology (ST) Track. 
This year we have a total of nine minitracks on a 
wide variety of important topics in software 
technology: IS education, cybersecurity, software 
assurance, wireless networking, agile methods, agile 
organizations, digital forensics, virtualization, cloud 
computing, and other vital emerging research areas. 
The nine minitracks are as follows:  
 
Secure Cloud Computing
: focuses on design issues 
and solutions for security aspects of  cloud 
computing. This minitrack brings together 
researchers across engineering, management, social, 
and legal areas to discuss this paradigm shift. In this 
context, quality of serv
ice, availability, theft of IP 
and personal information, are all critical research 
topics. 
 
Enlightened Cybersecurity
 and Software Assurance
: 
explores the scientific fo
undations for a unified 
discipline of software assurance to improve the 
dependability of software systems.  Assurance 
research focuses on achieving an acceptable level of 
trust and confidence through auditable evidence that 
software systems will be built and will function as 
intended in both benign 
and threat environments. 
 
Wireless Networks
: focuses on 
fundamental 
challenges and issues arising in wireless sensor 
networks and their applications. Wireless sensor 
nodes and networks must provide solutions to 
practical problems, and must be both cost-effective 
and an improvement ove
r previous practice. 
 
Software Product Lines: Engineering, Services, and 
Management
: focuses on business models and 
strategies, economic valuatio
n, organizational and 
process design, knowledge management practices 
and systems, service systems and their implications, 
and international standardizati
on initiatives related to 
product lines. 
 
Software Security 
for Mobile Platforms
: this 
minitrack is focused on the research and automation 
techniques that can be applied to mobile platforms 
that will insure that developed software on these 
devices are secure while not compromising other 
system properties such as performance or reliability. 
 
Agile and Lean Software Engineering
: looks at 
building a middle ground
 between traditional 
software engineering and agile software 
development, called Agile So
ftware Engineering.  It 
attempts to find best-of-
both approaches, merging 
where possible, and selecting one or the other where 
appropriate. 
 
IS Education and Training
: looks at methods and 
innovations for education and training. How are new 
IS paradigms being introduced and taught, and what 
are the practical means of implementing them in the 
classroom? What drives or degrades the demand and 
relevance of IS education and training? 
 
Agile and Lean 
Organizations
: looks at how agile 
development and lean product management interact 
with organizations, their structures, cultures and 
products. This includes an examination of how 
organizations interact with 
product groups, how they 
restructure to support agility, what cultural changes 
are required, what metrics are used to track such 
organizations, and how to markets respond to them. 
 
Digital Forensics—Education, Research, and 
Practice
: involves the use of software, computer 
science, software engineering
, and criminal justice 
procedures to explore and or investigate digital media 
with the objective of finding evidence to support a 
criminal or administrative case. It involves the 
preservation, identificatio
n, extraction, and 
documentation of computer or network evidence.   
 
We would like to than
k our minitrack chairs and 
authors who once again have put together a truly 
compelling set of minitracks.
 
 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5774710