 Contextualizing Knowledge Management Readiness to Support Change 
Management Strategies 
 Mark Keith 
Arizona State University 
mark.keith@asu.edu
  Michael Goul 
Arizona State University and 
William J. Clinton Distinguished Fellow, 
University of Arkansas  
Clinton School of Public Policy  
michael.goul@asu.edu
  Haluk Demirkan 
Arizona State University 
haluk.demirkan@asu.edu
  Jason Nichols 
Arizona State University 
jason.nichols@asu.edu
  Margaret C. Mitchell 
V. P. I. T. Global Card Services  
American Express Corporation 
margaret.c.mitchell@aexp.com
   Abstract
 Research on knowledge management (KM) 
readiness has matured. However, recent 

organizational structures have emerged which 

prevent traditional instruments from adequately 

measuring KM readiness in an organization. For 

example, service-oriented enterprise (SOE) structure 

and agile software development techniques are 
characterized by multiple groups working together 
with each performing “services” as part of project 

pattern or process. Each group acts in its own role as 
a sub-organization with its unique helping patterns 
and cultures [17]. Traditional instruments which 
measure aggregate constructs across the entire 
organization will miss important between-group 

differences in an SOE that might influence KM 

readiness. This paper presents a case-based field-

study from a large Fortune 500 financial firm 

transitioning its structure to SOE and considering 

agile software development methodologies. Survey 
data was collected along with a series of interviews 
with key managers and developers. Findings indicate 
statistically significant differences in KM readiness 
between groups and the need for alignment.
  
 
 1. Introduction 
 Knowledge Management (KM) strategies are 
maturing including the ability to assess an 
organization’s readiness for such systems [20, 19, 21]. 
Critical enablers of KM have been validated and 

organized in an integrative framework along with 

organizational processes and performance [14]. These 

studies and many like them provide frameworks and 

models for how knowledge can be effectively and 

efficiently managed within organizations. In 

particular, knowledge 
sharing
 (KS) has been 
identified as a critical process in the creation and 

application of new knowledge [1]. Because many KM 

initiatives do not evolve as successfully as their 
directors had planned, researchers have explored 
potential barriers and facilitators of KS in 

organizations [18, 8, 6]. Siemieniuch and Sinclair 

appropriately described their framework for 

organizational readiness for knowledge management 

by saying, 
if you would plant roses in the desert, first 
make sure the ground is wet
 [20]. The constructs 
produced by KM readiness research may help an 

organization to analyze its preparedness for effective 

knowledge sharing before a KM system is 

implemented. This is traditionally accomplished by 

administering an anonymous survey throughout an 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200610-7695-2507-5/06/$20.00 (C) 2006 IEEE organization which measures critical success factors 
for KM. However, such techniques may not be 

appropriate for some emerging organizational 

structures and processes. 
For example, the concept of “agile software 
development” (ASD) has recently received greater 
attention from researchers and practitioners alike [15, 
12, 10]. The strategy of agile methods is to reduce the 
cost of change throughout a project [11]. Agility 

during the lifecycle of the project allows teams to 
better adapt to shifting demands in user requirements 
and produce faster rework. But, such dynamics 
requires the use of expert knowledge during the entire 
project whereas traditional approaches, like the 
waterfall method, can still execute using expert 
knowledge during the project planning phase only [3]. 
An IT unit planning to make the shift to ASD 
would benefit from first analyzing their ability to 
support the kind of expert knowledge sharing 
necessary to reap the performance benefits of the new 

process. As stated previously, there is adequate theory 

to perform such an analysis. However, a key 

discriminator of ASD is that it is well-matched to 

small teams and short iterations relative to traditional 

methods where the entire project is planned and 

carried out by a single team under a master plan [12].  
In Perlow et al.’s [17] analysis used to develop 
their Nested Theory of Structuration, they discovered 

three distinct patterns of workgroup interaction within 
software engineering teams. Each group structure 
possessed unique interactions between reward 

structures, helping patterns, and team cultures. This 

finding allowed them to map the exchange of 

knowledge and information among and between team 

members and project leaders. In short, different teams 

may have different KS norms and practices. 
Therefore, a blanket survey which measures 
aggregative KM enabling constructs across all groups 

will miss important differences in KM readiness 

between
 teams. Such differences may critically affect 
the successful implementation of an agile software 
development process which depends on successful KS 
between teams. 
A Service-Oriented Enterprise (SOE) based on a 
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) is an emerging 
organizational 
structure
 which possesses some similar 
characteristics to the ASD 
process
. Brown and 
Carpenter [4] defined an SOE as 
an enterprise that 
implements and exposes its business processes 
through an SOA and that provides frameworks for 
managing its business processes across an SOA 

landscape.
 SOA is characterized generally by its 
architecture of “services.” A “service” is a 
standardized component of a business process or 

project performed by a person, computer, or team. In 
the software development process, work gets passed 
from service to service as it progresses towards 

completion. Occasionally, rework is required and 

certain services must be performed again. Throughout 

this process, knowledge and information must be 

quickly and efficiently shared between units to remain 
agile. Similar to ASD, team structures exist which 
might have differing cultures and patterns of KS. 

Again, these differences can hinder the agility of an 

SOE and would go unnoticed by a traditional KM 
readiness survey. 
The paper presents a case study from the business 
intelligence (BI) unit of a large Fortune 500 financial 

institution which will be termed ABC Corp for non-

disclosure purposes. Based on their need for faster 
customer response time, ABC Corp is currently 
exploring agile development methods within an SOE 
context. Because of the additional knowledge sharing 
required by these strategies, a survey was 
administered to measure ABC Corp’s KM readiness. 
The survey was tailored to detect specific differences 

between groups.  
Results indicate that when KM readiness surveys 
are used in the context of team-driven structures like 
SOE and ASD, a group-level analysis is necessary to 
capture an accurate assessment. Furthermore, such an 

analysis can better support change management 

strategies if an organization considers itself “unready” 

to share and manage knowledge in an agile 
environment. Practical implications include more 
targeted and accurate assessments of KM readiness 

for firms considering similar strategies. This 

information will improve an organization’s ability to 

make more actionable decisions based on their KM 

readiness assessments. 
The remainder of the paper is outlined as follows: 
Section 2 describes the current structure and needs of 

ABC Corp’s BI unit; Section 3 reviews the agile 
development methodology and SOA including why 

these structures might be good fits for ABC Corp’s 

needs; to assess ABC Corp’s preparedness for these 
new structures, Section 4 outlines current literature 
and theory in KM readiness to provide a theoretical 

base for the survey; also,  workgroup helping patterns, 

which illustrate the flow of knowledge within teams, 

are discussed to help contextualize the results of the 

survey; Section 5 presents the survey results; Section 

6 discusses limitations of the study and also how 

results  can be contextualized to the appropriate 

workgroup patterns used to better inform a change 
management strategy; and Section 7 concludes. 
  2. ABC Corp 
 Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20062 Within ABC Corp is a BI unit which manages the 
data warehouse. This unit performs typical data 

warehousing functions including producing reports 

for large clients based on the data gathered by the 

warehouse. Most projects require adjustments to 

database table structures in the data warehouse and 
some amount of software engineering to either 
produce the report or give the client access to generate 
the desired reports from an interface. Projects are 

typically driven by customer needs and requests. Each 
project can vary in size from medium to quite large.  
ABC Corp had several concerns with the 
efficiency and effectiveness of their current processes. 
A questionnaire revealed several general concerns 
relating to problems in communication, timeliness, 
teamwork, subject-matter competencies (implicit 

knowledge), and process organization. The structure 

of ABC Corp’s BI unit consists of several project 
teams each with a similar set of person resources 
sufficient to complete a typical project. Recently, 

ABC Corp switched to a “job shop” or component-

based structure where various teams are now 

responsible for separate components of a single 

project like data ETL (Export/Transform/Load), 

development, and testing rather than assigning one 

team to a complete project lifecycle. Although their 

organizational structure has changed, ABC Corp 

continues to follow the waterfall methodology for 

their software development process.  
  3. Organizational Structures 
 With the rapid growth of technology, 
organizational structures are becoming less of a static 

concept and more of a “work in progress.” Structures 
are constantly changing to adapt to market demands. 
During an interview, one ABC Crop team manager 
noted that customers either do not or can not provide 

an adequate definition of their own requirements and 

changes are frequently requested during development. 
In addition, requirements will frequently change 
during the development process as a result of new 
needs or requests from the customer. As a result, 

project managers end up providing padded cost and 
time estimates initially to plan for unexpected 

changes. Traditional project management, which 
refers to these changes as “scope creep,” is more 
concerned with controlling and preventing change 
rather than preparing for and expecting it. ABC 
Corp’s difficulties with handling change and new 

organization structure led to an exploration of ASD 
methods and an SOA structure. 
Project development lifecycles are becoming more 
characterized by changes in requirements and scope 
which doesn’t match well to the relatively inflexible 
plan-driven methods. As Highsmith and Cockburn 

[11] stated, “the question today is not how to stop 

change early in a project but how to better handle 

inevitable changes throughout its life cycle.” 
  3.1. Agile Software Development 
 The differences between agile and plan-driven 
methods have been characterized by several authors 

[15, 12, 10, 3, 11]. Their findings are generally 

consistent. 
Traditional plan-driven methods like the waterfall 
and spiral models are primarily motivated by the need 
for predictability and stability. They scale well to 
large projects and teams and flourish when the 

environment is stable with infrequent and non-critical 

change. The more common waterfall method can 

allow some overlapping of phases, but is typical a 

linear process. Usually, the project plans, knowledge, 

and information are well-documented and explicit. A 

mass of knowledge experts are critical in the early 

stages of planning and analysis when the project is 

defined, but needed less as the development and 
testing are actually carried out according to plan. As a 
result, client involvement is most important during 
these early stages.  Plan-driven methods do better in a 
culture with clear policies and procedures. Plan-
driven methods assume that projects can be 
completely defined and will require little, if any, 
change. 
Agile methods like extreme programming (XP), 
feature-driven development, scrum, and adaptive 

software development are characterized by the need 
for change, adaptability, and earlier release. They 

scale better to smaller team sizes and can handle 

smaller project sizes than plan-driven methods. Agile 
methods are characterized by series of short iterations 
– each like a small waterfall method. Project planning 
is simpler and knowledge is more tacit. A consistent 
amount of knowledge experts are required throughout 
the lifecycle of the project to handle and adapt to 

changes. Client involvement is required and usually 

expected throughout the entire project. Agile methods 

perform well in less-ordered environments with little 

organizational hierarchy. Agile methods assume small 

teams using rapid feedback can develop quality 
software through short iterations of continuous 

improvement and testing. 
  3.2. Service-Oriented Architecture and the 
Service-Oriented Enterprise 
 Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20063 Service-oriented architecture has been described as 
both a technical architecture and also a business 

modeling concept [4, 9]. Building and integrating 

SOAs leads to the evolution of an SOE. As a technical 

architecture, SOA is the standardized infrastructure 

based on XML and Web Services used to support 
business processes. Therefore, SOA may also refer to 
the actual business process supported by a service-
oriented infrastructure (SOI). In an SOE, the software 

development process is basically a choreography of 
services – like planning, analysis, design, build, test, 
and implement – which, when performed together, 
comprise the pattern of a software development 
project. Each major service may be composed of a 
series of sub-level services which are performed by a 
person, computer, or team. The advantages of an SOA 

stem from the underlying SOI characteristics based on 

Web Services like speed and agility in both the 
discovery and invocation of the unit of service. Also, 
the standardization of the service unit allows for a 

formal structure for inputs and outputs through each 

service which can improve workflow speed. 
The concept of SOA applies in this research in two 
distinct ways: 1) ABC Corp’s recent change in their 

BI unit structure from project teams to component 

teams resembles an SOA where the component teams 

resemble an architecture of services and 2) an SOE, 

characterized by its structure of SOAs, can better 

support an agile development environment consisting 
of small teams performing services like short 
iterations in a project development lifecycle. 
In summary, agile development methods within an 
SOA structure carry the theoretical potential to 

improve speed and adaptability to change (as desired 

by ABC Corp), but have certain requirements in 

communication, teamwork, KM, and process structure 
– all perceived as areas needing improvement at ABC 
Corp. If they want to change to these organizational 

structures, ABC Corp needs to first accurately assess 

their KM readiness. 
  4. Literature and Theory 
 As stated previously, theory on KM readiness has 
progressed in the traditional organizational context. In 

addition, there is theory to support helping patterns 
within groups which allows us to make actionable 
decisions regarding readiness assessments. But, SOA 

and the trend toward agile development methods 

present a new structure to examine readiness in. In 

particular, these new methods and technologies relax 

the assumption that knowledge sharing and 

interactions take place 
within
 groups only. The 
following subsections outline current literature and 
theory in KM readiness and the Nested Theory of 
Structuration. 
  4.1. Knowledge Management Readiness 
 Many studies have attempted to define the 
constructs which make an organization “ready” to 
manage knowledge or that cause individuals to intend 
to share knowledge [2, 20, 5, 19, 21].  Usually, each 
approach is tested by administering a validated survey 

instrument. Lee and Choi [14] performed a 

comprehensive experiment to integrate the many 
views on KM readiness. Their research examined the 
relationship between knowledge enablers, processes, 

and organizational performance in an integrative 

framework. Knowledge enablers are mechanisms that 

stimulate knowledge creation, protect knowledge, and 

facilitate knowledge sharing. Knowledge processes 

provide the structured coordination to effectively 

manage knowledge. Organizational performance 

refers to how well a business is accomplishing its 

goals in terms of learning, profitability, and other 

benefits of KM.  
Based on established theory and literature, Lee and 
Choi included organizational culture, structure, 
people, and IT as KM enablers in their research 
model. They defined six constructs from a social 
perspective and one from a technical perspective to 
measure those enablers:  
 
1) Collaboration
 is the degree to which people 
help each other in their work. 
2) Trust
 is the faith people have in each other in 
terms of intention and behaviors. 
3) Learning
 refers to the degree to which it is 
encouraged in an organization. 
4) Centralization
 refers to the locus of decision 
authority and control within an organization. 
5) Formalization
 is the point to which decisions 
and working relationships are controlled by 

rules, policies, and procedures. 
6) T-shaped skills
 are the skills in which a person 
has not only a deep knowledge within a 

subject (the vertical part of the “T”), but also 

how that subject interacts across domains (the 

horizontal part of the “T”). 
7)  IT support
 is simply the degree to which KM 
can be supported by technology. 
 Each construct was tested for its affects on the 
knowledge creation process which consists of 
socialization (generating new tacit knowledge through 

social interactions), externalization (converting 

knowledge from tacit to explicit), combination 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20064 (combining key pieces of explicit knowledge into 
systematic sets), and internalization (embodying 

explicit knowledge into tacit knowledge) [16]. 
These constructs provide the basis for a thorough 
analysis of KM readiness. However, the actual survey 

items used by the authors were not intended to 
adequately detect between-group differences in an 
organization characterized by multiple units 
interacting with each other like “mini” organizations – 

which might be found in an SOE or firm practicing 
agile development methods. In order to make 
informative decisions regarding team structures and 
reward systems to improve KM, organizations must 
adapt proven techniques like Lee and Choi’s 
instrument to discover how knowledge is currently 
being sharing and managed between groups. 
  4.2. Nested Theory of Structuration 
 Besides the proven KM enablers, there are also 
patterns of workgroup interaction which affect an 
organization’s flow of knowledge and information 
and therefore its readiness for KM. Perlo et al. [17] 

performed an extensive observational study of three 

large software engineering firms in different 

countries. They discovered three distinct patterns of 

helping within groups which they termed managerial 

centered, expertise centered, and team centered 

(Figure 1 – adapted from Perlow et al.). These 

patterns are based on the roles of project leaders, the 
roles of software engineers, and the source of 
knowledge when the need for help arises. 
  Figure 1 - Patterns of helping within work groups
  The managerial pattern (Figure 1a) is characterized 
by little to no communication among software 

engineers. In this pattern, the helping interaction is 

almost completely between engineers and project 

leaders. Expertise centered patterns are characterized 

by high helping interaction between engineers. Each 

team member is known for some kind of expertise 

that other members rely on for help. The project 

leader is removed from the day-to-day knowledge-
based technical questions and takes on the role of an 
overseer rather than provider of information. Finally, 

the project leader in the team centered pattern is more 

involved in addressing technical questions. The group 

is more team-oriented and members can turn to 

anyone in the group for help. 
The mutual reinforcement between human patterns 
and organizational structures is the premise of 

Structuration Theory. Perlow et al.’s 
Nested
 Theory of 
Structuration posits that organizations are most 
effective when there is a fit between the institutional 

context, organizational context, and patterns of 

workgroup interaction (See Figure 2 – adapted from 

Perlow et al.). An organizational context might be 

SOE using agile project development methods for 
example. In addition, the organizational context takes 

place within an even larger institutional context. For 
example, government policies and family values are 
variables that contribute to organizational context. 
Each level of nesting helps to shape the structure and 

patterns of the level without it just as the level within 

reinforces the structure of the outer level. So, there is 

a round of structuration within each level.  

  Figure 2 - Nested Theory of Structuration 
 To understand why it may be inadequate to ask 
traditional KM readiness questions without taking 

into account the organizational context and work 

group patterns, consider a typical survey item. To 
assess the perceived level of collaboration within an 

organization, a survey might ask for a user’s level of 

agreement with the statement, “Our organization 

members are helpful.” It is possible that more than 
one type of workgroup pattern exists in a single 
organization. Assume that data is collected from users 

in both a managerial centered group and a team 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20065 centered group. The user from the team centered 
group is giving a cumulative response about his or her 

entire group whereas the user from the managerial 

group is really only providing feedback on his or her 

project leader because that is the only person the user 

solicits help from. If the managerial group project 
leader is perceived by their subordinates as doing a 
poor job and is disliked, then responses from that 
group will be mostly negative, when in reality, maybe 

only the project leader is unhelpful. Now, consider 
yourself the director of an IT unit in a large 
organization trying to assess your KM readiness to 
switch to agile project development within an SOA. 
The results from your survey may indicate some 
groups – the managerial centered groups with poor 
project leaders – are not optimistic about 

collaboration. You may decide those groups are not 

ready for agile development, which requires a high 
degree of collaboration throughout a project lifecycle, 
when in reality you may only be suffering from poor 

project managers.  
After assessing KM readiness differences between 
groups, workgroup interactions should be discovered 
and used to contextualize the results. Then, these 

assessments can be used to plan change management 

strategies considering organizational and institutional 

contexts. 
  5. Research Methodology and Results 
 This research is based on the case study 
methodology adapted from interpretive research 

literature [13]. It progressed through a period of 6 

months. During this time, the data gathering was 
partly qualitative through structured and unstructured 
interviews, but mainly quantitative through the use of 
a survey instrument. To measure the KM readiness of 
ABC Corp, we developed a 46-item pilot survey 
adapted from Lee and Choi to measure their seven 

KM enablers. There were slight changes in wording to 
detect within and between group differences. Two of 

the questions were open-ended to detect additional 

issues and problems not addressed in the survey. 

 
 5.1. Measurement and Data Collection 
 Surveys were available in paper format and also 
emailed to 45 employees of ABC Corp’s BI unit. This 

unit is comprised of 5 teams with 7 to 10 members 

each and a few administrative personnel. To ensure 

anonymity, we have arbitrarily assigned group 

numbers and teams will be referred to as group 1, 

group 2, and so forth. Twenty-seven surveys were 
collected yielding a 60 percent response rate. 
Although each component team is responsible for 

different functions in the software engineering 

environment, each team is comprised of similar 

employee positions. For example each team has a 

project manager, programmers, and business analysts.  

 
 5.2. Results 
 
Figure 3 graphically displays the survey results. 
The average score on a 7-point Likert scale for each 

construct is plotted for groups 1 through 5. Each 

construct was measured by a set of questions adapted 

from Lee and Choi’s validated instrument. Table 1 
indicates the actual scores for each group on each KM 
enabler – collaboration (COL), trust (TRU), learning 

(LEA), centralization (CEN), T-shaped skills (TKS), 

formalization (FOR), IT support (ITS) – including the 

response rate for each group. Survey results indicated 

several significant differences in KM enablers 

between groups. Based on a simple t-Tests between 

groups, group 1 indicated a higher degree of 

collaboration than either group 4 or 5 (p = .01 and .05 

respectively), group 3 indicated a higher degree of 

trust than either group 4 or 5 (p = .02 and .05 

respectively), and group 1 rated their centralization as 
lower than either group 2 or 3 (p = .001 and .01 
respectively).  
 
  2.50
3.00
3.50

4.00
4.50
5.00
5.50
6.00
6.50
COLTRULEACENTKSFORITS
12345 Figure 3 - Results by group on KM enablers 
  Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20066 Table 1 – Group means and response rates 
   These results are consistent with data collected 
prior to the survey. In an interview near the beginning 
of the project, the managing director and cost 
manager of the BI unit (both have more than 5 years 
experience in their positions at ABC Corp) revealed 
that group 1 had consistently been the top performer 
both before and after the BI unit’s structural change to 
component teams. Their subjective judgment agrees 

with the survey results which indicate that group 1 

scores generally higher than other groups on KM 

enablers which Lee and Choi determined to influence 

the knowledge creation process which in turn is 

related to performance. 
  6.  Discussion and Limitations  
 
The purpose of the survey was to capture 
differences in KM readiness between groups if 

differences indeed exist. Based on the survey results 

and reports from management, the instrument 
accomplished its purpose. In addition, besides 
validating the perceptions from management, the 
survey identified the specific KM enablers in which 
groups differ. This supports more targeted change 
strategies to improve readiness for KM. However, this 

study has several limitations. First, the case study 
approach, while still a valid method of interpretive 
research, has limited generalizability because it only 
represents the results of one firm [13]. Second, even 

for a case study, the total number of responses was 

limited and may not represent an accurate assessment 

for each group – particularly in the case of groups 2 

and 3 from which only three surveys were collected. 

Finally, the study places KM readiness in the context 
of assessing an organization transitioning its structure 
to SOE and implementing agile development 
methods. While we propose KM readiness should be 

addressed at the group level in ABC Corp’s context, 

this may not be appropriate for all firms considering 

an SOE structure. As stated previously, the services 

performed by an SOA may be provided by an 

individual or web service and not necessarily by a 

team. This is also why the specific organizational 
context should be considered when assessing KM 
readiness. 

  6.1. Contextualizing Survey Results
  When specific between-group differences are 
discovered, they should be considered in the context 
of the particular helping pattern the group(s) of 

interest follow. For example, survey results indicate 

that group 1 is significantly less centralized than 

groups 2 and 3. This information may help to confirm 

a managerial centered workgroup structure in group 2 

and 3 and a team or expertise centered structure in 

group 1. If ABC Corp is planning to use agile 
development methods, which require more 
empowerment in team members to handle changes, 
they might try to alter the workgroup pattern of 
groups 2 and 3 as part of their change management 
strategy. Without examining the KM readiness at the 

group level, the organization would appear to have an 

average degree of centralization with a score of 3.71 
out of 7. If the company then implemented an agile 

development strategy, they might find later that 
groups 2 and 3 do not perform as well in an 
environment that favors decentralized decision 
making and individual empowerment. 
Another example stems from the difference in 
collaboration between group 1 and 5. The overall 

score for perceived collaboration is 4.69. Without 

examining the differences between groups, a company 

may determine that their degree of collaboration is 

sufficient and change their structure to an SOE. 

During a software development project within that 

SOE, work progresses as it passes from service to 

service. Occasionally, the workflow may follow 

multiple paths at once. If group 5 is performing a 

service in one path and discovers a bug or some other 
critical need for rework and is less willing to 
collaborate and share knowledge with groups 

performing services in other paths of the workflow, 

the agility of the process could be hindered. 
In summary, we have used the example of ABC 
Corp considering a change to SOE and agile 
development to argue that KM readiness assessment 
should be adapted to perform a group-level analysis. 
We have also explained how the survey results of 
ABC Corp might be placed in the context of the 

workgroup helping patterns to better understand the 
results. The next step is to use these contextualized 
results to improve change management strategies. 
  6.1. Change Management Strategy
  Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20067 Demirors and Frailey [7] defined a “horizontal 
change approach” to software process improvement. 

Their horizontal approach was motivated by the 

lacking ability of vertical approaches to quickly bring 

about desired change strategies. Vertical approaches 

focus on how to model, control and enact certain 
processes or improvements in a top-down fashion. 
They are similar to the waterfall life-cycle model 
where knowledge is at the top and less-skilled 

workers at the bottom. In the vertical approach, the 
bottom workers generate data from their activities 
which is analyzed by top management and returned to 
them in the form “task prescriptions.” However, 
software development is a knowledge based 
environment. The vertical approach does not work 
well for software process improvement where the 

knowledge is generated and in the greatest amounts at 

the bottom and is more difficult to analyze at levels 
other than where it was created. 
The horizontal approach emphasizes an 
environment that utilizes the expertise of all 
knowledge workers to achieve the change strategies. 
It is better structured to successfully accomplish 
change strategies in software development processes 

– especially as an organization moves to agile 

development methods where knowledge is shared and 

managed horizontally. Of the six principles of 

horizontal change approaches identified by Demirors 

and Frailey, three can be particularly supported by our 
findings: 
 
1. Processes should enable the surfacing of 
assumptions and expectations in an organization: 

gaps between the inherent assumptions and 

expectations of individuals cause major process 

inefficiencies. 
 The main goal of this research is to increase the 
surfacing of assumptions made by individuals by 

measuring their perceptions between groups in a 

survey and placing them in their proper workgroup 
and organizational context. This information can be 
used to reduce the gaps (by aligning differences) and 
better enable change. 
 2. Diverse communication should occur among 
individuals and spontaneous distribution of 
knowledge should occur irrespective of hierarchy. 
 A KM readiness assessment between groups such 
as the pilot survey performed in ABC Corp can 

discover where communication is being frustrated and 
establish controls to improve it. For example, 
meetings can be coordinated where necessary 

communication is not taking place. The type of 
helping patterns of the groups involved would affect 
who the most appropriate communicators are between 

groups. 

 
3. “More control occurs from less control”: 
knowledge workers should be empowered to take 
responsibility for measuring their processes, 
identifying their problems, improving their 

processes and providing feedback for the 

processes they consume. 
 This principle suggests an expertise or team 
centered workgroup pattern may facilitate change 

better in a software development group because they 

are characterized by more independence from the 
project leader. Understanding those patterns and being 
able to detect them from a more targeted survey may 
help improve process change strategies. 

 
 7. Conclusion 
 From the case analysis of ABC Corp, this study 
demonstrates that traditional KM readiness 
assessments should be adapted to detect group-level 
differences if they are to be effective for emerging 

team-driven structures like SOE and ASD methods. In 

addition, these assessments need to be considered in 

the context of the helping patterns that each group 

follows. Doing so can help an organization create a 

better “fit” between the organizational context and 

workgroup patterns of interaction which will, in turn, 

improve the effectiveness of the organizational 

structure. In addition, the contextualized KM 

readiness assessments can improve change strategies 

for software process improvement. 
  8. References 
 
[1] Alavi, M. and Leidner, D.E., “
Review
: Knowledge 
Management and Knowledge Management Systems: 
Conceptual Foundations and Research Issues”, 
MIS 
Quarterly
, 25, 1, 2001, 107-136. 
  [2] Bock, G., Zmud, R.W., Kim, Y., and Lee, J., 
“Behavioral Intention formation in Knowledge Sharing: 
Examining the Roles of Extrinsic Motivators, Social-
Psychological Forces, and Organizational Climate”, 
MIS 
Quarterly
, 29, 1, 2005, 87-111. 
 
[3] Boehm, B. and Turner, R., “Using Risk to Balance Agile 

and Plan-Driven Methods”, 
Computer
, 36, 6, 2003, 57-66. 
 [4] Brown, G.W. and Carpenter, R., “Successful 
Application of Service-Oriented Architecture Across the 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20068 Enterprise and Beyond”, 
Intel Technology Journal
, 8, 4, 
2004, 345-360. 

 [5] Chua, A., “Knowledge Sharing: a game people play”, 
Aslib Proceedings 2003
, 55, 3, 2003, 117-129. 
 [6] Damodaran, L. and Olphert, W., “Barriers and 

facilitators to the use of knowledge management systems”, 

Behaviour & Information Technology
, Taylor & Francis 
Ltd, 19, 6, 2000, 405-413. 

 
[7] Demirors, O. and Frailey, D. J., “A Horizontal Approach 
for Software Process Improvement”, 
Computer Software 
and Applications Conference, 1995. 
COMPUSAC 95. 
Proceedings., Nineteenth Annual International, 1995, 326-
331. 
 
[8] Desouza, K.C., “Barriers to Effective Use of 

Knolwledge Management Systems in Software 

Engineering”, 
Communications of the ACM
, 46, 1, 2003, 
99-101. 
 [9] Erl, T., 
Service-Oriented Architecture: A Field Guide to 
Integrating XML and Web-Services
, Prentice Hall, 2004. 
 
[10] Grossman, F., Bergin, J., Leip, D., Merritt, S., and 
Gotel, O., “One XP Experience: Introducing Agile (XP) 
Software Development into a Culture that is Willing but not 

Ready”, 
Proceedings of the 2004 Conference of the Centre 
for Advanced Studies on Collaborative Research
, Markham, 
Ontario, Canada, 2004, 242-254. 

 [11] Highsmith, J. and Cockburn, A., “Agile Software 
Development: The Business of Innovation”, 
Computer
, 34, 
9, 2001, 120-122. 

 
[12] Huo, M., Verner, J., Zhu, L., and Babar, M.A., 
“Software Quality and Agile Methods”, 
Proceedings of the 
28th Annual International Computer Software and 
Applications Conference (COMPSAC’04)
, 2004, 520-525. 
 [13] Klein, H.K. and Myers, M.D., “A Set of 
Principles for Conducting and Evaluating Interpretive 
Field Studies in Information Systems”, 
MIS 
Quarterly
, 23, 1, 1999, 67-94. 
  [14] Lee, H. and Choi, B., “Knowledge Management 

Enablers, Processes, and Organizational Performance: An 

Integrative View and Empirical Examination”, 
Journal of 
Management Information Systems
, 20, 1, 2003, 179-228. 
 [15] Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R., and Mangalara, G., 
“Challenges of Migrating to Agile Methodologies”, 

Communications of the ACM
, 8, 5, 2005, 73-78. 
 [16] Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H. “The Knowledge Creating 

Company” New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 

 
[17] Perlow, L.A., Gittell, J.H., and Katz, N. 
“Contextualizing Patterns of Work Group Interaction: 
Toward a Nested Theory of Structuration”, 
Organizational 
Science
, 15, 5, 2004, 520-536. 
 
[18] Pumareja, D.T., Sikkel, K., “The Role of Dissonance in 

Knowledge Exchange: A Case Study of a Knowledge 
Management System Implementation”, 
Proceedings of the 
38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
, 2005, 42b. 
 [19] Ruppel, C.P. and Harrington, S.J., “Sharing Knowledge 
Through Intranets: A Study of Organizational Culture and 
Intranet Implementation”, 
IEEE Transactions on 
Professional Communication
, 44, 1, 2001, 37-52. 
 
[20] Siemieniuch, C.E. and Sinclair, M.A., “A framework 
for organizational readiness for knowledge management”, 
International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management
, 24, 1, 2004, 79-98. 
 
[21] Tsai, W., “Social Structure of ‘Coopetition’ Within a 

Multiunit Organization: Coordination, Competition, and 
Intraorganizational Knowledge Sharing”, 
Organizational 
Science
, 13, 2, 2002, 179-190. 
   Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20069