  Gathering Experience Knowledge from Iterative Software Development 
Processes 
  Jouni K Kokkoniemi 
Department of Information Processing Science 
P.O. BOX 3000, FIN-90014 University of Oulu, Finland 
Jouni.kokkoniemi@oulu.fi 
  Abstract 
 This paper proposes that experience knowledge 
would be beneficial for iterative software 
development. In this paper, experience knowledge-
based artifacts have been linked to Extreme 
Programming via peer reviews. Experience 
knowledge can be defined as human experiences 

documented with the object of exploiting them in the 

organization. Extreme Programming has been 
selected to represent iterative software development 

processes. Systematically gathering experiences 

would support building evidence for improving and 

teaching iterative software development processes. 

This paper presents one possible solution as to how to 

put experience knowledge in practice in the context of 
iterative software development processes. It also 
reports results from projects where experience 
knowledge has been studied. The main findings of this 
paper are two ways in which experience knowledge-

based artifacts can be used with iterative software 

development, and that peer reviews are a good way to 

collect and treat experience knowledge-based 

artifacts. 

 . 1. Introduction 
 There can be found several different kinds of 
iterative software development models nowadays. 
Agile techniques have become probably the most 
popular representative of such models. However, 

many software development models that have 

iterative and incremental features were already 

developed years ago, for example, evolutionary 
software development [32, 16], rapid prototyping 
[14], spiral model [10], OMT++ [1], and Rational 
Unified Process [22, 31]. 
In this paper, Extreme Programming (XP) [6] has 
been selected to represent iterative software 
development approaches. At the beginning of the 

paper, it is reasonable to say that Extreme 

Programming differs considerably from the methods 

mentioned previously. Iterations of Extreme 

Programming are significantly shorter and Extreme 

Programming can be classified as an agile technique 

[3].  
Agile techniques apply the principles of light-
weight production to the overall software lifecycle. 

These techniques usually give a set of practices and 

procedures that support either the whole software 
lifecycle or parts of it. Different agile methods focus 
on different aspects of the software development 

lifecycle or process [3]. For example, Extreme 

Programming is a collection of principles and 

practices that aims at enabling successful software 

development despite vague or constantly changing 

requirements in small and medium sized teams. 
One common denominator of all agile techniques 
is communication and collaboration between the 

customer, project team, and other project stakeholders 
[7]. Short cycles, user involvement and integrated unit 
testing are used to avoid documentation overhead and 
ensure product quality. This has led to a reduction in 

the significance of peer reviews [39]. It should also be 

noted that agile techniques are suggested to be well 
suited for small projects with low criticality and 

changing requirements [11]. Based on what has been 

stated, it is true that the significance of peer reviews is 

less in small projects than in bigger ones. 
Experience knowledge (EK) is an organizational 
memory-based concept, which is mainly based on 
human experiences [25]. It has taken features from the 

‚knowledge management of software engineering 
lessons learned™ method presented by Birk and Tauz 
[9], the ‚experience factory™ method presented by 
Basili et al. [8], and the work of Nonaka and Takeuchi 

[30]. Ideas concerning experience knowledge have 

been evaluated and observed to be fit for use when 

studying inspections and inspection processes in 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20081530-1605/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE1  partner companies [27, 28]. In this paper, experience 
knowledge-based artifacts have been linked to 
Extreme Programming via peer reviews. 
The main purpose of this paper is to show how 
experience knowledge-based artifacts can be linked to 
software development processes. The objective of this 
paper is to answer the research question: how can 
experience knowledge be put into practice in the 

context of iterative software development processes? 

The original focus of this research was to investigate 

how experience knowledge-based artifacts can be 

generated [27] and how experiences can be gathered 

in the context of software development processes. The 

use of experience knowledge-based artifacts has been 

presented earlier and the use of experiences in process 

enactment and improvement has been presented 

previously by Kokkoniemi [25, 26, 28]. 
This paper will briefly present the selected agile 
technique, Extreme Programming. Then the paper 

presents the concept of experience knowledge and 

draws attention to potential areas of Extreme 

Programming in which experience knowledge-based 

artifacts can be used. Finally, the paper presents an 

example of how experience knowledge can be utilized 

via peer reviews. 
 2. Agile techniques and XP 
 Numerous agile techniques have emerged since the 
advent of the agile manifesto [7], each with different 
support for the development lifecycle phases. 
Abrahamsson et al. [4] discuss the evolution of agile 

techniques and analyze current methods for their use 

in supporting management, defined processes, and 

concrete practices throughout the phases of the 
software lifecycle. 
Agile principles promote the delivery of software 
in small increments and iterations, which enables 

frequent progress checks and provides the opportunity 

to refine the project™s goals in line with the 

customer™s desires. Self-adaptation is also promoted 

at both the project and the process level [29]. Agile 
development methods are particularly suitable for 
projects in which the requirements are unclear and 

likely to change. One definition of agility is stated as 

ﬁthe ability to both create and respond to change in 

order to profit in a turbulent business environment.ﬂ 
This is probably the primary advantage of agile 
approaches over plan-driven approaches [20]. 
Extreme Programming is probably the best known 
of the agile techniques. It can be described as a 

collection of practices and principles uncovered over 

recent decades. Extreme Programming emphasizes 

communication and collaboration within and between 

business and engineering teams. The impact of 
executing the practices, which strengthen each other, 

should negate the lack of traditional quality assurance 

activities. [6] 
The values of Extreme Programming are 
communication, simplicity, feedback and courage, 

and these are further described through the principles 
rapid feedback, assumption of simplicity, incremental 
change, embracing change and quality work. Beck [6] 

suggests that most of the problems in software 

development arise due to lack of communication 

between project stakeholders. This is avoided through 

the execution of practices that concentrate on 

communication. Rapid feedback, incremental change 

and embracing change describe the possibilities for 

adaptation and learning provided by minimizing the 

time between providing a solution and r
eceiving an 
opinion on it. This encourages the team to create 

quick and simple solutions, which can later be 
adjusted to fit situations that are more demanding. In 
summary, Extreme Programming primarily adapts 

software engineering practices in a way that promotes 
communication and co-operation within the project 

group and with the customer. It also provides a means 

for covering the common software engineering 

support processes, such as risk management and 

quality assurance, implicitly through its practices, 
instead of defining and executing them explicitly. 

Extreme Programming tracks the progress of the 

project and iterations through the completion of tasks 
and user stories that comply to acceptance test 
criteria. 
Extreme Programming has received both pos
itive 
and negative attention. The fact that it is a people-

centric lightweight process with a focus on 

communication is seen as a positive side. However, 
certain of its practices, such as pair programming, 

refactoring and test-driven development, are the 

subject of much debate. Though there are some 

promising results [40, 41], proof as to whether these 

practices can deliver what they promise is scarce. 

There are also doubts concerning its application to 
critical systems [12, 23]. Suggested negative points 
include the minor amount of documentation causing 

maintenance problems, and the method™s scalability in 

distributed or larger projects. The minor amount of 

documentation has also led to a reduction in the 

significance of peer reviews [19]. This is not usually a 

major problem, but when projects and the architecture 

of software increase, it can be. 
 3. Experience knowledge 
 Experience knowledge is an organizational 
memory-based concept, which is mainly based on 
human experiences [25]. It has taken features from the 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20082  ‚knowledge management of software engineering 
lessons learned™ method presented by Birk and Tauz 
[9], the ‚experience factory™ method presented by 

Basili et al. [8], and the work of Nonaka and Takeuchi 

[30]. Ideas concerning experience knowledge have 
been evaluated and observed to be fit for use when 
studying inspections and inspection processes in 
partner companies [27, 28].  
During the study of knowledge management in the 
context of inspections, an organizational memory-

based concept, experience knowledge, has been 

defined [25]. It is based mainly on human experiences 

Œ with experience defined as ﬁan event or occurrence, 

which leaves an impression on oneﬂ [13]. This 

definition is quite a general one and contains all 

possible experiences. On a general level, it has been 

concluded that a particular experience changes from 

the form of experience to that of experience 
knowledge when it is acquired, stored and shared 
systematically. Experience knowledge can be 

compared to experiential knowledge (Figure 1), as 

treated by Poikela [34] and Poikela [35], for example.  

 Theoretical
knowledge
Information
-potential
knowledge
Practical
knowledge
Experiential
knowledge
Tacit
knowledge
Knowing

-competence

-expertise
Knowledge
Theoretical
knowledge
Information
-potential
knowledge
Practical
knowledge
Experiential
knowledge
Tacit
knowledge
Knowing

-competence

-expertise
Knowledge
  Figure 1. 
Information, knowledge, knowing [35]. 
 Figure 1 illustrates how information changes into 
knowing through the transformation process of 
knowing. Information can be ﬁwhatever knowledgeﬂ 
encountered by any sense of the individual. In 

contrast, theoretical knowledge is conceptualized and 

symbolized information that is not meaningful until it 

is processed mentally. Practical knowledge is tangible 

and observable, like machines and organizations 
created by humans or objects of nature (like an ant 

hill). Theoretical knowledge as well as practical 

knowledge requires processing because objects and 
organisms cannot be understood without observations, 
concepts and experiments. [35]  
Figure 1 also describes the contextual and 
chronological transition of learning from education to 
working life. This involves learning by practicing for 

working, socializing in a work community and 

identifying a profession. Learning at work is only 

partially conscious processing of knowledge. Access 

to tacit knowledge is increasingly becoming more 

important. This know-how of tacit knowledge must be 
shared with novices as it is the best way of supporting 
their learning and professional development. 

Knowing must also be shared with the educational 

system in order to organize experiences of workplace 

learning during education. [35] 
In general, experiences are indicated as tacit 
knowledge and experience knowledge as explicit 

knowledge. A model for generating experience 

knowledge-based artifacts [27] has the main purpose 

of converting experiences to experience knowledge. 

The model helps an individual to perceive and 

understand possible purposes or values of a particular 
experience that he/she can utilize in software 
development.  
One might ask how experience knowledge is 
different from other forms of explicit knowledge. Is it 

different from the concept of document management 

systems or version control, for example? Normally, 

document management systems or version control 

manage documents. If the contents of a document are 

changed, the document gets a new version number or 

the document is preserved in the document 

management system. One can tell, therefore, from a 
new version number, that the contents of the 
document have been changed. In the case of 

experience knowledge, the generated artifacts are the 

result of a process that converts experiences (tacit 
knowledge) into experience knowledge (explicit 

knowledge). When an artifact has been generated it is 

reasonable to use some kind of version control 

because the completed artifact needs maintenance and 

updating, just like any other document [26].  
Three different phases relating to experience 
knowledge have been observed. These phases have 
been named ‚recognition™, ‚preservation™ and 
‚exploitation™ [25]. In the recognition phase, a person 
perceives and understands possible purposes or values 

of a particular experience. It is not necessary to make 

a note of the experience at this stage because he/she 

may still wish to evaluate it. Once he/she can be sure 

of the value of the experience, it may be profitable to 
preserve it. It is also possible to preserve experiences 

considered to be of possible value in the future. 
The fact that the medium of preservation can be of 
any form has brought about the conclusion that 

human experiences can be changed into the form of 
experience knowledge. One can use this preservation 
medium systematically. It is possible for a person to 

share their experiences while training new workers, 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20083  for example Œ preserving experiences in this way 
could be problematic if, for instance, the person with 
this particular experience changes jobs. In any case, 

this kind of experience knowledge repository is not in 

common use. The concession has been made that the 
human mind can be a repository, although if one 
wants to exploit experiences effectively one must use 
more solid ways of storing these experiences. 
It is worth noting that, while a person™s 
experiences change into the form of experience 

knowledge, the original experience stays in the human 

mind. Thus, while the person may forget certain 

initial experiences, when needed, experience can 

return in the form of the experience knowledge. This 

being the case, only a small fraction of experiences 

can be exploited as experience knowledge. While the 

majority of experiences can be considered tacit, 

experience knowledge is considered explicit. 
In the exploitation phase, experiences are 
preserved in a solid form that is in public use. One 

possible solution in general is to use checklists or, in 

the case of Extreme Programming, ﬁcoding standardsﬂ 

or ﬁown rulesﬂ [6], for example. These have been 

referred to as experience knowledge-based artifacts in 

the context of experience knowledge. 
When considering some process in the context of 
knowledge management it is impossible to overlook 

certain details. It is possible to acquire quite a lot of 

data from the process and the participants in the 
process. It is also true that part of the collected data 
can be directly classified as experience knowledge 

(data related to human experiences) and part as 

process data (data that is based on a process, like 

metrics). In the case of an agile project, it is possible 

that one has collected information of the ﬁlessons 

learnedﬂ type; this would be considered directly as 

experience knowledge, but collected metrics are not. 

However, in the context of experience knowledge 

they can both be related to experiences. The process 

data is not directly linked to human experiences but it 

is possible to collect metrics that may cause 
individual experiences. In any case, peer reviews are a 
good way to collect and treat experience knowledge-

based artifacts.  

 
 4. Utilization of EK in the context of XP 
 The core agile values promote communication and 
collaboration, and in small teams, direct ﬁface-to-
faceﬂ communication is seen as an efficient and 
favorable way to disseminate information. Despite 

this, there can be situations in which mainly 

experience knowledge can be utilized. Because of the 

speed of software development, communication and 
collaboration are important, and it is important to 
collect and transfer the experiences gained from the 

process. This section presents potential experience 

knowledge-based artifact candidates within Extreme 

Programming found when checking over XP projects 

in the University of Oulu and in VTT Technical 
Research Centre of Finland, and discussed with 
experienced personnel from both organizations. In 

addition, this section presents how the gathered 

metrics (presented in Hulkko & Abrahamsson [21] 

and Abrahamsson & Koskela [2], for example) can be 

offered in an effective way for the exploitation of 

experience knowledge.  

 4.1. Experience knowledge-based artifacts 
 One interesting question concerns the kind of 
information that has been treated within Extreme 
Programming, and in what kind of artifacts this 
information has appeared. Extreme Programming 

seeks to minimize documentation [4, 19], so it can be 

assumed that there are not many mainly document-

based experience knowledge-based artifacts within 
the compass of Extreme Programming. However, the 

study of Extreme Programming has found candidates 

that can act as experience knowledge-based artifacts 

[6, 3]. 
Possible experience knowledge-based artifacts 
identified by the practices of Extreme Programming 

include the following: user stories, new versions, 
metaphors, shared stories, test case code, coding 
standards, and own rules. These findings have not 

been examined more deeply in this paper because 

there are other interesting findings that have been 

made when examining Extreme Programming with 

experience knowledge. 
The same kind of artifact candidates as those 
presented by Beck [6] can naturally be found among 
the different phases of Extreme Programming, but 
other noteworthy observations can also be made. In 

the exploration phase of Extreme Programming, tools, 

technologies and practices have been mentioned, for 

example, and one needs some kind of instructions to 

use and understand them. Although instructions are 

not generated in the same way as the experience 

knowledge-based artifacts mentioned [25, 26, 27], 

they can act in similar ways. 
In the exploration phase of Extreme Programming, 
prototype architecture has also been mentioned 

(ﬁbuild a few prototype architectures to help decide 
on the actual architecture to be implementedﬂ in [6]). 
One example of a possible way to help building 

prototype architectures is the use of design patterns 

[18]. Design patterns can be used to solve repeatedly 

occurring design problems, and they display all the 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20084  characteristics of experience knowledge-based 
artifacts. Alghren and Markkula [5] have also arrived 
at the same kind of conclusion. In design patterns, 

experiences and knowledge as to how to solve 

problems has been preserved. However, this does not 
define design patterns accurately, as has been shown 
by Gamma et al. [18]. Agile design patterns can be 
generated in the company that uses them. They have 

the same structure as real design patterns but they are 

tailored for the target company, including experiences 

and knowledge from within it. 
On further consideration, experience knowledge-
based artifacts have been proved to support, in a 

certain sense, both knowledge gathering and 

knowledge transfer [27]. Figure 2 presents one 

possible way to use peer reviews when dealing with 

treating experience knowledge. The main point is that 

peer reviews are located between iterations even if 
there can be peer reviews within iterations. It is also 
practical to select some informal review method, such 

as peer deskcheck or passaround [39], for example. 
The member of the project group gets direct 
experiences from iteration because he/she has been 

working on and has prepared the release. At the same 
time, he/she learns about new issues (
1). Even if the 
amount of documentation is minor (
2), it is 
profitable to review documentation. The review can 
be informal but it can support both quality-based and 
experience knowledge-based aspects of a project. If 
divergences in experiences have been observed, it is  
easy for the project member to compare metric data to 

experiences from the previous iteration, because of 
the  
shortness of the cycle (
 3). The member of the 
project group will probably be able to remember the 
last two weeks, over which the iteration has lasted. 
This can create experiences that can later be 
transformed into experience knowledge form.  
The reviewers are usually project members and 
customer representatives, and they can use tools to 
support their work. Support tools can include, for 

example, checklists or rules that guide software 

development. Both of these tools can act like 

experience knowledge-based artifacts. 
The project member then continues to the next 
iteration (
4). Issues adopted from the previous 
iteration are still in his or her mind, but the 
recognition of experiences can take some time. 
Therefore, it is possible that experiences gathered in 
the previous iteration will be documented within this 

iteration or within some later iteration. 
It is profitable to document experiences for 
possible later use (
5). If this document is in general 
use, as are all other documents in Extreme 
Programming (ﬁCollective ownershipﬂ), it can be 
regarded as an experience knowledge-based artifact. 
For example, at group level this may take the form of 

some document in which new experiences are 

collected, or at individual level it may be some kind 
of diary or checklist. Diaries, etc. can be changed into 
experience knowledge-based artifact form when they 

become public.  
The experience knowledge-based artifact may also 
re-enter the next iteration or iterations (
6). This can 
happen if project members have short memories, or 
new members join the project group, for example. 
The experience knowledge-based artifact acts (
7) as 
the basis for a document in the next iteration. Within 
this iteration, the existing document will be 
supplemented with new experiences. The experience 
knowledge-based artifact generated based on some 
iteration can also be used in some future project (
8). 
  Iteration1
Iteration2
134578213456–––Review
Review
2Iteration1
Iteration2
134578213456–––Review
Review
2  Figure 2. 
Peer reviews in the context of XP when treating experience knowledge.
  Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20085  Because of the short length of releases, it is 
important to concentrate on the most important 
elements. So there can be found at least one 

moderately well studied experience knowledge-based 

artifact, which is not generally used with Extreme 
Programming but which is able to support this 
requirement. Checklists have most commonly been 
regarded as an inspection tool [17], although on a few 

rare occasions they have been connected to other 

purposes in software engineering. In research, 

checklists have been studied, not only for their main 

purpose of finding defects when inspecting a software 

product, but also in collecting experiences from 

companies. It is also true that checklists can be used 

in every phase of software development. In the case 

of Extreme Programming, the checklist can be 

defined as a list of questions that guides participants 

to pay attention to the right things. The general 
problem is that although there is plenty of information 
for every layer of Extreme Programming, everybody 

makes their own decisions, and also their own 

ﬁpioneer mistakesﬂ. One possible solution is for there 

to be ‚design guidelines™, ‚coding checklists™ and 

‚checklists for verification™. Separate checklists can 

be generated for every layer of Extreme 
Programming. The ‚design guidelines™ direct design, 
‚coding checklists™ direct coding and ‚checklists for 

verification™ confirm quality.  
These artifacts are only a few examples that can be 
used with Extreme Programming. One serious 

question is how they can be used without 
compromising the fundamental concept of agility. 
Another is how best to arrange the gathering, saving, 

use, and maintenance of checklists in the context of 

agile software development. The previous questions 

refer to discussions with agile software developers 
who thought that agile techniques do not need any 
new features. For example checklists or reviews seem 
to be too rigid to adapt to the process [19]. 
 4.2. Process data 
 Gathering metrics within agile techniques has been 
proved to be profitable [2]. It has also been shown 
that process data can be one source of experience 
knowledge [27]. Figure 3 shows one possible way that 
the process data can be transformed into experience 
knowledge in the context of iterative software 

development. In Figure 3 the process (presented in 

Figure 2) has been extended with postmortem reviews 
[15, 36] whose modes of action give support to the 

transformation of process data and help participants to 

become conscious of their experiences linked to the 

metric data. 
The member of the project group gets direct 
experiences from iteration because he/she has been 
working on and has prepared the release. At the same 
time, he or she learns about new issues (
1). Metrics 
have been gathered during the iteration (
2). This 
metric data must be stored somehow (for example, in 
a metrics repository).  
 Iteration1
Metricsrepository
Iterationn
–2 -6weeks
12233Postmortem
review
45646Optionalpostmortem
review
Review
5Iteration1
Metricsrepository
Iterationn
–2 -6weeks
12233Postmortem
review
45646Optionalpostmortem
review
Review
5  Figure 3. 
Transforming process data into experience knowledge.
  Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20086   3 depicts documents implemented during 
iteration, and arrow 
4 shows how documents 
implemented during iteration are taken into an 
optional postmortem review. Collected metrics data 
are also taken into the postmortem review (
5), as are 
the experiences of the participants of iteration (
6). 
Postmortem reviews can be replaced by some other 
review practice, project retrospectives [24] for 
example, or by some light-weight process 
improvement practice, a ﬁthird hourﬂ meeting [17], 
for example. 
Figure 3 depicts a situation in which an iterative 
process is in action. The process could be Extreme 
Programming or some other iterative software 

development process. The rapid cycle of iterations 

and the gathering of metrics means that if a member 

of the project group has the chance to become familiar 

with the metrics collected (some resources must be 

allocated to this) concerning not only themselves but 
the whole project group, they can draw conclusions 
about their own activities during the iteration. This 
means that they can perhaps gain new experiences 

that can be changed into experience knowledge form. 

The distribution of metrics data to project members 

can be organized in many ways. One possibility is 

peer review, and another the use of an intranet, as has 

been mentioned in Pehkonen [33]. 
Dingsøyr [15] has introduced practical methods for 
the harvesting of experience from projects that have 

either been completed or have finished a major 

activity or phase. In bigger projects, there can also be 

postmortem reviews as the project goes on (optional 
postmortem reviews in Figure 3). The main reason 
that postmortem reviews have been carried out during 
an ongoing project is that they support knowledge 

management and knowledge transfer from metrics 

data to experiences and from experiences to 

experience knowledge. 
It is worth noting that all process data (metrics) 
and experience knowledge-based artifacts can be 

exploited in future projects. The document generated 

(in Figure 2) can be used when new employees join 

the company, for example. It can be informal in 
format, or formatted as a design pattern. In fact, this 
practice has been preliminarily evaluated with agile 

techniques, but it works in general with iterative 

processes. 
 4.3. Knowledge creation 
 Nonaka and Takeuchi [30] explain the spiral of 
organizational knowledge creation as depicted in 
Figure 4. Different phases of the knowledge creation 
spiral can be linked to experience knowledge and to 

Figures 1 and 2. The basic ideas of this section have 
been adopted from the research of Tervonen and 
Kerola [38], but also from the results of our research 

[27].  

 SHARED TACIT
KNOWLEDGE (T)
SOCIALIZATION
TTEXTERNALIZATION
T ECOMBINATION
E EINTERNALIZATION
E TSHAREABLE
EXPLICIT
KNOWLEDGE
(E)
SHARED TACIT
KNOWLEDGE (T)
SOCIALIZATION
TTEXTERNALIZATION
T ECOMBINATION
E EINTERNALIZATION
E TSHAREABLE
EXPLICIT
KNOWLEDGE
(E)
 Figure 4. 
Four modes of knowledge creation and 
conversion. 
 Socialization is the process of sharing experiences 
and thereby creating tacit knowledge such as mental 
models and technical skills. An individual can acquire 
tacit knowledge directly from others without using 
language, i.e. through observation, imitation, and 

practice. This socialization happens when working 

together in a project group during iterations, and when 

participating in reviews. This mode serves the 

recognition phase of experience knowledge. In the 
recognition phase, a person perceives and understands 

possible purposes or values of a particular experience. 

It usually means that participants share experiences of 

the implemented software product, software 
development process and review process. In this case 
treated knowledge is shared tacit knowledge for 
software development.  
Externalization is the process of articulating tacit 
knowledge in the form of explicit concepts, in the 
form of metaphors, analogies, concepts, hypotheses or 

models. Once explicit concepts (artifacts or 

knowledge profitable to serve in this case) are created, 

they can be used in modeling. Models are usually 

generated from metaphors when new concepts are 

created in the business context. In this mode a 

participant or participants have made the decision that 
some experiences are worth saving in some format 
(the preservation phase of experience knowledge). In 

other words, tacit knowledge has been organized into 

explicit form. It is also possible to preserve 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20087  experiences considered to be of possible value in the 
future. 
Combination is the process of systemizing 
concepts into a knowledge system. This mode of 
knowledge conversion involves combining different 
bodies of explicit knowledge. Individuals exchange 
and combine knowledge through such media as 
documents, meetings, and collected metrics. 

Reconfiguration of existing explicit information 

through sorting, adding, combining and categorizing 

can lead to new knowledge which can be used in the 

next iteration. In this mode, shareable explicit 

knowledge for software development has been 

captured, organized and displayed. This mode mainly 

serves the exploitation phase of experience 

knowledge. 
Internalization is the process of embodying explicit 
knowledge in tacit knowledge. It is closely related to 
‚learning by doing™ or ‚re-experiencing™ through 
recorded artifacts. When experiences are internalized 

through socialization, externalization, and 

combination into the individual™s tacit knowledge 

bases in the form of shared mental models and 

technical know-how, these become valuable assets. 

This mode serves both the exploitation and 
recognition phases of extreme programming, and it 
usually happens during iterations. 
For organizational knowledge creation to take 
place, however, the tacit knowledge accumulated at 
the individual level needs to be socialized with other 
organizational members, thereby starting a new spiral 

of knowledge creation. For explicit knowledge to 

become tacit, it helps if the knowledge is verbalized 

or diagrammed into documents, manuals or oral 

stories. Documents or manuals facilitate the transfer 

of explicit knowledge to other people, thereby helping 

them appreciate the experiences of others indirectly 

(i.e. to ‚re-experience™ them).  

 5. Conclusion 
 This paper has presented some ideas as to how 
experience knowledge can be treated in iterative 
software development. The results presented were 
based on the Tarjous research project [37], 

observations made when checking over XP projects in 

the University of Oulu and in VTT Technical 
Research Centre of Finland, and discussed with 
experienced personnel from both organizations, and 
the preliminary results of a few studies that have not 

yet been published. In this paper, Extreme 

Programming was selected to represent iterative 

software development approaches. One possible way 

to utilize experience knowledge with Extreme 

Programming is through peer reviews. This paper first 
presented some arguments as to why it is reasonable 

and profitable to link Extreme Programming and 

experience knowledge together. Secondly, it 

presented the experience knowledge-based artifact 

candidates observed when studying Extreme 

Programming. Potential experience knowledge-based 
artifact candidates within Extreme Programming 
include user stories, coding standards, and own rules. 
The main observation of this paper shows two 
ways in which experience knowledge-based artifacts 

can be used with iterative software development. 

Another important observation is that peer reviews are 

a good way to collect and treat experience 

knowledge-based artifacts. Two observed experience 

knowledge-based artifacts are design patterns and 

checklists, and we have made observations 

concerning how to transform process data into 

experience knowledge in Extreme Programming (or 
any other iterative process in which metrics have been 
collected). 
It has been shown that with an iterative software 
development process there is a great need to collect 

and transfer knowledge. In rapid software 

development, it is also important to direct 

participants™ attention to the right, significant issues. 

One suggested artifact that directly supports these 

requirements is checklists. Another noteworthy 

artifact that can support such requirements is design 

patterns. It is also true that systematically gathering 
experiences would support building evidence for 
improving and teaching iterative software 

development methods, and that peer reviews are a 

good way to collect experiences. 
The thoughts presented here have been evaluated 
while checking over XP projects in the University of 
Oulu and in VTT Technical Research Centre of 

Finland, and have been discussed with experienced 

personnel from both organizations. Participants in 

agile projects in both organizations have understood 
the artifacts and reviews of work presented in this 

paper, but they do not want to add new tasks in agile 
methods. The research is to be continued with 
experience knowledge, Extreme Programming, and 
with other iterative software development processes. 
 6. References 
 [1] Aalto, J.M. and Jaaksi, A., ﬁObject-Oriented 
Development of Interactive Systems with OMT++ﬂ, 
Proceedings on TOOLS 14 (Technology of Object-Oriented 
Languages & Systems), Prentice-Hall, 1994, pp. 205Œ218. 
 [2] Abrahamsson, P. and Koskela, J., ﬁExtreme 

programming: a survey of empirical data from a controlled 

case studyﬂ, Proceedings on Empirical Software 

Engineering, 2004, pp. 73Œ82. 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20088  [3] Abrahamsson, P., Salo, O., Ronkainen, J., and Warsta, 
J., Agile Software Development Methods Œ Review and 

analysis, VTT Publications 478, Otamedia Oy, Espoo, 

Finland, 2002. 

 [4] Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M.T., and 
Ronkainen, J., ﬁNew Directions on Agile Methods: A 
Comparative Analysisﬂ, 25th International Conference on 

Software Engineering (ICSE'03), IEEE Computer Society; 

2003, pp. 244Œ254. 

 
[5] Alghren, R. and Markkula, J., ﬁDesign Patterns and 

Organizational Memory in Mobile Application 
Developmentﬂ, Proceedings on PROFES 2005, LNCS 3547, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 143Œ156. 
 
[6] Beck, K., Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 

Change, Addison-Wesley, 2000. 

 
[7] Beck, K. and Beedle, M., Manifesto for Agile Software 

Development, http://agilemanifesto.org/, 2001. 
 [8] Basili, V., Caldiera, G., and Rombach, H.D., ﬁThe 

Experience Factoryﬂ, Encyclopedia of Software 

Engineering, vol 1, John Wiley & Sons, 1994, pp. 469Œ476. 

 
[9] Birk, A. and Tauz, C., ﬁKnowledge Management of 

Software Engineering Lessons Learnedﬂ, Proceedings of the 

12th Conference on Software Engineering and Knowledge 
Engineering, 1998, pp. 24Œ31. 
 
[10] Boehm, B.W., ﬁA Spiral Model of Software 

Development and Enhancementﬂ, IEEE Computer, 21(5), 

1988, pp. 61Œ72. 

 
[11] Boehm, B.W. and Turner, R., Balancing Agility and 

Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed, Addison-Wesley 

Longman Publishing Co., 2003. 
 [12] Cohen, D. and Lindvall, M., Agile Software 

Development Œ State-of-the-art Report, Fraunhofer Center 

for Experimental Software Engineering and The University 

of Maryland., 2003. 

 
[13] The Concise Oxford Dictionary, 12th edition, New 

York, Oxford University Press Inc, 1999. 
 [14] Curtis, W., Krasner, H., Shen, V., and Iscoe, N., ﬁOn 

Building Software Process Models under the Lamppostﬂ, 

proceedings of the 9th International Conference on 

Software Engineering, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1987, 

pp. 96Œ103. 

 
[15] Dingsøyr, T., ﬁPostmortem reviews: purpose and 
approaches in software engineeringﬂ, Information and 
Software Technology, 47(5), 2005, pp. 293Œ303. 

 [16] Gilb, T., Principles of Software Engineering 

Management, Addison Wesley, 1988. 

 [17] Gilb, T. and Graham, D., Software Inspection, 
Wokingham, UK, Addison-Wesley, 1994. 

 
[18] Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., and Vlissides, J., 

Design Patterns Œ Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented 
Software, Addison-Wesley, USA, 1995. 
 [19] Hedberg, H. and Iisakka, J., ﬁTechnical Reviews in 

Agile Development: Case Mobile-D
TMﬂ, Proceedings of 
Quality Software, (QSIC 2006), 2006, pp. 347Œ353. 
 
[20] Highsmith, J., Agile Project Management, Addison-

Wesley, Boston, MA, 2004. 
 [21] Hulkko, H. and Abrahamsson, P., ﬁA multiple case 
study on the impact of pair programming on product 

qualityﬂ, Proceedings of the 27th international conference 

on Software engineering, St. Louis, MO, USA, 2005, pp. 

495Œ504.  

 
[22] Jacobson, I., Booch, G., and Rumbaugh, J., The unified 
software development process, Addison-Wesley Longman 
Publishing Inc., Boston, MA, USA, 1999. 
 
[23] Keefer, G., Extreme Programming Considered Harmful 

for Reliable Software Development, Proceedings of 

CONQUEST 2002, Nurenberg, Germany, 2002. 

 
[24] Kerth, N.L., Project Retrospectives Œ A Handbook for 
Team Reviews, Dorset House Publishing, New York, USA, 
2001. 

 
[25] Kokkoniemi, J., ﬁChecklists as a Tool for Collecting 

Experience Knowledgeﬂ, Proceedings of IASTED 

International Conference of Information and Knowledge 

Sharing (IKS  2002), St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, USA, 

2002, pp. 223Œ228. 

 [26] Kokkoniemi, J., ﬁThe Lifecycle of Checklists: A 
Knowledge Management-based Approachﬂ, Proceedings of 

the Third European Conference on Knowledge 

Management, Dublin, Ireland, 2002, pp. 376Œ386. 

 
[27] Kokkoniemi, J., ﬁA Preliminary Model for Generating 

Experience Knowledge Based Artifactsﬂ, Proceedings of the 

39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences (HICSS'06) Track 7, Kauai, Hawaii, USA, 2006, 
153b 
 
[28] Kokkoniemi, J., ﬁExperiences from Generating 

Checklistsﬂ. Proceedings of the IASTED International 

Conference on Knowledge Sharing and Collaborative 

Engineering (KSCE2006), St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, 

USA, 2006, pp. 51Œ56. 
 [29] Lindvall, M., Basili, V.R., Boehm, B.W., Costa, P., 

Dangle, K., Shull, F., Tesoriero, R., Williams, L.A., and 

Zelkowitz, M.V., ﬁEmpirical Findings in Agile Methodsﬂ, 

Proceedings of the Second XP Universe and First Agile 

Universe Conference on Extreme Programming and Agile 

Methods - XP/Agile Universe, 2002, pp. 197Œ207. 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20089  [30] Nonaka, L. and Takeuchi, H., The Knowledge-Creating 
Company Œ How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics 

of Innovation, Oxford Press, 1995. 

 
[31] Krutchten, P., The Rational unified process: an 
introduction, Addison-Wesley, 1999. 
 [32] Lehman, M.M. and Belady, L.A., Program evolution: 

processes of software change Academic Press Professional 

Inc., San Diego, CA, USA, 1985. 

 
[33] Pehkonen, A., Testauksen automatisointi ja 

organisointi testivetoisessa ohjelmisto-kehityksessä - 
Tapaus: Automaster Oy (in Finnish), University of Oulu, 
Department of Information Processing Science, Master™s 
thesis, Oulu, Finland, 2005. 

 
[34] Poikela, S., Ongelmaperustainen pedagogiikka ja 

tutorin osaaminen (in Finnish), Tampere University Press, 

2003. 

 [35] Poikela, E., ﬁDeveloping criteria for knowing and 
learning at work: towards context-based assessmentﬂ, 

Journal of Workplace Learning, 16(5/6), 2004, pp. 267Œ274. 

 
[36] Salo, O., Enabling Software Process Improvement in 

Agile Software Development Teams and Organisations, 

VTT Publications 618, Otamedia Oy, Espoo, Finland, 2006. 

 [37] Tervonen, I., Iisakka, J., Harjumaa, L., Kokkoniemi, J, 
and Hedberg, H., Reorganising Software Inspection: 

Challenges, Ideas and Preliminary Solutions (The final 

report of the TARJOUS research project), University of 

Oulu, Department of Information Processing Science, 
research papers series A 30, Oulu, Finland, 2000.  
 [38] Tervonen, I. and Kerola, P., ﬁTowards deeper co-

understanding of software qualityﬂ, Information and 

Software Technology 39, 1998, pp. 995Œ1003. 

 
[39] Wiegers, K.E., Peer Reviews in Software: A Practical 

Guide, Addison-Wesley, Boston, USA, 2002. 
 [40] Williams, L. and Kessler, R., Pair Programming 
Illuminated, Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc, 

2002. 

 
[41] Williams, L., Maximilien, E.M., and Vouk, M., ﬁTest-

Driven Development as a Defect-Reduction Practiceﬂ, 

Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on 
Software Reliability Engineering, 2003, p. 34. 
 Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200810