  Exploring the Transient Nature of Agile Project Management Practices
  Lech Krzanik 
University of Oulu, Finland 
 Lech.Krzanik@oulu.fi
 Pilar Rodriguez 
University of Oulu, Finland 
Pilar.Rodriguez@oulu.fi
 Jouni Similä 
University of Oulu, Finland 
 Jouni.Simila@oulu.fi
 Pasi Kuvaja 
University of Oulu, Finland 
 Pasi.Kuvaja@oulu.fi
 Anna Rohunen 
University of Oulu, Finland 
 Anna.Rohunen@oulu.fi
  Abstract
 Agile software projects have considerable freedom 
in shaping their emerging project management 
practices, and there are established ways to do that, 

e.g., with process retrosp
ectives. The practices may 
change due to many reasons, such as (i) 
changes to 
critical system or process properties
, (ii) process 
context, (iii) process capability maturity, etc. Maturity 
is not the only reason and a suitable wider perspective 
and support is necessary to handle the transient nature 
of agile practices. We propose to use a value-based 

approach and shift the discussion from the 
conventional solution space to the goal (value) space. 
Further we recommend an impact estimation approach 

for identifying current practice state (agile positioning) 
and a corresponding approach for navigating through 
the value (and solution) space as well as ways to 
visualize the results. This work underlies the ongoing 
development of an agile positioning and navigation 
tool including a survey appr
oach to practice and tool 
impact analysis and estimation.
    1. Introduction   Background
. Two large software projects provided 
background to this research. One investigated agile 
processes for development of innovative urban services 
targeting usability and user feedback, in geographically 
dispersed city organizations of various levels of 
expertise and size, to be sharing a considerable part of 

the product and process technology. The other looked 

for agile management practices for distributed 

embedded software development projects with very 
short time to market. In both cases it was obvious that 
projects had considerable freedom in shaping their 

emerging project management practices but at the same 

time a suitable wider perspective and support was 

necessary to handle the transient nature of agile 
practices. The established ways, e.g., with process 
retrospectives were not sufficient. 
The problem
. Agile software development and 
evolution project practices may dynamically change 
due to many reasons, such as (i) changes to critical 

system or process properties, 
(ii) process context, (iii) 
process capability maturity, etc. Examples of specific 
contexts are distributed projects, geographically and 
organizationally motivated multi-cultural 

environments, etc. Examples of system properties are 

usability, time to market, feedback. On a more general 

level, the set of practices of an agile software 

development and evolution project may vary as a result 
of changes to agile values or principles. Any of these 
may reference new practices or de-commit previously 

used ones. A wider perspective for considering the 

transient nature of practices is needed, suitable for 

addressing all kinds of changes and going above the 

practice level to a value-based view of practices and 
their changes. Support is needed in selection and 
evolution of emergent processes Œ and not necessarily 

in terms of conventional capability maturity. An 

example of such support might be a dynamic process 

configuration service. The useful popular agile 
management process models such as Scrum 
[10]
 provide a general guidance while they may need more 
specific practices to meet the requirements of concrete 

projects. 
From a multitude of practices possibly used on a 
project we are most interested in practices of highest 
impact on the project™s most important values and 
goals. A restricted set of such top important practices, 

values and goals will be called a practice ﬁworking 

setﬂ. To determine the importance factors we need to 

know (a) the critical values and goals and their 

priorities; (b) the available practices and their impacts 
on the values and goals under current constraints, and 
(c) the policy of creating and maintaining the practice 

set. Part (c) will constraint, possibly dynamically, the 

ﬁworking setﬂ practices, for instance some capability 

models prefer introducing practices in layers or levels, 
1Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010978-0-7695-3869-3/10 $26.00 €© 2010 IEEE and some evaluation methods have specific ways of 
resolving multiple impacts (e.g., architecture-oriented 

evaluation). Part (c) may also focus on ﬁfollow-upﬂ 
policies aiming at producing multiple approximate 
copies of a process.  
Contribution
. In this paper we demonstrate 
selected results from the research work aimed at a 
broader transient practice perspective and development 

of agile practice support. We propose to use a value-
based approach and shift the discussion from the 
conventional solution space to the goal (value) space. 

An impact estimation approach is proposed for 

identifying current practice state and a corresponding 

approach for navigating through the value and solution 

space as well as ways to visualize the results. This 
work underlies the ongoing development of an agile 
positioning and navigation tool including a survey 

approach to practice and tool impact analysis and 

estimation. 
We look at changes in the working set of agile 
management practices in time and in space. The 
temporal transient nature may, in connection with 
variation (i)-(iii) above, result from changing the 

quality focus, process capability tuning efforts, moving 

towards more demanding tasks in a given project, etc. 

The changes in space refer to situations of related 
projects executed under different contexts, e.g., 
geographical contexts and organizational cultures. We 

use a general concept of project culture aggregating 
agile values and goals, principles and practices. We 

investigate a range of projects representing various 

agile cultures and aiming at a variety of values and 
goals, with various practices and tools. The 
investigation also includes the fundamental question 
whether such varieties in fact exist. We construct a 

suitable model and identify it by using project data.  
We provide the following tool capabilities: 

A. (Positioning and consistency) Positioning: 
Position yourself on a map of project values 
and goals, and on a map of agile cultures to see 
your and others value coordinates. Explain 

project values. Consistency: Check consistency 

between changes to different layers of project 
culture: agile values and goals, principles, 
practices and tools. Are your values consistent 
with your practices and tools? 
B. (Navigation) See what measures can be taken 

(what measures others took or recommended) 

to reach new levels of project values and goals. 
Or to change an agile project™s management 
cultural status. Explain why you would use 
certain project practices. How successful are 

they going to be? 
As the result of the investigation we propose a tool, 
referred to as APN (Agile Positioning and Navigation), 
offering the consistency, positioning and navigation 
capabilities. It is essentially a survey tool equipped 

with traceability (impact analysis), goal (value) space 
visualization, database functions, and a continuity 
function allowing for references to previously collected 
data or to a specially designed initial data set. A most 

important characteristic of the tool is its agile 

responsiveness which greatly improves usability of the 

tool. The responsiveness is a result of the value-based 
analysis level, the working set approach, and other 
assumed solutions. This paper presents an overview of 

the research approach. Research results are presented 

in a separate forthcoming publication.  
Structure of the paper. The paper is constructed 
as follows. In section 2 we introduce and discuss the 
notion of agile culture. Section 3 discusses the survey 
which supports investigation of transient practices. In 

section 4 we consider a central research question for 

this discussion, of ﬁAre there really many cultures and 

working sets?ﬂ Section 5 presents the tool which 

exploits the survey approach. The tool provides agile 
software projects with consistency, positioning and 
navigation capabilities. Section 6 discusses the results 

are reviews related work. Section 8 includes 

conclusions and an outline of future work.  
 2. Agile cultures, cult
ure transitions and 
transient practices  
 Culture can be defined 
[11] 
as ﬁa fuzzy set of 
attitudes, beliefs, behavioral norms and basic 
assumptions and values that are shared by a group of 

people, and that influence each member™s behavior and 
his/her interpretations of the ‚meaning™ of other 
people™s behaviorﬂ. The elements are linked with 

iterative dependences, from culture with its beliefs and 
norms, to values which depend on beliefs and then to 
behaviors (principles and practices) which reflect the 

values; behaviors in turn impact the beliefs and norms 

and so on 
[13]
. The resulting data schema can be 
modeled as in Figure 1, including also tools supporting 
the practices. 
The structure is consistent with that of the Agile 
Manifesto 
[1]
 and with other publications (
[2], [9]
, etc.) 
Figure 2 shows a sample visualization of agile culture 
dependencies at instance level, with some available 

alternatives selected. For the purpose of this 
investigation agile project culture C can be modeled as 
a six,  
C = (Stakeholders, Values&Goals, Principles, 
Practices, Tools, Rules). 
2Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 Culture
Viewpoint
Stakeholder
Value&Goal
Principle
Supports
Practice
Tool
Supports
Impacts
Implements
  Figure 1. Data structure of the agile culture model. 
Stakeholders, Values&Goals, Principles, Practices, 
and Tools have similar interpretation as in Agile 
Manifesto 
[1]
 but can be more general. (Below, 
capitalized names as above will mean collections of 
respective instances.) Sample agile culture instances 

include EVO 
[7]
, Scrum 
[10]
, XP 
[4]
, and their 
specializations and extensions. However the culture 

instances considered here may represent particular 

project cultures which are occasionally much different 
from those declared in Manifesto.  
The Rules state the dependency and consistency 
relations between the other elements. This model will 
be used to derive impact functions of form v=c(p); v 

representing current Values&Goals, p representing 

current Practices, parameterized with other elements of 

the model. The following are examples of consistency 

relations between Values&Goals and Practices, and 
Practices and Tools, in the form of necessity and 
sufficiency rules. For Values&Goals and Practices they 

are:  Necessity rules of Values&Goals Importance: 
• Values&Goals 
 Importance 
• In a simple case we can assume an ordinal 
scale for Importance, 
Importance={Required,Optional,NotRecomm
ended}, where: 
o Required means a given 
Values&Goals instance must be 
satisfied in full 
o Optional means a given 

Values&Goals instance may or may 

not be satisfied 
o NotRecommended means a given 
Values&Goals instance should not be 
taken into account. 
Sufficiency rules of Practices Contribution to 
Values&Goals satisfaction:  
• Practices x Values&Goals 
 Contribution 
• In a simple case we can assume, 
Contribution={Complete,Partial,None}, 
where: 
o Complete means a given Practices 

instance provides complete 

contribution to the corresponding 
Values&Goals instance 
o Partial means a given Practices 
instance provides partial contribution 

to the corresponding Values&Goals 
instance 
o None means a given Practices 
instance provides no contribution to 
the corresponding Values&Goals 

instance 
o There is an aggregation rule stating 

that several (for instance, 3) Practices 

instances with Partial contribution to a 
corresponding Values&Goals instance 
are equivalent to Complete 

satisfaction of that Values&Goals 

instance. 
   Figure 2. Example of agile culture dependencie
s with some available 
alternatives selected.
 3Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 For consistency of Values&Goals with Practices we 
require that all Values&Goals instances with Required 
value have Complete contribution from Practices. 
For Practices and Tools the rules are as follows.  
Necessity rules of Practices ToolingImportance:  
• Practices
ToolingImportance 
• In a simple case we can assume an ordinal 
scale for ToolingImportance, 

ToolingImportance={Required,Optional,NotR
ecommended},  where: 
o Required means a given Practices 
instance must have Tools support in 

full 
o Optional means a given Practices 
instance may or may not have Tools 
support 
o NotRecommended means a given 
Practices instance should not be taken 

into account. 
Sufficiency rules of Tools Support for Practices: 
• Tools x Practices
Support, 
• In a simple case we can assume, 
Support={Complete,Partial,None}, where: 
o Complete means a given Tools 

instance provides complete support 

for the corresponding Practices 
instance 
o Partial means a given Tools instance 
provides partial support for the 
corresponding Practices instance 
o None means a given Tools instance 

provides no support for the 
corresponding Practices instance 
o There is an aggregation rule stating 
that several (for instance, 3) Tools 

instances with Partial support of a 

corresponding Practices instance are 
equivalent to Complete support of that 
Practices instance. 
For consistency of Practices with Tools we require 
that all Practices instances with Required value have 
Complete support from Tools. 
These examples assume qualitative evaluation of 
Values&Goals, Practices and Tools. Our ultimate 
objective is to introduce a quantitative interpretation 
which is under development now. Examples of 

applicable quantitative scales are presented, for 

instance, in 
[7]
. We assume here that Principles are 
merely informal annotations to Values&Goals and 
Practices. This coincides with their common 
interpretations as abstract summaries of Practices. 
A range of reasons may cause culture transitions or 
practice transitions, such as the reasons (i)-(iii) above 

and also changes in specific stakeholder viewpoint, 
new technology, new regulations, new market 
situation, etc. Some practic
es are no more considered, 
temporarily or permanently, while new ones are 
coming into focus Œ not known before, or recurrent 
practices. The necessity values (importance) and 
sufficiency values (completeness of contribution or 
support) may change as well. In spirit of agile 

development, all such changes are rooted in 

Values&Goals, hence are value-driven, emergent and 

contextual. 
In this approximate model, first of all and we are 
interested in most critical impacts, so that we take into 

account a ﬁworking setﬂ (e.g., no more than 10 

instances) of top priority instances - Values&Goals, 

Practices and Tools, and treat other elements of the 

culture model as parameters. We consider a 
dynamically changing working sets whose actual size 
may be static or dynamic following an assumed policy. 
For the working set of Values&Goals we prefer the 

instances which are Required or Optional. For the 

working set of Practices we prefer instances 
contributing to Required Values&Goals. For the 
working set of Tools we prefer instances supporting 
Practices with Required ToolingImportance. We try to 

avoid both under-design and overdesign. 
To use the model in tools we need to populate it 
with data, e.g., corresponding to the impacts and 
support specified above. The survey presented in the 
next section provides us with the necessary data. The 

subsequent sections discuss support tools for 

monitoring and controlling practice transitions. 
 3. Agile practices survey  

 The agile practices survey has been developed to 
provide data necessary for tools supporting practice 
transitions. With its reporting facility, the survey 
provides immediate essential feedback regarding some 
important aspects of the agile process, in particular its 
positioning and navigation (cf. Section 5). This 

corresponds to one of the critical goals of the survey 

design was Œ its agile responsiveness Œ illustrated in 
Figure 3 along with the survey and questionnaire 
structure and the respondent process: 
• The whole survey session takes on average no 

more than 3 min, including filling the 

questionnaire and producing the online 
respondent feedback report, 
• Questionnaire of max. 3 pages (with Practices 
only 2 pages, with Practices and Tools 3 

pages), 
• 1 page summary online respondent feedback 

report. 
 4Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010  Figure 3. Survey structure and the respondent 
process. 
Such agile operation of the survey has been 
achieved thanks to: (1) extensive reuse of experience 
information stored in survey database; (2) applying the 

culture selector approach which allowed for targeting a 

particular culture; (3) applying the ﬁworking setﬂ 
approach to focus on most critical instances in each 
category; (4) each session usually started with a 

respective previous session results, so the actual 

answers addressed only changes since last session. 

Also administration aspects, such as configuring, 
setting initial database content, and off-line summary 
report, have been designed to minimize resource usage.  
The questionnaire includes, in a compact form, 
sections for all basic data categories, namely Cultures, 

Values&Goals, Principles, Practices and Tools. There 

are two variants of the questionnaire. The shorter, 2-
page questionnaire, including pages 1 and 2 (Figure 4) 
addresses Practices only. The more elaborate 3-page 

questionnaire includes all three pages 1, 2 and 3 

(Figure 4), with the full scope of Practices and Tools. 

The shorter one is a subset of the more elaborate 

questionnaire. 
  Figure 4. Survey questionnaire. 
Pages 2 and 3 include the impact analysis and 
estimation sections for investigating Practices 
contribution to reach Values&Goals and Tools support 
for Practices respectively. This version of survey uses a 
simple, qualitative approach.  Impact analysis and 
estimation poses a challenge for user interface design, 

especially under the resource restrictions described 

above Œ as the impact tables tend to include many 

elements (number of working set Values&Goals times 
number of working set Practices, or number of working 
set Practices times number of working set Tools). On 
the other hand, having in one window the whole 

impact image helps in evaluating visually the overall 

effect. An approach that proved largely useful was a 

color-coded estimation illustrated in Figure 5: The 
impact value for a given cell of the impact table can be 
set with mouse clicks only, no key input is necessary. 
The consecutive clicks change the impact value 

cyclically, from None through Complete, Partial, 

Negative, etc. 
   Figure 5. Color-coded impact analysis and estimation: 
The impact value for a given cell can be set with 
mouse clicks which cyclically change the 
corresponding impact value. 
In the currently available version of the tool, the 
online feedback report provides a 1-page summary in 
the form of a map of the project values and goals on 
top of a visualization of the entire active culture. It 

supports a form of consistency check between changes 

to different layers of project culture: agile values and 

goals, principles, practices and tools. It is a part of a 

more elaborate function which we call ﬁagile 
positioning and consistencyﬂ, described in more detail 
in Section 5. 
 4. Are there really many cultures and 
different ﬁworking setsﬂ?  
 This is a fundamental question for existence of 
transitions. The survey helps in resolving the issue. 
The question about existence of a variety of solutions 

is relatively common in software engineering. This 
section was inspired by a similar question regarding 
design decision rationale documentation by Falessi et 

al. [6]. Depending on the context of a particular culture 
5Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 we expect that some Values&Goals and Practices will 
be more important than others and the resulting culture, 

and in particular the working sets, will be different. 
The investigation process is shown in Figure 6. The 
process is suitable for researching both cultures and 
working sets, for finding new cultures and working 

sets, as well as merging and decommissioning existing 

ones. The process can be applied off-line to derive an 

initial set of cultures, and then can be repeated with the 
current results collected in survey database. 
   Figure 6. The culture/working set research process.
 The diagram in Figure 6 denotes activities with 
rounded rectangles and the produced and consumed 
information with rectangles. 
We start with a predefined 
set of cultures. The analysis focuses on:  
• Context (to figure out the probability that the 
culture case will occur in the business and 
system context),  
• Measurable values and goals (to realize the 

benefits that such a culture case provides), 

and,  
• Required practices and tools (to estimate the 

cost or the amount of effort to spend on 
adopting and maintaining a practice or tool); 
for the yes/no decision about possible 

inclusion of a practice in the working set of 

practices ROI is calculated 
[3] 
as follows: 
ROI(s) = OccurrenceProbability(s) * 

Benefit(s) /Cost(s). 
The assumption about many cultures and working 
sets is valid only if the following null hypothesis is 

rejected: When enacting an agile process in different 
contexts i, j, there is no significant difference (H0ij) 
between the levels of importance (necessity and 

sufficiency) of the category of solution used 

(Values&Goals, Practices, Tools), where i, j index the 

set of all considered contexts. While context is the 

independent variable, the dependent variable is the 
importance (necessity and sufficiency) related to each 
specific solution (practice or tool) - 2-dimensional with 

3 x 3 ordinal scale points, as perceived by subjects, for 
enacting a specific (i) context or (ii) value or goal. 
The initial investigation addressed survey 
respondents in three groups distinguished by their 
relation to a large multi-national project investigating 

agile technology: (a) a local project team, (b) its 

industrial and research partner teams - national or 
international - and (c) external respondents not related 
to the project. With this setting we could introduce 
convenient and interesting classifications of contexts, 

values and goals. To minimize validity threats we 

initially considered extensive collections of solutions. 

Later solutions were restricted to those applicable to 
subsets of contexts. The descriptive data included: 
• Mean and variance for ﬂRequiredﬂ for each 
solution category, for all contexts, 
• Percentage of ﬂRequiredﬂ for each solution 

category vs. the contexts, 
• Mean and variance for ﬂCompleteﬂ for each 

solution category , for all contexts, 
• Percentage of ﬂCompleteﬂ for each solution 

category vs. the contexts. 
The hypothesis testing applied the Kruskal-Wall 
test on all contexts. In case it was possible to reject the 
null hypothesis H0ij for some i,j (p-value<0.05), the 
Mann-Whitney test was applied for all possible 

combinations of i,j, with respect to that category of 

solution. The initial results confirm existence of 

different cultures and working sets within cultures.  
 5. Agile support tool  
 The survey may be interpreted as an agile process 
support tool which provides support with regard to the 
following agile process questions (the current working 

version of the tool addresses only question A): 
A. (Positioning and consistency) Positioning: 

Position yourself on a map of project values 
and goals, and on a map of agile cultures to see 
your and others value coordinates. Explain 

project values. Consistency: Check consistency 

between changes to different layers of project 

culture: agile values and goals, principles, 

practices and tools. Are your values consistent 
with your practices and tools? 
B. (Navigation) See what measures can be taken 
(what measures others took or recommended) 

to reach new levels of project values and goals. 

Or to change an agile project™s management 

cultural status. Explain why you would use 
certain project practices. How successful are 
they going to be? 
6Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 The tool can support agile project management, at 
its various scopes, by recommending practices and 
tools contributing to values and goals particularly 
important with regard to the project stakeholders, 
context, maturity, etc. For instance, as illustrated in 
Figure 7, the tool, through its impact analysis and 

estimation capabilities, can 
support the selection of 
practices and tools assuring various planning activities 

of an agile project. (Note that this happens at the level 
of selecting entire practices and tools.)  
  Figure 7. Support in selecting agile project planning 
practices and tools, oriented towards assuring 
business value. 
Positioning
. Positioning finds out the coordinates 
of a particular project in a goal space of 
Values&Goals, by analyzing the impacts of the project 
practices on declared Values&Goals. Moreover it 
checks consistency of the result with the intended 
specified Values&Goals. This is shown in the goal 

space.  If the number of intended critical 

Values&Goals is too high special multidimensional 

visualization approaches such as Gilb™s radar 
[7]
 can be 
used. Positioning can show other related projects and 
compare them with the given one. 
Navigation
. Navigation provides a solution for the 
optimization task that finds Practices p which 
optimally impact the multi-criteria vector v of critical 

qualities and resources of Values&Goals: 
• Opt [p in P] (v), v in V,  
• where v in V indexes current working set of 
Values&Goals, and p in P indexes current 

working set of Practices; V and P are 

respective domains of index variables v 

and p, 
• subject to v = c(p), v in V, p in P, 
• where c: P 
 V, c is derived from C = 
(Values&Goals, Principles, Practices, 

Tools, Rules) and identified in its entire 

domain P during the positioning stage. 
The name ﬁnavigationﬂ is connected with the fact 
that the optimization can be performed iteratively to 
determine p(i), i=1,2,–, p(i) in P(i), so that at each 
step i a restricted set of Practices is added or removed, 
to yield a sequence of Values&Goals v(i), i=1,2,–, 
v(i) in V(i). In other words we navigate in the 

multidimensional space of Values&Goals by taking 

appropriate decisions rega
rding Practices. The whole 
process is determined by the introduced culture model. 
Thus we deal with optimization: 
• Opt [p(i) in P(i)] (v(i)), v(i) in V(i), i=1,2,–, 
• subject to v(i) = c(p(i)),
 v(i) in V(i), p(i) in 
P(i). 
An extended Gilb™s radar representation can be 
applied to visualize navigation. Individual radars can 
be linked together following the time (delivery) or the 
space integration principle. In contrast to positioning, 

which is focused on analysis, navigation is focused on 

controls and their synthesis. 
 6. Discussion and related results  
 Selecting practices and tools for agile projects is a 
subject of heated discussion, partly due to the emergent 
nature of such practice sets 
[8]
. Instead of a maturity-
related approach (
[14]
, [12]
, [8], etc.
) we suggest a wider 
perspective and support to handle the transient nature 

of agile practices. We recommend addressing the 

actual critical project values and goals, and considering 
transitions within or between agile cultures. We 
carefully consider such issues as various stakeholder 

viewpoints and project contexts. The results would 

support whoever takes decisions about configuring 

practices and tools for an agile project. The values and 

goals may also take into account the necessary 
transition resources, e.g., in the form of ROI. The area 
of value-based software engineering 
[5]
 to our 
knowledge hasn™t provided value-based methods of 

practice selection in relation to contexts other than 

capability maturity assessment and improvement. 
While there are numerous tools on the market to our 
knowledge none of them offers a type of functionality 

addressed here. An important advantage of this 

approach is its ﬁagileﬂ nature of tool support Œ the 

support can be obtained even with minimal resources. 
 7.  Conclusions and future work 
 Agile software projects have considerable freedom 
in shaping their emerging project management 
practices, and there are established ways to do that, 

e.g., with process retrospectives. The practices may 
change due to many reasons, such as (i) changes to 
critical system or process properties, (ii) process 
7Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 context, (iii) process capability maturity, etc. Maturity 
is not the only reason for change and a suitable wider 

perspective and support is necessary to handle the 
transient nature of agile practices. We propose to use a 
value-based approach and shift the discussion from the 
conventional solution space to the goal (value) space. 

Further we recommend an impact estimation approach 

for identifying current practice state (aka. agile 

positioning) and a corresponding approach for 
navigating through the value (and solution) space as 
well as ways to visualize the results. This work 

underlies the ongoing development of an agile 

positioning and navigation tool that includes a survey 

approach to practice and tool impact analysis and 

estimation. Our foreground task for the future is to 
provide a fully quantitative variant of the method and 
tool support. Another necessary part of the work, 

ongoing now, is validation of the navigation part. 
 8.  Acknowledgments 
 This work has been supported in part by project 
E3674-ITEA2 FLEXI and by Tekes, the Finnish 
Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation. 
 9.  References 

 [1] Agile Manifesto, 
http://www.agilemanifesto.com
, 2000. 
 
[2] Augustine, S., and S. Woodcock, ﬁAgile Project 

Management: Emergent Order through Visionary  

Leadershipﬂ, CC Pace Sys., Jul. 2002. 
 [3] Basili, V., G. Caldiera, and D. Rombach. 

"Goal/Question/Metric Paradigm", Encyclopedia of Software 

Engineering, vol. 1. John Wiley & Sons, 1994, pp. 528-532. 
 [4] Beck, K., and C. Andres. Extreme Programming 

Explained: Embrace Change, 2nd Ed.. Addison-Wesley 

Professional, 2004. 
 [5] Biffl, S, A. Aurum, B. Bohem, H. Erdogmus, and P. 

Grünbacher, Value-Based Software Engineering. Springer, 
2005 
 
[6] Falessi, D., G. Cantone, and P. Kruchten, Value-Based 

Design Decision Rationale Documentation: Principles and 
Empirical Feasibility Study. Proc. Seventh Working 
IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture, IEEE Press, 

2008. 

 [7] Gilb, T., Competitive Engineering: A Handbook for 
Systems Engineering, Requirements Engineering, and 

Software Engineering Using Planguage. Elsevier, 2005. 

 [8] Glazer, H., J. Dalton, D. Anderson, M. Konrad, and S. 
Shrum, ﬁCMMI® or Agile:Why Not Embrace Both!ﬂ, 

CMU/SEI-2008-TN-003, Pittsburgh, 2008. 
 [9] Highsmith, J., Agile Project Management: Principles 
and Tools. Cutter Consortium, 2002. 

 
[10] Schwaber, K., Agile Project Management with Scrum. 
Microsoft Professional, 2004. 
 
[11] Spencer-Oatey, H., Culturally Speaking: Managing 

Rapport through Talk across Cultures. Cassel, New York, 
2000. 
 
[12] Sutherland, J., C.R. Jakobsen, and K. Johnson, "Scrum 
and CMMI Level 5: The Magic Potion for Code Warriors". 
Agile (IEEE Computer Society), 2007, p. 272Œ278, 
http://jeffsutherland.com/scrum/Sutherland-
ScrumCMMI6pages.pdf
  
[13] Thomsett, R, ﬁProject Management Cultures: The 
Hidden Challengeﬂ, Agile Product and Project Management, 
8(7), Cutter IT Consortium, 2007. 
 
[14] Turner, R., and J. Apurva, ﬁAgile Meets CMMI: 
Culture Clash or Common Cause?ﬂ, Extreme Programming 
and Agile Methods - XP/Agile Universe 2002. Lecture Notes 

in Computer Science, Volume 2418/2002. Springer Berlin, 

2002. 
   8Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010