 Agile and Wellbeing — Stress, Empowerment, and Performance  
 in Scrum and Kanban Teams 
 
Maarit Laanti 
Nokia 
Maarit.Laanti@iki.fi
 
 
 
Abstract
 
Little
 
research data
 
exist about agile teams and 
wellbeing.
 
After changing our software engineering 
mode to agile, we wanted to find out if people 
experienced more or less stress than before. This 
study is based on a company-wide survey of 466 
software engineering practitioners. We asked about 
their subjective feelings 
about stress, empowerment, 
and performance in their respective engineering 
teams after they had started to use agile methods.
 
The 
results reveal that the feelings of higher performance 
improvement and sustainable pace are related, and 
that this difference is 
statistically significant. 
Respondents who feel that 
their team is empowered 
also feel less stress. However, no significant 
difference in feelings of stress and empowerment was 
found between respondents working in Kanban and 
Scrum mode after transition to agile.
 
The group that 
was improving its performance because of agile was 
also reporting a better workload balance. The group 
that was experiencing worse performance because of 
agile methods was also more stressed. The 
differences may be explained by the management 
styles being practiced in the teams. The results are 
important as those verify in industrial setting what 
some agile books suggest: limiting workload and 
team empowerment has 
an impact on performance 
and stress. This contribut
es to our understanding how 
agile teams should be managed. 
1.
 
Introduction and Related Literature 
1.1.
 
Sustainable Pace 
According to a Forrester study, agile has reached 
mainstream: in their su
rvey the majority of 
respondents stated that ag
ile most closely reflects 
their development methods [1]. The growth of the 
usage of agile methods in last three years (from 17% 
up to 35%) has been remarkable [2]. This is likely 
due to same reason why agile methods have gained 
popularity in Nokia; that the benefits of agile 
methods have been widely recognized in the software 
industry [3, 4]. In addition, the existing numerous 
publications on agile methods on both scientific and 
non-scientific forums main
ly report positive impacts 
of agile adoption. However, adoption of agile 
methods has proven to be a challenging task [5]. It 
has been claimed that agile adopters are often 
unaware of what agile adoption
 
really means, and 
how broad a change is actually required [2].  
Agile methods are reported to bring business 
value to users but only little research exists about 
whether this is actually happening at the expense of 
the wellbeing of the personnel in agile projects. Syed-
Abdullah, Holcombe, and Gheorge [6] have studied 
wellbeing in teams usi
ng Extreme Programming 
while Whitworth and Biddle have studied the social 
nature of agile teams [7].   
It is being said that Scrum, for example, 
resembles a typical project crisis mode: all people 
work just on the most important tasks at hand; 
priorities are made very explicit and there is pressure 
from the deadline.  
Traditionally, when the crisis is over people will 
return back to their normal working conditions and 
maybe need a break (or less busy hours) to recover 
from the overwork. Because agile teams are supposed 
to be capable of working with a constant flow (and 
constant pace) one of the twelve agile principles is 
the principle of 
sustainable pace: 
Agile processes 
promote sustainable deve
lopment. Product managers 
and owners, development teams, and people 
responsible for testing should be able to maintain a 
constant pace indefinitely [8]. So the central question 
is: how well can agile teams adapt to constant 
pressure of biweekly sprint deadlines and 
implementation priorities?  
In this reserach we study wellbeing in agile teams 
focusing on performance, empowerment, and stress 
level. The data are based on a survey done in 
December 2010 with 466 respondents from various 
teams in a large embedded software development 
organization at Nokia. The main agile model in use 
was scaled-up Scrum [8] as defined in [9] and [10] 
but some teams were also
 using Kanban [11] or a 
2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.7447592013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.744761 mixture of Scrum and Kanba
n. At the time of the 
research, Kanban was used only at team level, and 
mainly for maintenance. Thus in this paper Kanban is 
referred to as an agile method like in [11] though 
Kanban is rather based on lean than agile principles 
[12].  
This paper provides a reference point for similar 
wellbeing studies on other product development 
practices. The results indicate that for those people 
whose feelings of stress are connected to working 
method they use, team empow
erment is connected to 
having less stress, and that sustainable pace and 
teams’ performance are related. 
 
1.2
 
Background 
In Scrum, sustainable pace is linked with 
empowerment [13] and maintained by measuring the 
team velocity. Effort is pl
anned to the next timebox, 
a.k.a. sprint, based on the achievement from the 
previous timebox. Empower
ed teams measure their 
velocity, i.e. how many story points they can 
complete on the average in one sprint. A story point 
is an abstract measurem
ent unit for relative work 
amount size estimation. Each 
user story is estimated 
separately in terms of story points [14]. An 
empowered Scrum team plans only to do as much 
work as they completed in the previous sprint and is 
thus able to work following a sustainable pace. This 
is opposite to traditional plan-driven development, 
where management is often setting deadlines and 
teams are cutting quality and working overtime to get 
the release out [13].  
Empowered Scrum teams are also able to make 
technical decisions by themselves, whereas business 
decisions are the responsibility of product manager 
a.k.a. Product Owner. “Pr
oduct Owner” is a Scrum 
role responsible for defining and communicating the 
vision for the product being built and scoping the 
content when necessary. Agile development is based 
on the discovery that traditional software products 
have many features that are 
not at all or seldom used 
[15]. Thus the profitability of agile methods is also 
based on focusing on doing the right things with very 
good quality rather than implementing a broader set 
of features whereas trad
itional methods in their 
extreme try to push all planned features out of the 
development pipeline at the same time. This often 
results in delays and unclarity about the final release 
date since the last weeks of the product development 
project are spent in testing and improving the quality 
to an acceptable level. 
The fear of empowerment 
that traditional project 
management seems to have is related to the fear of 
breaking commitment to a delivery at a final project 
delivery deadline. Yet in Scrum teams there is 
willingness to achieve a release after every sprint. 
Peer pressure from agile team members is replacing 
the former management command-and-control type 
of target setting. This visibility may cause 
significantly higher stress fo
r some individuals. From 
the data available, we can only guess the reasons. 
Lack of competence, personality type, and not liking 
teamwork are some of the suggested reasons. Agile is 
demanding a lot of openness and teamwork but the 
fact is that we really do not know.  
2.
 
Research Approach 
In this section, the research aims, context, and 
data collection and analysis methods are presented. 
The assumption is that the studied variables have 
complex and unknown relations with each other. 
Thus the research done is exploratory research. This 
is why there are several research questions in this 
paper.  
 
2.1
 
Research Aims  
Several wellbeing studies have been conducted in 
traditional product development contexts, but only 
very few have been done within an agile setting. The 
aim of this research was to test the most typical 
claims in agile literature regarding subjective 
wellbeing in agile teams.  
Subjective feelings are important because 
“whatever we perceive is organized into patterns for 
which we the perceivers are largely responsible” 
[16]. Kurtz and Snowden [
17] propose that for those 
parts that we do not understand, “we fill the gaps to 
create an experience-based pattern on which we act.” 
These experiences, in turn, are visible only by means 
of inquiring about subjective feelings. Thus, it can be 
argued that they represent, when asked from a 
significant portion of the population, the reality as it 
exists in the studied orga
nization. The consideration 
of whether this reality is transferable to another 
organization falls outside t
he scope of this study. We 
maintain those subjective feelings and their 
subsequent correlations (or non-correlations) with the 
determinant factors that can act as a vehicle for 
discovering patterns of behaviour, which inherently 
are present in an agile organization. We acknowledge 
that the patterns may repeat for a time, but we cannot 
guarantee and foresee that they would continue to 
repeat [16].  
One of the typical statemen
ts with Scrum is that 
performance can increase even though teams are 
47604762 working with sustainable pace. This seems to be a 
typical discussion topic in
 blogs and other forums 
where agile practitioners discuss with each other.
1
 
These forums provide rich material for researchers to 
study different opinions of agile practitioners.  
Working overtime is one of the traditional 
management methods used, so the Scrum statement 
that sustainable pace increases performance is hard 
for seasoned project managers to believe. Thus, we 
set the first research question as: 
 
Q1. 
Has performance increased in all teams alike? 
Has sustainable pace anything to do with 
performance increase? 
 
One of the elements that Scrum and sprint 
planning advocate is “stress-free productivity.” In a 
survey like this we cannot measure productivity 
objectively, but the per
ceived (self-measured) 
performance. This perceived performance can then be 
compared to a perceived feeling of how empowered a 
team is and what the team stress level is.  
Not all people agree with the idea of “stress-free 
productivity”, though. Traditional project manage-
ment is based on thinking that more can be achieved 
if the team over-commits rather than under-commits.
2
 
We set the second research question as: 
 
Q2. 
Do feelings of stress and team empowerment 
relate? 
  
Here we study the claim that the work mode and 
feelings of stress and empowerment are related to 
each other. We study if the feelings are different for 
people working with differe
nt methods (Kanban or 
Scrum). Ken Schwaber has been claiming in his blog 
that “Kanban is just a death march without a pause” 
[18]. If this is true, then Kanban teams should have 
more stress and feel less em
powered. Thus we set the 
third and fourth research questions as:  
 
Q3. 
Do
 
Kanban and Scrum teams feel similar 
stress, compared to traditional development?
 
 
Q4. 
Do
 
Kanban and Scrum teams feel equally 
empowered, compared to 
traditional development? 
 
  
                                                
1
 
A related InfoQ article listing many links to agile blogs and other 
forums discussing overtime can be found here 
http://www.infoq.com/news/2008/05/sustainable-pace
 
2
 
See a related blog post, e.g. in 
http://scrumftw.blogspot.com/2011/02/overcommitment-is-better-
than.html
 
 
2.2
 
Research Context  
The survey was sent semi-randomly to different 
parts of the software engi
neering organization. We 
tried to send the survey to over 10,000 people but our 
survey tool could not handle this load and kept 
reporting problems. As a result, we do not know the 
actual number of sent invitations. Eventually, we 
received 466 unique answers. The answers were 
anonymized for the analysis
. There would have been 
an option to repeat the surv
ey with a better tool but 
when we analyzed the 466 answers we concluded 
that they were representative enough as the responses 
were spread over many roles and different types of 
teams.  
Most of the respondents were working in Scrum 
teams. Respondents had the following roles: 
•
 
59% Scrum team members, 
•
 
22% Scrum Masters, 
•
 
10% Product Owners, 
•
 
4% Coach, 
•
 
23% Other roles. 
Selection of multiple roles was possible, so the 
sum exceeds 100%. 
The teams were also asked if they were able to 
use all Scrum practices or if they were able to use just 
some. Following only a subset of practices from 
Scrum is called ScrumBUT according to Nokia Test
3
, 
and several teams were using this approach [19]. 
Some teams were also using a combination of Scrum 
and Kanban, called Scrumban. 
Respondents were using different methods: 
•
 
39% said they are following Scrum  
•
 
37% were following ScrumBUT  
•
 
10% were following Scrumban  
•
 
5% were following Kanban  
•
 
5% were following traditional methods 
•
 
3% said they were following some other method, 
and 
•
 
2% said this question is non-applicable to them. 
3.
 
Data Collection and Initial Results 
This research was conducted as a questionnaire-
based survey. The questionnaire was open for two 
and a half weeks in the end of December 2010. In the 
survey we
 
also asked for opinions on Kanban, the 
existing backlog tool, and 
what kind of tool the 
Kanban users would prefer. In this study, however, 
                                                
3
 
Nokia Test consists of several questions that test if a team is 
following all Scrum rules or not. The test was developed in 
Nokia Siemens Networks.
 
47614763 we limit ourselves to wellbeing and work mode 
questions. 
The work mode questions were multi-choice 
questions with both positive and negative options. 
Overall, the feedback towards agile methods was 
very positive: 
•
 
When people were asked about the workload 
with seven answer options, the biggest 
respondent group, i.e. 29% felt they were 
working with sustainable pace.  
•
 
The majority (64%) of respondents felt their 
performance had increased. 
•
 
Of those who stated that changing to use agile 
methods had impacted their stress level, a 
slightly larger group — 12% larger — stated that 
the impact had been positive. 
•
 
When simply asked if the respondents were 
working with sustainable pace with only Yes or 
No options, a clear majority (82%) felt their team 
was working with sustainable pace. The same is 
true also with empowerme
nt as almost as many 
(71%) felt their team was empowered. 
•
 
55% of respondents would like to stay working 
in agile way, and only 12% would like to go 
back to traditional way of working. 
All response options to th
e work mode questions 
and the distribution of answers were as follows: 
 
Q1. How is your team’s workload after taking 
agile into use?  
•
 
14% – There is more work, but it is not 
because of agile,  
•
 
12% – There is more work / more hectic 
because of agile,  
•
 
29% – There is workload balance / 
sustainable pace, 
•
 
7% – There is less work because better 
communication helps us optimize the 
solutions & content; we also do scope 
management,  
•
 
4% – There is simply too much work,  
•
 
25% – Agile has no impact to workload,  
•
 
10% – Other.  
 
Q2. How is your team’s performance after taking 
agile into use?  
•
 
3% – Performance has decreased 
significantly,  
•
 
8% – Performance has decreased, 
•
 
38% – Performance has increased, 
•
 
3% – Performance has increased 
significantly,  
•
 
26% – Performance has improved and it is 
still improving, 
•
 
26% – Other.  
 
Q3. How is your stress level after moving to 
agile?  
•
 
27% – Better because of agile,   
•
 
34% – The same,  
•
 
15% – Worse because of agile,   
•
 
23% – Not related to agile methods.  
 
Q4. Is your team “empowered”?  
•
 
71%
 – Yes, 
•
 
29% – No. 
 
Q5. Does your team work at “sustainable pace”?  
•
 
82% – Yes,  
•
 
18% –  No.  
 
Q6. Would you go back to the old way of 
working?  
•
 
55% – No,  
•
 
31% – I do not know,  
•
 
12% – Yes,  
•
 
2% – I do not know as I have never worked 
with non-agile methods. 
4.
 
Analysis of Results 
The quantitative analysis done is based on the 
Kruskal-Wallis H test [20, 21]. This test is a 
nonparametric test that does not assume normality. It 
tests the equality of population medians among the 
groups. Instead of using the variance, it is replacing 
the actual values with ranks — otherwise it is 
identical to the 
one-way ANOVA (analysis of 
variance) parametric test. The Kruskal-Wallis H test 
is like the Mann-Whitney U test, but it can be used 
with multiple values where the Mann-Whitney U is 
limited to nominal variables with only two values. 
It is assumed in the Kruskal-Wallis test that the 
observations in the data set are independent of each 
other and that the observati
ons must be drawn from 
the population by the process of random sampling.  
 
4.1.
 
Kruskal-Wallis H Test for Sustainable 
Pace and Performance 
The relation of sustainable pace and performance 
increase was studied with the Kruskal-Wallis H test. 
With the Kruskal-Wallis H test the mean ranks of 
samples from the populations are expected to be the 
same, i.e.: 
H
0
: 
µ
1
= 
µ
2
 = 
µ
3 
47624764 H
A
: 
µ
 
i

 
µ
 
j 
 
For this test we are omitting the 26% group who 
answered “Other” (
i.e. with free text answer) — most 
of them stated that their performance is not related to 
agile methods.  
Figure 4.1 shows how the 
opinions distribution of 
how agile impacts performance differs depending if 
the respondent is working in sustainable or non-
sustainable pace though the me
dian of both groups is 
the same. 
 
The mean ranks in Table 
4.1 indicate that teams 
that were working with sustainable pace had 
increased their performance more than those who did 
not work with sustainable pace.  
From Table 4.2 we can see that the means of the 
two groups are unequal and that the mean of the 
group that was working with sustainable pace is 
higher (so their performance had increased more). 
This result is significant with (H= 6.208, 1 d.f.
4
, P < 
0.05). 
 
Figure 4.1
 A boxplot figure of performance opinions and 
whether or not the team works with sustainable pace. 
 
 
Table 4.1
 Mean ranks of performance and sustainable pace. 
 Team’s performance after taking 
agile into use 
N Mean 
rank 
Sustainable pace  
 
Yes 254 159.44 
No 53 127.95 
Total 307  
 
 
Table 4.2
 Kruskal-Wallis test statistics, grouping variable: 
Sustainable pace. 
 
Team’s performance after taking 
                                                
4
 d.f. = degree of freedom 
agile into use 
Chi-Square 6.208  
df 1  
Asymp. Sig. 0.013  
 
4.2
 
Kruskal-Wallis H Test for Stress and 
Empowerment 
Table 4.3
 Mean ranks of stress 
and team empowerment. 
 Stress level after moving to agile 
N Mean 
rank 
Empowered   
Yes 262 161.85 
No 95 226.30 
Total 357  
 
 
Table 4.4
 Kruskal-Wallis test statistics, grouping variable: 
empowerment. 
 
Stress level after moving to agile 
Chi-Square 31.714  
Df 1  
Asymp. Sig. 0.000 
 
 
 
Figure 4.2 
Boxplot figure of opinions of stress level 
opinions and team is empowerment. 
The research question that stress and 
empowerment are not connected was tested with the 
Kruskal-Wallis H test. For this test we are omitting 
the 23% group who answered “Not related to agile 
methods” as in Kruskal-Wallis H Test the survey 
answers need to be ordered.
5
  
                                                
5
 
However, the survey response “Not related to agile methods” 
has numerical value of 4, i.e. it is the biggest of all response 
options. ”Worse because of agile” has 3, “The same” has 2 and 
“Better because of agile” has 1. When it is included in Kruskal-
Wallis H Test, the result is significant with (H= 27.301, 1 d.f., P 
< 0.01). 
 
47634765 Figure 4.2 shows how the 
median and distribution 
of stress levels differ be
tween empowered and non-
empowered teams. 
The mean ranks in Ta
ble 4.3 indicate that 
empowered teams are more 
likely to have less stress 
because of agile. Table 4.4 shows that the differences 
are significant.  
 
From the results we can see that the means of the 
two groups are unequal and that the empowered 
teams are more likely to have less stress. This result 
is significant with (H= 27
.301, 1 d.f., P < 0.01). 
 
4.3
 
Kruskal-Wallis H Test for Stress in 
Kanban and Scrum Teams 
The question if feelings of stress were similar 
between Kanban and Scrum teams was tested with 
the Kruskal-Wallis H test.  
Again, we omitted the group of 23% who think 
that stress and agile methods are not related. The 
mean ranks in Table 4.5 
indicate that Kanban teams 
might have slightly less st
ress, but Table 4.6 shows 
that these differences are not significant.  
 
 
Table 4.5
 Mean ranks of stress levels in different teams. 
 
Stress level after moving to agile 
N Mean 
rank 
Teams way of 
workin
g
 
  
Scrum 144 162.07 
ScrumBUT 136 171.85 
Scrumban 37 183.69 
Kanban 16 133.94 
Total 333  
 
Table 4.6
 Kruskal-Wallis test statistics, grouping variable: 
team’s way of working. 
 Stress level after moving to agile 
Chi-Square 4.197  
df 3  
Asymp. Sig. 0.241 
 
 
The results indicate that no significant difference 
was found in respondent’s feeling of stress based on 
which agile method they used.
6
  
 
4.4
 
Kruskal-Wallis H Test for Empower-
ment in Kanban and Scrum Teams 
The research question if Kanban and Scrum teams 
felt equally empowered was tested with the Kruskal-
                                                
6
 
The result would be the same with
 Asymp. Sig. 0.766, even if 
including also the group that thinks stress and agile methods are 
not related.
 
 
Wallis H test. Figure 4.3 shows the empowerment 
and work mode. 







Figure 4.3. 
Team Empowerment (Yes / No) by work mode 
(Kanban / Scrumban / ScrumBUT / Scrum).
  
The mean ranks in Table 
4.7 indicate that Scrum 
teams are likely to feel
 more empowered than 
Kanban teams, but table 4.8 shows that this 
difference is not significant.  
 
Table 4.7
 Mean ranks of empowerme
nt in different teams. 
 Empowered 
N Mean 
rank 
Team’s way of 
working 
  
Scrum 181 100.88 
Kanban 22 111.18 
Total 203  
 
The results indicate that no significant difference 
was found between respondents’ feeling of 
empowerment depending on t
heir use of Scrum or 
Kanban after transition to agile methods.
7
 
 
 
Table 4.8
 Kruskal-Wallis test statistics, grouping variable: 
team’s way of working. 
 Empowered 
Chi-Square 1.348  
df 1  
As
y
mp. Si
g
. 0.246  
5.
 
Discussion  
5.1
 
How are Over-commitment, Stress, and 
Performance Related? 
In the absence of more objective measures of 
empowered teams and produc
tivity, we can see how 
the reported stress levels compare to subjective 
opinions of teams’ perfor
mance. Figure 5.1 shows 
these data. From the graph we can see that 
                                                
7
 
This test was also repeated with Scrum and ScrumBUT teams, 
and it was discovered that this difference was significant — Scrum 
teams felt more empowered (H= 21.571, 1 d.f., P < 0.01). 
 
47644766 respondents who said that their stress level is the 
same or better are also mos
tly those who also stated  
their teams’ performance has increased or is still 
improving. These are people who seem to benefit 
from working in agile mode. 
 
 
Figure 5.1 
Stress level opinions grouped by performance.
 
 
Figure 5.2 
Stress level opinions grouped by if respondent would like to go back to traditional methods. 
 
Figure 5.3 
Stress level opinions grouped by workload opinions.
 
 
47654767 Table 6.1 
Summary of Research questions with results.
 
Research question 
 
Q1. 
Has performance increased in all teams alike? Has 
sustainable pace anything to do with performance 
increase? 
Not agreed. Sustainable pace leads to performance 
increase. Notice that there is a group of people who think 
agile is not impacting performance. 
Q2. 
Do feelings of stress and team empowerment relate
? Not agreed. Empowered teams have less stress. 
Q3. 
Do
 
Kanban and Scrum teams feel similar stress, 
compared to traditional development?
 
Agreed. There was no statistical difference found in how 
much stress Kanban and Scrum teams felt compared to 
time before agile change. 
Q4. 
Do
 
Kanban and Scrum teams feel equally 
empowered, compared to 
traditional development? 
Agreed. There was no statistical difference found in how 
empowered Kanban and Scrum teams felt compared to 
time before agile change. 
 
It would be worth of st
udying what leads to high 
performance with less stress. Scrum suggests 
continuous improvement as one
 answer. It could also 
be that these teams work with better tools than other 
teams. E.g. Kokko [22] ha
s suggested that a well-
working and jointly maintained Continuous 
Integration system improves 
the team’s and project’s 
productivity and speed of execution. 
There were 5 respondents who stated that their 
performance has decreased and their stress level was 
worse because of agile. These were the ones who 
were clearly unhappy with agile methods. It would be 
interesting to know why. 
Figure 5.2 reveals that people who felt stressed 
because of agile methods are also over-represented 
among those who would have liked to go back to the 
old way of working.  
Figure 5.3 shows that these feelings of stress are 
highly linked with the respondents’ workload: there 
seem to be teams that were able to work with 
sustainable pace and others that had not made this 
transition — i.e. they had higher stress and higher 
workload because of agile.  
Combining the result from Section 4.1 — teams 
who were working with sustainable pace also had 
higher performance — it can be concluded that over-
commitment will not lead to better results.  
There could be an alternative to over-
commitment, high stress, and high workload. A 
different management style, which builds on 
empowered teams and worki
ng smarter, not harder, 
with high focus might lead to better results. 
Management theories exist about how to lead 
empowered organizations 
— our study suggests that 
some managers relying on traditional management 
methods might benefit from such training. 
 
5.2
 
Limitations of the Study 
The biggest limitation of this study is that it is 
purely survey-based and the real performance of 
teams was not measured. A 
survey like this cannot 
reveal other contributing f
actors outside the survey 
instrument that could have revealed in in-depth 
interviews.  
We also limit ourselves on the studied factors 
only. Other factors that may have impact on the 
result, such as the length of the agile experience or 
the organization level, are excluded from the study. 
The survey was done in one company only, so it 
might have been biased by the organization culture 
and the specific interpretation of agility. This raises 
the question regarding external validity (i.e. how 
largely these results can be generalized).  
This study was covering several organizational 
units in Nokia and various types of projects. Thus the 
expectation is that there is variation of project and 
sub-organization cultures and how agile has been 
interpreted and deployed. This suggests that the 
results are more general, rather than specific to this 
one company. However, it is suggested that different 
companies and organizations would conduct related 
studies in order to validate our assumptions and the 
generality of these findings. 
It is typical to measure stress with many latent 
variables. E.g. the Siegri
st model uses two summary 
measures of work stress: imbalance, the ratio 
between extrinsic effort (demands on the job) and 
rewards (money, esteem, and status control), and 
over-commitment, a psychological coping style 
associated with the inability to withdraw from work 
obligations [21]. Measuring 
stress with a scale from 
high to low before and after agile would have given 
more room for interpretations than a single question. 
The Job Demands – Job Decision Latitude Model 
[24] is providing the scientific basis for studies on 
psychological stressors su
ch as working long and 
hard compared to worker’s authority on making 
decisions on the job and variety of skills used by 
worker on the job. Howe
ver, there are studies 
showing that subjective appraisals of work stress 
correlate more strongly with self-reported depression 
than objective studies of work conditions do [25]. 
Even though a more thorough study would be 
47664768 required to capture different perceptions regarding 
latent variables of stress, the perception cannot be 
totally neglected either. The fundamental principle of 
sociology, known as the Thomas
 theorem, states that 
"It is not important whether or not the interpretation 
is correct – if men define situations as real, they are 
real in their consequences" [26]. 
The Kruskal-Wallis H test measures the 
differences of medians among the groups. This study 
detected no differences in stress or empowerment 
variables between groups using Scrum and Kanban. 
This, however, does not mean that Scrum and 
Kanban teams are the same.
8
 On the contrary, it is 
suggested that further studies are conducted to study 
differences directly between Scrum and Kanban 
teams. 
Also, because of the pr
oblems with the survey 
tool the response percentage remains unknown. 
6.
 
Conclusions  
In this study, four research questions related to 
wellbeing in agile teams were studied. Traditionally, 
wellbeing in software development teams has been 
seen as important but not as important as getting the 
products ready. Based on the results of our
 
survey 
this kind of dualism may not have scientific support. 
In fact, it may be plausible that agile teams with high 
wellbeing actually have better performance. This is in 
alignment with previous st
udies of empowerment and 
performance [27].  
The results are important as those verify in 
industrial setting what some agile books suggest: 
limiting workload and team
 empowerment has an 
impact on performance and stress. This contributes to 
our understanding how agile teams should be 
managed. 
The four research questions were studied using 
quantitative methods. First, we investigated if a 
team’s sustainable pace leads to better performance. 
This was supported by our survey results. Second, we 
discovered that empowered 
teams cope better with 
stress. Finally, no statistical difference was found in 
stress and empowerment between Scrum and Kanban 
teams. Table 6.1 presents a summary of the research 
questions with the corresponding findings. 
The finding that empowered teams cope better 
with stress was no surprise and is aligned what 
psychologists have for a long time stated for 
                                                
8
  
Here, it should be noted that the questionnaire emphasis 
was set to “after taking agile into use”.
 
A study comparing 
Scrum mode directly to Kanban mode might give different 
results, and is suggested.
 
individuals: that feelings 
of empowerment lead to 
better control of stress [27]. However, this to our 
knowledge has not been previously verified in 
software development and with Scrum teams. 
It is notable that even when we asked about team 
empowerment, every person 
answered this survey 
individually, so people in the same team may have 
answered this question differently as they might have 
disagreed about their team
 being empowered or not. 
This could open further possibilities for research 
comparing teams instead of
 asking from individuals, 
or comparing the opinions of
 individuals within the 
same team. 
The results regarding sustainable pace and better 
performance need further verification by real 
performance metrics done at the team level. One 
could always argue that subjective means like this 
survey do not reveal the real situation. Yet the high 
number of respondents (466) would make it unlikely 
that people would just reply to the survey to please 
the researcher. We believe that it is far more 
plausible that people have answered this survey 
because what they have experienced in their everyday 
life. This means that organizations should take the 
transition as a serious challenge, and find means such 
as agile coaching in order to help teams and 
managers to transform from over-committing, 
stressful, and un-performing working mode to 
sustainable, less-stressful, and better-performing 
mode. 
Last but not least, special attention needs to be 
given to the small population that felt worse because 
of agile and whose performance had also decreased. 
Is this because of a problem in the existing way how 
agile is deployed that could be corrected? What made 
them favor the traditional way of working? Is there 
anything we could have changed in the existing 
setting to make them feel better?   
 
Acknowledgements 
The author would like to thank Professor Pekka 
Abrahamsson for his support and guidance. 
 
References
 
 
 
[1] West D, Grant T, Agile Development, Mainstream 
Adoption Has Changed Agility, Forrester Research, 
2010.   
[2]  Schwaber K, Laganza G,
 D'Silva D, The truth about 
agile processes: frank answers to frequently asked 
questions, Forrester Report, 2007. 
47674769 [3] Laanti M, Salo O, Abrahamsson P, Agile methods 
rapidly replacing traditional methods at Nokia: A 
survey of opinions on agile transformation. Information 
& Software Technology 53(3): 276-290 (2011) 
[4] Laanti M, Agile Transfo
rmation Study at Nokia - One 
Year After. LESS 2010: 3-19 
[5]  Svensson H, Höst M, Introducing an agile process in a 
software maintenance and evolution organization. 
Proceedings of 9th European conference of 
maintenance and reengineering,  2005. 
[6] Syed-Abdullah S, Holcombe M, Gheorge M, The 
Impact of an Agile Methodology on the Well Being of 
Development Teams. Empir Software Eng (2006) 11: 
143–167, DOI 10.1007/s10664-006-5968-5. 
[7]  Whitworth E, Biddle R, The Social Nature of Agile 
Teams. Proceeding of AGILE 2007. ISBN: 0-7695-
2872-4. 
[8]  Schwaber K, Beedle M, Agile Software Development 
with Scrum, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2002. 
[9] Laanti M, Implementing program model with agile 
principles in a large software development 
organization. In: Proceedings of 32nd annual IEEE 
international conference on Computer software and 
applications (Compsac '08), 2008. 
 [10]Leffingwell D, Aalto J-M, A Lean and Scalable 
Information Model for the Agile Enterprise. 
Whitepaper, 2009. 
[11]Kniberg H, Skarin M, Kanban and Scrum–making the 
most of both. Lulu.com, 2010. ISBN-10: 0557138329  
[12]Ikonen M, Lean Thinking in Software Development : 
Impacts of Kanban on Projects.
 Dissertation, University 
of Helsinki. ISBN: 978-952-10-7410-3
 
[13]Schwaber K, Enterprise 
and Scrum, Microsoft Press 
2007. ISBN-10: 0735623376, ISBN-13: 978-
0735623378. 
[14]Cohn M, Agile Estimating 
and Planning. Prentice Hall, 
2005. ISBN-10: 0131479415. ISBN-13: 978-
0131479418. 
[15]Larman C, Agile & Iterative Development. A 
Manager’s Guide. Addison-Wesley Professional 2003. 
ISBN-10: 0-13-111155-8. 
[16]Douglas M, Purity and Danger, An Analysis of 
Concepts of Pollution and Taboo, 1966. Routledge and 
Keegan Paul, ISBN: 0710012993 
[17]Kurtz, C.F, Snowden,
 D, The new dynamics of 
strategy: Sense-making in a complex and complicated 
world, IBM Systems Jour
nal, 42(3): 462-483, 2003. 
[18]Ken Schwaber's Blog, Telling It Like It Is Waterfall, 
Lean/Kanban, and Scrum 
http://kenschwaber.wordpress.com/2010/06/10/waterfal
l-leankanban-and-scrum-2/  
[19]Santana C, Caetano D, 
Alexandre S, and Rocha V, 
Measuring the Effectiveness of Nokia Test in Very 
Small Teams. Proceedings of Software Engineering and 
Applications (SEA) 2009 
[20]Field A, Discovering Statistics using SPSS, 3
rd
 edition. 
Sage Publications Ltd, 2009. ISBN 978-1-84787-906-6.  
[21]SPSS Base 16.0 User’s Gu
ide. SPSS Inc. 2007.ISBN-
10: 0-13-603600-7, ISBN-13: 978-0-13-603600-5.   
[22]Kokko H, Large Scale Continuous Integration. Scan 
Agile conference 2011.  
[21]Siegrist J, Peter R, Job stressors and coping 
characteristics in work related disease: issues of 
validity. Work & Stress. 1994;8:130 –140. 
[24]Ganster D, Schaubroeck J, Work Stress and Employee 
Health. Journal of Management 1991; 17; 235. DOI: 
10.1177/014920639101700202 
[25]Tennant C, Work-related stress and depressive 
disorders. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 51 
(2001) 697– 704.  
[26]Merton R, The self-fulfilling prophecy. The Antioch 
Review Vol. 8, No. 2 (Summer, 1948), pp. 193-210. 
[27]Erstad M, Empowerment and organizational change. 
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality 
Management 9/7, 1997, p.
 325-333. ISSN 0959-6119. 
 
47684770