 Modeling Supply-Chain Networks by a Multi-Agent System
Fu-Ren Lin
Department of Information
ManagementNational Sun Yat-sen
University
Kaohsiung, Taiwan 804R.O.C.frlin@mis.nsysu.edu.twGek Woo Tan
Department of BusinessAdministrationUniversity of Illinois atUrbana-ChampaignChampaign, IL 61820U.S.A.g-tan@uiuc.eduMichael J. ShawDepartment of BusinessAdministrationUniversity of Illinois atUrbana-ChampaignChampaign, IL 61820U.S.A.m-shaw2@uiuc.eduAbstract
This article proposes a multi-agent information
system (MAIS) approach to model the order fulfillment

process (OFP) in supply chain networks (SCNs).  An

order fulfillment process starts with receiving orders

from customers and ends with delivery of the finished

goods.  As manufacturing practice is shifting toward

the out-sourcing paradigm, the OFP is more likely to be

executed throughout SCNs.  It becomes imperative to

integrate the OFP into SCNs to improve the OFP.  The

proposed multi-agent information system (MAIS)

approach is used for modeling  the OFP in SCNs, and

evaluating OFP performance by applying the proposed

strategies.  The objective of reengineering the OFP is to

achieve agility of the process in terms of efficiency,

flexibility, robustness and adaptability.  A multi-agent

simulation platform, called Swarm, is enhanced and

applied for modeling the MAIS, and experiments are

conducted to simulate the OFP in SCNs in a multi-agent

environment.  Based on the Swarm simulation platform,

we model the OFP in SCNs, simulate the OFP, and then

evaluate the potential OFP improvement strategies to

identify useful strategies for improving the OFP.  The

results shed lights on identifying the main effects of

various strategies on OFP performance.  The insights

of utilizing various strategies in different SCNs help

redesign the OFP in SCNs.
1. IntroductionAn enterprise is a composition of business entities,
and its main purpose is to deliver value-added goods or
services to its customers.  Products delivered by a
manufacturing enterprise are physical goods while

products delivered by a service enterprise are services.

Despite this distinction,  an enterprise is composed of

several core business processes.  Each business process

calls for the cooperation and coordination of different

functional entities within the enterprise or outside the

enterprise to achieve the goals of the process.  A

business process is a structured, measured set of

activities designed to produce a specified output for a

particular customer or market ([7], pp. 5).  The number

of major processes is between 10 and 20 in some leading

companies, such as IBM, Xerox and British Telecom ([7],

p.28-29).  In general, an enterprise supported by the

three core business processes: (1) the product

development process, (2) the order fulfillment process,

and (3) the customer service process.
In order to remain agile, business processes of an
enterprise should be monitored and modified efficiently

and effectively.  So that an enterprise can stay

competitive under a constantly changing business

environment.  The efforts denoted as 
business process
reengineering (BPR) are aimed at fundamentally
rethinking and radically redesign business processes in

order to achieve dramatic improvements in critical,

contemporary measures of performance, such as cost,

quality, service, and speed ([9], pp. 32).  The BPR

success lies in the CEO support, and effective methods

for process redesign.  Information technology (IT) plays

a critical role in the BPR efforts.  IT enables the process

reengineering by allowing process owners to envision the

resulting processes prior to the process implementation.

IT itself also erects the infrastructure for business process

implementation.  Therefore, methods for modeling and
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE 3evaluating business processes are necessary for
envisioning the resulting process and crucial for deriving

useful strategies to improve processes.
This research focuses on reengineering 
the order
fulfillment process,
 one of the core business processes,
by using a multi-agent information system (MAIS)

approach.  The MAIS serves two purposes: (1) to model

the OFP in SCNs, and (2) to evaluate OFP performance

by applying the proposed strategies.  The objective of

reengineering the OFP is to achieve 
agility
 of the process
in terms of efficiency, flexibility, robustness and

adaptability.  A multi-agent simulation platform, called

Swarm
, is enhanced and applied for modeling the MAIS,
experiments are conducted to simulate the OFP in SCNs,

and various OFP improvement strategies are evaluated in

a multi-agent business environment.  The following

sections are used for illustrating these efforts and results.
2. The Order Fulfillment Process (OFP)
An order fulfillment process
 (OFP) starts with
receiving orders from the customers and ends with

having the finished goods delivered.  The 
order
fulfillment cycle time
 is defined as the period from order
receiving to products delivery.  The OFP is complex

because it is composed of several activities, executed by

different functional entities, and is heavily interdependent

between tasks, resources and agents involved in the

process.  This process involves the coordination of

diverse activities such as sales commitment, credit

checking, manufacturing, logistics, accounts receivable,

and relationships with external suppliers for purchasing

or shipping, which normally take place in several

different business units ([7], 1993).  The main activities

of the OFP can be summarized as follows:

1. order management which receives orders from
customers and commits order requests,
2. manufacturing, which includes production scheduling,
material planning, capacity planning and shop floor

control, and
3. distribution, which considers the logistics such as
inventory, transportation, etc.
The main objectives of the OFP can be generalized
into two dimensions [6][8][14]:

1. delivering qualified products to fulfill customer orders
at the right time and right place, and
2. achieving 
agility
 to handle uncertainties from internal
or external environments.
Agility can be defined as the ability to thrive in a

competitive environment of continually and
unpredictably changing market opportunities ([8], p.8).
Agility can be expressed as having four underlying

principles: delivering value to the customer, cooperating

to enhance competitiveness, organizing to master change

and uncertainty, and leveraging the impact of people and

information ([8], p.73-75; [4]).  In business process

redesign, the ﬁagilityﬂ can be measured in the following

dimensions:

1. efficiency
, defined as the cycle time reduction of
business processes.
2. flexibility
, defined as the minimization of costs
involved in dealing with changes in the process.
3. robustness
, defined as the strength of the
information system to handle uncertainty in the

process.
4. adaptability, defined as the self-learning ability of
the information system such that the performance of

the business process can be improved

incrementally.
3. Integrating the Supply Chain Network
with the OFP
The efforts of reengineering the OFP should be spent
on improving the process throughout the whole supply

chain network because (1) manufacturing practice is

shifting to the out-sourcing paradigm, (2) activities of the

OFP are executed inside a SCN, and (3) the variation of

the OFP determines the SCN structure.  A supply chain

network (SCN) is a network of autonomous or semi-

autonomous business entities that are involved, through

upstream and downstream linkages, in the different

processes and activities that produce physical goods or

services to customers [1][11][12][18].  A SCN can be

viewed from different perspectives:
1. From the material flow perspective
:  A SCN is a
network
 which links business entities together
through various activities.  A business entity can

be a factory transforming materials into products (or

semi-products), a distributor delivering products to

the downstream demanders with or without

assembly capacity, a retailer selling products to end

users, or a warehouse storing materials.  The

activities within the network, including procurement,

manufacturing, and distribution, aim to facilitate the

flow of products to customers.
2. From the roles of entities perspective
:  The tasks
of each entity are to facilitate the movement of

materials from upstream to downstream and, in turn,

deliver products to customers.  This refers to the
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE 4relative roles
 of entities.  A manufacturer is a
supplier to its downstream manufacturers and

distributors, and at the same time, this manufacturer

is also a demander of materials from its upstream

suppliers.
3. From the organizational boundary perspective
:A business entity is a participant of the network, and

it can be represented in different degrees of

abstraction according to the 
organizational
boundary
.  This contributes the 
multiple layer
abstraction
 of a SCN as shown in Figure 1.  This
multiple layer abstraction is substantiated by the

organizational boundary.  Business processes are

executed through the 
interactions
 among the
business entities of a SCN.  Business processes, in

essence, cross organizational boundaries, cooperate

different functional units, and exhibit the

interdependencies among entities.
4. From the network visibility perspective
:Business entities in a SCN are linked by

information
 and 
material linkages, or either of them,
where the relationship between entities can be

identified.  The information, e.g., data or control,

is used to facilitate the flow of materials.  Through

the information transfer between entities, an entity

can have better understanding about the

environment, and in turn, make more feasible

decisions.  The information transfer between

entities also enlarges the 
visibility
 of the SCN.
Due to the various degrees of visibility of a SCN,

there exists different degree of network

transparency of the network structure.
Manufacturer
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Assembler
Distributor
Distributor
Retailer
Retailer
Retailer
Supplier
Supplier
Assembler
Distributor
Business Entity
Inventory Stockpile
Material Flow
Legend:
Circle A
Circle B
Figure 1. The multiple layer abstraction of a SCN
As described in Section 2, the OFP consists of order
management, manufacturing, and distribution activities

which are executed within a SCN.  Figure 2 displays the

order fulfillment process within a supply chain network.

The information components, including order

management, production scheduling, capacity planning,

material planning, and production control, take charge of
the fulfillment of orders.  The order information is
passed to the order management unit from various

downstream business entities (e.g., end users, retailers, or

distributors,) depending on the information infrastructure.

The information about materials and capacity of

upstream business entities is fed in from the first tier

supplier or the beyond the first tier suppliers.  The

functional units in the circle of Figure 2 can be embedded

in one business entity (e.g., a factory) for the local

manufacturing processes, or they can be implemented to

control several entities.  The former structure is more

distributed planning and control, as the latter one is more

centralized planning and control.
Manufacturer
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Assembler
Distributor
Distributor
Retailer
Retailer
Retailer
Production
Control
Capacity
Planning
Production
Scheduling
Order
Management
Material
Planning
Legend: 
Business
Entity
Functional
Unit
Inventory
Stockpile
Material
Flow
Information
Flow
Figure 2. The order fulfillment process within a
supply chain network
Issues in improving the OFP within SCNs include
(1) how to manage the order information propagation in

order to improve the OFP, (2)
 how to reduce the
variability of the OFP within the SCN environment, (3)

how to synchronize the availability of materials for

manufacturing, (4)
 how to identify the critical resources
and layout the critical path of the network, and put the

efforts on the reduction of workload of critical resources,

and (5) how to and then change the structure of the

network.
4. Multi-Agent Information System
Approach (MAIS)
  Based on various designs for a multi-agent
system in the literature [2][3][5][15][20], and

considering the application domain and implementation

possibility, we design a multi-agent information system

(MAIS) composed of four components: 
agents, tasks,
organizations
, and 
information infrastructure
.  The
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE 5components of the MAIS are described as follows:
1.  An agent is an active object which possesses certain
capabilities to perform tasks, and communicates

with other agents based on the organizational

structure to cooperate the accomplishment of tasks.
2.  Tasks
 are things which agents are assigned to work
on.  Depending on the structure of the agents in an

organization, tasks can be 
decomposed by an agent
and distributed to other agents, or tasks

accomplished by agents are 
composed as the global
accomplishment.
3.  Organizations
 within a MAIS is formed according
to the relations between agents.  An organization is

formed by the connection through control and

information linkages between agents.  There are

two types of control mechanisms, c
entralized 
and
decentralized controls
.  The control linkage
between agent belongs to one of the two types or

the hybrid of both mechanisms.
4.  Information infrastructure
 lays out a foundation for
communications between agents.  In MAIS, the

digital information storage, operations, and

communications technology are used for facilitating

the communications and interactions among agents.

Information is shared either by common accessible

databases or through message passing.
Table 1. The mapping of properties between the MAIS
and Swarm
Multi-Agent
Information System
Swarm Simulation System
AgentObject-oriented representation
Self-organizationNested inherent hierarchy
Autonomous agent

behavior
Individual-based modeling
Distributed and loosely
coupled control
Parallel and concurrent
processing
 Agents in the MAIS are distributed
geographically, are autonomous but interdependent in

their task environments, are embedded with self-

organization capability, and are adaptive to changes in

their environment.  A simulation system should be able

to model these features in an efficient and effective way,

so that the interaction between agents can be represented,

and the system dynamics can be identified. Swarm is a

multi-agent simulation software platform for the study of

complex adaptive systems.  A prototype of the Swarm

simulation system was developed at the Santa Fe Institute

and aimed to provide a general purpose simulation tool

for building simulation models [10][19].  Table 1

describes the mapping of properties between the MAIS

and Swarm.  The mutli-agent information system
utilizing the Swarm simulation platform has been used
for enterprise integration modeling [13], and illustrating

electronic virtual organization management [16][17].
5. Modeling the OFP in SCNs
In this research, a MAIS behaves dual roles in the
context of reengineering the OFP in SCNs.  The MAIS

acts as a 
modeling tool
 to represent the business entities
as agents and the involved information and material

flows for the OFP in SCNs.  The MAIS also acts as a

testbed
 for evaluating proposed strategies in improving
the OFP in SCNs.  The OFP consists of two types of

movements: 
material flow
 and 
information flow
.  We
design two kinds of agents in this environment:
 physical
agents
 and 
logical agents
. A physical agent represents a
physical existing objects, such as a corporate, factory,

production line, machine, etc.  A logical agent

represents a logical existing object with certain function,

such as MRP system, order entry system, production

control system, etc.  The main distinction between

physical and logical agents lies in that a logical agent is

more active than a physical agent.  The MAIS model for

the OFP in a SCN utilizes physical and logical agents,

and the corresponding material and information flows are

shown in Figure 3.
Order Entry 
System 
Production 
Scheduling
System 
Material

Requirement

Planning 
Supply

Chain

Management 
Inventory
Management  
Shop

Floor
control  
Suppliers 
Warehouses 
Distribution Canters 
Customers  
Manufacturing Systems 
Capacity
Requirement 

Planning  
Physical 
Agent 
Functional 
Agent 
Physical 

Flow 
Information 

Flow  
Legend:
Figure 3. The MAIS utilizing physical and logical agent
representation for the OFP
The Swarm simulation platform is suitable for
modeling supply chain networks based on the following

analysis on their properties (summarized in Table 2).  A

supply chain network is composed of several autonomous

or semi-autonomous business entities which can be

viewed as a swarm of agents.  Each business entity has

its capability and capacity and can be assigned to, or take

certain types of tasks, according to its organizational
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE 6roles in the SCN.  These capability, capacity, and
organizational roles can be modeled by individual-based

models.  The SCN can be decomposed according to the

multiple layer abstraction, which can be modeled by

Swarm's nested inherent hierarchy property.  The

material flow is controlled by business entities within the

SCN.  These business entities can be represented as

physical agents, while logical agents are used for

controlling actions for material movement.  These

operational and control actions can be simulated by

Swarm's hybrid scheduling capability (i.e., discrete event

and time-stepped scheduling).  SCN visibility depends

on the boundary of information sharing which is an

analogy to the boundaries of message passing in Swarm.

In a SCN, the processes of each individual entity

contribute to the global performance of the SCN, while in

Swarm, the combination of individual behaviors

determine the collective performance of the whole group.

We enhanced the Swarm functions and customized it to

model the OFP in SCNs.
Table 2. The mapping of properties between SCNs and
Swarm
Supply Chain Networks
Swarm Simulation System
Composition of

autonomous and semi-

autonomous business

entitiesA swarm of agents with
individual based modeling
Business entities act

different organizational

roles.
Agents are constructed with
internal state variables and

action functions.
Multiple layer abstractionNested inherent hierarchy
Information flow between

business entities
Message passing between
agents
Material flow during

procurement,

manufacturing, and

distribution activities
Discrete event simulation
and time-stepped scheduling

to trigger agent actions
In a SCN, the processes of

individual entities

contribute to the global

SCN performance.
In Swarm, the combination
of individual behaviors

determines the collective

group behavior.
The visibility of a SCN is

determined by the

information boundary.
The boundaries of message
passing determine the

visibility.
Figure 4 shows the resulting system developed to
model the OFP in SCNs based on the Swarm. The

topmost Swarm, 
OFP Batch Swarm
, is designed to
control the whole simulation.  It creates two swarms, the

OFP Model Swarm
 and the 
Statistics Swarm
, createsactions, and then activates the simulation process.  The

OFP Model Swarm is composed of an array of 
SCN
Entities
 created while building objects.  The SCN
configuration with each entity's properties and product
information are fed in during the entities creation.  The

OFP model actions are composed of each SCN entity's

action, and then activate them when the OFP Model

Swarm is activated.  A SCN entity is composed of

several agents, such as an order management agent, an

inventory management agent, a SCN management agent,

and so forth.  In addition to having an order

management agent, an inventory management agent, and

a SCN management agent, an entity with manufacturing

capability includes a production planning agent, a

capacity planning agent, a material planning agent, a

shopfloor control agent, and manufacturing systems.  A

SCN Entity Swarm holds entity level information such as

suppliers, customers, order transfer delay time, and

product delivery time, which are accessible by internal

agents and other entities.  The encapsulated agents

perform certain functions in enabling the movement of

information and material within the entity and between

entities.  
The OFP Statistic Swarm
 is used to compute
the statistics data gathered through the simulation for

analysis purposes.
The functions of agents are described as follows:
Order management agent
 -- It processes orders
coming from outside entities or other agents inside

the entity.  Tasks include estimating due dates,

checking inventory availability, and forwarding

orders to upstream suppliers if needed.  It obtains

orders from the SCN Swarm, and queries inventory

availability through the inventory management

agent.  If the entity has manufacturing capability,

the estimation of due dates also queries product

availability through the production planning agent

and the shop floor control agent.
Inventory management agent
 -- It handles the
inventory related tasks, such as keeping track of

inventory records, determining the reordering point,

and responding to the inventory availability queries

from other agents, such as order management,

material planning, and shop floor control agents.
Production planning agent
 -- It takes the orders
from the order management agent, and then,

according to the product due dates, capacity and

material availability, generates build plans under

different planning horizons.  The build plan will be

used by the material planning and the shop floor

control agents to execute the production process.
Capacity planning agent
 -- It keeps track of the
capacity consumption of manufacturing systems,

and provides capacity availability information for

the production planning agent in production
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE 7planning.
Material planning agent
 -- It has two main roles:
one to plan the required materials for the

manufacturing process, including the allocation of

parts from inventory, or the purchase of materials

from suppliers; the other is to provide material

availability information for the production planning

agent to generate build plans.
Shopfloor control agent
 -- It dispatches parts from
inventory to the manufacturing systems according to

the work order derived from build plans.  It also

provides capacity utilization information for other

agents.
Manufacturing agent
 -- It executes the
manufacturing processes by inputing the

components and utilizing capacity.
SCN management agent
 -- It chooses suppliers for
the entities in acquiring components for

manufacturing or end products for distribution.
OFP Batch Swarm
(a Swarm)
OFP Model Swarm
(a Swarm)
OFP Statistics Swarm
(a Swarm)
Production Planning Agent
SCN Management Agent
Manufacturing Agent
Material Planning Agent
Order Management Agent
Shopfloor Control Agent
Inventory Management Agent
Capacity Planning Agent
Figure 4. The implementation of Swarm in modeling
supply chain networks
The following scenario describes the interactions
among these agents, and Figure 5 summarizes them.

For  example, an entity 
ScnESwarm A
 receives an order
from its customer 
ScnESwarm C
.  The order flows to
the order management agent (
OrdM).  According to the
customer lead times, the inventory availability

information (from 
InvM), the production plan (from
PrdP
), and the manufacturing capacity (from 
CapP
), the
order management agent assigns a due date to the order.

If the products are in stock, the order is fulfilled by

shipping the products from inventory.  If the products

are in receiving, the due date is set according to the

delivery delay of the products.  For an entity with

manufacturing capability, the order is forwarded to the
production planning agent (
PrdP
) where the schedule for
making the products is planned.  The capacity planning

agent (
CapP
) and the material planning agent (
MatP
) arepartner agents in generating achievable build plans.

The material planning agent obtains build plans from the

production planning agent to allocate materials for

manufacturing.  It also contributes information about

material availability to production planning for

scheduling.  The capacity planning agent (
capP) plans
the capacity by taking the build plan from 
PrdP
 and
sends capacity usage information to 
PrdP
 for scheduling
the build plan.  The SCN management agent (
ScnM)takes the order information to choose suppliers in

allocating material sources.  The outgoing orders are

transferred through its SCN Entity (
ScnESwarm A
) to be
transferred to other entities (i.e. 
ScnESwarm B
). The
above describes the 
information flow
 within an entity.
If the entity is a distribution center or a retailer
without manufacturing capability the ordered products

are delivered from suppliers as end products to ship to its

customers.   For an entity with manufacturing

capability, the ordered end products are supplied from

the shop floor (
ManuS
) to its customers.  The input
materials are components for the end products.  This

represents the 
material flow
 within an entity.  The
interaction of these agents enables the flows of materials

and information within an entity, and through SCN Entity

Swarm (
ScnESwarm
), the information and material flow
across the supply chain network.
ScnESwarm B
ScnESwarm A
ScnESwarm C
outgoing orders
outgoing 
orders
incoming orders
material
allocation
material
allocation
inventory
availability
work
orders
capacity
availability
inventory
availability
mfgorders
inventory
availability
dispatched
orders
capacity
utilization
outgoing products
incoming materials
Scn MOrdM
MatP
PrdP
InvM
ShopCManuS
CapP
Figure 5. The scenario of OFP within an entity
6. Evaluating OFP Improvement Strategies
 In order to achieve OFP agility, the efforts should be
spent on problems involved with the issues in improving

the OFP in SCNs.  The proposed strategies for

improving the OFP in SCNs are based on the dimensions

of managing supply chain networks, such as the

operations, structures, information infrastructure of the

supply chain network, and the other supporting business

processes.  Experiments are performed by modeling the
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE 8OFP in SCNs based on the Swarm simulation system.
The strategies we evaluated include
(1)  Coordinating demand management policies
 -- The
strategy of coordinating demand management

policies among entities across the network is

aimed at satisfying customer demand with low

inventory costs.  Because inconsistent demand

management policies will cause material shortages

or overflow, coordination of demand management

policies is key in resolving this problem.  In the

design of the simulation platform, four demand

management policies are embedded within each

entity, that is, 
Make-To-Order (MTO), 
Assembly-
To-Order
 (ATO), 
Make-To-Stock (MTS), and
Build-To-Forecast 
(BTF).  For entities with
manufacturing capability, these policies trigger

their manufacturing processes.  For entities

without manufacturing capability, these policies

describe different events for re-ordering products.

Depending on the number of tiers in the SCN

being modeled, various demand management

policies are applied to different tiers, and OFP

performance is evaluated using the performance

measures from above.  The effects of

coordinating demand management policies can be

simulated through various combinations of

different policies across the network.
(2)  Information sharing strategies
 -- The strategy of
sharing information between business entities

considers three issues: 
the information contents,
the depth of information penetration
 (the number
of tiers for which information is accessible), and

the information acquisition direction
 (upward or
downward sharing).  In the design of the

simulation platform, the information acquired by

downstream entities are mainly material and

capacity availability information from their

suppliers.  The information acquired by an

upstream entity is information about customer

demand and orders.  The depth of information

penetration can be specified in various degrees,

e.g., isolated, upward one tier, upward two tiers,

downward one tier, downward two tiers, and so

forth.  The obtained capacity and material

information from suppliers is used to estimate the

due dates of incoming orders, which are the basis

for generating  build plans or re-ordering

schedules.  The obtained customer demand

information is used to estimate the demand for the

next period, so that the production or re-ordering

schedules can adapt to external demand.
(3)  Synchronizing material and capacity availability
 -This strategy is aimed at enabling the production
planner to generate more achievable build plans

by considering both material and capacity

availability.  A build plan cannot be executed if

either capacity or material is unavailable.  The

material and capacity information shared by the

production planner can improve the accuracy of

build plans.  The effects of the synchronization

can be evaluated by the Swarm simulation

platform.
(4)  Dynamic material allocation 
-- This strategy is
aimed at maintaining a SCN's robustness while

facing uncertainties, such as demand and supply

fluctuations, and production process interruption.

The application of this strategy can be evaluated

using the Swarm simulation platform.
(5)  The combination of various strategies
 Œ This
approach is to combine the usage of the above

strategies.  The evaluation aims at finding the

joint effects of different strategies.
 These strategies were evaluated under a generic and
three specific supply chain networks with various

demand management policy combinations, different lead

times, and uncertainties.  The performance of the order

fulfillment process is measured by
 the order cycle time,
the order fulfillment rate, the inventory cost, and

tardiness on committed due dates and customer expected

lead times
.  The efforts are spent to understand
interactions between various demand management policy

combinations, to understand the main improvements from

various OFP improvement strategies, and to obtain the

trends of OFP improvement using different strategies

under different circumstances.  We describe the

evaluation results as follows.
 The OFP performance using different combinations of
demand management policies can be generalized as the

following patterns for applying combinations of policies

to SCNs:
The cycle time is a tradeoff with inventory cost
.Entities applying MTS or ATO result in shorter order

fulfillment cycle times, however, their inventory costs

are higher than other policies.  Due to the shorter

cycle time, they create less order fulfillment tardiness

problem both measured in committed due dates and

customer expected lead time.
The better policy combinations are those that use a
MTO policy at downstream tiers, and use MTS or

ATO policies at upstream tiers.  The distinct results

are shown in the extremely opposite combinations,

BTF-MTS-ATO-MTO vs. MTO-ATO-MTS-BTF.
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE 9The variation of lead times among very short, short,
and long does not change the relative performance of

different policy combinations.  Therefore, the

coordination of different policies is applicable to

various lead times.
The variation of demand patterns between even and
uneven does not change the relative performance of

different policy combinations.
One unexpected result is that the BTF policy does not
contribute significant improvement.  The reason may

be twofold: one reason could be that the forecasting

method does not accurately forecast demand from

previous demand patterns; the other could be the

period of forecasting is too short for entities to prepare,

so that it works more like a MTO policy.
The trends of information sharing strategies on
improving OFP performance are described as follows:

The main effects of upward information acquisition

include: (1) increasing the order fulfillment rate for those

policy combinations having low throughput at

downstream tiers, (2) significantly reducing inventory

cost at an assembly tier for those entities using make-to-

stock or assembly-to-order policies, and (3) significantly

reducing tardiness at upstream tiers and downstream tiers.

So that the main effects of upward information sharing

are on reducing the inventory cost and tardiness, and

increasing the order fulfillment rate.  The main effects

of downward information acquisition include: (1) trading

the cycle time with the inventory cost at those policy

combinations having the short order cycle time, and (2)

significantly reducing the inventory cost at an assembly

tier whose entities use an assembly-to-order demand

management policy.  These results support that

downward information sharing substitutes information

for inventory.  The results of bi-directional information

sharing show that the order cycle time is mainly affected

by the downward information sharing strategy.  This

support that the degree of OFP improvement is more

heavily affected by the accuracy of demand information

from customers than that of the material availability

information from suppliers.  However, for the other

performance measures, both upward and downward

information sharing strategies equally contribute to the

performance improvement, which results in the greater

improvement than when only either one is applied.  This

enhancement supports that the degree of OFP

improvement by a bi-directional information sharing is

more significantly than that by a single direction.  The

marginal improvements of multiple tiers of information

sharing against single tier information sharing are mainly

on inventory cost reduction and due date commitment.

For other measures, there are no significant
improvements.  Therefore, the marginal improvement of
using multiple tier information sharing is evaluated by

how critical the inventory and tardiness reduction

compared with the information cost increased by the

multiple tier information sharing.
Based on the results we found that by synchronizing
the material and capacity availability, the improvement is

not only on one single entity, but also improve the OFP

across a SCN.  The main effects of this strategy are

shown on the inventory reduction for those

manufacturing entities, and on the tardiness reduction for

the downstream customers.  In general, the strategy for

synchronizing capacity and material availability is an

effective strategy in meeting customer demand with less

inventory and tardiness.
Generally, from experiments on the dynamic material
allocation strategy, we can conclude the following

common trends of its effects: (1) the dynamic material

allocation strategy is an effective approach to reduce

OFP vulnerability under supply uncertainties, and to

improve OFP robustness under demand uncertainties,

and (2) the effectiveness of dynamic material allocation

strategy is highly influenced by the information transfer

efficiency.  With efficient information exchange, the

order cycle time and order fulfillment rate are improved

with less tardiness compared with material allocation

from stable suppliers.  However, with inefficient

information exchange, the OFP cycle time and tardiness

may increase although the fulfillment rate can increase on

those good policy combinations.
The results of OFP improvement by combining the
synchronization with information sharing strategies show

the synergy of the two strategies.  By combining the

demand or supply information from external entities in

production planning, the order fulfillment rate at

downstream entities, such as distribution centers and

retailers, increases because the manufacturing entities can

deliver goods in a timely manner.  Because of the

limitation of manufacturing capacity, the fulfillment rate

is reduced while the demand exceed the capacity, which

lengthens the order fulfillment cycle time.  Inventory

costs are reduced across tiers except at the assembly tier,

the increase of the fulfillment rate increases the inventory,

but not significantly.  Under demand uncertainties, the

joint strategy also shows its strengths to improve the OFP,

where OFP robustness is shown using this strategy.  The

analysis of the joint effects of dynamic material

allocation and synchronization of capacity and material

availability shows that such strategy significantly reduces

cycle times, inventory costs, and tardiness.
The findings from experiments are summarized as
follows:
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE :1. Information can substitute for inventory
.  The
information sharing strategies by querying supply

information from suppliers and demand information

from customers greatly improves the OFP in terms

of reducing inventory costs, order cycle time and

tardiness, and increasing the order fulfillment rate.

Demand information is more critical than supply

information because an accurate demand estimation

facilitates the usage of supply information.  The

bi-directional information sharing by sharing supply

and demand information can further improve the

OFP than uni-directional information sharing by

sharing either supply or demand information.  The

deeper the information is penetrated the better the

OFP is improved, especially at inventory and

tardiness reductions.  The information sharing

strategies can improve the OFP under various lead

times and uncertainties.  In general, information

substitutes for inventory in eliminating the

variability of a SCN and improving the OFP's

robustness.
2. Information infrastructure is critical for OFP
improvement
.  The coordination among agents
within an entity or among entities in a SCN relies on

efficient information transfer.  For example, the

OFP is not improved by using the dynamic material

allocation strategy without efficient information

transmission.  Because this strategy requires

several iterations of information exchange between

entities, it actually delays the OFP when the

information transmission speed is below or equal to

the speed of order or material transportation.
3. Different strategies have their marginal
improvement in different SCNs with different
policies
.  From the experiments on evaluating
various strategies in a generic supply chain network,

we found that OFP improvement varies under

different demand management policy combinations

using various strategies.  However, there are some

trends can be generalized to understand the effects

of OFP improvement strategies on different SCNs:

A. Supply information is important for an entity
in a SCN when end products are assembled by

many components from different suppliers.

Therefore, an upward information sharing

strategy is applicable.
B. Demand information is critical for an entity in
SCN when it faces a constantly changing

markets and high customization pressure.

Therefore, a downward information sharing

strategy is applicable.
C. The synchronization strategy to coordinate
material arrival and capacity allocation is
beneficial when products are made by many
constituent components.
D. Demand management can use the assembly-to-
order policy when information sharing or

synchronization strategies are utilized.
Through the modeling and evaluation efforts, an
enterprise can envision its OFP performance under

different strategies within various business environments.

The MAIS approach is a viable method to model the

OFP in SCNs, and the Swarm simulation platform is a

useful implementation tool.  Therefore, the proposed

strategies can be accurately evaluated before the OFP is

redesigned, and moreover, better strategies can be

derived by generalizing the evaluation results.  Such

strengths make the MAIS approach applicable to other

business process reengineering because various business

processes possess several common properties with the

OFP, such as cross organizational boundaries, task

interdependence, and various degrees of autonomy for

business entities.
7. ConclusionsIn this article, we propose the multi-agent
information system (MAIS) approach to model the order

fulfillment process (OFP) in supply chain networks

(SCNs), and evaluate strategies for improving OFP

performance.  Through the modeling and

implementation of the MAIS using Swarm, we

demonstrate that the MAIS approach is a viable method

to model the OFP in SCNs, and identify and evaluate

some strategies for improving OFP performance.  The

improvement of the OFP by various strategies with

various measures provides insights to manage the supply

chains for fulfilling orders.  Moreover, the MAIS

approach is also suitable for reengineering other business

processes because business processes share several

common characteristics.
Reference
[1]  B. C. Arntzen, G.G. Brown, T.P. Harrison, and L. L.
Trafton,. ﬁGlobal Supply Chain Management at Digital

Equipment Corporationﬂ,
 Interfaces
, 25(1), January-
February, 1995, pp. 69-93.
[2]  M. Barbuceanu, and M. S. Fox, ﬁThe Architecture of an
Agent Based Infrastructure for Agile Manufacturingﬂ,  In
The IJCAI-95 Workshop on Intelligent Manufacturing.
Montreal, Canada, 1995.
[3]  Bond, A. H. and L. Gasser (Eds.), 
Readings in Distributed
Artificial Intelligence
. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.,
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE 21San Mateo, CA, 1988.
[4]  S. Brostek, ﬁElimination of Materials Requirement
Uncertainty Through a Manufacturing Systems Networkﬂ,

Manufacturing Management Symposium 1995: DSS for

Manufacturing Logistics
, Northwestern University, 1995.
[5]  Carley, K. and M. J. Prietula (Eds.), 
Computational
Organization Theory,
 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Publishers, Inc., Hillsdale, New Jersey, 1994.
[6]  Christopher, M., 
Logistics and Supply Chain Management
,Pitman Publishing, London, UK, 1992.
[7]  Davenport, T. H., 
Process Innovation: Reengineering Work
Through Information Technology
, Harvard Business School
Press, Boston, Massachusetts, 1993
[8]  Goldman, S. L., R. N. Nagel, and K. Preiss, 
AgileCompetitors and Virtual Organizations: Strategies for

Enriching the Customer
, Van Nostrad Reinhold, New York,
NY, 1995
[9]  Hammer, M., and J. Champy, 
Reengineering the
Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution
, Harper
Business, New York, 1993.
[10]  D. Hiebeler, ﬁThe Swarm Simulation System and
Individual-Based Modelingﬂ, In 
Proceedings of Decision
Support 2001: Advanced Technology for Natural Resource

Management
, Toronto, 1994.
[11]  H. L. Lee, and C. Billington, ﬁMaterial Management in
Decentralized S
upply Chainsﬂ, 
Operations Research
, 41(5),
1993, pp. 835-847.
[12]  H. L. Lee, and C. Billington, ﬁThe Evolution of Supply-
Chain-Management Models and Practice at Hewlett-

Packardﬂ, 
Interfaces
, 25(5), 1995, September-October, pp.
42-63.
[13]  F. Lin, G. Tan, and M. J. Shaw, ﬁMulti-agent enterprise
modelingﬂ, submitted to
 Journal of Organizational
Computing and Electronic Commerce
, 1996.[14]  D. M. McCutcheon, A. S. Raturi, and J. R. Meredith, ﬁThe
Customization-Responsiveness Squ
eezeﬂ, 
SloanManagement Review
, 1994 Winter, pp.89-98.
[15]  M. J. Shaw, B. Harrow, and S. Herman, ﬁDistributed
Artificial Intelligence for Multi-agent Problem Solving and

Group Learningﬂ,  
Proceedings of the 
24h Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences
, 4, IEEE,1991, pp. 3-26.
[16]  T. J. Strader, F. Lin, and M. J. Shaw, ﬁInformation
Infrastructure for Electronic Virtual Organization

Managementﬂ, accepted by 
Decision Support Systems
 --
Special Issue on Intranets
, 1997.[17]  T. J. Strader, F. Lin, and M. J. Shaw, ﬁInformation
Infrastructure for Supply Chain Managementﬂ, submitted to

Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic

Commerce
, 1996.[18]  J. M. Swaminathan, S. F. Smith, and N. M. Sadeh,
ﬁModeling the Dynamics of Supply Chainsﬂ, 
Technical
Report of The Robertics Institute
, Carnegie Mellon
Unversity, 1994
[19]  Santa Fe Institute, 
Swarm Web Page
.http://www.santafe.edi/project/swarm/, 
1996.[20]  Wooldridge, M. J. and N. R. Jennings (Eds.), 
Intelligent
Agents: ECAI-94 Workshop on Agent Theories,

Architectures, and Languages
. Springler-Verlag, Berlin
Heidelberg, Germany, 1995.
1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE1060-3425/98 $10.00 (c) 1998 IEEE