 A Conceptual Framework of Transactive Networks System 
Sheng-cheng Lin 
Department of Information 
Management 
Tunghai University 
sclin@thu.edu.tw 
Yu-Min Wang 
Department of Information 
Management 
National Chi Nan University 
ymwang@ncnu.edu.tw
Daniel Y. Shee 
Department of Information 
Management 
National Changhua University 
of Education 
dyshee@cc.ncue.edu.tw 
Abstract 
A virtual organization is a temporary network 
of companies, which implies the potential 
opportunity to learn and share abundant sources 
of complementary and compatible knowledge 
possessed by members.  Learning in a virtual 

organization is the key to achieve agility of a 

virtual organization; however, few studies are 

focused on this dimension.  Therefore, this 

research attempts to bring insights of learning in a 
virtual organization by developing a framework of 

transactive networks system including five 

software components as matchmaking manager, 

skills-based manager, contribution manager, 

context manager, and social network manager.  

With the proposed multiagent-based system, this 
study illustrates how it can be of help to connect 
both knowledge requesters and appropriate 

knowledge contributors to augment and retain the 

social networks in fostering virtual organizational 

learning. The contributions of this research can be 

viewed in two dimensions: knowledge 

management technologies, and knowledge sharing 

and learning in virtual organizations.  
1. Introduction 
Virtual organizations are assuming an 
increasingly prominent role against the 
background of today™s dynamic environment. With 
more and more business processes intertwined 
across organizational boundaries and more 

specialized division of labor, no one person can 
possess all the knowledge necessary to complete a 
task; furthermore, what constitutes ﬁnecessaryﬂ 

knowledge is continually changing.  For example, 
a programmer may find himself always get into 

scrapes due to the continuously evolving coding 

techniques or possessing of partial knowledge and 

virtually no control over the behavior of the 

components created by other designers in open 

environments [22].  In a virtual organization, 
members may possess both complementary and 
compatible knowledge, and thus such form of 
organizational structure can be a treasure-house 

and shed lights on the need to learn and share 

knowledge throughout the organizations involved.  

Some researchers promote learning by introducing 

ﬁvisionﬂ and ﬁvaluesﬂ into the daily lexicon and 

practice, but are criticized to be too idyllic to 

realize [15]. 
More and more studies focus on the 
employment of technologies to facilitate 

organizational learning and knowledge sharing 

(e.g., [1, 2, 16, 45]).  Most of these researches 

emphasize on the needs of the knowledge 

requester, but ignore the context of the knowledge 

contributor.  For instance, if people are ardent to 

share what he or she knows, they may have no 

idea who needs their help anxiously, whether the 

requester is trustworthy of sharing knowledge, and 

which level of expertise the requester appreciates 

to avoid the reception gap between provider and 

requester.  In addition, although culture has been 
identified the principal factor to promote 
organizational learning and knowledge sharing 

(e.g., [3, 10]), many studies emphasize the 

compensation strategies rather than the enabling 

technologies to foster such a culture.  

Furthermore, for a knowledge requester, he or she 
may wish to obtain knowledge needed as soon as 

possible, but the physical and emotional 

availability of the appropriate responders is also 

questionable.  
Steil et al. [44] formulate several strategies to 
overcome the potential barriers for learning in 
virtual organizations and conclude that the 

conversion of tacit knowledge to explicit 

knowledge is harder to accomplish than the 
conversion of tacit knowledge in one person to 

new tacit knowledge in another person or group, 

and thus specially stress the importance of the 

socialization knowledge conversion process 

identified by Nonaka [33].  Further, many studies 

also point out the socialization, face-to-face 

communications or dialogues are powerful 
vehicles to knowledge transfer or learning (e.g., 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20081530-1605/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE1 [21, 23, 28, 39]). Therefore, traditional 
codification strategies remain un-applicable here, 

even the personalization may be out at the elbows 
to deal with one-shot conversation and capture it 
to augment the organizational memory [17].  All 

questions proposed in light of the need to establish 
certain mechanisms that reinforce active learning 
and encourage knowledge sharing in virtual 

organizations.  Therefore, this research proposed 
a framework of transactive networks and managed 

to implement the model through the multiagent 

technology.
2. Literature Reviews 
2.1 Organizational Learning in Virtual 
Organizations 
An organization is composed of individuals, 
and an organization ultimately learns via its 
individual members [26].  In an organization™s 
infancy organizational learning can be considered 
as synonymous with individual learning.  Few 

organizations would doubt the importance of 

individual learning to their own survival and 

competitive advantage [3].  Duncan and Weiss 
[14] argue that an individual is the only entity in 

the organization who can learn, individuals must 

be viewed as part of a learning system for 
exchanging what is learned among individuals.  
The process of knowledge exchange is of a social 

nature, or in their terms, an extra-individual 

process, which takes place in social interaction.
Dixon views organizational members as 
having meaning structures that could be 

categorized as 
private, accessible
 and 
collective
.The private meaning structure is composed of 

those parts of organizational members™ cognitive 

maps, which they choose to withhold from other 

members.  The accessible meaning structure is 
built by an individual™s cognitive map, which he 
or she is willing to make available to others.  The 

collective meaning structure is the cognitive maps, 

which organizational members hold jointly with 

other members.  For organizational learning to 

occur, Dixon [11] points out it is not enough by 

simply encouraging organizational members to 

exchange their accessible meaning structures with 

each other; the organization must actively 

facilitate collective learning. Organizational 

learning requires individual learning, and 
individual learning has to interact in a dynamic 
social environment in order to contribute 

organizational learning [40].
A virtual organization can be defined as a 
temporary network of companies that comes 
together quickly to exploit fast-changing 

opportunities [6].  The most significant 

characteristic of virtual organizations is the 

involvement of several organizations, and which 

implies the potential opportunity for 

organizational members to learn and share the 
abundant sources of diverse knowledge.  
According to Zucker [55], bureaucracies often 

lack ﬁexpertﬂ information and must therefore seek 

it externally.  An external ﬁinformation networkﬂ 

of experts can provide the firm with multiple 

evaluations of the value of its own information 
and know-how, thereby increasing its efficiency in 

searching for valuable information, screening 

information, and codifying information for 

managerial use.
Furthermore, Liebeskind et al. [31] identify 
that the use of boundary-spanning social networks 
by the two biotechnology firms increases both 
their learning and their flexibility in ways that 

would not be possible within a self-contained 
hierarchical organization, and concluded 

organizations whose employees are members of a 

social network would learn more efficiently than 

organizations whose employees are not members 

of a social network.  They also argue social 
network exchanges make two important 

contributions to organizational learning: extending 

the scope of organizational learning and 
integration of knowledge at firms.  The 
contention is similar to Pedler et al.™s [35] work, 

who notes that a characteristic of a learning 

organization is that it extends its learning culture 

to include customers, suppliers and other 

significant stakeholders. In addition, due to the 

temporary collaboration feature of most virtual 

organizations and thus permit the swift trust to 

generate between members, it may offer the 

greater opportunities to augment the social 

networks.
The other significant difference of learning in 
virtual organizations is the geographical disperse 

of members, which mostly relies on information 

communication technologies.  Steil et al. [44] 

designate several strategies for creating and 

disseminating tacit knowledge in virtual 

organizations and stress the importance to prompt 
ongoing discussions/questions. Ongoing 
discussions in digital format are also essential for 

helping the creation and dissemination of tacit 

knowledge. The greater the flux of communication 

among organizational members, the faster the rate 
of creation and dissemination of tacit knowledge 
in virtual organizations.  Schein [39] suggests 

that learning in groups takes place through 

conversation.  Several studies also indicate 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20082 mental models and tacit elements of expertise are 
always unconsciously or consciously externalized 

in one™s communication style, especially in 
storytelling situations [5].   
2.2 Transactive Memory 
We may review the role of memory first.  
Argyris and Schon [4] argue that memory is 
necessary to organizational learning.  The role of 
memory is interconnected with learning [8].  
What we already have in our memory affects what 

we will learn and what we have learned 

contributes to our memory.  Organizational 

memory is an instance of collective memory, 
which relies on knowledge that is spatially 
distributed throughout the processes, individuals, 

and artifacts of the organization and beyond its 

boundaries [45].  Organizational memory is vital 

for the organization™s effectiveness and learning 

[14].  Walsh and Ungson [51] assert that 

organizational memory can be structured into six 
retention bins: 
individuals, culture, 
transformations, structures, ecology
, and 
external 
archives
.  Hackbarth and Grover [16] further 
introduce a new bin, the 
information bin
, to denote 
rich data stored in formal information systems.
There are five mnemonic functions, 
acquisition, retention, maintenance, search, 
and
retrieval,
 to manipulate the organizational memory.  
Acquisition gathers the data, information, and 
knowledge from all available sources; retention is 

the locations that composes the structure of 

memory; memories must be maintained to make 

accessible by the way such as to decide how and 

when to update or delete files; the search function 

seeks more information, which updates, corrects, 

or adds to the organizational base; retrieval is the 
process which organizational memory can be 
called forth to support decision-making and 

problem solving [16, 45, 51]. 
Wegner [52] developed a concept of 
transactive memory
 for describing how people in 
close relationships share cognition, which means a 

shared system for encoding, storing, and retrieving 

information.  For example, a husband may not 

know where to find candles around the house, but 

may still be able to find them in a blackout by 

asking his wife where the candles are.  Each 

member can enjoy the benefits of the partner™s 
memory by assuming responsibility for 
remembering just those items that fall clearly to 

him or her and then by attending the categories of 

knowledge encoded by the partner so that items 

within those categories can be retrieved from the 

partner when they are needed.  Wegner [52] 
argues transactive memory systems have two 
major components: (1) the individual memories of 

the members and (2) the transactive processes that 

construct and use these individual memories in 

order to provide the group access to a larger pool 

of knowledge collectively.  He later used the 
metaphor of a directory-sharing computer network 
to describe the three key processes of a transactive 

memory system [53]. 

(1)Directory updating
: whereby people learn 
what others are likely to know, 
(2)Information allocation
: where new 
information is communicated to the person whose 

expertise will facilitate its storage, 

(3)Retrieval coordination
: which is a plan for 
retrieving needed information on any topic based 
on knowledge of the relative expertise of the 

individuals in the memory system.  
The concept of transactive memory that links 
individual memories to form a larger knowledge 

pool and the notion of directory and retrieval 

coordination may help us to portray the learning 

systems and knowledge sharing networks in 

virtual organizations.  
3. Transactive Networks System
With the continually changing ﬁnecessaryﬂ 
knowledge and the infeasibility to possess all the 
knowledge necessary to complete a task, 
especially the intertwined business processes 
across many organizations involved in a virtual 

organization, people will always be reminded with 

the needs to source requested knowledge from 

other™s accessible memories.  Attribute to the 
popular open systems and web-based technologies, 
information may flows up, down, around, and 
sideways easily, and people are no more isolated 

from information islands constrained by their 

working environments as in the past and capable 

of reaching others with ease.  All they lack 

mostly is an enabling mechanism to bridge both 
knowledge requesters and appropriate knowledge 
contributors. 
For organizational learning to occur, there are 
still more to do beyond the matchmaking function.  

Since individual learning has to interact in a 
dynamic social environment in order to contribute 
organizational learning, attempts to increase the 

flux of dialogue should be also highlighted.  

Each members in a virtual organization can be 

instilled the desire to learn, the willingness to 

broaden accessible individual memory, the 

possibility of smoothening communication 

processes especially when they are talking to 

strangers, and therefore contributes to increase the 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20083 flux of dialogue between them.  Besides, due to 
the temporary operation feature of virtual 

organizations, links to members in seceded 
organizations should be retained to augment the 
social networks.   
This study designates five software 
components as 
matchmaking manager
,skills-based manager
,contribution manager
,context manager
, and 
social network manager
 to 
facilitate these mechanisms accordingly as shown 
in Figure 1.  They are actualized by the 

multiagent technology. 
The agent metaphor can be thought as 
software objects that behave autonomously, have 

abilities to reason, and suitable to act in open 
environments.  They can be designed to perform 
variously specific tasks, such as monitoring, 

notification.  Besides, they can also have 
hierarchical relationships between them to have 
information accumulated upwardly.  When 

agents interact and communicate with other agents, 

they formed the multiagent system or agent 

community [22, 50].  The interacting processes 

in multiagent systems mostly can be described as 

matchmaking processes.  Consumer agents send 

requests to a matchmaking agent, and provider 

agents evaluate them.  Provider agents advertise 

capabilities to matchmaking agents, and consumer 

agents compare those capabilities to their needs.  
Some researchers found it was easier to have 
consumer agents express their needs than to have 

provider agents summarize their capabilities [34].  
Figure 1. Five software components 
contribute to increase the flux of dialogue in 

a virtual organization 
Characteristics such as the number of potential 
participants is large; communities have a dynamic 

nature; and individuality of each member is 
preserved are specific to network communities 
that make a multiagent architecture attractive to 

use [18]. All the enabling mechanisms can be seen 
as provided to afford transactive processes, and 
the linkages of accessible individual memories of 

members in virtual organizations can be termed as 
transactive networks.
3.1 Software Components in the 
Transactive Networks System 
There are five major software components in 
the transactive networks model. Their roles and 
functions are described as follows.
3.1.1 Skills-based Manager. 
People may search 
for knowledge actively and passively.  The 
former occurs when they encounter problems in 

performing certain tasks and thus requests 

knowledge from outside passively.  The latter 

takes place when they recognize the needs to 
self-learning to fill a position capably.  To 

encourage the flux of dialogue in demand side, I 

argue there ought to be some mechanisms existed 

to infuse the needs for people to learn by 
identifying their skill gaps, and designate the 
skills-based manager based on the concept of 
skills-based management. Skills-based 
management proposed by Riehl [37] advocates a 

skill inventory application with such components 

as skills, competency ratings, position profiles, 

employee profiles and learning events.  The 

SBM application can identify an employee™s skill 

gaps, the distance between the needed skill level 

and the current skill possessed by the employee.  

It also facilitates the understanding of 

relationships between skills and business goals 
through measures, and then traces and combines 
skills into job descriptions.  The most important 

objective of SBM is to instill an individual with a 

greater responsibility for developing his or her 

valued skills by providing the information 

resources to define, measure, and achieve the 

goal.
The tasks of the skills-based manager are 
listed below: 

(1) Interacting with two repositories, as skill 

inventory and employee profiles, to obtain 
information about member™s possessed skills, 
competency rating for each skill, and compared 

with positional profiles to identify skill gaps.  

Which can be viewed as knowledge-mapping 

processes in individual level correspond to 

organizational level. 

(2)Providing the matchmaking manager with the 

competency ratings of involved skills possessed 

by the knowledge requester.  This attempt may 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20084 scatter the linking requests to other possible 
providers with comparatively higher rating than 

requesters of the involved skills, and by the way 
to prevent real experts from being flooded with 
basic questions. 

3.1.2 Contribution Manager. 
Compared with 
skills-based manager, a contribution manager 

focuses on encouraging the flux of dialogue based 

on the theory of social exchange and collaborative 
filtering concept.   
People need incentives to participate in the 
knowledge sharing process, and thus it is 

paramount to develop compensation and incentive 

systems to ensure commitment to the creation and 

dissemination of knowledge in virtual 
organizations [17, 44].  To gain insight into how 
the encouragement of knowledge sharing works, 

social exchange theory [47] may be applied [25].  
Social exchange theory suggests that there is a 
relationship between a person™s affect and his 

commitment to the relationship.  According to 

social exchange theory, workers will actively 

contribute and participate in a community if the 

level of satisfaction with the processes within such 

a community, as perceived by them, is high.  

Tiwana and Bush [48] further identify three 

possible reasons that could underlie the motivation 

and commitment of community members to their 

communities: 
(1)Anticipated reciprocity: expectation that he 
will r
eceive actionable information and useful 
information in return, actionable information has 

also been appropriately defined as knowledge 

[10].  The anticipation of future collaboration is 

also identified as factor to facilitate the 

development of trust between members [21, 23].  

Besides, local participants are also more likely to 

provide information, since personal social ties are 

key motivators in providing assistance [27]. 

(2)Reputation and influence within a 

community: Rheingold [36] suggests that the 
effect of one™s contributions based upon his 
reputation within the community can also 

influence, both positively and negatively, his or 

her willingness to share relevant knowledge with 

other members of the community.  There are 

some factors, which may increase a contributor™s 

reputation: high quality information, impressive 

technical details in one™s answers, willingness to 

help others, and elegant writing. 

(3)Perception of efficacy: members are more 

likely to exert greater effort if one or more of the 
following three conditions apply: (1) their 
contributions are identified as being important (2) 

contributions are personally relevant (3) members 

perceives a clear relationship between 
contribution and outcome [42].  This perception 
of efficacy is defined as a community member™s 

belief that his regular, quality contributions have 
an impact on his community as a whole, and such 
contributions add to the contributor™s reputation.  
Collaborative filtering refers to ﬁsharing 
knowledge through recommendationsﬂ [24] and 

hence emphasizes the significance of social 

networks in a virtual environment.  To screen out 
valueless ﬁgarbageﬂ and provide high quality 

information, they proposed several approaches 

such as to add annotations or ratings to documents 

they read.  The unwillingness to spend some 

more time to evaluate each article should be a 

problem.  Tiwana and Bush [48] further develop 
an active collaborate filtering system which 
contains a contribution manager dedicated to 

calculate user™s contributions compared to total 
member™s contributions in real-time.  Through 
the offering of active feedback, they argue that 

such a system will encourage knowledge sharing 

and increase member participation.
Thus, the tasks of the contribution manager 
are:

(1)Actively providing the comparison of 

specific employee to the average member™s 

contribution to inspire the willingness to share 

knowledge with others.   

(2)Facilitating the scoring of contribution.  The 
contribution score is judged by the knowledge 
requester, according to his satisfaction with the 

help offered by the knowledge contributors, and 

then stored in employee profiles.  Such 

contribution score may be of help when 

incorporate into compensation policies.   

(3)Facilitating the high quality knowledge to be 

disseminated.  When criticized to be high 

contribution score, the contribution manager will 

notify the matchmaking manager to ask the 

knowledge contributor for the feasibility of the 

offered knowledge also to be shared to other 
members with the same skills and competency 
ratings.  

3.1.3 Context Manager. 
The context manager is 
designed to smoothen the communication process, 

and based on the context-based approach and 

social awareness viewpoint.  
A context describes the circumstances 
surrounding of an act or event.  Do, Halatchev, 

and Neumann [12] proposed a context-based 

approach to support virtual enterprises and 

emphasize the importance of context in software 
engineering.  I import the term ‚context™ here to 
extend the concept to include the background of 

people and information.  The SIDE theory 

suggests that in the absence of individual cues 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20085 about others, as is the case in computer-mediated 
communication, individuals builds stereotypical 

impressions of others based on limited information 
[30], and the first impression will play an 
important role to smoothen communication as well 

as trust-building [23].  Based on transactive 
memory theory, Rulke and Rau [38] found that 
newly formed groups spending time discussing 

their expertise.  Hollingshead [19] also learned 
from a laboratory experiment that when 

communication is allowed, strangers begin to 

develop transactive memory system by explicitly 

establishing relative expertise when working on a 

knowledge-pooling task.  Stasser et al. [43] state 

that explicit and mutual recognition of expertise 
and their expert status at the onset of discussion, 
people can focus their information search and 

rehearsal on the subsets of information that 
contain unshared items.  Besides, they also 
suggest the assignment of expert roles facilitated 

the dissemination of unshared information and the 

discovery of a hidden profile, and designating 

persons as expert makes them feel less dispensable 

and more accountable and results in more effective 

cognitive processing [46].  These suggestions in 

line with Ishaya and Macaulay™s work [21] about 

the role of trust in virtual environment, and had 

full background of others, early identification of 

roles are significant factors identified by them to 
build trust.  
The importance of contextualization of 
information provided by other people should not 
be ignored.  Ackerman and McDonald [2] 

learned from a field study and stressed that 

providing the contextualization of answers would 

facilitate the user™s understanding of an answer.  

This implies both geographical proximity and 

similarity in background can increase the 

‚absorptive capacity (identified by [9])™ between 

people.  Co-location is said to reinforce social 

similarity, shared values, and expectations [29].  
On the other hand, Shenkar and Li [41] classify 
two types of organizational knowledge, 

compatibility
 and 
complementarity
, when seeking 
knowledge from prospective partners.  People 

seek additional knowledge in the same domain in 

which they already have the prior knowledge, and 

this permits the assimilation and exploitation of 

new knowledge [9]. 
In virtual environment, people may have the 
desire to know the social situation of other 

members, such as whether they can be disturbed 
right now.  Social awareness is defined as ﬁthe 
understanding of the activity of the others, which 

provides a context of your own activity [13]ﬂ.  

Tollmar et al. [49] indicate social awareness a key 
element in our everyday work, and people gather 
continuously information about our colleagues and 

act accordingly.  If they listen, we talk.  Kraut et 
al. [27] point out the knowledge of persons™ 
availability can be physical and emotional.  

Moran and Andersson [32] also address the 
importance of signaling the availability of 
information and people in a way that uses the 

human capability to peripherally process 
non-attended aspects.
There are five aspects of virtual interaction. 
Virtual interaction is aspatial (i.e., not affected by 

distance), generally asynchronous, acorporal (no 

co-presence), relatively astigmatic (stigma are 

markings or behaviors that locate an individual™s 
particular social status), anonymous [7], and 
accordingly some factors may influence the 

smooth of communication in virtual environment.  
The timely exchange of information, frequent 
interactions, and accurate feedback on each 

partner™s actions will minimize misperceptions 

and strengthen cooperation in the alliance [20, 23], 

and providing feedback actively to members is 

considered as principal factor to influence their 

behavior and willingness to contribute [48].  

Moreover, people may be shy of asking ‚stupid™ 

questions and thus in light of the need of 

mechanism to facilitate asking anonymously [1].  

Carver [7] also stressed the importance of 
humanization when interact in virtual environment.  
The more complex problem may be the access 

control policy, for some documentations or 

knowledge are restricted to share with outsiders, 

but an overly restrictive information policy will 

damage trust, hamper learning, and impede the 

development of interpersonal relationships across 

organizations [20].
Therefore, the tasks of the context manager 
are:

(1)Preparing the physical and emotional 

availability of members for the matchmaking 
manager.  People who face problems mostly 
have the desire to know the answer as soon as 

possible.  Consider the contexts of possible 

knowledge contributors; they may remain 

unavailable due to not being on-line or unwilling 

to be disturbed.  The context manager employs 

the agent technology to collect such information 

for better matching. 

(2)Providing context information of knowledge 

contributor.  As Stasser et al. [43] states, explicit 

and mutual recognition of expertise and their 
expert status at the onset of discussion will 
helpful for the communication process.  People 

may have several chances talking to strangers 

through information and communication 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20086 technologies in virtual organizations.  When 
asking for help, knowledge requesters can see the 

background information such as expertise level of 
the knowledge contributive candidates, and of 
help to smoothen the onset of dialogue. 

(3)Providing background information of 
knowledge requesters.  When being asked for 
offering knowledge, the possible providers can 

see the context information about the requesters, 
includes the purpose of request, expertise level, 

and contribution score.  Being aware of such 

information, he can determine whether to accept 

the request, which form or level of knowledge is 

suited for the requester, otherwise he may feel 

watchful to share with someone totally unknown.  
As for sensitive knowledge, he can judge the 
extant to share.   

(4)Allowing knowledge requester to ask 
anonymously.  Sometimes people may be shy of 
asking ‚stupid™ questions, and they may choose to 

request anonymously but not anonymous to the 

system. 

3.1.4 Social Network Manager. 
Attributing to 
the involvement of multi-organizations and 

temporary collaboration character of virtual 

organizations, social network may have a greater 

opportunity to be extended faster.   The social 

network manager is responsible for:

(1)Retaining the profiles of possible knowledge 
contributors.  Even when members exit from the 
ongoing virtual organization, their personal 

profiles and participation will be kept.  They 

may still act as before to participate in the social 

network.  For the transactive networks system, 

the only difference is their available priority may 

go lower but can be accessed when needed. 

(2)Facilitating the contextualization of answers.  

The social network manager may provide 

matchmaking manager with priorities of serving 

candidates according to their geographical 

proximity, by the way to help the understanding 
of knowledge or facilitate the face-to-face 
communication. 

(3)Capturing the outer linkage to system.  

When knowledge contributor fails to provide 

sufficient knowledge, he may recommend some 

other experts capable to answer beyond the virtual 

organization.  Although insufficient context 

information, such linkages are also captured to 

augment the social networks. 

(4)Facilitating repeated interaction.  Repeated 

interaction will help to build trust and mutual 
understanding.  When criticized to be high 
contribution score, the social network manager 

will provide the knowledge contributive candidate 

with higher priority to promote the chance of 
repeated interaction. 
3.1.5 Matchmaking Manager. 
The matchmaking 
manager serves as an interface between 
knowledge requesters and contributors and 
performs essential functions such as:

(1)Parsing the knowledge requests to categorize 
involved skills by utilizing information retrieval 
technologies (e.g. knowledge category, please 

refer to [50]).   
(2)Helping the requester to find appropriate 

contributors.  After interacting with other four 

managers, the matchmaking manager will capable 

of providing the requester with context 

information about the smaller, more focused set 

of contributors, who are ranked to be the highest 
priority. 
(3)Allowing knowledge contributor to 

selectively share knowledge.  With the context 
information provided by context manager, 
members may choose to accept or reject the 

request. 
4. Operative Processes in the 
Transactive Networks Model 
The transactive networks operated by the 
following procedures described in Figure 2:
(1)Each time registered, the personal agent 
notifies the physical and emotional availability of 
the member to the context manager.  The context 
manager generates an agent to keep informed 

about the availability of the member.  The 

physical availability is detected from keystroke or 

mouse moving by personal agent every certain 
minute. The emotional availability is determined 

by the member at any time.  He can turn to ‚bad 

mood™ if don™t want to be disturbed. 

(2)The context manager notifies the 

matchmaking manager to wake up the member™s 

personal skill agents. 
(3)The matchmaking manager interacts with 
skills-based manager and social network manager 

to obtain lists of personal skill agents labeled as 

active. 

(4)Each member™s personal skill agents possess 

information about the expertise level of the 

specific skill.  In abstract room of skill S
1,personal skill agent of P
2 is absent due to not 
possessing the skill.  On the other hand, personal 
skill agent of P
4 is labeled as inactive due to not 
on-line or has been quitted from the virtual 
organization, and thus being categorized as low 
priorities. 
(5)The skills-based manager may interact with 

social network manager to generate skill gaps of 

the member actively. 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20087 (6)The contribution manager may interact with 
social network manager to generate the 

contribution report of the members actively. 
I™ll demonstrate the matchmaking process as 
shown in Figure 3:
(1)The knowledge requester sends a knowledge 
request, which is trigger by active or passive 
learning motivations.  He can ask anonymously 

if intended but won™t affect any other processes 
except display the context information to 
knowledge contributor without name. 

(2)The matchmaking manager interacts with  
Figure 2. The regular processes of transactive networks model 
Figure 3. The matchmaking processes of transactive networks model 
Contribution
Manager
Contribution
Manager
Skills-Based
Manager
Skills-Based
Manager
Context
Manager
Context
Manager
Social Network
Manager
Social Network
Manager
Individual
P1Individual
P3P1P1Personal
Skill 
Agent
S1S1Group
Agent
Abstract Room of Skill 
S1–P1P1Personal 
Agent
P3P3Personal 
Agent
P3P3Personal
Skill 
Agent
Individual
P2P4P4Personal
Skill 
Agent
ZZSkill
Inventory
Skill
Inventory
Individual
P4Matchmaking Manager
BeginnerBeginner
Expert
Employee
Profiles
Employee
Profiles
Knowledge
Requester
Knowledge
Contributor
Knowledge
Possessor
Knowledge
Possessor
P2P2Personal 
Agent
Contribution
Manager
Contribution
Manager
Skills-Based
Manager
Skills-Based
Manager
Context
Manager
Context
Manager
Social Network
Manager
Social Network
Manager
Individual
P1Individual
P3P1P1Personal
Skill 
Agent
P1P1Personal
Skill 
Agent
S1S1Group
Agent
S1S1Group
Agent
Abstract Room of Skill 
S1–P1P1Personal 
Agent
P1P1Personal 
Agent
P3P3Personal 
Agent
P3P3Personal 
Agent
P3P3Personal
Skill 
Agent
P3P3Personal
Skill 
Agent
Individual
P2P4P4Personal
Skill 
Agent
P4P4Personal
Skill 
Agent
ZZSkill
Inventory
Skill
Inventory
Skill
Inventory
Skill
Inventory
Individual
P4Matchmaking Manager
BeginnerBeginner
Expert
Employee
Profiles
Employee
Profiles
Employee
Profiles
Employee
Profiles
Knowledge
Requester
Knowledge
Contributor
Knowledge
Possessor
Knowledge
Possessor
P2P2Personal 
Agent
P2P2Personal 
Agent
Contribution
Manager
Contribution
Manager
Skills-Based
Manager
Skills-Based
Manager
Context
Manager
Context
Manager
Social Network
Manager
Social Network
Manager
Individual
P1Individual
P3P1P1Personal
Skill 
Agent
S1S1Group
Agent
Abstract Room of Skill 
S1–P3P3Personal
Skill 
Agent
Individual
P2P4P4Personal
Skill 
Agent
ZZSkill
Inventory
Skill
Inventory
Individual
P4Matchmaking Manager
BeginnerBeginner
Expert
Employee
Profiles
Employee
Profiles
Knowledge
Requester
Knowledge
Contributor
Knowledge
Possessor
Knowledge
Possessor
Contribution
Manager
Contribution
Manager
Skills-Based
Manager
Skills-Based
Manager
Context
Manager
Context
Manager
Social Network
Manager
Social Network
Manager
Individual
P1Individual
P3P1P1Personal
Skill 
Agent
P1P1Personal
Skill 
Agent
S1S1Group
Agent
S1S1Group
Agent
Abstract Room of Skill 
S1–P3P3Personal
Skill 
Agent
P3P3Personal
Skill 
Agent
Individual
P2P4P4Personal
Skill 
Agent
P4P4Personal
Skill 
Agent
ZZSkill
Inventory
Skill
Inventory
Skill
Inventory
Skill
Inventory
Individual
P4Matchmaking Manager
BeginnerBeginner
Expert
Employee
Profiles
Employee
Profiles
Employee
Profiles
Employee
Profiles
Knowledge
Requester
Knowledge
Contributor
Knowledge
Possessor
Knowledge
Possessor
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20088 skills-based manager to categorize involved 
skills. 

(3)The matchmaking agent accesses abstract 
rooms corresponding to each involved skills to 
generate a limited list of appropriate contributors 

in order of priorities. 
(4)The priorities are determined by physical 
and emotional availability provided by the 

context manager, competency ratings of skills 
provided by the skills-based manager, and some 

bonus conditions such as the geographical 

proximities or repeated interaction provided by 

the social network manager. 

(5)The context information of possible 

contributor with the highest priority is displayed 
to the requester.  The requester may be asked to 
select from the limited list of appropriate 

contributors if intended. 
(6)When specific candidate is determined, the 
requester is asked for keying the purpose of the 

request.  The context information of the 

requester, purpose of the request, and contribution 

report are sent together to the designate 

knowledge contributor. 

(7)If accepted, the contributor provided 

requested knowledge through information and 

communication technologies or face-to-face 

communication.  Otherwise, the requester 

chooses another one to ask.  
(8)The knowledge requester is asked to score 
the contribution offered by the contributor each 

time a matchmaking process is completed. 

(9)If criticized to be high contribution score, the 

contribution manager will notify the 

matchmaking manager to ask the knowledge 

contributor for the feasibility of the offered 

knowledge also to be shared to other members 

with the same skills and competency ratings. 

(10)If the offered knowledge is codified and the 

contributor permits to share, the group agent of 

involved skill scans for qualified personal skill 
agents to disseminate actively. 
I hope the transactive networks system will 
contribute to increasing the flux of dialogue 
through instilling the desire to learn, inspiring the 

willingness to broaden a
ccessible individual 
memory, and smoothening the communication 

processes.
5. Conclusions and Future Research 
This paper proposes the transactive networks 
model for elaborating knowledge sharing and 
learning in a virtual organization.  It includes five 
software components as matchmaking manager, 
skills-based manager, contribution manager, 
context manager, and social network manager.  
With the proposed multiagent-based system, I 

illustrate how it can be of help to connect both 

knowledge requesters and appropriate knowledge 

contributors to augment and retain the social 

networks in fostering virtual organizational 
learning. In future research, the author will further 
implement these components and functions for a 

transactive network.  Through the 

implementation, I can revise the model to make it 

more feasible for facilitating learning in virtual 

organizations.  The role of trust in virtual 

organizational learning and the visualization of 

social networks dynamically are also interesting 

issues for further studies. 
This research was supported by the National 
Science Council of Taiwan under the grant NSC-
96-2416-H-029-007.
6. References 
[1] Ackerman, M. S., ﬁAugmenting Organizational Memory: A 
Field Study of Answer Garden,ﬂ 
ACM Transactions on 
Information Systems
 (16:3), 1998, pp.203-224. 
[2] Ackerman, M. S. and McDonald, D. W., ﬁAnswer Garden 
2: Merging Organizational Memory with Collaborative Help,ﬂ 

In 
Proceedings of Computer Supported Cooperative Work ™96
,ACM, 1996, pp.97-105.  
[3] Antipolis, S., ﬁOrganizational Learning and Inter-Firm 
‚Partnering™ in the UK Construction Industry,ﬂ In 
Proceedings 
of ECLO™97
, France, 1997.  
[4] Argyris, C., Schon, D., 
Theory in Practice: Increasing 
Professional Effectiveness
. San Fransisco: Jossey-Bass, 1974.  
[5] Boje, D., ﬁThe Storytelling Organizations: A Study of 

Story Performance in an Office-Supply Firm,ﬂ 
Administrative 
Science Quarterly
 (36), 1991, pp.106-126.  
[6] Byrne, J.A., ﬁThe Virtual Corporation,ﬂ 
Business Week,
3304, 1993.  
[7] Carver, C., ﬁBuilding a Vritual Community for a 
Tele-Learning Environment,ﬂ 
IEEE Communications 
Manazine
, 1999, pp.114-118.  
[8] Cohen, M. D. and Sproull, L. S., 
Organizational Learning
,Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA, 1996.  
[9] Cohen, W. and Levinthal, D. ﬁAbsorptive Capacity: A New 

Perspective on Learning and Innovation,ﬂ 
Administrative 
Science Quarterly
 (35), 1990, pp.128-152.  
[10]Davenport T. H. and Prusak, L., 
Working Knowledge: 
How Organizations Manage What They Know
, Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press, 1998.  

[11]Dixon, N. M. 
The Organizational Learning Cycle: How 
We Can Learn Collectively
, McGraw-Hill, 1994.  
[12]Do, V. T., Halatchev, M., and Neumann, D., ﬁA 
Contextbased Approach to Support Virtual Enterprises,ﬂ In 

Proceedings of the 33
rd Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences
, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, 
USA, 2000, 10 pgs.  
[13]Dourish, P. and BellottiV., ﬁAwareness and Coordination 
in Shared Workshops,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of CSCW™92
, ACM, 
1992.  
[14]Duncan, R. and Weiss, A. ﬁOrganizational Learning: 
Implications for Organizational Design,ﬂ in 
Research in 
Organizational Behavior
, B. Staw (Ed.), Vol.1, JAI Press, 
Greenwich, CT, 1979, pp.75-123.  

[15]Garvin, D. A., ﬁBuilding a Learning Organization,ﬂ 
Harvard Business Review
 (71:4), 1993.  
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20089 [16]Hackbarth, G. and Grover, V. ﬁThe Knowledge Repository: 
Organizational Memory Information Systems,ﬂ 
Information 
Systems Management
, Summer 1999, pp.21-30.  
[17]Hansen, M. T. Nohria, N. and Tierney T., ﬁWhat™s Your 
Strategy for Managing Knowledge?ﬂ 
Harvard Business 
Review
 (77:2), 1999, pp.106-116.  
[18]Hattori, F., Ohguro, T., Yokoo, M., Matsubara, S., and 
Yoshida, S., ﬁSocialware: Multiagent Systems for Supporting 
Network Communities,ﬂ 
Communication of the ACM
 (42:3), 
1999, pp.55-61.  
[19]Hollingshead, A. B. ﬁRetrieval Processes in Transactive 
Memory Systems,ﬂ 
Journal of Personality 
and Social 
Psychology
 (74:3), 1998, pp.659-671.  
[20]Hutt, M. D., Stafford, E. R., Walker, B. A., and Reingen, P. 
H., ﬁCase Study: Defining the Social Network of a Strategic 
Alliances,ﬂ 
Sloan Management Review
 (41:2), 2000, pp.51-62.  
[21]Ishaya, T. and Macaulay, L., ﬁThe Role of Trust in Virtual 
Teams,ﬂ 
Electronic Journal of Organizational Virtualness
(1:1), 1999, pp.140-157.  
[22]Jain, A. K., Aparicio IV, M., and Singh, M. P., ﬁAgents for 
Process Coherence in Virtual Enterprises,ﬂ 
Communications of 
the ACM
 (42:3), 1999, pp.62-69.  
[23]Jarvenppa S. L. and Leidner, D. E., ﬁCommunication and 

Trust in Global Virtual Teams,ﬂ 
Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication
 (3:4), 1998.  
[24]Kautz, H., Selman, B., and Shah, M., ﬁReferral Web: 

Combining Social Networks and Collaborative Filtering,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (40:3), 1997, pp.63-65.  
[25]Ke, W. and Wei, K. K., "Critical factors affecting the firm 
to share knowledge with trading partners: a comparative 
exploratory case study," In 
Proceedings of the 7th 
international conference on Electronic commerce
, 2005, 
pp.177-183.  

[26]Kim, D. H. ﬁThe Link between Individual and 

Organizational Learning,ﬂ 
Sloan Management Review
 (35:1), 
Fall 1993.  

[27]Kraut, R., Egido, C., and Galegher, J., ﬁPatterns of 

Contact and Communication in Scientific Research 
Collaboration,ﬂ 
Intellectual Teamwork
, Lawrence Eribaum, 
Hillsdale, NJ, 1990.  
[28]Kraut, R., Steinfield, C., Chan, A., Bulter, B., and Hoag, 
A., ﬁCoordination and Virtualization: The Role of Electronic 
Networks and Personal Relationships,ﬂ 
Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication
 (3:4), 1998.  
[29]Latane, B., Liu, J. H., Nowak, A., Bonevento, M., and 

Zheng, L., ﬁDistance Matters: Physical Space and Social 

Impact,ﬂ 
Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin
 (21:8), 
1995, pp.795-805.  

[30]Lea, M. and Spear, R., ﬁParalanguage and Social 

Perception in Computer-Mediated Communication,ﬂ 
Journal 
of Organizational Computing
 (2:3&4), 1992, pp.321-341.  
[31]Liebeskind, J. P., Oliver A. L., Zucker, L., Brewer, M., 

ﬁSocial Networks, Learning, and Flexibility: Sourcing 

Scientific Knowledge in New Biotechnology Firms,ﬂ 
Organization Science
 (7:4), 1996, pp.428-443.  
[32]Moran, T. P., and Anderson, R. J., ﬁThe Workday World as 
a Paradigm for CSCW,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of CSCW™90
, ACM, 
1990.  

[33]Nonaka, I. ﬁA Dynamic Theory of Organizational 

Knowledge Creation,ﬂ 
Organization Science 
(5:1), Feb 1994, 
pp.14-37.  

[34]O™Leary D. E., Kuokka, D., and Plant, R., ﬁArtifical 

Intelligence and Virtual Organizations,ﬂ 
Communications of 
the ACM
 (40:1), 1997, pp.52-59.  
[35]Pedler, M., Burgoyne, J., and Boydell, T., 
The Learning 
Company: A Strategy for Sustainable Development
,McGraw-Hill, Maidenhead, 1991.  

[36]Rheingold, H., 
The Virtual Community: Homesteading on 
the Electronic Frontier
, New York: Addison-Wesley, 1993.  
[37]Riehl, H. ﬁManaging with Skills,ﬂ 
Ivey Business Journal
(62:4), 1998, pp.50-54.  
[38]Rulke, D. L. and Rau, D. ﬁExamining the Encoding 
Process of Transactive Memory in Group Training,ﬂ 
Academy 
of Management Proceedings
, 1997, pp.349-353.  
[39]Schein, E., ﬁOn Dialogue, Culture and Organizational 
Learning, ﬁ 
Organizational Dynamics
, 1993, pp.40-51.  
[40]Seufert S. and Seufert, A., ﬁTowards the Continuously 
Learning Organization through Knowledge Networking Œ 
Case Swiss Re Group,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of the 33
rd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences-2000
, IEEE, 
2000, 11 pgs.  
[41]Shenkar, O. and Li, J. ﬁKnowledge Search in International 
Cooperative Ventures,ﬂ 
Organization Science
 (10:2), 1999, 
pp.134-143.  
[42]Shepperd, J., ﬁProductivity Loss in Performance Groups: 
A Motivation Analysis,ﬂ 
Psychological Bulletin
 (113), 1993, 
pp.67-81.  
[43]Stasser, G., Stewart, D. D., and Wittenbaum, G. M., 
ﬁExpert Roles and Information Exchange during Discussion: 
The Importance of Knowing Who Knows What,ﬂ 
Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology
 (31), 1995, pp.244-265.  
[44]Steil, A. V., Barcia, R. M., and Pacheco, C. S., ﬁAn 

Approach to Learning in Virtual Organizations,ﬂ 
Electronic 
Journal of Organizational Virtualness
 (1:1), 1999, pp.69-88.  
[45]Stein, E. W. and Zwass, V. ﬁActualizing Organizational 
Memory with Information Systems,ﬂ 
Information Systems 
Research 
(6:2), 1995, pp.85-117.  
[46]Tetlock, P. E., ﬁAccountability: The Neglected Social 

Context of Judgment and Choice,ﬂ In L. L. Cummings & B. M. 
Staw (Eds.), 
Information and Cogn
ition in Organizations
,Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.  
[47]Thibaut, J, and Kelley, H., 
The Social Psychology of 
Groups
, NewYork: Wiley,1959.  
[48]Tiwana, A. and Bush, A., ﬁPeer-to-Peer Valuation as a 

Mechanism for Reinforcing Active Learning in Virtual 
Communities: Actualizing Social Exchange Theory,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of the 33
rd Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences-2000
, IEEE, 2000, 10 pgs.  
[49]Tollmar, K., Sandor, O., and Schomer, A., ﬁSupporting 
Social Awareness @ Work Design and Experience,ﬂ In 

Proceedings of CSCW™96
, 1996.  
[50]Tu, H. C. and Hsiang, Jieh, ﬁAn Architecture and 
Category Knowledge for Intelligent Information Retrieval 

Agents,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of the 31st Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS'98)
, IEEE, 1998.  
[51]Walsh, J. P. and Ungson, G. R. ﬁOrganizational Memory,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Journal 
(16:1), 1991, pp.57-91.  
[52]Wegner, D. M. ﬁTransactive Memory: A Contemporary 
Analysis of the Group Mind,ﬂ In B. Mullen & G. R. Goethals 
(Eds.), 
Theories of Group behavior
, New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 1986, pp.185-208.  
[53]Wegner, D. M. ﬁA Computer Network Model of Human 

Transactive Memory,ﬂ 
Social Cognition 
(13), 1995, 
pp.319-339.  
[54]Wijnhoven, F., ﬁDevelopment Scenarios for 
Organizational Memory Information System,ﬂ
Journal of 
Management Information Systems 
(16:1), Summer 1999, 
pp.121.  

[55]Zucker, L., ﬁMarkets for Bureaucratic Authority and 

Control: Information Quality in Professions and Services,ﬂ 
Research in the Sociology of Organizations
 (8), 1991, 
pp.157-190.  
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200810