 Towards DevOps in the Embedded Systems Domain: Why is It so Hard? 
 
Lucy Ellen Lwakatare
1
, Teemu Karvonen
1
, Tanja Sauvola
1
, Pasi Kuvaja
1
, Helena Holmström Olsson
2
, Jan Bosch
3
and Markku Oivo
1
1
University of Oulu, {lucy.lwakatare, teemu.3.karvone
n, tanja.sauvola, pasi.kuvaja, markku.oivo}@oulu.fi 
2
Malmö University,helena.holmstrom.olsson@mah.se 
3
Chalmers University of Technology,jan.bosch@chalmers.se
Abstract
 
DevOps is a predominant 
phenomenon in the web 
domain. Its two core
 principles emphasize 
collaboration between so
ftware development and 
operations, and the use of agile principles to manage 
deployment environments 
and their configurations. 
DevOps techniques, such 
as collaboration and 
behaviour-driven monitoring
, have been used by web 
companies to facilita
te continuous deployment of new 
functionality to customers. The techniques may also 
offer opportunities for continuous product 
improvement when adopted 
in the embedded systems 
domain. However, certain characteristics of 
embedded software development present obstacles 
for DevOps adoption, and as yet, there is no 
empirical evidence of its 
adoption in the embedded 
systems domain. In this 
study, we present the 
challenges for DevOps 
adoption in embedded 
systems using a multiple-case study approach with 
four companies. The contribu
tion of this paper is to 
introduce the concept of DevOps adoption in the 
embedded systems domain and then to identify key 
challenges for th
e DevOps adoption.
 
1. Introduction  
DevOps is a new phenomenon in software 
engineering, emphasizing collaboration, automation, 
virtualization and new tools that bridge software 
development and operations 
activities [1]. A blend of 
the words ‘development’ and ‘operations’, DevOps 
constitutes both technical and non-technical practices 
that help software-intensive companies to increase 
responsiveness to customer needs through frequent 
and automated software releases. Having frequent 
releases helps to reduce 
the risks that are associated 
with deployment, and leads to faster feedback 
regarding any changes to software application and its 
configurations (including environments). Generally, 
providing feedback as quickly as possible is essential 
to facilitating new information that influences 
subsequent choices in the software development 
process. 
Today, the ability to frequently deploy new 
software features to the production environment, 
from multiple times a month to even multiple times a 
day, has become a competitive advantage for most 
companies operating in the web domain, especially 
those providing software applications on demand 
over the internet through software as a service (SaaS) 
delivery model [2], [3], [4]. This paradigm change 
towards continuous deployment gives companies the 
opportunity to quickly verify whether their new 
software features are useful to customers and 
adopting practices such as A/B testing to conduct 
feature experimentation [5]. A/B testing is a practice 
where users are randomly assigned to one of the two 
variants of the system for experimentation e.g. 
feature usage experimentation [6]
.
 
As Humble and Farley [1] have noted, the ability 
to frequently deploy new software features requires 
effective coordination of activities in the software 
development process, as well as collaborative work 
among developers, testers,
 build and operations 
personnel. DevOps recognizes the need for a 
continuous bridge between software development and 
its operational deployment [7]. 
In the literature, DevOps is predominantly a 
phenomenon of SaaS applications but not yet a 
practice in the embedded systems domain. DevOps is 
easy to adopt in the web domain, because 
virtualization helps software developers to abstract 
the infrastructure. Moreover, tool support for 
configuration management helps them to set up 
development, testing and staging environments that 
reflect the production environment. When 
configuration management software is used in 
combination with automated verification and 
validation, it increases the 
level of confidence for 
correct deployment the first time new features are 
deployed to production [1]. By using DevOps 
practices, software development teams can deploy 
2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.67154362016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2016.6715437 new software features directly to production while 
operations personnel help to support the 
infrastructure development and performance [2], [4].  
Software development in the web domain differs 
substantially from the embedded systems domain. In 
embedded systems, software is only one part, though 
an increasingly important one, in addition to 
mechanics, optics, electronics, and so on [8]. The
characteristics of embedded systems development, 
such as hardware dependency, present challenges to 
adoption of DevOps. Moreover, embedded systems 
are typically sold as products in ‘boxes’ which upon 
purchase are solely the customer’s property [8]. In 
many cases, the custom
er may purchase optional 
maintenance services that commission the software 
supplier to offer after-sales updates and support for 
the product. This is contrary to the model of SaaS 
applications, in which customers typically purchase 
services for which they pay subscription fees or 
freely have rights to use the service only via web 
browser or other thin-client
 applications [2], [3].  
Despite the challenges, adopting the underlying 
concepts of DevOps—such as fast feedback to 
development regarding environmental configuration 
changes [1], as well as the use of post-deployment 
data for continuous product improvements [9]—
would offer opportunities to shorten the development 
cycle in the embedded systems domain. In this paper, 
we investigate what stands in the way of DevOps 
adoption in embedded syst
ems. Based on a multiple-
case study, we identify 
key obstacles for the adoption 
of DevOps in four Finnish companies operating in 
embedded systems domain. The research question of 
the study is: What are the key challenges for DevOps 
adoption in the embedded systems domain? The main 
contribution of this paper is twofold. First, it presents 
the concept of DevOps adoption in the embedded 
systems domain; and second, it identifies specific 
challenges for the DevOps adoption.  
The paper is organised as follows. The next 
section presents background and related work on 
DevOps. Section 3 describ
es the research approach 
used in this study. The findings of the study are set 
out in section 4. Section 5 presents discussion, 
followed by conclusions in section 6. 
2. Background and related works 
2.1. The DevOps concept 
According to Humble and Farley [1], the DevOps 
movement  has two core principles. First, it 
emphasizes collaboration between development and 
operations activities [7]. Second, it uses agile 
principles and automation to manage deployment 
environments and their configurations. The main goal 
is to shorten feedback 
loops and the development 
cycle through collaboration, automation and frequent 
software releases [1], [
10]. Collaboration in DevOps 
seeks to bridge the silos of
 software development and 
operations functions, which exist as separate 
functions in most companies. Collaboration is 
particularly essential when new software features are 
developed and released to 
the customer frequently 
and quickly on a cont
inuous basis [10].  
The origins of development and operations 
existing as distinct and ph
ased activities can be traced 
from systems engineering, which influenced the 
traditional ‘waterfall model’ of software development 
[11]. In systems engineering, development is 
described as an activity involving requirement 
definition, design, implementation and system 
integration and testing. On the other hand, operations 
processes typically occur in parallel with 
maintenance activities, mainly focusing on system 
installation and its practical use [11].  
In many companies, the split between 
development and operations in separate departments 
is one obstacle towards the 
transition to continuous 
deployment. The latter is mostly due to different 
goals and incentives that are owned by the two 
separate organisational units 
or groups. For instance, 
developers want to push 
changes into production as 
fast as possible, whereas ope
rations personnel’s want 
to keep production environment stable [1]. Herbsleb 
[12] had shown that there is typically a substantial 
delay or loss of information when tasks that are 
mutually interdependent are split, which prolongs 
development time as a result. DevOps addresses 
communication gaps between development and 
operations during the softwa
re development process. 
As such, information about system performance and 
feature usage in production can be communicated to 
the development team early to be used as a basis for 
making continuous improvements to existing and 
new products, not only in the web domain but also in 
the embedded systems domain [9],[13]. 
DevOps practices rely on the foundations of agile 
and lean software development including continuous 
integration (CI) practices [5], [14]. Previous 
empirical studies have shown how agile and lean 
methods helped to address collaboration challenges 
within the traditional ‘waterfall’ development activity 
and helped improve its performance [15]. However, 
in most cases, the improvements did not extend 
beyond the development teams, because the 
deployment of software features to customers 
occurred infrequently [3]. Although several factors 
contribute to the infrequency, poor communication 
54375438 between developers and infrastructure owners is one 
factor [16]. That issue is being addressed by DevOps 
and other studies on the need to scale agile methods 
across the entire company [16], [4].  
Despite the emphasis on the importance of 
DevOps by practitioners, there is limited knowledge 
and evidence about it in 
the software engineering 
literature [10]. Most studies on DevOps have focused 
on the web domain, though the practice is 
acknowledged as suitable for other domains, such as 
the embedded systems domain, for example [17]. 
2.2. DevOps in the cloud environment 
DevOps has mostly been adopted by companies 
delivering software ap
plications from a cloud 
computing environment, such as Facebook, Jira, and 
Spotify [2], [3], [4]. DevOp
s has proven to be most 
conducive to SaaS applications, because companies 
maintain full control and ownership of the 
infrastructure and have fast mechanisms for rolling 
back new software releases whenever there are 
problems [2]. Additionally, computing models 
offered by cloud vendors—e.g., platform as a service 
(PaaS) and infrastructure as a service (IaaS)—have 
tremendous effects on how web applications are 
developed and deployed to production.  
Web companies that have adopted DevOps use 
several approaches to en
sure collaboration between 
software development and operation activities, 
including shifting some responsibilities from 
operations to development [10]. The culture of 
collaboration in DevOps impacts the team structures 
and task coordination both within software 
development and between so
ftware development and 
operations [10]. In DevOps, new software features 
are developed and deployed 
directly to the production 
environment by cross-functional feature teams [4]. 
Chief architects and governance architects play a 
crucial role in ensuring high-level architectural 
designs and decisions and in supporting and 
coordinating groups of feature teams [4]. Individual 
software development engineers can also deploy 
features directly to production [2], [18], although 
additional oversight can be added in areas with legal 
restrictions by adding the role of release engineer, for 
example [2].  
 A major principle of DevOps is to automate 
development and operations activities as much as 
possible [6]. The greatest emphasis has been on 
automating aspects of the operations process, such as 
deployment and configuration management of 
applications and deployment environments [1], [19]. 
Virtualization achieved through cloud computing 
models has helped web companies to abstract 
different layers of environments, thus simplifying the 
management of infrastructure. The latter, together 
with emerging configuration management and 
deployment automation tools (e.g., Puppet and 
Docker), makes it possible to provide environments 
that are similar to production. The automatic 
provision of production-like environments serves a 
dual purpose for testing production deployment and 
as a backup [1].  
Typically, monitoring is performed during 
operational use of the system. Data gathered from 
operational usage can serve as feedback to developers 
to help them assess the quality of the software design 
and identify areas for refactoring [13]. Although 
monitoring has often been done for fault diagnostic 
purposes, web companies are using it as an 
opportunity to learn about feature usage [2]. 
Generally, data from different sources can be 
consolidated and used with analytical tools to provide 
informative feedback as a basis for continuous 
product improvements and infrastructure.  
2.3. DevOps in the embedded systems domain 
To the best of our knowledge, there is no 
literature available to date regarding the adoption of 
DevOps in the embedded systems domain. In this 
domain, factors such as system reliability, cost and 
time to market mostly drive product development 
decisions, rather than the need to constantly add new 
functionality [8], [20]. Additionally, operations 
activities, such as installing new software features, 
are performed by customer support technicians who 
are distributed and typically allocated close to each 
user’s local environment [21]. 
Empirical evidence on embedded software 
development shows that product development in 
embedded systems is mostly hardware driven [8]. 
Development of products is slow due to long lead 
times for hardware development [8], [20]. Also, the 
separation of hardware and software development 
further prolongs the development cycle time since 
high levels of domain expertise requirements and 
distribution of work seldom allows teams to have 
end-to-end visibility to a complete R&D value 
stream.   This means that development teams often 
need to communicate and coordinate better. On the 
other hand, a considerable amount of time has to be 
spent in architectural design 
to describe and compose 
functionality of the complete system rather than 
focusing only on the immediate needs [8]. It has also 
been observed that in industry, non-functional 
requirements (e.g., system performance and use of 
memory and power) are often specified based on 
developers’ experience during product development 
54385439 [8]. This is because techno
logies used by software 
engineers lack special features for dealing with such 
requirements [8]. Furthermore, the majority of 
software engineering technologies are not adopted, 
because they need to be compatible with legacy code, 
as many products are not started from scratch and 
tend to contain legacy code [8]. 
3. Research approach  
This study uses a multi-case study with an 
interpretive approach [22]. Data was collected from 
four Finnish companies developing embedded 
systems. An explorative case study approach was 
chosen because it gives a 
deep understanding of a 
phenomenon under study in its natural setting. The 
companies are designated as companies A, B, C and 
D owing to a confidentiality agreement.  
3.1. Data collection and analysis 
Data was collected primarily through semi-
structured interviews using open-ended questions 
with representatives of the four companies. The 
companies were selected using convenience sampling 
from a group of companies participating in a large 
national research program, Need for Speed (N4S)
1
, 
aimed at enhancing Finnish ICT com
panies’ 
capability to deliver value in
 real time. Prior to data 
collection, a case study protocol with an interview 
guide was developed and used as a basis for 
discussion during the data collection process. 
Five employees with varying roles (Table 1) were 
interviewed from each of the selected companies. 
Altogether, 20 interviews were conducted, each 
lasting approximately two hours. Data was collected 
over the course of three months (November 2014
–
January 2015). The interview guide had parts, which 
inquired about the: 
1)Current ways-of-working in software 
development, deployment and post-deployment; 
2)Strengths and weaknesses in ways of working;   
3)Barriers experienced when moving towards 
frequent and continuous short releases.
During each interview, th
ree researchers shared 
rotating responsibilities, with one researcher mainly 
asking the questions and the other two taking notes. 
All interviews were recorded with the permission 
of the interviewees and later transcribed for analysis. 
All collected data, including interview audio, 
transcripts and notes, were stored in NVivo (a 
qualitative data analysis software) for analysis. After 
                                                
1
 Need for Speed (N4S): 
http://www.n4s.fi/en/
 
the initial reading of the transcript, we used the 
grounded theory coding technique to identify and 
code various insights and perceived challenges 
pertaining to product development and deployment 
activities.  
3.3. Threats to validity
The design of our study was carefully planned to 
take into account validity concerns throughout the 
study. Threats to validity can be sorted into three 
categories: construct validi
ty, reliability and external 
validity [22]. 
 To ensure that the data collected during 
interviews was appropriate to answer the research 
question, an interview guide was developed by 
working with a fifth company not included in the 
study, which helped to refine research design and 
interview questions. Appropriate companies were 
selected for the study interviews, and materials 
describing the purpose and goal of the research were 
provided to each intervi
ewee prior to data collection.
Threats to the reliability of the study findings were 
mitigated by having at least three researchers 
involved in all phases of the research process, 
particularly during data co
llection and analysis. This 
practice helped to minimize research biases. In 
addition, the interview transcripts used for data 
analysis were sent to the interviewees for their 
review. External validity is mostly concerned with 
whether a study
’s
 findings can be generalised. The 
findings of this study cannot be generalised to the 
entire population; rather, they are meant specifically 
to provide insight into the challenges of DevOps 
adoption in embedded software development. 
4.
Findings
  
This section presents software development and 
deployment practices in the four case companies 
operating in the embedded systems domain. The 
challenges for adopting DevOps within embedded 
systems are also presented.  
4.1. Development and deployment practices  
In this section we present a summary of how the 
case companies develop and release new features to 
customers. Table 1 gives a summary of the products 
developed by the companies with the corresponding 
release cycle times. 
54395440 4.1.1. Company A
.
 Company A develops embedded 
software solutions for specialised markets in the 
wireless and automotive industries. The company 
also provides R&D services to companies operating 
in these sectors. Company A has an adaptable 
product development process with important 
milestones to signify different phases of end product 
(both hardware and software) development. The 
frequency of software releases depends on the 
milestone phase
—
more frequent during development 
and less frequent during maintenance. The operations 
unit is responsible for serial production of devices, 
together with the customer and other external 
manufacturing companies, after the customer 
acceptance stage. In projects involving device 
manufacturing, the operations team is involved in the 
early phases to make cost estimates to be specified in 
contracts agreed upon wi
th the customer. During 
development, new software features are released to 
customers in a two-week release cycle; however, 
production releases (hardware, mechanics and 
software) typically have alonger cycle, ranging from 
ten months to three years depending on the product 
(e.g., handset, base station, etc.). For the two-week 
major releases, customers 
typically have a targeted 
hardware device to run the new software features. 
Depending on the project, the release (build) manager 
makes available the new releases and corresponding 
documentation to customers. The releases can be 
deployed to customers through over-the-air or by 
pushing files to customers’ 
repositories. In some 
R&D projects, data is collected from the devices and 
testing is conducted with internal (alpha and beta) 
user groups.   
At the end of development but prior to product 
launch, acceptance testing is conducted with the 
customer to validate product functionality in a
production environment.
4.1.2. Company B
.
 Company B is a 
telecommunications equipment manufacturer that 
also provides solutions and services for managing 
network operations. Within company B, we studied 
the development of a compact mobile broadband 
solution. Different product development milestones 
are used to signify product development efforts over 
time. The company has been introducing cross-
functional software development teams, but module 
development teams still exist in the company.The 
company has two major releases each year and 
several (small) maintenance releases between the 
major releases.
Typically, a few months beforea product is made 
available for global use, it is verified and validated 
with a lead customer. System verification with the 
customer is first done in the 
customer’s
 testing lab, 
taking two to six weeks to complete. After that, the 
products are taken to a re
al field environment for 
verification and validation. There,the product is 
tested and monitored for how it works and behaves. 
When the lead customer accepts the product, it is 
granted acceptancefor global use.For the rest of the 
Company 
ID
Domain
Product/service
Interim releases
Cycle time to 
production
Interviewees’ roles
A
Wireless 
embedde
d systems
1) Special device 
platform product
2) R&D services 
New software 
functionality 
(two-
week 
release cycle during 
development
)
Maintenance releases 
(after product launch)
10 mos.
–
3 yrs. 
1) Special device senior manager, 2) 
Special device product owner, 3) 
Sales and account manager, 4) Senior 
specialist in software, 5) Quality 
manager in wireless segment
B
Telecom 
network
Compact mobile 
broadband 
solution 
Maintenance releases 
(
two-week release 
cycle)
6 mos.
1) Test automation manager, 2) Senior 
developer, 3) Program manager, 4) 
Operations manager of the local site, 
5) Technical coordinator
C
Industrial 
automati
on
Factory 
automation 
platform solution
None 
(newly initiated 
program)
First release 
scheduled in 
2016 (typically 
1 yr.)
1) Project manager, 2) Program 
manager, 3) User experience (UX) 
designer, 4) Product manager, 5) 
Developer
D
Telecom 
network
Network-
monitoring 
solution
Maintenance releases
Releases for 
Cus
tomer-
specific projects
6 mos.
1) System verification engineer, 2) 
Program manager, 3) Software 
architect, 4) Product line manager, 5) 
Software engineer
Table 1. Summary of case companies and roles of interviewees
54405441 customer base, customer 
units and service personnel 
in local environments across the globe are 
responsible for product deployment at the customer
s’
sites.
4.1.3. Company C
.
 Company C develops factory 
automation solutions for avariety of customers in the 
mining, construction, oil and gas industries. 
Interviews were conducted with people involved in a 
large companywide R&D program that is developing 
a factory automation platform solution. Company C 
has an operations function that is mostly responsible 
for customer delivery projec
ts in which products are 
installed and specifically configured for each 
customer. 
Within the new R&D program, development 
teams develop new functionality in two-week sprint 
cycles. New functionality is released internally 
through demonstrations to other teams and internal 
customers (i.e., other product lines and operations) 
during increment reviews after every six weeks and 
at the end of each six-month program phase. 
Synchronisation of work and management of 
dependencies is mostly done during increment 
reviews and at the end of the program phase. Prior to 
launch, products are tested for factory acceptance, 
which many times takes several months. As the R&D 
program is new, there have been no releases of the 
factory automation platform solution to customers. 
Typically, release managers are responsible for 
preparing releases, which 
are then delivered to 
operations for yearly releases. Prior to customer 
installations, the R&D team trains the operations and 
support team and supplies user manuals and 
documentation on how to do the installations. 
4.1.4. Company D
.
 Company D is a 
telecommunication equipment manufacturer. We
studied how the company is developing a network-
monitoring solution used by network operators to 
track network traffic in real time.  
The software development teams in company D 
are fully responsible to impl
ement main user stories 
(software features), including verification. The 
company has two main releases annually, even 
though it is possible to deliver new features of the 
monitoring tool more frequently (e.g., monthly).The 
semi-annual schedule was chosen to follow an 
internal company policy that is applied to all product 
development teams across different products. Parallel 
to the development of the main monitoring tool, 
development teams also work on customer projects 
according to customer priority. In customer-specific 
projects, releases to the cu
stomer are more frequent. 
Prior to product launch, pilot tests are conducted with 
apilot customer. Upon cu
stomer acceptance, the 
product is ready for glob
al use and the product is 
placed online on
company’s download site to be 
downloaded and used by the customer. However, 
there is typically some planning involved between the 
customer and a customer technical support unit
—
one 
of several available globally
—
regarding how the 
customer will put the product into use. 
4.2. Challenges of DevOps in the embedded 
systems domain 
This section introduces the challenges for DevOps 
adoption in the embedded systems domain. The 
challenges are identified by comparing DevOps 
practices in the web domain with 
interviewees’
responses about the barriers of moving towards 
frequent and continuous short releases and challenges 
inherent in the current ways of developing, releasing 
and maintaining software features. The findings are 
presented in figure 1.  
4.2.1. Culture of continuous improvement
.
Web companies that have adopted DevOps tend to 
have self-organising agile development 
feature teams
with the skills and tools to 
design, test and release to 
production new software features [12]. On the other 
hand, in the embedded systems domain, new product 
features are developed in silos of 
module teams
. In 
companies B and C, software development is a 
combination of feature and module development 
teams. Feature teams are cross functional, mostly 
working at the end user interface level to develop a 
set of features that cover the entire system stack. 
Module teams tend to require some level of 
specialisation to develop software modules for the 
lower layers of the system stack, particularly closer to 
the hardware. Development of new features in silos 
of modules requires effective communication and 
underscores the importance of agile software 
development in a large scale context and CI practices 
as coordination mechanisms both within the team and 
across the team when building an end-to-end product 
(C1 in figure 1).
‘
People working for acertain 
module don’t know enough what’s happening outside 
their modules. I would prefer 
that we would have 
only cross-functional teams that
 will work in end-to-
end solution in th
e bigger picture.
…There’s too 
little interaction between 
the different modules. 
Cross-functional teams with more responsibility on 
the end-to-end aspect of the feature for each team 
would be a great benefit
.
’
 (Senior developer, 
Company B). 
54415442 As embedded systems are very complex, there is 
oftentimes no mechanism to
 propagate rapid changes 
made by one team to other teams across the company 
on acontinuous basis. To enable fast feedback loops, 
systems development needs to encompass new ways 
of working whereby teams bear the responsibility for 
accepting acontinuous flow of rapid changes and 
also propagating their changes rapidly to other teams.
This is similar to a Dev
Ops culture of personal 
responsibility, in which all software developers are 
responsible for code changes they make and, when 
necessary, code changes that they did not make but 
that are affecting other developers or users [2].
However, cultural and mind-set change in terms of 
collaboration is often accomp
anied by difficulties and 
resistance. 
‘
We now have one guy from the 
operations in our R&D team. That hasn’t helped as 
much as I hoped earlier, 
because I think it’s
a
personality question that
—he’s very like a scientist
, 
more like a scientist, the personality of the guy, and it 
doesn’t help. But somehow I—
earlier, I thought that 
getting this customer exp
erience to the team would 
help a lot. But now, it hasn’t been so
 successful so 
far.
’
 (Project manager, company C) 
4.2.2. Configuration management of test 
environments
.
 Acceptance is an important stage that 
takes development teams beyond CI practices to 
validate whether new software features are valuable 
to the customer [1].In SaaS applications with 
DevOps practices, virtualization and tool support for 
configuration management are used to provide
production-like environments for acceptance test [1].
Together with automated regression and acceptance 
tests, this allows for an au
tomated process for every 
software version that has passed CI [1].In the 
embedded systems domain, customer/factory 
acceptance tests 
are executed in a controlled 
environment; for instance, in company C, afactory 
acceptance test takes several months after start-up 
after the completion of system development. The 
acceptance stage is also important for gaining 
information about how the customer environment is 
configured, because companies such as companies B
and C have alimited view of how customer 
environments are configured (C2 in figure 1). For 
these companies, each customer environment has its 
own configuration, with several elements provided 
and configured by other vendors. That creates 
complexity and makes it difficult for companies to 
repeatedly and reliably construct test environments 
that are also representative of a wide range of 
possible customer configurations.As a result, 
company B and others like 
it tend to discover many 
Figure 1. Distinguishing characteri
stics of DevOps in the web domain and obstacles in the 
embedded systems domain
54425443 faults in the system during customer acceptance tests 
in the field. This is due to having a variety of tests 
performed in a similarly configured test environment.
Moreover, companies lack fully automated 
acceptance test coverage, requiring a lot of time to be 
spent on manual acceptance
 and regression testing. 
‘
The setup is sometimes extremely complex in 
customer networks, 
and we don’t have detailed 
information about that. ... The problem is that there 
are quite many features and each of those has quite 
many different setups or 
configurations, and if we 
include all, it gets quite complex.
’
 (Senior developer, 
company B) 
4.2.3. Deployment process automation
.
In
DevOps, automation of the deployment process is 
achieved through tool support that helps to 
automatically manage application and infrastructure 
configurations [1]. In the embedded systems domain, 
deploying new software functionality to customer 
sites involves numerous activities that also require 
gaining consent from customers. In most cases, the 
complex systems cannot be updated easily because 
specific versions of software need to be updated in 
multiple places (C1 in figure 1). Also, product 
installations and new software upgrades often involve 
making customer-specific configurations. 
Embedded systems also have a long lifecycle with 
large amounts of legacy code that cannot be updated 
easily. Very often, customers acquire new product 
features for their existing systems, which may have 
old software versions from releases made several 
years earlier. Customers with old software versions 
of existing products were found in all the studied 
companies, because the companies often provided 
maintenance support to existing products or were 
legally required to support products for long periods 
after terminating development. For instance, some of 
company C’s 
products have to be supported for a 
minimum of ten years after end-of-life notification is 
given to customers. The long lifecycle of products 
requires companies to ensure high compatibility 
between new software features and the existing 
software features at customer sites. Ensuring system 
compatibility is a challenging task. 
‘
If we deliver fast, 
that means that we delive
r different versions to 
different customers, and we ha
ve to maintain all the 
versions for a very long
 time. They have to be 
compatible with the new d
eliveries. That’s really a 
tough thing to do.
’
 (Project manager, company C) 
We also found that customer processes may 
prevent automatic deployment of new software 
features on a continuous basis. It was often stated by 
the interviewees that customers do not like to 
upgrade existing systems if they are working 
correctly, and as a common rule, 
‘
you don’t fix what 
is not broken
’
.All the companies inour study have 
customers running critical proc
esses that require high 
reliability of systems. In company C, the systems at 
customer sites are required
 to run with no production 
downtime or at most afew shutdowns in a year. In
such contexts, software updates for new product 
features or hardware replacements are infrequent and 
done mostly to ensure the high reliability of the 
system. Specifically, we observed a lack of 
technology to automatically deploy new features 
repeatedly and reliably without downtime in complex 
and critical embedded systems (C3 in figure 1). For 
some products, such as mobile devices, it is easy to 
make software updates using over the air (OTA), as 
in an R&D service project implemented by company 
A. According to interviewees, automatic deployment 
would theoretically be po
ssible even in critical 
systems by using the redundant systems that are often 
present for backup; however, this approach increases 
risk for the customer.
‘
You 
don’t stop the turbine or 
paper machine for a software update. ... Upgrade of 
certain components is something that I don’t think we 
have a technological solution for that, even as simple 
athing as process control
…
 For embedded devices, 
not even mission-critical ones, we still need 
technology solutions for guaranteeing reliable 
updateability, so whether 
this will be best on 
virtualization and things like 
that, but all of those 
pieces are not in place yet
.
’
 (Program manager, 
company C)
4.2.4. Monitoring inthe production 
environment
.
 In the embedded systems domain, 
every component of a system (both software and 
hardware) needs to meet certain operational 
performance criteria. In nearly all cases, the devices 
are equipped with mechanisms for logging traced 
operational data for the entire
 system. Data is stored 
and analysed later for avariety of purposes, including 
fault diagnostics and to monitor product reliability 
and performance. In most cases, monitoring of 
software feature usage information (e.g., usage-
behaviour monitoring for software functionality) is 
rarely performed (C4 in figure 1). Some instances of 
software feature usage can be identified by 
developers who are doing maintenance work on a
fault reported by the customer.  
It is impossible to monitor customer systems, 
especially after product launches, unless the customer 
sends direct reports to the company. The four 
companies in the study rarely had access to 
monitored data from customer systems, except during 
customer trial tests or when doing fault diagnostics 
during maintenance.It is also a challenge for 
54435444 suppliers to monitor systems for a variety of often-
inaccessible customers. Generally, in the embedded 
systems domain, it would be a great benefit for the 
companies to have access to monitored data to get 
feedback about device performance and product 
feature usage patterns.
‘
Most cases, it is mandated by 
laws and regulations that logging and tracing of 
everything is a very importa
nt feature of everything 
that we do.... Here the focus 
of the monitoring is in 
technical monitoring, so like 
load scenarios. There is 
less emphasis on monitoring user behaviour
’
(Program manager,company C) 
5. Discussion 
The aim of this paper is to present the challenges 
for DevOps adoption in the embedded systems 
domain, in contrast to the web domain,where 
DevOps practices are becoming increasingly easy to 
adopt in most SaaS applications because of 
virtualization and tool support. 
The key challenges for DevOps adoption within 
embedded systems are identified in four categories. 
The first of these is 
hardware dependency and 
compatibility with multiple versions.Hardware 
dependency has resulted in companies having silos of 
software development teams in different modules. 
Despite short software development cycles, new 
feature releases to customer
s are delayed due to long 
hardware development cycles. Previous studies have 
also reported similar findings of prolonged 
development cycles resulting from hardware 
dependency [8].  
The second category of challenges is the limited 
visibility of customer environments with regard to 
configuring test environments. The DevOps concept 
emphasizes testing new software features in a
production-like environment. Tool support in 
DevOps enables web companies to automatically 
provide production-like test environments repeatedly 
and reliably. However, the companies developing 
embedded systems in our study havealimited view 
of their 
customers’ production environments.  
Customer-specific configurations further complicate 
the construction of representative test environments 
for system and acceptance testing.Liu et al. [20] 
made a similar observation that in the embedded 
systems, development environments are inconsistent 
with runtime environments.These environments are 
further complicated by the heterogeneity of hardware 
platforms [20].
The third set of challenges involves a scarcity of 
tools. DevOps in the web domain is supported by a
variety of open-source tools to automate the 
deployment process. Much research has been focused 
on testing these tools for repeatability and 
idempotence [19]. In the embedded systems domain, 
especially in critical systems, there isalack of 
technology that would allow new software features to 
be automatically deployed repeatedly and reliably on 
a continuous basis. The lack of suitable tools for 
embedded software development is a common issue 
in the embedded systems domain [20]. Currently, 
based on the study findings, frequent automatic 
deployment of new software features is less preferred 
in safety and business critical embedded systems 
domain. However, more likely to be implemented in 
the presence of suitable tools which would also 
guarantee the repeatability, reliability and operability 
of existing products and services. 
The fourth category of challenges is the absence 
of feature usage data in system performance data 
collected by embedded systems companies. Post-
deployment data presents an opportunity for 
continuous product improvement [9]. Web 
companies with DevOps practices not only monitor 
the performance of infrastructure but also conduct 
experiments regarding feature usage through A/B 
testing and canary releases [1],[2].  
In this study, the DevOps concept underscores the 
importance of agile software development and CI 
practices as foundational for the transition towards 
continuous deployment of software functionality 
[14]. Additionally, it presents the importance of 
having technology to automate the deployment 
process, as well as effective management of systems 
configurations. Therefore, from our study it is evident 
that DevOps practices originating from the web 
domain are applicable also in the embedded systems 
domain. However, further adaptation and 
contextualization of the practices is needed in order 
for the embedded systems domain to fully reap the 
benefits of DevOps as presented in this paper. 
6. Conclusion and future work 
This study identified and presented the challenges 
of adopting DevOps practices in the embedded 
systems domain. The key challenges were found to 
be (1) hardware dependency and compatibility with 
multiple software versions; 
 (2) limited visibility of
customer environments when configuring test 
environments; (3) lack of technology to 
automatically, reliably and repeatedly deploy new 
features in customer-specific environments;and (4) 
absence of feature usage data in systems performance 
data. 
54445445 We found that the application of DevOps 
concepts to the embedded systems domain 
underscored the importance of agile software 
development, specifically cross-functional teams and 
CI practices that still need improvement in the 
studied companies. Improvements to the mechanisms 
used to facilitate deployment are also necessary, such 
that it becomes repeatable and reliable. Future 
research that provides evidence on how to tackle the 
identified challenges would be of great benefit to 
academia and practitioners. 
Acknowledgment  
This work was supported by TEKES as part of the 
Need for Speed project (http://www.n4s.fi/) of 
DIGILE (Finnish Strategic Centre for Science, 
Technology and Innovation in the field of ICT and 
digital business).  
6. References  
[1] J. Humble and D. Farley, 
Continuous Delivery: 
Reliable Software Releases through Build, Test, 
and Deployment Automation
, 1st ed. Boston: 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2010. 
[2] D. G. Feitelson, E. Frachtenberg, and K. L. Beck, 
“Development and Deployment at Facebook,” 
IEEE Internet Computing
, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 8
–
17, 
2013. 
[3] G. G. Claps, R. Berntsson Svensson, and A. 
Aurum, “On the Journey to Continuous 
Deployment: Technical and Social Challenges 
Along the Way,” 
Information and Software 
Technology
, vol. 57, pp. 21
–
31, Jan. 2015. 
[4] 
A. Kniberg, H; Ivarsson, “Scaling Agile @ 
Spotify,” 2012. 
[Online]. Available: 
https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/1018963/Arti
cles/SpotifyScaling.pdf. [Accessed: 30-Apr-2015]. 
[5] 
H. Olsson, H. Alahyari, and J. Bosch, “Climbing 
the‘ Stairway to Heaven’
--A Mulitiple-Case Study 
Exploring Barriers in the Transition from Agile 
Development towards Continuous Deployment of 
Software,” 
In Software Engineering and Advanced 
Applications (SEAA)
, 2012. 
[6] R. Kohavi, R. Longbotham, D. Sommerfield, and 
R. M. Henne, “Controlled experiments on the web: 
survey and practical guid
e,” 
Data Mining and 
Knowledge Discovery
,vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 140
–
181, 
2008. 
[7] B. Fitzgerald and K.-
J. Stol, “Continuous Software 
Engineering and Beyond: Trends and Challenges,” 
in 
1st International Workshop on Rapid 
Continuous Software Engineering
, pp. 1
–
9, 2014. 
[8] B. Graaf, M. Lormans, and H. Toetenel, 
“Embedded software engineering: The state of the 
practice,” 
IEEE Software
, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 61
–
69, 2003. 
[9] 
H. Olsson and J. Bosch, “Towards Data
-Driven 
Product Development: A Multiple Case Study on 
Post-deployment Data Usage in Software-
Intensive Embedded Systems,” 
Lean Enterprise 
Software and Systems
, 2013. 
[10] LE. Lwakatare, P. Kuvaja, M. 
Oivo, “Dimensions 
of DevOps,” in 
16th International Conference on 
Agile Software Development
, pp. 212
–
217, 2015. 
[11] I. Sommerville, 
Software Engineering
, 9th ed. 
New York: Pearson, 2011. 
[12] 
J. Herbsleb and J. Roberts, “Collaboration In 
Software Engineering Projects: A Theory Of 
Coordination,” 
27th International Conference on 
Information Systems
. AIS Electronic Library 
(AISeL), pp. 553
–
568, 2006. 
[13] 
J. F. Perez, W. Wang, and G. Casale, “Towards a 
DevOps Approach for Software Quality 
Engineering,” in
 Workshop on Challenges in 
Performance Methods for Software Development
,
pp. 5
–
10, 2015. 
[14] D. Nightingale and J. Srinivasan, 
Beyond the Lean 
Revolution: Achieving Successful and Sustainable 
En
terprise Transformation
. New York, American 
Management Association, 2011. 
[15] P. Rodríguez, J. Markkula, M. Oivo, and K. 
Turula, “Survey on agile and lean usage in
 Finnish 
s
oftware industry,” in
 ACM-IEEE International 
symposium on Empirical so
ftware engineering and 
measurement
, 2012, pp. 139
–
148. 
[16] 
O. Gotel and D. Leip, “Agile software 
development meets corporate deployment 
procedures: stretching the agile envelope,” 
in 
8th
International Conference on Agile Software 
Development,
pp.21-24, 2007. 
[17] 
E. Skoglund, “Why DevOps is relevant when there 
is no Ops….Or what is Ops for embedded 
systems?,” 2015. [Online]. Available: 
http://blogs.windriver.com/wind_river_blog/2015/
04/why-devops-is-relevant-when-there-is-no-ops-
or-what-is-ops-for-embedded-systems.html. 
[Accessed:
 20-May-2015]. 
[18] 
D. Cukier, “DevOps patterns to scale web 
applications using cloud services,” 
Conference on 
Systems, programming, & applications: software 
for humanity
, 2013. 
[19] W. Hummer, F. Rosenberg, F. Oliveira, and T. 
Eilam, “Testing idempotence for infrastructure as 
code,” 
Middleware
, 2013. 
[20] G. Rong, T. Liu, M. Xie, J. Chen, C. Ma, and D. 
Shao, “Processes for embedded systems 
development: preliminary results from a 
systematic review,” in
 International Conference 
on Software and System Process
, 2014, pp. 94
–
98. 
[21] 
J. Roche, “Adopting DevOps Practices in Quality 
Assurance,” in 
Communications of the ACM
, vol. 
56, no. 11, pp. 38
–
43, 2013. 
[22] P. Runes
on and M. Höst, “Guidelines for 
Conducting and Reporting Case Study Research in 
Software Engineering,” 
Empirical Software 
Engineering
, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 131
–
164, 2008.  
54455446