 Engineering Quality while Embracing Change: Lessons Learned 
 
M.C. Marinovici, H. Kirkham, K.A. Glass, L.C. Carlsen
 
Pacific Northwest National 
Laboratory, Richland, WA 
{cristina.marinovici, harold.kirkham, kevin.glass, leif.carlsen}@pnnl.gov 
 
 
Abstract
 
In an increasingly comp
lex technical environ-
ment, failure is accepted 
as a way of maximizing 
potential, a way of growing up. Experience can be 
utilized to improve designs, advance product 
maturity, and at the same time
,
 can increase team’s 
training and education. It is not enough to 
understand the development tools to ensure a 
project’s success. Unde
rstanding how to plan, 
measure, communicate, interact, and work in teams 
is mandatory to make a project successful. A 
manager cannot enforce a process of good 
communication between team members. Project 
teams have to work together in supporting each other 
and establish a constant communication 
environment. This paper presents lessons learned 
during the development pr
ocess of operations 
research software. The te
am members have matured 
and learned during the process to plan successfully, 
adapt to changes, use Agile methodologies, and 
embrace a new attitude towards failures and 
communication
. 
 
 
 
1.
 
Overview of Paper 
 
The need to embrace change becomes an accepted 
fact of life in software development environments. 
Any software project is subjected to continuous 
changes as it supports evolving user needs. Diverse 
factors make people change their minds, and these 
changes affect the development process.  
As a first step in adapting to change, the software 
team may shift gears, self-organize and adopt the 
progressive, iterative and incremental development 
approach known as Agile. Since the standard 
methods may not work, the team might experiment in 
adjusting the methods until they find what works best 
for them. At this point, the knowledge gained can be 
utilized to improve the project’s state of art, practice, 
and the team’s education and training. 
In this paper, the reasons for change in some 
software projects are identified and their effect on the 
team’s activities are examined
. Therefore, in Section 
2 of the paper a brief description of a particular 
scientific software project and its development path 
are presented. In Section 3 and Section 4, the 
software engineering is detailed and analyzed, 
pointing out the changing points. The final part of the 
paper summarizes the lessons learned. Readers who 
develop software for scientific projects may find 
similar situations in their projects and may be able to 
use our learned lessons in their own development 
practices. 
 
2.
 
Introduction: the project
 
 
The growing penetra
tion of intermittent 
resources, such as wind and solar power generation, 
makes planning and operating the electric grid more 
challenging than ever. Decisions must be made at 
time-scales ranging from minutes to years. In 
operation, power grid operators adjust generation to 
balance the continuously changing load. In the past, 
the load on the power system has varied with 
customer needs, but the generation has been 
completely under the control of the power system. 
With intermittent renewable 
generation, not only is 
the load subject to being changeable, so is some of 
the generation. Operators have to maintain a state of 
balance by monitoring system frequency, by starting 
and controlling generator units over a time-horizon of 
hours, and doing so at minimum cost.  
To address the challenge, operational research 
software was planned. The aim of it was to allow a 
user to quantitatively analyze the impacts of 
resources with unpredictable supplies and to develop 
strategies to deal with how this unpredictability 
affects operations. The model can be used to evaluate 
an existing or future generation mix and take into 
account the effect on operations of unpredictable 
supply of various resources. 
The software was divided into two parts: the 
operational problem and the “model.” The 
operational problem is one of optimization and it is 
divided in three sub-problems, each an optimization, 
2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.19348082013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.1934810 at a different time-scale. Th
e optimizations at longer 
time-scales are used as inputs to shorter scale 
optimization. This approach, which emulates the 
behavior of actual power delivery operations, makes 
the model more detailed as execution proceeds.  
The “model” is the set of calculations that play no 
role in the optimizations, but allow calculation of 
various performance measures, or (for example) the 
carbon produced in the system operations. 
Looking retrospectively at the project, one can 
see that from the beginning, the project exhibited 
some of Mike Cohn’s problems of project 
management [2]. The project tried to do too much for 
the resources and schedule available, it had an 
unrestrained craving for f
eatures, and it believed it 
knew everything about how to build the product. The 
software development for a scientific community is 
challenging for software engineers and poses two 
major problems: requirements development and 
understanding between the engaged parties [3]. 
At its start, the project was designed as a set of 
separate functional blocks prototyped using 
MATLAB routines. Usually scientists start by 
developing a prototype and when the complexity of 
the product requires higher expertise, the software 
developers are involved [3]. A good deal of effort 
had gone into MATLAB programming before the 
software requirements, software design and 
construction procedures started being defined and put 
in place. During the first life stages of the project, the 
level of understanding of the complexity of the 
overall problem being solved gradually improved. As 
a result, the level of detail required in the modeling 
increased beyond what had first been anticipated.  
A direct consequence of the improved 
understanding was to change the solution method to 
an agent-based simulation. Given the new approach 
and the required problem sizes, the development 
team chose C++ language and the commercial 
optimizer solver IBM ILOG CPLEX to implement 
the simulation. At this point, the development of 
software requirements construction began. Once the 
software engineering pro
cess was started, it became 
evident that the scale of the system had been 
underestimated in the original planning.  
New management was introduced, and it was 
realized that one of the th
ree “iron triangle” critical 
factors – scope (features, functionality), resources 
(cost, budget) and schedule (time) – should be varied 
in order to have a successful project of a good quality 
[4]. The decision was made to de-scope. The iron 
triangle became a more elastic triangle.  
Consequently, the outside observer (non-
participant) perceived a slowing of progress, and 
pressure was brought to cut corners and produce a 
“scaled-down” version of the product. In fact, this 
pressure resulted in a reduced-capability model that 
was reasonably functional, but which could not 
readily be taken to complete the overall task.  
As the development proceeded, new require-
ments were added to the original problem, which 
inevitably altered the earlier efforts. The lack of a 
complete set of requirements made the code 
inflexible as new requirements were introduced. At 
this point, it was understood that requirements are 
what defined the work going on in the project, and 
their definition became top priority. External factors 
dictated changes in the way the things were thought 
to be and influenced specifications, making the 
requirements a living document. Dealing with 
specifications that are continuously improving means 
continuous software changes. Accepting changes was 
implicitly making the delivery target slip.  
Looking at the motivations behind the software 
changes in our project, the same reasons as the ones 
listed by Edberg and Olfman in their paper can be 
identified [5]: 

 
external changes - changes required to meet 
some external environment or outside-the-
organization needs. This sort of change or 
new requirement might be at a high level 
(sponsor) or lower; 

 
internal changes - changes required because 
of company changes, such as management 
changes or restructuring; 

 
technical changes - required to meet new 
technical demands; 

 
learning changes - due to gained knowledge 
as a result of individuals or group learning, 
(i.e., second system development – improved 
version of the old system). 
During the development of the simulator, 
another reason for software change surfaced. There 
was a communication problem. Team members did 
not have a common vocabulary and did not have a 
shared perspective on the software development 
process. Hence, misunderstandings arose related to 
the software’s feature set, 
priorities, architecture and 
structural requirements. These misunderstandings 
caused several false starts and unproductive project 
tasks. Clearly, team internal communication affects 
the productivity of the project and the knowledge 
exchange process is reduced.  
In the following section each o
f these points will 
be analyzed in detail. 
 
 
 
48094811 3.
 
Challenges in the Engineering 
 
As in any evolving process, in software 
engineering new technologies and practices are 
adopted, while the old ones are abandoned and even 
deprecated. It is considered 
that software engineering 
can be divided into ten sub-disciplines [6] as shown 
in Table 1. 
Table 1. Software engineering sub-
disciplines
 
Discipline Description 
Software 
requirements 
elicitation, analysis, specification, 
and validation of requirements for 
software 
Software 
design 
the architecture, components, 
interfaces, and other characteristics 
of a system or component 
definition  
Software 
construction 
create working, meaningful 
software through a combination 
of coding, verification, unit 
testing, integra
tion testing, and 
debugging. 
Software 
testing 
dynamic verification of the 
behavior of a program on a finite 
set of test cases, against the 
expected behavior. 
Software 
maintenance 
activities required to provide cost-
effective support to software 
Software 
configuration 
management 
systematically controlling changes 
in configuration, maintaining the 
integrity and traceability of the 
configuration throughout the 
system life cycle 
Software 
engineering 
management 
planning, coordinating, measuring, 
monitoring, controlling, and 
reporting activities to ensure that 
the development and maintenance 
of software is systematic, 
disciplined, and quantified 
Software 
engineering 
process 
definition, implementation, 
assessment, measurement, 
management, change, and 
improvement of the software life 
cycle process itself 
Software 
engineering 
tools and 
methods 
computer-based tools and  
methods which impose structure 
on the systematic software 
engineering activity  
Software 
quality 
degree to which a set of inherent 
characteristics fulfills 
requirements 
 
Not all software engineering endeavors can be 
divided this way; the needs of each project define the 
application criteria and boundaries. In what follows, 
the hurdles of the project engineering are detailed, 
focusing on the sub-disciplines subjected to 
continuous changes. 
The software requirements definition was the 
first serious system engineering on the project. 
Initially requirements were written in natural 
language. Each of the requirements was put into one 
of the below four levels: 

 
At Level 1 were requirements that derived 
directly from the sponsor. For example, the 
model had to be accessible to users who 
were outside our laboratory. 

 
Level 2 collected together the requirements 
that the user might have on the system. For 
example, the ability to retrieve any 
calculated value (i.e., any parameter) after 
running the model.  

 
Level 3 requirements were system 
requirements, applying to the entire system, 
and typically having to do with the design. 
An example of a level 3 requirement is that 
the user shall be able
 to calculate reserve 
requirements according to a standardized 
method.  

 
At level 4, the implementation is specified in 
more detail. For example, there are level 4 
requirements that are applied to operations, 
unit commitment, economic dispatch, 
generation and so on.  
While the requirements writers (power 
engineers) viewed them as acceptable, the software 
team viewed them as ambiguous or incomplete. The 
process of trying to resolve the communications gap 
and clarify the requirements revealed things that were 
not accounted for. Therefore, specification changes 
were inevitable.  
Due to the time and budget constraints, 
implementation of the full-scale system requirements 
was perceived as a difficult task. The knowledge 
embodied in the team is easier to materialize 
following an Agile methodology, than a traditional 
one [4]. Therefore, employment of the Agile method-
ology allowed the team to embrace change, and not 
try to prevent or fight it. In this light, the 
requirements and test scen
arios were linked together, 
exemplifying the abstract description of rules and 
conditions. To keep up with the project scope and 
deliverables, prioritization 
techniques were applied. 
When a requirement came in, it was analyzed and 
prioritized; its value was the most important thing for 
the development process and the coming-in time does 
not matter. Based on IEEE Std 830-1998 [7], the 
48104812 initial prioritization follows the semantic rules 
presented in Table 2: 
 
Table 2. Initial Prioritization Rules 
PriorityMeaning 
1. The requirement is a 
must have
 of the 
on-going construction (essential) 
2. The requirement is 
nice to have
 in the 
current release (conditional) 
3. The requirement is 
postponed
 to a later 
release (optional) 
As a subsequent step, the requirements were 
prioritized based on their risk-value and impact on 
functionality. By functionality, the prioritized work 
items are viewed as options and the options are 
managed as a pool. An example of possible pools, 
adapted from Scott Amber [4] is presented in Figure 
1. Stakeholder input is used for defining and selecting 
the high priority value work.  
Figure 1. Possible pools categories 
The software design process was also subjected 
to change. The initial design had called for a system 
that would run on a high-performance computer 
system. Users of the system would specify a model 
from a remote workstation. A GUI was developed to 
aid the user in model development. Simulations 
results, which were expected to store up to 1 TB of 
data, would be shipped to users for remote analysis.  
The system was also expected to use third party 
data to generate historical and projected data. To 
support this requirement, the project had to provide 
networked access to the system. In addition to the 
remote user requirements, there were requirements to 
support several different model types. During the 
course of development, other requirements were 
added, and then removed from the core requirements. 
Improved comprehension of the modeled system, 
and recognition of scope creep, required a change in 
whole system design. The project focus shifted 
toward implementation of the calculation engine with 
more modularity and flexibility for the final product. 
A “Version 2” got on the drawing board. The 
software design in Version 2 was changed. The 
project experienced the 
second system effect 
[8]: a 
smarter 
system was developed, based on the initial 
prototype. Once the development of the smarter 
system started, many fixes and improvements from 
the old system were forced in, and the chain of 
changes continued.  
The software development community estimates 
that about 40% of the development budget is used for 
code rework due to poor requirements or not getting 
the requirement “right” in the product design [5]. The 
software development team’s lack of power system 
knowledge made the translation of the requirements 
and tacit power-system practices into software 
difficult. There were even cases where the 
interpretation of a requir
ement was incorrect, and 
therefore required changes later on.  
When the second system implementation started, 
it was clear to the project team that communication 
was one of the major project problems. This was a 
project team observation, where project team means 
the whole group, including the developers, testers and 
power-system engineers. In order to overcome this 
hurdle, the project team decided to follow the Agile 
methodologies: adopted iterative and incremental 
development, followed the scrum framework and 
started pair programming sessions.  
This change improved the team dynamic and its 
communication: the power engineers were working 
together with the developers and testers to properly 
translate the requirements into software. Migration 
from the initial system to the second one also helped 
individual knowledge to be transferred to the whole 
group. In many cases, the power-systems engineers 
discussed the problem to be modeled with the team, 
helping to choose the optimal approach.  
This type of knowledge sharing can be viewed as 
a way of saving other’s time. Technical literature 
surveys provided evidence that pair programing is 
almost similar in cost with the single person 
programming [9], if you take into account the quality 
of the produced code. In the case studied here, a 
productivity increase by employing pair programing 
was observed; the continue peer-review of the 
software generated more flexible, cleaner and high 
quality code. All the team members remain in contact 
with each other and are aware of the project needs 
and directions. 
In our case, the team gained experience in risk 
assessments and was able to prevent failures by 
thinking ahead in the development process. As the 
system complexity increases, the risks grow 
proportionally, but some of the failure cases can be 
48114813 caughtearlier if knowledge is made available[10]. 
As a result of pair programming and collective efforts 
the defects life-time had reduced visibly compared 
with the period before Agile methodologies adoption. 
This fact was supported by studying the life time of a 
series of defects during a predefined time frame. The 
graph in Figure 2 shows how applying Agile 
methodologies improved the average defect time 
span. 
 
 
 
 
The project had to deal with internal changes 
too: the management changed three times and the 
project team went through multiple re-structuring 
drills.  
From time to time, in order to keep up with the 
project deliverables, the addition of more resources to 
the project was considered as
 a solution. It is a well-
recognized fact that the benefit of resources increase 
is not a linear operation: people need time to get up to 
speed and their productivity is different from person 
to person. Adding people to a project that is already 
late may not speed up the process, instead it may 
slow down even more. A bigger team will require 
more channels of communication, as presented 
mathematically by Brooks’s formulation [8]: for 
n
 
team-mates, it is necessary to have 
n
(
n

of communication. In the case of this simulator, the 
increased manpower represented a “surge.” The long-
term picture was one of decreasing manpower. 
The project had well defined software testing and 
software quality strategies, but with so many 
deviations and changes in the development path, the 
testing strategy changed too. Shifting the 
development towards Agile methodologies, where 
coding and testing are part of the same process, 
testing became a way of ensuring continuous 
progress and the quality of the product.  
Testing practices from all Agile testing quadrants 
[11], [12] (see Figure 3) were employed during the 
project life-cycle
1
. The Agile testing quadrants, put
together, define the multiple dimensions of the 
testing problem. The testing process can be viewed 
from the application or developer point of view, also 
from the way the things are built or from the point of 
view of final product and its quality [12]. 
 
Figure 3. Agile testing quadrants 
 
For example, the software team is likely to be 
concerned mainly with the bottom half of the chart, 
while the power system team would be more 
concerned with the top. In our project, unit testing 
(lower left quadrant) and performance testing (lower 
right) were almost exclusively the purview of the 
software team. The power team was more concerned 
with functional tests and scenario development. 
It is a well-known adage in mission assurance 
that you cannot “test-in” quality. Quality is 
something that has to be built in, and software is no 
exception to that. In terms of the four quadrants 
shown in Figure 3, the two quadrants on the left can 
be viewed as the more “creative,” and the likely to 
contribute to (rather than simply to discover) quality. 
What this meant for our project was that involving 
both the software team and the power team in this 
work was very beneficial. 
Since our software product is a complex system, 
a powerful and very useful approach to testing was 
represented by exploratory testing. James Bach’s 
definition of exploratory testing - “the simultaneous 
learning, test design and test execution” - states 
perfectly our testing strategy [13]. In many cases 
little was known about the proper and desired 
behavior of the software product and exploratory 
testing was performed. It helped us to define the next 
step in testing and go beyond the obvious. 
The software maintenance and configuration 
management did not experience too many major 
deviations. Everything was built respecting the 
principles of continuous integration: each check-in 
into the version-controlled repository triggers a 
                                                 
1
 
The Agile testing quadrants were introduced by Brian 
Marick, improved by Lisa Crispin and Craig Brown. The version 
presented above is based on these Agile testing quadrants [11] but 
with our own descriptions. 
Figure 2. Defects life-time curve 
48124814 software build. To assure the high quality of work, 
alignment with the refactoring principles was sought. 
Every time minor mistakes were found in the code, 
they were fixed, as part of avoiding the 90% 
syndrome [14] and the accumulation of bugs. 
Focusing on maximizing customer value, the 
engineering management and engineering process 
activities were exposed to changes associated with 
the migration towards Agile and lean software 
development. While the development team worked 
on delivering prioritized, va
lued product features, the 
management tried to dete
rmine metrics around value 
in the form of test coverage, team velocity, Agile 
adoption assessment, defect counts, and definition of 
done. In this effort, the management tried, but was 
not always successful in avoiding the seven deadly 
sins of project management [2]. For the whole project 
team, it was clear that understanding and 
implementing software engineering principles and 
other best practices is just as  important as specialized 
knowledge. 
4.The Lessons Learned 
 
In hindsight, the project engineering approach 
could have been handled better. Each type of project 
requires a different engineering approach. Making 
mistakes is helping us progress and as James Dyson 
said “instead of being punished for mistakes along 
the way, learn from them” [15]. The falling down is 
part of growing up [1]. A summary of lessons learned 
while “growing up” is presented in Figure 4. 
Figure 4. Lessons learned 
Better initial understanding of customer‘s needs 
save hours, days, weeks and even months of effort 
further down the road. Even if the process seems 
slow at the beginning, a significant increase of speed 
will be seen at each milestone [16].  
Failure to solicit feedback and learn from the 
customers and teammates creates communication 
problems, delays and, in the end, unsuccessful 
products. Communication breakdown should be 
minimized across project team and all the barriers 
that affect communication flow should be resolved as 
they appear. All team members should assure and 
establish an environment of good communication. 
 Communication is also the key for avoiding 
“muddy requirements” [17], by allowing 
transformation of tacit knowledge, ambiguous 
assumptions and beliefs into precise specification 
formulations. The “mud” comes from the different 
knowledge of the application subject experts and the 
software experts: communication is the only solution. 
Engineers must create a functional specification from 
the marketing concept proposal to document specific 
features for implementation. The functional 
specification document should be customer reviewed 
and validated.  
In the software world, project changes 
(requirements, design strategies etc.) are inevitable. 
They should not be fought; they should be regarded 
as ways of assuring quality and progress. The team 
gains experience in assessing risk and preventing 
failures. Increase of resources at critical times does 
not always speed up the progress. Working at a 
sustainable pace is the key for reducing overtime and 
product quality surprises. The team velocity shall be 
used for the incremental workload planning and 
project duration estimation. The use of team velocity 
will eliminate opaqueness [2] from the development 
process and will keep management informed on the 
project timelines and progress.  
Making use of the existing techniques, tools and 
methods can improve the project development work, 
it can speed it up by making the activity systematic 
and ultimately more likely to be successful.  
 
5.Conclusions 
There are multiple factors that determine the 
success of software projects of the same magnitude. 
Each software project is different and no single 
method can be prescribed for success. During the 
development stage, any methods that prove unreliable 
should be replaced with more dependable ones. 
Adoption of Agile and lean software development 
methodologies are ways to provide flexibility and 
adaptability to change. 
48134815 Attitudes of risk avoidance and fear of failure do 
not allow us to consider all the possibilities and 
alternative solution to our problems. But embracing 
change and accepting failure is a good way to learn 
and innovate. Instead of trying to prevent changes 
completely, the team should work together to manage 
the changes effectively, while not affecting the 
project timelines and budget. Throughout the project 
development discussed here, experience was gained 
by learning from each other and from our mistakes. 
The team feels duty-bound to share the lessons 
learned and project’s reflections with anyone 
interested in listening. 
 
References  
 
[1]
 
Henry Petroski, "
To Engineer Is Human",
 St. Martin's 
Press, New York, 1982 
 
[2]
 
Mike Cohn, “
Agile and the Seven Deadly Sins of 
Project Management
”, 
ˆ
˝gile-and-Deadly-Sins-of-
Project-Management.pdf, 2011 
 
[3]
 
J. Segal., ‘
When software engineers met research 
scientists: a case study’
, Empirical Software 
Engineering, 10(4), 2005, pp. 517-536 
 
[4]
 
Scott W. Ambler, “
Agile modeling: effective practices 
for eXtreme programming and the unified process
”, J. 
Wiley, 2002 
 
[5]
 
D. Edberg, L. Olfman, “
Organizational Learning 
through the Process of Enhancing Information 
Systems
”, 34th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS-34)-Volume 4, IEEE 
Computer Society, 2001 
 
[6]
 
Alain Abran, , Pierre Bourque, Robert Dupuis, James 
W. Moore, “
Guide to the Software Engineering Body 
of Knowledge”,
 IEEE Computer Society, 2004, pp. 1–
1, ISBN 0-7695-2330-7 
 
[7]
 
IEEE Recommended Practice for Software 
Requirements Specifications (IEEE Std 830-1998, 
Revision of IEEE Std 830-1993) 
[8]
 
Frederick P. Brooks, "
The Second-System Effect -
 
The 
Mythical Man-Month: essays on software 
engineering
”, Addison Wesley,  1975 
 
 
[9]
 
William A. Wood and William L. Kleb, “
Exploring 
XP for scientific research
”, IEEE Software Vol. 20, 
Issue 3, 2003, pp. 30Y36
 
 
[10]
 
W. W. Cottenrum, J. A. Senn, “
Challenges and 
Strategies for Research in Systems Development
”, 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1992
 
 
[11]
 
Craig Brown, “
Lisa Crispin’s test quadrants”, 

!-crispins-
test-quadrants.html
, 
2010
 
 
[12]
 
Brian Marick, "
A manglish way of working: Agile 
software development
", .in Andrew Pickering and 
Keith Guzik, "
The mangle in practice: Science, 
Society, and Becoming"
, Duke University Press, 2008 
 
[13]
 
Cem Kaner, James Bach, Bret Pettichord, "
Lessons 
Learned in Software Testing
", Wiley & Sons, 2001 
 
[14]
 
Tarek Abdel-Hamid, “
Understanding the “90% 
syndrome” in software project management: A 
simulation-based case study
”, 
Journal of Systems and 
S
oftware, Volume 8, Issue 4, September 1988, pp. 
319–330 
 
[15]
 
James Dyson, " 
No Innovator’s Dilemma Here: In 
Praise of Failure
", 
$praise-of-
ˇ
 
[16]
 
Rodney C. Wilson, “
Software RX: Secrets of 
Engineering Quality Software
”, Prentice Hall, 1996 
 
[17]
 
Ivy F. Hooks, Kristin. A. Farry, "
Customer Centered 
Products: Creating Su
ccessful Products Through 
Smart Requirements Management.", 
AMACOM -
American Management Association, New York, 2000 
 
 
 
48144816