 The Hidden Job Requirements for a Software Engineer 
 
Cristina Marinovici 
Pacific Northwest National 
Laboratory, Richland, WA 
cristina.marinovici@pnnl.gov 
Harold Kirkham 
Pacific Northwest National 
Laboratory, Richland, WA 
harold.kirkham@pnnl.gov 
Kevin Glass 
Pacific Northwest National 
Laboratory, Richland, WA 
kevin.glass@pnnl.gov 
 
 
Abstract
 
In a world increasingly operated by computers, 
where innovation depends on software, the software 
engineer’s role is changing continuously and gaining 
new dimensions. In commercial software development 
as well as scientific research environments, the way 
software developers are perceived is changing, 
because they are more important to the business than 
ever before. Nowadays, their job requires skills 
extending beyond the regular job description posted by 
HR, and more is expected. To advance and thrive in 
their new roles, the softwa
re engineers must embrace 
change, and practice the themes of the new era 
(integration, collaboration and optimization). The 
challenges may be somehow intimidating for freshly 
graduated software engineers. Through this paper the 
authors hope to set them on a path for success, by 
helping them relinquish their fear of the unknown.  
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Technology evolution creates a new and exciting 
reality, where software is used everywhere and in 
everything. Software employment in every small thing 
is changing the role of the software developer and at 
the same time the expectations people have of 
developers. Just having the technical skills is not 
enough any more. The days when developers were 
working in isolation, focusing on a single task are 
becoming history. Today, in some fields, the necessity 
to deal with a massive volume of data is changing the 
developer role, making him/her more important for the 
business. In other fields, developers become testers and 
act for the end users. Others may interact more and 
more with customers. Moreover, developers have to be 
project managers, business analysts, security experts 
and even domain experts. The developers facilitate, 
yield, and require more fundamental scientific 
understanding of the domain that they work on, 
therefore they must become 
domain experts. This is the 
environment in which the freshly graduated software 
engineer is supposed be prepared to work. 
Usually, a software developer job description 
presents only the quantifiable aspects of the work and 
cannot account for the dynamic on-the-job aspects. It is 
easy to decide whether or not the developer possesses 
the domain knowledge and the skill set. But there are 
other factors defining what is expected of the 
(employed) software developer. These factors relate 
not only to the necessary dedicated skill set and the 
level of domain knowledge, but also to the ability to 
communicate in and outside th
e team, to adapt to new 
technologies and tolerate ambiguities.  
For a software engineer working in a scientific 
research community, the employer’s expectations are 
driven by different aspects compared to the software 
engineer working in a commercial software 
development environment. Much of what is taught in 
schools focuses on business-oriented design used to 
develop commercial software. In the commercial 
world, software requirements are gathered to define not 
just the desired project, but to also understand future 
directions. This allows the developers to design 
defensively, create main
tainable, reliable and 
extensible code.  
However, thi
s is not a typical development 
environment for a science and engineering software 
project. Further, software design from an academic 
perspective is radically diffe
rent then the reality of 
scientific software development. 
The science and engineering oriented development 
environment is more dynamic. Though the purpose of 
the project should remain consistent through its 
lifetime, the underlying algorithms, design and 
numerical approaches change constantly. That may 
mean that high-level requirements are more constant 
than low-level ones. Sometimes even high-level 
requirements could undergo several adjustments. For 
scientific software projects, this entails a constant shift 
to unpredictable courses that inhibit the ability to 
design for future directions. 
An environment like this is 
not amenable for gathering clear and constant software 
requirements. In many cases, the programming strategy 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.6114979 focuses on scientist’s personal theories, with little 
attention to the broader software project, making code 
difficult to extend.  
These are only some of the hurdles that make 
scientific software development hard to maintain, 
extend and susceptible to being unreliable. 
Lately, the scientific software community started to 
adopt methodologies and techniques that proved to 
enhance productivity in commercial software 
development. This paper shares the authors’ experience 
working on scientific research projects, and 
extrapolates the findings wi
th the hope of inspiring 
others striving to become better software engineers. 
 
2. Skill set  
 
The most important and desired skill from any 
engineer is the capability to “properly” design a 
system. It is a matter of having a global view of the 
problem, while accounting for future potentials. What 
today is really high-tech and expensive, tomorrow will 
be commonly used. 
For example, the task of storing real data becomes 
cheap and easy, being facilitated by the creation of 
large data warehouses in which the information is kept. 
Therefore, what is left as the most challenging task is 
properly analyzing the data. 
“
We’re still in danger of 
suffering from shortsightedness when it comes to data 
custodianship. Every experiment needs a clear plan in 
place to ensure that a record of the original 
observations is still available and readable, even 
decades into the future [1].” 
The traditional academic curriculum, including 
research and project classes,
 influences the shaping of 
the student software engineer, preparing him/her for 
the real world work. Some of the key skills to possess 
originate from this academic training. These include: 

 
Use of scripting languages (i.e. UNIX shell 
scripting, Python) for extracting and accessing 
data from various sources. Taking advantage of 
increased computer speed, the scripting 
languages are becoming more and more 
important for the future
 applications [2]. 

 
Ability to pre-process the real data and “clean” 
it (remove noise, errors, duplications and a 
variety of other defects), which are preliminary 
steps for analysis. Often thoroughness during 
this step yields the greatest benefits. It is well 
accepted that you can recover from bad 
analysis, but you cannot recover from bad data. 
A simple analysis of clean data can be more 
productive than a complex analysis of noisy 
and irregular data. 

 
Explore data - how to go from "the bits" to 
actual understanding of the data. Appropriate 
statistical methods (many scientists and 
engineers are surprisingly bad at statistical 
analysis), and educated exploratory data analysis 
can reveal great interesting trends in data [3]. 

 
Ability to employ numerical linear algebra, 
computational and statistical methods to model 
data. These days, this may be as important as 
coding knowledge for a software engineer. 
Generating an output may be of no help 
without the benefits of interpreting it and 
understanding whether it makes sense or not. 

 
Competence in using visualization tools, which 
needs to be complemented most of the times by 
specific domain knowledge to interpret the 
data. This brings more fundamental scientific 
understanding and therefore influences the 
decision-making processes. In most scientific 
research projects, a picture (or a graph) is 
worth a thousand words [4].  
It is really important to ensure that students get 
exposure to quality assurance (QA) and software 
testing skills and techniques. This does indeed prepare 
graduates with degrees in computer science for various 
careers in software engineering. In many product 
lifecycles, the testing is performed under pressure and 
therefore a good QA skill base is valuable and desired 
for a software engineer. Testing skills, that can be 
applied in any software engineering work-field, include 
the ability to : 

 
f
ocus on what is really important and matters 
for the product delivery, 

 
actively identify, listen to, and learn from 
context drivers, 

 
dynamically prioritize testing, considering the 
risk-value and impact on functionality, 

 
create effective decision-making workflows , 

 
avoid wasteful re-work in all aspects of test 
implementation and execution, 

 
accept mistakes as a way of learning and 
embrace risk as a way to progress [5]. 
Doubtless there are more. 
In product development, projects do not always 
evolve as planned. The authors have presented detailed 
descriptions of the lessons learned from the 
development of a scientific research project in power 
system field area in a previous paper [5]. It is important 
to mention that the project was facing the de-scope 
decision. To bring back the project on track, as a first 
step, a “scaled-down” version, with fewer features was 
produced. Adoption of Agile methodologies with 
in
cremental releases (and reduction of feature-
4980 cravings) also contributed. The teams started to
 
communicate more, achieving quick and timely 
responsiveness and better collaboration. As a result, it 
has been noticed improved efficiency through better 
flow of the features from design, development, testing 
to integration. The team was able to see convergence 
of value, and most importantly reduction in bug count. 
 
2.1. Domain Knowledge 
 
Domain knowledge is hard to teach but very 
valuable. It requires practice and experience in the 
field, and is often the requirement that distinguishes 
software engineer qualifications. In scientific research 
groups, the software engineers grow their skill sets and 
domain knowledge by worki
ng on dedicated projects. 
They are able to develop a technical vocabulary, to 
understand the business and technical terms and, at the 
same time, to deal with the ambiguities of the scientific 
field. Ambiguities and misinterpretations of 
requirements when translated from business language 
into scientific language are two major factors 
introducing costly defects into product design. As the 
level of complexity of the product increases, the 
weaving between requirements and state of the 
software-product becomes more intricate [6]. 
 
2.2. Creativity 
 
Besides really good domain knowledge, creativity 
is the driving factor of the software engineering 
profession. As Edward de Bono stated “creativity 
involves breaking out of established patterns in order 
to look at things in a different way [7].” 
The necessity to incorporate rigor and subjectivity as 
well as creativity into the scientific process leaves 
space in every implementation for biases, and 
particular threats to vali
dity [8]. Nevertheless, 
creativity has a direct impact on the business, as has 
been demonstrated by the big commercial software 
companies; workplaces where talent and innovation are 
unleashed create a more productive, efficient, and 
profitable environment. In the research community, 
searching for alternative explanations, finding an 
adequate software solutio
n while accounting for the 
methods’ limitations, and ha
ving a self-critical attitude 
are vital.  
 
3. Adoption of Dynamic and Evolving 
Methodologies  
 
The economic mechanisms of the market are forcing 
the software industries to move away from the long 
years of development efforts, and to compete with each 
other in releasing better products faster . Adoption of 
dynamic and evolving methodologies can unleash a 
world of possibilities, if applied properly.  
It may not be obvious to the recently graduated 
software engineer, but 
improper
 application of 
dynamic methodologies and their trends may actually 
hinder creativity. Trying to develop a solution outside 
the carefully monitored framework may lead to 
disaster. The software engineer should keep an open 
mind, understand his or her role and responsibilities 
within the team framework, and just embrace the 
challenges.  
Adoption of new methodologies creates 
psychological changes for the software engineer. The 
daily scrum framework increases team interaction, 
creating a camaraderie connection, and influencing 
team velocity. It is important to understand that the 
scrum is not a status review, it is a way of informing 
the team of the potential blockers and to plan on how 
to surpass them. Early tackling of blockers increases 
efficiency, improves code quality and may reduce 
defect counts. 
The adoption of new methodologies (i.e., lean, 
Agile, XP, continuous delivery, etc.) changes the 
development process by asking more flexibility of the 
software engineers and their product. The change also 
affects the planning, forcing a better scope of the 
design and approach it through incremental steps.  
The effect of new methodologies adoption is visible 
in the end-product. In each sprint, the code is 
implemented end to end, being tested and integrated 
right away; this fact makes the product almost ready 
for production. Every project is different, of course, 
and therefore there is no ideal sprint length. For our 
scientific power system software development project, 
the length of the sprint was correlated with project 
milestones and resources availability.  
In any project, either scientific or commercial , t
he 
adoption of dynamic methodologies gives developers 
the possibility to experience different roles (scrum 
master, tester, user, developer, architect or manager). 
This change in roles provides a better perspective and 
understanding of the task(s), as well as a better 
estimation of the work-effort. In his article, Scott 
Sehlhorst describes estimation as “reflection of 
probabilities distribution and not specific numbers. 
Estimation carries a lot of 
risk. The estimates can be 
wrong, the estimates can be expensive, and the 
estimates can be reused. Risk is not necessarily a 
reason to avoid estimating …. Estimates can have 
value - informing rational top-down investment 
decisions, allowing for efficient investment of team 
effort by getting the most bang-for-the-buck, and 
4981 providing motivation, feedback, and learning to team 
members [9].” 
3.1. Distributed Teams 
Having your team distributed all over the globe is 
not a new thing any more. Working in global teams has 
its own problems. The time difference is the major 
factor that influences team dynamics. Communication 
channels should nevertheless be maintained open; for 
the project’s success discussions should occur often. 
Working in a distributed team on the same product will 
alleviate the meaning of work hours; you will be 
required to work late in the night or bright and early in 
the morning to be able to communicate with your 
teammates in other parts of the world.  
This is one of the cases where flexibility and 
adaptability of the software developer is really 
important. Communication that does not happen in the 
face-to-face manner will require the use of technology 
(i.e., conference calls, screen sharing, and so on). 
Colocation of team members is a way of improving 
team interaction and allowing a better knowledge 
exchange. In the case of multi-disciplinary teams the 
knowledge exchange occurs more often when teams 
are co-located or located in proximity to each other.  
On our power system software project, being close 
made it easy to ask for clarifications of the 
requirements, and saved us time and reduced the 
defects-count increase. As a result of pair 
programming and collective efforts of a multi-
disciplinary team, the defects life-time had reduced 
visibly compared with the period before Agile 
methodologies adoption. This fact was supported by 
studying the life time of a series of defects during a 
predefined time frame. The graph in 
Figure 1 
shows 
how applying Agile methodologies improved the 
average defect time span. 
Figure 1. Defects life-time curve
 
Sometimes when multidisciplinary teams are 
located together, the envi
ronment may become too 
noisy. Research studies on disciplinary team colocation 
showed that sometimes productivity decreases instead 
of increasing [10]. In an open space environment the 
level of noise can reach 80 decibels, while 65 decibels 
represents the threshold at which you heart rate reaches 
the heart-attack level [11]. In the effort of eliminating 
noise, the team members may inadvertently shut down 
the channels of communication.
 If the level of noise is 
too high in the office, offi
ce-mates will use headphones 
to filter the noise, but that will filter the technical 
discussions and disable the knowledge transfer. 
Scientific studies showed that people seeking help 
from others in open environments are becoming more 
productive, while the people offering help are having a 
decrease in productivity [10]. The interruption of your 
work to help others requires reacquaintance with the 
details of your task every time you come back to it. 
Therefore, the best approach is to set time periods 
when you cannot be disturbed and periods when you 
are willing to help others. 
 
3.2. Technology to Help Work 
 
Every company has its own preferred tool for 
editing, debugging, tracking defects and requirements, 
monitoring of the product life-cycles, revision control 
systems for code and releases, for updating 
documentation and so on. One thing it is clear: it is 
hard to have exposure to all the available products in 
the market. The software developer of a product should 
be able to master the use of the company choices in 
tools, optimize the tedious and time-consuming tasks 
by making use of the available tools. 
Working on a team (distributed or not, collocated or 
not) requires inte
raction with the other teammates. The 
use of instant messages, conference calls, screen 
sharing and google hangouts represent the routine part 
in a developer day. Interactions occur all the time 
during the work day and sometimes there is the danger 
of losing track of temporal knowledge. Answer to a 
question like “why has this approach been chosen?” 
represents temporal knowledge that may get lost in the 
development process. In th
e Agile methodologies, the 
team writes notes, keeps a history of the sprints and 
backlogs, defects and translates everything in work 
items. Discussing and taking decisions on the problems 
with the whole team improve the knowledge exchange 
and keep everyone equally involved in the 
development process. 
Many companies agree that cloud computing is the 
direction towards which things are going [12]. The 
integration of the cloud-based services is in its early 
days. Based on the needs of the organization, one can 
use the commercial public cloud services or build 
one’s own private clouds, or do both. Cloud computing 
4982 providers offer their services according to several 
fundamental models (i.e., SaaS (Software as a Service), 
PaaS (Platform as a Service), IaaS (Infrastructure as a 
Service)). Using cloud computing will allow the 
companies to maximize the effectiveness of the shared 
resources and it can be viewed as a way of increasing 
productivity.
Even in the scientific software community the 
cloud computing and parallel programming are gaining 
more ground, being adopted as ways to improve 
quality of software and productivity. The increased 
complexity of the modeled problems require high 
performance computing capabilities, dedicated 
platforms and sometime the possibility to integrate 
hardware equipment and software parts.
 
 
4. Communication 
Communication is the key to avoid “muddy 
requirements” [13], by allowing transformation of tacit 
knowledge, ambiguous assumptions and beliefs into 
precise specification formulations. The “mud” comes 
from the different knowledge of the application subject 
experts and the software experts: communication is the 
only solution. Engineers must create a functional 
specification from the marketing concept proposal to 
document specific features for implementation. The 
original concept is likely written in business-readable 
language, and its translation into technical functional 
specifications can introduce ambiguous and 
inconsistent requirements. It is important for the 
functional specification document to be customer 
reviewed and validated in order to enforce its technical 
integrity. 
Migration from one phase of the project to the the 
second one may help individual knowledge to be 
transferred to the whole group. In many instances, in 
our scientific development project, the power-systems 
engineers discussed the problem to be modeled with 
the team, helping to choose the optimal approach. This 
type of knowledge sharing can be viewed as a way of 
saving each other’s time, if one accounts for the quality 
of the code produced. In our studied case, a 
productivity increase by employing pair programing 
was observed; the continuing peer-review of the 
software generated more flexible, cleaner and high 
quality code. All the team members remained in 
contact with each other and were aware of the project 
needs and directions. The team gained experience in 
risk assessments and was able to prevent failures by 
thinking ahead in the development process. 
Communication should occur at all levels in a team. 
The internal team likely has dedicated communication 
channels in place, but communication with customers 
is a bit more difficult. If there is no direct channel of 
communication between developers and customers, 
and all the communication is accomplished through the 
business representatives, many requirements/features 
can be miscommunicated or misinterpreted.  
For illustration purposes, let us include an example 
that describes the unforeseen troubles of the problem 
of power factor in a utility. Broadly speaking, the 
problem was to keep the power factor near unity at a 
substation. The solution implemented gave results as 
presented in 
Figure 2
. The diagram shows the result of 
an automatic control system, operating over several 
days. It is very clear that when the control is activated, 
the power factor is maintained very close to unity. 
Figure 2. Power factor at bus for 5-day period 
The power factor on the substation was being well- 
controlled. However, closer investigation revealed a 
problem. The power factor on the secondary bus of the 
substation was indeed quite well controlled, but on the 
various lines that were fed by the bus, it was far from 
well managed. An example of feeder power factor 
corresponding to the time shown in 
Figure 2
 is given in 
Figure 3.
 
It can be seen that the feeder has very large 
deviations from unity power factor when the control is 
active, not very different from when it is not activated. 
While the control system is clearly capable of solving 
the problem, the problem was not well-defined, and the 
wrong problem
 was solved.  
Figure 3. Power factor on line for same 5-day 
period as Figure 2
 
There is a trend today to involve the software 
developer in customer interaction. They can interact 
4983 with them directly, and get direct user feedback. 
Feedback is brought back into the product development 
life-cycle, and that translates
 into a decreased risk in 
customer product acceptance. Having a shorter 
feedback loop can also be reflected in productivity. 
Software engineers are more visible in media, 
social networks and at conferences, providing the 
audience with direct information on products and the 
ways they were designed. Usually, software products 
are not the result of an individual software developer, 
especially in the commercial companies. Even if each 
developer is only responsible for a specific part of a 
large software product, they can and should be part of 
the team promoting the result. It is hard to say whether 
or not this would positively influence the product 
distribution. For example, would a chat with one of the 
software developers affect the decision of a car buyer, 
even if the car depended on millions of lines of code? 
Nevertheless, some developers are becoming more 
involved in assisting their business in making its value 
known in the world. 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
The future for the software developer looks bright. 
Demand among government, scientific communities 
and business entities to leve
rage new data sources for 
business advantage is growing. Digital control is 
replacing analog. User interfaces are everywhere. 
Companies can tailor their customer offerings and 
develop tighter connections with them. These industry 
trends are creating a demand for greater numbers of 
software engineers, but they are also changing the role 
of software engineers. The software engineer of 
tomorrow will need education and experience beyond 
that of the software engineer of yesterday. 
 
7. References  
 
[1]
 
Viktor T. Toth, Slava G. Turyshev, “Finding the 
Source of the Pioneer Anomaly”, IEEE Spectrum, 
November 2012 
 
[2]
 
John Ousterhout, “Scripting: Higher Level 
Programming for the 21st Century”, IEEE 
COMPUTER, 1998  
 
[3]
 
John W. Tukey, “The Technical Tools of Statistics”, 
http://cm.bell-
labs.com/cm/ms/departments/sia/tukey/ 
 
 
[4]
 
 Harold Kirkham and Robin Dumas, “The Right 
Graph: a Manual for Engineers and Scientists”, Wiley 
and Sons, New York, 2009. 
 
[5]
 
Cristina Marinovici, Harold Kirkham, “The many 
faces of a software engineer in a research 
community”, Pacific Northwest Software Quality 
Conference, 2013 
 
[6]
 
Cristina Marinovici, Harold Kirkham, Kevin Glass, 
and Leif Carlsen, “Engineering Quality while 
Embracing Change: Lessons Learned”, 46th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS), 2013 
 
[7]
 
Edward de Bono,
 “
Lateral Thinking: Creativity Step 
by Step”, Harper & Row Publisher, New York 1973 
 
[8]
 
Robin Whittemore, Susan K. Chase, Carol Lynn 
Mandle, “Validity in Qualitative Research”, Qual 
Health Res
 
July 2001 11: 522-537
,
 
 
[9]
 
Scott
 
Sehlhorst, “To Estimate or Not to Estimate - 
That Is the Question”, 2013, 
http://www.techwell.com/2013/05/estimate-or-not-
estimate-question 
 
[10]
 
Beth Romanik, “Embrace the Cubicle: Open-Plan 
Offices Make You Less Productive”, 2013, 
http://www.techwell.com/2013/05/embrace-cubicle-
open-plan-offices-make-you-less-productive 
 
[11]
 
Decibel Levels of Common Sounds, 
http://home.earthlink.net/~dnitzer/4HaasEaton/Decibe
l.html 
 
[12]
 
Eric Knott, Galen Gruman, “What cloud computing 
really means“, http://www.infoworld.com/d/cloud-
computing/what-cloud-computing-really-means-
031?page=0,0 
 
[13]
 
Ivy F. Hooks, Kristin. A. Farry, "Customer Centered 
Products: Creating Successful Products Through 
Smart Requirements Management.
", 
AMACOM -
American Management Association, New York, 2000  
 
 
4984