 Understanding Shared Leadership in Agile Development: A Case Study 
 Nils Brede Moe
1, Torgeir Dingsøyr
2, Øyvind Kvangardsnes
2 1SINTEF ICT, NO-7465 Trondheim, Norway 
2Dept. of Computer and Information Science, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway nilsm@sintef.no, dingsoyr@idi.ntnu.no, oyvinkva@stud.ntnu.no
  Abstract 
 In agile software development methods such as 
Scrum, software is developed in self-organizing teams. 
In such teams, leadership should be diffused rather 
than centralized; also the team-members need to affect 
managerial decisions for achieving the benefits of a 

self-managed team. When the team and team leaders 

share leadership, leadership is rotated to the person 
with the key knowledge, skills, and abilities for the 
particular issues facing the team at any given moment. 
Therefore, we argue that the team leadership in Scrum 
should be divided among the Product-owner, Scrum-

master, and the self-organizing team. If teams are to 
succeed at implementing shared leadership in Scrum, 

not only do the vertical (o
r traditional) leaders need 
training and development but so too do the team 
members themselves. 

 1. Introduction  Agile software development [11] represents a new 
approach for planning and managing software projects. 
Agile development differs from the traditional plan-
driven approaches as it puts less emphasis on up-front 

plans and strict plan-based control and more emphasis 

on mechanisms for change management during the 

project [25]. Further, agile development relies on 

people and their creativity rather than on processes [7]. 
Leadership and collaboration, informal communication 
and an organic (flexible and participative, encouraging 

cooperative social action) organizational form are other 

characteristics of agile software development [24]. 
Cohn and Ford [9] have referred to a number of 
possible setbacks or errors that may occur when an 
organisation is making the transition from plan-driven 

towards agile processes. The problems are mainly 

caused by resistance to, or over-enthusiasm for, agile 

practices within a software development team. When 

changing from plan-driven to change-driven, this may 
also impact several aspects of the organization 
including its structure, culture, and management 
practice [24]. Neither culture nor mind-sets of people 
can be easily changed, which makes the move to agile 

methodologies all the more formidable for many 

organizations [6]. Software development processes 
depend significantly on team performance, as does any 
process that involves human interaction. Two 

important factors to achieve team performance are 

feedback and communication. Also leadership, in 

addition with composition and motivation, are of near-

universal importance to teams [15, 28]. 
Agile development relies on teamwork, as opposed 
to individual role assignment that characterizes plan-

driven development [24]. In a team following a plan-

driven model, the usually independently focused self-

managing professionals have role specifications, 
including a specialized leadership role. This view on 
leadership assumes that there is usually one person 

who has much more influence that other members. The 

opposite view is that that leadership is no different 

from the social influence process occurring among all 

members of a group, and leadership is as a collective 
process among the members [37]. Agile methodologies 
supports this view and requires a shift from command-
and control management to leadership-and-
collaboration [24]. 
Augustine et al. [4] describe agile project 
management at a form of enabling the project 
managers and employees to adapt to changing 
circumstances rather than imposing formal control. 

They refer to Complex Adaptive Systems, which 

explains for example the complex behaviour of ants as 

based on a limited number of simple rules. A question 
is then, what kind of simple rules should be in place to 
enable leadership in an agile team? And if leadership is 

supposed to emerge from simple rules, what is the role 

of the managers? How should good leadership be 

established? 
Motivated by the importance of both teams and 
team leadership in software development, and the 
challenge of introducing self-organizing teams in 

change-driven development, our research question is:  

 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20091978-0-7695-3450-3/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE What are the main challenges in establishing 
leadership in an agile software development project? 

 The 
remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
In Section 2, we present background information on 
agile development, and we use the literature to 

understand team leadership. In section 3, we describe 

our research method in detail. In Section 4, we present 
results from a single-case study of a Norwegian 

software company on team leadership in agile 
development. We discuss our findings in Section 5. 
Section 6 concludes and presents key findings from the 

study. 
 2. Agility and team leadership 
 In this section we use the literature to describe agile 
development and Scrum, self-organizing teams and 
two major characteristics which have to be in place for 

self-organized teams: Shared leadership and good 

mechanisms for learning. 
 2.1. Agile development and Scrum  
 Agile software development comprises a number of 
practices and methods [1, 8, 11, 12]. Among the most 

known and adopted agile methods are Extreme 
Programming (XP) [5] and Scrum [29]. In this study 
the focus is on Scrum since Scrum is an agile approach 

to management of software development projects [1, 8, 

12]. For studies of Scrum, see [10, 14, 20, 22, 26].
 In Scrum, the team is given significant authority 
and responsibility for many aspects of their work, such 

as planning, scheduling, assigning tasks to members, 

and making decisions: "The team is accorded full 
authority to do whatever it decides is necessary to 

achieve the goal" [29]. 
Scrum and Agile development favour a leadership-
and-collaboration style of management where the 

traditional Project-manager’s role is replaced with the 

Scrum-master’s role of a facilitato
r or coach [1, 8, 12]. 
The Scrum-master does not o
rganize the team, but the 
team organizes itself and makes the decisions 

concerning what to do. The Scrum-master works to 

remove the impediments of the process, runs and 
makes decisions in the daily meetings and validates 

them with the management [29].  
In addition to the Scrum master and the Scrum-
team, the Product-owner is 
an important role regarding 
team leadership. The Product-owner is the official 

responsible for the project, managing, controlling and 
making visible the product backlog list. He or she is 

selected by the Scrum-master, the customer and by the 

management. He makes the final decisions on the 
product backlog, participate in estimating the effort for 
backlog items and turns the issues in the backlog into 
features to be developed [29].  
In a self-organizing team, 
leadership should be 
diffused rather than centralized [23]. 
Therefore we 
argue 
that the team leadership in Scrum should be 
divided among the Product-owner, Scrum-master, and 
the team. To understand how this should be 

implemented, it is essential to understand the concept 
of self-organizing teams and shared leadership. 
 2.2. Self-organizing teams 
 Self-organizing, autonomous or self-managed teams 
have been found to stimulate participation and 

involvement. An effect of this is increased emotional 
attachment to the organization, resulting in greater 
commitment, motivation to perform and desire for 

responsibility. As a result, employees care more about 

their work, which may lead to greater creativity and 

helping behaviour, higher productivity and service 

quality [13]. Self-management can also directly 
influence team effectiveness since it brings decision-
making authority to the level of operational problems 

and uncertainties and, thus, increase the speed and 

accuracy of problem solving [32]. 
Self-organizing 
teams are seen as one of the premises for succeeding 
with innovative projects [16, 31]. 
Miles et al. [21] 
suggested that self-management is the 
first design 
principle
 for an innovative and collaborative 
organization. 
Takeuchi and Nonaka [31] found that although the 
members of a self-organized team are largely on their 
own, they are not uncontrolled. Management should 

establish enough checkpoints to prevent instability, 

ambiguity, and tension from turning into chaos. At the 
same time, managers should avoid the kind of rigid 
control that impairs creativity and spontaneity. Tata 
and Prasada [32] found that employees really need to 

affect managerial decisions for achieving the benefits 

of a self-managed team. Also there is evidence 

indicating that the 
type of autonomy may be just as 
important as the 
amount 
[17]. 
In the following, we define autonomy as the degree 
to which the task provides substantial freedom, 

independence, and discretion in scheduling the work 

and in determining the procedures to be used in 
carrying it out [33]. When discussing autonomy in 
relation to a self-organizing team, we define autonomy 

on three levels [22]:  
 2.2.1. External autonomy.
 External autonomy is the 
influence of management and other individuals 
(outside the team) on the team
s activities [16]. Such 
influence can be deliberate actions from management 

to limit autonomy, such as requiring the team to make 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20092 certain decisions regarding work strategies or 
processes, project goals and resource allocation. While 

some forms of team-external influence are sometimes 
beneficial because they provide important feedback, 
the specific type of team-external influence considered 
here is detrimental to teamwork in projects e.g. 

developing software [16]. 
When decisions are made outside the team, such 
decisions reflect outside perspectives. If the team 
members feel that the project reflect largely external 
demands, then they are less likely to identify with the 

project [22]. The level of external autonomy can be 

reduced by the lack of a system for support and people 

working on several projects because the team will then 

have problems protecting their resources. [22]. Also 
the team need to be involved in the initially planning of 
the project (deadlines, contracts etc) [22]. 

  
2.2.2. Internal autonomy.
 Internal autonomy refers to 
the degree to which all team members jointly share 

decision authority, rather than a centralized decision 
structure where one person (e.g., the team leader) 
makes all the decisions or a decentralized decision 

structure where all team members make decisions 

regarding their work individually and independently of 

other team members [16]. Not every decision must be 
made jointly with equal involvement by every team 
member; rather the team can also delegate authority to 

individuals or subgroups within the team. 
One big threat against internal autonomy is highly 
specialized skills and corresponding division of work 

[22]. This can result in a lack of redundancy, which 
reduce the flexibility and, thus, the internal autonomy 
of the team. But a paradox arises: how much 

redundancy should be built into a system? 
 2.2.3 Individual autonomy.
 Individual autonomy 
refers to the amount of freedom and discretion an 
individual has in carrying out assigned tasks [19, 33]. 
Langfred [19] describes individuals with high 

autonomy as individuals who have few rules and 

procedure constraints, high control over rules and 

procedures, and high control over the nature and pace 
of their work. As individual work becomes more 
independent, and as individuals exert more control 
over the scheduling and implementation of their own 
tasks, there will be less interaction between group 

members. Given reduced contact between group 

members, it may be a problem to achieve a high level 
of internal autonomy. 
Autonomy on an individual level may conflict with 
autonomy on a group level, because when individual 

goals are more important than the team
s goals this 
reduces the internal autonomy [22]. 

 2.3. Shared leadership  
 For the team to have internal autonomy, they need 
shared decision authority and shared leadership. When 
the team and team leaders share leadership, leadership 
is rotated to the person with the key knowledge, skills, 

and abilities for the particular issues facing the team at 

any given moment [19]. While the project manager 

should maintain the leadership for project management 

duties (vertical leader), team members should be 
allowed to lead when they possess the knowledge that 
needs to be shared or utilized during different phases of 

the project [11].  
It is one thing to say that we need shared leadership 
in a Scrum team but another thing entirely to develop it 

effectively. According to Pearce [19] the team leader 
should be responsible for designing (and re-designing) 
the team, including clarifying purpose, securing 

resources, articulating vision, selecting members, and 

defining team processes. He or she should also manage 

the boundaries of the team. When applying Scrum, 
these responsibilities should be the assigned to the 
Scrum-master, except for the vision which should be 

assigned to the Product-owner. 
Insofar as possible, team leaders should select team 
members based on their technical, teamwork, and 

leadership skills. If shared leadership is to be 
developed, the right people must be on the team, and 
the teams need to be small [19]. The vertical leader 

must also articulate how the team will approach its task 

and function as a team [19]. At the same time, the team 

leader must articulate trust and confidence in the team 
Training is essential when introducing shared 
leadership. If teams are to succeed at implementing 
shared leadership, not only do the vertical (or 

traditional) leaders need tr
aining and development but 
so too do the team members themselves [19]. 
 2.4 Learning and agile leadership 
 Single-loop and double-loop learning [3] is 
important in agile leadership. In single-loop learning, 
one receives feedback in the form of observed effects 
and then acts on the basis solely of these observations 

to change and improve the process or causal chain of 

events that generated them. 
In double-loop learning, 
one not only observes the effects of a process or causal 

chain of events, but also understands the factors that 
influence the effects. C
ontinuous self-organizing 
requires a capacity for double-loop learning that allows 

operating norms and rules to change along with 
transformation in the wider environment [23]. 
Therefore, from the literature described earlier in 
this paper, we argue that there are two major 
characteristics which have to be in place in order to 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20093 ensure distributed leadership in agile development, 
namely good mechanisms for learning, and a sufficient 

division of external, individual and internal autonomy. 
The Scrum-master is responsible for establishing this. 
We discuss these characteristics in section 5. 
 3. Research design and method 
 The goal of this research is to understand team 
leadership in agile software development; hence, it is 
important to study software development teams in 
practice. We chose a flexible research design [27], 

namely a single-case holistic study [36], where we 

studied team leadership in a project in a small software 
development department, using multiple sources of 
data. The company had recently started to use Scrum. 
The company introduced Scrum because they 
wanted to improve their ability to deliver iteratively 

and on time, increase the quality of software, improve 

the team-feeling and team communication. The whole 

development department with 16 developers were 
introduced to Scrum one year prior to the start of the 
project described in this study. The project started in 

February 2007 and was supposed to be delivered by 

January 2008, but was not finished by February 2008 

when our data collection ended. It was the third Scrum 

project in the company. 
The data material for this case study is a subset of 
an ethnographically informed study. 
 Table 1: Data sources used in this study. 
Source Comment 
Observation Participant observation and observation 
of daily stand-up meetings (19), sprint 
planning meetings (4), sprint reviews (6), 
and sprint retrospective (1) as well as 

other meetings. The 72 observations were 

documented in field notes, which also 
include pictures. 
Interviews Interviews with three developers and 
Scrum-master, transcribed. 
Documents Product backlog, sprint backlogs, burn-
down charts and recorded data from 

Team System as well as documented on 

index cards on wall in the development 
area. 
 As for observation, the first and the last authors 
conducted ethnographic observations (Participant 
observation [18]) from April 2007 until January 2008. 
In addition to participant observation, we used 
interviews and documents as data sources, see Table 1. 
 Choosing this approach was inspired by Sharp and 
Robinson [30]. In the beginning of the project the first 
author worked extensively with the team on GUI-

design. After the design was finished the first and third 
author was involved in workshops on high-level 
architectural design, estimation and planning meetings. 

In the two first development sprints, the third author 
was responsible for running unit tests, and also set up 
automated testing. From sprint 3 and onwards, the 

researchers became more outside researchers by only 

observing and not actively participate in meetings.  
The observation sessions lasted from ten minutes to 
eight hours. We visited the team one to five times a 
week, in total 72 observations. The semi-structured 
interviews were performed towards the end of the 
project. 
As for documents, we gathered material from 
Microsoft Team System, which gave an overview of 

items in each sprint, estimates and burndown charts for 
the first eight sprints. However, the data in Team 
System sometimes deviated from what was reported in 

the company and also from what could be seen in the 
wall which will be described in the following. 
As for analysis, we organized two data analysis 
sessions where all three researchers discussed the 
material from the study. We used time-plots of events 
and weekly write-ups in addition to reading interview 

transcripts and plotting the data collected. We 

organized the material to give a rich description of the 

case, but focused primarily on the aspects related to 
team leadership and team self-organizing. 
 4. Team leadership in an agile project 
 The goal of the project under study was to 
redevelop a software package used internally to handle 

reports from customers. Winter is the low season for 
the use of this software and the high season begins in 
March/April with 60-70 simultaneously users. The 

seasonal constraints gave a relatively narrow time 
frame for introduction of a new version of the 

software, and therefore the deadline was initially 
January 2008. The project started February 2007, and 
was estimated to use 3000 hours. The old version of 
the system was developed and maintained by a 

consultancy company, but the company now wanted to 

improve the system and to able to maintain it 

themselves.  
Initially the project consisted of two developers 
(one junior developer recently hired and working 100% 

on the project, and an experienced developer working 
50-100% on the project), a Scrum-master, a Product-
owner, and a Project-manager. The Scrum-master was 

also doing some development and also had the role as 
department head, which meant he had many other 
obligations. The Project-manager was cooperating with 

the Product-owner to define the features, in addition to 

being responsible for the budget and communicating 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20094 with the top management. The Product-owner and the 
Project-manager were situated in another city. Two 

months after start-up, a third experienced programmer 
joined the team. He was working 50-100% on the 
project. 
Traditionally this was a plan-driven company 
relying on highly specialized skills and corresponding 

division of work. This was now gradually changing 

after introducing Scrum. One developer said: 
We are 
now working more together, and we share the code, 
and we know which functionality the others are 

working on.
 Another said: 
This is the first time I have 
experienced that we are editing each others code, and 

that we all have a good overview. If a person for some 

reason goes away, this will not stop the project. 
 Table 2. Sprints with number of workdays, 
planned and actually used hours.  
Sprint 
Work 
days 
Hours 
planned
 Hours 
used % 1 22 300 182 61% 
2 24 350 245 70% 
3 43 327 372 114% 
4 22 400 375 94% 
5 20 350 260 74% 
6 11 254 278 109% 
7 9 254 253 100% 
8 8 NA NA NA 
 4.1. Pre-game: February to April 
 This phase started with a kick-off meeting, 
including five developers in addition to the Scrum-
master. Three of these five developers were planned to 
join later. However, the Scrum-master lost two of these 
developers to other projects. 
The focus of the first phase was analysis, design and 
planning. The vision for this phase was: Describe the 
user interfaces which we will need to change. This 
vision highlighted that the project in essence was a re-
engineering project. 
During this phase the team extensively used white-
board prototyping to create sketches of the GUI. They 
also produced diagrams for describing workflow, 
architecture, and the design. This way of working 
stimulated shared decision-making and then shared 
leadership. As the Product-owner was not physically 

present, the team communicated frequently with him 

using telephone and e-mail. But the team often got 

stuck because they could not get immediate feedback 

from him. This resulted in discussions ending without 
conclusion because the team was lacking vital 
information. 
During some of the workshops in this phase the 
Scrum-master was frequently interrupted. When he left 
the workshop the progress usually stopped. One of the 
developers commented while waiting for the Scrum-

master: 
A lot of time is wasted because people run in 
and out of meetings. Team members getting interrupted 
all the time slows us down. 
It seemed like the team was 
lacking skills when the Scrum-master was absent, and 

when a person in lead suddenly left the work stopped.
 One of the design-workshops was prepared by the 
newly hired developer. In the beginning of the 
workshop, it became clear that he was lacking some 
core competence, the team had to redo his work, and 

someone else lead the design effort. Since the newly 

hired developer was the only one working full time on 

the project, he often had to take responsibility for 

important work. He later commented: 
It is a bit odd 
that the fresh developer with no experience on vital 
part of the technology used, is the one ending up doing 

most of the project. It is strange that experience is not 

more important when planning and accomplishing a 

project. 
 The problem with resources vanishing from the 
project was discussed during one lunch: Chris (the 
developer joining later): 
I do not think the management 
knows how many hours we use on all the changes in 

other projects, and I
m not sure we get paid either. 
There has been a crisis in one of my projects lately, 
and there is continuously fire fighting.
 Lindy (working 
part time on the project): 
If you get the responsibility 
for a project in this company, you are stuck with it 
forever. It is like a quagmire, and the result is people 
not wanting to take responsibility. You get really tired 

when people continuously come and ask you to do 
something; I get exhausted because it takes my energy. 
If you do not say 
NO you will use all your time 
dealing with request from the internal customers. They 
blame us on delivering bad 
quality, and we blame them 
on lacking technical competence. 
Mike: 
We are too 
specialised, resulting in only one person being able to 
solve an issue. So when anything happens you need to 
leave whatever you are doing at the moment.
 This conversation describes one of the reasons for 
why people were frequently interrupted, why 

developers did not want to assume leadership, and as a 
result the difficulty of applying shared leadership. 
The first phase ended with a planning meeting, 
where the Product-owner presented the first draft of the 

product backlog in addition to a preliminary release 
plan. The Scrum-master and the team also presented 

what they had identified as the project concerns. A 
project concern [34] is a functional aspect that is 
considered to be of such importance that they should 

be treated separately and be specifically visible through 
the project. The team defined the concerns to be 
performance and reliability. The concerns should make 
it easier for the team to prioritize, decide and lead 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20095 when working on the architecture and implementation. 
We observed several times that this helped the team 

identify and dealing with conflicting features. 
Another important tool for understanding the 
project-environment was the work on defining the 
project risk list and corresponding measures. The risks 

were identified by the Scrum-master and later 

discussed with the team to identify measures. This was 
then presented in this planning meeting. 
During the first planning meeting we observed that 
the two developers were mostly quiet. We also noticed 

that the discussions were mostly about issues relevant 

to the Product-owner, Project-manager and Scrum-

master. This, as well as a fear of taking leadership 

ending up in another quagmire, could be reasons for 
the silence. 
 4.2. Everyday work: Sprint one to five  
 
From the start of sprint one in April, to the end of 
sprint five in October, the length of the sprint was 

around 20 working days (see table 2). Both the Scrum-

master and Product-owners seemed reasonably 

satisfied with the progress during the review-meetings. 
The third developer started working partly on this 
project during this phase, but it was clear that he was 

missing taking part of some of the early discussions. 
Six months later he said: 
most of the decisions were 
taken and agreed upon a long time before I joined the 
project.
 On the day of the review- and planning-meeting, the 
Product-owner and Project-manager usually arrived by 
airplane early in the morning and usually leaving the 

same afternoon. In the planning meetings there were a 
lot of discussions about the intention of each feature 
and how the system was supposed to be used. It was 
obvious that this was important for being able to 

decide on what to do; however these discussions were 

time-consuming and seemed somehow to exclude the 

developers. Also these meetings ended in a discussion 

between the Scrum-master, Product-Owner and 
Project-manager. These discussions reduced the time 
available for planning the upcoming sprint, and 

excluded some team-members from the decision-
making. This probably affected the team
s chance of 
really committing to the sprint. Later on we observed 

another phenomenon affecting the possibility for 
committing and take leadership. The Scrum-master 
sometimes suggested who should do what in the 

planning- and morning-meetings. When we later 
discussed this topic with the Scrum-master he said: 
I probably influence what they do. It difficult to keep 
your mouth shut when you feel you have some good 
recommendations to give. It
s an old habit, difficult to 
change. They often agree on my suggestions, but not 
every time. I think they speak up if they do not agree, 

and I feel they show initiative regarding their job.  
It was obvious that he felt he got the most 
competence and should take the leadership on several 
issues. During the detailed planning the next day, using 

planning poker, the team often ended up getting stuck 

in discussions. The team then needed to contact the 
Product-owner after the meeting to finalize the plan 
and this complicated the process. Also during this 
meeting the team found the backlog difficult to use. 

One developer later commented: 
The product-backlog 
is a mix of very detailed and very general items. 
Especially all the detailed items are a problem because 
they also include design, and they often only require 1-
2 hours of work. Then you plan to do several of these 
small items in parallel since they are all related, and 

then you often get problems. It should be us splitting 

up the features, not the Product-Owner.  
The team felt they were not able to take the 
leadership when the product backlog was translated to 
the sprint backlog. The Product-Owner got good skills 
and experience in defining traditional requirements, 

and therefore created a too detailed product backlog.
  One recurring phenomenon in this phase was the 
team never finishing any of the sprint backlogs. There 
were many unfinished tasks when the sprint ended. In 
each sprint, the backlog early indicated that it was not 

possible to complete all tasks. It seemed that everyone 
knew they could not finish the sprint, but no one 
suggested any measures to be taken. The Scrum-master 

commented this at the end of the project: 
In the 
beginning there were so many dependencies to other 
projects and subcontractors, so we did not know which 

tasks we could complete during the sprint. It is also 

about optimization. You should always have the 

possibility to work on something else if you are stuck. 

We also started on too many tasks in parallel, and then 
we lost progress on project-status.
 When talking about 
the effect of this Chris said: 
When you during a sprint 
realized that you would not finish, you do not care if 
you were 70% or 90% done. It did not matter. These 

tasks were just moved to the next sprint, but then we 
also needed to add several other tasks to show 
progress. We ended up always having a lag from the 
last sprint but without knowing how big this was. Since 
we also added too many features we knew we could not 

finish, and then we did not care if we did not complete 
all the tasks during a sprint. Some tasks were moved 4 
sprints before they were even started.  
During the discussion with Chris it became clear 
they were not strict about the done criteria, or doing 

proper testing. This also affected the possibility to 
finish a sprint. He said: 
Another problem was that we 
classified tasks as finished before they were completed, 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20096 and we knew there were still work to be done. It seems 
that the Scrum-master wants to show progress, and 

make us look a little better than we really are. These 
tasks are then not on the list of the next sprint since 
they officially are done, but we know there is still some 
more work needed. Each sprint starts with doing things 

that we have said were finished, and then you know 

you will not finish the sprint. 
Another issue discussed frequently was that 
resources were taken from the project. Two of the 
developers were involved in other projects having 

problems or releases in this period, resulting in the 

team only getting 50-70% of the planned contribution 

from the senior developers. The only one working 

100% was the fresh developer.
 In the daily stand-up the Scrum-master often asked: 
Will you work on the project this week? 
Lindy: 
probably
 today or tomorrow. 
Chris: 
probably I will 
work today.
 In the following stand-up we observed that Chris 
had not done anything because of several emerging 
meetings. 
During sprint two the team and the product-owner 
discussed the problem with adding too many features 

to the sprint backlog and loosing resources. The 

Scrum-master: 
This sprint we did not get as many 
resources as planned.
 Product-Owner: 
but this does 
not answer why you only did half of what we planned 

to do.
 Scrum-Master: 
No, we also added too many 
features. Next time we need to start on the right level
  Our data indicate that this situation did not change 
much. Leadership was absent regarding this problem. 
 The wall
 was introduced in the middle of this 
phase. Every task was then visible, and categorized 

into 
not started
, in progress
 and 
finished
. The 
wall
 made it visible to everyone that they were 
working on a lot of tasks in parallel.  
One day before a review-meeting we overheard the 
Scrum-master telling the developers to report more 
hours than already reported. This report is presented 

for the Product-owner, and this action seemed to be 

taken to make the team look as contributing according 

to the plan. However the Product-owner and Project-
Manager seemed to understand that something was not 
correct regarding the reports. During a planning 
meeting the Product-owner said: 
It is a little bit 
difficult to know status on the project from how you 

report. 
Project-manager: 
and the upper management 
need a clear status on th
e project. New projects are 
coming up. It
s my opinion that we need to finish this 
project first, therefore we need a clear status.
 Also in sprint two, the developers found that a 
major part of the code needed to be rewritten. One 

developer said: 
These kinds of problems always 
emerge during a project, but in Scrum they get really 
visible.
 The team used 80 hours on this, 31% of the 
resources reported in sprint 2.  
From our observation it seemed that everyone was 
aware of the different problems and that this affected 
the project. However no one took the leadership in this 
matter, The only official retrospective, conducted 
during the third sprint:  
• testing is not done properly (need a deadline; 
we are developing to the last minute) 
• the resource situation is a problem 
• there are several dependencies to other projects 
Also in the last planning meeting in this phase, the 
team discussed to try pair programming on some 
complex functionality.  
The only change done was implementing daily 
builds to help developers coordinate their development 

activities. Towards the end of sprint four, it became 

apparent to everyone that the team was delivering too 
slowly to be able to meet the final deadline. This was 

the main issue on the agenda when planning sprint 
five, but no measures were taken. The team seemed to 
agree on that if everything went according to their plan 

in sprint five it would still be possible to finish as 
planned. However, this was not the case. 
In the last planning meeting the Product-owner 
decided that he wanted to speak with the upper 
management, to discuss the problem with losing 
resources. In addition, other measures were discussed: 
• isolation 4 days a week 
• use overtime 
• decrease functionality and extend the deadline. 
Also in this meeting there was a big discussion 
about the importance of the deadline January the 1st. 

The Product owner argued that it was not possible to 

move this deadline and that this had been 

communicated from the beginning of the project. The 

team did not agree on this. Later we found that our 
research notes backed the teams
 interpretation of this. 
After sprint five measures were taken. The Scrum-
master later said: 
I told the Product-owner and the 
Project-manager, that we co
uld not possible deliver 
what was planned before the deadline. This was 

discussed during the review-meeting. Then, two days 
later, after speaking with the management, we found a 
solution to the problem. We agreed on postponing the 

deadline, keeping the functionality, and then isolate the 

team.   4.3. Emergency Scrum: Sprint six to nine 
 
The conclusion from the previous phase was to 
shorten the sprints to help increasing focus and to make 
it easier to isolate the team. The Scrum-master decided 
that the team was not even allowed to receive phone 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20097 calls, while in isolation. This was broadcasted 
generally in the company. The Scrum-master now 

collocated with the team The team agreed on using 
some overtime.  
Isolation of the team was not 100% effective; 
especially when the Scrum-master was absent. One 

developer said: 
The isolation works how it should do, 
but we end up in a dilemma. Like today, it
s crazy in 
the other project, where the customers are starting to 
use the system this week. And I
m the only one who can 
fix problems. Then I just need to help if they are having 

problems. I do not like to decide which project will not 

meet its deadlines, because that is what it is all about. 

But now the Scrum-master has decided what to 

prioritize. However I feel I need to do it anyway; 
during the day or before I go home. There is no time 
allocated to this kind of support, and there are several 

people expecting me to solve the problems. 
When we discussed this problem later on the 
Scrum-master said: 
I know that some of them are 
feeling the pressure from ot
her projects, and that they 
do other things than we agreed upon. If someone is 
calling them, this can result in a developer using time 

on something else, even If they are in full isolation. I 

do not think it
s their fault; it
s my responsibility to 
protect them. Today someone called one of the 
developers. I told him that he could use 3 minutes. If he 
had not stopped the conversation, I would have pulled 

out his phone plug.
 The developer felt there was a contradiction in 
terms of the official policy of the company and the 

reality. However the isolation was seen as a big 
improvement by the team. The isolation was most 
effective when the Scrum-master was in the area, but 

the developers also felt it easier to say 
no, I'm busy
 when asked about something. 
The Scrum-master commented: 
I can see that the 
team is working harder and more focused. Earlier, 
they seemed relaxed the first week of the sprint. Now 
they are relaxing the first day, but then they start to 

feel the pressure. But I do not know how long we can 

do this, how long the effect will last.  
It seemed easier for the developers to focus on the 
project and they said they felt more dedicated. 
However during the last sprint one developer 
commented while writing code: 
We need to talk to the 
Product-owner, but he is on a vacation. I guess they do 

not really care too much, and this affects us as well. 
The situation regarding making functionality 
finishes was not changed much. Still they were writing 
new code on the day of the review meeting, and in this 

meeting the developers did not know which part of the 
code would work fine and what could fail. It seemed 

they were trying to present as much as possible to 
impress the Product-owner. Also some features were 
not demonstrated during one of the review meeting 
because the person who developed the features was 

sick. It
s obvious that even though they are working 
together and knew each others code, they did not know 
enough to demonstrate what others were doing.  
This was confirmed in sprint 8, when one of the 
developers had an accident resulting in a sick leave for 

the rest of the year. No one continued to do his task, 

partly because they were not seen as critical. 
 5. Discussion 
 After this broad description of the project, we return 
to discuss it in light of our research question: 

 What are the main challenges in establishing 
leadership in an agile software development project? 
 
Section 2 concluded with the major characteristics 
which we argued have to be in place in order to ensure 
a distributed leadership in agile development and let 
the team adapt to changing circumstances, namely a 
sufficient distribution of external, individual and 

internal autonomy, and good mechanisms for learning. 
The leadership should be rotated to the person with the 
key knowledge, skills, and abilities for the particular 

issues facing the team at any given moment. The team 
should be manned with the right people. The team 
leader should be responsible for designing (and re-

designing) the team, and also manage the boundaries of 

the team. 
It seemed clear in the project that the team leader 
did not manage to change the company culture and 
protect the team as much as he should do. He lost 
resources and the team was constantly interrupted. 

However this situation improved in the last phase. He 

also did not manage to design the team as originally 

planned, resulting in lacking competence, which again 

made it difficult to rotate le
adership. He often needed 
to take leadership regarding design and architecture, 
but when he was absent the work sometimes stopped. 
Introducing agile methods like Scrum takes time, 
because it requires the whole organization to change. It 

requires transformational leadership [37]. This 
leadership is about empowering subordinates to 
participate in the process of transforming the 

organization. And without focus on transformational 

leadership it is difficult for the project to change and 

improve since they are heavily integrated with the rest 

of the organization. Transformational leadership was 
mostly missing in this project. Even though applying 
most of the Scrum practices and experiencing an 

improved development processes, it was clear that 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20098 project-external issues were reducing both external and 
internal autonomy.  
As for mechanisms for learning, we see that the 
major change in the development process, the change 
from four-week to two-week iterations, was improving 
the resource-situation. However this change came late 

(the problems were reported already in the first sprint). 

Using project retrospectives more might have led to 
this discussion coming earlier; however the scrum-
master did not take enough leadership on this issue. 
Also, the fact that the team and the Scrum-master 

wanted to present more features as finished than was 

the case, and to report more hours than actually used. 

This is defined as 
impression management
 by 
Morgan [23], and is a barrier to double-loop learning. 
Another issue observed in the project, was that 
work progress was sometimes slow when a person had 

to leave a meeting or when the product owner was not 

available. This could indicate a lack of shared mental 

models on what was to be done in the project and 

lacking core competence, and might be an issue that 
could have been improved if the sprint planning 
meetings had been more focused on planning 

development work. Lacking competence makes shared 

leadership difficult. 
As for external autonomy, we see from the 
description in the previous section that the frequent 
interruption from other projects resulted in less 

resources than allocated was reported in four of the 

five first sprints. Also, when people suddenly had to 

leave a workshop to handle a problem somewhere else, 

this delayed everyday work. When the team was 
isolated, this changed. 
A threat to the internal autonomy of the 
development team was that the planning meetings were 
not sufficiently used for short-term planning in the 
project. This might be another cause why the sprints in 

the first phase had many items which had to be 
transferred to the next sprint, which again led to little 
commitment on the backlog from the team. 
The fact that the team never finished any of the 
sprint-backlogs, made it difficult for the team to really 

commit to the sprint. They knew they could not finish 
even before starting. That the Scrum master was 
assigned work, and that developers often had to do 
other work than planned might also have lead to 
lowered commitment from the developers. They were 

experiencing symbolic self-organising [32].  
In hindsight, it is easy to point at the planning 
meetings, concluding that these meetings should have 
been better prepared by all parties. 
Since both the internal and external autonomy was 
reduced, in addition to stro
ng individual autonomy this 
affected the ability to be fully self-organized, which 

again weakened the distributed leadership. 
6. Conclusion and future work 
 This paper presented data from an eleven month 
ethnographically informed case study of professional 
developers in a Scrum team. We have focused the 
description of the project on challenges when 

establishing leadership in an agile software 
development project. From the described project, we 

identified two main challenges: 
First, we see that mechanisms to enable efficient 
learning were not in place in the project. We observed 
that the problem with loosing resourced was improved 

when shortening the sprints. However the decision to 

isolate the project team was taken late, although there 

were clear signs of problems at the sprint review and 

planning meetings. The project lacked a mechanism to 
ensure double-loop learning, and because the team 
tried to impress the Product-owner this made double-

loop learning even harder.  
Second, establishing right levels of autonomy for 
project, externally, internally and individually was 
challenging as we observed from the problems related 
to the 
quagmire
 and problems with short-term 
planning. The fear of the 
quagmire
 also resulted in 
no one few taking leadership. The missing double-loop 
learning also reduced the possibility to improve self-
organising.  
For practitioners, we think this paper illustrates 
some of the difficulties in establishing shared 

leadership in agile project teams. This is an issue 
which is not well-described in the agile literature.  
Further work in this direction should focus on 
investigating other barriers with leadership in agile 
development, for example related to coordination. In 
particular it would be interesting to study more mature 

agile development teams to see if the problems 

identified here have been overcome.  

 7. References 
 [1] P. Abrahamsson, O. Salo, J. Ronkainen, and J. Warsta, 
Agile Software Development Methods: Review and 
Analysis,
 VTT Technical report 2002, 
[2] P. Abrahamsson, J. Warsta, M. T. Siponen, and J. 

Ronkainen, 
New Directions on Agile Methods: A 
Comparative Analysis,
 Proceedings of the 25th International 
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE'03), IEEE Press, 

2003. 

[3] C. Argyris and D. A. Schon, 
On Organizational Learning 
Ii: Theory, Method and Practise
. Reading, MA: Addison 
Wesley, 1996,  

[4] S. Augustine, B. Payne, F. Sencindiver, and S. 

Woodcock, 
Agile Project Management: Steering from the 
Edges,
 Communications of the ACM
, no. 12, vol. 48, pp. 85-
89, 2005. 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20099 [5] K. Beck and C. Andres, 
Extreme Programming 
Explained: Embrace Chage (2nd Ed)
: Addison-Wesley, 
2004, ISBN 978-0321278654. 
[6] B. W. Boehm and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and 
Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed
: Addison-Wesley 
2003,  

[7] A. Cockburn and J. Highsmith, 
Agile Software 
Development: The People Factor,
 Computer
, no. 11, vol. 
34, pp. 131-133, 2001. 

[8] D. Cohen, M. Lindvall, and P. Costa, 
An Introduction to 
Agile Methods,
 in 
Advances in Computers, Advances in 
Software Engineering
, vol. 62, M. V. Zelkowitz, Ed. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2004. 

[9] M. Cohn and D. Ford, 
Introducing an Agile Process to 
an Organization [Software Development],
 Computer
, no. 6, 
vol. 36, pp. 74-78, 2003. 
[10] T. Dingsøyr, G. K. Hanssen, T. Dybå, G. Anker, and J. 

O. Nygaard, 
Developing Software with Scrum in a Small 
Cross-Organizational Project,
 in 
13th European Conference 
on Software Process Improvement (Eurospi)
, Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science
, vol. 4257, I. Richardson, P. Runeson, 
and R. Messnarz, Eds. Joensuu, Finland: Springer Verlag, 

2006, pp. 5-15. 
[11] T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, 
Empirical Studies of Agile 
Software Development: A Systematic Review,
 Information 
and Software Technology
, vol 50, pp. 833-859, 2008. 
[12] J. Erickson, K. Lyytinen, and K. Siau, 
Agile Modeling, 
Agile Software Development, and Extreme Programming: 
The State of Research,
 Journal of Database Management
, no. 4, vol. 16, pp. 88 - 100, 2005. 

[13] M. Fenton-O'Creevy, 
Employee Involvement and the 
Middle Manager: Evidence from a Survey of Organizations,
 Journal of Organizational Behavior
, no. 1, vol. 19, pp. 67-
84, 1998. 

[14] B. Fitzgerald, G. Hartnett, and K. Conboy, 

Customizing Agile Methods to Software Practices at Intel 
Shannon,
 European Journal of Information Systems
, no. 2, 
vol. 15, pp. 200-213, 2006. 

[15] R. A. Guzzo and M. W. Dickson, 
Teams in 
Organizations: Recent Research on Performance and 
Effectiveness,
 Annual Review of Psychology
, vol. 47, pp. 
307-338, 1996. 

[16] M. Hoegl and K. P. Parboteeah, 
Autonomy and 
Teamwork in Innovative Projects,
 Human Resource 
Management
, no. 1, vol. 45, pp. 67-79, 2006. 
[17] B. D. Janz, J. A. Colquitt, and R. A. Noe, 
Knowledge 
Worker Team Effectiveness: The Role of Autonomy, 

Interdependence, Team Development, and Contextual 
Support Variables,
 Personnel Psychology
, no. 4, vol. 50, pp. 
877-904, 1997. 

[18] D. L. Jorgensen, 
Participant Observation: A 
Methodology for Human Studies
. Thousands Oak, California: 
Sage publications, 1989,  
[19] C. W. Langfred, 
The Paradox of Self-Management: 
Individual and Group Autonomy in Work Groups,
 Journal 
of Organizational Behavior
, no. 5, vol. 21, pp. 563-585, 
2000. 
[20] C. Mann and F. Maurer, 
A Case Study on the Impact of 
Scrum on Overtime and Customer Satisfaction,
 in 
Proceedings of Agile 2005
. Denver: IEEE Press, 2005. 
[21] R. E. Miles, C. C. Snow, and G. Miles, 
Thefuture.Org,
 Long Range Planning
, no. 3, vol. 33, pp. 300-321, 2000. 
[22] N. B. Moe, T. Dingsøyr, and T. Dybå, 
Understanding 
Self-Organizing Teams in Agile Software Development,
 Proceedings of the Australian Software Engineering 

Conference (ASWEC), Perth, Australia, pp. 76-85, 2008. 

[23] G. Morgan, 
Images of Organizations
. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: SAGE publications, 2006.  
[24] S. Nerur, R. Mahapatra, and G. Mangalaraj, 
Challenges 
of Migrating to Agile Methodologies,
 Communications of 
the ACM
, no. 5, vol. 48, pp. 72, 2005. 
[25] S. Nerur and V. Balijepally, 
Theoretical Reflections on 
Agile Development Methodologies - the Traditional Goal of 

Optimization and Control Is Making Way for Learning and 

Innovation,
 Communications of the ACM
, no. 3, vol. 50, pp. 
79-83, 2007. 
[26] L. Rising and N. S. Janoff, 
The Scrum Software 
Development Process for Small Teams,
 IEEE Software
, no. 
4, vol. 17, pp. 26-+, 2000. 
[27] C. Robson, 
Real World Research
. Oxford: Blackwell, 
2002,  

[28] E. Salas, D. E. Sims, and C. S. Burke, 
Is There A "Big 
Five" In Teamwork?,
 Small Group Research
, no. 5, vol. 36, 
pp. 555-599, 2005. 
[29] K. Schwaber and Beedle, 
Agile Software Development 
with Scrum
: Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 2001,  
[30] H. Sharp and H. Robinson, 
An Ethnographic Study of 
Xp Practice,
 Empirical Software Engineering
, no. 4, vol. 9, 
pp. 353-375, 2004. 

[31] H. Takeuchi and I. Nonaka, 
The New New Product 
Development Game,
 Harvard Business Review 64: 137-146 
1986. 
[32] J. Tata and S. Prasad, 
Team Self-Management, 
Organizational Structure, and Judgments of Team 

Effectiveness,
 Journal of Managerial Issues
, no. Issue 2, 
vol. Vol. 16 pp. p248 - 265, 2004. 
[33] H. van Mierlo, 
Individual Autonomy in Work Teams: 
The Role of Team Autonomy, Self-Efficacy, and Social 

Support,
 European Journal of Work and Organizational 
Psychology
, no. 3, vol. 15, pp. 281, 2006. 
[34] S. Walderhaug, E. Stav, S. L. Tomassen, L. Røstad, and 
N. B. Moe, 
Mafiia 
 an Architectural Description 
Framework: Experience from the Health Care Domain,
 in 
Interoperability of Enterprise Software and Applications
, D. 
Konstantas, J.-P. Bourrières, M. Léonard, and N. Boudjlida, 
Eds. Geneva, Switzerland: Springer Verlag, 2005, pp. 43-54. 

[35] G. Walsham, 
Doing Interpretive Research,
 European 
Journal of Information Systems
, no. 3, vol. 15, pp. 320-330, 
2006. 
[36] R. K. Yin, 
Case Study Research: Design and Methods
, 3rd ed: Sage Publications, 2003, ISBN 0-7619-2553-8. 

[37] G. Yukl, 
Managerial Leadership - a Review of Theory 
and Research,
 Journal of Management
, no. 2, vol. 15, pp. 
251-289, 1989. 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200910