 Documentation in Systems Development: A Significant Criterion for Project 
Success 
  M. Faisal Fariduddin Attar Nasution 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
 nasutionmf@vcu.edu
 H. Roland Weistroffer 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
 hrweistr@vcu.edu
   Abstract
 Agile software development methods seem 
inherently suitable for today’s quick-paced business 

environment as they shorten the time to develop new 
systems and typically incur lower development costs 
compared to the conventional systems development life 
cycle (SDLC) approach. Software development project 
failures using conventional SDLC are often attributed 
to project delays, resulting in budget overruns. On the 
other hand, a well planned and documented systems 
development project is more likely to result in a system 
that meets the expectations 
of both the intended users 
and the software engineers. This paper takes another 
look at conventional SDLC methodology by focusing 
on an aspect that is often overlooked in systems 
development practice, namely the significance of good 
documentation. 
 1. Introduction   The success of a software application package can 
generally be traced back to its development: a 

development project that was both cost and time 
efficient. A good software project should progress on 
time and within budget, and should result in all of the 

agreed functionality [15]. The conventional systems 

development life cycle (SDLC) approach, however, is 

now often perceived as taking too long, being too 

expensive, and to produce software that often does not 
meet the users
 needs and thus results in users
 dissatisfaction with the software product. The 

successful outcome of a software development project 

in general depends on 1) the delivered system meeting 
the functional requirements of customers/users, 2) the 
project being completed within budget, 3) the project 
being completed on time, 4) the project being 
completed in its entirety, 5) the delivered software 

consisting of solid and, thoroughly tested code; and 6) 
the system being easy to use [20]. 
In contrast to the conventional SDLC approach, 
agile methods generally proceed with system 
construction without waiting for 
formal requirements 
analysis and design phases
 [3]. Agile methods seek 
to strip away as much of the heaviness, commonly 
associated with traditional software-development 

methodologies, as possible to promote quick response 
to changing environments, changes in user 
requirements, accelerated project deadlines, and the 
like
 [7]. These methods also play down the need for 
formal documentation, such as well-documented 

software architecture and detailed project planning 

[25]. These characteristics of agile methods make them 

suitable for a quick-paced and dynamic business 
environment and offer rapid information systems 
solutions [3,17]. However, this may also results in 

difficulty of reusing agile developed components due 
to the rather loose structure of the agile approach [16]. 
And most importantly, omitting documenting the 

development process may lead to corporate memory 
loss [23]. 
The conventional SDLC approach has evolved into 
several newer methodologies that include techniques 
such as prototyping and object-oriented analysis and 

design. But the basic approach still consists of 
multiple, sequential phases that constitute specific 
activities for designing and developing information 
systems. Each phase involves designated tasks, which 

when followed properly should lead to an information 
system that meets the needs of the users [10]. The 

literature has noted various software development 
failures, which may be attributed to a lack of properly 
following SDLC practice. 
Given these facts, can good documentation reduce 
the likelihood of failure that has been haunting the 

outcome of many conventional SDLC projects? This 
study seeks to investigate the impact of good 
documentation practice on the outcome of 
conventional SDLC. This study therefore looks at the 

documentation framework in SDLC that should deliver 
successful system products. The argument made is that 

well documented systems development assures system 

products that satisfy both the intended users and the 
software engineers. A well-documented SDLC 
execution that delivers satisfactory outcomes is likely 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20091978-0-7695-3450-3/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE if communication and requirements elicitation 
practices encourage good documentation. This study is 

based on an extensive literatures review and a 
reexamination of a published case study. 
 1.1. Systems Development Life Cycle
  The systems development life cycle methodology, 
or SDLC, was developed as a means to structure and 
improve the management of systems development 

through the identification of phases and activities [1]. 

During the early days of computer software 

development, SDLC was focused on programming and 
solving technical issues, due to the limited capability of 
computer hardware at that time. SDLC typically 

consists of various activities that make up each phase. 

These activities dictate what needs to be achieved and 
what tools should be used. Th
e phases typically include 
feasibility study, systems investigation, analysis, 
design, development, implementation, testing, and 
maintenance. 
The early SDLC is also referred to as the waterfall 
model as each phase produces an artifact that leads into 
the next phase, in one direction only without any going 

back, like water flowing over a waterfall [22]. This 
model is possibly the most widely known model and, 
with variations, used to be the most common model in 

industry practice. The waterfall model ideally requires 

that each phase be documented in a report and be 

validated before advancing to the next phase [13]. As 

such, the waterfall model is very suitable for systems 
development projects with well defined requirements. 
However, because the waterfall model does not allow 

for iterative creation of artifacts, any mistakes made in 

any phase are propagated into subsequent phases, and 

fixing these mistakes becomes difficult and expensive, 
often leading to late delivery and budget overruns. 
Prototyping is an approach that, if used in 
conjunction with a modified SDLC model, may 

alleviate some of these disadvantages. Its primary use 

is to reduce risk by 
buying knowledge
 and thus to 
increase the likelihood of success of a software 
project
 [4]. Prototyping provides better control than 
the pure waterfall model in terms of meeting user 

requirements.  

 1.2. Documenting the SDLC
  Extensive documentation in SDLC plays an 
essential role in communicating between developers, 

managers, and users, particularly in the analysis phase 
[9]. Good documentation 
allows companies to 
measure current performance, identify areas of 

weakness, and initiate improvement actions
 [5]. 
A study by Luqi et al. (2004) denotes the benefits 
of document driven development (DDD), which 

demands comprehensive systems documentation that 
records all phases of SDLC and is capable of handling 
even complicated issues often related to real-time 

systems. DDD enables users, or stakeholders, to 

effectively monitor the systems development process 

and to communicate with each other by providing users 

the opportunity to receive the compiled information 
[11].  In addition, DDD also provides support for 
systems maintenance and evolution [11]. 
 1.3. Agile Methods
  One of the main reasons for using agile methods is 
the capability of keeping overtime and expenses in 

check while satisfying the needs of users [24]. Agile 

methods are most suitable for developing information 
systems in highly dynamic business environments. A 
dynamic business environment is reflected through 

rapidly changing requirements [17].  
One characteristic of agile methods is the informal 
communication among stakeholders. Informal 

communication minimizes the necessity to document 
development progress, in contrast to conventional 
SDLC [25]. Furthermore, agile practices tend to 

determine specifications from user stories rather than 

from formal documents, and commercial modeling 

tools are seen as 
tailored drawing environments
 [24]. 
Despite the reduced need for documentation, the need 
for some documentation arises when there is a 
communication breakdown among stakeholders [3].  
Communication breakdowns include factors such as 

inability to scale the software, evolving the 
application over time, and inducting new member into 
the development team
 or 
personnel turnover, rapid 
changes to requirements, unavailability of appropriate 
customer representatives, or the application
s growing 
complexity
 [3]. As such, the minimal documentation 
effort in agile development may jeopardize effective 

requirements determination. 
Additionally, limitations of agile methods include 
limited support for 1) distributed systems development 
environments, 2) outsourcing to subcontractors, 3) 

building reusable artifacts, 4) large development teams, 

and 5) developing large, complex systems [23]. 
 2. Research Method 
 2.1. Research Approach
  This paper uses secondary data from a published 
case study [18] and grounded theory to derive concepts 

relevant to our base argument. Grounded theory 

involves obtaining 
theory that was derived from data, 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20092 systematically gathered and analyzed through the 
research process
 [21]. 
Orlikowski [19] states that grounded theory is a 
theory discovery approach that is inductive by nature, 
allowing researchers to develop a theoretical account 
while grounding the account based on empirical 

observations or data. In addition, grounded theory 

provides for development of a 
context-based, process-
oriented description and explanation of the 
phenomenon
 [19]. Grounded theory consists of three phases, which 
are open coding, axial coding, and selective coding. 

Open coding focuses on conceptualizing or grouping 

similar items according to similar defined properties, 

defining categories, and developing categories in terms 
of their properties and dimensions, and proceeds by 
relating categories through hypotheses or statements of 

relationships. Axial coding is concerned with 

systematically developing
 and relating categories. 
Finally, selective coding integrates and refines the 

theory. 
The data are extracted from a published case study, 
described in the following section. The data are 

explored using open coding to derive categories, axial 

coding to relate these categories, and selective coding 

to define theory based on data from the previous two 
phases. 
 2.2. Review of the Case Study
  The case study [18], which examines the systems 
development project progress in conventional SDLC, is 

a published report based on action research conducted 

by Tetsuro Motoyama, Chief Research and 

Development Engineer of Advanced Imaging and 
Network Technologies at Ricoh, a company that 
primarily produces cameras and electronic office 
equipment. This case study was selected because it 
provides a complete narrative description of a 

conventional SDLC project that emphasizes 

documentation. Most other published case studies (e.g. 
Börjesson & Mathiassen [2], Kautz et al. [12], and 
Erdogmus [6]) are too condensed or were adapted to 

the use of specific research methodologies. 
Motoyama
s case study began in 1993 by a small 
research group that explores various software 

technologies at Ricoh. The case study reviews two 
issues in the SDLC that force the author to improve the 
development process, involving sixteen projects 

divided into three stages. The three stages include 

problem recognition and initial response, process 

establishment and early trials, and continuous 
improvement. 
The first stage involved familiarizing members with 
best practices of SDLC. The author specifies that 
before introducing a new standard of development 
process, particularly the coding procedure, he 

familiarized himself with the new code inspection 
standard. The purpose of the first stage was therefore 
to motivate developers, particularly engineers, to write 

better code by making source code visible through 

inspection. 
The second stage began three years after the initial 
stage. In this stage, the author considered the resolution 
to problems that occurred in the previous project. This 
stage saw another two projects, of which the first, 

referred to as J01, generated a development procedure 

based on ISO 9001 and lasted for about six months. 

The second project, J02, used the new development 

procedure from the previous project. In this stage, the 
author took several actions, which included separating 
designers and programmers, generating an integration-

test plan from the technical requirements, encouraging 

each department member to create a list of tasks, 

implementing a risk officer and risk list, carefully 

reviewing design documents until inspection, 
encouraging the use of th
e Web to record activities 
progress, and recording and documenting problems. 
The third stage focused on improving practices to 
overcome problems encountered during J02. The third 

stage started in 1999, precisely a year after J02. This 
stage was merely a continuation of the previous 
project. Activities at this stage included generating 

Design Document Guidelines, reviewing Document 

Change Requests, creating skeleton code before 

coding, conducting unit testing, tracking problems for 

improvement, improving the Web site that contains 
past-project information and relevant documents, 
initiating documents automation, and scheduling 

management. 

 3. Findings 
 3.1. Open Coding Phase
  The findings are compiled concepts extracted from 
the case study by using grounded theory. As was 
mentioned, the open coding defines and develops 
categories. The emerging concepts are grouped in these 
categories. This phase specifically uncovers texts and 

exposes thoughts, ideas, and meanings contained 
therein [21]. During the axial coding phase, data that 
were fractured during open coding are reassembled to 

form major categories. Finally, these categories are 
integrated to form a larger theoretical scheme, which 
will be the theory behind this study. 
Open coding is conducted to derive the following 
concepts. The initial impression that was found in this 
case study is that systems development projects 
regularly face many problems. 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20093  3.1.1. Stage 1: Problem Recognition and Initial 
Response. 
The objective of this stage was to refine the 
construction of source code based on established 
guidelines. To start out, Motoyama read some 
published guidelines, 
Code Complete
1. Motoyama
s statement is as follow:  
 To begin addressing our problems, I read 
Code 
Complete
 in late 1993. Then, I distributed the book 
to all the engineers in my department and instructed 

them to follow the techniques it describes.
  
This stage also included introducing two changes in 
the development process, which included inspecting 
code before check-in and effectively introducing the 
coding techniques in 
Code Complete 
as the standard 
for the department. These changes are described as 

follow: 
 I also introduced two changes to our 
development process. One was to inspect code 
before check-in. On the basis of the guidelines in 

Software Inspection 
and 
Software Inspection 
Process
, I simplified the inspection procedure to fit 
our small department. Second, I made the coding 
techniques in 
Code Complete 
our department
s standard.
  
Furthermore, these changes resulted in better 
understanding of source code instruction that included 

code inspection to conduct early detection of design 
problems, implement easier error correction during 
integration, and complete partial code constructed by 
departed member(s). 
 The code inspection resulted in the early 
detection of design problems, particularly among 
each module
s interfaces. Another benefit was that 
correcting errors during integration became easier, 
because everyone in the project was familiar with 

each other
s code. In addition, because of this 
familiarity, other engineers could complete a 
departing engineer
s section of code.
  Motoyama implies that the benefits of reviewing 
and inspecting code involve technical and social 

impacts. The members become more disciplined and 
code becomes better constructed. At this stage, 
documentation provides the benefit of early error 
detection. 
                                                  1 S. McConnell, 
Code Complete
, Microsoft Press, 1993. 
3.1.2. Stage 2: Process Establishment and Early 
Trials.
 This stage involved a pilot project that began in 
1996. Motoyama lists several problems encountered 
after the project
s second iteration: coding before 
design, insufficient analysis of problems, a long design 

phase due to the lack of technical understanding and 

lack of architecture, repeated code segments, 

inspection of documents turning into design 

discussions, an unorderly sequence of code 
construction, difficult code integration due to compile 
and link errors, insufficient time to learn new 

materials, increased communication time to 

compensate for the lack of needed documents, and 

insufficient schedule tracking. 
Motoyama and several members of the team 
proceeded with the next project, J01, which started in 
1998. Motoyama states that this project successfully 

improved the development process by learning from 

the aforementioned problems and that the resulting 
development process abides to an acceptable standard 

of ISO 9001. 
 In 1998, two junior engineers and I started a 
new project, which I
ll call J01. This transitional 
project lasted only six months, but we had time to 

improve our development process. I generated a 
development procedure that covered a research 
project
s entire life cycle and was based on ISO 
9001.  The next project, J02, started in October 1998, 
about six months after J01. This project utilized the 
new development process with additional insights from 
an SDLC guideline document, 
Software Project 
Survival Guide
2.  
The first insight included separating designers and 
programmers. Motoyama argues that this approach 
dramatically improves quality of the design documents 
in general. Motoyama explicitly cites the benefits of 

this approach, including improved inspection, easier 
recovery from designer
s mistakes, significant 
improvement on quality of documents, and clear 
separation of prototype code and production code.  
 In my approach, the designer of a section of 
code carefully examined that code during 

inspection, resulting in improved inspection. In 

addition, when the design contained errors, the 
programmer could more easily recover from the 
designer
s mistakes because the programmer had 
participated in the design review and inspection. 
                                                 2 S. McConnell, 
Software Project Survival Guide
, Microsoft Press, 
1998. 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20094 This approach had two other main advantages. 
First, because designers wrote the design 

documents to be readable and because programmers 
carefully evaluated others
 design documents for 
coding, the documents
 quality improved 
tremendously. Second, prototype code didn
t creep into production code.
  The early integration-test specification was to 
generate an integration-test plan based on the technical 
requirements while developers created a better design. 

This initiative benefited developers in that they became 

better prepared to address testing issues during code 

construction. Motoyama states specifically: 
 In J02, I decided to generate an integration-test 
plan from the technical requirements while the 

engineers created the detailed designs
During 
programming, the programmers knew the test 

plans contents, which helped them address testing 
issues during code construction.
  Each team member regularly updated the task list  
at each development stage. The task list in general 

helped update the project schedule and thus increased 

the speed of the SDLC process. Motoyama states: 
 We published the task lists on the Web, which 
motivated members to beat their estimated dates 

because everyone could see the project
s progress. 
So, we finished J02 ahead of our estimated 

schedule. Later, when we had accumulated enough 
data, we could use the past task lists to estimate our 
next schedule. Because of our accumulated task 

lists, we
re very comfortable with our schedule 
estimations.
  
The next initiative included creating a risk list and 
appointing a risk officer. Motoyama writes about the 
benefit of recording risks as follow: 
 In this project, however, we immediately 
addressed the highest risk, letting us get back on 
schedule at the earliest possible time. So, we had 
sufficient time to recover from any unanticipated 
events and avoided any crippling problems.
  Further, Motoyama implemented regular discussion 
meetings before inspection of defects. 
 In J02, we added a discussion meeting before 
inspecting any documents to familiarize inspectors 

with design issues and let others contribute to our 

design
s improvement.
  Motoyama specified the use of the Web to generate 
HTML specification documents based on established 

processes, to record meetings, and to publish 
discussion and inspection results immediately after 
each meeting. Despite several problems, including 
design documents that were not uniform among 
designers and the large size of some documents, J02 

provided the process basis for the next projects. 

Motoyama specifies his satisfaction with the second 
stage, particular J02 as follow: 
 we finished the project on time and completed 
the target functions. 
J02 also established a basic practice for future 
projects
generating a document that described the 
project
s problems and success.
  
3.1.3. Stage 3: Continuous Improvement. 
The goal 
of this stage was to improve the development process 

by overcoming problems encountered in projects in 

stage 2, particularly J02. The next project, J03, started 
in April 1999 and generated the Design Document 
Guidelines. Though these guidelines were not 

immediately accepted as department standards, they 

served as a basis for later improvements. 
Motoyama mentions an initiative to use Document 
Change Request, which helps find errors in inspected 
and published documents. The pilot implementation of 

this form was not well received as members were 

reluctant and embarrassed to admit mistakes. It was not 

until J04 when Document Change Request is finally 
received and used throughout the remaining projects. 
The decision to fully utilize this form is as follow: 
 Instead of hiding our mistakes, we decided to 
describe them to improve development. During J04, 

we increasingly used Document Change Requests. 

Also, we analyzed the reasons for the change 
requests at the project
s conclusion as part of our 
Analysis of Software Development Process 

document. Most change requests concerned the 

detailed design documents.
  The development team has had track records of 
problems encountered during the development process. 

These records are published as part of the project 
output documents. As part of the documents, the 

records are published automatically using the Web. 
Motoyama describes the intention to track problems as 
follow: 
 Later, we tracked problems and successes 
through the Web instead of the whiteboard. We 

addressed these problems at the beginning of the 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20095 next project to improve our development process, 
documentation, and code conventions.
  Furthermore, automation is not only limited to 
tracking problems, but also for some parts of the 
development process. 

 3.2. Axial and Selective Coding Phases 
 
This section analyzes the emerging concepts and 
theory from the previous section. The use of axial and 
selective coding encourages theory to emerge based on 
the previous concepts. Based on the following 
concepts, the theory uncovered in this study states that 

documentation, coordination, integration significantly 

reduce errors and accelerate systems development 

process. Figure 1 shows the theoretical model for this 

study.  
Systems that have fewer errors and a reasonable 
development process according to its original schedule 

are the desired outcomes on almost all conventional 

SDLC projects. Any errors should be documented for 

future reference. 
As was mentioned earlier, documentation 
significantly increases the successful outcomes of 
conventional SDLC, however, documentation alone is 

not sufficient to guarantee success. Good 
documentation requires coordination among 
development team members and stakeholders, and 

integrated tasks and responsibilities. Table 1 
summarizes the concepts decoded in this study. The 
following describes how the emerging concepts 
intertwine to develop the theory. 

 3.2.1. Learning from Established Documents. 
One 
of such essential concepts that emerge is that reviewing 

and learning from established documents significantly 

affects activities and actions, resulting in fewer 

mistakes, and outcomes resulting in fewer errors. Each 

team member is encouraged to review and learn from 
previous documents, which include development 
process guidelines and literature on development 

process. Best practices as lessons learned are applied to 

the actual development process. The application of best 
practices should be adjusted based on the needs and 

circumstances of the project. Learning from established 
documents significantly reduces errors and increases 
development speed, as members know what to do and 

what outcomes to expect. 
 3.2.2. Revisiting Previous Mistakes.
 This study finds 
that members of the team are often reluctant to admit 
mistakes that occur during the development process. 
Members are required to report and record not only 

progress and desired outcomes, but also mistakes, 

problems, and errors that significantly affect the 

development process. Only by doing so will all team 
members learn what to do to improve the development 
process and avoid project failure. Mistakes and errors 
should be documented for future reference. 
    Figure 1  Theoretical Model
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20096   
3.2.3. Coordination and Integration.
 Not only the 
team members need to be managed, but also tasks and 
documents need to be coordinated and integrated. 
Team members meet regularly to discuss and report 

each other
s progress and errors that may have 
occurred during the development process. Results of 

the meetings should also be documented for future 
reference. 
Furthermore, responsibilities and tasks of each team 
member need to be clearly specified. The case study 

reports that members have overlapping tasks and 

responsibilities, sometimes resulting in prototype code 

creeping into the production code. Therefore, tasks 
should be clearly defined so that activities and 
responsibilities will not overlap. As such, clearly 
defined activities and responsibilities greatly reduce 
errors and thus help increase development speed. 
 3.2.4. Developing Systems Documents.
 Document 
development is the most essential concept in this study. 

The use of documents is iterative in nature according to 

the model composed in this study. Previous SDLC 

documents can always be used as guidelines and 
references for upcoming projects. 
Documenting involves recording any activity, 
mistake, and improvement in any phase of the 

development process. Documenting needs to be 
implemented not only for recording meetings. 

Documenting helps accelerate development process 
and reduces errors. 
 Table 1 
 Concepts that Contribute to Defining Theory 
 Concepts 
Descriptions 
Learning from Established Documents 
Includes reviewing documents from previous projects and other 
documents such as guidelines and literatures. Lessons of best practices are 
applied to the actual project. 
Revisiting Previous Mistakes 
Each member must admit mistakes that significantly affect development 
process. Mistakes should be documented as guidelines of what should not 
be repeated. 
Coordination and Integration 
Activities, documents, and personnel need to be coordinated and 
integrated efficiently. Members are encouraged to meet regularly and 
discuss any mistake and improvement occurred during development 
process. Tasks should be clearly defined so that activities will not overlap. 
Developing Systems Documents 
Includes regularly recording any activity, mistake, improvement at any 
phase of the development process. Documents should not be built during 
personnel meeting only. 
  4. Contributions and Conclusion 
 Very little research in SDLC has tried to show the 
superiority of conventional SDLC over agile methods. 
Much research has attempted just the opposite. 

Conventional SDLC is notoriously known for delayed 
deliverable outcomes, resulting in much increased 
project costs. This study does not seek to claim 

superiority of conventional SDLC; rather it identifies 

best practices for conventional SDLC through analysis 

of an existing case study. Most importantly, this study 
shows that SDLC documentation may indeed be an 
important contributing factor for successful system 
outcomes, in spite of what the reduced emphasis on 
documentation by agile practices may suggest. Thus, 
the agile manifesto
3 specifically values 
working 
software over comprehensive documentation
, and 
Fruhling et al.,
 for example, write that SDLC 
documentation needs to be 
pared down to the 
essentials in creating environments that are more 

responsive to change
 [8]. The contribution in terms of methodology is in the 
novel use of grounded theory to analyze a case study in 

SDLC research. Much research in SDLC involves the 
use of design science or quantitative methods in order 
to achieve objectivity. The use of a case study 
delineates the social perspective of SDLC, whereas 
SDLC includes not only systems and process, but also 

humans that control systems and process. The SDLC 

process can be considered a part of the world of 
                                                 3 http://agilemanifesto.org/
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20097 humanly created meaning and thus is an integral part of 
the subject matter that the research is studying [14]. 

The use of an interpretive approach in researching 
SDLC shows that the SDLC process can also be seen 
as a social construction of reality. 
This study seeks to address the use of 
comprehensive SDLC documentation that reduces 

failures in conventional SDLC projects, most notably 

delayed project outcomes and budget overruns. 
Lessons learned from this study are that SDLC 
documentation, members
 coordination, and integrated 
tasks and documents can reduce such failures. 
A limitation of this study is the use of an existing 
case study, rather than conducting field research. This 

may be the focus of future research, to validate the 
findings of the current study. Also of interest for future 
research may be investigating the effect of using more 

formal documentation as a means of communication in 

projects that otherwise make use of agile practices, 

rather than following conventional SDLC. 

 5. References 
      [1] D. Avison and D. Fitzgerald, 
Where Now for 
Development Methodologies?
, Communications of the 
ACM, 46(1), 2003, pp. 79-82. 
 [2] A. 
Börjesson and L. Mathiassen, 
Improving 
Software Organizations: Agility Challenges and 
Implications
, Information Technology & People
, 18(4), 2005, pp. 359-382.
  [3] L. Cao and B. Ramesh, 
Agile Requirements Engineering 
Practices: An Empirical Study
, IEEE Software
, 25(1), 2008, 
pp. 60-67. 
 [4] N. Cerpa and J. Verner, 
Prototyping: Some New 
Results, Information and Software Technology
, 38(12), 
1996, pp. 743-755. 
 [5] G. Coleman and R. Verbruggen, 
A Quality Software 
Process for Rapid Application Development
, Software 
Quality Journal
, 7(2), 1998, pp. 107-122. 
 [6] H. Erdogmus, 
What
s Good Software, Anyway?
, IEEE Software
, 24(2), 2007, pp. 5-7. 
 
[7] J. Erickson, K. Lyytinen, and K. Siau, 
Agile Modeling, 
Agile Software Development, and Extreme Programming: 
The State of Research
, Journal of Database Management
, 16(4), 2005, pp. 88-100. 

 [8] A. Fruhling, P. McDonald, and C. Dunbar, 
A Case 
Study: Introducing eXtreme Programming in a U.S. 

Government System Development Project
, Proceedings of 
the 41
st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
January 2008. 
 [9] L. Garceau and E. Jancura, 
Documentation and Training 
as a Systems Development Tool
, The CPA Journal
, 60(11), 
1990, pp. 84-89. 
 [10] S. Gavurin, 
Where Does Prototyping Fit in IS 
Development?
, Journal of Systems Management
, 42(2), 
1991, pp. 13-17. 
 [11] Luqi, L. Zhang, V. Berzins, and Y. Qiao, 

Documentation Driven Development for Complex Real-
Time Systems
, IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering
, 30(12), 2004, pp. 936-952. 
 
[12] K. Kautz, B. Hansen, and D. Jacobsen, 
The Utilization 
of Information Systems Development Methodologies in 
Practice
, Journal of Information Technology Cases and 
Applications
, 6(4), 2004, pp. 1-20. 
 
[13] M. Khalifa and J. Verner, 
Drivers for Software 
Development Method Usage
, IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Management
, 47(3), 2000, pp. 360-369. 
 
[14] A. S. Lee, 
Researching MIS
, in Rethinking 
Management Information Systems: An Interdisciplinary 
Perspective
, New York: Oxford University Press, 1999, 
edited by W. L .Currie and B. Calliers, pp. 7-27. 

 [15] K. Linberg, 
Software Developer Perceptions about 
Software Project Failure: A Case Study
, The Journal of 
Systems and Software
, 49(2-3), 1999, pp. 177-192. 
 [16] F. McCarey, 
Agile Software Reuse Recommender
, Proceedings of the 27
th International Conference Software 
Engineering, May 2005. 

 
[17] P. Meso and R. Jain, 
Agile Software Development: 
Adaptive Systems Principles and Best Practices
, Information Systems Management
, 23(3), 2006, pp. 16-30. 
 
[18] T. Motoyama, 
Improving Software Development 
through Three Stages
, IEEE Software
, 23(5), 2006, pp. 81-
87. 

 
[19] W. J. Orlikowski, 
CASE Tools as Organizational 
Change: Investigating Incremental and Radical Changes in 
Systems Development
, MIS Quarterly
, 17(3), 1993, pp. 
309-340. 

 [20] J. D. Procaccino and J. M. Verner, 
Software Project 
Managers and Project Success: An Exploratory Study
, The 
Journal of Systems and Software
, 76(11), 2006, pp. 1541-
1551. 
 [21] Strauss, A. and J. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative 

Research: Techniques and Procedure for Developing 

Grounded Theory, SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 
1998. 
 
[22] B. Tsai, S. Stobart, N. Parrington, and B. Thompson, 

Iterative Design and Testing Within the Software 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20098 Development Life Cycle
, Software Quality Journal
, 6(4), 
1997, pp. 295-309. 

 [23] D. Turk, R. France, and B. Rumpe, 
Limitations of 
Agile Software Processes,
 Proceedings of the 3
rd International Conference on Extreme Programming and 

Flexible Processes in Software Engineering, May 2002. 
 [24] D. Turk, R. France, and B. Rumpe, 
Assumptions 
Underlying Agile Software-Development Processes
, Journal of Database Management
, 16(4), 2005, pp. 62-87. 
 [25] P. Wagstrom and J. Herbsleb, 
Dependency Forecasting 
in the Distributed Agile Organization
, Communications of 
the ACM
, 49(10), 2006, pp. 55-56. 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20099