 Enhancing the Performance of Software
 Development Virtual Teams through 
the Use of Agile Meth
ods: A Pilot Study 
 Saggi Nevo 
University at Albany 
snevo@albany.edu 
InduShobha Chengalur-Smith 
University at Albany 
shobha@albany.edu 
  Abstract
  This paper develops a conceptual model that 
explicates the role of synchronous communication 

media in enabling Œ directly and indirectly, via social 
presence Œ virtual software development teams to 
adopt and apply Agile methods. In turn, Agile 

methods, as well as perceived social presence, are 

theorized to have a positive impact on 
communication convergence and transactive 
memory. Ultimately, these outcomes are formulated 

as direct antecedents of virtual team performance. A 

pilot study of 40 Free/Libre Open Source Software 

(FLOSS) teams provides preliminary supporting 
evidence for the conceptual model. 
 1. Introduction  
 A virtual team is a geographically distributed 
organization whose members are coherently bound 
by a shared interest or goal, and who communicate 
and coordinate their projects through information 
communication technologies (ICTs) [2; 40]. There 
are clear benefits to the geographic and cultural 

diversity of virtual teams, such as facilitating around-

the-clock work and increased innovation [58]. 
However, such arrangements often result in lower 
levels of commitment and urgency, leading to long 

periods of latency [20]. Using geographically-

dispersed Free/Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS) 

teams, this paper aims to discover conditions that 

improve performance in virtual software 
development teams.  
Historically, the use of Agile methods
1 has led to 
improved performance in manufacturing teams and 
has been extended to increase the responsiveness of 

supply chains [9] and even entire organizations [21]. 

Recently, Agile methods such as XP and Scrum have 
                                                 1 Agile methods involve, i
ndividuals and interactions 
over processes and tools; working software over 
comprehensive documentation; customer collaboration over 
contract negotiation, and; responding to change over 
following a plan (source: 
http://agilemanifesto.org/
; accessed May 27, 2010).
 been applied to software development [1; 31]. 
Although not all Agile methods are feasible for 
geographically distributed software development 
teams, even partial deployment of these methods has 
been found to increase morale and commitment 

among team members [48].  
Several researchers have argued that to be 
effective, virtual teams need to meet face-to-face 
intermittently [e.g., 4]. Yet, for some virtual teams 
face-to-face meetings may never happen. In this 
paper, we propose that by leveraging the media 

synchronicity capabilities of ICT to enable the use of 

Agile methods in virtual settings, it may be possible 
to overcome some of the obstacles faced by virtual 
software development teams. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows. First, we lay the foundations for our research 
model by summarizing the literatures on virtual 
teams and Agile methods. Next, we introduce the 
theories on which we base our hypotheses, viz. media 
synchronicity, social presence, and transactive 

memory. This is followed by a description of our 

research method and data collection. We conclude 

with a discussion of our results. 
 2. Literature 
review  

 Unlike traditional co-located teams whose 
members collaborate mostly by communicating face-
to-face, members of virtual teams are faced with the 

challenges of relying on ICTs to communicate and 
work with one another. Since they often lack a 
system of mutual understanding based on a common 
context derived from a shared location, virtual teams 
frequently suffer from coordination problems and 

weak group dynamics [30].  
Despite continuous advancements in ICTs (e.g., 
e-mail, chat rooms, instant messaging, and virtual 

worlds), virtual teams (including virtual software 
development teams) continue to struggle with task 
coordination and project control [14; 31; 34]. For 

example, among virtual FLOSS teams, previous 

research has observed loss of motivation, 

commitment issues, and drop in participation [20]. 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201111530-1605/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE Our contention is that the performance of virtual 
software development teams can be enhanced 
through the use of Agile methods that are enabled 
through the appropriation of relevant ICT. 
 2.1. Agile 
methods 
 
Olson and Olson [52] noted that virtual 
organizations increase effectiveness as their members 
adapt themselves to changing socio-technical systems 
with enhanced ICTs. Accordingly, we submit that 
certain capabilities of ICT, in particular media 
synchronicity, may afford team members the ability 
to capture some of the benefits of face-to-face 

meetings, while retaining the advantages of 

virtualness. Specifically, we propose that the use of 

synchronous ICT would enable the application of 

Agile methods by virtual software development 
teams, thereby leading to improved outcomes (e.g., 
team performance). 
Agile methods are rooted in concepts of 
continuous improvement from Lean Manufacturing 

and Six Sigma approaches [49]. For co-located 

software development projects, applying Agile 
methods may be manifested by setting up self-
organized teams working in short iteration cycles that 

result in emergent requirements and incremental 

functionality [39]. Agile-based software development 

takes place through a series of 
sprints
, which are 
short iterative development sub-projects. Agile 
methods involve teams that work together in close 
proximity, with frequent reflection and feedback on 

practices [10]. Teams that practice Agile methods are 

generally small in size, usually between five and nine 

members who typically work in a single, large, open 
space to facilitate communication. This enhanced 
communication helps to develop tacit knowledge 
within the team that substitutes for more formal 

documentation and allows for quicker response to 

changes. Team members participate in daily 
stand-
ups where they briefly report on their previous 
progress and their current plans. The emphasis is on 
short status updates and quick feedback which 
promote accountability and transparency, 

characteristics that Agile teams highly value [54]. 
Agile teams are self-organized in the sense that 
rather than following the directions of a separate 
management group, the team members themselves 
prioritize tasks and make all the decisions pertaining 
to the coordination and management of the project. 

Another vital difference between Agile and regular 

teams is that roles are flexible and members may 
volunteer to pick up tasks to even out the workload 
over the duration of a sprint. A sprint typically runs 
for two to four weeks, but could last anywhere from 
one week to four months. At the end of a sprint, the 
team (and in some cases, the customer) reviews the 

project™s progress and sets goals for the next sprint, 
allowing the team to be highly adaptive. The idea of 
continuous improvement is embodied in the 

retrospective process that takes place at the end of 

every sprint. The process of reflection and 

introspection encourages cooperation among the team 

members and facilitates collaborative decision 
making [28]. Face-to-face communication, 
transparency and the sense of a community are key to 

the success of any Agile team. 
Nevertheless, Agile methods are not suitable for 
all development projects, and using these methods 
could be a challenge for virtual software development 
teams since virtual team members are not co-located 
(e.g., fewer projects are likely to have daily stand-

ups). However, it appears that despite these obstacles, 

an increasing number of global software teams begin 

to recognize the value in adopting some of these 

Agile methods and use hybrid development 
approaches that integrate certain aspects of Agile 
methods into the development process [31; 24]. We 

believe that certain ICT can help overcome some of 

the abovementioned challenges and enable a broader 

integration of Agile methods into virtual software 
development teams, thereby increasing the likelihood 
of project success. 
 3. Theoretical 
foundations and 
model 
development 
 Virtual teams are often comprised of individuals 
with their own idiosyncratic goals and cultures who 
have only temporary alliances, making the 

development of a shared understanding a challenging 
task [26]. Members of virtual software development 
teams interact primarily via ICT and although there 

are many accompanying benefits such as improved 

communication records, opportunities for 24/7 

development (i.e., follow-the-sun work schedule), 
and access to rich skill sets, the reliance on electronic 
communication media leads to increased 

communication volume, decreased comprehension, 

coordination difficulties, delays in project 

deliverables, and loss of focus [17; 31]. Research on 

virtual teams has uncovered myriad obstacles that 
need to be overcome for effective teamwork. These 
include lack of non-verbal cues, reduced 

opportunities for serendipitous encounters and 

informal conversations (e.g., water cooler talks) and 

hence fewer opportunities for relationships to 

develop, and difficulties in building consensus and 
establishing shared meaning [51]. 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20112 Communication is essential to the success of any 
team endeavor and this holds true for software 
development as well. We expect that the use of a 
synchronous communication media, as part of the 
virtual work environment, will enable 
geographically-dispersed teams to better leverage 

Agile methods and thus improve team performance. 

We, therefore, propose that adequate appropriation of 

the communication capabilities of certain ICT can 
ameliorate some of the obstacles associated with 
physical distance in virtual software development 

teams. Specifically, we propose that using 

synchronous communication technologies such as 

instant messaging, voice over IP, and 

videoconferencing will enable such teams to better 
practice Agile methods, which in turn will enhance 
process outcomes.    
Next, we develop a model that examines virtual 
team performance in open source software 

development projects and employs constructs from 

media synchronicity, social presence, and TM 
theories (see Figure 1). 
 3.1. Media synchronicity 
theory 
 Media synchronicity theory (MST) examines the fit 

between the capabilities of communication media and 

the needs of communication processes and contends 

that greater fit is associated with improved outcomes 

[16]. MST proposes five capabilities of 
communication media, which jointly determine the 
ability of the medium to support synchronicity Œ i.e., 

ﬁa shared pattern of coordinated behavior among 

individuals as their work together [16; p. 575]ﬂ: 

transmission velocity, symbol sets, parallelism, 
rehearsability, and reprocessability. Of these five 
capabilities, the first two are particularly relevant to 
this study. Transmission velocity refers to the rate at 

which a communication medium can transmit a 

message to intended recipients. Symbol sets are the 
number of ways in which information can be encoded 
and transmitted by a communication medium. 

Different media can be characterized in terms of the 

communication capabilities they possess and the 

functionalities they enable, which places them along 

the media synchronicity continuum. For example, 
videoconferencing is high on transmission velocity 
and symbol set variety but low on parallelism, 

rehearsability, and reprocessability whereas e-mail is 

low on the first two but high on the last three 

capabilities [43].  
MST conceptualizes two communication 
processes: conveyance and convergence. Conveyance 

refers to the transmission and processing of new 

information whereas convergence refers to 

establishment of the meaning of the information. We 

argue that the use of ICT to enable conveyance 

processes is, to a large extent, independent of the 
team™s arrangement. Specifically, co-located teams 
and virtual teams alike rely on similar asynchronous 

ICTs to support conveyance processes such as the 

transmission of large amounts of new information. 

Accordingly, this paper focuses on convergence 
processes where virtual teams aim to develop shared 
understanding and focus, coordinate and control 

project activities, and assign roles and 

responsibilities. Compared with co-located teams, 

virtual teams face greater difficulties obtaining these 

goals despite their greater use of a variety of 
communication media [31]. 
According to MST, two capabilities of 
communication media are particularly salient to 
enabling synchronicity and supporting convergence: 

transmission velocity and symbol sets [16]. 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20113 Furthermore, media capabilities alone are not 
sufficient to affect communication convergence and 

attention must also be paid to their appropriation by 
the users of the technologies [15; 16; 23]. The 
argument for the insufficiency of media capabilities 
alone to explain various outcomes is consistent with 

the view that it is how ICT are used in the context in 

which they are used that will explain the myriad 

outcomes we observe [e.g., 35]. Hence, we contend 
that communications media that afford instant 
messaging, audio channels, and non-verbal cues 

would allow virtual software development teams to 

seek and obtain quick feedback in a variety of 

formats and interact and collaborate in an 

environment that transcends geographical boundaries. 
Therefore, synchronous media can be leveraged to 
improve teamwork, self-organizations, and quick 

adaptation to change Œ 
the hallmarks of Agile 
methods. Hence, 
 H1: The degree to which a virtual software 
development team uses synchronous communication 
media is positively related to the degree to which it 

uses Agile methods. 
 
Note that co-located software development teams 
often use a hybrid approach to adopting Agile 

methods [7]. Thus, rather than envisioning a 

dichotomy of non-Agile versus purely Agile, we can 
measure the degree of to which a virtual team uses 

Agile methods along a continuum. 
 A key challenge for virtual teams involves 
coordination of projects. In addition, virtual software 
development teams need to agree on the list of 

features and functionalities [20; 55]. Although it is 

difficult to apply Agile methods to geographically-

dispersed software development projects, anecdotal 
evidence suggests that leveraging the capabilities of 
the appropriate ICT may help virtual teams overcome 
of these challenges [59]. For example, requirements 

elicitation techniques that are part of Agile methods 

can be used to brainstorm functionalities and 
prioritize tasks. 
Past research has identified the importance of 
shared understanding in the area of software 
development. For example, Curtis et al. [12] note that 

a critical issue in software development is the 

establishment of a common understanding of the 
software requirements and design elements across the 
project team. They analyzed the transcripts of team 
meetings and conclude that designers spend large 

amounts of time trying to develop a shared mental 

model of the design. In general, as part of the 

development process, the software team needs to 
converge on the project goals and the approach it will 
take to achieve those goals.  
Yet, for virtual software development teams, 
achieving this convergence is a challenge. Naturally, 
face-to-face meetings allow richer interactions and 
are helpful in overcoming organizational and cultural 

differences [22]. However, face-to-face meetings 

among virtual software developers are rare [11]. 
According to MST, convergence is likely to result 
in improved task performance. Most of the activities 

in Agile software development environments require 

open discussion and consensus building. For 

example, during planning meetings, the team uses 

elicitation techniques such as brainstorming and 

prioritization [55]. This suggests that practicing Agile 
methods, made possible by synchronous 
communication media, is likely to allow virtual 

software development teams to convergence on the 

project™s goals and the means to these goals. Thus, 
 H2: The degree to which a virtual software 
development team uses Agile methods positively 
affects the team™s communication convergence.  
 3.2. Social 
presence 
theory 
 Social presence is defined as the extent to which a 
communication medium facilitates awareness of 

others involved in the communication process while 

rendering itself ™invisible™ to the process participants 

[61]. Social presence theory proposes that during 
interactions, individuals prefer to perceive others as 
co-present [41]. Since individuals interact in a variety 

of ways (e.g., physical, visual, verbal  [13; 61]), their 

ability to communicate realistically in a computer-

mediated communication environment depends on 

two media capabilities Œ i.e., transmission velocity 
and symbol sets. At high rates of transmission 
velocity, computer-mediated communication 

resembles natural conversation and numerous symbol 

sets can be used to convey messages in a variety of 

ways [16]. In addition, these media capabilities can 

help relay the communicators™ social presence and 
can provide a variety of important social cues [36; 
53], which are important for establishing and 

maintaining social relationships.  
Since many virtual teams never get to meet face-
to-face before or during the project, alternative 

mechanisms may be required to create a sense of 
social presence. Accordingly, we propose that 
synchronous communication media may be able to 

compensate, at least partially, for the lack of face-to-

face interactions and create a sense of social presence 

among members of virtual software development 
teams. Thus, we foresee a positive link between 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20114 media synchronicity and the extent of social presence 
experienced by members of virtual teams. Hence, 
 H3: The degree to which a virtual software 
development team uses synchronous communication 
media has a positive impact on the perceived social 

presence of its members. 
 
While social presence is important for the 
establishment and support of social relationships 

[63], past research did not find a relationship between 

social presence and task performance [e.g., 66]. This 

lack of evidence may be attributed to the fact that 

social presence is a media characteristic, albeit a 

socially derived one [16], which, in and of itself, is 
insufficient to impact performance outcomes. 
Ultimately, like other communication media 

characteristics, social presence must be appropriated 

and used to leverage communication processes [15; 

18]. Accordingly, we propose that interactions among 

members of virtual software development teams, who 
use synchronous communication media, which are 
expected to generate strong social presence, can 

enable and support the use of Agile methods by 

virtual teams. Specifically, with greater social 

presence, which infuses realism into virtual 
interactions, Agile methods are likely to be seen as a 
feasible software development methodology for 

virtual teams. Accordingly, 
 H4: The degree of social presence experienced by a 
virtual software development has a positive effect on 
the degree to which it uses Agile methods 
 3.3. Transact
ive memory 
theory 
 Transactive memory (TM) is the notion that, 
within teams, one™s knowledge is not limited to the 
information he or she has been able to store, retain, 
and recall but one can also access other team 
members™ knowledge [37]. In that sense, other 
individuals within the same team may serve as 

external memory repositories [65]. Thus, team 

members may benefit from one another™s expertise 
and knowledge if they develop a shared 
understanding of who knows what in the team. 

According to the theory, team members can exchange 

knowledge and leverage each other™s expertise by 

interacting with one another. Research has shown 

that TM enables teams to reach higher levels of 
performance [e.g., 45; 38; 56]. TM was also found to 
play a positive role in virtual teams [3; 25; 33]. 
TM develops when team members learn about 
each other™s knowledge and expertise and mentally 

encode this information. When the team encounters 
new knowledge it ‚stores™ it within the domain 
expert. Later, when this knowledge becomes central 
to a particular problem, team members can retrieve it 
by locating the owner of the knowledge [57; 65]. 
Researchers observed that the absence of certain 
institutional enablers makes it a challenging task for 
virtual teams to develop TM [3; 50]. Despite these 

challenges, some TM was shown to develop in virtual 

teams, albeit after long periods of time [33]. In the 
context of software development, we propose that in 
order to assign roles and responsibilities to a team, 

high levels of TM are required. A close inspection of 

the components of TM and how it is developed 

suggests that the key activities of Agile methods can 

help virtual software development teams using highly 
synchronous communication media to develop TM. 
Specifically, Agile methods can be applied 

throughout the software development lifecycle, from 

requirements gathering to product testing. The use of 

some Agile methods has been shown to reduce the 

problems associated with temporal, spatial and socio-
cultural differences in global software development 
[31]. As Agile methods de-emphasize documentation, 

stand-ups are crucial for sharing tacit knowledge with 

team members. Such activities offer important 

opportunities to develop TM memory among virtual 
teams. Therefore, 
 H5: The degree to which a virtual software 
development team uses Agile methods has a positive 

effect on its ability to develop transactive memory. 
 Virtual team members are less effective at 
disseminating information and locating and engaging 
experts [29]. Prior research has proposed that team 

members™ co-presence is conducive to the 

development of TM since it enables confirmation or 

modification of mental structures via multiple 
information gathering methods [6]. Accordingly, we 
propose that virtual software development teams with 
strong social presence Œ enabled by synchronous 
communication media Œ may be able to compensate 

for lack of co-presence as far as TM development is 
concerned. Hence, 
 H6: The degree of social presence experienced by a 
virtual software development has a positive effect on 

the team™s ability to develop transactive memory. 
 3.3. Team 
performance 
 During the process of software development, team 
members often question, make suggestions, report 
bugs, provide feedback and discuss project-related 

issues, all of which complicate the software 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20115 development process and can, potentially, adversely 
affect its outcomes. In general, it is challenging for 

virtual software development teams to work on tasks 
that require close coordination [29]. Therefore, teams 
that perform well are able to resolve conflicts and 
solve problems, and these efforts predominantly 

depend on convergence communication [16]. Hence, 
 Hypothesis 7: The stronger the communication 
convergence attained by the virtual software 
development team, the better its performance. 
 
Prior research has studied the relationship 
between TM and virtual team performance [e.g., 33]. 

For conceptual completeness, we present a final 
hypothesis regarding this relationship but provide no 
further discussion. Instead, we note that our focus is 

on the enablers of TM in virtual teams, which have 

been studied to a lesser extent. Accordingly, 
 Hypothesis 8: Virtual teams with better transactive 
memory will enjoy greater team performance.  
 4. Research 
methodology   4.1. Sampling 
frame
  Over the past decade, 
Free/Libre Open Source 
Software (FLOSS) has gained substantial interest 
from businesses, governments and researchers as an 
alternative to proprietary software as well as 

commercial software development practices. Thus, 
we posit that finding mechanisms that could increase 
the effectiveness of FLOSS teams is important for 

academics and practitioners alike. 
 Since the source code is in the public domain, 
FLOSS provides a fount of code components that can 

be reused by any developer [62]. In addition, the 
process of developing open source code incorporates 
best practices such as version control, peer review 

and issue tracking, processes that are characteristics 

of large, mature software engineering organizations 

[62]. Thus the advent of open source software has 

had a positive influence on software development, 
both in terms of the final product and in terms of the 
development process. As FLOSS merges into the 

mainstream, it becomes increasingly vital to identify 

methods and technologies that will nourish it. 

Accordingly, this paper studies FLOSS teams. 
 4.2. Instrument
 development
 For this pilot study, we developed an instrument 
using validated scales to measure the key constructs: 
virtual social presence [42], communication 
convergence [32], TM [37], and team performance 
[27]. (All items are presented in the appendix.) In 

addition, we captured the level of media 

synchronicity by recording the extent to which 

different types of communication media were used by 
the teams (i.e., 
VoIP, Videoconferencing
, and 
IM). 
Similarly, we assessed the use of Agile methods by 
measuring the extent to which various activities 

associated with this software development approach 

were performed (specifically, 
Sprints
, Stands-Ups
, and 
XP.   4.3. Data collection 
 We begin with a preliminary exploration of the 
relationships among the factors in our model. To do 
this, we conducted a pilot study within a population 
of developers involved in virtual FLOSS projects. 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20116 Accordingly, invitations to participate in a survey 
were sent to members of an online community for 
FLOSS developers. There are no costs associated 
with joining the community and participation is 
voluntary. Members of the community represent 
myriad companies in various industries as is evident 

from their profiles. A personal invitation [19] to 

participate in the study was sent by email to 577 

randomly chosen members of the community (out of 
more than 2,000 members). In exchange for 
participation in the study, respondents were offered a 

report of the findings. 41 completed questionnaires 

were received in a single wave, representing a 7.1% 

response rate. To increase the response rate and the 

absolute number of responses in the full-scale survey 
we plan to conduct two waves of data collection 
(initial and follow-up) and offer a small monetary 

reward. In addition, a leading Agile methods 

community has agreed to sponsor our study. 
 4.4. Data analysis
  
While PLS can handle small datasets [8] and 
previous studies have conducted a full-scale path 
analysis using equivalent sample sizes [e.g., 64], we 
created summated scales for each construct in the 

model
2. The structural model of the PLS regression 
was used for a preliminary testing of the hypotheses. 

A bootstrapping procedure was used to assess the 

significance of the hypothesized paths and the 
amount of variance in the dependent variables 
attributed to the explanatory variables. The results of 

the analysis Œ paths coefficients and R
2 values Œ are 
presented in Figure 2.  
The results from the structural model generated 
by PLS support our key arguments for the 
antecedents of virtual software development team 
performance. We found empirical support for the 

hypothesized relationship between the extent of use 

of synchronous communication media and the extent 

of Agile methods used by the virtual FLOSS team 
(H1), and between the former and virtual social 
presence experienced by the virtual team (H3). We 

also found support for the hypothesized relationship 

between the extent of Agile methods used and 

communication convergence (H2), and between the 

extent of Agile methods used and TM (H5). Support 
was also found for the relationship between virtual 
social presence and Agile methods (H4), and between 

the former and TM (H6). Finally, communication 

convergence and TM were found to have a positive 
                                                 2 Confirmatory factor analysis indicated that the scales 
exhibit adequate convergent and discriminant validities. 
Additional tests will accompany the full-scale survey. 
 effect on virtual team performance (H7 and H8, 
respectively). All path coefficients were significant at 

 = 0.05 or better. 
 5. Discussion and 
conclusions 
 The goal of the study reported in this paper was to 
examine the impact of media synchronicity and Agile 
methods on virtual team performance. The use of 

Agile methods in software development requires high 

levels of interaction and communication, which is 

posing a challenge for virtual teams intending to 
adopt these methods. However, we demonstrate that 
by leveraging the communication capabilities of the 

appropriate ICT not only can virtual software 

development teams successfully adopt Agile 

practices, but their overall performance can be 

improved as well. In particular, we find that by using 
ICT with high media synchronicity, such as instant 
messaging, videoconferencing, and voice over IP, 

team members are likely to increase their perception 

of virtual social presence as well as their ability to 

practice Agile methods. 
Media synchronicity posits that the alignment of 
communication media capabilities with process 

requirements is likely to lead to improved outcomes. 

In the context of software development, this paper 

outlines a mechanism via which an enabling 

configuration could occur. In particular, leveraging 
ICT with high media synchronicity capabilities has a 
direct, as well as an indirect, impact on the use of 

Agile methods, which in turn increases the TM and 

communication convergence of the virtual team and 

ultimately its performance. The overall effect is that 

high media synchronicity combined with virtual 
social presence enhances the ability of a team to use 
Agile methods. The perception of virtual social 
presence has a direct impact on TM, but when 

combined with the use of Agile methods, it seems to 

provide an additional boost 
to the creation of this 
tacit resource. Thus, adopting and practicing Agile 
methods appears to act as a catalyst in harnessing 
virtual co-presence to generate TM. 
Our data show that the use of Agile methods 
integrated with technologies that enable virtual social 
presence increases the TM and communication 
convergence of the team. About half of the variation 
in team performance can be attributed to the forming 
of TM and the attainment of communication 

convergence.  
The results suggest that the use of Agile methods 
is not only feasible, but could also be valuable for 
virtual software development teams. However their 
successful implementation is contingent upon 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20117 leveraging the appropriate ICT. Future research 
should amass larger datasets to assess the robustness 

of these findings. The results obtained in this pilot 
study encourage us to continue to explore the 
relationships outlined in the conceptual model using a 
larger sample.  
 References  
      [1]
 Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M. T., & 
Ronkainen, J. ﬁNew directions on agile methods: A 
comparative analysis,ﬂ International Conference on 
Software Engineering (ICSE25), Portland, Oregon, 2003. 
 [2]
 Ahuja, M. K., and Carley, K. ﬁNetwork structure 
in virtual organizations,ﬂ Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 1998, 3(4). 
 [3]
 Alavi, M., and Tiwana, A. ﬁKnowledge 
Integration in Virtual Teams: The Potential Role of 

Knowledge Management Systems,ﬂ Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
2002, 53(12). 
 [4]
 Beise, C. M., Niederman, F., and Mattord, H. ﬂIT 
project managers' perceptions and use of virtual team 
technologies,ﬂ Information Resources Management 

Journal, 2004, 17(4), pp. 73-88. 
 [5]
 Boomen, M. v. d., and Schäfer, M. T. ﬁWill the 
revolution be open-sourced? How open source travels 

through society,ﬂ In M. Wynants & J. Cornelis (Eds.), How 

Open is the Future: Economic
, Social & Cultural Scenarios 
inspired by Free & Open-Source Software (pp. 31-68). 

Brussels, Belgium: VUB Brusse
ls University Press, 2005. 
 [6]
 Brandon, D.P. and Hollingshead, A.B. 
ﬁTransactive memory systems in organizations: Matching 

tasks, expertise, and people,ﬂ Organization Science, 2004, 

15(6), pp. 633-644. 
 [7]
 Cao, L., Mohan, K., Xu, P., and Ramesh, B. ﬁA 
framework for adapting agile development methodologies,ﬂ 

European Journal of Information Systems, 2009, 18(4), pp. 

332-343. 
 [8]
 Chin, W. W., and Newsted, P. R. "Structural 
Equation Modeling Analysis with Small Samples Using 

Partial Least Squares," in Statistical Strategies for Small 

Sample Research, R. H. Hoyle (Ed.), Sage Publications, 
Thousand Oaks, CA, 1999, pp. 307-341. 
 [9]
 Christopher, M. ﬁThe agile supply chain: 
Competing in volatile markets,ﬂ Industrial Marketing 

Management, 2000. 29(1), pp. 37. 
 
[10]
 Cockburn, A. ﬁAgile software development joins 
the ‚would-be™ crowd,ﬂ Cutter IT Journal, 2002, 15(1), pp. 
6-12. 
 [11]
 Crowston, K., Howison, J., Masango, C., and 
Eseryel, U. Y. ﬁThe role of face-to-face meetings in 
technology-supported self-organizing distributed teams,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Profe
ssional Communications, 2007, 
50(3). 
 [12]
 Curtis, B., Walz, D. and Elam, J.J. ﬁStudying the 
process of software design teams,ﬂ th International 
Software Process Workshop On Experience With Software 
Process Models, Kennebunkport, Maine, United States, 

1990, pp. 52Œ53. 
 [13]
 Daft, R. L., and Lengel, R. H. ﬁOrganizational 
Information Requirements, Media Richness and Structural 
Design,ﬂ Management Science, 1986, 32(5), pp. 554-571. 
 [14]
 Davis, A., Murphy, J., Owens, D., Khazanchi, D., 
and Zigurs, I. ﬁAvatars, People, and Virtual Worlds: 
Foundations for Research in Metaverses,ﬂ Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems, 2009, 10(2). 
 [15]
 Dennis, A. R., Wixom, B.A., and Vandenberg, 
R.J. ﬁUnderstanding fit and appropriation effects in group 

support systems via meta-analysis,ﬂ MIS Quarterly, 25(2), 
pp. 167-193. 
 [16]
 Dennis, A. R., Fuller, R. M., and Valacich, J. S. 
ﬁMedia, tasks and communication process: A theory of 
media synchronicity,ﬂ MIS Quarterly, 2008, 32(3), pp. 575-

600. 
 [17]
 DeSanctis, G., and Monge, P. ﬁCommunication 
processes for virtual organizations,ﬂ Organization Science, 
1999, 10(6), pp. 693-703. 

 [18]
 DeSanctis, G., and Poole, M. S. ﬁCapturing the 
complexity in advanced technology use: adaptive 
structuration theory,ﬂ Organization Science, 1994, 5(2), pp. 

121-147. 
 [19]
 Dillman, D.A. ﬁMail and Internet Surveys: The 
Tailored Design Method,ﬂ John Wiley Company, New 

York, NY, 1999. 

 [20]
 Fang, Y., and Neufeld, D. ﬁUnderstanding 
Sustained Participation in Open Source Software Projects,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 2009, 25(4), 
pp. 9-50. 
 [21]
 Fink, L. and Neumann, S. ﬁGaining agility 
through IT personnel capabilities: The mediating role of 

infrastructure capability,ﬂ Journal of the AIS, 2007, 8(8), 
pp. 440-458. 
 
[22]
 Fiol, C., and O'Connor, E. ﬁIdentification in face-
to-face, hybrid, and pure virtual teams: Untangling the 
contradictions,ﬂ Organization Science, 2005, 16(1), pp. 19-
32. 

 
[23]
 Fuller, R.N. and Dennis, A.R. ﬁDoes fit matter? 
The impact of task-technology fit and appropriation on 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20118 team performance in repeated tasks,ﬂ Information Systems 
Research, 20(1), pp. 2-17. 
 [24]
 Goth, G. ﬁSprinting towards Open Source 
Development,ﬂ IEEE Software, 2007, pp. 88-91. 
 [25]
 Griffith, T. L., Sawyer, J. E., and Neale, M. A. 
ﬁVirtualness and knowledge in teams: Managing the love 
triangle of organizations, individuals, and information 

technology,ﬂ MIS Quarterly, 2003, 27, pp. 265-287. 

 [26]
 Grabowski, M., and Roberts, K. H. Risk 
mitigation in virtual organizations. Organization Science, 
2000, 10, pp. 704-721. 
 [27]
 Hardin, A.M., M.A. Fuller, and Davison, R.M. ﬁI 
know I can, but can we? Culture and Efficacy beliefs in 
global virtual teams,ﬂ Small Group Research, 38, pp. 130-

155. 
 [28]
 Highsmith, J. ﬁThe great methodologies debate: 
Part 2,ﬂ Cutter IT Journal, 2002, 15(1), pp. 2-5. 
 [29]
 Herbsleb, J. and A. Mockus, ﬁOpen source design 
and Collaboration,ﬂ UIUC/NSF Workshop on the 

Continuous (Re)Design of Open Source Software, 

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign - October 8-9, 
2003. 
 [30]
 Hinds, P. J., and Mortensen, M. ﬁUnderstanding 
conflict in distributed teams: An empirical investigation,ﬂ 
Organization Science, 2005, 16(3), pp. 290-307. 
 [31]
 Holmström, H., Fitzgerald, B., Ågerfalk, P.J., and 
Ó Conchúir, E. ﬁAgile practices reduce distance in global 
software development,ﬂ Information Systems Management, 
2006, 23, pp. 7-18. 
 [32]
 Hung, Y-.T. C., N.T.T. Duyen, W.-C. Wong, and 
A.-L. Chua. ﬁReexamining media capacity theories using 
workplace instant messaging,ﬂ IEEE Transactions on 
Professional Communication, 2008, 51(4), pp. 352. 
 [33]
 Kanawattanachai, P. and Yoo, Y. ﬁThe impact of 
knowledge coordination on virtual team performance over 

time,ﬂ MIS Quarterly, 2007, 31(4), pp. 783-808.  
 [34]
 Kotlarsky, J. and Oshri, I. ﬁSocial ties, 
knowledge sharing and successful collaboration in globally 

distributed systems development projects,ﬂ European 

Journal of Information Systems, 2005, 14(1), pp. 37. 

 [35]
 Kling, R. "Social informatics", Encyclopedia of 
LIS, available at: www.slis.indiana.edu/SI/ si2001.html 
(accessed 24 July 
2004),ﬂ 2001, Kluwer Publishing, 
Dordrecht. 
 [36]
 Kock, N. ﬁThe Psychobiological Model: Towards 
a New Theory of Computer-Mediated Communication 

Based on Darwinian Evolution,ﬂ Organization Science, 
2004, 15(3), pp. 327-348. 
 [37]
 Lewis, K. ﬁMeasuring Transactive Memory 
Systems in the Field: Scale Development and Validation,ﬂ 
Journal of Applied Psychology,ﬂ 2003, 88(4), pp. 587-604. 
 [38]
 Lewis, K., Lange, D., a
nd Gillis, L. ﬁTransactive 
Memory Systems, Learning, and Learning Transfer,ﬂ 
Organization Science, 2005, 16(6), pp. 581-600. 
 
[39]
 Lindvall, M., Basili, V., Boehm, B., Costa, P., 
and Dangle, K. ﬁEmpirical findings in agile methods,ﬂ 
XP/Agile Universe, Chicago, IL, 2002. 
 
[40]
 Lipnack, J., and J. Stamps. ﬁVirtual Teams-
Reaching Across Space, Time, and Organizations with 
Technology,ﬂ John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1997. 
 
[41]
 Lowry, P. B., Robert, T. L., Romano, N. C., 
Cheney, P. D., and Hightower, R. T. ﬁThe impact of group 
size and social presence on small-group communication,ﬂ 
Small Group Research, 2006, 37(6), pp. 631-661. 
 [42]
 Malhotra, A. and Majchrzak, A. ﬁCommunication 
Context-Dependent Technology Use In Virtual Teams,ﬂ 

Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Conference on 

Information Systems, Phoenix, Arizona 2009. 

 [43]
 Maruping, L. M., and Agarwal, R. ﬁManaging 
Team Interpersonal Processes Through Technology: A 
Task-Technology Fit Perspective,ﬂ Journal of Applied 

Psychology, 2004, 89(6), pp. 975-990. 
 [44]
 McGrath, J. E. ﬁTime, interaction, and 
performance (TIP): A theory of groups,ﬂ Small Group 
Research, 1991, 22(2), pp. 147-174. 

 [45]
 Moreland, R. L., and Argote, L. Transactive 
memory in dynamic organizations. In R. Peterson & E. 
Mannix (Eds.), Leading and managing people in the 

dynamic organization. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2003. 
 [46]
 Murray, S. R., and Peyrefitte, J. ﬁKnowledge 
Type and Communication Media Choice in the Knowledge 

Transfer Process,ﬂ Journal of Managerial Issues, 2007, 
19(1), pp. 111-133. 
 
[47]
 Nandhakumar, J., and Baskerville, R. ﬁDurability 
of Online Teamworking: Patterns of Trust,ﬂ Information 
Technology & People, 2006, 19(4), pp. 371-389. 
 
[48]
 Ngo-The, A., Hoang, K., Nguyen, T., and Mai, 
N. ﬂExtreme Programming in Distributed Software 
Development: A Case study,ﬁ International Workshop on 
Distributed Software Development, Paris, 2005. 

 
[49]
 Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R., and Mangalaraj, G. 
ﬁChallenges of migrating to agile methodologies,ﬂ 

Communications of the ACM, 2005, 48(5), pp. 72-78. 

 Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20119 [50]
 Nevo, D., and Wand, Y. ﬁOrganizational memory 
information systems: a transactive memory approach,ﬂ 
Decision Support Systems, 2005, 39(4), pp. 549-562. 
 [51]
 Nunamaker, J. F., Reinig, B. A., and Briggs, R. 
O. ﬁPrinciples for effective virtual teamwork,ﬂ 
Communication of the ACM, 2009, 52(4), pp. 113-117. 
 [52]
 Olson, G. M., and Olson, J. S. ﬁDistance matters. 
Human Computer Interaction,ﬂ 2000, 15, pp. 139-178. 

 [53]
 Otondo, R. F., Van Scotter, J. R., Allen, D. G., 
and Palvia, P. ﬁThe complexity of richness: Media, 
message and communication outcomes,ﬂ Information & 

Management, 2008, 45(1), pp. 21-30. 
 [54]
 Paasivaara, M., Durasiewicz, S., and Lassenius, 
C. ﬁDistributed Agile Development: Using Scrum in a 

Large Project. IEEE International Conference on Global 
Software Engineering (ICGSE 2008). pp. 87-95. 
 
[55]
 Paetsch, F., Eberlein, A., and Maurer, F. 
ﬁRequirements Engineering and Agile Software 
Development,ﬂ 12th IEEE International Workshop on 
Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative 

Enterprises, Linz, Austria, 2003. 

 [56]
 Reagans, R., Argote, L., and Brooks, D. 
ﬁIndividual experience and experience working together: 
Predicting learning rates from knowing what to do and 

knowing who knows what,ﬂ Management Science, 2005, 
51, pp. 869-881. 
 
[57]
 Rulke, D. L., and Rau, D. ﬁInvestigating the 
encoding process of transactive memory development in 

group training,ﬂ Group & Organization Management, 2000, 
25(4), pp. 373-396. 
 
[58]
 Sarker, S. and Sahay, S. ﬁImplications of space 
and time on distributed work: An interpretive study of US-
Norwegian systems development teams,ﬂ European Journal 
of Information System, 2004, 13(1), pp. 3. 

 [59]
 Sarker, S. and Sarker, S. ﬁExploring agility in 
distributed information systems development teams: An 
interpretive study in an offshoring context,ﬂ Information 

Systems Research, 2009, 20(3), pp. 440-463. 
 [60]
 Shah, S. K. ﬁMotivation, governance, and the 
viability of hybrid forms in open source software 

development,ﬂ Management Science, 2006, 52(7), pp. 
1000-1014. 
 
[61]
 Short, J., Williams, E., and Christie, B. The 
Social Psychology of Telecommunications. New York: 
Wiley, 1976. 
 
[62]
 Spinellis, D., and Szyperski, C. ﬁHow is open 
source affecting softward development?ﬂ IEEE Software, 
2004, 21(1), pp. 28-33. 
 
[63]
 Urry, J. ﬁMobility and Proximity,ﬂ Sociology, 
2002, 36(2), pp. 255-274. 
 [64]
 Wagner, C. and R.K.F. Ip. ﬁAction Learning with 
Second Life - A Pilot Study,ﬂ Journal of Information 

Systems Education, 2009, 20(2), pp. 249-258. 
 [65]
 Wegner, D. M. (1986). Transactive memory: A 
contemporary analysis of the group mind. In Theories of 

Group Behavior (pp. 185-205). New York: Springer-
Verlag. 
 
[66]
 Yoo, Y., and Alavi, M. ﬁMedia and Group 
Cohesion: Relative Influences on Social Presence, Task 

Participation, and Group Consensus,ﬂ MIS Quarterly, 2001, 
25(3), pp. 371-390. 
  Appendix Œ 
survey 
items 
 Transactive Memory (TM) 
1. I am comfortable accepting procedural suggestions 
from other team members. 
2. I trust that other members™ knowledge about the project 
is credible. 
3. I am confident relying on the information that other 
team members bring to the discussion. 
4. When other team members give information, I want to 
double-check it for myself. 
5. I do not have much faith in other members™ ﬁexpertise.ﬂ 
6. The team works together in a well-coordinated fashion. 
7. The team has very few misunderstandings about what 

to do. 
8. The team needs to backtrack and start over a lot. 
9. We accomplish the task smoothly and efficiently. 
10. There is much confusion about how we would 
accomplish the task. 
 Team Performance 
1. I am satisfied with my team members. 
2. I am pleased with the way my teammates and I work 
together. 
3. I am very satisfied working with this team. 
 Virtual Social Presence 
The technologies used by the team enable me to... 

1. ...feel as if I were present in the same location as the 

other members (even when I wasn™t). 
2. ...engage in synchronous interactions with other team 
members mirroring the way I would have interacted if I 
were face-to face. 
3. ...easily call for impromptu communication between 
team members. 
 Communication Convergence 
1. Effectively debate [project] issues. 
2. Effectively resolve disagreement on [project]. 
3. Effectively reach a solution to [project] problem. 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201110