 A Model of Agile Evolution and Maintenance Process 
  Mira Kajko-Mattsson and Jaana Nyfjord 
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences 
 mira@dsv.su.se
, jaana@dsv.su.se
   Abstract 
Most of the agile methods 
mainly concentrate on the 
development phase. None of them however is explicitly 
dedicated to the evolution 
and maintenance domain. In 
this paper, we outline an agile evolution and 
maintenance process model and evaluate it within two 
Canadian software organizations.  We do this by 

comparing current agile development process models 
to the industrial evolution 
and maintenance practice in 
order to find issues relevant for the evolution and 

maintenance domain. Our results show that some 

changes need be made in the current agile methods.  
  1. Introduction  Agile processes have been extensively studied in 
both academia and industry. Most of the current 
research has mainly concentrated on the development 

phase. Little has been done to adapt them to the 
evolution and maintenance domain. So far, we have 
not found any publications that approach agile 
evolution and maintenance whatsoever. 
In this paper, we outline an agile evolution and 
maintenance process model and evaluate it within two 

Canadian organizations. Our goal is to find out how 
agility is approached in the industrial evolution and 
maintenance today.  
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 
presents our research method. Section 3 describes the 

evolution and maintenance agile model. Section 4 lists 

the differences between our model and the industrial 
agile evolution and maintenance practice. Finally, 
conclusions and future research are presented in 
Section 5.
   2. Research method 
In this section, our research method is described. 
The research phases are presented in Sections 2.1. 
Section 2.2 describes the two Canadian organizations 

studied. 
2.1 Research phases 
 As a first step, we studied current agile models and 
elicited activities belonging to both the pre-
implementation and implementation phases on 
business and engineering levels. We then put these into 

a synthesized 
Evolution and Maintenance Process 
Model
.  There is a number of existing agile process models. 
To avoid bias towards a specific process model and to 
achieve objective representation, we studied several 
models and selected their representative subset. The 

agile models chosen included eXtreme Programming 

(XP) and Scrum [4, 15].  
We selected these because they were the most 
widely accepted models [5]. According to [1], they 
also complement each other. Whereas XP has a 
definite engineering flavor (pair programming, test 

driven development, refactoring, continuous 
integration), Scrum concentrates on the management of 
software projects [14]. Hence, together they represent a 

comprehensive agile framework covering both the 
business and engineering process levels. The result of 
their synthesis is presented in Figure 1 and Table 1. 

Each activity in Table 1 is marked with its origin, 

where 
S stands for Scrum and 
XP stands for eXtreme 
Programming. 
When creating our synthesized model,
 we 
discovered that important activities were missing in our 

synthesized agile model. To ensure its 

comprehensiveness and that no activity would be 

missed in this study, we complemented our model with 

activities from the standard software process model 
[7]. Our goal was to find out whether they were 
applicable within the industrial agile evolution and 
maintenance context. These activities are marked with 

HW, 
standing for heavyweight. 
Using the synthesized 
Evolution and Maintenance
 Process Model
, we then created two questionnaires, 
one  for  studying  the  pre-implementation and one for 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20091978-0-7695-3450-3/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE   Figure 1. Process phases studied 
 studying the implementation process phases. The 
questionnaires were open-ended and semi-structured. 
They focused on finding out the activities as conducted 

within the agile evolution and maintenance processes 
and their status within the organizations studied.  
To cover all the phases and their activities, more 
than 200 questions were created. Due to space 
restrictions, we cannot list them all. However, most of 

the questions that were asked followed a somewhat 

uniform pattern. The pattern was: (1) Do you have this 

activity? (2) Does it differ from the activity that we 

describe here? If yes/no, please describe how? (3) Who 
is responsible for/involved in this activity? Please, state 
all the roles and their responsibilities; (4) In what form 
is this activity conducted? (a) by individual? (b) 
meeting? (c) other form(s)? (5) Is this activity 

important? If yes/no, please motivate why? (6) Are 

there any additional activities in this phase that are 
missing in this model? Could you please describe 
them? 
As a second step, we studied the agile practice by 
interviewing the representatives of the agile processes 

in the Canadian companies. The companies were 
selected according to their relative ease of access, i.e. 
by the convenience sampling method [13], which 
means that we considered the companies that agreed to 

participate in our study. For confidentiality reasons, we 

do not name them. In Section 2.2, however, we briefly 
describe them. 
Due to the comprehensiveness of this study, we had 
to make a series of lengthy and time-consuming 
interviews. In total, we made four interviews, 

corresponding to about ten hours. In order not to miss 

anything, we recorded and then documented each 

interview.     
As a next step, we used the results of the interviews 
to analyze our model from the evolution and 

maintenance perspective. Here, we realized that the 
organizations studied used a set of heavyweight 
activities. To find out the reasons and to validate the 
model, we contacted the organizations anew. These 
reasons are described and motivated in Section 4.4.  
 2.3 Organizations studied 
 We interviewed the representatives of the agile 
development organizations in two Canadian companies 
applying a mix of Scrum and XP practices.  
The first company, denoted as 
Organization 1
, develops products ranging from ground stations for 
satellite radar systems to e-commerce applications. 
Here, we interviewed a process owner, project 
manager, and chief architect. We studied one small and 

one middle-sized agile project evolving data 
transaction systems. This company took part in both 
the pre-implementation and implementation study.  
The second company, denoted as 
Organization 2
, is 
an IT management consulting firm with 800 

employees. It provides IT services and solutions to 

both private and public sector clients. Here, we 

interviewed a method owner/project manager regarding 

the agile process of a small software project. This 
company took part in both the pre-implementation and 
implementation study. 
 3. The process model 
     This section presents the synthesized 
Evolution and 
Maintenance
 Process Model
. Its pre-implementation 
phase is described in Section 3.1 and its 
implementation phase is described in Section 3.3. In 

addition, both phases and their activities are listed in 

Table 1. Due to space restrictions of this paper, we can 

only briefly describe the phases.  
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20092 Table 1a. Pre-implementation process phases. S stands for Scrum. XP stands for eXtreme 
Progamming. Bullets () and (I) stands for the activi
ties elicited from industry in this study   
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20093 Table 1b. Implementation process phases. S stands for Scrum. XP stands for eXtreme 
Progamming. Bullets () and (I) stands for the acti
vities elicited from industry in this study. 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
      
 Table 1 outlines the process model that has first 
been synthesized from the agile methods studied and 
complemented with some heavyweight activities. 
These activities are marked with their origin, where 
S stands for Scrum, 
XP 
stands for eXtreme 
Programming, and 
HW stands for heavyweight. Their 
set reflects the status of our model before the industrial 

study was made. 
After having matched the synthesized model to the 
industrial practice, we noticed some discrepancies 

between the industrial practice and our model. This, in 
turn, led us to modify our model to better reflect the 
industrial state of agile evolution and maintenance 

practice. Due to space restrictions of this paper, the 
modifications are put into the same table, that is, in 
Table 1. To distinguish from the original activities,  
they are marked with bullets 
 before and with an 
(I)
 after the activity number. 
Finally, we would like point out that the total 
process structures phases and activities. The goal is to 

map out what activities are relevant in what stage. 

However, the process does not impose any specific 
order of conducting these activities. Depending on the 
context at hand, these activities may or may not be 
selected in any order. 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20094  3.1. Pre-Implementation Process Phases 
 As illustrated in Figure 1, the
 Pre-Implementation
 process phase is executed on both 
Business
 and 
Engineering
 levels. It covers the phases and their 
activities during which one makes various preparations 

for the next-coming implementation. These are 

Product Vision Planning, 
and 
Product
 Roadmap and 
Release Planning. 
Organizations generally have an overall picture of 
their businesses, core values, strategic goals, mission 

and product portfolios. In the 
Product Vision Planning 
phase, this overall picture is evolved into a more 

detailed product vision. At this phase, one focuses on 
product goals, overall business and product structure, 
development environment, and return on investment. 
Product Vision
 Planning
 guides work in subsequent 
planning, decision making, and work [3, 15].   
    The subsequent phase, 
Product Roadmap and 
Release Planning
 consists of three sub-phases:
 Release 
Preparation, Product Roadmap Planning 
and
 Release 
Planning
. The Release Preparation
 sub-phase involves 
preparatory activities for th
e whole phase. Here, one 
schedules the planning meetings and gathers all the 
necessary information, including the product vision 
plan and high-level 
requirements specification [3, 15].  
In the 
Product Roadmap and Release Planning
 phase, one outlines a high-level roadmap of future 
product versions.
 Here, one studies the product vision 
plan as produced during the 
Product Vision Planning
 phase
, identifies new or revises old high-level 
requirements, creates a requir
ements list (a backlog in 
Scrum or a set of Stories in XP), and updates the 
requirements specification [3, 15]. 
 3.2. Implementation Process Phases 
 As illustrated in Figure 1, the
 Implementation
 process phase is executed on the 
Engineering
 level. It 
covers phases and activities during which the actual 

implementation takes place. These are
 Iteration 
Planning 
and
 Iteration Implementation. 
 Iteration Planning
 is conducted at the start of each 
iteration. It
 involves three phases, 
Iteration Planning 
Preparation, Iteration Scoping 
and
 Task Planning
. Here, the team, product management and other relevant 
stakeholders meet to plan the implementation work to 

be conducted in the coming iterations [4, 15]. 
After having planned the iteration, one steps into the 
Iteration Implementation phase. This phase consists of 
the sub-phases: 
Iteration Preparation, Daily Meetings, 
Development and 
Iteration Completion
.  The 
Iteration Preparation
 is required for the 
subsequent phases. Its objective is to make initial 

preparations for starting the consecutive iterations. It 
involves the setting up of an appropriate environment 
and ensuring that all the pertinent facilities are in place. 

According to the agile models studied, it is conducted 

only once, prior to the development start [3, 15].  
The 
Daily Status
 is a meeting that takes place on a 
day-to-day basis throughout the whole iteration. The 
agile models studied suggest that the team
 gathers 
briefly (usually, for 15 minutes) to establish project 

status and to confirm or readjust their commitments, if 

necessary [3, 15].  
The daily meeting is only a quick status meeting. If 
need arises to discuss additional matters, then one 
establishes follow-up meetings with the team members 
concerned. Follow-up meetings usually take place after 

the daily meeting [3, 15]. 
In the 
Development 
sub-phase, the requirements 
planned for the iteration are implemented and tested. 

The goal is to deliver an increment of working 
functionality [4].  Finally, during the 
Iteration 
Completion
 sub-phase, one delivers the functionality 
that has been developed during the iteration, evaluates 

the iteration, and identifies the improvements to be 

made in the next iteration [3, 15].  
 4. Observations Made during our Study 
 In this study, we noticed some discrepancies and 
similarities between the industrial practice and our 
synthesized model. The discrepancies have led us to 

modify our synthesized model to better reflect the 
industrial state of practice. As already mentioned, the 
modifications resulting from the industrial study are 

marked with bullets next to the activity number and 

with an 
(I)
 put after the activity name in Table 1. 
Below, we list and describe the observations made in 

Sections 4.1-4.4, respectively. 
 4.1. Differences Observed in the Pre-
Implementation Process Phases 
    On a general level, our results show that many of the 

activities as identified in the Pre-Implementation 
process phases are typically done in the agile projects 
studied. The differences identified concern (1) contract 
management, (2) use of ROI, and (3) requirements 

specification.  
     4.1.1. Contract Management
. Agile models value 
customer collaboration over contracts [2].  Our results 

show that the organizations
 studied negotiate contracts 
before the 
Product Roadmap and Release Planning
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20095 phase. The reason claimed is that some contract items, 
such as for instance budget, constitute an important 

prerequisite for carrying out product and release 
planning. For this reason, we add a new activity for 
contract writing in the 
Product Vision Planning
 phase 
(see 
A-1.12 Write Contract 
 in Table 1a).  
     4.1.2. Use of ROI. 
Agile models studied suggest 
measurement of productivity in ROI in the 
Product 
Vision Planning
 phase [15]. The organizations studied 
however do not make any ROI calculations in this 
phase. They claim that they lack appropriate tools for 
doing it at this level. The coarse-grained character of 

the functionality specified at this level does not allow 

the organizations to make any meaningful ROI 

calculations. However, they make ROI calculations in 
later phases. Despite this, they agree that with 
appropriate tools, ROI calculations should take place in 

the Product Vision Planning
 phase.  
As a result of this observation, we keep the activities 
involving the ROI calculation in this phase
 (see 
Activity 
A-1.2 in Table 1a), and do not modify our 
synthesized model. Instead, we propose that the 

research community analyses the current ROI tools to 

find out reasons for why they are claimed to be 
insufficient. 
    4.1.3. Requirements Specification in the Product 
Vision Planning phase. 
The agile process models are 
vague about pointing out the phase during which 
requirements are identified, analyzed and specified. 
We have observed that the identification of the overall 
very high-level
 functionality is already carried out in 
the
 Product Vision Planning
 phase (see Activity 
A-1.9.3). It is documented in a product vision plan called 
Operational Concept
, a document corresponding to a 
high-level system sp
ecification. It gi
ves a high-level 
view of the system needs, its context and operational 

characteristics.      The Operational Concept
 document is used for 
various purposes. First, it provides a basis for the 
developers to relate their changes to the overall system 

characteristics. Second, it provides a platform for 

further evolving the system description and 

requirements specification in
 the subsequent process 
phase which is the 
Product Roadmap and Release 
Planning
 phase. To address this, we have added the 
Activity
 A-2.14: Create requirement specification
 in 
the Release Planning
 phase into our model (see Table 
1a).  
 4.2. Differences Observed in the 
Implementation Process Phases 
 Generally, many of the activities as identified in the 
Implementation process phases are typically done in 
the agile projects studied. The differences identified 
concern (1) iteration planning practice, (2) 
personal/team 
Service Level Agreements
, (3) Duration 
of task planning, (4) timing of the daily meetings, (5) 

portfolio of status meetings, (6) project scalability, (7) 
measurement guidelines and frequency, (8) pair 
programming practice, (9) refactoring practice, (10) 

test-programming practice, (11) release management 
practice, (12) number of iteration review meetings, and 

(13) placement of post-mortem analysis.  
4.2.1. Iteration Planning Practice. 
Scrum suggests 
that the planning of iterations be prepared by 
scheduling meetings and by gathering the necessary 

information [15]. We have found that the iteration 

preparation activity involves a study of a document 

called Work Definition
, produced prior to the iteration 
planning. It functions as a driving wheel of the 
iteration planning sessions by providing an overview 
of the iteration plan. We believe that this is a relevant 
aspect to consider in addition to the two already 

existing activities of the 
Iteration Preparation 
phase 
(see activities 
A-3.2 and 
A-3.3 in Figure 2). Creating 
such a document also results in new input to the 
Iteration Scoping
 phase. Hence, we add two new 
activities. These are 
A-3.1 Create Work Definition
 in 
the 
Iteration Preparation
 phase (see Table 1a) and
 A-
3.4 Study Work Definition 
in the
 Iteration Scoping 
phase (see Table 1a). 
4.2.2. Personal/Team Service Level Agreements. 
The agile models do not suggest contract writing 
neither on the developers nor on the team level. In 

Organization 1,
 we have however observed that 
developers write under contracts that are official 

agreements between developers and a chief system 
engineer.  
At the beginning of an iteration, developers signs off 
the undertaking of the tasks assigned to them. These 
undertakings are then combined into a 
Team Service 
Level Agreement. 
The reason is that the responsibility 
for delivering the iteration results should be shared by 
the whole team.  
At the end of the iteration, during the activity called 
Sign-Off
 in the 
Iteration Completion 
phase, the 
deliverables provided by the developers and teams are 
measured against these agreements. Here, the architect 
checks whether the tasks promised in the 
Team SLA
 have been fulfilled, i.e. that the code, tests, design 
documentation, and the quality goals have been 
fulfilled.  
Organization 1
 claims that the sign-off activity is 
crucial. They have found that developers often 

implement only 80% of a particular task and forget 
about the remaining 20%. Before they introduced the 
Sign-Off
 activity, this happened all the time. 
Introducing it at the end of the iteration has therefore 

become an effective control of the task fulfillment 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20096 ensuring that the team delivers according to their initial 
commitment.  
If the 
Sign-Off
 is not approved in 
Organization 1,
 then the unfulfilled tasks must be addressed directly, 
unless they are large and require considerable re-work. 
The plan allows two days after the 
Sign-Off
 activity 
to finish any incomplete or unapproved tasks.  
This practice is considered as a necessary quality 
assurance activity. For this reason, we have added it to 
our model by introducing two activities: (1) 
A-3.28 Write personal/team service level agreement
 at the end 
of the 
Iteration Planning
 phase (see Table 1a) and (2) 
A-6.13 Sign-off personal/team service level agreement 
at the end of the 
Development  phase (see Table 1b). 
4.2.3. Duration of Task Planning. 
Agile models 
suggest that the 
Task Planning
 takes place during the 
first day of the iteration [4]. We have however 
observed that it takes longer than one day in the 
organizations studied. Within middle-sized projects in 
Organization 1
, planning the tasks could sometimes 
take up to three days. Its duration depends on the 
complexity and criticality of the tasks and the skills of 
the engineers. This observation has made us extend the 

number of days dedicated to 
Task Planning 
from one 
day to 1-3 days instead (see Table 1a). We also 
propose that the models revise their suggestions for the 
duration length of this activity. 
4.2.4. Timing of the daily meetings. 
The agile 
models prescribe status meetings in the morning [4]. 
Our study shows evidence that this timing was not 
effective. In the organizations studied, the daily 

meetings are kept in the afternoon. The reason is a 
substantial improvement of meeting effectiveness.  
The organizations studied have found that it is 
difficult to have an effective and informative meeting 
in the morning because people tend to come to work at 
different times. There is also a risk that issues 

encountered during the previous day get forgotten. 
Just because the timing aspect is not explicitly 
covered in our model, we do not modify it. However, 

in accordance with our results, we state that it is critical 
to find an appropriate time when all team members can 
contribute to the meeting effectiveness.  
4.2.5. Portfolio of status meetings. 
The agile 
models only suggest daily status meetings within the 
team and between teams (
Scrum of Scrums)
 [15]. We 
have however observed that the organizations studied 
have complementary management and corporate-level 
status meetings conducted on a weekly basis. On those 

meetings, one presents an overall organizational view 

of project status and discusses various organizational 

and technical issues that might impact the project. 
These meetings are kept irrespective of whether the 
teams are small or large.  
The corporate-level status meetings in the 
organizations studied are driven by the organizational 
standards and information needs, rather than by the 

agile process. For this reason, we regard them as 

optional and therefore, we do not modify our process 

model.  
4.2.6. Coverage of project scalability.
 The agile 
models studied provide relatively little or different 
guidelines for scalability. XP allows teams to consist 

of 20 developers [4], while Scrum suggests team sizes 

of 7 +/-2 people 0. Scrum however proposes 
Scrum of 
Scrum
 meetings to help coordinate the work between 
several teams [15].  
In accordance with Scrum and the results reported in 
[6], our findings also indicate that the size of a project 
affects both the structure of the teams, procedures and 
the scheduling of the dail
y meetings. According to one 
of our interviewees, additional coordination 

mechanisms are required for all projects that are larger 
than six developers. As a result of these findings, we 
add a note clarifying that scalability might impact the 
meeting structures and that supplementary coordination 
mechanisms may be needed (see 
Note 2
 in the 
Daily 
Status
 phase in Table 1b).  
4.2.7. Measurement guidelines and frequency. 
The organizations studied do not use burn-down charts 
for measuring their daily progress as prescribed by 
Scrum or story points as prescribed by XP [4]. The 

management regards the agile guidelines as one-

dimensional, insufficient and difficult for making 
predictions. However, our interviewees agreed that 
they still provide an attractive and simple useful way to 
start measuring the status within in the team.  
Regarding the measurement frequency, the agile 
models studied suggest measurement of the progress 

on a daily basis [3, 15]. However, measurement on a 

day-to-day basis is regarded to be too granular and too 
time consuming by the organizations studied. 
According to them, measurement on a weekly basis 

provides more useful figures about the progress in their 
projects.  
Regarding the measurement aspects in the agile 
environment, we do not take any standpoint. We feel 
that measurement in an agile context is an unexplored 
issue and needs be further elaborated on. Hence, we do 
not make any modifications to our model.  
4.2.8. Pair programming practice.
 Pair 
programming is prescribed by XP [4], but not by 

Scrum as it focuses on the management activities. 
However, pair programming is not conducted in the 
organizations studied. It is regarded to be too 

expensive and the programmers are not interested in 
doing it. We do not modify our model due to this 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20097 observation. We believe that it should be an option and 
not a must, as far as other forms of achieving good 

communication, collaboration and shared project 
responsibility are practiced. However, we agree that 
this practice constitutes an effective tool when 
managing evolution and maintenance changes.  
4.2.9. Refactoring practice. 
XP strongly advocates 
refactoring [3, 4]. Despite this, refactoring is not 

promoted in the organizations studied. If used, then 
only on an ad hoc manner, depending on the team and 
each programmer
s personal preference.  
Management and some senior engineers are the 
main reason for this. In their opinion, refactoring is an 

excuse for old sins, sins providing the evidence that 

developers have not thought through their work 
upfront good enough. The observation of this 
difference does not lead to any changes in our model. 

We believe that refactoring is an important 

maintainability aspect that should be seriously 

promoted within the industry.  
4.2.10. Test-first programming practice. 
Test-first 
programming is conducted to a limited extent, only in 
Organization 1
. Although the developers have 
guidelines for test-first programming, they do not fully 

follow them. They only write test cases upfront for 

known and well-defined classes. They then write the 
remaining tests either during or after the coding. 
The interviewee in 
Organization 1
 claims that test-
first programming is technically difficult and not 

always applicable. For instance, some test cases (i.e., 

white-box test cases) cannot be written in advance. 

Due to the fact that test-first programming requires a 
complete change of the programming mindset, it is also 
difficult to implement straightforwardly. It forces the 

developers to reorder the development activities, and 
write tests as part of the design process. Still, however, 
the interviewee recognizes many benefits of test-first 

development and claims that they strive towards 
achieving this practice as much as possible. 
This finding has also been confirmed in [10]. 
Hence, we add the step of writing additional tests 

during and after coding into our model (see Activity 
A-6.3.2.4
 Write additional test cases
 in Figure 3). 
4.2.11.
 Release management practice.
 Both 
organizations studied conduct release management. 
Their processes however differ somewhat depending 
on the project size. In 
Organization 2,
 the process is 
performed by the development team. In 
Organization 
1, the scenario varies depending on the project size and 
the customer
s technical capability of managing the 
release process. 
In case of small projects where the customer does 
not have the capacity or skills to manage the release, 

the development team manages the entire release 
process. They first assist the customers in the 
acceptance testing. They then package the system and 
install it on the customer
s site.  
In case of medium-sized and large projects, where 
the customers have the capacity or skills to manage the 
release, they manage the release process by 
themselves. They either take full responsibility for the 
whole process or part of it. The development team only 

provides some assistance. For instance, it packages the 

software system and submits it into a known location 
on the customer site. The customer then performs 
acceptance testing and installation on his own. 
Regarding the release management roles, 
Organization 1
 has defined two roles dedicated to 
release management whereas 
Organization 2
 has only 
one role (
Release Manager)
. The roles of
 Organization 
1 are 
Primary Release Captain
 and a 
Secondary 
Release Backup
. These roles are rotated around the 
team members; the 
Secondary Release Backup
 will 
become the 
Primary Release Captain
 in the next 
iteration, and a new 
Secondary Release Backup 
gets 
chosen in the team. 
The agile models studied do not provide any 
explicit guidelines for the activities involved in release 

management. As described above, the development 

teams have a release process in place to ensure that the 

outcome of the iteration is delivered. To point out that 
a set of release management process activities are 
required, we add a note that clarifies this (see 
Note 6
 for Activity
 A-7.6 in Table 1b).
  A.2.12. Number of iteration review meetings.
 Both organizations
 have iteration review meetings 
during which the product is demonstrated and reviewed 
by the team and the customer.
 Organization 2 
has only 
one meeting where the project manager, the team and 

the customer discuss the deliverable and any possible 

changes in the next iteration. 
Organization 1,
 on the 
other hand, has three separate meetings. These are: 
• Meeting 1:
 It is a quick one hour meeting where 
the deliverable is demonstrated internally within 
the team to check whether the iteration goals have 
been fulfilled and to identify improvements in the 
next iteration. 
• Meeting 2:
 The developers walk through the 
deliverable to demonstrate a tangible proof of the 
iteration results to the customer.  
• Meeting 3:
 The architect demonstrates the 
deliverable to the QA group to get their final 

approval.  
The agile models studied prescribe two review 
meetings at the end of the iteration [3, 15]. Both 

organizations studied conduct reviews according to the 

agile guidelines. As described above, the only 

difference is the number of meetings. Because the 

purpose is the same, we do not modify our model.  
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20098 A-4.13. Placement of Post-Mortem Analysis.
 Both organizations studied conduct post-mortem 
analyses. However, they conduct them at different 
formality levels and at different points in time. 
Organization 2
 has a brief post-mortem analysis at the 
same time as the above-mentioned delivery meeting. 

Organization 1
, on the other hand, generally conducts 
an informal post-mortem analysis in the initial phase of 

the 
Implementation phase, that is, in the 
Iteration 
Planning
 phase (see Figure 1a). This observation does 
not lead to any changes in our model.  
 4.3. Differences Observed both in the Pre-
Implementation and Implementation Phases 
 In this section, we report on the differences common 
to both the 
Pre-Implementation
 and 
Implementation process phases. These are (1) use of backlog, (2) points 
in time when acceptance tests are written, and (3) roles 

involved in acceptance testing.  
4.3.1. Use of Backlog.  
Scrum defines the backlog 
as a prioritized list of requirements that drives the 
release planning, iteration planning and 

implementation. Scrum also suggests that it be 

maintained by a product owner [15].  In the 

organizations studied, the objective of the backlog 
differs from the one defined in Scrum. It is maintained 
by the team and serves only as a complementary list of 
work to be done within the team. Other documents are 

used for planning and organizing the iteration work, 

such as the 
Operational Concept
 and 
Work Definition
.      The Work Definition
 document is claimed to be the 
primary driving wheel of futu
re iterations. It plans the 
next-coming iterations and assigns requirements to 

them. This observation does not lead us to make any 

observable changes in our model. We believe that one 

should be free to decide on th
e media used for planning 
and managing the iterations. We
 however clarify that a 
backlog can be used as a complimentary driving wheel 

of iterations. We do it by: 
• adding the Activity 
A-2.22 Create/update backlog, 
if needed in the 
Release Planning
 phase in Table 1 
a,  • splitting the original activity 
A-5.10 Update 
backlog into 
A-5-10 Update backlog, if needed
 and 
A-5.11 Update iteration plan, if needed 
(see the 
Daily Status
 phase in Table 1b), 
• adding the Activity 
A-7.4  Reprioritize and update 
backlog, if needed in the 
Iteration Completion
 phase to further reflect the use of the concept of 
backlog in the industry. 
4.3.2. Point in time when acceptance tests are 
written. XP suggests that tests be written early, 
preferably before the implementation starts [4]. 
However, it does not provide any clear guidelines 
about the exact point in time when the acceptance tests 
should be written. Our results show that writing of 

some of the acceptance tests already starts during the 

Pre-Implementation
 phase (see 
Product Roadmap and 
Release Planning 
phase in Figure 1). As a result of it 
we infuse the following changes into our model:  
• add a new activity (
A-2.19 Write acceptance tests
) in the 
Product Roadmap and Release Planning
 phase (see Table 1a), 
• reword the activity 
A-6.2 Write acceptance tests
 to 
A-6.2 Revise existing/write new acceptance tests, if 
needed instead
.  By doing so, we adapt our model to two scenarios: 
(1) the acceptance tests are written before the 
implementation phase which is the case of larger 

evolution and maintenance projects, and (2) the 
acceptance tests are written at the beginning of the 
implementation phase, which is mainly the case of 

small innovative projects. 
4.3.3. Roles
 involved in acceptance testing.
 The 
agile models studied suggest that acceptance tests be 
written and performed by the customer together with 
the developers [4].
 Our observations show that in 
larger projects, acceptance testing is conducted by a 
separate QA team. Essentially, the acceptance testing 
activities in larger projects remain the same, however, 

there may be different roles conducting them. For this 

reason, we do not modify our model. However, we 

clarify that a separate QA team may be introduced in 
larger and more critical projects (see 
Notes 4
 and 
5 in 
the 
Development phase in Table 1b).  
 4.4. Other Observations 
 We have found that several of the activities that we 
have added to the synthesized model from the standard 
software development model [7] are applied in the 
organizations studied. Many of these activities are 

typical for heavywei
ght processes. They mainly 
concern the pre-implementation activities such as 

requirements elicitation, analy
sis and specification, 
architectural analysis and design, documentation 
practice, guidelines regarding scalability, risk 

management and thorough task planning.  
This observation has made us contact the 
interviewees anew to find out the reasons. Our 

interviewees claim that the degree of agility of the pre-

implementation phases vari
es among projects. It 
depends on the phase in the product lifecycle, project 

type, its size, criticality, innovative character, degree of 

uncertainty, risk taking, permission from stakeholders’ 

side to take risk, and budget.  
The majority of their evol
ution and maintenance 
projects follow a more traditional pre-implementation 

approach. The small, innovative, creative and totally 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20099 new projects, on the other hand, follow a more agile 
approach. In these projects, one has difficulties to 

conduct detailed planning in advance. Hence, one 
mainly outlines product vision and high level 
requirements within the pre-implementation phases 

and allows the rest to be resolved within the later 

phases.  
Finally, our interviewees claim that in the context of 
evolution and maintenance projects, one must still plan 
upfront. According to them, good planning upfront in 

the Pre-Implementation 
phases allows more agility in 
the Implementation
 phase. The key issue is to set up an 
instructive plan and then let the teams decide on the 

implementation process approach. With good and 
thorough plans, any degree of agility works well as 
long as long as one keeps control of the product vision, 
goals and fulfillment of these goals. 
  5. Final remarks 
 The synthesized evolution and maintenance process 
model presented in this paper is based on a subset of 
the existing agile process models. It also reflects the 

state of practice within the two software organizations 

studied. Our results show that the organizations studied 

have adopted an agile approach within evolution and 

maintenance of their systems. However, the degree of 
agility varies across the phases. It is higher in the
 Implementation phase and lower in the 
Pre-
Implementation phase. This observation makes us 
conclude that some agile aspects may be relevant in the 

context of software evolution and maintenance. More 
studies however need to be made to confirm the 
premises presented herein.  
6. References 
 [1] Abrahamsson P. et al., Agile Software 
Development Methods: Review and Analysis. VTT 
Electronics/ Oulu University, 2002. 
 
[2] Beck K., Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change. Addison-Wesley, 2000.  
 [3]   Beck K., Test Driven Development: By Example. 
Pearson Education, Boston, MA, 2003. 
 [4] Beck K., Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change. 2
nd Ed. Addison-Wesley, 2004.  
 
[5]  Charette R., The Decision is in: Agile vs Heavy 
Methodologies (2001). Cutter Consortium, Vol. 2 (19) 

http://www.cutter.com/content/project/fulltext/updates/2001/
epmu0119.html. Accessed in October 2007
.  [6]  Cohen D. et al., Agile Software Development: a DACS 
State-of-the-Art Report. Fraunhofer Center for Experimental 
Software Engineering/University of Maryland, 2003. 
 [7]  IEEE Standards, IEEE Std 12207.0-1996 Software Life 
Cycle Processes. IEEE Inc. New York, NY, 1998. 
 [8]  Jeffries R., Anderson A. and Hendrickson C., eXtreme 
Programming Installed.
 Addison-Wesley,
 2000.. 
 [9]  Kajko-Mattsson M. and Yulong F., Outlining a Model of 
a Release Management Process. Journal of Design & Process  
Science: Trans. of the SDPS, Vol. 9 (4), 2005, pp. 13-25.  
 [10] Kajko-Mattsson M., Björnsson T., Outlining 
Developers
 Testing Process Model. Proc. of Euromicro 
Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced 
Applications, 2007 
 [11]  Kaner et al., Testing Computer Software.
 John Wiley & 
Sons, 2001. 
 [12]  Merriam-Webster, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online 
[Online]. URL: 
http://www.m-w.com/dictionary/backlog . 
Accessed December 2007
.  [13] Robson C., Real World Research. Blackwell Publishing, 
2002. 
 [14] Schwaber K., Scrum Development Process. Proc. of  
Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, 
Languages and Applications, 1995. 
 [15] ScrumMethodology, Scrum Methodology: Incremental, 
Iterative Software Development from Agile Processes. Rev. 
0.9. Advanced Development Methods Inc., 2003. 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200910