 Building Evolvable Software Using Normalized Systems Theory:  
A Case Study
 
 
Gilles Oorts 
University of Antwerp 
Normalized Systems Insitute 
gilles.oorts@uantwerp.be 
 
Herwig Mannaert 
University of Antwerp 
Normalized Systems Insitute 
herwig.mannaert@uantwerp.be  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Philip Huysmans 
University of Antwerp 
Normalized Systems Insitute 
philip.huysmans@uantwerp.be 
 
Jan Verelst 
University of Antwerp 
Normalized Systems Insitute 
jan.verelst@uantwerp.be  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Peter De Bruyn 
University of Antwerp 
Normalized Systems Insitute 
peter.debruyn@uantwerp.be 
 
Arco Oost 
Normalized Systems eXpanders 
factory 
arco.oost@nsx.normalizedsyste
ms.org  
 
Abstract
 
Normalized Systems (NS) 
theory has recently been 
proposed as an approach to develop agile and 
evolvable software by defining theorems and design 
patterns for software architectures. In this paper we 
discuss the NS development process, which is 
illustrated by means of an elaborate description of a 
case regarding a budget management application 
developed according to the theory. Advantages of the 
NS approach, such as swift application development 
through code expansion and the transfer of additional 
NS design knowledge to new applications, are equally 
discussed.   
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Over the last decade, an ever-increasing amount of 
research conducted has been conducted on agile 
software development [3]. Although the progress made 
in this research domain has proven to be very valuable 
in improving agile developm
ent processes (e.g. [9], 
[4]), less attention has been paid to making the 
software itself more agile. In 
this paper, we describe a 
project in which the focus is on the evolvability of the 
software architecture itself. 
If an organization is to be 
competitive in current volatile and competitive 
economic conditions, it needs to be agile across its 
organizational structure, en
terprise architecture and 
information systems [1]. Therefore it is important for 
organizations to focus on implementing software that 
supports changes in the organization, as this can be 
considered as an important step or precondition in 
establishing an agile organization. 
Recently Normalized Systems (NS) theory has been 
proposed as a theory for making software more agile 
[13]. Here the ability for software to be easily changed 
is called software evolvability. This evolvability can be 
achieved by adhering to a limited set of theorems that 
result in a very specific and evolvable software 
architecture. The NS theory has been extended for 
several years now, up to a point that it has become 
fully theoretically founded 
[8] and implemented in 
several software projects. Although the theoretical 
contributions of NS have been widely documented in 
previous research (e.g., [
11,12,13]), few reports are 
available on real-life cases in which NS was employed. 
Nevertheless, NS offers advantages in both theory and 
practice. In this paper, we document such a 
development project to (1) show the feasibility of the 
NS approach for building evolvable software in 
practice and (2) to highlight the benefits of a real-life 
NS development project. 
As the case description requires an understanding 
of the NS theory, its foundations are discussed in 
Section 2. The practical implications of these 
foundations will be explained in Section 3, by 
describing the NS conforming development of a budget 
management application for a local Belgian 
government. In Section 4, we will discuss one specific 
advantage of NS development, which is the inclusion 
of NS knowledge into new applications. In the next 
Section we discuss some 
observations, contributions 
and future research. We end the paper with a 
conclusion in Section 6. 
 
 
 
 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5854760 2. Normalized Systems  
 
The Normalized Systems theory postulates that 
software architectures should exhibit 
evolvability 
due 
to ever changing business requirements [8,11,12,13]. 
In the theory, evolvability is operationalized by the 
absence of 
combinatorial effects
. Such an effect is 
defined as a change of which the impact is not solely 
related to the kind of the change, but also to the size of 
the system it is applied on. As the NS theory assumes 
that over time software is subject to an unlimited 
evolution (i.e., both additional and changing 
requirements), combinatorial effects have a highly 
undesirable effect on software evolvability. Indeed, if 
changes to a system depend on the size of the ever-
growing system, these changes become ever more 
difficult to cope with (i.e., requiring more effort) and 
hence reduce the evolvability of the system.  
The theoretical foundation of NS reasoning is the 
concept of systems stability 
from systems theory [11], 
which states that a bounded input (i.e., changing 
requirements) should result in a bounded output (i.e., 
changes in the software). Additionally, significant 
progress has recently been made in establishing the 
theoretical concept of entropy as a second foundation 
for the NS theory [10].  
Normalized Systems theory proposes a set of four 
theorems and five expandable elements that constitute 
the foundation for developing evolvable software 
through pattern expansion of the elements. The 
theorems are formally proven principles (cf. [12]) 
which offer a set of necessary conditions that should be 
strictly adhered to, in order to avoid combinatorial 
effects. The NS theorems have been implemented in 
NS elements. These elements provide a set of 
predefined higher-level structures, patterns or 
“building blocks” offering an unambiguous blueprint 
for the implementation of the core functionalities of 
realistic information systems, adhering to the four 
stated theorems [13]. 
 
2.1 Theorems  
 
NS theory proposes four theorems, which have 
been proven to lead to combinatorial effects if not 
adhered to [11]: 
 
•
 
Separation of Concerns (SoC)
, requiring that 
every change driver (concern) is separated from 
other concerns in its own module;  
•
 
Data Version Transparency (DvT)
, requiring that 
data entities can be updated without impacting the 
entities using it as an input or producing it as an 
output;  
•
 
Action Version Transparency (AvT)
, requiring that 
an action entity can be upgraded without 
impacting its calling components;  
•
 
Separation of States (SoS)
, requiring that each step 
in a work-flow is separated from the others in time 
by keeping state after every step. 
 
These theorems are not new in themselves but 
relate to well-known and often tacit design heuristics 
of software developers, as mentioned explicitly in [12]. 
For example, well-known concepts such as an 
integration bus, a separated external workflow or the 
use of multiple tiers can all be seen as manifestations 
of the Separation of Concerns theorem [12]. The value 
of the four NS theorems can however be found in the 
fact that they (1) make certain aspects of that heuristic 
design knowledge explicit, (2) offer this knowledge in 
an unambiguous way (i.e., violations against the 
theorems can be proven), (3) are unified based on one 
single postulate (i.e., the need for evolvable software 
architectures having no combinatorial effects) and (4) 
have all been proven in a formal way in [11]. 
 
 
2.2 Normalized Systems Elements  
 
Consistently adhering to the four NS theorems is 
very challenging for developers due to two reasons. 
First each violation of the NS theorems during any 
stage of the development process results in a 
combinatorial effect. Secondly, the systematic 
application of these theorems results in very fine-
grained structures. Therefor
e five expandable elements 
were proposed which make the realization of NS 
applications more feasible. These elements are 
encapsulated high-level patterns that comply with the 
four NS theorems: 
 
•
 
data element
, being the structured composition of 
software constructs to encapsulate a data construct 
into an isolated module (i
ncluding get- and set- 
methods, persistency, exhibiting version 
transparency,...); 
•
 
action elements
, being the structured composition 
of software constructs to encapsulate an action 
construct into an isolated module; 
•
 
workflow element
, being the structured 
composition of software constructs describing the 
sequence in which a set of action elements should 
be performed in order to fulfill a flow into an 
isolated module; 
•
 
connector element
, being the structured 
composition of software constructs into an isolated 
module allowing external sy
stems to interact with 
4761 the NS system without calling components in a 
stateless way; 
•
 
trigger element
, being the structured composition 
of software constructs into an isolated module 
which controls the states of the system and checks 
whether any action element should be triggered 
accordingly. 
 
More extensive descriptions of these elements are 
for example available in [11,12,13]. Each of the five 
elements discussed are in fact design patterns, as they 
represent a recurring set of constructs encapsulated in 
the element. Each element 
contains the intended core 
construct and a set of relevant cross-cutting concerns 
(such as remote access, logging, access control, etc.). 
This construction entails that the elements facilitate a 
set of anticipated changes th
at ensure the elements are 
evolvable, as more thoroughl
y described in [12]. As 
discussed in [2], the definition and identification of the 
NS elements is based on the implications of the set of 
NS theorems. As an example we can quote how the 
theorems Separation of Concerns (SoC) and Separation 
of States (SoS) indicate the need to formulate a 
workflow element. Such a 
workflow element allows 
the stateful invocation of action elements in a 
(workflow) construct. Indeed the SoS theorem requires 
this kind of stateful invo
cation and the SoC theorem 
demands that the concern of invocation is handled by a 
separate construct.  
The implementation of a data element in a Java 
Enterprise Edition (JEE) implementation (a widely 
used platform for the de
velopment of distributed 
systems [14]) has also been described in previous 
work. In [12] it is discussed how a data element Obj is 
associated with a bean 
class ObjBean, interfaces 
ObjLocal and ObjRemote, home interfaces 
ObjHomeLocal and ObjHomeRemote, transport 
classes ObjDetails and ObjInfo, deployment 
descriptors and EJB-QL for finder methods. 
Additionally, methods to manipulate a data element’s 
bean class (create, delete, etc.) and to retrieve the two 
serializable transport classes are incorporated. Finally, 
an agent class ObjAgen provides the remote access. 
Combined, these elements provide the main concerns 
and cross-cutting concerns of the data element 
instance. Similarly, the functionality of other NS 
element instances is provided by about 10 classes per 
instance. Comparing this to for example the observer 
design pattern defined by [5], the complex architecture 
of NS conforming applications becomes clear. 
Whereas the observer pattern of Gamma requires two 
classes and two interfaces, 
the NS implementations 
requires seven NS elements and thus about 70 classes. 
Consequently, it is clear that in order to prevent 
combinatorial effects, a very fine-grained modular 
structure needs to be adhered to. How the complexity 
of the large amount of classes is coped with will be 
discussed in the next section. 
Moreover, the complete set of elements covers the 
core functionality of an information system. 
Consequently, as such detailed description is provided 
for each of the five elements, an NS application can be 
considered as an aggregation of a set of instantiations 
of the NS elements. This is
 shown in Figure 1. The top 
level of this figure shows the five NS elements. Based 
on these elements, the functional analyst will formulate 
instantiations that are the foundations of a NS 
application. Figure 1 shows how the application 
discussed in this paper includes amongst others 
Budget, Budget change and Product instances of the 
NS data element. At run time, these instances are 
instantiated once more (i.e., form a double 
instantiation) to form sp
ecific occurrences of, for 
example, a budget. 
 
 
Figure 1. Principle of 
double instantiation in 
Normalized Systems 
  
2.3 Pattern expansion  
 
In practice it seems very unlikely to arrive at the 
very fine-grained modular structure implied by the NS 
theorems without the use of higher-level primitives or 
patterns. The process of defining these patterns and 
transforming them into code
 is shown in Figure 2, 
which will be discussed in Section 3. As NS proposes a 
set of five elements that se
rve as patterns, this figure 
shows how the actual software architecture of NS 
conforming software applications can be generated in a 
relatively straightforward way by the use of NS 
expansion. This expansion mechanism is an essential 
part of making the NS theory applicable in practice. 
4762 3. The NS Budget Application Case 
 
Because of the fundamental new insights the 
discussed Normalized Systems theory offers in the 
development of evolvable software, there was a need 
for a new software development process that supports 
the NS theorems. In this section we will explain and 
discuss this development process by using a completed 
real-life case as an exemplar. 
Over the last few years, 
several evolvable software 
applications have been built according to the NS 
theory. Although these applications have been quoted 
as examples of the feasibility [12] and theoretical 
soundness [8] of NS theory, none of them have been 
extensively elaborated on in academic literature. In this 
paper we will therefore discuss one of the finished NS 
projects at length. As this is the first time we describe a 
NS case in this way, we have specifically chosen a 
project with limited complexity
. This allows us to fully 
explain the application at 
hand while also explaining 
the development process and discussing some 
interesting observations. 
The case we have chosen is the development of an 
application to manage the budgets of a local Belgian 
government. The administration of this government 
does intensive tracking of its budgets. The overall 
available budget is divided into very fine-grained sub-
budgets, complicating the budget assignment, 
reservation, fixations, changes, etc. This was 
traditionally done using the flexibility offered by pivot 
tables within Microsoft Excel. These tables allowed for 
the selection of subsets of a specific budget and for 
quick calculation of the available budget for a 
department, activity, etc. In 
an effort to enable the 
integration of these budget management functionalities 
with project management, budget reporting and budget 
simulations functionalities, a project was initiated to 
capture the budget management functionalities in a 
stand-alone application.  
However, the development of this application 
presented some challenges. The first one was that the 
new application needed to 
satisfy the flexibility and 
versatility the users got used to in managing the 
budgets in Microsoft Excel pivot tables. To cope with 
this challenge, it was decided to focus the initial 
application solely on budget management and its user-
friendliness. This application would then be a sound 
basis for further extending the application to include 
the other requirements of budget reporting, simulation 
and project management. These incremental 
expansions of the application will be supported by the 
fact that NS applications can be changed and expanded 
without the needed effort increasing due to the size of 
the application.  
  Another challenge was that the budget 
management tool is very c
ontext-specific. Budgets are 
defined at different levels of the specific government. 
Therefore budgets can be managed on both very 
general and very fine-grained levels, but the 
application needs to include the composition of 
budgets at all levels. More specifically, budgets are 
defined by a combination of the following six 
parameters: department, 
activity, article, domain, 
product and budget year. The unique combination of 
these six parameters is the key of a budget in its most 
specific manifestation. However, budgets also need to 
be consulted as combinations of these parameters. For 
instance, the aggregated budget of a specific 
department or the combined budget of a product in a 
specific department also need to be retrieved. This 
specific composition of budgets could not be realized 
in common ERP-systems and therefore a custom 
application had to be built. 
These challenges were however all successfully 
coped with in the development process, and this in no 
small part due to the NS development process. Five 
sequential steps, which are shown in Figure 2, 
characterize this developmen
t process. These steps will 
be discussed in-depth in the following sections, 
together with their in
terpretation in the budget 
application development process. 
 
3.1. Functional analysis  
 
As in most software projects, the first stage of the 
budget application development process is the 
functional analysis. Similar to other development 
methodologies (such as the 
object-oriented approach), 
this analysis is advised to be done in terms of the 
constructs defined by the approach itself. In NS 
development, this means that real-world requirements 
in any form (e.g., use cases, natural language 
description, domain class 
diagrams, Business Process 
Modeling Notation (BPMN)-diagrams, etc.) are 
translated into instantiations of the five NS elements 
discussed earlier.  
For the budget application, a manageable set of 
requirements was extracted together with end users. 
System analysis happened in two sessions in which an 
Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) and a table with 
data elements were drawn 
up. The ERD diagram that 
resulted from these sessions is shown in Figure 3. This 
figure shows the identified NS element instantiations 
of the application. As the application is very data-
intensive, the application could be built only using NS 
data element instantiations.  
4763 Figure 2. The NS development process 
(adapted from 
[2]
) 
 
The functional requirements can be easily 
explained using the ERD. As visually represented in 
the ERD, the 
Budget
 is the central data element 
instance of the application. The current budget is 
defined by the aggregation of changes to that budget 
over time. The consultation of the current budget is 
therefore done in real-time, meaning that the 
application calculates the current budget based on all 
previous 
Budget changes
. This is done for data 
integrity reasons, as one single error in the calculation 
can lead to erroneous data stored in a database. By 
calculating all current budgets in real-time, no budgets 
are saved to a database and errors cannot get stored 
permanently. The 
Department
, 
Activity
, 
Article
, 
Domain
, 
Product
 and 
Budget year
 instances on the left 
of the figure are used to define the most granular 
budgets. A combination of these instances can be used 
as a key for defining a budget, as a specific budget 
belongs to a single department, activity, etc. 
Furthermore the application allows for the grouping of 
articles in 
Economic groups
, which in turn make up a 
Budget estimate
. This estimate is used to draw up a 
target budget at the beginning of a budget year. The 
management of budgets is controlled by the data 
element instances on the right side of the ERD. 
Fragments of a budget can be reserved (i.e., a 
Budget 
fixation
) for a specific cause and the fixations are 
allocated to a specific supplier. Over time, these 
fixations can be called in 
Budget calls
, so the budgets 
can be partially spent when needed. For these budget 
calls, 
Invoices
 and 
Work orders
 need to be made so the 
calls can be successfully supported with the necessary 
paperwork.   
 
3.2. Descriptor files  
 
Once the requirements have been formulated as NS 
element instances, the instantia
tions need to be coded. 
This is done in descriptor files, which are text- or 
XML-based files describing the inputs for the 
expanders. For example, in case of a data element 
instance, the pattern expansion mechanism would need 
a set of parameters including the basic name of the data 
element instance (e.g., Budge
t), context information 
(e.g., component and package name), data field 
information (e.g., data type) 
and its relationships with 
other element instances. Th
is shows that with a 
minimum of input, descriptor files can be used to 
expand code into large applications. Through the 
process of expansion, this 
minimum of information can 
be transformed in a full application, as discussed in the 
next section. For the budget application, all 15 element 
instances were defined in descriptor files. 
 
 
3.3. Code expansion  
 
In the next phase, the descriptor files get expanded 
into the code of a functional application. This is done 
by software (called NS expanders) developed 
especially for this purpose
 by the Normalized Systems 
eXpanders factory (NSX). The NS expanders expand 
the descriptor files into skeleton source code for all the 
identified instantiations, together with all deployment 
and configuration files required to construct a working 
application on one of several supported technology 
stacks. The classes of the skeleton code represent the 
modular structure of the defined NS elements. 
Moreover, the required boilerplate code is included as 
well. For the budget example, this would be the set of 
classes and data fields: the bean class BudgetBean, 
interfaces BudgetLocal and BudgetRemote, etc.. 
Because the code expansion process is typically very 
fast, the NS development process allows for iterative 
and interactive sessions with end users. In these 
sessions, changes to functional requirements and data 
models can immediately be 
made in the descriptor 
files, followed by a re-expansion into a new version of 
the application.  
4764  
 
Figure 3. Entity Relationship 
Diagram of Budget application 
 
Therefore, the correctness of requirements, data 
model and descriptor files can be validated within a 
single or very few sessions. This way, the first three 
steps on the NS development process -analysis, 
creation of descriptor files and expansion- are in fact 
an iterative loop that is repeated as long as needed. 
Because the descriptor files can be easily changed and 
re-expanded, this loop can be gone through very fast, 
leading to short development cycles. Once the end user 
expectations have been fu
lly verified by the iterative 
development cycles, the basic functionalities of the 
application are fixed, which significantly reduces the 
risk of scope creep in the remainder of the project. 
For the budget application, the expanded code base 
consisted of 379 Java files and 586 Strut files. The fact 
that these files are all part of the 15 NS elements 
defined in the functional analysis, shows how the 
meticulous adherence to the theorem of Separation of 
Concerns impacts the granularity of modules in the 
codebase.   
 
3.4. Extensions 
 
 
Although the process of expansion delivers a fully 
working application that includes all defined NS 
element instances, the functionalities of the application 
most likely still need to be extended in the fourth phase 
of the development cycle. This is because the NS 
expanders are carefully designed to only expand code 
that fully complies to the NS
 theory. However, not all 
code can already be expanded in this way, implying 
that two types of requirements may still need to be 
added to the code of an expanded application: (1) 
requirements that are very specific to the application 
and (2) generic requirements that have not yet been 
“Normalized” and therefore not have been included in 
the NS expanders. The first type of requirements will 
always have to be implemented by developers, as it 
concerns extensions for specific customer requests. 
These context-specific extensi
ons are kept out of the 
NS expanders, as these should only contain (general) 
architectural deductions from
 the four NS theorems. 
The latter manual additions are due to the fact that 
extending the NS expanders to include new features in 
a normalized way is a difficult process: any addition to 
the expanders needs to be 
in full accordance with the 
NS theory. Therefore, not every feature of NS 
applications can yet be expanded and manually coded 
extensions are needed to enhance the functionalities of 
the expanded application. When building applications, 
the developers however constantly look for 
possibilities to include extended features in the NS 
elements, as has been done with some features of the 
budget application.  
Adding extensions to the expanded code needs to 
happen in a controlled way, as experience shows that 
combinatorial effects can be injected in software when 
4765 they are not included in the right way. This has 
however been resolved by only allowing extensions to 
be added in two controlled ways: (1) by adding it in a 
separate class or (2) by adding extensions within pre-
specified anchors in the expanded code. An automated 
harvesting mechanism then allows for the extensions to 
be extracted from the expanded code and stored 
separately. After a re-expansion, the extensions can 
then be re-injected in the expanded code without any 
impact on the process of expansion. When a new 
version of the expanders is built (for example with new 
frameworks in the web tier or in the persistence tier, or 
with minor upgrades), the application is re-generated 
by first expanding the skeleton code and then injecting 
the extensions. This re-expansion process is highly 
automated and can be performed quickly, but can still 
result in conflicts between the extensions and the 
skeleton code. That is one reason why NS applications 
should regularly be regenerated; another reason is that 
with this minimal regeneration effort, all new features 
in the expander code (for example, new user interface 
widgets, value types or validation rules) are made 
available in all regenerated applications. 
As the functional analysis and code expansion can 
be done fast, most of the effort in building the budget 
application was invested in programming the 
extensions. Of the total development time of 30 man-
days, about 90% of the effort was spent on developing 
the extensions. Of these 27 man-days of development 
time, approximately 60% of the effort was spent on 
actually incorporating the extensions and the other 
40% was spent on incorporating the extensions of the 
budget case into the NS elements in a way that the 
same extensions can be expanded in a fully evolvable 
way in future NS applications.  
For the budget application, two types of extensions 
were needed to satisfy the user’s requirements: logic 
extensions and graphical extensions. The logic 
extensions included operations that are not included in 
the NS expanders because of their context-specific 
nature, such as the on-the-f
ly calculation of the current 
budget based on all previous budget changes, 
validation of uniqueness of budgets, validation of 
budgets calls not exceeding available budget, etc. 
These extensions only account for about 30% of the 
effort spent on extensions. The second type of 
extensions was responsible for much larger 
development efforts, amounting to 70% of the 
extension development time and therefore about 60% 
of the total development time of the application. The 
high costs of the graphical extensions were caused by 
the impossibility of expanding advanced graphical 
screens at the time of the start of the development of 
the budget case. As the application contains data 
regarding budgets at several different levels, the end 
users required different overviews of budgets (e.g., by 
department, activity, etc.) which were not included in 
the standard screens the NS. Therefore, a great deal of 
extensions was needed to provide this advanced screen 
functionality. In this way, these advanced screens 
incorporate a similar functionality as the Excel pivot 
tables that were used before. These advanced screens 
also allow the presentation of several NS data element 
instances within the same 
screen, so-called “composite 
screens”.  
Although developing these advanced screens was a 
time-intensive task, we need to
 stress that the effort to 
produce an important part of these composite screens 
can be re-used in future applications as well. Therefore 
approximately 40% of development time spent on the 
advanced screens is estimated to be in other 
applications. Additionally, 
while the initial attempts 
required 600 lines of code to correctly show a 
composite screen, it only takes approximately 60 lines 
of code in newer applications. 
  
 
3.5. Launch and Use of application 
 
Once the extensions have been added to the 
expanded application, an NS application needs to go 
through testing, verification and data input phases 
before it can be deployed. Because of the rapid 
expansions of applications, issues that are otherwise 
proportionally irrelevant, become some of the biggest 
issues during an NS project. This is the case since the 
resolution time of these issues cannot be shortened, 
even though the overall development time of NS 
applications is drastically shortened. Some of these 
issues are for example technical challenges such as 
data conversion and input. In the budget case, data 
from the replaced application and spreadsheets was 
fragmented and in different 
data standards. Therefore, 
data conversion and input 
were labor-intensive and 
provided one of the biggest challenges of the project. 
To handle these issues, import mechanisms have been 
developed to import existing data in new NS 
applications. This import is managed through either 
manual input screens or automatically generated 
import clients. The chosen method depends on the 
amount of instances that need to be imported. When 
there are a lot of instances to be imported, this is done 
by automated import clients. Sometimes these import 
clients need to be extended depending on the (type of) 
data to be imported, which means this will only be 
done if manual input is too cumbersome because of a 
large amount of instances.  
The 500 existing budgets of the previous budget 
application were imported using clients. First, 500 
instantiations of the budget element were created and 
their value was set by an initial budget change for 
4766 every budget. Therefore this import process also 
included a verification whether each budget was 
unique (i.e., each budget should have its own unique 
key) and whether data for every empty budget field 
were present.
  
 
4. Transferring knowledge to new 
applications 
 
An important aspect of the development of NS 
applications is that ne
w insights obtained from 
practical application of the theory are constantly being 
added to the NS knowledge base. These insights range 
from newly normalized features in the NS elements 
that can be re-used in future applications to new 
general reflections on building Normalized software. 
The knowledge management processes that support 
capturing, storing, transfe
rring and applying these 
knowledge have been discussed in previous work [2].  
During the development of the budget application, 
several of such new insights have been gained which, 
since then, have been applied to other applications. 
Although there plenty examples of new knowledge and 
additions amassed from the budget case, we will 
discuss three of the most important types in the next 
paragraphs. 
Through the repeated application of the NS 
theorems, software modules become more and more 
granular. This is mainly because of the Separation of 
Concerns theorem that requires concerns to be 
separated. For software to become truly evolvable, this 
separation should be applied very thoroughly. For the 
graphical screens, this fo
r example means that an 
empty page is generated and all graphical items such as 
tables, figures, buttons, etc. are included as separate 
elements. This far-reaching separation of elements 
allows these elements to be changed without affecting 
other parts of the page (i.e., being evolvable) and it 
allows for the re-use of thes
e elements (e.g., a table) in 
other pages. Another example of concerns that have 
been separated in the budget application is the 
presentation of a clickable button and the logic that 
determines what needs to happen when the button is 
clicked. Clicking the “view
” button, for example, 
needs to trigger a selection model to determine which 
type of presentation will be used to present the 
requested data. Normally these selections are hard-
coded in JavaScript for each button, meaning the 
selection model for the type of graphical representation 
for several pages cannot be changed in one single 
location in the code. However, by separating these 
concerns it becomes possible to change both concerns 
(i.e., the button click and graphic selection model) 
independently and at their own single location. But 
decoupling the code according to the NS theorems 
requires insight and well thought-out planning. For 
example, where does the graphic selection model 
belong: it is not related to the included table or the 
pagination, so where does it belong?
 
The second addition to the NS knowledge base 
gained from the developmen
t of the budget application 
is the advanced GUI screens (i.e., composite screens). 
Although these cannot yet be directly expanded 
(extensions are still necessary), the goal is to make this 
possible one day. However, thanks to the efforts made 
during the budget application development, some 
components of the composite GUI screens will be 
readily available to be (re-)used. To make complete 
GUI screens available out-of-the-box, some 
complexities needed to be overcome. According to the 
developers, the complexity resides in the fact that end 
users have different perspectives on a specific data 
element. Consider for example the data element  
“Contract”. Some users are interested in the legal 
aspects of a contract, while others are interested in the 
financial aspects. These different interpretations of the 
same element should be translated in the presentation 
of the data element instances
 to the users, so that 
different data related to the same data element can be 
shown to users (i.e. differe
nt views/projections). For 
example, some possible views for the budget 
application are (1) which budget is available, (2) which 
budget is billed and (3) which budget is fixed. These 
distinctions are however 
not yet fully understood and 
implemented. But once they are, the more complex 
GUI screens can also be included in the expansion 
mechanism.  
A third addition to the NS knowledge base was the 
use of an improved extension harvesting mechanism. 
As discussed earlier, extensions can be added either in 
separate classes or between pre-specified anchors in 
the implementation code. An automated harvesting 
mechanism can then harvest all extensions and re-
inject them after the application has been expanded 
again. This process makes the extensions and expanded 
code independent. This mechanism has been developed 
during the budget case project. Before that, extensions 
were added by replacing existing implementation 
classes. This however led to duplicated code when 
these extensions needed to be applied in several double 
element instances. Additiona
lly, the code extensions 
were not clearly identifiable which resulted in a loss of 
code (or manual retrieval) when a re-expansion was 
performed. Therefore the new harvesting mechanism 
was devised and has been used in the development of 
all NS applications since the budget application. 
 
 
4767 5. Discussion 
 
Some interesting 
observations
 can be made from 
the description of the case in the previous section. 
First, we can notice that -although both their 
discussion in this paper as the period of time spent on 
them in the project are rather lengthy- the NS 
extensions are anything but limitations of NS 
development projects. As the NS approach allows for a 
very fast way of developing the basic application (i.e., 
by descriptor files and expansion), the time spent on 
developing extensions b
ecomes the only significant 
component of the complete development process, as 
shown by the 90% effort spent on the extensions (i.e., 
27 man-days). Because of the expansion mechanism, 
time spent on programming skeleton code and 
“boilerplate code” is minimized. The overall effect of 
the expansion on the total development time is 
therefore positive, as the extensions would take up the 
same time when building an application according to a 
non-NS approach. This is shown by the equal 
development times (of 16 man-days) for application-
specific requirements in both development processes in 
Figure 4. Furthermore, an a
udit shows that only 5% of 
the total code of the budget application was “touched” 
after expansion. That is, only 5% of the total 
application code is made up of extensions. However, 
the actual implementation of these extensions 
accounted for 54% (or 16 man-days) of the total 
development effort of the application (i.e. 90% of total 
development time was spent on extensions, of which 
only 60% was used for actually implementing them). 
As manually programming extensions is far more labor 
and cost-intensive than using automated code 
expansion, we can state that the NS development 
provides a great advantage over traditional 
development of software. This advantage is also shown 
in Figure 4. The time needed to program the skeleton 
code (including boilerplate code) is significantly 
reduced from approximately 30 man-days to only 3 
man-days due to the expansion of NS elements. To 
make this reduction possible, the NS development 
process however requires an investment of 
development time in order to incorporate NS 
extensions of the application into the NS elements. For 
the budget management application 11 man-days 
needed to be invested in this phase. This additional 
effort is however needed to further extend the 
advantages of NS expansion so these extensions (e.g. 
advanced GUI items, logic extensions) can be rapidly 
expanded into future applications without the need for 
manual programming (as discussed in Section 4).  
Second, we already mentioned that the functional 
analysis in the NS development process is done in 
terms of the constructs of the approach (i.e., instances 
 
Figure 4. Comparison of estimated 
development times 
 
of the 5 NS elements). We believe the NS 
development approach can actually completely fulfill 
this promise, which could be criticized for Object-
Oriented (OO) analysis 
and design methods. In NS, 
contrary to “objects”, the elements can truly be 
considered anthropomorphic. This is because the NS 
elements also include cross-cutting concerns such as 
persistency, security, etc. Therefore one can portray a 
complete application by only needing to describe its 
NS element instances. For the NS budget application 
presented in Figure 3, this means the presented ERD 
shows all aspects of the application, as all cross-cutting 
concerns are automatically included in the shown 
element instances. In contra
st, a description of the 
anthropomorphic objects in object-oriented 
programming does not suffice for such a complete 
application description. Indeed, additional classes to 
provide persistency, security etc. need to be added 
manually to the model later on, thereby weakening the 
anthropomorphic character of
 the implemented class 
diagram. 
A final observation that can be made from the case 
is that the development of evolvable software does not 
need to entail exorbitant
 costs. Although building 
evolvable software is shown to be very complex, the 
NS expansion mechanism and the transfer of 
knowledge to new applications help to streamline this 
apparent impossible development. Moreover, the 
evolvable structure of an application will result in far 
lower adaptation and integration costs during later 
phases of the life cycle of the IT application. This is 
because new functional requirements can be 
implemented without the effo
rt needed for a specific 
change to the system grow
ing over time (i.e., when the 
application becomes larger and more complex). 
Presuming volatile environments that require regular 
changes to the organization and its information 
systems, this leads to an overall lower Total Cost of 
Ownership of the IT application. 
4768 This paper also has a number of 
contributions
. 
First, the description of the development of an NS 
application shows the practical feasibility of the NS 
design theory [8]. In doing so, it addresses the requisite 
relevance cycle in design science research [7] and 
fulfills the “expository inst
antiation” component of the 
design theory anatomy defined by Gregor and Jones 
[6]. Therefore this paper has a theoretical contribution 
as well, as we once more demonstrated the 
completeness of the NS theory as a design science 
theory
.
 Third, the case description shows the 
complexity involved with developing evolvable 
software. Considering the described application is 
rather small, the issues and difficulties cited in this 
paper show that developing evolvable software is 
surprisingly challenging. This paper however 
demonstrates how these challenges can be overcome 
thanks to the NS theorems, NS development process, 
pattern expansion, etc. 
Several possibilities for 
future research
 can also be 
defined. As discussed in this paper, the included 
budget application is rather small and only includes 
data element instances. Th
erefore an evident first 
extension would be the discussion of more complex 
cases performed according to the NS theory and its 
development process. In such research, one could study 
whether additional challenges and problems arise 
because of the larger or more complex nature of the 
developed applications. A 
second possible route for 
future research is to do a quantitative study comparing 
the lead time and Total Cost of Ownership of NS 
applications to non NS-compliant software. However, 
it should be noted that such a study is very challenging 
and resource-intensive.  
 
6. Conclusion 
 
In this paper we discussed how the NS theory can 
be applied to develop evolvable software. This was 
shown by means of the extensive description of a 
budget management application developed according 
to the NS theory and its development process.  
  
7. Acknowledgment 
 
P.D.B. is supported by a 
Research Grant of the 
Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology in 
Flanders (IWT). 
 
8. References  
[1] Bieberstein, N., Bose, S., Walker, L., and Lynch, A. 
Impact of service-oriented arch
itecture on enterprise systems, 
organizational structures, and individuals. 
IBM systems 
journal 44
, 4 (2005), 691–708. 
[2] De Bruyn, P., Huysmans, P., Oorts, G., et al. 
Incorporating Design Knowledge into Software development 
using Normalized Systems. 
International Journal On 
Advances in Software 6
, 1 (2013). 
[3] Dyba, T. and Dingsøyr, T. Empirical studies of agile 
software development: A systematic review. 
Information and 
Software Technology 50
, 9-10 (2008), 833–859. 
[4] Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G., and Conboy, K. Customising 
agile methods to software practices at Intel Shannon. 
European Journal of Information Systems 15
, 2 (2006), 200–
213. 
[5] Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johns
on, R., and Vlissides, J. 
Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented 
Software
. Addison Wesley Professional, 1994. 
[6] Gregor, S. and Jones, D. The anatomy of a design theory. 
Journal of the Association for Information systems 8
, 5 
(2007), 312–335. 
[7] Hevner, A.R., March, S.T., Park, J., and Ram, S. Design 
Science in Information Systems Research. 
MIS Quarterly 28
, 
1 (2004), 75–105. 
[8] Huysmans, P., Oorts, G., De Bruyn, P., Mannaert, H., and 
Verelst, J. Positioning the normalized systems theory in a 
design theory framework. 
Lecture Notes in Business 
Information Processing 142
, (2013), 43–63. 
[9] Layman, L., Williams, L., and Cunningham, L. 
Motivations and measurements in an agile case study. 
Journal of Systems Architecture 52
, 1 (2006), 654–667. 
[10] Mannaert, H., De Bruyn, P., and Verelst, J. Exploring 
entropy in software systemards a precise definition and 
design rules. (2012), 93–99. 
[11] Mannaert, H., Verelst, J., and Ven, K. The 
transformation of requirements into software primitives: 
Studying evolvability based on systems theoretic stability. 
Science of Computer Programming 76
, 12 (2011), 1210–
1222. 
[12] Mannaert, H., Verelst, J., and Ven, K. Towards 
evolvable software architectures based on systems theoretic 
stability. 
Software: Practice and Experience 42
, (2011), 89–
116. 
[13] Mannaert, H. and Verelst, J. 
Normalized systems: re-
creating information technology based on laws for software 
evolvability
. Koppa, 2009. 
[14] Oracle. Java platform, enterprise edition. 
http://www.oracle. 
com/technetwork/java/javaee/overview/index.html. 
 
4769