 Perceptions of Agility and Collaboration in Software Development Practice 
  Chaitali Patel, Mark Lycett, Robert Macredie, Sergio de Cesare 
Brunel University 
School of Information Systems, Computing and Mathematics 
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB8 3PH, United Kingdom 
{firstname.lastname}@brunel.ac.uk 
  Abstract
 Agility is a facet of software development 
attracting increasing interest. The purpose of this 
paper is to investigate the value of agility in practice. 
Data collected from senior development/project 
managers in 62 organizations is used to investigate 
perceptions related to agile development. Specifically, 
the perceptions tested relate to (a) belief in agile 
values and principles, and (b) value of agile 

principles within current development and 

organizational practice. These perceptions are then 

examined in the context of current practice in order to 
test perceptions against behavior and understand the 
valued aspects of agile practice that are implicit in 
software development today. The findings suggest that 
agile values and principles related to communication 

and collaboration, and team involvement are 

perceived as important and are being practiced 

widely. On the other hand, principles related to 
reflection and frequent delivery of software are rated 
high to medium in importance but its full adoption in 

practice is limited. The principle relating to managing 
changing requirements is perceived as significant but 
agile practices relating to this principle are not being 

implemented in practice. 

 . 1. Introduction 
 Organizations undertaking software development 
are often reminded that successful practice depends 

on a number of non-technical issues that are 
managerial, cultural and organizational in nature [1-
3].  These issues cover aspects from appropriate 

corporate structure, through software process 
development and standardization to effective 
collaborative practice.  Since the recognition of the 

‘software crisis’ [4] in the late 1960s, significant 

effort has been put into addressing problems related to 
the cost, time and quality of software development via 
the application of systematic processes and 
management practices for software engineering.  
Early efforts resulted in structured methods, which 
have evolved and expanded over time to embrace 

consortia/company-led initiatives such as the Unified 
Modeling Language and the Unified Process 
alongside formal process frameworks such as the 
International Standards Organization’s 9000 series, 

the Capability Maturity Model and SPICE.  
More recently, the philosophy behind engineering 
initiatives has been questioned by the agile 
movement, which seeks to emphasize the human and 
craft aspects of software development over and above 
the engineering aspects [5-7].  Agile practice is 
strongly collaborative in its outlook, favoring 

individuals and interactions over processes and tools, 

working software over comprehensive documentation, 

customer collaboration over contract negotiation, and 

responding to change over following a plan.  Early 

experience reports on the use of agile practice suggest 
some success in dealing with the problems of the 
software crisis [8], and suggest that engineering and 
agile practice are not mutually exclusive [9]. With this 

duality in mind, this article surveys the current 
practice in software engineering alongside perceptions 

of senior development managers in relation to agile 

practice in order to understand the principles of agility 
that may be practiced implicitly. 
 
 2. Background  
 In early 2001 a group of seventeen leading 
methodologists, known as the Agile Alliance, 
convened with the intention of formulating a set of 
values and principles for good software development 

practice. These values and principles place people, 

their skills and capabilities, and personal relationships 

at the heart of the software development process. In 

contrast with most part of the past software 
development literature, agile development shifts its 
focus away from methods and techniques as the main 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200610-7695-2507-5/06/$20.00 (C) 2006 IEEE thrust to delivering quality software. Agile software 
development (ASD) focuses on creating and 
efficiently responding to change in order to profit in a 
turbulent business environment [7, 10]. Increasingly, 
the approach has been adopted by the software 

development community as a viable solution to the 

problems of the ‘software crisis’ which are still a 

reality today (i.e., problems of budget and schedule 
overruns, low quality and unreliable systems, and 
non-conformance to users’ needs). 
ASD places strong emphasis on collaboration and 
interaction through four core values. The values 
agreed by the Agile Alliance are: (1) 
individuals and 
interactions
 over processes and tools; (2) 
working 
software
 over comprehensive documentation; (3) 
customer collaboration
 over contract negotiation; and 
(4) responding to change
 over following a plan [5]. 
The methodologists of the Agile Alliance also agreed 
on twelve principles (see Table 2) that support the 

values and decided to leave the practical application 
of the principles to individuals.   
Current agile software development research is 
driven by the two core ideas elicited from the agile 
values and principles by Highsmith and Cockburn 
[11]: (a) different projects need different processes or 

methodologies and (b) focusing on skills, 

communication, and community allows projects to be 

more effective and more agile than focusing on 

processes. ASD aims to reduce the cost of change 
throughout the project, hence reducing the cost of 
rework. 

  3. Details of the Survey 
 To elicit an understanding of current practice and 
perceptions related to agility, an online questionnaire 
was designed with the following objectives in mind: 
• To review current software development 
practice. 
• To assess perceptions related to agile principles 
and values. 
• To examine the implicit/explicit integration of 
agile principles with mainstream development 
and organizational practice. 
Based on these research objectives, a web-based 
survey technique was considered the most suitable 

research strategy for this study.  A key feature of 

surveys is to “obtain snapshots of practice, situations 
or views at a particular point in time (via 
questionnaires or interviews) from which inferences 

are made (using quantitative analytical techniques) 
regarding the relationship that exist in the past, 
present and future” [12]. 
Surveys have been widely used by researchers in 
software development research for the purpose of 

capturing current trends in practice [13-18].  Surveys 

have the potential of capturing large amounts of data 

from a wide sample in a short space of time.  The 

advantage of having a wide sample can lead to greater 
validity as the sample can be more representative.  
Results thus can be generalized to a larger population. 

As Marshall and Rossman [19]  aptly state: “Survey 

research is the appropriate mode of inquiry for 

making inferences about a large group of people from 

data drawn on a relatively small number of 

individuals from that group” [19] 
E-mail was used to contact senior development 
managers at 970 organizations, requesting that they 

participate in the research.  The selection of 
participants was based on the contact list available 
and research noting that senior management influence 
productivity [20].  The survey itself comprised of 32 

questions that were organized into three sections 
addressing (a) background/demographics, (b) current 
software development practice and (c) perceptions 
related to agility (the questionnaire is available on 
request). 
The background section of the questionnaire 
concerned questions related to respondents’ 
experience in the area of software development, their 
knowledge, their organization and their current 
project.  These questions were aimed at validating the 
response sample and carrying out cross-analysis 

between groups.   
The objective of the second section (Current 
Software Development Practice) was to understand 

the state-of-practice in relation to the use of software 
development methods and the current practice of agile 
principles in organizations.  The section contained 

questions on the adoption of software development 

methods/approaches and the way that they are used in 

practice.  Specific questions were asked on the current 

implementation of each agile principle through 

current practices (i.e., are agile practices implemented 
implicitly or explicitly?). These questions were 
created to correlate the gap between the respondents’ 

current implementation of current practice (i.e., what 

they do) to the respondents’ perception of agile 

principles (i.e., what they think). 
The last section of the questionnaire contained 
questions specifically related to agile values and 
principles. The aim of such questioning was to (a)  
ascertain perceptions related to the value and 

importance of agility and (b) relate that information 

back to the context of current practice in order to 

understand the match between principle and practice. 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20062 In summary, respondents were presented with 
background information related to agile values and 
principles and asked to rank the principles in terms of 
importance from an organizational perspective and 
then rate its importance from a personal perspective.  
Online presentation of the questionnaire ensured 
that the section on current practice had to be 

completed before the section on perceptions of agility 
could be viewed and completed.  
A pilot study was carried out on 8 industrialists. 
The purpose of the pilot was to test (a) the 

understandability and clarity of questions, (b) the time 

it took to complete the questions and (c) to test the 

correct input of data collected by the web-base. Their 

comments were used to refine the questionnaire. The 
questionnaire was shortened and some questions were 
reworded for the purpose of clarity.  
Table 1 summarizes the demographics of the 62 
organizations that responded to the online survey 

(equating to a response rate of 6%).  Overall, the 
respondents had on average more than 10 years 

development experience, had variation in their 
development experience (having worked in more than 
4 software development roles), and worked in 
organizations that had more than 500 employees. The 

majority of responses received were from IT 

Directors, Senior Architects and IT Managers.  In 

addition, responses from the larger organizations 

covered in-house development departments of a 
variety of sizes from fewer than 10 employees to 
more than 500 employees. 
  Table 1. Demographics of respondents 
     
 4. General View of Software Development 
 The objective of understanding the state-of-
practice was providing a benchmark in order to assess 

the gap with the concepts of agile practice.  The use 

of software development process provided the 
framework for questioning and a number of questions 
were asked to provide correlation points for agile 
practice (discussed later). The major points of interest 

are that: 
• Most organizations employ a software 
development process but implement it in a 
flexible/configured manner. 
• Development processes are supported by the 
strong use of iterative lifecycles, but change is 

implemented in a structured manner that does not 
necessarily fit. 
In detailed terms, more than half the sample claim 
to use a formal software development process within 

their organization, either developed in-house (56%) or 

commercially branded (18%). Of the commercially 
branded approaches, there was a fairly even 
utilization of the Rational Unified Process (RUP), 

Structured Systems Analysis and Design 
Methodology (SSADM) and the Dynamic Systems 

Development Methodology (DSDM). Interestingly, 

however, organizations using formal software 

development processes (a) tend to tailor/configure 
them strongly (82%), lending weight to the adage that 
‘people don’t adopt a methodology, they adapt it’ 

(attributed to Tom DeMarco) and (b) use different 

processes for different types of project (79%).   
The levels of effort put into tailoring/configuring 
process varied: 16% stated they spent 1% percent of 

overall project time on tailoring the software 
development process; 67% of respondents stated the 
time to tailor processes ranged from 1% to 5% of 
overall project time; 19% stated they spent 10% – 

20% of the project time and 2% stated that they use 
40% of the project time.  The type of people involved 
in process tailoring were senior management, project 
managers, architects and the development team – 
where there appeared to be a decision maker, the 
development team was always involved in the 

decision. Lastly, ‘project characteristics’ were the 

predominant criteria on which tailoring decisions 

were made (44%).  
Of the respondents that do follow some form of 
software development process, the majority stated that 
their processes are based on an iterative and/or 
incremental software development lifecycle (68%), 
the remainder being based on the more sequential 
waterfall model. Nearly all respondents stated that 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20063 they cater for changing requirements, even late in the 
project (98%). Of that proportion, only some follow 
the dynamic prioritization path proposed by 
iterative/incremental development (39%) - the 
majority of respondents continue to use traditional 

change control request (61%). 

 
 5. Perceptions of Agile Principles 
 The objectives of questioning around agile 
principles were (a) to ascertain perceptions related to 
the value and importance of agility and (b) to relate 
that information back to the context of current 
practice in order to understand the match between 

principle and practice.    Summary results are shown 

in Table 2; these findings were then linked back to 

earlier questions to match perceptions with practice.  
The major points of interest are that: 
• The most widely valued agile principles relate to 
the frequent delivery of working software, daily 
interaction between business people and 

developers and the importance of face-to-face 
communication.   
• The highest levels of equivocation exist around 
principles related to changing requirements late 
in the development cycle and working software 
being the primary measure of progress. 
• The lowest areas of organizational importance 
were that the needs of the development team 

must be prioritized in line with cost, quality and 
time and that architecture and design should 
emerge and not be imposed. 
In detailed terms, the results showed Principles 1, 
5 and 7 (see Table 2) as unequivocal in their 
perceived importance (60, 84 and 60% respectively).  
When examining the frequent delivery of working 

software the results from current practice showed that 

the majority of respondents delivered on three 

monthly cycles (31%).  Significantly, however, a 

number of respondents delivered on monthly cycles 

(24%) and two-week cycles (24%) – smaller 
percentages delivered on weekly cycles (5%) or 
produced only a final release (17%).  In 

communication terms, the frequency of 

communication between Business and IT ranged from 

approximately once a month (13%), through once or 
twice a week (56%), to communication on a daily 
basis (29%).  The primary means of communication 
within software development practice is face-to-face 
within development team (79%) - few respondents 

use Email (17%) or telephone (4%) as a primary 

communication tool for example.   
While the delivery of working software was seen 
as important, the results related to software being the 
primary measure of progress were much more 
ambiguous. Here, findings from the data collected in 

practice showed a strong reliance on traditional 
project metrics. While a number of project 

respondents do use working software as the primary 

measure of progress (26%), a significant number use 
other project milestones and deliverables (54%) or 
completion of process/lifecycle stages (20%). 

Similarly, while the majority of respondents state that 

they cater for change late in the development cycle, 

change does not appear to be a particularly welcome 

factor. Interestingly, however, there is a strong 

correlation between the respondents who embrace 
change (40%) and their use of dynamic change 
control techniques (38%). 
Low areas of organizational importance indicate 
that a significant number of respondents (47%) value 

human facets of development over and above typical 

facets of cost, quality and time.  This view is borne 

out to a given degree when the data is correlated with 
the view that projects should be built around 
motivated individuals (53%) and practice indicating 
that (a) the development team is involved with 
decision making (64% on average) and (b) individuals 

are empowered to make decisions on work directly 

related to them (89%). In contrast, however, the 

results note that, while the development team is 
involved in tailoring the software development 
process (64%), team skills are the least used tailoring 

criteria (22%).  

 Table 2. Agile perception results 
   The results also indicated that architecture and 
design were viewed from a top-down perspective and 

not as artifacts that should emerge from practice and 
dialogue. While this is interesting, the respondents’ 
comments indicate a poor understanding of the 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20064 question and we have thus discounted data in this 
regard. Lastly, other interesting but less obvious 
results are: 
• Project/process reflection has some 
organizational ‘presence’.  Here practice results 
show that the primary techniques are ‘lessons 
learnt’ analysis (50%), self-reflection (24%) and 

as an outcome of formal monitoring and 
measuring (13%).  Those respondents who stated 
that no explicit reflection was carried out cited 
time limitation as the cause. 
• Documentation is still seen as important. Here, 
however, the majority of respondents viewed 

their current levels of documentation as 
necessary and sufficient for need (50%) though a 
significant number saw their documentation as 
necessary but not sufficient for their needs 

(38%).  In correlation terms, the majority of 

respondents who note documentation as both 

necessary and sufficient use formal but tailored 
development processes. 
  Table 3: Agile themes in relation to their 
adoption in practice 
    Table 3 provides a summary of agile themes that 
are relevant in terms of their acceptance in practice. 

Overall, the findings suggest that there is an 

acceptance in the principles of agile development, but 

that this acceptance is implic
itly tied with the 
acceptance of process tailoring and iterative lifecycles 
– the correlation between these factors and the agile 
principles seen as important in practice is strong.  

This provides support for other studies noting that, to 
be agile, a project’s processes must be cyclical and 
involve builds and increments done in parallel [8].  
 
 6. Conclusion 
 All surveys carry health warnings and this 
example is not immune.  Overall, the sample size of 
the data can be considered limited in that it addresses 

a UK audience and the response rate is small at 6%.  

With such limitations in mind the results have been 

presented in order to allow the readers to draw their 

own implications.  Overall, however, a number of 

interesting conclusions may be drawn in relation to 
the state of practice and the implicit use of agile 
principles: 
• A number of respondents state that they develop 
software in an ad-hoc manner (26%).  From one 
perspective, this finding may be considered 
worrying in light of the ongoing issues of the 

software crisis.  From another perspective, 

however, ad hoc does not necessarily equate to 

disorganized and may be related to the use of 

‘rules of thumb’ used implicitly across 

development (see [21]), where formal process is 
considered too heavy.  Indeed, a significant 
number of respondents in this respect work in 

small development environments (63% have 
fewer than 9 employees). 
• The trend of adapting/tailoring software 
development process to context is on the 

increase.  In relation to an earlier study (see 
[22]), the findings here suggest an increase in the 
number of organizations that tailor/adapt their 
development process and a decrease in the 

number of organizations that follow a 
commercial process in a prescriptive fashion. 
• A large number of organizations now base their 
software development on iterative and/or 

incremental lifecycles (68%). The frequency of 
software delivery ranges from every two weeks 
to every three months (the majority) and by far 
outweighs delivery only on final release.  Change 

control, however, is still firmly locked in a 
traditional project management loop 
 In summary, this research aimed to: (a) to review 
current software development practice; (b) to assess 

perceptions related to agile principles and values and 

(c) to examine the implicit/explicit integration of agile 
principles with mainstream development/ 
organizational practice. 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20065 In reviewing current software development 
practice, it can be concluded that the adoption of 
software development methods is increasing as 
opposed to findings in [22] which highlighted the 
decrease of software development usage in practice.  

However, the type of software development methods 

being adopted have changed from traditional, 

prescriptive software development methods that 
follow the waterfall lifecycle to software development 
frameworks that require tailoring to specific contexts 

and that follow iterative and incremental lifecycles 

(e.g. RUP and DSDM).   
In relation to the second objective of this research, 
one can conclude that a majority of practitioners 

perceive agile values and principles as important. The 
Agile Manifesto has just made these values and 
principles explicit and now a more conscience effort 

can be put towards implementing such values and 

principles in practice (e.g., time for reflection can be 

accounted for, frequency of software delivery and 

managing change can become a priority).  
When examining the implicit/explicit integration 
of agile principles with mainstream development/ 
organizational practice, the principles that were rated 
of high importance were implemented in practice as 

well. Those principles influenced by traditional 

prescriptive organizational processes (e.g. managing 

frequent delivery of software through dynamic 

prioritization as opposed to change request processes), 
on the other hand, were not being implemented in 
practice. 

  6. References 
 
[1] M. L. Griss and M. Wosser, "Making Reuse 

Work at Hewlett-Packard," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 12, 
pp. 105-107, 1995. 

 
[2] V. R. Basili, G. Caldiera, and G. Cantone, "A 

Reference Architecture for the Component Factory," 
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and 
Methodology
, vol. 1, pp. 53-80, 1992. 
 
[3] D. Fafchamps, "Organizational Factors and 

Reuse," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 11, pp. 31-41, 1994. 
 
[4] P. Naur and B. Randell, "Software Engineering: 
Report of a conference sponsored by the NATO 
Science Committee," presented at NATO, Garmisch, 

Germany, 1968. 
 [5] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. van Bennekum, A. 

Cockburn, W. Cunningham, M. Fowler, J. Grenning, 

J. Highsmith, A. Hunt, R. Jeffries, J. Kern, B. Marick, 
R. C. Martin, S. Mellor, K. Schwaber, J. Suntherland, 
and D. Tomas, "Manifesto for Agile Software 

Development," vol. 2003, 2001. 

 
[6] A. Cockburn, "Agile Software Development 

Joins the "Would-be" Crowd," 
Cutter IT Journal
, vol. 
15, pp. 6 - 12, 2002. 

 [7] J. Highsmith, 
Agile Software Development 
Ecosystems
: Addison Wesley, 2002. 
 [8] D. J. Reifer, "How Good are Agile Methods?," 

IEEE Software
, vol. 19, pp. 16-18, 2002. 
 
[9] M. Lycett, R. Macredie, C. Patel, and R. Paul, 
"Migrating Agile Methods to Standardized 
Development Practice," 
Computer
, vol. 36, pp. 79 - 
85, 2003. 

 
[10] A. Cockburn and J. Highsmith, "Agile Software 

Development: The People Factor," 
Computer
, vol. 
November, pp. 131 - 133, 2001. 
 [11] J. Highsmith and A. Cockburn, "Agile Software 
Development: The Business of Innovation," 

Computer
, vol. September, pp. 120 - 122, 2001. 
 
[12] R. D. Galliers, "Information Systems Research: 

Contemporary Approaches & Emergent Traditions," 
presented at Proceeding of the IFIP TC8/WG 8.2 
Working Conference on the Information Systems 

Research Arena of the 90's Challenges, Perceptions 

and Alterative Approaches, Copenhagen, Denmark, 

1991. 

 
[13] T. L. Roberts, M. L. Gibson, K. T. Fields, and R. 
K. R. Jr., "Factors that Impact Implementing a System 
Development Methodology," 
IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering
, vol. 24, pp. 640 - 649, 1998. 
 
[14] C. J. Hardy, J. B. Thompson, and H. M. 

Edwards, "The use, limitations and customization of 

structured systems developement methods in the 
United Kingdom," 
Information and Software 
Technology
, vol. 37, pp. 467-477, 1995. 
 
[15] B. Fitzgerald, "An empirical investigation into 
the adoption of systems development methodologies," 
Information & Management
, vol. 34, pp. 317-328, 
1998. 
 [16] G. Fitzgerald, A. Philippides, and S. Probert, 

"Information systems development, maintenance and 

enhancement: findings from a UK study," 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20066 International Journal of Information Management
, vol. 19, pp. 319-328, 1999. 
 [17] C. Barry and M. Lang, "A Survey of Multimedia 
and Web Development Techniques and Methodology 

Usage," 
IEEE Multimedia
, pp. 2 - 10, 2001. 
 
[18] G. J. Hidding, "Reinventing Methodology: Who 
Reads It and Why?," 
Communications of the Acm
, vol. 40, pp. 102 - 109, 1997. 

 
[19] C. Marshall and G. Rossman, 
Designing 
Qualitaive Research
, Third ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage 
Publication, 1999. 

 [20] S. Dutta, M. Lee, and L. V. Wassenhove, 
"Software Engineering in Europe: A Study of Best 

Practices," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 16, pp. 82 - 90, 1999. 
 
[21] R. L. Glass, "In Seach of Meaning (A Tale of 
Two Words)," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 19, pp. 134 -136, 
2002. 
 [22] B. Fitzgerald, "The use of systems development 
methodologies in practice: a field study," 
Information 
Systems Journal
, vol. 7, pp. 201-212, 1997. 
 Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20067