 Supporting Scaling Agile with Por
tfolio Managemen
t: Case Paf.com Kristian Rautiainen 
Aalto University School of 
Science and Technology 
kristian.rautiainen@tkk.fi 
Joachim von Schantz 
Paf 
 Joachim.vonSchantz@paf.com 
Jarno Vähäniitty  
Aalto University School of 
Science and Technology 
jarno.vahaniitty@tkk.fi 
  Abstract 
This paper is a descriptive case study of how one 
department at Paf, Paf.com, introduced portfolio 
management to help support scaling agile software 
development. Paf.com had experienced problems with 
long time-to-market due to thrashing, which was 
caused by frequently changing priorities due to an ad-

hoc prioritization process and handovers. Also, there 

was lack of visibility into projects entering and 

progressing in the development pipeline. No structured 
way of starting projects was enforced company-wide, 
and too many parallel projects got started. As a result 

of introducing a structured portfolio management 

process, the number of ongoing projects has 

dramatically reduced, from over 200 to 30, reducing 

thrashing. Listing all projects in priority order in the 
Paf.com backlog provides visibility into what is 
currently ongoing, helping coordinate the work of 

multiple Scrum teams. The portfolio follow-up function 

provides progress data on the projects, helping 

managers make more informed decisions, considering 

the whole portfolio. 
1. Introduction 
During the past 10 years, agile software 
development methods have gained acceptance in the 

software industry. Originally, the sweet spot for agile 

software development was one co-located team of 3-8 

persons working on one product [3]. Lately, the trend 
has been in scaling agile to the enterprise level and 
applying lean philosophy to software development, see 

e.g. [14-16, 22, 23]. Some amazing results have been 

reported about applying fully distributed Scrum [28, 

29], but not many can boast such impressive results. 
The transition from the agile sweet spot to 
enterprise-scale agility is not easy. Kalliney [9] reports 

ﬁportfolio problemsﬂ when scaling Scrum, specifically 

regarding product management and enacting the 

company vision, managing cross-team risks and 

dependencies, and handling the silos of knowledge and 

skills. 
The process for achieving balanced resource 
allocation in terms of value maximization, strategic 

alignment, risk level, and the number of ongoing 
projects is called new product development portfolio 
management [5], or portfolio management for short. It 

has been mostly addressed in literature on new product 

development (NPD), but lately also in literature on 

scaling agile and lean. However, experience reports 

and case studies in the context of lean or agile are 
scarce. This paper aims to add to that body of 
knowledge by providing a descriptive case study of 

how one company, Paf, introduced portfolio 

management to help support scaling agile software 

development. We also report on initial results and 

challenges met. 
The paper is structured in the following way. First 
we present related work on portfolio management from 

literature on NPD and especially literature on agile and 

lean software development. Second we describe the 

research methodology and provide case company 

background information. In Section 4 we provide the 
results of the case study. Finally, we sum up the paper 
with its contributions and suggestions for future work. 
2. Related work 
2.1. Portfolio management in new product 
development 
The concept of portfolio management is not new. It 
has appeared over the decades under various names, 
such as R&D project selection, prioritisation or 
resource allocation. The focus of research has been in 
the area of new product development (NPD) and on 
developing quantitative techniques and methods for 

project evaluation, selection and prioritisation. [4] 
Portfolio management has been adopted in the 
industry, but not without problems. A recent study of 

30 companies [2] shows that while the companies have 

adopted portfolio management practices, they still 

struggle with completing projects within schedule and 

lack a broad overview of ongoing projects. The main 

reasons behind this were; (1) very different types of 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201111530-1605/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE projects are included in the managed portfolio, and (2) 
not all projects and smaller activities are managed as 

part of the portfolio. Therefore as much as 50% of the 
product developers™ time can be allocated to work that 
is not seen by the portfolio managers. This creates a 
gap between required and available resources that can 

go unnoticed. Since portfolio management is 

essentially about resource allocation, the inherent 

complexity of the issues involved keeps it far from 
being a mechanical exercise. 
Successful portfolio management is about 
achieving a balance between the four potentially 
conflicting goals of 1) 
maximising the financial value 
of the portfolio, 2) 
linking the portfolio to strategy
, 3) 
balancing
 it on relevant dimensions, and 4) ensuring 
that the 
total number of ongoing activities is feasible
. Different portfolio management techniques, such as 

financial and economic models, scoring models and 

mapping approaches emphasise these goals differently. 

[5, 17] 
Setting up proper portfolio management has been 
recognized as challenging even for the best of 

organizations [19]. In practice, portfolio management 

is often realised through integrating techniques for 

project evaluation, selection and prioritisation with a 

phased review process for ongoing development 
projects [5, 17, 34]. Phased review processes organise 
product development projects into a sequential set of 

phases having themes (beginning with idea generation 
and ending with product launch and maintenance), 

with a corresponding business and prioritisation 

decision point (i.e., the review) at the end of each 
phase. Development work is conducted during the 
phases, along with gathering the information needed to 
pass the next review. [4, 6] 
Literature describes two basic alternatives for 
implementing the portfolio management process in 

practice. The first one emphasises decision-making 
through in-depth reviews for each ongoing project and 
manages the portfolio in a bottom-up manner (e.g. 
gates dominate
 [5] and 
model I funnel
 [34]). The 
second is top-down, with decisions based on looking at 

the portfolio as a whole (e.g. 
portfolio reviews 
dominate 
[5] and 
model II funnel
 [34]). The first 
mentioned is better suited for larger firms in mature 

businesses with dedicated resources and fairly static 

portfolios, because the emphasis is more in making 

sound go/kill decisions for individual projects than re-

prioritising the entire portfolio every few months. 
Likewise, the second is more appropriate for smaller 
companies in fast-paced and fluid markets because it 
allows for more dynamic resource allocation through 

periodically reviewing the entire portfolio. [5, 34] 
2.2. Portfolio management in agile and lean 
software development 
Advocates of agile methods tend to see much of the 
literature on managing new product development as 
fundamentally incompatible with agile software 
development because it tends to view development as a 
separate ﬁphaseﬂ in the cycle of realizing an idea into 
an actual working solution [12]. For example, phased 

review processes as described in Section 2.1 are by 

some seen as incompatible with the basic principles of 
agile development [14, 15]. Whatever the case, 
integrating agile software development with phased 

review processes may not be straightforward due to 

attitudes, as well as a number of actual contradictions 

in e.g. level of abstraction in planning and feedback 

cadence [10]. 
Not much has to date been written on how to set up 
portfolio management so that the result would 

compatible with agile and/or lean principles. Still, the 

ideas and practices of portfolio management have 

begun to emerge also in agile software development, 
mainly through the introduction of lean principles to 
software development, see e.g. [11, 12, 14, 15, 22, 24, 

25]. However, the use of the term portfolio 

management differs between the authors. 
Leffingwell provides in his book [16] and its blog 
companion (scalingsoftwareagility.wordpress.com) a 
very high-level view to portfolio management. At the 
portfolio management level the company™s executives 

define 
investment themes
 that drive the resource 
allocation and thus investment priorities of the 
company. 
Epics or epic-scale initiatives are used to 
express the portfolio vision in practice. These guide 
upcoming product releases. 
Poppendieck & Poppendieck [22] provides another 
viewpoint to what could be interpreted as an approach 
to portfolio management. Possible development efforts 

that take up people™s time are first classifies by type, 

for example as strategic business initiatives, feature 
upgrades, infrastructure upgrades, and maintenance. 
Then the desired cycle time for each type of effort is 
decided. The investment levels for the categories are 

set by determining how many initiatives of each type 

should be carried out within, e.g. a year. Or, in the case 
of e.g. maintenance, a reservation is made of how 
much of the total capacity the activity should be 
allowed to take. Finally, the slots for the initiatives are 

laid out in the calendar in advance. When the time slot 

of a certain initiative approaches, its actual content is 

decided on the basis of what is most valuable for the 
company at that point in time. 
The most common interpretation of portfolio 
management in software development follows the 
definition from NPD literature; portfolio management 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20112 is the activity of making resourcing decisions across a 
portfolio of planned and ongoing projects. Shalloway™s 

concept of 
Lean Portfolio Management 
[25]
 means 
deciding on a frequent basis across a portfolio of 
projects how the development resources are allocated 
for delivering the 
minimum marketable features
 or business 
features that at the moment provide the most 
business value. Pichler [20] agrees with Shalloway™s 

idea and recommends that ﬁcompeting backlogsﬂ 
should be dealt with in a similar fashion. 
Larman and Vodde [14, 15] are along the same 
lines. They note that in organizations with less than 
100 people, prioritizing on the level of the portfolio of 

products and services offered tends to lead to local 

optimization. Instead, portfolio management can be 
more effectively carried out by merging the backlogs 
of different product/service offerings into a single 

backlog, and then performing backlog management on 

that single backlog. This vi
ew is shared by Krebs [12], 
who advocates that the ongoing and planned projects 

should be kept in a list called the ﬁproject portfolio 
backlogﬂ. Decisions on which projects should 
continue, be put on hold, be launched, or be killed, are 

then made on a per-sprint basis. A similar approach is 

also mentioned by Rothman [24]. These approaches 

seem to assume that the iterations are synchronized for 
the whole organization and that all projects use an agile 
software process. An off-synch portfolio of projects 

can indeed lead to problems, as pointed out in [33]. 
Only a few experience reports seem to exist to date. 
Karlström and Runeson [10] report experiences on how 
two large software systems projects attempted to use 
eXtreme Programming in the context of a phase-gate 
model. Tengshe and Noble [30] report how the 
Portfolio Management Office
 (PMO) helped balance 
the demand on Capital One Auto Finance™s resources 

from multiple and sometimes inter-dependent projects. 

Kalliney [9] reports how Ultimate Software 
transitioned from agile development to an agile 
enterprise, setting up portfolio management practices 
to solve some of the problems related to the transition. 

Thomas and Baker [31] report on what challenges they 

faced when applying agile methods to IT investment 
funding, change management, and governance, and 
how they managed their projects as a portfolio. Steindl 
[26] reports how IBM manages agility on three levels; 

project, portfolio, and business. Laanti [13] describes 

how a large organization implemented portfolio 

management as an ﬁouter control loopﬂ on top of the 
ﬁinner scrum control loopﬂ according to the 
Sashimi 
model
 from [18]. 
3. Methodology 3.1. Research methods 
This study is a longitudinal, descriptive case study 
[35], with elements of action research [27]. The first 
and third author and other researchers have observed 

the portfolio management process at Eget and later 

Paf.com from the beginning of 2008. The second 

author has worked in the company since August 2008 
and he has been responsible for defining the 
Paf model 
for 
projects (Pamp) presented in Section 4, and for 
further refining the portfolio management approach. 
The researchers arranged a survey and interviews 
with selected personnel in March 2008 to investigate 

the state-of-practice of portfolio management at the 
company. The survey contained 56 statements related 

to different aspects of portfolio management and it was 

answered by 21 respondents. The sampling was 

purposeful. Key personnel from a diverse assortment 

of roles and responsibilities (developer and tester 
representatives, R&D management, business 
representatives, Product Owners (PO™s), Scrum 

Masters (SM™s)) were selected to participate in the 

survey. Of those 21 people, 7 were further interviewed, 

using the survey statements as an interview guide. The 

results of the survey and interview were disseminated 
to the whole company two weeks after the interviews. 
After the dissemination of the results of the survey and 

interviews, the researchers participated as observers in 

different meetings relating to the development process 

and later the portfolio management process of the 

company. They also reviewed documents related to the 
existing and planned processes and provided feedback. 
In September 2010 the survey was re-run, with 28 
respondents of which 6 had also answered on the first 
round. However, new interviews based on the second 

survey round were not made before the publication of 
this paper. 
3.2. Case background 
Paf (Ålands Penningautomatförening), founded in 
1966, is a public association that operates gaming 
activities on the autonomous Åland Islands, onboard 
Ålandic and Finnish ships and on the Internet. Gaming 
began on 1
st January 1967 in collaboration with the 
member associations behind Paf: the public health 
service on Åland, the Åland branch of Save the 
Children, the Finnish Red Cross and the child welfare 
foundation Stiftelsen Dagens Barn. This study is 
focusing on the software development of the Internet 

gaming activities. Internet gaming on www.paf.fi was 

launched on 3
rd December 1999. The first form of 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20113 gambling was betting. Today, the business also 
encompasses gaming machines, casino gaming, bingo 

and lotteries, poker, and skill games. 
Paf founded the subsidiary Eget focusing on 
internet gambling in 1999. Paf held the majority of 

Eget shares. Eget developed and operated Internet 

monetary games for Paf and other companies. In the 

spring of 2008 Paf and Eget merged but the setup of 

buyer and supplier was still around in the minds of the 
employees. Later, in the spring of 2009, most of the 
former Eget was to be known as Paf.com, the Internet 

department at Paf. 
Scrum was introduced at Eget around 2006 to solve 
problems related to quality, release planning and ways 

of distributing work. Scrum was introduced bottom-up 
starting with one team. In the fall of 2008 most teams 
used Scrum ﬁby the bookﬂ. At that time the visibility 

into teams™ backlogs was established, but the backlogs 

and other documentation of 10+ geographically 

distributed teams were spread all over the company 

wiki and in Excel files with no structure. However, the 
main problem was the visibility into what PO™s and 
development teams 
actually
 did, which was a result of 
unclear and shifting priorities from the Marketing and 

Sales department due to congestion of the development 

pipeline. For example, if the capacity of the 
development pipeline was 5 projects, 5 projects were 
started, but before these projects were ready and the 

deliverables were released into production, 5 new 
projects were started, and so on. 
This congestion and thus shifting priorities caused 
thrashing, which resulted in long time-to-market. This 
could also be seen as Development-Business 
disconnect and inefficient and uncontrolled portfolio-
level decision making. These had been identified as the 

two most pressing challenges in a survey conducted by 

the first author and his researcher colleagues in the 

spring of 2008, when the collaboration with the 
company and researchers began. 
In a value chain mapping exercise performed by the 
developers at Eget, the outcome was that even if a 
game took 5 months to develop on average, the worst 

case scenario was that it would go into production in a 
total of 24 months with 19 months of shelf time and 
handovers. It was also proven that a simple game can 
be put out into production in 3 months when expedited 

by C-level managers. The situation in the fall of 2008 

was that releases were planned five weeks ahead as a 

release train [16] and the practice of joint release 
planning [8, 16] had been taken into use, to make the 
teams™ plans visible to all the other teams and 
stakeholders and to reduce handovers. 
The problems found are similar to symptoms that 
have been identified in literature to be associated with 

inadequate portfolio management [32]. Therefore 
setting up practices for portfolio management was 
selected as one of the improvement paths. 
Thrashing was not the only reason for long time-to-
market. A monolithic architecture that had evolved 
over time was also a major contributing factor. Due to 
the architecture and history, Paf.com operates with 

component teams: Slot team, Lotteries & Bingo team, 

Integration team, BackOffice team, Core team, Report 

team, CRM team, Web management team and so on. 
Build automation was introduced and further 
developed to mitigate the effect of the complex 

architecture and help coordinate the work of the 10+ 

geographically distributed teams. However, the impact 

of architecture and build automation or changes in 

team structures are excluded from this study that 
concentrates on the initial experiences of introducing 
portfolio management practices to alleviate the 

problem of unclear and shifting priorities and 

thrashing. 
4. Introducing portfolio management 
4.1. First steps towards portfolio management 
The first steps towards portfolio management were 
taken when the content of every release was internally 

prioritized according to business value. In every 

release there were 3-5 upgrades or new components 
that were committed to be ready to be put into 
production by the teams. Some effort was spent on 

training the Marketing and Sales department in the 

ways of agile planning and prioritizing, i.e. the most 

important things need to be completed first, so that less 

important things can be scoped out at the end of the 
release time box, if need be. Gradually this began to 
work but then 4 new problems were discovered: 
• lack of visibility on ﬁprojectsﬂ about to enter 

the development pipeline  
• the maturity of the planning of the  ﬁprojectsﬂ 
entering the development pipeline  
• prioritisation of projects was ad-hoc 
• rogue, ﬁbusiness criticalﬂ projects were 
induced ﬁunder the hoodﬂ by some managers 
These problems were discovered in the fall of 2008, 
when the newly created Project Management Office 
(PMO) made an inventory of all the active projects in 
Paf development and technical operations (later 

Paf.com). As a result, 214 ﬂprojectsﬂ were found, 

including duplicates and sub-projects. To get visibility 

into the situation, the PMO started to issue unique 
project ID™s to existing and new projects. However, it 
was difficult to get grasp of the existing projects, since 
they were unstructured and very little documentation 
was available. 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20114 In the spring of 2009 the management of Paf was 
still not happy with the inefficiency and handovers in 
the organization inherited from the merger of Paf and 
Eget. Cooperation negotiations were held to get a 
competence shift towards the Internet business. The 
guiding star of the new organization was less 

handovers. In the new organization the departments 

System & Services, Games, Sales, Customer 

Experience and Customer Relations were formed into 
Paf.com with responsibility for the Internet gaming 
business. The component/development teams were 

divided under the appropriate departments. The idea 

was that problems and opportunities discovered in a 

department could be handled by its development 

teams. Problems and opportunities that are dependent 
on resources outside the own department were to be 
handled in a structured manner according to the 

suggested new project framework Pamp, which is 

discussed in the next section. 
4.2. Paf model for projects (Pamp) 
In the spring of 2009, the PMO and QA proposed a 
model for managing the portfolio of projects in a 

structured way. It was called Pamp and it combined 

elements from Stage-Gate models [7], the Open 
Unified Process (http://epf.eclipse.org/wikis/openup/), 
and PMBoK [21]. 
The main goal of Pamp was to 
clarify a business 
need and increase the visibility
 for each project in 
Paf.com. The idea was to tackle the problems 

identified earlier and described in the previous section. 
Pamp was not to include guidelines for the actual 
project execution process, which was left for the 
team(s) and project manager to decide. Typically, the 

execution was done using the existing Scrum process. 
Figure 1 shows an overview of Pamp. Pamp 
controls and monitors project planning, prioritization, 

and execution through 4 project demos (Proposal, 

Planning, Design, Closing), where the person having 
the role of project manager presents the status of 
planning and execution. The time units in Figure 1 are 

indications of calendar time (the size of which may 
differ, depending on project size); most of the effort is 
done in the Execution phase by the development 

team(s). The level of required documentation and 

planning is governed by a complexity classification of 

the projects into complex, normal, or simple. The 

demos are held as a review and workshop with 
representatives from the project organization and 
senior project and process managers reviewing the 

documentation. The emphasis is on clarifying risks, 

dependencies, stakeholders, and business value. 
In the project proposal demo, the project manager 
presents, e.g. one structured PowerPoint slide including 
information on: 
• Business issue/opportunity 
• Primary project deliverable(s) or Epic 
statement 
• Business benefits of the project outcome 
• Project overview 
• Main risks and dependencies 
If the proposal is accepted, the project is put into 
the Paf.com backlog, which is further explained in the 
following section. The first draft of the project plan is 
prepared and presented in the project planning demo, 
addressing the work that needs to be undertaken: 
 Figure 1 Paf model for projects (Pamp) 
Proposal
ŁProject Proposal
ŁProject Charter
ŁEpic statement
Proposal 
Demo 
Planning
ŁWho?
ŁWhy?
ŁWhat?
ŁWhen?
Design
ŁEstimation
ŁRoadmap
ŁDependencies
ŁMock up
Execution
ŁDevelopment
ŁIntegration
ŁTesting
ŁRelease
Closing
ŁRetrospective
Final report 
in 0 to 6 
months
Time to Market
Production &Maintenance
10 time units
20 time units
70 time units
Planning 
Demo  
Design 
Demo  
Closing
Demo  
WHATWHAT
WHAT
HOWHOW
Chosen Process
e.g. Agile Framework, Business Case, 
Construction process, Summer vacation project
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20115 • Who will primarily be doing the work 
• What are the main deliverables and project 
scope 
• When is the target release date 
• Why the work is done, including more refined 
business and other benefits compared to the 

project proposal 
After the planning demo, project preparations move 
on to the design demo, where the plan for how the 
project will be executed is presented, including: 
• Roadmap of preliminary epics and sprints 
• Initial estimations of the epics 
• Resource needs 
• Dependencies 
• Mock-up to show technical feasibility in more 
complex projects 
The final, closing demo is arranged after the project 
has ended. The project™s success is reviewed and a 

retrospective is held. 
During the project execution period, the follow-up 
is governed by the approved project plan, which is a 

living document that is updated and ﬁre-approvedﬂ 

throughout the project. While this sounds like a plan-

driven approach, it is still similar to the roll-out 

planning of Scrum. The extra planning is needed for 
coordination when scaling agile to development 
projects involving several teams, especially if the 

teams are component teams and a switch to feature 
teams is not feasible in the short run. The teams still do 
the actual value-adding work using Scrum and burn-

down charts are used to evaluate progress. If the burn 
down shows problems in reaching the desired scope, 
corrective actions are taken 
as deemed appropriate, and 
a re-evaluation of project value can be performed. In 
this way the ranking of the project might fall (or rise) 

in the portfolio review, arranged once a month. 
The project manager (PM) is a role that a PO can 
have during a project. When a project needs multiple 
teams, a project manager is appointed to handle 
project-related matters not related to the PO work, such 

as budgeting for multiple teams, handling reporting to 

the steering group, and facilitating the communication 
and problem solving between the PO™s in the project. 
For a cross-departmental project the final say is with 
the PM unless it is escalated to the project owner 

(usually a department head). In a typical setup the PO 

that is most central in the project and has the biggest 

need to get the project done is made PM for the project 
and through the Paf.com backlog prioritisation 
(described in the following section) (s)he gets the other 
PO™s support and resources. Usually the PO appointed 

as PM does not have full knowledge about the domain 

that the supporting teams are developing. Therefore the 
PO responsible for that domain is handling the backlog 
for that supporting team. 
The effort of using Pamp for giving visibility to the 
work and helping in the planning is small compared to 
the situation of not having information for portfolio 
management. In general, writing the proposal takes a 

couple of hours and preparing the plan for the project a 

couple of days. Feedback has shown that it is faster if 

the project manager has a clear view on the work that 
has to be undertaken. The proposal and the plan for the 
project are based on templates that also function as 

checklists for planning the work and presenting 

possible business value for Paf.com management. The 

rule of the thumb is that the project manager has a lot 

of freedom in designing the work as long as the highest 
risks are mitigated to a certain extent and the way of 
working is documented. Statements like ﬁaccording to 

company process Xﬂ, ﬁwill be clarified in week 5 of 

the projectﬂ or ﬁaccording to team estimatesﬂ are valid. 
The demos take approximately 1 hour or less, if the 
project manager has prepared herself properly. The 
senior experts invited to the demo ask the project 
manager to clarify questions around the main points of 

the project plan. This is done to make sure everybody 

understands what the project is about, so that the 

portfolio decisions are based on the best possible data. 
Next we take a look at the Paf.com backlog 
process, which is the portfolio management process of 

Paf.com. 
4.3. Paf.com backlog process 
The backlog process was first drafted in 2008 and 
in the beginning of summer 2009 the current version 

shown in 
Figure 2 was taken into use. The process 
addresses the problem of managers inducing ﬁbusiness 

criticalﬂ projects ﬁunder the hoodﬂ. All Pamp projects 
are in the Paf.com backlog. Also projects that are not 
using Pamp are visible. Projects not using Pamp are, 
for instance, new games, security patches, or general 

updates, which are done from the team™s or 

department™s own backlog. The Paf.com backlog is a 

simple table placed in the intranet of Paf.com. It shows 
project priority, ID, name, sponsor (Paf.com 
management representative), manager (person taking 

the role of project manager for that particular project), 

status, estimated completion date, and capitalization 

information. Finance is monitoring the Paf.com 

backlog to follow up on costs from projects and 
released value-adding content. 
The 5-10 most important projects are prioritized, 
out of roughly 30 (which is considerably less than 214 
in the fall of 2008), by Paf.com management 

(consisting of department heads and the Paf.com 
director) on a monthly basis in a portfolio review 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20116 meeting, with the PMO owning the prioritization 
backlog called Paf.com backlog. The reason for 

Paf.com management to prioritize the projects is that 
they control the resources and need to commit to 
assigning their resources to a specific project. The 
person having the role of project manager can and is 

obliged to ask for resources from projects ranked lower 

in the Paf.com backlog to sp
eed up project completion. 
The driving force is to concen
trate on a few things at a 
time so that projects can be done fast to deliver value 

and thus help achieve shorter time-to-market. This is in 

accordance with lean principles [23]. 
 Figure 2 Paf.com backlog process 
Resourcing can be done by giving work to other 
teams or by taking individuals into the team working 
with the project with a higher priority. Company-wide 
changes to platforms or proc
esses are prioritized in the 
Paf.com backlog in the same way so teams know what 

to focus on in the company sprint of 5 weeks (release 

train) and what is expected from them when the release 
is done. Joint company sprint planning is used as a 
practice to make it possible to more easily negotiate the 
resources for each company sprint. The teams and 

individuals can easily block requests that are not 

connected to a higher priority project. If there are no 
requests, the team can work on their assigned project 
even if it is not prioritized. The teams™ sprints 
(typically 2 weeks) are not synchronized and every 

team has the freedom to plan their work within the 

company sprint as they see fit. Only those teams that 

have their own component in an upcoming release 
participate in the releasing activities. On average 
during 2009, 8 out of 16 teams were involved in 
making a production release. The smallest amount of 

teams participating in making a production release was 

4 and at one occasion 12 teams participated. 
Figure 3 shows the backlog hierarchy at Paf.com. 
Pamp and the Paf.com backlog process are only 
concerned with the two left-most backlogs, which 
provide input to the teams™ backlogs. You could also 
say that the Paf.com backlog and the project backlog 
show business priorities and high-level plans, whereas 

the teams™ backlogs contain the actual development 
work. 
 Figure 3 The backlog hierarchy 
The PMO monitors project progress based on the 
teams™ story point estimates and burn down charts, and 
reports to Paf.com management as part of the portfolio 
follow-up function. Story point estimates reflect the 

complexity of the story to be implemented and do not 

account for how long it takes to implement the story. 

The estimation is done by the teams using standard 
planning poker with Fibonacci series numbers. Story 
points per sprint, normalized by sprint length gives an 

approximation of velocity from which a forecast of 

project completion can be derived, when the story 

points of unfinished stories are known. The forecast is 

calculated based on the mean value of the story points 
in the last three completed sprints. 
When several teams work on the same project in 
different sprint schedules with different velocity and 
differently sized backlogs, the forecasts are made on 

team level. The team with the completion forecast 

furthest away is used as the current forecast for 
completion of the project. The forecast gets more 
uncertain as the complexity of the project grows, i.e. 
more teams, new technology, or complex solutions are 

involved. Forecasted date and targeted date are not to 

be mixed. The difference is basically how a project 

was planned to go and how is it going time wise. The 
forecast can be used like a project burn down, 
signalling when there is a need to re-scope the project 
or extend the schedule of the project. 
A web-based backlog management tool was 
introduced in early spring 2009 for all the teams to 
gradually take into use as their primary reporting tool 
to show the team™s stories and their progress in respect 
to the release train. In the fall of 2009 all teams were 

using the tool. The aim was to provide a unified way of 

measuring and visualizing progress of work and effort 

left undone in the projects. The information is used as 
background in the portfolio review. From a 
development project™s viewpoint all necessary data is 
available at a glance; amount of story points done and 

not done, velocity, and forecast. Additionally, the size 

of releases of the release train can be estimated based 

on complexity, not time spent on coding. SM™s and 
PO™s are the main users of the tool. The PO™s keep 
their backlogs in the tool and SM™s update progress 
information, taking them an average of about 5 minutes 
Paf.com 
Backlog
Paf.com management
Portfolio follow-up function
Release train
PMOPaf.com backlog
process
Project 
backlog:
Epics
Paf.com 
backlog:
Projects
Team(s™) sprint 
backlog(s):
Stories and 
tasks
Release 
content
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20117 per day. The main tool for internal communication and 
information is the team™s own Scrum wall in the team 

room. One of the main reasons for additional, web-
based reporting is that the teams are geographically 
dispersed to seven offices in four countries. The 
information that is needed, e.g. to plan and coordinate 

the release train, cannot thus be collected just by 

walking through all the team rooms and reading the 

Scrum walls. 
4.4. Initial results from introducing portfolio 
management 
While explicit portfolio management has only just 
been introduced at Paf.com and the investigation to its 

possible drawbacks and benefits is still ongoing, we 

can provide some initial results. As already mentioned, 

the amount of ongoing projects has gone down with 
one order of magnitude from 214 to 30. Even if the 214 
projects included sub-projects and duplicates, the 

reduction is considerable and can be attributed to the 

introduction of Pamp, the restructuring of the backlog 

process, and improved planning practices, which also 
have helped in reducing handovers. Pamp is working 
as a gate for the paf.com backlog, guarding it from too 

many or too immature projects. 
Additionally, from those 30 projects, only 5-10 at a 
time are indicated as high-priority, making the 

priorities clear to the whole organization. This drives 
the way work is organized and accepted by the teams, 
and the team members have already shown that they 

now can refuse to take work of lower priority, instead 

of ending up in a thrashing mode of constantly 

changing priorities. Otherwise Pamp has not directly 

affected the way teams work, and they can still use 
Scrum as defined in the company. 
The portfolio follow-up function and the Paf.com 
backlog provide visibility into what is currently 
ongoing at Paf.com. The process enforces a clearer and 

more specific definition of project goals and business 

value. This helps managers understand what is going 
on in other departments and the business value of the 
work. New opportunities can 
still be utilized fast 
enough. It takes at the longest 5 weeks to get a new 

project accepted into teams™ sprint planning. Even 

though the process gives room for expediting, there is 
no record of terminating a sprint due to demands from 
a higher-ranked project. Making things more visible 
has also helped with this, because now managers can 

negotiate with each other in preparing a business case 

for a new opportunity and they can make an informed 

decision based on the facts of all the ongoing projects. 
In this way, a less important project can be put on hold 
and a new project of higher business value can replace 
it in a controlled manner.  
The structured process for proposing new projects 
has also dramatically reduced the amount of ﬁDo it, it 
doesn™t matter what it costs and how much time it 
takes, because I want it!ﬂ projects in the portfolio. 
These ﬁpet projectsﬂ could be seen 2 years ago (if one 

knew where to look for them), but today none exist as 

far as we know. 
Still, not everything is run as a project and thus is 
not part of the Paf.com backlog or the portfolio 
management process. For this, there is a clearly 
defined and accepted, company-wide prioritization 

based on work types. All production problems, i.e. 

problems in the customer-facing, live products, get first 

priority. Second priority is on all work that needs to be 

done to be able to make the next release. During 2009 
10 production releases were made and more than 20 
patches, meaning a response to production issues, were 
deployed into production. 
These two work types are allowed to thrash work of 
the third priority, work based on the priority order of 
the Paf.com backlog. If time still remains, other work 
can be performed. In general, one team is working on 
one project backlog with additional stories or tasks 

from company-wide improvement work, such as 

upgrading or migrating infrastructure or improving the 

logging functionality of the component they are 
responsible of. If somebody tries to circumvent this 
priority order of work, they are stopped or the issue is 

escalated. However, as noticed in [2], this could be a 

source of problems because the availability of 

resources at any moment is unknown, and thus the 

situation needs to be monitored in the future. 
To summarize the initial positive results, it seems 
that the problems that were tackled by introducing 

Pamp and portfolio management have been solved 

quite satisfactorily. However, it is still too early to 

conclusively say how much time-to-market has 

improved. The second survey results show 
improvement in the areas identified as the biggest 
challenges. Also, the areas of over commitment and 

multitasking show improvement, which is in line with 
the goals for introducing portfolio management. 
4.5. Improvement needs and ideas 
While the initial feeling and reaction has been 
mostly positive, some improvement needs and ideas 
have already surfaced. According to the second author, 

one of the most challenging things related to the 
introduction of portfolio management and Pamp has 
been to make people understand the separation of the 

value-adding work in a project from the planning of the 

project. The conceptual mix of having an overall agile 

framework for development work together with more 
ﬁtraditionalﬂ project management practices and 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20118 portfolio management for planning the work can 
admittedly be confusing. The planning is needed to 

help prioritize and coordinate the work, especially 
when several teams work on the same project. From an 
agile standpoint one could argue that the ﬁrightﬂ way to 
go would have been to create true feature teams. But 

the agile ideal is far from easy to gain in a multi-team 

environment. Portfolio management has been shown 

both in theory and practice to be one good alternative 
for helping in scaling agile. Therefore it was a valid 
choice to be tried out in our opinion. 
Developing a training package for project 
management in the context of Pamp and the Paf.com 

backlog process could help mitigate the lack of 

understanding. Furthermore, a forum for PO™s is being 
started, where they can interact, learn from each other, 
and solve problems together. This forum will later be 

officially added to the Paf.com backlog process after 

the test-run has been completed and the retrospective 

has found it useful in practice. 
There is still work to be done to get good enough 
progress data out of evaluation projects, or spikes in 

XP-terminology [1]. Currently the data is a subjective 

opinion communicated in progress reports distributed 

to the whole organization by e-mail. Demos are also 

used, but mainly for the stakeholders of the evaluation 
project, which makes it hard to see the impact to other 
projects and overall resourcing when making portfolio-

level decisions. 
5. Contribution and future work 
The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we 
describe how Paf.com has introduced portfolio 

management to help them scale agile software 
development. We provide a rich description of the 
introduction of portfolio management and initial 
results. While we cannot generalize the results based 

on only one case company, the results may still inspire 

other companies into considering portfolio 

management as an option to help in scaling agile. The 
descriptive case study adds to the body of knowledge 
of portfolio management 
Second, the condensed section on related work, 
especially Section 2.2, provides a good starting point 

of references for anyone interested in adopting or 
improving portfolio management in their agile 
organization. While the list of references is by no 

means exhaustive, we feel that it is a good sampling of 

the current trends in portfolio management, especially 

regarding agile ways of working. 
Since this work only reports on the initial results 
and experiences, we intend to continue monitoring and 

improving the portfolio management practices and 

process. Part of this work is conducting the interview 
for the second round of the survey and analyzing and 
disseminating the results. 
We are also planning to write a case study on the 
biggest project in Paf.com history, ending in the fall 
2010. That would also help fill the gap left in this 
paper as to describing in more detail the whole 

development process, including the project and 

portfolio management processes presented in this 

paper. 
While specific techniques for portfolio 
management, such as valuation of projects/epics, were 

left out of scope of this paper, there is still a need to 

study which of these exist or could be applicable for 

portfolio management in a lean or agile context. This 

could include, for example, studies of IT investment 
analysis, real options, and other IT governance models. 
Also, other competing models for scaling agile should 

be reviewed and a comparative analysis of different 

models would provide value in helping companies 

choose suitable scaling strategies and practices. In 

general, more case studies and industry experience 
reports on portfolio management are needed to help 
industrial actors find better ways of working.  
6. References 
[1] K. Beck, 
EXtreme Programming eXplained. 
Addison-
Wesley, 2000.  
[2] B. S. Blichfeldt and P. Eskerod, "Project portfolio 
management - There's more to it than what management 

enacts," 
International Journal of Project Management, 
vol. 
26, pp. 357-365, 2008.  
[3] A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development. 
Pearson 
Education, 2002.  
[4] R. G. Cooper, S. J. Edgett and E. J. Kleinschmidt, 
Portfolio Management for New Products. 
Perseus Books, 
2001.  
[5] R. G. Cooper, S. J. Edgett and E. J. Kleinschmidt, 
"Portfolio management: Fundamental to new product 

success," in 
The PDMA Toolbook for New Product 
Development$ $
, P. Belliveau, A. Griffin and S. 
Somermeyer, Eds. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2002, 

pp. 331-364.  
[6] R. G. Cooper, 
Product Leadership: Creating and 
Launching Superior New Products. 
Perseus Books, 1998.  
[7] R. G. Cooper, "Perspective: Third-Generation New 
Product Processes," 
JPIM, 
vol. 11, pp. 3-14, January, 1994.  
[8] V. T. Heikkilä, K. Rautiainen and S. Jansen, "A 
revelatory case study on scaling agile release planning," in 
Proceedings of the 36th Euromicro/SEAA, 
Lille, France, 
2010, pp. 289-296.  
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20119 [9] M. Kalliney, "Transitioning from agile development to 
enterprise product management agility," in 
Proceedings of 
AGILE 2009, 
Nashville, USA, 2009.  
[10] D. Karlström and P. Runeson, "Integrating agile 
software development into stage-gate managed product 
development," 
Empirical Software Engineering, 
vol. 11, pp. 
203-225, 2006.  
[11] P. Kettunen, "Adopting key lessons from agile 
manufacturing to agile software product developmentŠA 
comparative study," 
Technovation, 
vol. 29, pp. 408-422, 7, 
2009.  
[12] J. Krebs, 
Agile Portfolio Management. 
Redmond, WA, 
USA: Microsoft Press, 2009.  
[13] M. Laanti, "Implementing program model with agile 
principles in a large software development organization," in 
2008, pp. 1383-1391.  
[14] G. Larman and B. Vodde, 
Practices for Scaling Lean & 
Agile Development: Large, Multisite, and Offshore Product 
Development with Large-Scale Scrum. 
Boston, MA, USA: 
Addison-Wesley, 2010.  
[15] G. Larman and B. Vodde, 
Scaling Lean & Agile 
Development: Thinking and Organizational Tools for Large-
Scale Scrum. 
Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2009.  
[16] D. Leffingwell, 
Scaling Software Agility: Best Practices 
for Large Enterprises. 
USA: Addison-Wesley, 2007.  
[17] M. McGrath, "Setting the PACE in product 

development," 1996.  
[18] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, "The New New Product 
Development Game," 
Harv. Bus. Rev., 
vol. 64, pp. 137-146, 
1986.  
[19] P. O'Connor, "Spiral-up implementation of NPD 
portfolio and pipeline management," in 
The PDMA Toolbook 
for New Product Development
, P. Belliveau, A. Griffin and 
S. Somermeyer, Eds. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
2004, pp. 461-492.  
[20] R. Pichler, 
Agile Product Management with Scrum: 
Creating Products that Customers Love. 
Boston, MA, USA: 
Addison-Wesley, 2010.  

[21] PMI, 
A Guide to the Project Management Body of 
Knowledge : PMBOK Guide. 
Newtown Square, PA, USA: 
PMI, 2008.  

[22] M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, 
Leading Lean 
Software Development: Results are Not the Point. 
Boston, 
MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2010.  
[23] M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, 
Implementing 
Lean Software Development: From Concept to Cash. 
Boston, 
MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2007.  
[24] J. Rothman, 
Manage Your Project Portfolio: Increase 
Your Capacity and Finish More Projects. 
USA: Pragmatic 
Bookshelf, 2009.  
[25] A. Shalloway, G. Beaver and J. R. Trott, 
Lean-Agile 
Software Development: Achieving Enterprise Agility. 
Boston, 
MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2010.  

[26] C. Steindl, "From agile software development to agile 
business," in 
Proceedings of 31st Euromicro/SEAA, 
Porto, 
Portugal, 2005, pp. 258-265.  
[27] G. I. Susman and R. D. Evered, "An Assessment of the 
Scientific Merits of Action Research," 
ASQ, vol. 23, pp. 582-
603, December, 
1978.  
[28] J. Sutherland, G. Schoonheim and M. Rijk, "Fully 
distributed scrum: Replicating local productivity and quality 
with offshore teams," in 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 
Hawaii, USA, 
2009.  
[29] J. Sutherland, A. Viktorov, J. Blount and N. Puntikov, 
"Distributed scrum: Agile project management with 
outsourced development teams," in 
Proceedings of the 40th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
Hawaii, USA, 2007. 
[30] A. Tengshe and S. Noble, "Establishing the agile PMO: 
Managing variability across projects and portfolios," in 
Proceedings of AGILE 2007, 
Washington D.C., USA, 2007.  
[31] J. C. Thomas and S. W. Baker, "Establishing an agile 
portfolio to align IT investme
nts with business needs," in 
Proceedings of Agile 2008, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008, 
pp. 252-258.  
[32] J. Vähäniitty, K. Rautiainen and C. Lassenius, "Small 
software organisations need explicit project portfolio 

management," 
IBM J. RES. & DEV., 
vol. 54, pp. 1-12, 
March/April, 2010.  
[33] J. Vähäniitty and K. Rautiainen, "Towards an approach 
for managing the development portfolio in small product-
oriented software companies," in 
Proceedings of the 38th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
Hawaii, USA, 2005.  
[34] S. C. Wheelwright and K. B. Clark, 
Revolutionizing 
Product D
evelopment. 
New York: The Free Press, 1992.  
[35] R. K. Yin, 
Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 
London: SAGE Publications, 1994.  
  Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201110