 The Role of the Story Master:  A Case Study of the Cognitive Load of Story 
Management Tasks 
 Aaron Read 
Center for Collaboration Science 
University of Nebraska Omaha 
aread@mail.unomaha.edu
  Nicholas Arreola 
Center for Collaboration Science 
University of Nebraska Omaha 
narreola@mail.unomaha.edu
  Robert O. Briggs 
Center for Collaboration Science 
University of Nebraska Omaha 
rbriggs@mail.unomaha.edu
   Abstract
 Agile software development methods allow design 
teams to respond quickly to changing circumstances.  
Much of this fl
exibility is achieved through increased 
involvement of the customer who becomes responsible 
for the development of the specifications of the 
software and the communication of these requirements 
to the developers.  Reports have shown that the 
customer is often overloaded in the role.  We discuss 
the customer™s role in terms of cognitive effort and find 

that much of this effort performed by the customer can 
be performed by someone else.  We explore this 
possibility through the experie
nces of two individuals 
in the ﬁstory masterﬂ role, a role created as part of a 
complex software project, as an assistant to the 
customer.  We present the evi
dence from the case study 
as a set of tasks performed by the role which reduce 
cognitive effort.  We evaluate the role™s success as an 
Agile Information System
s Development component 
using Conboy™s [1] framework.    
1. Introduction  Information systems projects continue to be 
troubled by low success rates [2]. Defects in system 
requirements account for a major portion of these 

failures [3]. It is a cognitively demanding task to assure 

the correctness, completeness, and consistency of  

requirements for complex systems. It is not uncommon 
for a large-scale system to have tens of thousands of 
requirements with complex interdependencies.  
Requirements can be made more manageable by 
representing them systematically with modeling and 

structuring techniques [4-7]. Modeling a system may 

require extensive up-front effort to discover and 
document requirements. Much of this work may be 
wasted, however, because it is common for 

requirements to change during the course of a large-

scale systems project as the business environment 

evolves and as stakeholders gain new insights about 

their problems and possible solutions.   
Agile software development methodologies try to 
minimize the cognitive effort of creating and 
maintaining system requirements by keeping 

documentation to a minimum. These methods often 
capture a high-level summary of a requirement as a 
user story
 Š a one sentence description of a user™s 
interaction with some feature of the system [8, 9]. In 

agile methods, details of the requirements are meant to 

be communicated directly between the developers and 

the customers as the software develops. This allows 
requirements to be moved very quickly from the 
intentions of the customer to the development of 

software without going through the effort of formal 

specifications. For this approach to work, developers 

and customer are encouraged to be co-located and must 

invest considerable time in face-to-face conversations. 
Several reports have shown that the customer role 
and related Agile roles such as the product owner are 

overloaded with work.  [10, 11].  In our experience 

using the Scrum method to develop a complex 

software application with many detailed software 

requirements, we have found as well that the product 
owner is overloaded.  Many meetings discussing 
design details with developers and a UI designer make 

it difficult to assure that decisions made end up as 

developed user stories. 
Much of the work surrounding user story or 
requirement management involves assuring that 

important design details are correctly captured, 

organized, and communicated.  This work can be 

described in terms of cognitive load and cognitive 

effort.  The Time-Based Resource Sharing (TBRS) 
model of cognitive load [12] describes the limited 
information processing capability of short term 
memory in terms of the number and difficulty of 

information retrievals that must be performed in a 

given amount of time.  As the number and difficulty of 

performing information retrievals increase, the amount 

of cognitive effort increases.    The implications of 
TBRS for requirements management will be discussed 
in greater detail later in the theory section. Essentially, 

TBRS allows us to understand how the need to 

comprehend and work with details leads to more time 

and effort.  We can then understand the cognitive effort 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201111530-1605/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE needed to be performed by a customer in terms of the 
information cues they need to process. 
While a customer is central to decision-making and 
prioritization of user stories, much of the work 
commonly attributed to the 
customer role, such as 
backlog management [13], and the writing of 
acceptance tests may not need to be performed by the 

customer.  In our study, we explore the feasibility of 

transferring such tasks to another individual who takes 
on the role of a story master, through a case study of 
the experiences of two individuals who assumed the 

role.  Exploring this possibility has potential economic 

benefits, in addition to having benefits for researchers 

seeking to understand the nature of cognitive load in 

Agile Software development.  Customers and other 
roles that support the development of requirements in 
software development projects such as business 

analysts and requirements engineers are expensive to 

train and employ.  The story master can provide the 

benefit of reducing the cognitive load of the customer 

role with much less cost, since they do not require the 
training or expertise of the other roles mentioned. This 
case study illustrates the feasibility of transferring 

cognitive efforts to another individual.  Each cognitive 

effort is explained in terms of TBRS.  We also analyze 

the agility of this role using Conboy™s [1] framework to 
illustrate it™s success as an agile software development 
method.  We discuss our findings and suggest future 

research.   
2. Background 
In this section we will describe the tasks of the 
customer in terms of their cognitive effort.  We will 

begin by discussing the TBRS model of cognitive load 
and how it can be used to describe the cognitive effort 
of customer tasks.  We then discuss the tasks of the 
customer in terms of cognitive effort 

 2.1 The Time-Based Resource Sharing Model 
of Cognitive Load 
 In the education literature, cognitive load is 
classified as extrinsic, intrinsic and endogenous [14]. 
Researchers use this classification scheme to focus on 
eliminating material that contributes to cognitive load 
but do not contribute to understanding. However, this 
classification scheme does not provide insight into the 

cognitive mechanisms that give rise to cognitive load. 

The Time Based Resource Sharing model of working 

memory (TBRS) proposes such mechanisms [12, 15]. 
Unlike earlier cognitive models, TBRS  proposes that 
working memory has a single central processor that is 

single threaded Œ it can only complete one operation at 
a time.  The central processor must divide its time 
among several tasks, such as processing information 

cues, fetching things from long term memory, pushing 
things from working memory to long term memory, 
processing concepts in working memory, and 
refreshing the contents in the contents of working 

memory. Items held in working memory fade in a few 

seconds and must be refreshed by the central processor 

to keep them active in working memory. Each of these 
operations requires time, so there is a limit to how 
many operations can be executed in a given slice of 
time time  before concepts start to drop out of working 

memory. According to TBRS, cognitive load is defined 

as the proportion of time the processor is busy doing 

other things to  maintaining items in short term 
memory. It can be represented by the equation: 
 CL = 
 aN/T 
 In which  
N represents the number of operations, 
a  the 
difficulty of those operations, and 
T the time taken for 
a set of operations.  
If the logic of TBRS holds, then the number of 
information cues necessary for a person to complete a 
task pertaining to system requirements would directly 

affect the cognitive load imposed by the task. As 
information cues increase, the number of fetches and 
pushes to and from long-term memory would also 

increase, which could cause a cascading of cognitive 

load. The less expertise or understanding a person has 

of the information cues, the more difficult it is to 

process those cues, and thus the negative impact of 
cognitive load increases.  
While cognitive load considers the number and 
difficulty of operations needed to process information 
cues in a set amount of time, cognitive effort can be 

conceptualized as the amount of effort and the number 

of operations needed to complete a task.  In other 
words, as the quality and quantity of informational 
cues associated with a specific task increase, so does 

the level of cognitive effort required to complete that 

task.  
   2.2 Tasks of the Customer Role 
 Regardless of the Agile Methodology followed, the 
customer is central to the supply, clarification, and 
validation of requirements.  The greater the flexibility 

afforded by the Agile approach the  greater the need 

for feedback from the customer [16].   The customer, 
therefore, also has the responsibility to collaborate and 
communicate feedback frequently with the developers 

when building the software instead of working through 

an upfront contract [17].   This is accomplished 

through the following activities: 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20112 • Providing stories [18].   
• Maintaining stories  in the backlog (In 
Scrum)[13]. 
• Prioritizing stories so that the most 
important features of the software are 

developed first [18]. 
• Participating in sprint planning meetings 
or the planning game where the effort to 
build the software in the stories is 
estimated. 
• Developing acceptance tests with which 
to validate the software. 
• In XP, the customer is encouraged to be 

onsite in order to clarify requirements [8] 
Literature discussing the customer role in agile 
highlights the importance of customer tasks associated 

with getting the requirements right, as many challenges 

associated with the customer role are related to 

developing requirements correctly.  This is a natural 

result of the need for requirements to be developed 
quickly in Agile settings. These challenges include: 
• Be knowledgeable enough to formulate 
requirements [8]. 
• Developing requirements that result in an end-

to-end product [19]. 
• Developing requirements with enough detail  
• Inspecting requirements [20]. 
The last three requirements are challenges  
associated with tasks high in cognitive effort because 
they involve the processing of many information cues 

which are characteristic  of requirements engineering.   
This is especially true in systems that involve many 
user stories in which assuring that requirements are 
correct and complete involves processing large 

amounts of information.   
Although a more effective customer understands 
the domain of the software, its business value, and is 
capable of making decisions about the prioritizations of 
user stories[8], many of these challenging tasks do not 
need to be performed by the customer role. For 

example, business analysts may be used to assist in the 

writing of user stories, and testers assist in validating 
the software [11]. 
In other words, the customer is uniquely qualified 
to perform some of the tasks he is responsible for while 
some of the work associated with this role may be 

cognitive overheadŠcognitive effort that the customer 

does not necessarily need to exert.  Given the time 
constraints and pressures faced by the customer, an 
understanding of these important but re-assignable 
tasks is of great importance to the Agile software 

development movement.  We explore many of these 

tasks through a case study of the story master roleŠa 
role specifically designed to aid the customer in 
capturing, managing, and communicating user stories.  
We present our findings as a set of insights gained 
as two different story masters filled the role on the 
project.  Both story masters had no formal training or 
experience as systems analysts, programmers, or 

testers.   

 
   3. The Case Study 
 Our case study answers the question: How much 
cognitive effort does the customer have to perform in 

providing stories to the development team, that does 

not necessarily need to be performed by the customer? 
We answer this question by reviewing insights gained 
through the experiences of two individuals who have 

filled the role for 16 months.  These insights are 

grouped according to the cognitive effort they address.  

We also address the challenges of transferring 
cognitive effort from the customer to another 
individual. We first introduce the background of the 

case study. 

 3.1 Case Study Background 
 3.1.1 People Involved. 
A group of stakeholders agreed 
to build a new rapid development environment for 

collaborative software applications called 
ActionCenters. 
Drawing on experience with earlier 
prototypes, they anticipated the project would require 
approximately 500,000 to 1,000,000 lines of new code. 

The team had a budget of $4,000,000 USD, which they 

anticipated would only be sufficient to build the core 

functionality of the proposed system. Further funding 
would depend heavily on the degree to which the 
organization could derive value from first round of 

development. 
 The ActionCenters project team consisted of a one 
customer representative, a system architect, four full-

time senior developers, two part time developers, a UI 
designer, and the story master. Each professional team 
member teamed with an intern/mentee. Part way 

through the project, the testing team formed consisting 

of a test lead and two testers.  

 
3.1.2 The Project.
 The customer had been involved in 
developing the requirements for an earlier full-scale 

prototype of the system. None of the prototype code 

could be used in the production version of the system 

because the team decided to implement the new system 

on a different technical platform. None of the 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20113 developers of the prototype system was involved in 
developing the production version.  
Full formal specifications for the prototype system 
existed. The customer and the prototype development 
team had spent a year writing those specifications 
before coding began. Those specifications could not be 

reused, however, because they were too closely tied to 

the original development platform. The team found 

that it was not possible to reverse engineer the 
requirements and constraints from the detailed system 
specifications. The customer had a detailed 

understanding of what the capabilities and constraints 

of the system should be. Those requirements remained 

stable over the life of the project.  

 3.1.3 Selection of an Agile Software Development 
Methodology. 
At the beginning of the project, only the 
customer knew the system requirements. The customer 
had other duties in addition to the project, and so could 

not devote full time to communicating the 

requirements to the development team. The customer 
and development team therefore agreed to use an Agile 
development approach for the project hoping to 

eliminate the cognitive load associated with writing 

formal specifications. The customer also expected to 

take advantage of the flexibility of developing software 
iteratively.  None of the team had previous experience 
with Agile methodologies. 
 The development team established work practices 
based on the Scrum Agile Software Development 
method (Highsmith and Cockburn 2001). The architect 

also served as the scrum master. The customer and the 
architect shared the duties of the product owner. The 
team agreed to develop software in four-week 
iterations. The customer, the scrum master, and story 

master would work together to decide which stories 

should be implemented in each iteration. Each iteration 

would begin with a one-to-two day planning meeting 
where the stakeholders would review what had been 
accomplished and learned in the previous iteration. 
Then developers would estimate the level of effort 

required for stories to be built in the next cycle. 

Developers made their estimates in terms of story 
points [9]. A story point roughly equated to a half a 
day of work for a single developer. During each 
iteration, developers held a daily 15 minute stand-up 

meeting to report what they had achieved the previous 

day, what they would achieve that day, and what 

barriers they faced. The customer was co-located at the 
university, along with the development team.  
However, he did not make himself available to the 
team unless it was for scheduled meetings which 

usually occurred between the systems architect, UI 

designer, and story masterŠthe customer was 

constantly pressed with other duties.    
  
3.1.4  Cognitive Overload of the Customer. 
The 
customer originally agreed to write the stories for the 
project. However, the customer had responsibilities 
outside the project, and therefore did not have enough 

time to write well framed stories during each sprint.  

This cognitive overload would remain evident 

throughout his involvement with the project.  Four 
sources of cognitive effort are referenced later in the 
case study.
  
3.1.5 Creation of the Story Master Role. 
The team  
created a new role they called ﬁstory masterﬂ and hired 

a person to work with the customer to capture and 
document stories and enter them into an online story 
management system. The principle duty of the story 

master was to assure that the development team had 

stories to estimate at the beginning of each iteration. 

The story master therefore participated in design 

meetings with the customer and UI designer, and made 
notes about the design decisions and agreements they 
achieved. The story master worked with the customer 

and the scrum master to decide which stories should be 

executed in the next iteration. The story master wrote 

acceptance tests for each story the developers 
committed to build during a sprint. In the early months 
of the project, the story master typically spent 15-20 

hours a week in the role.  
 3.2 Review of Insights into the Cognitive Effort 
of customer tasks 
 Four major cognitive efforts emerge as we 
reviewed field notes from both story masters.  We 
discuss how the role evolved to overcome challenges 
associated with transferring this cognitive effort to 
another role.  At the end of each section, we 

summarize the challenges and solutions associated 
with handling each cognitive effort. 
 1. Capturing stories in meetings 
2. Managing the backlog 
3. Coordinating development of stories with UI 
designer and Development team 
4. Creating and running acceptance tests 
 3.2.1 Reducing the cognitive load of capturing user 
stories   
How cognitive effort is reduced:
 Much of the critical 
elements of the software™s design and other decisions 
related to the software were captured during intense, 

free flowing meetings, in which the customer and other 

stakeholders would be fully engaged. Any attention 

shifted away from these engagements in order to focus 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20114 on something else, such as capturing a story, was 
potentially devastating to the goals of the meeting 

because it would inevitably squelch productivity. 
When the constant shift in attention would occur, the 
customer and stakeholders would walk away from the 
meetings feeling ﬁmentally exhausted.ﬂ In terms of 

TBRS, such complaints are predictable as the work 

practice just described normally entails shifting back 

and forth from working memory, the details discussed 
at present, and long term memory, especially when 
elements from past discussions and projects needed to 

be recalled. A reduction in the number of complaints of 

ﬁmental exhaustionﬂ was noticed as the story master 

matured into its role, which was to be a team member 

who prevent the customer and stakeholder™s need for 
shifting attention during intense, free flowing 
discussions. 
  
Evolution of the Story Master Role:
 Initially, there was 
the assumption that the story master would be 

capturing many more details relating to the software 
than is currently the practice.  The story master 
attended almost every scrum meeting, weekly status 

meeting, in addition to design meetings between the 

customer and the UI designer and interviews with the 

customer.  Meetings involving the customer as well as 
GUI design meetings were recorded with an audio 
recorder to be reviewed later, when needed. There 

seemed to be the expectation that the story master 
would automatically be able to recognize any detail as 

a user story.  However, this expectation changed 

quickly for several reasons.  First, it was not efficient 
for the story master to be present in all meetings.  The 
amount of software-relevant details captured in these 
meetings varied greatly.  In the initial interviews with 

the customer,   458 user stories were captured in two 

two-hour sessions.  On the other hand, almost no 

details about the software showed up in scrum 
meetings or status meetings.  Roughly a dozen new 
details would show up in initial six-hour-meetings with 
the UI designer.  At the same time, the first story 

master found listening for these user stories to be very 

demanding.  Stories could show up at any time and he 
felt like it was necessary to pay full attention in 
meetings while without knowing exactly what was 
supposed to be noted.   
The need to improve understanding of how to focus 
in story master meetings continued with the second 

story master.  After the role transition from the original 
Story Master to the new Story Master, the process was 
going smoothly in that expectations were becoming 
clearer for which meetings the story master should 

attend. However, it was still unclear as to how the 

Story Master was successfully contributing to the Agile 

process within the meetings. One of the Story Master™s 
challenges was knowing when to capture information 
that needed to be documented as stories without being 

a burden on the Customer and other team members. 
This was challenging because stories that needed to be 
captured were getting lost in discussions related to 
design issues, negotiations among the Customer, 

programmers, and the GUI, as well as deciphering 

programming language. During such important 

discussions, the customer, is in a state of cognitive 
overload, and pausing and restarting the discussions to 
capture stories only makes such a state worse.  
A new work practice was implemented, meetings 
involved a portion of time when titles of stories would 

be written on the board whenever the Customer 

thought of them. During downtime, at the end of the 
meeting, or at a designated time the Customer and the 
Story Master would get together and turn the titles into 

formal stories.  These titles were useful because the 

Story Master would use them to guide his listening for 

further details related to the titles and they would jog 

the memory of the Customer when it came down to 
developing the titles into formal stories. Moreover, 
they reduced the amount of cognitive effort needed by 

the Customer because he no
 longer needed to switch 
back and forth from capturing complete stories to 

playing a critical role in team discussions.  T   
Developing an ear for capturing user stories 
involved learning what details to listen for during 

meetings and knowing when to interrupt a discussion 
to prevent from missing critical information. Before 
the implementation of the new work practice, the Story 

Master wasted a lot of effort capturing irrelevant 
information. Instead, what th
e Story Master needed to 
learn was to capture 
decisions
 that came out of the 
discussions. Also, it became the responsibility of the 
Story Master to interrupt the discussions when he 

thought that certain decisions needed to be captured or 

information was unclear. The team knew, in advance, 
to be prepared for this, and actually appreciated the 
extra clarification. 
Finally, developing a formal structure for building 
stories streamlined the process for knowing what 
details to capture because 
it helped categorize them. 
This story structure consists of: A Location + User + 
An Action + Goal or Purpose + Effect. Location refers 
to where the story is occurring in the system, such as 

the Rich Text Editor, the user refers to the type of user 

such as the Administrator, an action, such as Right 

Click + Menu + Copy refers to what is being done by 
the user as a means to the goal or purpose, the Goal or 
Purpose refer to the user™s objective such as Copy [a 
line of text], and the Effect, such as Text Goes to the 

Copy Buffer is what happens when the previous four 

elements are satisfied.   

 Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20115 Challenges:  
 -The Story Master idle in many meetings. 
-It is difficult for story master to recognize details as 
stories. 
-The Story Master not able to be present at all 
meetings.   

 
Solutions:
 -Develop an ear for capturing stories 
-Write Titles of stories, fill in the details of the stories 
later.   -If the Story Master is not present, have the customer 
write down the stories and discuss them later with the 

Story Master 

-Develop a structure for stories to assure that the 
correct details are captured. 
 3.2.2 Managing the Backlog for the Customer 
 How cognitive effort was reduced
:  Aside from 
prioritizing and clarification in planning meetings, the 
customer does not need to be involved in the 
maintenance of the backlog.  The story master 

decreases cognitive effort of the customer and the team 

by de-cluttering and organizing stories, finding stories 

when needed, labeling the stories in a meaningful way, 
and moving the specific stories needed for the planning 
session to an established are. In addition, the story 

master removes stories that are obsolete stories and 

duplicated stories.  All of these tasks involve 

processing information cues in order to understand the 

relationships between stories.  This can amount to a 
time consuming and messy task. In this project, the 
backlog often held 300-400 items. 

 
Evolution of the Story Master Role: 
The primary tasks 
of the story master associated with managing the 
backlog were to make sure that stories were 
understandable, to prevent duplicate stories from being 
in the backlog, and to ensure that stories were 
prioritized. This was accomplished by using feature 

groups and categorizing the stories under subprojects, 

and to delete obsolete stories. In addition, epics needed 
to be broken down into stories and dependencies 
needed to be created and checked for accuracy. Having 
someone primarily responsible for managing the 

backlog helped to reduce the duration of the sprint 

planning sessions because prior to these sessions, the 

Story Master would meet with the Customer and the 
Programming Architect to prioritize the stories and rate 
them on complexity, and to move them to the top of 
the backlog. This was also a check to make sure that all 

the stories needed to be estimated were available. This 

task could usually be done in one relatively short 

meeting. This whole process is most effective when a 
week or so prior, the Story Master meets with the 
Customer to get final approval for any new stories. 

These meetings were important even with the backlog 
well organized, since it was difficult to keep it clean of 
redundant or out-of-date stories resulting from 

changing thinking about how the system should be 

designed. In addition to organizing the backlog 

effectively, it was also important to make the user 

stories in the backlog memorable.  Especially earlier in 
the project, team members would have a hard time 
recalling what a story meant, even if it was only just 
over an iteration old. Having a formal structure for 
building stories (mentioned in the section on reducing 

the cognitive effort of capturing stories) also helped 

with understanding a story™s meaning and mitigated the 
negative outcomes of memory decay over time because 
story details that were usually forgotten using the 

previous work practice were now being remembered. 

In addition to the previously mentioned benefits, 

individuals with little exposure to the system could 

more easily understand the meaning of a story captured 
using this structure, which was critical when bringing 
in new employees, such as the testers, later in the 

project. 
 In addition to meeting with the Customer and 
Programming Architect prior to each sprint planning 
session, the Story Master would meet with the UI 
Designer to obtain ﬁwireframes,ﬂ or in other words, a 

basic, black and white draft or blueprint of specific 

features of the system that corresponded with specific 

stories that were going to be estimated, when 

applicable. Having the corresponding wireframe 
attached to the story immensely helped the team recall 
details when estimating because it added more 

meaning to the story description by providing a visual.     
 Challenges: 
   
- Changing thinking about stories results in out-of-date 
and redundant stories. 
-Memory decay makes some user stories 
unrecognizable. 
  Solutions:
 -Have meetings a week before the end of the sprint to 
assure that enough user stories are prioritized and 

ready for the sprint planning meeting.  
-Have a formal structure for user stories, 
-Include wireframe diagrams of functionality 

represented in user stories. 
 3.2.3 Reducing the cognitive effort of 
communicating stories 

 How cognitive load of customer is reduced
:  The Story 
Master can reduce cognitive effort of communicating 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20116 user stories to the developers and UI designers.  
Several members of the team, especially the 

developers, need to know important details about up-
coming user stories.  Explaining and clarifying the 
details of these user stories requires that the customer 
think about the delivery of several information cues 

which results in higher cognitive effort.  

  
Evolution of the Story Master Role: 
Initially stories 
were developed between the story master and 

customer, then taken to the UI designer, and then 

presented to the developers in the sprint planning 

meetings.  Problems with this workflow were 

discovered as the functionality to develop became 

more complex.  In the first iteration, development 
focused on the login screens for the tool.  The 
functionality did not require much design work as they 

were typical to many software applications (e.g. login 

and user management).  After iteration 2, however, as 

the team began moving towards designing and 

developing parts of the software that needed more 
design input, the UI designer requested that stories 
come out of his designs and discussions with the 

customer instead of designing the user interface to fit 

the story.  Stories very often contained information 

about how user needs should bet in addition to 
containing information about what the needs of the 
user were.  These stories unnecessarily constrained the 

UI designer.  Additionally, the story designer could not 
work independent of the customer since most of the 

time he required the customer™s knowledge of the 

user™s needs when developing the software.  It became 
a rule that stories be developed after meetings with the 
UI designer.   This was not a hard rule, however.  
Sometimes stories would be developed which did not 

have the UI designer™s blessing.  Currently the UI 

designer generates many of the user stories from 

sessions with the customer.  
 The developers also had an interest in stories before 
they were submitted for sprint planning meetings as 

well for a couple reasons.  First, UI design decisions 

were often a concern for the UI developer on the team.  

To save development time, the development team 
reused existing UI components built in EXTJS 
(Extended Javascript).  The nature of the UI and the 
functionality could be altered to take advantage of the 

reuse opportunity.  Secondly, the customer and UI 

designer needed feedback from the developers about 

the feasibility of the interface and the difficulty of the 
interface.  These stories needed to be understood in 
detail.  For example, in one case, an ﬁundoﬂ command 
was included in the acceptance tests of a story about 

cutting objects (as part of a cut and paste sequence).  

The cut story was estimated and became part of the 

sprint without the developers reading the associated 
acceptance tests.  When the developers prepared to 
develop the story, they noticed the undo functionality 

in the acceptance test tie  had to meet with the 
customer to re-estimate the number of story points to 
complete the story.  The inclusion of the undo 
functionality increased the number of points from 5 to 

25. 
As user stories continued to become more complex, 
it became apparent that it would be useful to keep track 
of more details about them.  To increase the likelihood 
that important details were included as often as 

possible, a format was developed which assured that 

the customer included inputs and outputs of the story. 

This format helped the customer think in enough detail.  

It also created expectations for how much the 
developers should expect in terms of details.   
 
Challenges: 
 -User stories contain ﬁWhatﬂ informationŠsimply 

communicating them to the UI designer doesn™t work.  

Customer must be consulted to get at the ﬁwhy.ﬂ 
-Systems architect needs some heads up on what 
stories will be developed next.   

-Important details are sometimes omitted from 

communication of stories between developers and 

customer. 
 Solutions:
 -Allow UI designer and developers to have input on 

how a story should be implemented. 

-Have a format that assures that important details are 

communicated. 
 3.2.4 Reducing the Customer™s Cognitive Effort of 
Creating Acceptance Tests 
 How cognitive load is reduced
:  Creating tests involves 
assuring that the details of how the story should be 
tested are included in acceptan
ce tests.   This involves 
processing and generating several information cues 
about the user stories details, until enough details have 

been made explicit as an acceptance test. 
On a weekly basis, the Story Master and the 
Systems architect would meet for about an hour to 

discuss various issues such as test cases and an update 

on progress. When discussing test cases, sometimes the 

Story Master would need help testing stories related to 

the system™s architecture where observable effects 

were not as obvious from the user perspective. The 
progress update was mostly a checkup to see how 
things were going, and a time to discuss areas where 

more focus was needed and future plans for the 

software. This weekly meeting was helpful because the 

Story Master and Systems Architect did not often work 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20117 in the same area. In fact, the Story Master performed 
most of his work from home.   

 Challenges: 
 -Accepting the software requires consultation with the 
systems architect to understand how the software was 

implemented in some cases.   

 
Solutions:
 -The Story Master can meet with the systems architect 

regularly to determine the implementation of the user 

stories. 
 4. Analysis   
   In this section, we will analyze the success of the 
story master role using Conboy™s [1] framework for 
assessing the agility of an information systems 
development component (ISD).  Conboy defines the 
agility of an ISD as: 
 ﬁThe continual readiness of an ISD method to rapidly 
or inherently create change, proactively or reactively 

embrace change, and learn from change while 

contributing to perceived customer value (economy, 

quality, and simplicity), through its collective 
components and relationships with its environmentﬂ (p. 
340). 
From this definition the framework is derived: 

1. To be agile, an ISD method component 
must 
contribute to 
one or more of the following: 
(i) creation of change 
(ii) proaction in advance of change 

(iii) reaction to change 

(iv) learning from change 

2. To be agile, an ISD method component 
must 
contribute to one 
or more of the following, and 
must not 
detract from 
any: 
(i) perceived economy 

(ii) perceived quality 

(iii) perceived simplicity 
3. To be agile, an ISD method component 
must 
be continually 
ready i.e. minimal time and cost to prepare the 
component for use. 
We will analyze each task performed by the story 
master in terms of the framework.  Note that the 

analysis of the role is in its current state. 
Reducing the Cognitive Effort of Capturing Stories
 +While the customer must still affirm user story titles 
with the story master following meetings, the story 
master facilitates the creation of change by allowing 

the customer more bandwidth to focus on design 
decisions during meetings.   
+The user story capturing process evolved in a way 
that conserved quality while at the same time 
increasing economy.  Story titles caught the gist of user 

stories and could be noted by the UI designer in case of 

the story master™s absence.  The quality of the stories 

was conserved because the customer could verify and 

flesh out the stories in an easy-to-remember format 
later.  Reducing the Cognitive Effort of Managing the 
Backlog 
+The customer did not have to manage the backlog, 
again allowing him to focus on story creation.  The 
backlog was kept free of obsolete and duplicate stories 
so that the customer could quickly reference and 

negotiate user stories with developers in planning 

meetings.  This contributed to the customer™s ability to 

prepare for opportunities to change presented in 

planning meetings 
+The backlog also increased overall economy without 
sacrificing quality or simplicity, as the customer did 

not have to perform maintenance tasks 

 Reducing the Cognitive E
ffort of Communicating 
stories 
 In the end, the user story did not act in this role.  The 
backlog became the sole point of communication of 
user stories. 

 Reducing the Cognitive Effort of Creating 
Acceptance Tests 
 +The customer was able to get a sense of how the 
software worked without needing to understand 
whether or not the minute details of the software 
worked.  
 Transition from Original
 Story Master to Current 
 In order to discuss the continual readiness of the story 
master role, we talk here about the second story 
master™s assumption of the role. 
 During iteration eight, a new Story Master was 
brought on the team to replace the original Story 

Master, who had been assigned different 
responsibilities within the
 organization. Far unlike the 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20118 original Story Master who had a background in 
information systems and was working on a Ph.D. in 

management information systems, the new story 
master had a background in psychology, and was a first 
year graduate student working on a master™s degree in 
industrial and organizational psychology. In addition, 

the new Story Master had absolutely no prior exposure 

to the Agile software development methodology.  At 

the time of this transition, the role had hardly matured, 
and there was still uncertainty as to how the team 
would benefit the most from the Story Master role.  
The immediate responsibilities assigned to the 
Story Master were: maintenance of the backlog, 

capturing of stories, and creation of test cases. To 

become familiar with these responsibilities, and as a 
form of training, the new Story Master shadowed the 
Original Story Master for one iteration, and then they 

switched positions during the subsequent iteration. In 

other words, the new Story Master took an active lead 

while being closely monitored by the original Story 

Master. This training procedure was successful as 
indicated by the fact that the new Story Master felt 
comfortable in the position and the other team 

members were pleased with his performance. 

Evaluation of performance, however, was mostly based 

on the new Story Master™s work ethic and how well he 
adapted to the project, and not on the betterment of the 
Agile process. The lack of focus on the latter was 

likely due to lack of understanding and maturation of 
the story master role. 
 -In short, this may have been a weakness of the role, 
especially at first when it 
was still evolving.  It took 
both story masters several iterations before they could 
recognize stories to capture 
and to be able to create 
adequate stories.  Several aspects of the story master 

process have improved this however.  The template for 

stories mentioned in the story capturing section helped 
with this, in addition to the practice of capturing story 
titles.   
 Overall Assessment of Agility 
 The story master role contributes to change mainly by 
facilitating the customer™s ability to create, prepare for, 
and react to it.  It also contributes to quality without 

compromising economy.  While we do not have 

quantitative evidence of the comparative economic 

cost or benefit of the story master role, it is highly 
likely that the role is more economical than a customer 
role or many of the other possible roles that would 
replace it.  Examples of such roles could include the 

product owner, a business analyst, a developer, or the 

scrum master.  Each of these roles has a wider skill set 

than the story master.  As we have shown, the story 
master does not require extensive educational or 
domain training to fill.  
  5. Discussion and Conclusion 
 We presented the story master role to illustrate 
aspects of the customer role of Agile software 
development methods that may be considered 
cognitive overheadŠcognitive effort that the customer 
does not need to perform.  While the story master was 
successful in reducing the cognitive effort of capturing 

stories, maintaining the backlog, and performing 

acceptance tests, the development of the role to fulfill 

these tasks did not come without challenges.  Many of 
these challenges have been addressed through the 
evolution of the work practices of the role.  However, 

some of the difficulties of the role can only be  

overcome through experience.   
We evaluated the story master role in terms of its 
agility as an Information Systems development 

component and found that it contributes to the 

development of change in a way that is more 

economical than having the customer perform these 

roles alone and does not detract from the quality of the 

work performed by the customer. The story master is 
most applicable to projects with substantially complex 
requirements.  When there are fewer requirements, 

there may not be enough work for the story master to 

perform.  Additionally, this project was not subject to 

changing requirements from external factors.  The user 

stories changed frequently due to new insights gained 
about how the software should be design.  Our case 
study is also unique in that the story master role 

supported a customer who had a knowledge of all the 
requirements.   
While we were able to assess the value of the Story 
Master as an Agile Software Development method, we 
emphasize that this is exploratory research. The main 
contribution of this study was to identify the existence 

of a phenomena in a real life context: transferrable 

cognitive effort.  Future research should seek to 

validate the decrease in cognitive effort by the 
customer through a set of studies that provides for a 
baseline comparison of the customer™s cognitive effort 
with and without the role.  Future research should also 

explore the effectiveness of the story master role in 

other settings to see if our findings are replicated as 

well as whether or not the story master role is 
constrained by other factors than project complexity.    
6. References 
[1] K. Conboy, "Agility from First Principles: 
Reconstructing the Concept of Agility in Information 
Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20119 Systems Development"
. INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
RESEARCH, 2009. 20(3): p. 329-354. 
[2] D. Rubenstein. 
Standish Group Report: There's 
Less Development Chaos Today
. Software 
Development Times  2007  [cited; Available from: 
http:// 

www.sdtimes.com/content/article.aspx?ArticleID=302

47. 
[3] H.F. Hofmann and F. Lehner, "Requirements 
Engineering as a Success Factor in Software Projects"
. IEEE Software, 2001. 18(4): p. 58-66. 
[4] A. van Lamsweerde, "Goal-Oriented Requirements 
Engineering: A Guided Tour". 2001. p. 249. 
[5] W. Damm and D. Harel, "Breathing life into 
message sequence charts."
. Formal Methods in 
Systems Design, 2001. 19(1): p. 45-80. 
[6] A. Sutcliffe, "Scenario-based requirements 
engineering", in 
Requirements Engineering 
Conference, 2003. Proceedings. 11th IEEE 

International
. 2003. p. 320-329. 
[7] N. Desai, A.U. Mallya, A.K. Chopra, and M.P. 
Singh, "Interaction protocols as design abstractions for 
business processes"
. IEEE Transactions Software 
Engineering, 2005. 32(12): p. 1015-1027. 
[8] K. Beck and M. Fowler, Planning Extreme 
Programming. 2000: Addison-Wesley Longman 
Publishing Co., Inc. 160  
[9] M. Cohn, User Stories Applied: For Agile Software 
Development. 2004: Addison Wesley Longman 

Publishing Co., Inc. . 
[10] M. Groeneveld. 
Scrum: The Mythical Product 
Owner Role
.  2008  [cited 2010 June 15]; 
http://blog.xebia.com/2008/05/22/scrum-the-mythical-
product-owner-role/]. 
[11] A. Martin, R. Biddle, and J. Noble, "The XP 
Customer Role in Practice: Three Studies", in 
Agile 
Development Conference
. 2004. 
[12] P. Barrouillet, S. Bernardin, S. Portrat, E. 
Vergauwe, and V. Camos, "Time and Cognitive Load 
in Working Memory"
. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 2007. 

33(3): p. 570-585. 
[13] J. Sutherland and K. Schwaber (2010) 
Scrum 
Guide
. Retrieved 06-02-2010 from Scrum.org Volume,   
[14] J. Sweller, J. van Merrienboer, and F. Paas, 
"Cognitive Architecture and Instructional Design"
. Educational Psychology Review, 1998. 10(3): p. 251-
296. 
[15] P. Barrouillet, S. Bernardin, and V.r. Camos, 
"Time Constraints and Resource Sharing in Adults' 

Working Memory Spans"
. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology General, 2004. 133(1): p. 83-100. 
[16] M. Harris, L., R.W. Collins, and A.R. Hevner, 
"Control of Flexible Software Development Under 

Uncertainty"
. Information Systems Research, 2009. 
20(3): p. 400-419. 
[17] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. van Bennekum, A. 
Cockburn, W. Cunningham, M. Fowler, J. Grenning, J. 
Highsmith, R.E. Jeffries, J. Kern, B. Marick, R.C. 

Martin, S. Mellor, K. Schwaber, J. Sutherland, and D. 

Thomas. 
Manifesto for Agile Software Development
.  2001  [cited (avialable at www.agilemanifesto.org). 
[18] K. Beck, "Embracing Change with Extreme 
Programming"
. Computer, 1999. 32(10): p. 70-77 %U 
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=619045.621348. 
[19] I. Patton, "Ambiguous Business Value Harms 
Software Products", in 
Software, IEEE
. 2008. 
[20] L. Cao and B. Ramesh, "Agile Requirements 
Engineering Practices: An Empirical Study"
. IEEE Softw., 2008. 25(1): p. 60-67 %U 
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1339828.134007

0.  Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 201110