 The Many Lives of an Agile Story:  Design Processes, Design Products, and 
Understandings in a Large-Scale Agile Development Project 
 Aaron Read 
Center for Collaboration Science 
University of Nebraska Omaha 
aread@unomaha.edu 
 Robert O. Briggs 
MIS Department  
San Diego State University 
rbriggs@mail.sdsu.edu 
Abstract
 In Agile Software Development (ASD), 
stakeholders use stories to stimulate conversations 

that create and convey understanding of software 

requirements.  Some authors have argued that ASD 

methods have limited applicability to large-scale 

projects because agile stories are not sufficient to 

capture the complexities of up-front design.  This 
paper reports a 2.5-year field study of how an ASD 
team for a complex software system adapted the user 

story concept and the Scrum approach.  The team 

sought to create a convention for representing agile 
stories which could capture the complexities of the 
system requirements without burdening the team with 

unneeded documentation.  They developed eight 
different ways to represent a story. The core 
representation of the approach was called a 

HyperEpic, 
a structured
 collection of closely-related 
HyperStories.  HyperEpics required 90-99% fewer 

words than conventional specifications. Because of 

their dense form, Hyper-epics were not useful for 

other phases in the design/build processes.  The team 
evolved a design/build work practice that proceeded 
in stages.  In each stage, stories underwent a one or 
more transformations.  Each transformation 

represented stories differently to create varied kinds 

of understandings among different stakeholder sets.  

The team was able to gain the benefits of ASD – 

faster development cycles, less documentation, rapid 
adaptation to insights and conditions. 
 1. Introduction  
 While the use of Agile Software Development 
(ASD) is on the rise, and ASD teams are seeing faster 

times to market, 
ASD methods have not generally 
been considered appropriate for large-scale complex 
projects [1].  One goal of agile methodologies is to 

improve efficiency by reducing the cognitive burden 

of capturing and updating complex system 

specifications.  In an environment where 

requirements change quickly, exhaustive 
specification documents would have to be repeatedly 
reworked or scrapped.  In Agile methods, developers 
do not create exhaustive designs before they start 
building the system.  Rather, they design only a small 

part of the system at a time, and do so only just prior 

to the time when that small part will be built.   
Agile requirements modeling, the use of low-
fidelity/low formality requirements modeling 

methods,  has emerged as an effort to introduce 
requirements modeling in a way that still achieves 
efficiencies [2]. In ASD, requirements are often 

captured in the form of stories, which are one-to-two 

sentence descriptions 
of a user’s 
interaction the 
system [3, 4].  The purpose of an agile story is to 

stimulate face-to-face conversation among system 

stakeholders to create understandings about why a 
capability is valuable and how it could be realized.  
Face-to-face communication among small groups can 
be rich, efficient, and accurate compared to static 
documentation, which that may become outdated as 

understanding grows and concepts change over time.   
As projects grows larger, however, their 
complexity increases with the number of 
requirements that must be de-conflicted, the number 
and diversity of stakeholder interests that must be 

accommodated, and the number of changes that must 

be managed [5].  The need to understand and analyze 

the design of software becomes greater as the size 

and complexity of the project increases.  Face-to-face 
conversation among stakeholders becomes 
increasingly difficult, and becomes a less-and-less 
effective way to create and convey clear 
understandings about the system.  ASD typically 

does not use formal requirements modeling and 

documentation, which makes it difficult to analyze 

large collections of requirements for completeness, 

consistency and conflicts, and provides little basis for 

evaluating the potential impact of changes to 
requirements [6, 7].  Lacking formal documentation, 
project knowledge rests only in the minds of the 

people who participate in the discussions that gave 
rise to it.  It can therefore be difficult to transfer 
project knowledge to a large team.  Thus, ASD teams 
working on large scale projects struggle to balance 
the need for precise, verifiable detailed designs with 
2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.68453192012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences978-0-7695-4525-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2012.6845319 the need to minimize the cognitive load and wasted 
effort that can accompany detailed specifications.   
This paper reports a 2.5 year exploratory study of 
that struggle in a large-scale ASD project in which 
the authors played several active roles, among them 
customer, product owner, user, storymaster, and test 
master.  Throughout the life of the project, team 
members tried to devise a convention for representing 

agile stories that would be sufficiently parsimonious 

and timely that undue effort was not wasted in their 

creation, yet sufficiently detailed that the nuances and 

interdependencies among the requirements could be 
captured and conveyed.    
In the end, the team developed eight different 
conventions for representing a story. They evolved a 

design/build work practice during which stories 

underwent a sequence of transformations.  Each 

transformation represented stories at a different level 
of abstraction or detail, or in a different format to 
create different kinds of understandings among 
different stakeholder sets.  
In the following sections, we present our research 
methods and describe the project context. We then 

present the stages of the design/build work practice 

that emerged.  For each stage we discuss the work 

process, the ways stories were transformed and 
represented, and the understandings the 
transformations were meant to support.  We discuss 

the merits and disadvantages of the emergent 
design/build approach, and propose future research.
  2.  Methods 
 This research could be characterized as Action 
Research, because the authors participated actively in 

the design/build work practices under study [8].  This 
work could be characterized as Design Science [9] 
because its objects of inquiry are design processes 

and design products, because it was informed by the 

academic literature on ASD, and because it 

contributes this study back to the knowledge base.  
This study could be characterized as exploratory 
research [10] because it seeks to discover and 

describe phenomena in the context where they 

manifest. Accordingly, data collection methods for 

this study were primarily qualitative.  We recorded 

daily observations, events, conversations, and 
interviews in our field notes.  We collected and 
archived project documents and e-mail exchanged.  
After each design/build cycle, we conducted a 

qualitative retrospective about the advantages and 

limitations of the current work practices.  During 

each retrospective, we conducted design discussions 
with key stakeholders about how to improve the 
design/build work practice, and how to improve story 
representation formats for the next cycle.  

 3.  The Project 
 A group of civilian, military, and academic 
stakeholders (of which we were members) from the 

U.S. and the Netherlands agreed to build a new rapid 

development environment for collaborative software 

applications called 
ActionCenters.  
Drawing on experience with earlier prototypes, 
we anticipated the project would require 
approximately 500,000 to 1,000,000 lines of new 
code.  
The team had a budget of $3,600,000 USD, which 
they anticipated would only be sufficient to build the 

core functionality of the proposed system.  Further 

funding would depend heavily on the degree to which 

the funding agencies could derive value from first 
round of development. A two-week project kickoff 
meeting was held in early January of 2009 in the 

U.S., during which a preliminary architecture for the 

system was defined.  A second two week session was 

held in March, 2009 in the Netherlands, during which 
most architectural issues were settled, and a roadmap 
was created for the creation of key capabilities.  
 The ActionCenters project team consisted of a one 
Problem Owner (PO), a System Architect (SA), four 

full-time senior developers, two part time developers, 

a UI designer (UI), and a Story Master (SM).  Each 

professional team member teamed with an 

intern/mentee. A third of the  way through the 

project, the testing team formed consisting of a Test 
Lead (TL) and two testers.  
The PO had been involved in the design and 
development of an earlier full-scale thick-client 
proof-of-concept prototype of the system. None of 
the prototype code could be used in the field-grade 

version of the system because the team decided to 

implement the new system on a thin-client platform.  

None of the developers of the prototype system was 
involved in developing the production version.  
Full formal specifications for the proof-of-concept 
prototype system existed. The PO  and the team on 

the original prototype development team had spent a 

year writing those specifications before starting to 

code the system. Those specifications could not be 
reused, however, because they were too closely tied 
to the original development platform. The team found 
that it was not possible to reverse engineer the 

requirements and constraints from the detailed 

system specifications. The PO had a detailed 

understanding of what the capabilities and constraints 
of the system should be.  Those requirements 
remained stable over the life of the project.  
53205320 During the project, the development team logged 
11,084 hours of work, and a comparable level of 

effort was devoted to design and test efforts.  As of 

the writing of this paper, the core functionality of the 
ActionCenters 
platform has been completed.  
Collaboration Engineers can use it to design, publish, 
and run custom collaborative environments with a 
wide range of configurations.    
 3.1 Selection of an Agile Software Development 
Methodology. 
At the beginning of the project, only 
the PO knew the system requirements. The PO had 
other duties in addition to the project, and so could 
not devote full time to communicating the 

requirements to the development team, and was not 

willing or able to spend another year writing new 

specifications.  The PO and development team 

therefore decided to use an Agile development 
approach for the project, hoping to eliminate the 
cognitive load associated with writing formal 
specifications. The PO also expected to take 

advantage of the flexibility of developing software 

iteratively.  None of the development team had 

previous experience with Agile methodologies. 
 The development team established work practices 
based on the Scrum (Highsmith and Cockburn 2001). 
The SA also served as the Scrum Master. The team 
agreed to develop software in 30-day iterations called 

“sprints”
. The PO, the scrum master, and SM would 
work together to decide which stories should be 
implemented in each iteration. Each sprint would 

begin with a one-to-two day planning meeting where 

the stakeholders would review what had been 
accomplished and learned in the previous sprint. 
Then developers would estimate the level of effort 

required for stories to be built in the next cycle. 

Developers made their estimates in terms of story 

points [4]. A story point roughly equated to an ideal 

half a day of work for a single developer. During the 

2.5 years, the team executed 2,771 story points.  
Stories were managed in a widely used 
commercial  system called VersionOne.  During each 
sprint, developers held a daily 15 minute stand-up 

meeting to report what they had achieved the 

previous day, what they would achieve that day, and 

what barriers they faced.  
 3.2  The Challenge.  
The PO was co-located with the 
development team at a university, but was constantly 
pressed with other duties, and so could only spend 

about ¼ of his time on the project.  During the month 

before the technical team began to write code, the PO 
and SM met several times to write stories for the 
development team.  Lacking experience, the PO and 
SM wrote  stories were short, vague and ambiguous, 
such as, “
Login to system
,”  (note that this example 
says nothing about who should be allowed to login 

under what conditions, nor about what a
ccess 
controls should be in place for login), and  “
We 
should be able to paste agenda items onto a project.
” (note also several missing details).   
During the first sprint planning session, the 
development team asked few questions about the 

stories, but estimated the level of  effort for the 

stories and committed to develop them over the 

course of the sprint.  During the sprint, being 

inexperienced with agile methods, the developers and 
PO did not discuss what the stories meant, nor how 
they should be implemented.   At the end of the first 

sprint, the PO was disappointed  that many of the 

features did not function as intended, and some, 

although computationally correct, could not be used 

for their intended purpose.   A frustrated programmer 
said, “The story didn’t say I should do that, so I 
didn’t do it.”  
 For the next sprint, the PO tried to write formal 
specifications, but found that the level of effort 

required would far exceed the av
ailable time.  The 
team  concluded that the project would fail if they 

could not find a faster way to communicate about the 

requirements.  They set out to find a way to write 
stories that would convey sufficient detail about 
requirements that the team could develop satisfactory 

code, while requiring less cognitive effort to create 
and maintain than formal specifications.  
 3.3 Toward a Solution.
 Over the next several 
sprints, the PO, the SA, and the SM, with input from 
all other members of the team, devised, piloted, and 
rejected several story formats, before conceiving on 

an approach they called HyperEpics (Table 1).   
A HyperEpic was a structured collection of 
closely related HyperStories.  The HyperStory was 

similar to a conventional agile story, but it followed a 

five-part structured format:   
In some 
place
, a person in some 
role
 takes some 
action
, for some 
goal, which produces some 
effect
.   
For example,  
STORY:  
Delete Activity 
In the ActionCenter Builder, a collaboration engineer 
deletes an activity from the Agenda to eliminate it 
from the work practice.  The activity disappears from 

the ActionCenter Builder and appears in the recycle 
bin. 
END STORY 
Place
 refers to the aspect of the system where the 
story takes place (e.g. the ActionCenter Builder).  

User Role
 refers to the type of user who can execute 
the action (e.g. a collaboration engineer). 
Action
 refers to what the user will do in the system (e.g. 
delete an activity).  
Goal
 refers to the reason the user 
53215321 wants to execute the action (e.g. to eliminate an 
activity from a work practice).  
Effect
 states what 
should happen when the user takes the action (e.g. an 

activity disappears from the agenda and appears in 
the recycle bin).   
Any aspect of a HyperStory that would be 
repeated frequently  in other stories was abstracted 
into a reusable parameter.  Any objects or events for 

which a story would be repeated were likewise 

abstracted to reusable parameters with multiple 

values.  Parameters were inserted in brackets into a 

HyperStory, for example:   
STORY:  
Delete [Agenda Item] 
In a [CACE Editor] a [user] deletes an [agenda item] 
from the agenda in order to eliminate it from the work 
practice.  The [agenda item] disappears from all [CACE 

Editor]s and appears in the recycle bin. 
END STORY 
PARAMETERS 
[CACE Editor]:  Agenda editor; FPM Editor; ActionCenter 
Builder 
[user]: Collaboration Engineer; Guest] 

[agenda item]: Phase; Activity 
END PARAMETERS 
Closely related HyperStories that shared parameters 
were typically developed in parallel as a HyperEpic 

like that illustrated in Table 1.  A unified list of 

parameter values from all stories appears at the end 

of the HyperEpic.  HyperEpics were typically 
composed of five to fifteen stories.  
The approach substantially reduced cognitive load 
and time-on-task for design documentation, while 
providing significantly more details than 

conventional stories.  
The HyperEpic format required 
90-99% fewer words than were needed for formal 

specifications.  The two HyperStories in Table 1, for 

example took the place of 144 conventional 

specifications.  Further, the HyperEpics were more-
easily maintained than formal specifications, because 
a single revision to a parameter would propagate to 

all stories where the parameter appeared.  Because 
the logic of a story could be considered separately 
from the values of its parameters, the format made it 

easier to validate consistency and completeness of 

requirements.   
Because of their dense, compact form, however, 
HyperEpics were not useful for many phases of the 
project.  Programmers, for example, found it difficult 

to hunt through a HyperEpic to find the particular 

story on which they were to work, and then to work 

back-and-forth between the story and the parameter 
list, which could be several pages away. Further, 
many parameterized HyperStories, although they 
were compact, were, nonetheless, too large to be 

executed in a single sprint, and so were not a useful 

unit of analysis for estimating development effort for 
a sprint. The team therefore evolved a design/build 
work practice that proceeded in stages.  In each stage, 
stories underwent a one or more transformations to 
produce artifacts that would be useful for the goals of 

the phase.   
In the following section, we describe the phases 
of the work practice.   We present the understandings 

that each phase was meant to create, and explain the 
transformation(s) that stories underwent so those 
understandings could be reached.  We provide 

examples of each story format.   
 4. The HyperEpics Design/Build Work 
Practice 
 The HyperEpics work practice proceeded in 
three concurrent cycles:  The design cycle, the build 
cycle, and the test cycle.  During a given sprint, the 

design team would design the capabilities that were 

to be built in the following sprint; the developers 

would build the capabilities that had been designed in 

the previous sprint, and the testers would test the 
capabilities that had been developed in the previous 
sprint.  A story was born and transformed during the 

design cycle, further transformed several times 

during the build cycle, and transformed again for the 

test cycle.   Stories   were initially created during the 
Preliminary Design phase. 
 4.1 Preliminary design.  
The purpose of the 
preliminary phase was to understand the goals of the 

users of proposed system capabilities, and to design 

high-level interface/user experience (UI/UX) and 

technical approaches for providing those capabilities.  

The system under development was so complex that 

it presented some daunting (UI/UX) challenges.  One 
interface, for example, was sufficiently challenging 
that it took 3 months of repeated efforts before the 
team found an elegant solution that both supported 
the complexity of users’ needs, and presented a 

simple-to-use user interface.   
The team found it useful to develop UI/UX and 
technical implementation solutions simultaneously, 

because it was frequently the case that two equally 
useful UI/UX designs would require very different 
levels of development effort.  Further, the technical 

people often provided inspiration for UI/UX 

solutions, and the UI/UX people often provided 

inspiration for technical solutions.   
53225322 Preliminary design processes were conducted in 
weekly and bi-weekly face-to-face meetings that 
lasted four to eight hours.  Typically, these meetings 

involved the PO, UI, SA, and SM.  The inputs to this 

phase were usually a) a system aspect from the 
development roadmap; and b) oral statements of user 
goals.  PO and UI typically made a series of rapid 

sketches of possible user interface solutions on a 

whiteboard to support the UI/UX discussions.  PO 

and SA sometimes sketched data models on the 
whiteboard to support discussion of approaches for 
technical implementation.  All participants 
contributed to all aspects of the discussion.  When the 
group reached consensus on an approach, some 
member would turn to the SM and say, “Catch a 
story 
title 
on this.”  
This was the first format for a story.   
During the design session, story titles were 
captured as brief, sometimes cryptic phrase or 
sentence that with just enough information to remind 

the PO and SM about the nature of the solution to 

which the group had agreed, for example: 
“Lobby roles for newly created accounts
” “Alphabetize the Explore
” “FFFIBBU on Population Rules”
   Table 1.  Example of a small HyperEpic.  
A HyperEpic is a structured collection of closely related HyperStories.  
A HyperStory follows a structure format:  In some 
place, 
a person in some 
role 
takes some 
action, 
for some 
goal, 
which produces some 
effect.  
Any aspect of a story that woul
d be repeated in other stories,
 and any objects or 
events for which a story would be repeated are abstracted to reusable parameters.  Parameters appear in brackets 
in a HyperStory. A list of parameter values appears at the end of the HyperEpic.  HyperStories in the same 
HyperEpic typically share one or more parameters.  The two
 HyperStories shown here take the place of 144 
conventional specifications 
 EPIC:  
Open and Close Element editors 
STORY: 
 Open Element Editor 
In [a CASE Editor], a Collaboration Engineer [opens] the element editor  for an [object] to configure the 
features of  that [object].  The element editor for that [object] appears on a new tab in the CACE editor 

pane.  Fields with values set appear with those values.  Fields with no values set appear empty.   
BUSINESS RULES: 
The first time an element editor for an [object] is opened, default values will be set for all fields
 END RULES 
END STORY 
STORY:
 Close Element Editor 
In the CACE, A Collaboration Engineer [closes] an [object] element editor to hide the configurable features 
of that [object] to reduce visual load.  The element editor for the object closes.  The values of all fields in 
the element editor are saved to the server. 
BUSINESS RULES 
A user cannot not close an element editor until the all its fields have displayed
 END RULES 
END STORY 

PARAMETERS: 
[a CACE Editor]
  Explorer Tree;  ActionCenter Builder; Screen Editor; Tool Editor 
[closes] 
 clicks the x on the element editor tab; right clicks element editor tab and selects close; clicks the 
close button on the element editor 
[object]  
Project; Phase; Activity; Role; Screen; Tool; Component; Control
 [opens] 
Double-clicks; Right-
clicks and selects “Edit”; Clicks the File menu and selects “Edit”
 END PARAMETERS 
END EPIC
 53235323 The group would discuss the wording of the 
story title, take a picture of whiteboard diagrams, and 

then move on to the next design challenge.     
At the end of the meeting, as a memory aid, some 
of the more complex story titles would be 
transformed to a somewhat  more structured format, 
similar to, but not as complete as that of a 
HyperStory, for example, the story title:  
 
“Open Activity Element Editor
”  might be elaborated to read:  
 “in the CACE tool, A collaboration engineer 
opens an Activity Element Editor with the 

mouse or keyboard.”
    

Elaborated Story Titles could include some or all of 
the HyperStory elements, Place + User Role + Action 
+ Goal + Effect.  Most did not include the goal, 
however, and they never included parameters.   
The final design products for the Preliminary 
Design Phase were Story Titles and photographs of 

whiteboard sketches. The story titles represented 

design commitments agreed to between the PO, SA, 

and UI.  The elaborated title format helped to assure 
that the important details of the discussion were 
captured.  These products were well suited to 

capturing the understandings achieved in the design 
phase because they required very little effort to 
create, which meant that capturing them did not 

disrupt the design process.  They had a limited shelf 

life, however.  If they were not taken into a Detailed 
Design session within a day or two, the stakeholders 
would forget the nuances and details of the design 

approaches to which they had agreed.  On several 

occasions, when the team waited too long to execute 

the next phase, they had to repeat the preliminary 

design for some aspect of the system. 
 4.2. Detailed Design. 
The goal of the detailed design 
phase was to create complete and consistent catalog 
of the functionality required for system capabilities 

being designed.  The goal was not to create complete 

specifications.  Rather, it was to create a complete set 

of expectations that could be discussed with the 

development team.  The inputs to this phase were the 

story titles and whiteboard sketches produced during 
Preliminary Design.   
In this phase, The PO and SM would transform 
Story Titles into fully parameterized HyperEpics 

(Table 1).  HyperEpics were high-level narrative of 
the user’
s experience with the capability.  A 
HyperEpics contained a collection of related titled, 
parameterized stories, the list of parameters the 
stories shared, and a list of business rules that 
clarified the expected behavior of the capability.  

Story parameters represent, for example, lists of 

objects to which the story applied, or lists of events 
that would initiate the story’s action.  Business rules 
might include, for example, algorithms for 
calculations, or constraints on actions specified in the 
story.  
The Detailed design Phase almost always exposed 
issues and opportunities that had not been considered 

during Preliminary Design, so HyperEpics typically 

contained many more stories than were represented 
by the story titles created in the previous phase.   
During the Detailed Design phase, UI would 
often transform whiteboard sketches into two kinds 

of formal drawings: wire frames or pixel perfect 

comps.  A wire frame diagram represented screen 

elements as simple shapes, showed their relative 
positions and proportions on the screen, and showed 
the wording that should be used, for example, on 
menus, buttons, and screen prompts.  Pixel perfect 

comps showed exact representations of user 

interfaces down to the position and color of very 

pixel on the screen.  Wire frames were faster to draw, 

but some user interfaces had so many nuanced details 

that comps were a faster way to communicate the 
requirements to the programmers.  Wireframes, 
Comps, and whiteboard diagrams were attached as 

digital objects to the HyperEpics to which they 
pertained.  
The final products of the Detailed Design Phase 
were HyperEpics with their associated Wireframes 

and Comps.  The transformation of story titles into 
HyperEpics helped the PO and SM understand 
whether the design of a capability had matured 

sufficiently for the team to consider its development.  

HyperEpics also gave PO, SM, and SA a better 

understanding of the relationships, overlaps, and 

dependencies among capabilities; HyperStories that 

shared parameter sets frequently wound up sharing 

code.   
 4.3 Story Evaluation Phase 
The goal of the Story 
Evaluation phase was to understand the relative 

importance of each story for the success of the 

project, and the technical complexity of 

implementing it.  The inputs to the Story Evaluation 

Phase were the HyperEpics  and UI designs from the 
Detailed Design phase.  
 While HyperEpics were a very fast way to capture 

complete and consistent requirements, they were too 

dense and too complex to be evaluated as a unit.  The 
Story Evaluation Phase therefore began with the SM 
transforming the HyperEpics into stand-alone 
HyperStories.  Each story appeared with its own 
53245324 parameter set, and its own business rules, for 
example:
  STORY: 
 Open Element Editor 
In [a CASE Editor], a Collaboration Engineer [opens] 
the element editor  for an [object] to configure the 
features of  that [object].  The element editor for that 
[object] appears on a new tab in the CACE editor pane.  

Fields with values set  appear with those values 
displayed.  Fields with no values set appear empty.   
BUSINESS RULES: 
The first time an element editor for an [object] is 
opened, default values will be set for all fields 
END RULES 
PARAMETERS: 
[a CACE Editor]  Explorer Tree;  ActionCenter 
Builder; Screen Editor; Tool Editor 
 [opens] Double-clicks; Right-clicks and selects 
“Edit”; Clicks the File menu and selects “Edit”
  [object]  Project; Phase; Activity; Role; Screen; 
Tool; Component; Control 
END PARAMETERS 
END STORY 
One goal of breaking down the HyperEpics was to 
decompose them into estimateable chunks.  Some of 
the resulting HyperStories were still too large to 
estimate.  These would be split into separate stories, 

each with a different subset of the parameters.  The 

SM entered all HyperStories into the backlog of the 

VersionOne Story Management system. When 

possible, the SM linked supporting artifacts, such as 

diagrams to serve as a reminder about proposed 
design details. 
One week before the end of a sprint, PO and SA 
would transform further by adding priority and 
complexity ratings to each story.  The PO would 

assign one of four qualitative priority ratings to each 

story. 
A story would be rated “Critical” if it was 
essential to the core capabilities of the system.  It 

would be rated low if it was a convenience or 
cosmetic issue.  The SA would assign one of four 
qualitative complexity ratings to each story (Low, 

Medium, High, Too High, Too many Questions).   A 

story would be rated “Too High” if the SA believed it 

would take more than one sprint to execute the story.  

That story would be further decomposed into smaller 
stories.  A story would be rated “Too Many 
Questions” if the SA found it too ambig
uous to 
estimate.  The SA and PO would discuss and 

annotate the story and the SA would reevaluate it.   

  Items with a Critical rating were placed at the top of 

the backlog in rank order of priority by the PO.  A 
cutoff line was placed in the backlog to designate 
which stories that would be considered for 
development during the next sprint.   
The final design products from the Story 
Evaluation Phase were Evaluated HyperStories - 
HyperStories and their associated diagrams rated on 
priority and complexity.  Transforming the 
HyperEpics into Evaluated Stories helped the PO and 
SM understand the development trajectory for the 

system, and helped the SA understand the 

expectations of the PO for the next sprint, and the 

levels of effort that might be required.    
 4.4 Sprint Planning Meeting
 The Goal of the Sprint 
Planning Meeting was to understand what 

capabilities would be developed during the next 

sprint.  Sprint Planning Meeting marked the end of 

one sprint and the beginning of the next.  All project 

stakeholders participated in this event.   
The meeting began with a retrospective during 
programmers would demonstrate story-by-story the 
new capabilities they had built in the previous sprint.  

New stories often emerged during the retrospective as 

bugs were discovered or as new opportunities were 

identified.  These were added directly to the backlog.  

If the story were deemed sufficiently important to be 

addressed in the next sprint, it would be placed 
“above the line” at the top of the bac
klog and 
evaluated for priority and complexity on the spot.  If 

it were not sufficiently critical, it would be placed 
unevaluated “below the line.”  
 After the retrospective, the technical team would 
decide how many story points they could complete in 

the next sprint, taking into account number of points 
they had executed in the previous sprint, holidays, 
vacations, and other issues that might affect their 

productivity.  Next, they focused on the backlog, 

working story-by-story from the top down to estimate 

the number of story points each story would require.  

First, the PO would explain a story to the other 

stakeholders, who would ask questions until they 

understood not only the story, but why the capability 
was needed.  The team would discuss the technical 
details of how the story could be implemented. 
Next, the development team members would 
estimate the number of points the story would require 

using the “Points Poker” technique.  E
ach developer 
had a stack of numbered cards that approximated a 

Fibonacci sequence: 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 20, 40.  Each 
developer would select a card to representing the 
number of points that would be needed to execute the 

story.  The rule was, if they believed a story 
couldn’t 
be developed for a smaller number of points, they 
had to jump to the next number in the Fibonacci 
sequence.  If, for example a story could not be 
completed in five points, the developer would have to 
53255325 estimate 8 points.  On a signal, all developers would 
reveal their estimate cards simultaneously.  If the 

cards matched, then that number of points would be 

assigned to a story.  If the cards differed by no more 
than one number, then the highest number would be 
assigned to the story without discussion.  If the cards 
differed by more than one number, then the person 
with the highest card would have to debate the rating 

with the person who displayed the lowest card.  After 

the debate, a new round of voting would take place.  

This would continue until ratings were different by 

no more than one number.  If a developer did not 
know enough to offer an informed estimate, they 
would abstain by displaying a question-mark card.   
Often, the story-point debates revealed issues that 
had not yet been considered.  The resulting 

conversations often led to better implementation 

solutions than had been devised in the design phase.  
Sometimes these debates gave rise to new stories that 
were entered into the backlog for further 
consideration.  It was often the case that a 

HyperStory was too large to be completed in one 

sprint.  Such stories would be split.  The developers 

would commit to complete some of the parameters of 

the story during the current sprint; the rest would be 

put back into the backlog for future consideration.   
More often than not, after the vote, the SA, with the 
cooperation of the development team, would 

transform a HyperStory into a unparameterized, plain 
language story expressed in terms that made sense to 
them. They would add annotations to the story about 

issues and agreements that emerged from the 

discussion of the story.  The HyperStory was 
typically retained as an annotation to the plain 
language story, and annotations on the Plain-

language story often referred to parameters of the 

HyperStory.  Plain-language stories were often as 

cryptic as the initial story titles had been, for 

example:  

 
Edit Role in Element Editor 
-include double click on role in Explorer [refers 
to HyperStory] 

-include double click on role in ACB [refers to 

HyperStory 
3 Story Points
  
The exercise of transforming the HyperStory into a 
plain-language story, however, appeared to help the 
developers internalize the concepts of the story.  We 

observed that, during development, they would 

frequently return to the HyperStory to remind 
themselves of its details.   
Once the development points had been assigned 
to a story, the PO would decide whether the story 
should be developed in the next sprint.  If so, the 
estimated story would then be moved from the 

backlog onto the development list.   
The design products of the Sprint Planning 
Meeting were  Estimated HyperStories and Estimated 
Plain Language Stories, elaborated with annotations 
about issues and agreements made during the session, 
and often annotated with the original HyperStory. 

Transforming HyperStories into these formats helped 

all stakeholders understand the goals and products of 

the next sprint, and helped the PO understand which 

stories would yield the most value for the effort 
expended, and so how to shape the development 
trajectory.  The Sprint Planning Meeting ended of 

one Design Cycle and the beginning of another. 
 4.5 Task Analysis Phase 
The Development Cycle 
began the day after the Sprint Planning Meeting with 
the Task Analysis Phase.  The goals of the Task 
Analysis Phase were to assign stories to developers, 
and to estimate how many hours would be required to 

complete each story, so the team could track their 

progress toward completion of sprint commitments 

on a daily basis.  SA and developers would meet to 

discuss which developers would work on which 

story.  Each developer would then analyze each story 
into a set of tasks, and estimate the number of hours 
each task would take.   For example: 
 Markup xml to reflect properties -- 4 hours 
 Add all the objects to that Role can have 
– 2 hours 
Double-click action on the role node -- 2 hours 

 Add the element editor the existing role editor group 
--4 hours 

 Next, the developers met to identify dependencies 
among their tasks, so they could plan the order in 

which their tasks should be executed.  The tasks and 

hours for each story were entered into the story 

management system.  As they completed their tasks, 
they recorded the actual hours spent on the task, and 
so were able to project whether they were ahead of or 

behind schedule.  
Sometimes this analysis revealed that the 
developers had over-estimated or under-estimated the 

story points during the Sprint Planning Meeting.  

Over time, however, it appeared that the positive and 
negative deviations tended to cancel each other out, 
so no serious difficulties emerged.  All sprints were 

completed on time, and most sprints actually 

completed more work than that to which the team 
committed.   
Transforming Stories into Estimated Tasks helped 
developers to understand how they were going to 
53265326 realize the story as system capabilities, and how well 
they were maintaining their development schedule. 
 4.6  Acceptance Testing Phase 
The end of the Sprint 
Planning Meeting also marked the beginning of the 

Test Cycle, which included Acceptance Testing and 

Regression Testing.  The goal of acceptance testing 
was to assure that the software developed matched 
the capabilities intended by the PO.  A
cceptance 
testing included stress testing to identify defects as 
early as possible in the life of the capability.  The TM 

attended the sprint planning meeting to assure that he 

understood what functionality would be developed in 

the next sprint. Afterward, the TM would transform 
stories into acceptance test cases.  Acceptance tests 
decomposed HyperStories into Action-effect pairs:
  Action 
-Double click a role in the Explorer Tree.  
Expected Result 
-The element editor for the object opens in the main 
window of the CACE tool.   
 Action 
-Double Click a role in the ACB. 

Expected Result 
-The Element Editor for the object opens in the main 

window of the CACE Tool 

 Action 
-Double Click on a role in the explorer with the role 
element editor already opened in a tab, but with 
another tab viewable. 
-Expected Result 
-The role element editor becomes the active tab. 

 Acceptance Tests were run manually by testers 
soon as a story was completed by the programmers.  

Pass/fail results of tests were reported back to 

programmers.  If a test failed, the developer 

responsible for that story would have the opportunity 

to fix the problem before the sprint finished.   

 The products of the Acceptance Test phase were 
Acceptance Tests, bug reports, and tested code.  The 
transformation of stories into A
cceptance Tests 
helped testers understand how the system was 

supposed to work.  A
cceptance tests were represented 
in a highly explicit format to communicate clearly 

how the software was to function.   
 4.7 Regression Test Phase
 The goal of the 
Regression Test Phase was to assure that new code 

introduced into the system did not have an adverse 

effect on existing code.  In the  Regression Testing 

Phase,  selected Acceptance Tests were Transformed 

into Regression tests.  Over most of the life of the 
project, Regression tests were coded into an 
automated test harness that would execute the tests 
without human intervention, and provide a report to 

the test team on any tests that failed.   
Regression tests were coded with keywords 
pertaining to the aspects of the system they tested.  

Testers could select a batch of regression tests to test 

just the aspects of the system that might have been 
affected by recent changes.  As the set of regression 
tests grew, priority was given to tests that had not 

been run as frequently or as recently, or that had 
failed during a previous sprint. 
The products of this phase were regression tests 
and tested code.  Regression tests helped testing team 
Table 
2.  The Many Lives of an Agile Story.   
Design Processes, Design Products, and the Understandings They 
Facilitated Among Stakeholders in a Large Scale Agile Software Development Project
 Design Processes 
Design Products 
Understandings 
Preliminary Design 
Story Titles 
UI/UX sketches 
Goals of the users of propose system capabilities. 
High-level understandings of UI/UX and technical approaches  
Detailed Design 
HyperEpics 
Detailed understandings of  required functionality 
Completeness and consistency of proposed solutions  
Story Evaluation 
HyperStories 
Evaluated HyperStories 
Relative importance of stories to project success 
Complexity of implementing stories 
Sprint Planning 
Estimated HyperStories 
Estimated Plain 
Language Stories 
What capabilities would be developed in the next sprint. 
Technical implementation strategy for each story
 Task Analysis 
Estimated Tasks 
Production scheduling constraints. 
Technical implementation tactics for each story. 
Acceptance Testing 
Acceptance Tests 
The extent to which newly developed code instantiates 
stakeholder expectations and intentions 
Regression Testing 
Regression Tests 
Robustness of existing code after new code is added. 
53275327 members who did not attend sprint planning sessions 
to understand how best to test the system.   
 5.  Analysis and Discussion 
 Table 1 summarizes the design process, the 
design products, and the understandings they 

facilitated in the HyperEpic approach to 
ASD.  With 
this work practice, stakeholders in complex software 

development project were able to understand, design, 

build, and test, and manage design, development, and 
test cycles dealing with thousands of detailed 
requirements.  Instead of using a single 
representation of a user story, as is the conventional 
method of documenting requirements in ASD [4], we 

use 8 different formats, each tailored to a support 

specific understandings in the design, development or 

testing phase.  We presented these formats of these 

representations, and discussed transformations they 
underwent at each work practice in its current state.         
 Reflecting upon the differences between our 
work practice and story representation and the 

practice described in the ASD 
literature [4], we can 
assess advantages and disadvantages of our method 
in a project where complex design software is being 
developed:   
Advantages
:  This approach to formatting, transforming 
and organizing stories recognizes several 

different stages of design, build, and test.  

Conducting the phases of design allowed us 

to tailor the formatting of user stories to fit 

the different tasks of different design phases  
 We successfully eliminated some of the 
waste of using an ASD process in a complex 

environment: the obsolescence of stories.  
When design changes were likely to occur, 
we captured only short story titles, 

eliminating the wasted effort of prioritizing 

and placing stories on the backlog.  
 When structure is advantageous, we have 
incorporated structure.  With the use of 

HyperEpics, we reduced the cognitive load 

of establishing and verifying the 

completeness and consistency of a set of 

requirements.   
Disadvantages: 
 Some flexibility, which is a key feature of 
ASD, is lost when more stages of design are 
recognized.  In our own experience, there 

were cases where many of the design phases 

were not necessary.  For example, following 

a retrospective, user stories would be placed 
directly on the backlog.  If the team had not 
recognized intuitively that this was 
appropriate, effort would have been wasted 
formatting the story for unnecessary design 

phases.  
 This method may be overkill for projects 
with lower complexity and fewer design 
details.   
 6. Conclusion 
 We have presented a work practice which has several 

advantages over traditional user stories used in ASD.  
We feel that our discovery of different design stages 
and formats has the potential to generalize to many 
ASD projects.  In future research we w
ill focus on the 
forces which led us to utilize these different stages.  
  References 
 1. Boehm, B. and R. Turner, 
Using Risk to Balance 
Agile and Plan-Driven Methods.
 Computer, 
2003. 
36(6): p. 57-66. 
2. Ambler, S., 
The object primer: Agile model-
driven development with UML 2.0
. 2004: 
Cambridge University Press. 
3. Beck, K. and M. Fowler, 
Planning Extreme 
Programming
. 2000: Addison-Wesley Longman 
Publishing Co., Inc. 160  
4. Cohn, M., 
User Stories Applied: For Agile 
Software Development
. 2004: Addison Wesley 
Longman Publishing Co., Inc. . 
5. Wood, R.E., 
Task complexity: Definition of the 
construct.
 Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 1986. 
37(1): p. 60-82. 
6. Turk, D. and R. France. R, 
Assumptions 
Underlying Agile Software-Development 
Processes.
 Journal of Database Management, 
2005. 
16(4): p. 62-87. 
7. Ramesh, B., L. Cao, and R. Baskerville, 
Agile 
Requirements Engineering Practices and 

Challenges: An Empirical Study.
 Information 
Systems Journal, 2010. 
20: p. 449-480. 
8. Argyris, C., R. Putnam, and D.M. Smith, 
Action 
Science
. Josssey-Bass Social and Behavioral 
Science Series. 1985, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass 

Publishers. 
9. Hevner, A. and S. Chatterjee, 
Design Science 
Research: Looking to the Future
, in 
Design 
Research in Information Systems
, A. Hevner and 
S. Chatterjee, Editors. 2010, Springer US: New 
York. p. 261-268. 
10. Stebbins, R., 
Exploratory research in the social 
sciences
. 2001: Sage Publications, Inc. 
 53285328