  Developing Entrepreneurial Skills in IT Courses: The Role of Agile 
Software Development Practices in Producing Successful Student Initiated 
Products
Aaron Read 
Arizona State University 
Aaron.Read@asu.edu 
Douglas C. Derrick  
University of Nebraska at 
Omaha  
dcderrick@unomaha.edu 
Gina S. Ligon 
University of Nebraska at 
Omaha 
gligon@unomaha.edu  
Abstract
 
 
Universities are under incr
easing pressure to 
provide real world ex
perience to students. 
Entrepreneurial courses ar
e prevalent in business 
schools and have been shown to develop 
entrepreneurial skills.  Entrepreneurial skills are 
equally important in the deve
lopment of IT innovations.  
The research in this area 
of education is not as 
prevalent.  We argue that 
Agile Software development 
methods, along with other 
key course characteristics 
enable students to learn entr
epreneurial skills related to 
IT product development and do so in an environment 
where innovation can flourish.  We present some 
preliminary data, which demo
nstrates some success in 
the course in developing en
trepreneurial skills, with a 
particular focus on the use 
of Agile Development and 
mentoring methods in de
veloping those skills.
 
1. Introduction  
The mounting research in entrepreneurship provides 
convincing evidence that entrepreneurs can be 
developed through education and training, and are not 
simply born [1]
. Pittaway’s 
[2] systematic review of the 
entrepreneurship education literature, as well as other 
previous reviews [3,4] sp
eak to the ubiquity of 
entrepreneurship courses within business schools, the 
developing maturity of entr
epreneurship programs, as 
well as a significant understanding of entrepreneurship 
through academic research.   Major areas of research 
according to Pittaway’s review include the exploration 
of management training, the study of the factors which 
contribute to the propensity to become an entrepreneur, 
teaching and learning pedagogy, and institutional 
policies towards entrepreneurship education. Those who 
are prepared to act as entrepreneurs
—
those who are 
willing and able to pursue the implementation of new 
and useful ideas, cannot only develop new products, but 
are also useful within large corporations [1], allowing 
for larger returns on research and development efforts 
[2]. The research is mature 
enough that research studies 
should focus on more particular matters of 
entrepreneurship education instead of demonstrating 
whether or not it should or can be taught.  
The current study focuses on the development of 
entrepreneurship education in the area of IT product 
development and innovation.  
This is a compelling area 
of research, since much of research in the field of 
information systems and other related disciplines has 
explored in great depth the development, diffusion [5] 
and adoption [6], and impact 
of IT in organizations as 
well as in a broader market or societal context.  While 
there are some studies sp
ecifically focusing on IT 
entrepreneurship [7,8],the pr
esent effort adds to this 
emerging body of research in at least three ways.  
First, in the current study we illustrate how 
knowledge from the field of information systems can be 
used to design an experiential entrepreneurial course in 
IT product development.  Specifically, we look at how 
using the Agile software development process, in 
conjunction with other key course characteristics such 
as instructor mentoring, product idea ownership, and 
autonomy creates an ideal en
vironment to both develop 
the propensity of students to develop innovative IT 
products, and provide an ideal environment for 
entrepreneurial IT product development at the same 
time.  We explore these and other key characteristics of 
an IT innovation course recently implemented outside 
the business school in a large university in the 
Midwestern United States.  
Second, we provide some support for success of this 
course in the development of an IT entrepreneur through 
perceptions of increased skills and confidence in the 
product development process as well as team related 
processes. Third, we demonstrate the success of the 
course via student entrepreneurial behavior of 
developing products and by validation from external 
businesses and venture capitalists. 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.34201 Before turning to these three objectives, we first 
discuss IT entrepreneurship
—
and specifically, the 
characteristics an entrepre
neur as well as the context 
within which entrepreneurship occurs.  We also review 
Agile software development and mentoring, and discuss 
their relationship to the development of IT entrepreneurs 
and the provision of an ideal context for 
entrepreneurship to occur.
2.Background  
2.1 Entrepreneurship &Related Concepts 
Entrepreneurship is closely related to the concepts of 
creativity and innovation.  Amabile defines 
entrepreneurship as a special ty
pe of  creativity which is 
involved in the implementation of  creative ideas [9].In 
this discussion of entrepreneurship, creativity is defined 
as a focusing on the develo
pment of novel and useful 
ideas.  Innovation focuses on the successful 
implementation of an idea (within an organization).  
Entrepreneurship is a special type of implementation of 
a novel and useful idea
—
it must be connected with a 
new product or new method of developing and 
delivering a product.  
The spirit of entrepreneurship lies in the fact that 
there is an individual willing to undertake the 
responsibility of pursing the implementation of the 
creative idea, in spite of potential hardships.
Entrepreneurship is defined by Stephenson [10] as 
“
a
process by which individuals-either on their own or 
inside organizations-pursue opportunities without 
regard to the resources they currently control.
Entrepreneurship is differentiated from innovation 
largely in the fact that an individual or individuals are 
willing to bear the risk of implementing an innovation.  
This is why entrepreneursh
ip is often associated with 
starting a small business. However, for the present 
effort, we are interested in developing an individual’s 
capacity to implement a novel, useful idea in a way that 
could translate to innovation in a small business or in a 
larger organization.  
2.2 Characteristics of 
an Entrepreneur
Research into the characteris
tics of an entrepreneur 
range from gender and back
ground characteristics [11,
12], to personality traits [9,11], to knowledge of 
business practices and risks [13,12], perceptions of 
barriers and support factors when contemplating 
entrepreneurial activities [14] as well as access to 
support networks [15], and the nature of motivations 
surrounding the innovation opportunity[9].
Amabile’s 
[9] dimensions of individual creativity, 
which she uses to explain entrepreneurial behavior in 
organizations, provides a useful framework for 
grouping the type of characteristics.  The framework 
emphasizes that creativity leading to entrepreneurship 
arises from three elements:  
domain expertise, creativity 
skills, and motivation.  Each of these is discussed below: 
Entrepreneurial knowledge enables the entrepreneur 
to recognize and take advantage of opportunities.  There 
are recognized skill sets which enable an entrepreneur 
to act.  Expertise in domain of innovation is critical [9].
Expertise 
creates a larger “network of possible 
wanderings” 
[16].
Many of the personal characteristics relating to 
successful entrepreneurship revolve around skills and 
attributes specific to 
the creative process: thinking skills 
such as an intuitive problem solving style [17] and the 
ability and confidence in the ability to be creative [9,
18].  This can also include a tolerance for ambiguity.  
Additionally, team building skills, networking skills 
[15] and the ability to work with customers can be 
crucial as well. 
Finally, motivation has been linked to creativity and 
entrepreneurship
—
where intrinsic motivations, or 
motivations which arise from one’s 
internal attitude 
toward an activity, are linked to creativity [9,19].One 
aspect that is continuously linked to the maintenance of 
intrinsic motivation is autonomy, or practices that allow 
an individual personal control of the conditions in which 
he completes his work [20].  
While research has not extensively explored the 
extent  to which entrepre
neurial characteristics of 
students has led to actual business startups or product 
developments, skills such as creativity, market 
awareness, flexibility [21], startup knowledge, and 
confidence [22] have been found to correlate with the 
intention to become an entrepreneur.  Assessments of 
entrepreneurial education which evaluate student’s 
perceptions of themselves [23] reflect many of these 
dimensions. In the following section, we will describe 
how an agile software development approach was used 
to increase students’ capacity for domain expertise, 
creative thinking skills, and motivation or creative 
efficacy.  
2.3 The Entrepreneu
rial Environment
Organizational motivation to innovate
—
Cohesiveness of the group enables the individual to 
introduce new ideas without censure. If the entrepreneur 
perceives that an organization will be supportive of the 
innovative behavior, by supporting diversity, and the 
development of new ideas, then he or she will be more 
likely to innovate [9]. 
Management Practices
—
allowing a degree of 
freedom or autonomy to individuals in the conducting 
of their own work [20] Matching individuals to work 
assignments, well balanced groups that trust each other 
and communicate well.   
202 Resources
—
Resources which facilitate 
entrepreneurial creativity include people with expertise, 
funding, information, and training [24]. 
3. Increasing Students 
Entrepreneurial 
Skills Using Agile Methods  
In this section, our usage of Agile Software 
Development in our IT innovation course is described in 
detail, followed by a description of how the course 
enhances students
’
 abilities to develop an innovative IT 
product, as well as providing the proper environment for 
IT product innovation. 
3.1 Agile Software Development and 
other Key Features 
3.1.1 Agile Overview 
Agile software development enables individuals in a 
software development team to quickly deliver a product 
and do so with a high degree of collaboration with the 
customer. At the heart of the design of Agile Methods 
is the desire to enable a software development team to 
perform as a Complex Adaptive System [25], a set of 
autonomous agents which have the ability to coordinate 
together to respond/adapt to their external environment. 
According to Vidgen, Ag
ile teams are able to 
respond quickly to customer’s ne
eds by having 1) the 
ability to match the rate of change of the customer 2) 
optimize the ability to self-organize, and 3) synchronize 
exploitation and exploration
—
essentially know which 
practices to keep and which to abandon as new practices 
are learned.  There is a hi
gh degree of conceptual 
overlap between the makings of a complex adaptive 
system and the capabilities necessary to enable a 
development team effort to lead to successful new 
product development [26].   New product development 
teams need capabilities, which include including 
awareness of the market orientation, absorptive 
capability (the ability to learn), coordination and 
collective mind (both aspects of good self-organizing 
skills.  
3.1.2 Agile Software Development Skills
The goal of Agile Software Development is to 
enable a software development team respond quickly to 
changing business needs. Evolving business needs are a 
reality of many organizations, which translate into 
evolving requirements [27].
There are many flavors of agile software 
development methods.  The most commonly 
implemented is Scrum [28].  The key components of the 
scrum method are:  
1)Iterative development of the software broken 
down in to 
sprints
 where a deliverable piece of 
software is created each sprint.  
2)The utilization of 
user stories
 as a primary 
method of documenting requirements.  User 
stories are one or two sentence descriptions of a 
chunk of functionality (or software related 
work).  User stories enable the quick effort 
estimation, prioritization, and division of work 
on a software project.  User stories serve as 
reminders for conversations where the details of 
the user story are elaborated and recorded as 
acceptance tests.   
3)The creation,prioritization,
 and maintenance of 
a
backlog
 at the beginning of a software 
development project where in initial set of user 
stories is created and prioritized. 
4)
Daily Standup Meetings
 are short (short enough 
that standing remains comfortable) status 
meetings where each member of the team 
explains what was accomplished and any issues 
that prevent further work. 
5)
Sprint Planning Meetings 
and 
Retrospectives
.  
At the beginning of each sprint, the user stories 
to be developed are discussed and prioritized, 
and the work for the sprint is finalized.  During 
Retrospectives, the team reviews work for the 
sprint discussing what lessons from the sprint 
could be taken forward into the method of 
working in the next sprint. 
6)
Other 
There are several other technical 
practices such as unit testing, continuous 
integration,  
Teaching agile software development in an IT 
innovation course provides students with raw project 
management knowledge and skills gained through direct 
experience.  There are se
veral skills which can be 
obtained through experience
 with Agile in the classroom 
setting [29], such as: 

Breaking down a project task into smaller tasks 

Estimating effort needed to complete software 
development work 

Negotiating and prioritizing features 

Interacting with customers / product owners 
All of these practices are widely used in industry, 
enabling students to participate in or lead teams of 
developers with greater confidence. 
3.1.3 Autonomy as a Complementing Key Course 
Structure 
A key aspect of Agile is that team members are free 
to act on their own, without too much interference of 
203 process.  Additionally there is a joint sense of ownership 
of the code, instead of a single motivation to lead. 
3.1.4 Course Instructor as a Product Owner / 
Mentor 
There is a natural fit between the product owner role 
in Scrum and the role of the course instructor as mentor.  
The resources which a mentor would provide for a 
student team would be very similar to the resources 
provided to an actual software development team.   
3.2 Developing IT Product Innovation
Attributes and Skills  
Motivation:
 Students experience a dramatic shift 
from conventional lecture-based courses where projects 
are assigned to being free 
to select their own project.
This al
lows student’s work to hinge more 
heavily on
intrinsic motivation as opposed to motivation to 
complete the course to get 
a good grade.Additionally, 
within their project teams, they act as autonomous team 
members, free to make decisions as to how they 
complete the work.  
Domain Expertise:
Students develop 
understanding of the Agile process as well as 
developing some of the necessary knowledge of 
programming tools to develop IT Innovations, as well as 
knowledge of marketing. 
Key to the development of entrepreneurs is the 
knowledge organization or cognitive strategies that the 
mentor is able to bestow upon 
the protégé.  Mentors also 
play a key role in shaping 
the attitudes and perceptions 
of students.  They can make the idea of developing a 
new IT product seem more possible 
In an Agile setting, a mentor acts much like a 
product owner and a scrum master, interfacing the team 
with the customer who will develop the software.  The 
product owner/scrum master also helps to remove 
barriers for members of the team.  Finally, the mentor 
can assures that students have a serious attitude towards 
the Scrum practices, and that the practices are followed 
correctly.   
Creative Process Skills: 
There are several skills 
associated with Agile software development which 
could be considered creative 
process skills.  The creative 
process model [30] indicate
s there are eight related 
processes associated with developing and implementing 
innovative ideas: 1) problem definition, 2) information 
gathering, 3) idea ge
neration, 4) conceptual 
combination, 5) idea selection, 6) idea evaluation, 7) 
implementation planning, and 8) solution monitoring. 
Much of the difficulty of so
ftware development lay in 
properly defining the requirements.  Many of the 
creative process steps must be performed 
simultaneously
—
the problem must be
 defined while new 
information, new ideas,
 and new understanding 
emerges about how the software will be designed to 
address the problem.  The Agile process addresses much 
of the complexity of the requ
irements by tackling the 
problem iteratively, a
llowing emergent creative 
knowledge to be incorpora
ted into future iterations. 
3.3 Creating an IT Innovation 
Environment 
Organizational motivation to innovate
: the 
motivational climate is shaped primarily by allowing the 
students to define their own projects and to be the 
generators of the innovations and solutions.  The 
students own the idea.  Also
, the grading policy focuses 
on the creative process not solely on outcomes.  
Students who are graded on specific project outcomes 
may be less motivated to innovate than those who.  The 
organizational structure is also shaped by having small, 
self-selected teams.  On a broader level, the 
organizational involvement may also include the 
willingness of the local venture capital investing 
community to spend the time providing students with 
feedback about their products as well as actually 
offering money to invest in them 
Management Involvement:
 Management 
involvement consists of the course instructor acting in 
the position of product manager or product owner (in 
Agile Scrum Software Development Terms).  The 
instructor is involved heavily in providing the right 
amount of structure, in forming groups to encourage 
innovation, and  
Resources:
The largest resource provided to the 
students is the mentor who 
provides expertise in the 
areas of information technology tools, processes,  and 
market research.  The mentor also provides access to 
potential customers and investors who could provide 
further feedback, funding an
d resources for the project 
4. Course Description 
The course that encapsulates these principles is called 
“Applied IT Innovation”.  It consists of multiple 
teaching methodologies that include lecture, guest 
speakers, weekly standup meetings, etc.  The defining 
feature is that students generate their own idea for a 
project, self-select into teams and them use Agile 
software development to create a minimally viable 
product.   On the second da
y of class, each student was 
required to deliver an 80 Word Idea pitch presentation 
to the class.  The students br
iefly explained their interest 
and confidence in developing the product.  Students then 
formed into teams around the product ideas that were 
considered by the class to be
 most interesting, viable and 
204 innovative..Each student was also required to have a 
personal interview with the instructor to help the student 
to orient themselves within the IT innovation degree, 
and gave them the opportunity to air any concerns.  It 
also allowed for direct mentoring of the students based 
on their concerns, abilities and perceptions.   
Team Project 
The centerpiece of the course is the 
team project.  The goal of the project is to create a 
minimally viable product
—
a product capable of being 
deployed to a subset of customers for evaluation.The 
goal of a minimally viable product is to enable a product 
development team to learn the most about the customer 
(through feedback) with the least amount of money 
spent.  The customers targeted
 are usually early adopters 
who are more forgiving, and 
more able to understand the 
purpose of the product. See 
http://venturehacks.com/articles/minimum-viable-
product
 for a definition of a minimally viable product.  
All projects require utilization of information 
technology as part of the product delivery.  These often 
include the development of web applications or mobile 
applications.  In order to create the minimum viable IT 
product, each student team created an initial backlog of 
user stories with input and mentoring from the instructor 
to assure that students were thinking about key issues of 
the project.  There were four sprints during the 
semester
—
each 3 weeks long.  With each initial sprint,
there was a retrospective and review and the teams were 
expected to deliver working software.  At the end of 
each sprint, each team pr
esented a retrospective, 
detailing the results of their ef
forts during the previous 
sprint.  A burn down chart representing the progressive 
completion and they talked about team, process, and 
technical risks, and laid out a 
plan for remediation in the 
next sprint..   
At the end of the semester, students present their 
final product in a demonstration and presentation, which 
highlights the lessons learned,
 and other developments 
as team worked towards the development of the product. 
Each team presented a formal pitch of their presentation 
idea to venture capitalists. Two of the teams received 
term sheets for actual investment ranging from $25,000 
to $50,000.  
Market Research
-Students are required to do initial 
market research to determine th
e need for their product.  
Market research can include the search for other similar 
products, as well as contacting potential customers to 
establish need. 
5. Data Collection Method  
In Section 3, we argued why our utilization of Agile 
Software Development in an IT innovation course 
would provide an environment where innovation could 
occur, and, most importantly, where entrepreneurial 
skills and attributes can be developed.  We present some 
evidence of the changed attit
udes and increased skills of 
the students who participated in the course.  This 
evidence includes quantitative and qualitative 
perceptions of students ab
out the development of IT 
innovations, about themselves, and about the course.  
We also briefly describe the quality of the resulting 
products produced by each of the student teams..
Free Response and Scaled Response Questionnaire 
At the end of the course, a questionnaire was given 
to each member of the course, containing free response 
and scaled response items to provide for a quantitative 
and qualitative analysis 
of student’s perceptions of the 
course and themselves in relation to the development of 
an innovative IT product. 
All of the scaled response questions were 
administered after the qualita
tive response so that the 
students were not biased to respond to free response 
questions using the concepts in the scaled response 
section.  The questions used are reported in the analysis 
section in conjunction with the reported results.  
6. Analysis and Results 
6.1 Qualitative Analysis Method 
The qualitative responses were coded for themes by 
one of the authors. Substantially distinct categories 
emerged such as those which 
focused either on technical 
expertise
—
mentioning coding, programming 
languages) or marketing expertise (doing market 
research), general project management (time / 
coordination concerns), and team related concerns (team 
dynamics, getting along, social loafing).  An Agile 
software development category was developed to 
capture any comment which mentioned an Agile 
software development practice (iterative development, 
standup meetings, etc.).Students could respond with 
multiple answers to each question.  Each response was 
categorized separately. 
6.2 Qualitative Analysis Results
  
We asked students which challenges they perceived 
in developing a new IT product, and how the 
characteristics of the course
 addressed those challenges.
Under
standing student’s perceptions 
of challenges, and 
how these challenges were overcome through 
participation in the course gives us some insight into 
how students develop confidence in their innovative 
product development abilities. 
We report here the proportion of students which 
responded with a certain category 
What were your greatest co
ncerns related to your 
own abilities to deliver 
your team’s proje
ct idea when 
205 you began the project? Think 
of two or th
ree concerns 
and describe each concern in a sentence. 

64% voiced concerns about their own technical 
skills 

36% mentioned project management concerns-
could the project be completed on time 

36% raised team concerns related to getting 
along with the team and the efforts of other team 
members. 

28% related to the specific idea for the product.
What aspects of the course
 improved your ability to 
develop an innovative product? 

50% cited the Agile software development 
process 

42% cited contact with business people 

14% cited course environment 

14% cited presentations given to customers  
What do you feel have been your greatest 
improvements in your abilit
y to contribute to the 
delivery of an innovative produ
ct?  Think of two or three 
improvements

43%cited technical skills  

36% cited time management/task management 
skills (at least one per team) 

29% cited scoping skills 

29% cited teamwork skills  

21% Students cited working with customer 
skills 
What were your greatest concerns about working on 
a team at the beginning of th
e project? Think of two or 
three concerns. 

43%
concerned with other group member’s 
efforts 

43% Students concerned with getting along 
with other group members 

28% Students concerned with coordination 
(meeting, staying focused).   

21% cited differences in technical skills 
What aspects of the course improved your team 
skills? 

57%  cited Agile development practices.   

29% cited open-endedness of course 

29% cited self-selecting teams 

14% cited feedback from other team members 
6.3 Quantitative Analysis and Results 
Students were asked at the end of the course to rate 
different perceptions of their abilities.  The quantitative 
analysis results are based off of the results of a two-
tailed T-Test comparing the mean scores for the start 
and end of the semester for 
each question.  The sample 
size for these results is 
n=
14.
The results of the analysis are reported in Table 1 
below. 
Following this questionnaire, students were asked to 
rate the extent to which cour
se characteristics influenced 
their improvements.  The results
 of this data analysis are 
reported in Table 2: 
 
Mean 
SD 
Iterative 
Development 
8.72 .91 
User Stories 
Requirements 
Documentation 
7.27 1.48 
Standup Meetings 
7.18 
1.32 
Mentoring 
8.72 
1.35 
Self-Assigned 
Teams 
8.27 1.35 
Table 2: Importance of 
Course Characteristics 
Results 
206   
Semester Start
 
Semester End 
 
 
  
Mean 
S.D.
 
Mean
 
S.D 
Dif 
Sig. 
My confidence in my ability to contribute to 
the delivery of a working version of a new product 
6.17
 
1.70
 
8.00
 
1.60 1.83
 
0.0070
 
My ability understand 
and clearly define a 
problem the product needs to be able to solve 
7.25
 
1.86
 
8.58
 
1.24 1.33
 
0.0300
 
My ability to estimate the amount of effort and 
resources needed to comp
lete a software project 
5.50
 
2.71
 
7.25
 
1.14 1.75
 
0.0340
 
My ability to break down work into smaller 
tasks 
5.58
 
2.02
 
7.92
 
1.44 2.33
 
0.0008
 
My ability to communicate concerns and 
suggestions to others 
7.00
 
1.35
 
8.75
 
0.62 1.75
 
0.0002
 
My ability to coordinate my efforts with others 
6.25
 
1.54
 
7.33
 
1.61 1.08
 
0.0800
 
Table 1: Perceptions of Confidence and Skills Results 
6.4 Product Quality Results 
There were four product teams in total, resulting in 
four products: a website for connecting language 
learners in a local metropolis
 area, a mobile app side 
scrolling game, an app for recording cow pregnancy 
tests, and an app for identifying allergens in foods. 
Perhaps the most important measure of the quality 
of the product is the reception of the market to the 
development of the product.   
Two products resulted in actual capital being 
awarded by venture capitalists:  one for $50,000 and 
one for $20,000. 
According to the instructor’s vie
wpoint, each 
project could be considered a successful minimally 
viable project.  
7. Discussion of Results 
The goal of this class was to foster 
entrepreneurship in IT students by using several 
different pedagogical techniqu
es to help them develop 
an innovative product. Students perceived an increase 
in their ability to develop innovative products, along 
with several other supporting skills such as problem 
definition, project management, and team relationship.  
Each team developed a quality product, some of them 
attracting the attention of invest
ors.  Many of the skills 
learned in this course could have been learned in 
another experiential course.However, half the class 
attributed improvements in their individual abilities to 
develop an innovative pr
oduct to the use of Agile 
software development practices.  Agile software 
development practices were also attributed for the 
development of team skills. 
The improvement in team skills should not be a 
surprise, given that students were probably more 
accountable to each other, met more often, and 
discussed work in more detail than they would have in 
other courses.  User story development, sprint 
planning sessions, and weekly standup meetings all 
led to this.   
The improvement in innovation skills likely came 
from the increased flexibility of the Agile software 
development process, especially when the student’s 
idea was less defined.  Most of the students who 
mentioned Agile were from the same team
—
the team 
that created a video game.  The idea for the game had 
to be refined (especially wi
th respect to scope issues) 
over time.  The iterative nature of the Agile process 
could be acting as a reality 
check for creative ideas, 
allowing them to be turned into real products through 
the limitation of scope. 
8. Lessons Learned 
One of the critical lessons learned in developing 
entrepreneurial skills is to let the students practice 
entrepreneurship.  The students must be allowed to 
lead and risk in the classroom setting.  Allowing the 
students to define the work in the class and to evaluate 
the work products gives students the opportunity to 
lead the creative process.  In this class, we found that 
with ownership, comes effort.  Students took the 
initiative to learn outside skills and to make 
connections on their own related to their projects that 
were not suggested or encouraged by the instructor.  In 
other words, the students believed in their ideas and 
sought to advance them not just for the class, but also 
for the sake of the idea itself.  For example, one student 
contacted a prominent trade magazine to get an article 
printed promoting their idea.  Another team learned a 
new programing language and framework to aid in the 
development of their product.   
207 A second lesson learned is that some structure is 
needed, but it must be stru
cture around the students’ 
ideas.  All aspects of the class were in context of the 
students’ goals and objectives for their projects.  So 
the agile methodology, and almost all of the 
assignments were geared to advancing the students’ 
idea and agenda.  
This paradigm of structure around 
the students led to projects
 that are richer and more 
interesting.  Agile software development allowed for 
the appropriate amount of flexibility and structure to 
accomplish this end.   
Third, the students were able to create value in a 
short period of time.  Two projects received term 
sheets for investment in their ideas.  This external 
market validation shows that these were successful 
student initiated projects. 
Mentoring is a critical part of this process.  By 
allowing the students to defi
ne the work and projects, 
the instructor became mentor and coach.  It required 
both accountability and guidance to move them 
through this process.   Ment
oring consisted of offering 
technical guidance, team dynamics assistance, and 
process help.  The mentorin
g role helped the students 
lead and grow. 
Finally, it was fun.  The students learned and loved 
the class.  The ideas were novel and valuable and the 
interactions were connected to real-world problems.  
The course had meaning because the students were 
advancing their own ideas.   Everyone felt invested in 
the ideas because they were original and they had 
selected to work on them.   
This lead to a rich and full 
class and projects that live 
beyond the class itself.   
9. References 
[1] P. F. Drucker, 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship
,
Harper & Row, New York, 1985. 
[2] L. Pittaway and J. 
Cope, "Entrepreneurship 
Education: A Systematic Review of the Evidence", 
International Small Business Journal, 5:25 (2007), pp. 
479-510.
[3] J. A. Katz, "The Chronology and Intellectual 
Trajectory of American Entrepreneurship Education", 
Journal of Business Venturing, 18 (2003), pp. 283-
300.
[4] G. Gorman, D. Hanlon and W. King, "Some 
Research Perspectives on Entrepreneurship 
Education, Enterprise Educ
ation and Education for 
Small Business Management: A Ten-Year Literature 
Review", International Small business Journal, 3:15 
(1997), pp. 56-77.
[5] E. M. Rogers, 
The Diffusion of Innovations
, The 
Free Press, New York, New York, 1995. 
[6] F. D. Davis, R. P. Ba
gozzi and P. R. Warshaw, 
"User Acceptance of Computer Technology", 
Management Science, 8:35 (1989), pp. 982-1003.
[7] M. Frydenberg, "Fosterin
g Entrepreneurship in the 
Cis Sandbox", Information Systems Journal, 3:11 
(2013), pp. 35-41.
[8] D. A. Kirby, 
Entrepreneurship 
Education: Can 
Business Schools Meet the Challenge?
,
Proceedings of 
the 2005 Silicon Valley Global Entrepreneurship 
Research Conference
, San Fransisco, California, 
2005, pp. 173-193.
[9] T. M. Amabile, "Creativity and Innovation in 
Organizations", Harvard Business School, January: 
(1996), pp. 1-13. 
[10] H. H. Stevenson and J. C. Jarillo, "A Paradigm of 
Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial Management", 
Strategic Management Journal, Special Issue: 
Corporate Entrepreneurship:11 (1990), pp. 17-27.
[11] T. S. Hatten and S. K. 
Ruhland, "Student Attitude 
toward Entrepreneurship as 
Affected by Participation 
in an Sbi Program", Journal of Education for Business, 
4:70 (1995), pp. 224-227. 
[12] C. K. Wang and W. Poh-Kam, "Entrepreneurial 
Interest of University Students in Singapore", 
Technovation, 2:24 (2004), pp. 163-172. 
[13] R. P. Oakey, S.-M. Mukhtar and M. Kipling, 
"Student Perspectives on Entrepreneurship: 
Observations on Their Propensity for Entrepreneurial 
Behavior", International Jour
nal of Entrepreurship and 
Innovation Management, 4/5:2 (2002), pp. 308-322.
[14] C. Lüthje and N. Franke, "The ‘Making’ of an 
Entrepreneur: Testing a Model of Entrepreneurial 
Intent among Engineering Students at Mit", R&D 
Management, 2:33 (2003), pp. 135-147. 
[15] S. Birley, "The Role of Networks in the 
Entrepreneurial Process", Journal of Business 
Venturing, 1:1 (1985), pp. 107-117.
[16] A. Newell and H. Simon, 
Human Problem 
Solving
, Prentice-Hall, Engelwood Cliffs, N.J., 1972. 
[17] S. G. Scott and R. A. Bruce, "Determinants of 
Innovative Behavior: A Path Model of Individual 
Innovation in the Workplace", Academy of 
Management Journal, 3:37 (1994), pp. 580-607. 
[18] Y. Gong, J.-C. Huang and J.-L. Farh, "Employee 
Learning Orientation, Transformational Leadership, 
and Employee Creativity
: The Mediating Role of 
Employee Creative Self-Efficacy", Academy of 
Management Journal, 4:52 (2009), pp. 765-778. 
[19] E. L. Deci and R. M. Ryan, 
Intrinsic Motivation 
and Self-Determination in Human Behavior
, Plenum, 
New York, 1985. 
[20] D. Pelz and F. Andrews, "Autonomy, 
Coordination, and Stimulation in Relation to Scientific 
Achievement", Behavioral Science, 11 (1966), pp. 89-
97.
208 [21] H. Oosterbeek, M. vo
n Praag and Ijsselstein, "The 
Impact of Entrepreneurship Education on 
Entrepreneurship Skills and Motivation", European 
Economic Review, 54 (2010), pp. 442-454.
[22] G. Graevenitz, D. Harhoff and R. Weber, "The 
Effects of Entrepreneurship Education", Journal of 
Ecomonic behavior and orga
nization, 1:76 (2010), pp. 
90-112.
[23] N. Duval-Couetil, T. Reed-Rhoads and S. 
Haghighi, 
Development of an Assessment Instrument 
to Examine Outcomes of Entr
epreneurship Education 
on Engineering Students
,
Frontiers in Education 
Conference (FIE), 2010 IEEE
, 2010, pp. T4D-1-T4D-
6.
[24] T. M. Amabile and S. S. Gryskiewicz, 
Creativity 
in the R&D Group
,
Technical Report Number 30
,
Center for Creative Lead
ership, Greensboro, NC, 
1987.
[25] R. Vidgen and X. Wang, "Coevolving Systems 
and the Organization of Agile Software 
Development", Information Systems Research, 3:20 
(2009), pp. 355-376. 
[26] P. A. Pavlou and O. A. El Sawy, "From It 
Leveraging Competence to Competitive Advantage in 
Turbulent Environments: The Case of New Product 
Development", Information Systems Research, 3:17 
(2006), pp. 198-227. 
[27] J. F. Hoorn, E. A. Konijn, H. van Vliet and G. van 
der Veer, "Requirements Change: Fears Dictate the 
Must Haves; Desires the Won't Haves", Journal of 
Systems and Software, 3:80 (2007), pp. 328-355.
[28] VersionOne, 
State of Agile Survey
, VersionOne, 
2010.
[29] V. Mahnic, "A Capstone Course on Agile 
Software Development", IEEE Transactions on 
Education, 1:55 (2012), pp. 99-106.
[30] M. D. Mumford and M. S. Connelly, "Cases of 
Invention", Psyccritiqyes, 38 (1993), pp. 120-1211. 
209