 Effects of Agile Methods on Electronic Commerce: Do They Improve Website Quality?  David F. Rico  dave@davidfrico.com   Abstract  The purpose of this paper is to present a model for 
measuring the relationship between the use of agile 

methods to manage the development of Internet 

websites and their quality. Agile methods are a general 

purpose approach for managing the development of 
new products, which are often associated with Internet 

software. Agile methods may be used for improving 

website quality by obtaining 
early customer feedback 
on a large number of frequent software releases. Agile 

methods are characterized by early customer 

involvement, iterative d
evelopment, self organizing 
teams, and flexibility. This model may help managers 

better understand the business effects of adopting or 

failing to adopt agile methods for the $2 trillion U.S. 

electronic commerce industry.  

 1. Introduction  Does use of agile methods improve quality of 
Internet websites used for $2 trillion electronic 

commerce industry by U.S. firms
?  Agile methods are a contemporary management 
approach used for developing Internet or electronic 

commerce websites by U.S. firms. There is a well-

documented debate among management scholars about 

the best approaches for managing the development of 

Internet websites. Some scholars believe traditional 

methods rooted in well-established scientific 

management principles lead to high quality Internet 

websites. However, contemporary management 

scholars believe agile methods have the characteristic 

of a job-shop or craft industry predating the scientific 

management era and are the best approach for 

managing the development of high-quality Internet 

websites. 
Agile methods are an approach used for managing 
the development of internet 
software, which aspire to 
improve website quality from
 early customer feedback 
on a large number of frequent releases. 
Our challenge is to identify, survey, select, or 
develop a scholarly instrument for measuring the use 

of agile methods and the quality of Internet websites, 
and then collect data to determine whether their use is 
linked to higher quality websites for electronic 

commerce by U.S. firms. Though agile methods are a 

general purpose approach for managing the 

development of new products, they are often 

associated with Internet soft
ware, which is the focus of 
this paper. 
There seems to be no middle ground on this issue. 
Some management scholars firmly believe agile 

methods lead to lower qua
lity websites and others 
believe agile methods lead to higher quality websites, 

with neither side offering 
much empirical evidence to 
support their claims. We hope to create the first in a 

long line of scholarly papers which test the 

relationships between the use of agile methods as a 

management approach for developing Internet 

websites and improved website quality for electronic 

commerce among U.S. firms. 
Internet websites are the fundamental tool for 
conducting business transactions on the Internet, 

otherwise known as electronic commerce. The U.S. 

alone generates around $1.95 
trillion in revenues using 
Internet websites each year
. Likewise, U.S. firms 
commit between $152 and $231 billion in information 

technology expenditures each year to achieve these 

revenues. Currently at stake is a ten fold return on 

investment in electronic commerce revenues to 

information technology expenditures by U.S. firms 

each year (e.g., revenues ÷ expenditures). U.S. managers have already committed between 
50% and 67% of their information technology projects 

to the use of agile management methods [1]. They may 

want to know whether the use of agile methods for 

managing the development of Internet websites leads 

to higher quality websites and what the potential 

consequences to lower electronic commerce revenues 

are if the detractors of agile methods are indeed correct 

Š That is, whether traditional methods rooted in 

scientific management principles are superior to those 

of agile methods associated with the much earlier job-

shop or craft industry traditi
on of the early industrial 
revolution in the U.S. The lessons associated with both 

sides of these debates will be addressed throughout this 
paper. 
  1.1. Rationale and justification  Today, U.S. firms generate more than $2 trillion 
each year from electronic commerce and Internet 

websites are a big part of this massive revenue stream 

[2]. As a result, the top 500 U.S. firms spend more 

than $231 billion per year on Internet related 

technologies in order to exploit this potential revenue 

[3]. Furthermore, much of the annual $400 billion U.S. 

defense budget is devoted to 
information technology as 
well [4], which may increase interest in the results of 

this paper. There are more than 250,000 software 

projects in the U.S. of which more than 72% have 

failed or are failing [5]. 
Therefore, executives and 
managers of U.S. firms may benefit from the 

knowledge that agile methods may be linked to better 

website quality. There has never been a greater need 

for scholarly studies of agile methods. 
 1.2. Goals and objectives  The research goals and objectives are to gather 
information that might determine if a link exists 

between the use of agile methods for managing the 

development Internet software and website quality for 

electronic commerce. Therefor
e, the research goals and 
objectives are to examine th
e empirical links between 
the theoretical factors of agile methods and scholarly 

constructs of website quality in the field of electronic 

commerce. Conversely, the research goals and 

objectives of this paper are also to determine if early 

customer involvement, iterative development, self 

organizing teams, and flexibility are not linked to 

scholarly models of website quality for electronic 

commerce. Negative correlati
ons between the factors 
of agile methods and webs
ite quality for electronic 
commerce are just as important as positive ones. 

 1.3. Research questions  The basic research area to be explored is whether 
the use of agile methods by U.S. firms is more 

effective than traditional approaches based on 

scientific management principles. A closely related 

question is how firms manage the development of 

Internet software for the $2 trillion U.S. electronic 

commerce industry? Another closely related question 

is what management approaches are linked to website 

quality for U.S. firms? And, of course, what factors are 

motivating the use of new management approaches 

such as agile methods? 
Specific questions include whether the major 
factors or principles of agile methods are linked to 
website quality among U.S. firms. Is the use of early 
customer involvement linke
d to website quality among 
U.S. firms? Is the use of iterative development linked 

to website quality among U.S. firms? Is the use of self 

organizing teams linked to 
website quality among U.S. 
firms? Is the use of flexibility linked to website quality 

among U.S. firms? Equally important is whether the 

answer to these questions is ﬁno.ﬂ 
 2.0 Literature review 
 2.1. History of computers and software  Modern electronic computer
s are characterized by 
four major generations: firs
t generation vacuum tube 
computers from 1940 to 1950, second generation 

transistorized computers from 1950 to 1964, third 

generation integrated circuit computers from 1964 to 

1980, and fourth generation microprocessor computers 

from 1980 to the present [6, 7, 8]. By 1972, there were 

170 programming languages in the U.S. alone [9] and 

today there are over 8,500 programming languages 

worldwide [10]. First and second generation computers 

did not have any operating systems, third generation 

computers consisted of the first multiprogramming 

operating systems such as UNIX, and fourth 

generation computers were 
best characterized by 
personal computer operating systems such as MS-DOS 

and Microsoft Windows [8]. The international 

software industry grew slowly in revenues for 

commercially shrink-wrapped software from about 

zero in 1964, to $2 billion per year in 1979, and $50 

billion by 1990 [11, 12]. By
 1990, there were over 
20,000 commercial shrink-wrapped software packages 

on the market [13]. And, the international software 

industry grew to more than $90 billion for pre-

packaged software and $330 
billion for all software-related products and services by 2002 [3]. First and 

second generation computers 
were not known to have 
been networked together, third generation computers 

gave rise to packet switching theory, and fourth 

generation computers gave rise to the Internet as we 

know it today, when the number of computers on the 

Internet reached 110 million in 2001 [14, 15]. 
 2.2. History of electronic commerce  Electronic commerce is as old as the computer and 
software industries themselves and predates the 

Internet era of the 1990s [16]. There is no standard 

taxonomy of electronic commerce technologies, but 

they do include major categories such as magnetic ink 

character recognition, au
tomatic teller machines, 
 electronic funds transfer, stock market automation, 
facsimiles, email, point of sale systems, Internet 

service providers, and electronic data interchange, as 

well as electronic retail trade and shopping websites 

[16]. Second generation computers were associated 

with electronic commerce technologies such as 

magnetic ink character rec
ognition or MICR created in 
1956 [17]. Third generation computers were associated 

with electronic commerce technologies such as 

automatic teller machines, electronic funds transfer, 

stock market automation, facsimiles, email, point of 

sale systems, electronic bu
lletin boards, and electronic 
data interchange. Early fourth generation computers 

were associated with electronic commerce 

technologies such as the vast automation of the stock 

market. Mid fourth generation computers were 

associated with electronic commerce technologies such 

as selected electronic servi
ces, electronic retail trade, 
and electronic shopping and mail order houses, which 

today garner more than $1.95 million in revenues [2]. 

 2.3. History of software methods 
 Methodologies may be regarded as formal 
processes for managing the development of 

information systems, which 
standardize the steps of design with the intention of improving productivity 

and quality [18]. The mainframe era of the 1960s 

included software methods such as database design, 

automatic programming, software project management, 

early user involvement, structured methods, and formal 

methods. The midrange era of the 1970s included 

software methods such as software life cycles, 

software reviews, object oriented methods, software 

testing, software environments, software quality 

assurance, and software processes. The microcomputer 

era of the 1980s included software methods such as 

rapid development, softwa
re reuse, and software 
architecture. Finally, the Internet era of the 1990s 

included software methods such as agile methods. 

 2.4. History of agile methods 
 Agile methods gained prominence in the late 
Internet and early personalized eras to accommodate 

the uniquely flexible nature of Internet technologies. 

Agile methods are an approach for managing the 

development of software, which are based upon 

obtaining early customer feedback on a large number 

of frequent software releases [19]. The dynamic 

systems development methodology or DSDM has three 

broad phases, which consist of requirements 

prototypes, design prototypes, and then an 
implementation or production phase [20]. Scrum is a 
light weight software development process consisting 

of implementing a small number of customer 

requirements in two to four week sprint cycles [21]. 

Extreme programming or XP consists of collecting 

informal requirements from on-site customers, 

organizing teams of pair programmers, developing 

simple designs, conducting rigorous unit testing, and 

delivering small and simple software packages in short 

two-week intervals [22]. Open source software 

development involves freely sharing, peer reviewing, 

and rapidly evolving software source code for the 

purpose of increasing its quality and reliability [23]. 

Crystal methods involve frequent delivery; reflective 

improvement; close communication; personal safety; 

focus; easy access to expert users; and a technical 

environment with automated testing, configuration 

management, and frequent integration [24]. Feature 

driven development involves developing an overall 

model, building a features list, planning by feature, 

designing by feature, and building by feature [25]. 

 3.0 Examples of agile methods  3.1. Scrum 
 In 1993, Jeff Sutherland of the Easel Corporation 
adapted the principles from the ﬁnew product 

development gameﬂ [26] to the field of computer 

programming management, explicitly calling it 

ﬁscrumﬂ [21]. In particular, scrum assumes that the 

ﬁsystems development process is an unpredictable and 

complicated process that can only be roughly 

described as an overall progression.ﬂ Furthermore, 

scrum™s creators believed the ﬁstated philosophy that 

systems development is a well understood approach 

that can be planned, estimated, and successfully 

completed has proven incorrect
 in practice.ﬂ Therefore, scrum™s creators set out to define a process as ﬁa loose 

set of activities that combin
es known, workable tools 
and techniques with the best that a development team 

can devise to build systems.ﬂ Today, scrum is 

composed of three broad phases: (a) pre-sprint 

planning, (b) sprint, and (c) post-sprint meeting. 

During the pre-sprint planning phase, computer 

programmers gather to pr
ioritize customer needs. 
During the sprint phase, computer programmers pretty 

much do whatever it takes to complete a working 

version of software that meets a small set of high 

priority customer needs. Finally, during the post-sprint 

meeting, computer programmers demonstrate working 

software to their customers, adjust their priorities, and 
 repeat the cycle. Today, scrum is gaining in 
widespread popularity for its overall simplicity. 

 3.2. Extreme programming 
 In 1998, 20 software managers working for the 
Chrysler Corporation published an article on how they 

devised a management approached called ﬁextreme 

programmingﬂ or XP to turn around a failing software 

project that would provide payroll services for 86,000 

Chrysler employees [22]. In 
their article, they stated 
that ﬁextreme programming rests on the values of 

simplicity, communication, testing, and 

aggressiveness.ﬂ They also st
ated that the ﬁproject had 
been declared a failure and 
all code thrown away, but 
using the extreme programming methodology, 

Chrysler started over from scratch and delivered a very 

successful result.ﬂ Extreme programming consists of 

13 principles: (a) planning game, (b) small releases, (c) 

metaphor, (d) simple design, (e) tests, (f) refactoring, 

(g) pair programming, (h) continuous integration, (i) 

collective ownership, (j) onsite customer, (k) 40 hour 

workweek, (l) open workspace, and (m) just rules. 

What these 20 software managers did was start over, 

get an informal statement of
 customer needs, gradually 
evolve a simple system design using iterative 

development, apply rigorous testing, use small teams 

of programmers, and get early customer feedback on 

their evolving design. In the end, Chrysler was able to 

deploy an operational payroll system serving more 

than 86,000 employees. Today, extreme programming 

is the most widely used management approach for 

developing software. 

 3.3. Feature driven development  In 1997, three software managers and five software 
developers created a software development approach 

called ﬁfeature driven developmentﬂ to help save a 

failed project for an international bank in Singapore 

[25]. In their textbook, they stated that ﬁthe bank had 

already made one attempt at the project and failed, the 

project had inherited a skeptical user community, wary 

upper management, and a demoralized development 

team.ﬂ Furthermore, they st
ated that ﬁthe project was 
very ambitious, with a highly complex problem 

domain spanning three lines of business, from front 

office automation to backend legacy system 

integration.ﬂ In order to address this highly complex 

problem domain that had already experienced severe 

setbacks, they created an 
agile and adaptive software 
development process that is ﬁhighly iterative, 

emphasizes quality at each step, delivers frequent 
tangible working results, provides accurate and 
meaningful progress, and is liked by clients, managers, 

and developers.ﬂ Feature driven development consists 

of five overall phases or processes: (a) develop an 

overall model, (b) build a features list, (c) plan by 

feature, (d) design by feature, and (e) build by feature. 

Feature driven development also consists of other best 

practices in software management and development 

such as domain object modeling, developing by 

feature, individual class ownership, feature teams, 

inspections, regular builds, configuration management, 

and reporting and visibility of results. 

 3.4. Dynamic systems development  In 1993, 16 academic and industry organizations in 
the United Kingdom banded together to create a 

management approach for commercial software called 

the ﬁdynamic systems development methodﬂ or simply 

DSDM [20]. Their goal was to ﬁdevelop and 

continuously evolve a public domain method for rapid 

application developmentﬂ in an era dominated by 

proprietary methods. Initially, DSDM emphasized 

three success factors: (a) ﬁthe end user community 

must have a committed senior staff that allows 

developers easy access to end users,ﬂ (b) ﬁthe 

development team must be stable and have well 

established skills,ﬂ and (c) ﬁthe application area must 

be commercial with flexible initial requirements and a 

clearly defined user group.ﬂ These success factors 

would later be expanded to include functionality 

versus quality, product vers
us process, rigorous 
configuration management, a focus on business 

objectives, rigorous software testing, risk management, 

and flexible software requirements. DSDM consists of 

five major stages: (a) feasibility study, (b) business 

study, (c) functional model iteration, (d) design and 

build iteration, and (e) implementation. The goal of 

DSDM is to explore customer requirements by 

building two full scale prototypes before the final 

system is implemented. 

 4. Studies of agile methods  4.1. Early case studies  In 1989, three managers from IBM in Rochester, 
Minnesota, published an article on how IBM devised a 

management approach called the ﬁnew development 

rhythm,ﬂ to bring the AS/400 midrange computer to 

market in only two years [27]. The new development 

rhythm consisted of six major principles: (a) 

modularized software designs, (b) software reuse, (c) 
 rigorous software reviews a
nd software testing, (d) 
iterative development, (e) overlapped software 

releases, and (f) early user involvement and feedback. 

IBM™s new development rhythm was a remarkable feat 

of management science, and boasted a long list of 

accomplishments: (a) time-to-market improvement of 

40%, (b) development of seven million lines of 

operating system software in 26 months, (c) 

compatibility with 30 billion lines of commercial 

applications, (d) $14 billion in revenues, and (e) the 
IBM corporation™s first Malcolm Baldrige National 

Quality Award. 
In 1995, two management scholars from MIT™s 
Sloan School of Management published a textbook on 

how Microsoft managed the development of software 

for personal computers, dubbed the ﬁsync-n-stabilizeﬂ 

approach [28]. The synch-n-stabilize approach 

consisted of six major principles: (a) parallel 

programming and testing, (b) flexible software 

requirements, (c) daily operational builds, (d) iterative 

development, (e) early customer feedback, and (f) use 

of small programming teams. Microsoft™s success was 

indeed remarkable, and 
their synch-n-stabilize approach did indeed help them create more than 20 

million lines of code for Windows and Office 95, 

achieve customer satisfaction levels of 95%, and 

maintain annual profit margins of nearly 36%. 
In 1998, two management scholars from both the 
Harvard Business School and MIT™s Sloan School of 

Management published a textbook on how Netscape 

managed the development of software for the Internet, 

dubbed the ﬁjudo strategyﬂ [29]. Some of the more 

notable principles characteristic of Netscape™s judo 

strategy included: (a) design products with 

modularized architectures; (b) use parallel 

development; (c) rapidly adapt to changing market 

priorities; (d) apply as much rigorous testing as 

possible; and (e) use beta testing and open source 

strategies to solicit early ma
rket feedback on features, 
capabilities, quality, and architecture. The judo 

strategy helped Netscape achieve $1.4B in revenues, a 

168% growth rate, and capture 90% of the market 

share for Internet browsers. 
 4.2. Early scholarly studies  In 1998, a management scholar from the Harvard 
Business School conducted a study on how U.S. firms 

manage the development of websites, referring to his 

approach as ﬁInternet timeﬂ [
30]. He set out to test the 
theory that website quality was associated with three 

major principles: (a) greater investments in 

architectural design, (b) early
 market feedback, and (c) 
greater amounts of generational experience. 
Correlational analysis supported two of the 
hypotheses, e.g., greater ar
chitectural resources and 
early market feedback were
 associated with higher 
website quality, but not the third, e.g., greater 

experience among computer programmers is associated 

with higher website quality. 
In 1999, two management scholars from Boston 
College™s Carroll School of Management conducted a 

case study of 28 software projects to determine the 

effects of Results driven
 incrementalism on project 
success [31]. Their approach consisted of the use of 

targeted business results, a series of non-overlapping 

increments, increments 
implementing everything 
required to produce desired results, 90 day iteration 

periods, and feeding back th
e results of each increment 
into subsequent iterations. What they found was that 

software projects that use iterative development deliver 

working software 38% sooner, complete their projects 

twice as fast, and satisfy ove
r twice as many software 
requirements. 
In 2003, two management scholars conducted a 
study of 42 software projects, 19 implementing agile 

methods and 23 of them implementing more traditional 

waterfall methods [32]. They measured actual effort in 

person hours, estimated effort in person hours, 

balanced relative error bias, actual schedule 

performance in calendar days, estimated schedule 

performance in calendar days, and the amount of 

functionality implemented. What they found was that 

agile projects have fewer overruns due to better 

requirements from early user involvement. 

 4.3. Early surveys  In 2003, Reifer Consultants conducted a survey of 
78 projects from 18 firms to determine the effects of 

using agile methods to manage the development of 

software [33]. What they found was that 14% to 25% 

of respondents experienced productivity gains, 7% to 

12% reported cost reductions, and 25% to 80% 

reported time-to-market improvements. 
In 2003, Shine Technologies conducted an 
international survey of 131 respondents to determine 

the effects of using agile methods to manage the 

development of software [34]. What they found was 

that 49% of the respondents experienced cost 

reductions, 93% of the respondents experienced 

productivity increases, 88% of the respondents 

experienced quality increases, and 83% experienced 

customer satisfaction improvements. 
In 2004, CIO Magazine conducted a survey of 100 
information technology executives with an average 

annual budget of $270 million to determine the effects 

of agile management on organizational effectiveness 
 [35]. What they found was that 28% of respondents 
had been using agile management methods since 2001, 

85% of the respondents were undergoing enterprise 

wide agile management initiatives, 43% of the 

respondents were using agile management to improve 

organizational growth and market share, and 85% said 

agile management was a core part of their 

organizational strategy. 

 4.3. Newest surveys  In 2006, Digital Focus conducted a survey of 136 
respondents to determine the effects of using agile 

methods to manage the development of software [36]. 

What they found was that 27% of the respondents were 

adopting agile methods for a project, 23% of the 

respondents were adopting agile methods company 

wide, 51% of the respondents wanted to use agile 

methods to speed up the development process, 51% of 

the respondents said they lack
ed the skills necessary to 
implement agile methods at the project level, 62% of 

the respondents said they lack
ed the skills necessary to 
implement agile methods at the organization level, and 

60% planned on teaching themselves how to use agile 

methods. 
In 2006, Version One conducted an international 
survey of 722 respondents to determine the effects of 

using agile methods to manage the development of 

software [37]. What they found was that 86% of the 

respondents reported time-to-market improvements, 

87% of the respondents reported productivity 

improvements, 86% of the respondents reported 

quality improvements, 63% of the respondents 

reported cost reductions, 92% of the respondents 

reported the ability to manage changing priorities, 74% 

of the respondents reported improved morale, 72% of 

the respondents reported risk reductions, 66% of the 

respondents reported satisfaction of business goals, 

and 40% were using the scrum method. 
In 2006, Ambysoft conducted an international 
survey of 4,232 respondents to determine the effects of 

using agile methods to manage the development of 

software [38]. What they found was that 41% of 

organizations were using agile methods; 65% used 

more than one type of agile method; 44% reported 

improvements in productivity, quality, and cost 

reductions; and 38% reported improvements in 

customer satisfaction. 

 5. Agile manifesto  In 2001, the central figures responsible for creating 
agile methods convened a council to analyze the 
similarities between their approaches, the goals of 
agile methods, and how agile methods differed from 

the traditional methods. The manifesto for agile 

software development states, ﬁwe are uncovering 

better ways of developing software by doing it and 

helping others do itﬂ [39]. They devised four broad 

values: (a) ﬁindividuals and interactions over processes 

and tools,ﬂ (b) ﬁworking software over comprehensive 

documentation,ﬂ (c) ﬁcustomer collaboration over 

contract negotiation,ﬂ and (d) ﬁresponding to change 

over following a plan.ﬂ Furthermore, they stated, 

ﬁwhile there is value in the items on the right, we value 

the items on the left more.ﬂ In other words, they value 

individuals and interactions, working software, 

customer collaboration, and responding to change 

much more than processes and tools, comprehensive 

documentation, contract negotiation, and following a 

plan. They also devised 12 broad principles, which can 

be summarized as: (a) early customer involvement, (b) 

iterative development, (c) self organizing teams, and 

(d) flexibility. Early customer involvement provides 
feedback on working software releases; iterative 

development means programmers produce frequent 

small releases of working software; self organizing 

teams means programmers are free to manage 

themselves as they see fit; and flexibility means use of 

informal processes, freely accepting changing 

requirements, and structuring the software itself to 

accommodate change. The values opposed software 

methods characterized by processes, tools, 

documentation, contract negotiation, and following 

plans. 

 6. Conceptual model of agile methods  Following an analysis of literature on agile 
methods, a conceptual model of agile methods was 

created. The conceptual model consisted of five broad 

factors: (a) early customer involvement, (b) iterative 

development, (c) self organizing teams, (d) flexibility, 

and (e) website quality. While a factor analysis of 

numerous textbooks and articles was conducted over a 

2.5 year period, [39] and [40] served as the primary 

sources of the four principal factors of agile methods. 

An analysis of 76 research studies from 44 scholarly 

journals covering 138 authors, 200 factors, 564 

variables, 2,550 instrument items, and 30,797 

respondents was then conducted to identify and select 

operational variables and meas
ures for each of the five 
factors comprising the model. 14 variables and 61 

instrument items were chosen that were: (a) 

conceptually aligned with the factors of agile methods 

and website quality, (b) used within the same study to 
 ensure inter-item reliability, and (c) proven to exhibit 
high levels of validity with the fewest number of 

instrument items. 

 6.1. Early customer involvement 
 6.1.1. Responsibility
. To what extent do customers 
lead the project team? To 
what extent do customers 
estimate project costs? To what extent do customers 

approve additional resources? To what extent do 

customers select hardware
 and software? To what 
extent do customers have 
responsibility for system 
success? To what extent do customers have 

responsibility for system development? [41] 
6.1.2. Hands-on activity
. To what extent do 
customers define or help define input/output forms? To 

what extent do customers define or help define screen 

layouts? To what extent do customers define or help 

define report formats? To what extent do customers 

design user training for systems? To what extent do 

customers create documentati
on for systems? To what 
extent do customers train other users to use systems? 

[41] 
6.1.3. User-IS relationship
. To what extent do 
customers draw up formalized
 agreements of work to 
be done? To what extent do customers make changes 

to formalized agreements of work to be done? To what 

extent do customers sign off on formalized agreements 

of work to be done? To what extent do customers 

receive information concer
ning progress or problems? 
To what extent do cust
omers review system 
requirements produced by developers? To what extent 

do customers approve system requirements produced 

by developers? To what extent do customers review 

work done by developers? To what extent do 

customers approve work done by developers? [41] 

 6.2. Iterative development 
 6.2.1. Non-linearity of process
. To what extent are 
product concepts redefined a lot of times in a project? 

To what extent are the c
oncept and prototype stages 
interwoven with each other? To what extent are new 

concept definitions formed after prototype tests? To 

what extent are product designs changed more than 

five times during development? [42] 
6.2.2. Knowledge development
. To what extent are lots of iterations based on customer feedback prior to 

release? To what extent are lots of new ideas 

developed and tested during development? To what 

extent are numerous failed experiments produced 

during development? To what extent are customer 

preferences learned as a result of new iterations? To 
what extent are actual products different from initial 
expectations? [43] 
6.2.3. Design change frequency
. To what extent 
are many design changes and redesigns produced 

during development? To what extent do design 

changes and redesigns gr
ow more frequent during 
development? [44] 

 6.3. Self organizing teams 
 6.3.1. Affective trust
. To what extent do team 
members make emotional investments in working 

relationships? To what extent do team members have 

sharing relationships with each
 other? To what extent 
do team members talk freely about difficulties and 

know others want to listen? To what extent do team 

members feel a sense of loss if they could no longer 

work together? [45] 
6.3.2. Cognitive trust
. To what extent do team 
members know everyone approaches their work with 

professionalism? To what extent do team members 

trust each other™s competence and preparation for a 

job? To what extent do team members believe they can 

rely on one another to do careful work? [45] 
6.3.3. Communication quality
. To what extent do 
team members answer each other™s questions in a 

timely manner? To what extent do team members 

respond to questions with correct and useful answers? 

To what extent do team members respond to questions 

in a thoughtful manner? [45] 

 6.4. Flexibility  6.4.1. Process flexibility
. To what extent are 
changes made to a system in a timely manner? To what 

extent does up-to-date knowledge and expertise about 

a system exist and is shared? To what extent do system 

developers and customers coordinate their actions with 

one another? [46] 
6.4.2. Structural flexibility
. To what extent does 
formal system design separation and modularity exist 

within a system? To what extent do systems have a 

built-in capacity for change
 and change acceptance? 
To what extent are data and components integrated 

consistently across the system? [46] 

 6.5. Website quality  6.5.1. Website design
. To what extent do websites 
provide in-depth information? To what extent do 

websites avoid wasting time? To what extent do 

websites make it quick and easy to complete 

transactions? To what extent do websites allow for 
 personalization? To what extent do websites have a 
good selection of products, services, and information? 

[47] 
6.5.2. Fulfillment/reliability
. To what extent do 
websites accurately represent products to be delivered? 

To what extent do websites provide products ordered 

from them? To what extent do websites satisfy the 

product delivery times they promise? [47] 
6.5.3. Security/privacy
. To what extent do 
websites provide the feeling that privacy is protected? 

To what extent do websites provide the feeling that 

transactions are safe? To what extent do websites have 

adequate security features? [47] 
6.5.4. Customer service
. To what extent are 
websites designed to respond to customer needs? To 

what extent are websites designed to show a sincere 

interest in solving problems? To what extent are 

websites designed to answer inquiries promptly? [47] 

 7. Summary  Similar, but not identical, papers have empirically 
examined the use of agile methods for managing the 

development of Internet software and website quality. 

These papers have implied or even shown limited and 

indirect linkages between the use of agile methods and 

primitive constructs of Internet software quality, 

reliability, and robustness. Some have even gone as far 

as to link the use of agile methods to basic notions of 

website quality and project success. In doing so, these 

papers have demonstrated some empirical evidence of 

the reliability and validity of these hypothesized 

inferences and knowledge claims. These papers may 

reduce the risks associated with attempting to link the 

use of agile methods to website quality for electronic 

commerce. The uniqueness of this paper is a holistic 

focus on all of the major tenets of agile methods. This 

paper proposes to link the use of agile methods to 

scholarly models of website quality for electronic 

commerce. Thus, this may be one of the first holistic 

examinations of agile methods for the $2 trillion U.S. 

electronic commerce industry. 

 8. References  [1] Sliwa, C. (2002). Users warm up to agile programming. 
Computer World, 36(12), 8-8. 
 
[2] U.S. Census Bureau. (2006)
. E-stats. Washington, DC: 
Author. 
 
[3] U.S. Department
 of Commerce. (2006). Information and 
communication technology: 2004. 
Washington, DC: Author.  [4] Fulghum, D. A., & Wall, R. (2004). Is this war? Aviation 
Week and Space Technology, 160(6), 22-24. 

 
[5] Standish Group. (2000). Extr
eme chaos. West Yarmouth, 
MA: Author. 
 
[6] Denning, J. (1971). Third ge
neration computer systems. 
ACM Computing Surveys, 3(4), 175-216. 

 
[7] Rosen, S. (1969). Electronic computers: A historical 

survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 1(1), 7-36. 

 
[8] Tanenbaum, A. (2001). M
odern operating systems. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
 
[9] Sammet, J. E. (1972b). Pr
ogramming languages: History 
and future. Communications of the ACM, 15(7), 601-610. 
 
[10] Pigott, D. (2006). HOPL: An interactive roster of 

programming languages. Retrie
ved October 21, 2006, from 
http://hopl.murdoch.edu.au 
 
[11] Campbell-Kelly, M. (1995). Development and structure 

of the international softwa
re industry: 1950-1990. Business 
and Economic History, 24(2), 73-110. 

 
[12] Steinmueller, W. E. (1996)
. The U.S. software industry: 
An analysis and interpretive hist
ory. In D. C. Mowery (Ed.), 
The international computer software industry (pp. 25-52). 

New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

 
[13] Middleton, R., & Wardley, P. (1990). Information 

technology in economic and social history: The computer as 

philosopher™s stone or pandora™s box? Economic History 

Review, 43(4), 667-696. 
 
[14] Leiner, B., Cerf, V. G., Clark, D. D., Kahn, R. E., 

Kleinrock, L., Lynch, D. C., et al. (1997). The past and 

future history of the internet. Communications of the ACM, 

40(2), 102-108. 
 
[15] Mowery, D. C., & Simcoe, T. (2002). Is the internet a 

US invention? An economic 
and technological history of 
computer networking. Research Policy, 31(8/9), 1369-1387. 

 
[16] Kalakota, R., & Whinston, A. (1996). Electronic 

commerce: A manager's guide
. Reading, MA: Addison 
Wesley. 

 
[17] Mandell, L. (1977). Diffusion of EFTS among national 

banks. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 9(2), 341-

348. 
 
[18] Hardgrave, B. C., Davis, F. D., & Riemenschneider, C. 

K. (2003). Investigating determin
ants of software developer's 
intentions to follow methodologi
es. Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 20(1), 123-151. 

 
[19] Beck, K. (1999). Embr
acing change with extreme 
programming. IEEE Computer, 32(10), 70-77. 
  [20] Millington, D., & Stapleton, J. (1995). Developing a 

RAD standard. IEEE Software, 12(5), 54-56. 

 
[21] Schwaber, K. (1995). Scrum development process. 

Proceedings of the 10th Annual ACM Conference on Object 

Oriented Programming Sy
stems, Languages, and 
Applications (OOPSLA 1995), Austin, Texas, USA, 117-

134. 
 
[22] Anderson, A., Beattie, 
R., Beck, K., Bryant, D., 
DeArment, M., Fowler, M., et al. (1998). Chrysler goes to 

extremes. Distributed Compu
ting Magazine, 1(10), 24-28.  
[23] O™Reilly, T. (1999). Lessons from open source software 

development. Communications of the ACM, 42(4), 32-37. 
 
[24] Cockburn, A. (2002). Ag
ile software development. 
Boston, MA: Addison Wesley. 

 
[25] Palmer, S. R., & Felsing, 
J. M. (2002). A practical guide 
to feature driven development. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 

Prentice Hall. 

 
[26] Takeuchi, H., & Nonaka, I. (1986). The new product 

development game. Harvard Business Review, 64(1), 137-

146. 
 
[27] Sulack, R. A., Lindner, R. J., & Dietz, D. N. (1989). A 

new development rhythm for 
AS/400 software. IBM Systems 
Journal, 28(3), 386-406. 
 
[28] Cusumano, M. A., & Selby, R. W. (1995). Microsoft 

secrets: How the world™s most powerful software company 

creates technology, shapes ma
rkets, and manages people. 
New York, NY: The Free Press. 

 
[29] Cusumano, M. A., & Yoffi
e, D. B. (1998). Competing 
on internet time: Lessons from 
netscape and its battle with 
microsoft. New York, NY: The Free Press. 

 
[30] MacCormack, A. (1998). Managing adaptation: An 

empirical study of product development in rapidly changing 

environments. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard 
University, Boston, MA, United States. 

 
[31] Fichman, R. G., & Moses, S. A. (1999). An incremental 

process for software implem
entation. Sloan Management 
Review, 40(2), 39-52. 
 
[32] Molokken-Ostvold, K., & Jorgensen, M. (2005). A 

comparison of software project overruns: Flexible versus 

sequential development models. IEEE Transactions on 

Software Engineering, 31(5), 754-766. 
 
[33] Reifer, D. J. (2003). The business case for agile 

methods/extreme programming (XP). Proceedings of the 

Seventh Annual PSM Users Group Conference, Keystone, 

Colorado, USA, 1-30. 
 [34] Johnson, M. (2003). Agile methodologies: Survey 
results. Victoria, Australia: Shine Technologies. 
 
[35] Prewitt, E. (2004). The agile 100. CIO Magazine, 

17(21), 4-7. 
 
[36] Digital Focus. (2006). Agile 2006 survey: Results and 

analysis. Herndon, VA: Author. 

 
[37] Version One. (2006). The state of agile development. 

Apharetta, GA: Author. 

 
[38] Ambler, S. W. (2006). Agile adoption rate survey: 

March 2006. Retrieved Se
ptember 17, 2006, from 
http://www.ambysoft.com/downl
oads/surveys/AgileAdoptio
nRates.ppt 
 
[39] Agile Manifesto. (2001). 
Manifesto for agile software 
development. Retrieved 
November 29, 2006, from 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org 

 
[40] Highsmith, J. A. (2002). 
Agile software development 
ecosystems. Boston, MA: Addison Wesley. 

 
[41] Barki, H., & Hartwick, J.
 (1994a). User participation, 
conflict, and conflict resoluti
on: The mediating roles of 
influence. Information Systems Research, 5(4), 422-438. 

 
[42] Jin, Z. (2000). How produc
t newness influences learning and probing and the linearity of its development process. 

Creativity and Innovation Management, 9(1), 21-45. 

 
[43] Joshi, A. W., & Sharma, S. (2004). Customer 

knowledge development: Antecedents and impact on new 

product performance. Journal of Marketing, 68(4), 47-59. 
 
[44] Sherman, J. D., Souder, W.
 E., & Jenssen, S. A. (2000). 
Differential effects of the primary forms of cross functional 

integration on product development cycle time. Journal of 
Product Innovation Management, 17(4), 257-267. 
 
[45] Stewart, K. J., & Gosain, S. (2006). The impact of 

ideology on effectiveness in open source software 

development teams. MIS Quarterly, 30(2), 291-314. 

 
[46] Nelson, K., M. & Ghods, M. (1998). Measuring 

technology flexibility. European Journal of Information 

Systems, 7(4), 232-240. 

 
[47] Wolfinbarger, M., & Gilly, M. C. (2003). Etailq: 

Dimensionalizing, measuring, and predicting etail quality. 

Journal of Retailing, 79(3), 183-198. 