 Combining Lean Thinking and Agile Methods for Software Development  
A Case Study of a Finnish Provider of Wireless Embedded Systems 
 
Pilar Rodríguez 
University of Oulu 
Pilar.Rodriguez@oulu.fi
 
 
Jari Partanen 
Elektrobit 
Jari.Partanen@elektrobit.com
 
 
Pasi Kuvaja 
University of Oulu 
Pasi.Kuvaja@oulu.fi
 
 
Markku Oivo 
University of Oulu 
Markku.Oivo@oulu.fi
  
 
Abstract
 
Lean Software Development 
has attracted a great 
deal of attention during last
 years. However, it remains 
unclear how Lean is implemented in a domain that 
fundamentally differs from th
e automotive industry in 
which it originated.   Th
is study provides empirical 
evidence of how Lean can be combined with Agile 
methods to enhance software development processes. A 
case study was conducted
 at Elektrobit Wireless 
Segment, which has used Ag
ile from 2007 and began to 
adopt Lean in 2010. Our findings evidence numerous 
compatibilities between Lean 
and Agile. In addition to 
well-established practices in
 Agile, Lean thinking has 
brought new elements to softwa
re development such as 
Kanban and work-in-progress limits, a “pull” and 
“less waste” oriented culture, and a stronger emphasis 
on transparency and collaborative development. 
Scaling flexibility, business
 management involvement 
and waste reduction were found as challenges, whilst 
setting up teams, self-organization and empowerment 
appeared easier to achieve. 
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Agile software development (ASD) has become 
popular among industrial practitioners because of its 
promising benefits in terms of decreasing time-to-
market and increasing development flexibility and 
product quality [1, 2]. However, Agile, as traditionally 
described in methods such as Scrum and eXtreme 
Programming, has been found to have limitations for 
scaling to the whole organization [3]. Lean is a new 
fuzzy term that has emerged in software development, 
especially in the circles closest to Agile methods, as a 
means of enhancing software development processes 
and scaling up Agile [4].  However, it is unclear how to 
implement Lean thinking—originally developed in the 
automotive industry—in a domain as software 
development, in which most items are intangible and 
where work primarily i
nvolves information and 
knowledgeable workers. Moreover, it is important to 
understand how Lean thinking can be combined with 
well-established software engineering practices to 
achieve the best-of-all approaches. 
The literature reveals that the idea of applying Lean 
to software development appeared already in the 90s 
[5], well before the Agile Manifesto 
(
http://agilemanifesto.org/
, 2001) was formulated. 
Originally, the focus was on making software 
development processes more efficient by removing 
‘
waste’
. Nowadays, it is generally believed that as long 
as Agile and Lean in software development nearly 
converge, they could complement each other and 
enhance software development processes [6, 7, 8]. Due 
to the attention that Lean is causing in the software 
industry, there is a growing body of literature in the 
topic [9, 10, 11, 12]. However, as recently noticed by 
Ebert, Abrahamsson and Oza “
We’re still in the early 
phases of truly understanding how Lean methods 
impact software developmen
t. […]. If everything is 
called ‘Lean’, and different methods from Agile to 
project management are mixed ad hoc, confusion 
results both in science and practice
” [13]. 
This paper contributes a better understanding of 
Lean in the context of ASD by analyzing how 
Elektrobit (EB), a large Finni
sh provider of wireless 
embedded systems, combines Agile methods and Lean 
thinking in its software development processes. 
Specifically, EB’s Wireless Segment, which has used 
Agile since 2007 and began to adopt Lean in 2010, is 
the object of study. During these years, the segment 
has perceived important enhancements in its software 
development processes. For example, internal metrics 
shows that productivity has increased by more than 
30% in some areas, customer satisfaction has also 
improved as a result of a better ability to respond to 
changes, information and ex
pertise are more properly 
shared and the work environment better encourages 
and support the generation of new ideas. 
The primary interest of this study is in identifying 
the essential elements that characterize EB’s Wireless 
Segment Lean and Agile way of working, especially 
those that the adoption of Lean has brought on top of 
practices that predate the Lean Software Development 
movement. In order to have a wide picture of the 
phenomenon, we are also interested in identifying 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5864770 challenges that EB wireless segment’s personnel has 
faced when transitioning to Lean and Agile as well as 
more readily achievable elements. In the context of an 
assessment exercise, we explored EB way of working 
by conducting five focus group sessions with EB’s 
software processes experts and a personnel survey 
filled by 49 employees of the segment.  The paper 
makes two primary contributions. First, it offers deeper 
insight into Lean Software Development, and the 
essential elements that define its combination with 
ASD. Second, although technologies are not 
universally good but appropriate according to the 
circumstances, our findings may be useful for other 
organizations in the process of adopting Lean thinking, 
insofar as they provide new insights into how Lean 
Software Development is occurring in practice and 
challenges potentially faced when adopting it. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
reviews related work. Section 3 describes the research 
setting. Section 4 presents the findings, which are 
discussed in Section 5. Finally, section 6 presents 
conclusions, limitations
 and future research. 
 
2. Background and related work  
 
This section introduces Lean thinking as originally 
developed in manufacturing and reviews prior research 
in the specific field of Lean Software Development. 
 
2.1. Lean thinking and its five core principles 
 
Lean thinking emerged in the Japanese automotive 
industry in the 1940s. Shortly, it focuses on 
maximizing value and minimizing waste in production 
processes. The difficulties of analyzing it arise because 
there is no common definition of Lean neither in 
manufacturing nor software development [10]. Thus, 
Lean has been differently de
scribed by various authors 
[14, 15, 16] and adapted to different domains such as 
aeronautics [17], health c
are [18] and retail clothing 
[19]. In this study, Lean Software Development is 
explored through the lens of the five principles of Lean 
thinking as originally identified by researchers from 
the 
International Motor Vehicle Program
 (MIT-IMVP) 
[15]. Since there is not a standardized definition of 
Lean thinking, we believe these principles can help us 
to simplify the analysis to the roots of Lean, avoiding 
secondary interpretations b
ias. These principles are:  

 
Value
, understood from a customer’s perspective, 
is the core focus of Lean. Everything done in the 
organization should produce value to the 
customer. Thus, if something absorbs resources 
but produces no value, it is considered 
waste
 and 
has to be removed. 

 
Value stream
 is the end-to-end collection of 
actions required to bring a product from customer 
order to customer care, ensuring that each activity 
provides customer value. 

 
Flow
 means that the value stream does not have 
discontinuities so that activities are organized as a 
continuous ‘flow’ enabling smooth deliveries. 

 
Pull
 implies producing products (or part of 
products) only when they are really needed (just-
in-time), on demand on the customer.  

 
Perfection
 centers in the concept of continuous 
improvement to achieve zero defects. 
 
2.2. Previous work on Agile and Lean software 
development 
 
The potential exhibited by Lean in terms of 
productivity, time-to-market, product quality and 
customer satisfaction [20] have aroused the interest of 
the software industry. Although, the universal 
application of Lean principles to knowledge work like 
software development is under debate [10], more 
authors agree that whilst specific practices and tools 
need to be adapted, Lean principles could be virtually 
applied to any domain [10, 21]. Lean thinking in 
software development star
ted as early as the 1990s 
with concepts such as Lean software production [5]. 
However, Lean Software Development is known today 
through its promotion by the Agile community [1], 
where it has progressively acquired an identity of its 
own [7]. As philosophies Agile and Lean have some 
differences [22]. However, the particularities of 
software products, such as its value proposition and 
malleability, open new opportunities for combining 
Agile and Lean in a software domain [8]. Thus, 
Poppendieck considered Lean thinking a “
platform 
upon which to build agile software development 
practices
.” [23]. Similarly, Edogmus said that “
if we 
avoid nit-picking based on semantics, it’s easy to come 
up with a many-to-many mapping 
[between the two 
approaches]” [6], and Coplien
 and Bjornwig argue that 
Agile and Lean complement 
each other by addressing 
different components of systems development [24]. 
Recent studies reviewing the body of knowledge of 
Lean in software development reflect the freshness of 
the topic. Based on 30 experience reports, Wang et al. 
[7] examined the purposes of applying Lean in ASD 
identifying six strategies: non-purposeful combination, 
using Lean to interact with other business areas while 
keeping Agile in software de
velopment, directly using 
Lean in software development processes to facilitate 
the adoption of Agile, using Lean in software 
development to improve Agile processes, transforming 
from Agile to Lean, and synchronizing Agile and Lean. 
4771 Although Wang et al.’s study offers significant insights 
into why Lean is applied 
with ASD, it does not deeply 
explore how the combination is actually implemented. 
More recently, Jonsson’s systematic literature review 
[25] reveals that although Lean Software Development 
is a promising approach, the low amount of available 
studies and the dominance of some authors make 
difficult to draw reliable conclusions. 
Most published knowledge in Lean Software 
Development are in form of books, which provide a 
diversity of interpretations of what Lean Software 
Development is and how it should be used (e.g. [4, 24, 
26, 27]). Perhaps, the most widely acknowledged 
generalization of Lean Software Development 
principles is the seven principles compiled by 
Poppendieck and Poppendieck: eliminate waste, 
amplify learning, decide as 
late as possible, deliver as 
fast as possible, empower the team, build in integrity, 
and see the whole [4]. Other authors have stressed on 
Lean architectures [24] or us
ing Kanban to bring Lean 
thinking [26].  However, there is also a growing body 
of scientific studies documenting case studies [9, 10, 
11, 12] and analyzing specific elements of Lean [28]. 
Table 1 summarizes previous work, which as our study 
address the “
how
” of Lean Software Development.  
 
Table 1. Studies on Lean Software Development 
Study 
Scope 
Main elements 
Middleton 
2001[29] 
Two 
software 
development 
teams
 
Reducing WIP 
Stop
-the-line 
Key f
actors: Organizational 
alignment and people aspects 
Middleton
Faxel and 
Cookson 
2005 [30] 
Case study  
Timberline 
Inc.
 
WIP limits and small batches dev. 
Cross
-functional teams  
Standardized procedures 
 
Transparency, data driven decisions
 
Mehta 
Anderson 
and
 
Raffo 
2008 [9] 
IT 
department, 
web
-
based 
sales system 
 
Frequent builds using cadence 
Substantial time on upfront tasks 
Integrated product teams 
 
Transparent development process 
Staats, 
Brunner 
and Upton 
2011 [10] 
Wipro Tech. 
(From 
waterfall to 
Lean)
 
Iterative development  
Streamlined communication
 
Visual control boards
  
More standardized tasks 
Middleton 
and Joyce 
2012 [11] 
Dev. team at 
BBC London 
using 
Kanban for 
one year
 
Transparency, Kanban boards and 
information radiators.
 
Daily standup meetings help to 
smooth workflow and to identify 
bottlenecks
 
Trimble 
and 
Webster 
2013 [31] 
Dev. team at 
NASA 
moving to 
Lean and 
Agile
 
Scrum, short delivery cycles 
User centered development 
Automatized unit testing
 
Continuous integration, “hackathon” 
Tools support (JIRA)
 
Rodríguez 
et. al  
2013 [12] 
Ericsson 
R&D 
Finland 
Scrum, Kanban, continuous integra. 
Transparency using R&D team areas 
Avoiding extra standardization
 
Empowerment and learning 
Although few, yet they reveal similitudes on how 
Lean is implemented in software development as well 
as conflictive aspects. Recurrent elements are Kanban 
[26], sometimes combined with Scrum, in which is 
called Scrumban, work in progress (WIP) limits, 
frequent builds through continuous integration, social 
and ‘people’ aspects such as team work and self-
organization, development tr
ansparency (i.e., where 
everyone can see the entire
 development chain) and 
continuous improvement. Discrepancies are also 
observable in aspects such as work standardization and 
effort allocated to upfront analysis and architectural 
work. Our previous work is also aligned with these 
findings. In a case study with Ericsson we found that 
its combination of Agile and Lean is based on “
well 
known agile elements such as product owners and 
continuous integration 
[and]
 newer elements like 
emphasized transpar
ency, R&D team areas, value 
stream mapping and WIP limits
” [12]. 
 
3. Case study design 
 
As the study is exploratory, we used a case study 
strategy that facilitates deep understanding of the 
phenomenon in its natural context [32]. 
 
3.1. Objective and research questions 
 
The goal of the study is to explore how software 
intensive companies combine Lean thinking and ASD 
in practice. Three complementary research questions 
drove the study as follows: 

 
RQ1. What elements characterize the 
combination of Agile 
methods and Lean thinking 
in software development? 

 
RQ2. What challenges are potentially faced when 
combining ASD and Lean thinking? 

 
RQ3. What elements are more easily achievable 
when combining ASD and Lean thinking? 
 
3.2. The case company and its context 
 
The study was conducted at the software 
development units of EB Wireless Segment. EB is a 
provider of embedded systems for the wireless and 
automotive industry. The company has more than 1600 
employees in seven countries. Its wireless segment 
employs approximately 600 people distributed mainly 
in Finland and the United States. The segment offers 
wireless solutions for customer-specific devices in a 
not mass-manufacturing scale, to customers such as 
telecommunication manufacturers and public defense 
authorities. The wireless segment is organized around 
projects with a wide scope, ranging from prototypes to 
4772 complete validated solutions. A software development 
project involves from 3 or 5 up to 20 teams working 
simultaneously, with 2 to 15 teams directly dealing 
with software development. Systems are developed for 
operating systems such as Linux, Android and 
Windows using languages such as C++. 
The initial implementation of Agile in EB Wireless 
Segment started in 2007 through pilots with selected 
teams and projects. In 2008, Agile, specifically Scrum, 
was taken into a wider context and the segment was 
organized around Scrum teams. However, as EB was 
maturing through its use of Agile, it was evident that 
scaling Agile extended well beyond just forming Agile 
teams. Thus, since 2010 Agile has been complemented 
with Lean principles, which are based on more holistic 
enterprise thinking. EB Wireless Segment could be 
included in the category E of Wang, Convoy and 
Cawley classification [7], ‘
purposeful application of 
lean approaches in ASD - 
Comprehensible application 
of Lean approaches to tr
ansform Agile processes
’. 
Currently, all software development teams use Scrum 
or Kanban as primary method. Projects are organized 
around product owners, Scrum or Kanban masters and 
teams. Approximately 100 Scrum masters have been 
trained, most of whom have been certified. As EB is 
also developing hardware other methods in addition to 
Scrum and Kanban are used. EB Wireless Segment has 
also progressively change
d to a leaner structure, 
reducing the number of organizational levels to 4 or 5.  
 
3.3. The research process 
 
The research was driven by
 the company’s desire to 
assess its transition to Lean and Agile.  It was 
composed of two phases. First, EB Wireless Segment’s 
way of working was explored using focus groups. 
Next, the segment was evaluated using a survey tool 
resulting from previous phase. Thus, the first phase 
focused on RQ1 and the second on RQ2 and RQ3. 
Phase 1: Focus group sessions
.
 Focus groups were 
conducted with experts guiding the transformation and 
employees applying Lean and Agile in different roles. 
For the design of the focus groups, we followed the 
guidelines of Kontio et al. [33]. As depicted in Table 2, 
five sessions were conducted, involving seven 
company representatives and three researchers. 
Company participants included two process managers, 
responsible for coaching Lean and Agile and ensuring 
processes quality; two program managers, responsible 
for programs consisting of multiple projects; one 
project manager, responsible 
for concrete projects; and 
two team members, one dev
eloper and one tester. The 
process managers participated in all sessions, whilst 
the rest took part in 
the last two sessions. 
Table 2. Focus groups design 
Variation 
Sessions 
Participants 
Effort 
Traditional 
face
-to
-
face
 
5 
(~10 
hours) 
Attending 
all sessions 
2 process 
managers
 
3 researchers 
70 
(p*h) 
Attending 
last
 
two 
sessions 
2 program managers 
1 project manager 
2 team members 
 
The question “
What are the essential elements that 
define our Lean and Agile wa
y of working, which 
should be included in a survey to assess our 
transformation?
” directed the discussions. As the 
number of questions that could be included in the 
survey was limited, only those elements considered as 
most important were included. As advised by Kontio et 
al. [33], a guide was used to focus the discussions. 
Based on company’s internal material and literature on 
the topic, the researchers prepared statements in 
advance that could be part of the assessment survey 
tool. For example, as the co
ncept of waste is relevant 
in Lean thinking, the statement ‘
We reduce wasteful 
activities frequently
’ was included in the guide. The 
guide had 57 statements. During the focus group, the 
statements in the guide were displayed on a big screen 
and discussed one by one. It was then decided whether 
the statement under discussion was relevant to EB 
Wireless Segment or not. New topics related to the 
statement under discussion usually surfaced and, 
similarly, elements considered in the guide but found 
to be of little interest were dropped. Sessions were 
conducted until there was an agreement on the survey, 
which was finally composed by 97 statements.  
Afterward, the survey statements were coded 
following the guidelines by Miles and Huberman [34, 
pp.54], to identify the most important elements of the 
Lean and Agile combination at EB Wireless Segment. 
During the coding process, descriptive codes emerged 
as important concepts were 
identified (e.g. “customer 
value”, “prioritization”, “tool”, “communication”, 
“teamwork”). Descriptive codes were subsequently 
clustered into themes such as “transparency” and 
“flexibility” and according to the five principles of 
Lean when possible, under the codes “value/waste”, 
“value stream”, “flow”, “pul
l” and “perfection” using 
interpretative codes. The coded survey was analyzed to 
answer RQ1 and a company representative (the second 
author) reviewed the primary findings for validation. 
Due to confidentiality, the survey cannot be made 
publicly available. However, Appendix A shows a 
fragment of it, including the coding analysis. 
Phase 2: Lean and Agile assessment survey
.
 In 
the second phase, the survey was used to assess EB 
Wireless Segment processes, identifying challenges 
and more easily achievable aspects. In addition to the 
4773 statements designed during the focus groups, questions 
about demographics and respondents’ profile were 
included. Statements were measured by asking the 
respondents to rate the extent to which he/she agrees 
with each of the 97 statements using a five-point Likert 
scale, from 
strongly agree
 (5), 
agree (4)
, 
neutral (3)
, 
disagree (2)
 to 
strongly disagree 
(1), including also an 
option “
I cannot answer/not applicable
” (0). 
Statements were designed in a positive way to define 
elements that should be in place. Four representative 
units of the segment were selected for the assessment. 
After piloting the questionnaire
 to check its legibility, 
an e-mail request was sent to 226 of the segment’s 
staff. 49 responses were collected. Table 3 shows 
information about respondent’s profile and experience 
in software development and ASD. 
 
Table 3. Survey design 
Sample 
Responses 
Respondents profile
 a
 
Experience 
4 units  
(226 
staff) 
49 
(Response 
rate 22%) 
Developers (53%) 
Testers (12%)
 
Scrum masters
 
(10%) 
Architects (10%)
 
Project managers (8%) 
Support functions (8%) 
Build&integration
 
(4%) 
Business manager
 
(2%) 
Product owner (2%) 
Release manager (2%) 
Quality manager (2%) 
Other (6%) 
SW development 
> 10 years: 59% 
2-10 years: 17% 
< 2 years: 23% 
 
Agile methods 
> 2 years: 36% 
6-
24 
months: 
30% 
 
< 6 months: 
32%
 
 
 
The results were analyzed by calculating the 
average of each statement. “
I cannot answer/not 
applicable
” responses were omitted from the analysis. 
Statements were shortened by lower averages and 
those with an average lo
wer than 3 (most of the 
respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed) were 
considered as challenges in applying Lean and Agile. 
In the case that more than one statement belonged to a 
specific topic, the average 
of the group was calculated. 
Statements with an average higher than 3.5 (most of 
the respondents agreed or strongly agreed), were 
similarly analyzed to identify more easily achievable 
elements. 
 
4. Findings 
 
4.1. RQ1: Agile and Lean combination 
  
Discussions during the focus groups mainly 
concentrated on elements already known in ASD. 
However, a Lean flavor extending Agile concepts was 
clearly perceived, and some distinctive elements of 
Lean were also pointed out. For example, although the 
idea of product owners analyzing the "voice of the 
customer" is not new and has been practiced for more 
than a decade as part of Agile adoption, the emphasis 
on doing only things that add customer value extends 
the responsibility of caring about value not just to 
product owners but also to everyone else inside the 
organization. Figure 1 summarizes the findings of this 
phase. Findings are grouped by elements already 
considered in the literature of ASD, and elements 
brought by Lean thinking. Overall, we did not find a 
radical change from ASD to Lean Software 
Development but rather an incremental improvement 
in which Agile is not abandoned when Lean is adopted. 
Two aspects appeared supporting transversally EB way 
of working, transparency and people-oriented culture. 
Value and Value Stream
.
 32% of the statements 
of the survey were related to customer value aspects. A 
network of business/product owners was established to 
manage customer value. Business owners work at 
higher level, whilst product owners work directly with 
development teams. Business owners define the 
release/feature content and priority the product 
backlog. Product owners collaborate closer with teams 
to prioritize and define user stories. Although features 
and user stories are defined from a customer’s point of 
view (in problem domain), architects and system 
designers also par
ticipate in release and sprint planning 
meetings to support business/product owners to bring 
to bear an architectu
ral and technical perspective when 
depicting the product. Moreover, in the case of large 
projects, one team is allocated to do upfront planning, 
analysis and architectural work in a Kanban mode, for 
those features that present a complicated Definition of 
Done. Release plannings are conducted every four 
weeks for both Scrum and Kanban teams. Scrum 
cycles last one or two weeks depending on the team. A 
unique product backlog is kept for each product using 
JIRA as the product management tool. At the end of 
each release/sprint, business/product owners validate 
and accept features and user stories respectively from a 
customer perspective. Although all these elements are 
part of Scrum, it was found that focusing on customer 
value is emphasized more by Lean thinking. Thus, 
discussions stressed that everything done in the 
organization should provide customer value, extending 
the responsibility of caring about value from product 
owners to everyone in the organization.  
Speed and flexibility, key in ASD, were 
emphasized during the discussions. Discussions 
focused on the importance of having short lead-time 
between business opportunities and deliveries, and 
having room for changes in releases to include latest 
customer/business requests. In the software intensive 
a.
 
Respondents could select more than one role
. 
4774 industry flexibility is perceived as a must to meet 
customer needs. In a manufacturing context, flexibility 
has been often considered a source of waste that may 
make Lean and Agile not fully compatible [22]. 
Flexibility in software development does not derive 
from development volume, but from changeable 
customer needs. The fact that software is easily 
malleable and value is not limited to a single time-
bound effort [21] enables new ways of combining 
flexibility and Lean thinking in a software context [8]. 
Finally, eliminating waste and seeing the whole 
were identified as newer elements brought by Lean 
thinking. Regarding waste, employees at EB wireless 
segment are trained to identify and reduce wasteful 
activities in their work. Delayed decision making, 
which usually causes unnecessary handover during the 
development process, excess WIP in the form of 
backlog work waiting to be done and unused features 
were discussed as typical sources of waste in software. 
Excess WIP was found to be especially relevant 
because it easily become
s obsolete being a potential 
source of bugs. On the other hand, seeing the whole 
was found important to recognize that systems are not 
simply the sum of their parts. It was discussed that 
organizational entities cannot work independently 
because the outcome is related to their cooperative 
capabilities to create value. 
Interacting components are 
important for reaching smooth value streams and 
avoiding local optimizations. Previous studies have 
indicated that “
the implementation of [product owner 
roles] has frequently led to violate the principle of 
optimizing the whole
” [21]. In manufacturing, Lean 
does not consider an intermediate role for defining and 
prioritizing work for separate teams as the role of 
Product Owner, but a Chief engineer takes the 
responsibility of the product as a whole. EB Wireless 
Segment uses a network of product owners but 
promotes to take responsibility for the product as a 
whole already from implementation teams. The 
statement “
Implementation teams see the big picture, 
collaborate with other tea
ms and take responsibility 
for the product as a whole
” reflected this aspect.  
Flow and Pull
. Continuous planning and 
execution, which is extended from development teams 
to organizational strategy (internally called ‘
strategic 
agility
’), is a key element of the EB Wireless Segment 
way of working. At implementation level, two weeks 
Scrum sprints, continuous integrations and test 
automation support continuous planning, cadence and 
smooth deliveries. At business level the strategy of the 
segment is reviewed partially monthly and wholly 
quarterly to review the progress of the plans, results 
and key performance indica
tors. The purpose is to 
transform from annual clock orientation toward 
continual reconsideration of
 long-term targets, based 
on implementation feedback. Long term targets are 
divided into short term plans and executed in a Scrum 
mode. This way of working enables EB Wireless 
Segment to reduce the elapsed time between making a 
decision and seeing the consequences (shorter 
feedback cycles), endorsing continuous learning and 
improving the ability to adapt to customer changes.  
Figure 1. Main elements characterizing EB’s Wirele
ss Segment Agile and Lean way of working 
4775 Continuous planning and execution requires a high 
level of synchronization among business managers, 
product owners and project teams. Techniques such as 
Scrum of Scrum meetings, common iteration schedules 
for Scrum teams and fluent communication and 
cooperation inside and outside teams support 
synchronization and coordination. Estimations also 
play an important role. Th
e emphasis is not on 
ensuring predictability and control.  Contrarily, 
uncertainty is managed by continuous learning and 
adaptation through smaller 
and accurate estimations. 
The principle of pull has been emphasized with the 
adoption of Kanban. Kanban is
 increasingly used for 
visualizing the workflow, measuring lead-time and 
explicitly limiting the WIP. Results of the assessment 
survey indicated that approximately 40% of EB 
Wireless Segment is using Kanban as the development 
method. For preventing discontinuities, Scrum or 
Kanban masters and Product Owners act as firewalls to 
protect teams from external in
terruptions so that teams 
can focus on the highest priority tasks. Especial focus 
is also put on the decision making process. Delays in 
decision making were considered a source of waste 
preventing flow. Thus, some of the focus group 
discussions stressed that decision making should not 
cause delays in the definition of releases and in the 
work of development teams. 
Perfection
. Agile continuous improvement has 
been extended to continuous learning with the adoption 
of Lean. Besides retrospectives and Scrum masters 
facilitating the work of the teams and eliminating 
impediments (already considered in Agile methods), 
Kanban and its ability to visualize queues, techniques 
to find the root cause of the problems as well as 
promoting sharing learning inside the organization 
were discussed during the sessions. One problem 
attributed to retrospectives
 is that if opportunities for 
improvement are not seriously considered, 
improvement activities begin to accumulate without 
positive results. Thus, EB Wireless Segment wanted 
not just to assess whether retrospectives were in place 
but also whether teams were really changing their way 
of working based on the results of retrospectives and 
finding the root causes of problems to avoid repeating 
the same issues from retros
pective to retrospective.  
Transparency
. Transparency was the most stressed 
element at EB Wireless Segment
 in the discussions. In 
EB Wireless Segment’s view, transparency is the key 
enabler to identify opportunities for improvement and 
to achieve aligned goals. So, almost all statements in 
the survey made in one way or another reference to 
transparency. Visibility to cu
stomer value at all levels 
and in all directions (from management to everyone 
and from everyone to management) was stressed. 
Statements such as “
Customer feedback is received and 
provided continuously durin
g the whole development 
lifecycle
”, “
My team has visibility of the plans and 
roadmaps that they are contributing to
” and 
“
Stakeholders attend and are interested in sprint 
reviews and demos
” resulted from the focus groups. 
Other statements evidencing the importance of 
transparency were “
All team members participate in 
Stand-up meetings
” and “
The members of my team 
daily make available the st
atus of our project into 
JIRA, wiki or other
 
similar tool
”. Tools such as JIRA 
and wikis were found important to support 
transparency, communicatio
n, cooperation and short 
feedback loops. Effort has been invested in creating an 
environment that can be easily understood by all team 
members, independently of the member profile. Tools 
help share knowledge and spread management’s top-
down vision and strategy directions, which is discussed 
and improved as a consequence of people 
empowerment. Continuous integration, code review 
and code analysis tools help also teams to rapidly 
receive feedback in developm
ent issues such as bugs. 
People oriented development. 
The people factor 
has been highly emphasized in ASD [35].  Respect 
people is also a pillar of Lean thinking [16], which 
ranges from more philosophical to more practical 
aspects such as humanity, respecting culture and 
customs, enhancing quality of life and enhancing 
individual creativity and teamwork. In the specific case 
of EB Wireless Segment, team work is strongly 
promoted. In fact the whole segment is organized 
around Scrum/Kanban teams with a common team 
goal. Because software development relies on 
knowledgeable and creative people, teams’ self-
organization and empowerment is also strongly 
promoted. When team members have responsibility, 
they can make decisions faster and speed up the 
development process. The people factor was 
represented in the survey through statements such as 
“
All my team members co
mmit to sprint goals
”, 
“
Differences between individual
s are respected in my 
team
” and “
Implementation teams enjoy responsibility, 
trust and respect and not scapegoating
.” 
 
4.2. RQ2 and RQ3: Assessment results 
 
In the second phase of the study, the Lean and 
Agile assessment survey was conducted to assess EB 
Wireless Segment way of working. Table 4 shows the 
results of this phase. Overall, strengths refer mainly to 
elements already considered in ASD, where EB has 
longer experience. However, key elements brought by 
Lean such as transparency and focus on customer value 
scored also highly in the survey. 
4776 Table 4. Top five st
rengths and challenges 
Strengths 
Avg. 
Challenges 
Avg. 
1.Implementation set-up 
4.16 
1. Flexibility 
2.69 
2. Respect people 
3.90 
2. Business mgmt. tasks 
2.72 
3. Self-organization 
3.71 
3. Waste reduction 
2.82 
4.Focus on customer   
   value  
3.68 
4.Syncrhonization and  
   coordination 
2.86 
5.Transparency 
3.63 
5. Short feedbak loops 
2.87 
 
Challenges. 
Flexibility, in the form of capacity to 
include changes in products 
during the development, 
scored the lowest in the survey (2.69). Agile provides 
thoughts for increasing 
velocity and flexibility. 
However, to realize in a practical manner, flexibility 
needs to be through in the whole value stream, which 
according to the results of the survey remains as a 
challenge.
 
On the other hand, short feedback loops from 
teams up to highest business levels are important in 
Agile and Lean. However, the 
results of the assessment 
showed that in practical set-ups it is not easy to involve 
business management to prioritize the backlog, defining 
the feature content and accepting the developed features 
as done. Statements regarding to these tasks scored 
2.93, 2.47 and 2.78 respectively. Eliminating waste is 
other key principle in the Lean thinking. Assessed 
teams perceived that they were not able to remove 
waste so much (2.82), even they could identify it (3.6), 
because of their complex project set-up. Finding 
resources and time for carrying out activities to 
eliminate waste appeared as a challenge.
 
Regarding 
synchronization and coordination, one of the 
bottlenecks was identified in the collaboration and 
synchronization of the hardware and software teams. 
Deliverables may vary from minutes or hours in 
software up to weeks in hardware development. This 
topic resulted in the survey in a quite low score (2.86). 
Finally, teams did not see the feedback loop as short as 
expected (2.87). Long feedback loops were found to be 
cause by challenges to involving business management 
with development and to integrating suppliers with 
development tasks. 
More ready achievable elements.
 Set-up at 
implementation level, referr
ing to elements of Agile 
methods such as roles, Scrum ceremonies and practices 
such as continuous improvem
ent and automated testing, 
appeared to be in good situation. Thus, statements such 
as “
The role of the Product Owner is clear to me”
, 
“
Architects and System Desi
gners are available for 
defining Feature/Release content
”, “
The Scrum Master 
is available for my team when needed
” and 
“
Continuous Integration 
environment is available
” 
scored 4.79, 4.3, 4.03, and 3.82 respectively.  Similarly, 
statements designed to assess people related aspects 
such as “
Differences between individuals are respected 
in my team
”, “
I am empowered to make decisions by 
myself
”, and “
Implementation teams are self-organized
” 
scored quite high with 4.0, 3.83, and 3.78 respectively. 
Regarding to customer value and transparency, some 
statements evidenced the go
od status of these elements. 
“
All features delivered are relevant to our customers
” 
and “
Projects complete with a satisfied customer
”, 
scored 3.67 and 3.71 respectively. “
All team members 
participate in Stand-up meetings
” (4.14), “
It is clear to 
me in which Release feature delivery belongs
” (3.63), 
“
My team has visibility of the plans and roadmaps that 
they are contributing to
” (3.37) got also good scores. 
 
5. Discussion  
 
Although Lean Software Development was initially 
mainstreamed by Poppendieck’s work [4], recently 
much more diversity has been introduced [13]. The 
combination of Agile and Lean has been questioned in 
manufacturing [22]. As most of previous work, our 
study confirms that Lean and Agile thinking are not that 
dissimilar in a software domain. Thus, software 
intensive companies select those elements from Agile 
and Lean that suit well in a software development 
context, creating their own interpretation of Lean 
Software Development. What EB Wireless Segment 
considers works better for them includes a combination 
of elements from ASD, to
 achieve flexibility, Lean 
thinking, to scale Agile and make software 
development processes more efficient, and good 
practices of software engineering.  The “
softer
” side of 
software development has been highlighted during last 
years [35]. So, it may be a misconception that Agile and 
Lean Software Development serve as easy excuses for 
irresponsibility with no regard to the engineering side 
of the software discipline. However, it is interesting to 
observe that technical and human aspects were balanced 
in the survey. Thus, EB Wireless Segment recognizes 
the importance of the social aspect of software 
development, but without forgetting engineering 
practices, similarly important. For example, from a 
technical perspective practices such as continuous 
integration, concurrent de
velopment and testing, test 
automation and static code analysis were considered as 
essential during the focus groups.  
Comparing our findings with previous studies 
several similarities can be found. The network of 
product owners for managing customer value is also 
discussed in [12]. Similarly to Middleton’s work [29, 
30, 11], we found WIP limits as an important element 
for achieving flow in a software development context. 
Actually, Kanban is more and more used and helps to 
visualize and manage WIP, and create a pull (versus a 
push) culture. Also, as mentioned in previous studies 
[12], continuous integration and test automation 
appeared as keys to support flow by frequent and 
smaller builds. Also, the concepts of transparency and 
4777 streamlined communication, emphasized in previous 
studies [30, 9, 10, 11, 12], were found essential. What 
is different in the case of
 EB Wireless Segment is its 
strong reliance on JIRA for supporting transparency. 
EB uses JIRA not just for tracking the status of the 
product (features and user stories) but also for making 
visible everything in its product development cycle 
without restrictions in sharing information, from 
development tasks to business goals and strategy.  
Based on the results of the assessment, some lesson 
can be learnt. On the one hand, we learnt that setting 
up Agile and Kanban tea
ms appears as a relatively 
simple task. Aspects such as self-organization and 
focusing on customer value got also good scores in the 
assessment. However, involving business management 
and achieving company level agility remains still as 
challenges, which challenges also to achieve short 
feedback loops and 
prevents flow. Thus, although Lean 
thinking supports in scaling Agile from development 
teams to software development units, embracing also 
other parts of the organization such as hardware was 
found still as a challenge. 
 
6. Conclusions, limitations and future work  
 
This study examines how Lean and Agile are 
applied in software intensive organizations by 
analyzing the case of EB Wireless Segment. The 
results show a balance 
between social and technical 
aspects, where Lean thinking not just guides the way of 
scaling Agile but also adds new elements to software 
development processes. In addition to practices well 
established in Agile over the past few years, Lean 
thinking brings elements such as WIP limits and the 
pull concept, mainly by the usage of Kanban, the 
concept of removing waste, the principle of see-the-
whole and a greater emphasis on transparency and 
collaborative development. On the other hand, whilst 
setting up teams and establishing self-organization 
were relatively easy to achieve, this study found it was 
much more challenging to scale flexibility, reduce 
waste and involve business management in the Agile 
and Lean way of working. 
Our study suffers the common limitations in case 
studies [32]. Since the study was conducted in a single 
company, it is possible that our observations cannot be 
fully generalized to other settings (external validity). 
However, Lean Software Development is a relatively 
unexplored phenomenon. Since EB has showed some 
success in its transformation, our results can bring new 
insights and guide organizations pursuing a similar 
endeavor. It may be also 
questioned whether the Lean 
implementation of EB Wireless Segment is actually 
fully conformant with Lean thinking. Our study does 
not focus on epistemological concerns. However, we 
are convinced EB is consciously trying to transform 
itself to a Lean organization. Regarding data collection 
and analysis methods
, in an attempt to minimize threats 
to construct validity, a material walkthrough workshop 
was organized at the beginning of the research, which 
helped researchers and particip
ants to speak the same 
language (construct validity). Moreover, multiple data 
sources (process documentation and focus groups) 
were used and participants’ triangulation lent the data 
greater accuracy and validity
. As future work, elements 
identified as important, as well as strengths and 
challenges, are topics of 
interest to be studied in 
greater detail. We are conduc
ting similar studies in 
other companies to enable analytical generalization and 
extend results to cases with
 common characteristics.  
 
7. References  
 
[1] T. Dybå, and T. Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile 
software development: a systematic review”, Inf. Softw. 
Technol., vol. 50, pp. 9-10, 2008. 
[2] P. Rodríguez, J. Markkula, M. Oivo, K. Turula, “Survey 
on Agile and Lean Usage in Finnish Software Industry”, in 
ESEM, pp. 139-148, 2012. 
[3] K. Vilkki, “When agile is not enough”, in 1st Int. 
Conference on Lean Enterprise Software and Systems, 2010. 
[4] M. Poppendieck, and T. Poppendieck, Lean software 
development: An agile toolkit, Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2002. 
[5] P. Freeman, Lean concepts in software engineering, 
IPSS-Europe International Conference on Lean Software 
Development, Stuttgart, Germany, pp. 1-8, 1992. 
[6] K. Vilkki, and H. Erdogmus, “Point/Counterpoint”, IEEE 
Software, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 60-63, Sept.-Oct. 2012. 
[7] X. Wang, K. Convoy, and O. Cawley, “Leagile software 
development: An experience report analysis of the 
application of lean approaches in agile software 
development”. Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 85, no. 
6, pp. 1287-1299, 2012. 
[8] P. Rodríguez, J. Markkula, M. Oivo, and J. Garbajosa, 
“Analyzing the drivers of the combination of lean and agile 
in software development companies”, 13th Int. Conference 
on Product-Focused Software Development and Process 
Improvement, 2012.  
[9] M. Mehta, D. Anderson, D. Raffo, “Providing value to 
customers in software development through lean principles”, 
Software Process Improvement and Practice, vol. 13, no. 1, 
pp. 101-109, 2008. 
[10] B. Staats, D. Brunner, and D. Upton, “Lean principles, 
learning, and knowledge work: evidence from a software 
services provider”, Journal of Operations Management, 
vol.29, no. 5, pp. 376-390, 2011. 
4778 [11] P. Middleton, D. Joyce, “Lean Software Management: 
BBC Worldwide Case Study”, Engineering Management, 
IEEE Transactions on , vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 20-32, 2012. 
[12] P. Rodríguez, K. Mikkonen, P. Kuvaja, M. Oivo and J. 
Garbajosa, ”Building lean thinking in a telecom software 
development organization: strengths and challenges”, 
Conference on Software and System Process (ICSSP), 2013. 
[13] C. Ebert, P. Abrahamsson A, and N. Oza, “Lean 
Software Development”,  IEEE Software, vol.29, no.5, pp. 
22-25, 2012.  
[14] T. Ohno, Toyota production system: beyond large-scale 
production. Portland, Oregon: Productivity Press, 1988. 
[15] J.P. Womack, and D.T. Jones, Lean thinking. Simon and 
Schuster, New York, 1996. 
[16] J. K. Liker, The Toyota way: 14 management principles 
from the world's greatest manufacturer. McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
[17] M. Venables, “Boeing: going for lean”, Manufacturing 
Engineer, vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 26-31, 2005. 
[18] C.S. Kim, D. A. Spahlinger, J. M., Kin, R. J. Coffey, 
and J. E. Billi, “Implementation of lean thinking: one health 
system's journey”, Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf., vol. 35, no. 
8, pp. 406-413, Aug. 2009. 
[19] N. Tokatli, “Global sourcing: insights from the global 
clothing industry—the case of Zara, a fast fashion retailer”, J. 
of Economic Geography, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-38, 2007. 
[20] B. Bremer, and D. Dawson, “Can anything stop 
Toyota?”, Business Week, vol. 117, Nov. 17, 2003. 
[21] M. Poppendieck, M. Cusumano, “Lean Software 
Development: A Tutorial”, IEEE Software, vol.29, no5, 
pp.26-32, 2012. 
[22] J. Ben Naylor, M. Naim, D. Berry, “Leagility: 
integrating the lean and agile manufacturing paradigms in the 
total supply chain”, Int. Journal of Production Economics, 
vol.62, no.1, pp.107-118, 1999. 
[23] M. Poppendieck, “Principles of Lean Thinking”, 
OOPSLA Onward!, November, 2002. 
[24] J. Coplien, and G. Bjornwig, Lean architecture for agile 
software development. John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 2010. 
[25] H. Jonsson, “Lean Software Development: a systematic 
literature review”, IDT Mini-conference on Interesting 
Results in Computer Science and Engineering, 2012. 
[26] D. Anderson, Kanban: Successful Evolutionary Change 
for Your Technology Business, Blue Hole Press, 2010. 
[27] C. Larman, and B. Vodde, Scaling Lean & Agile 
Development, Addison-Wesley, 2009. 
[28] K. Petersen, and C. Wohlin, “Measuring the flow in lean 
software development”, Software: Practice and Experience, 
vol. 41, no. 9, pp. 975-996, 2010. 
[29] P. Middleton, “Lean software development: two case 
studies”, Software Quality J., vol.9, no.2, pp.41-252, 2001. 
[30] P. Middleton, A. Flaxel, A. Cookson, “Lean software 
management case study: timbe
rline”, Extreme programming 
and agile processes in software engineering (XP 2005). 
[31] J. Trimble, and C. Webster,  “From Traditional, to Lean, 
to Agile Development: Finding the Optimal Software 
Engineering Cycle”. 46th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences (HICSS), pp. 4826-4833, 2013. 
[32] P. Runeson, and M. Höst, “Guidelines for conducting 
and reporting case study research in software engineering”, 
Emp. Software Eng., vol. 14, no 2, pp. 131-164, 2009. 
[33] J. Kontio, J. Bragge, and L. Lehtola, The focus group 
method as an empirical tool in software engineering.  Guide 
to advanced empirical software engineering. Springer, 2008. 
[34] M. B. Miles, and A. M. Huberman, Qualitative data 
analysis: an expanded sourcebook. Sage Publications, 1994. 
[35] A. Cockburn, and J. Highsmith, “Agile software 
development, the people factor”, Computer, vol. 34, no. 11, 
pp. 131-133, 2001. 
 
 
 
 
ASD and Lean Thinking elements 
Survey statements
 (20/97 statements)
 
Lean Principles 
Themes 
Elements 
already in 
ASD 
Value and 
value stream 
 
Product owners 
Business Managers define and prioritize Feature/Releases for Implementation Teams. 
Product backlog  
Features are clear and concrete for establishing User Stories without problems. 
Flexibility  
There is room to make changes in releases for including latest customer requests. 
Speed 
Lead time for business opportunity and delivery is short enough. 
Flow and 
Pull 
Continuous 
planning/execution 
Plans (such as Release/Sprint plans) are updated at the end of every Sprint. 
Developers integrate code 
multiple times per day. 
Synchronization  
All Implementation Teams are synchronized in the same iteration schedule. 
Estimations  
Implementation Team's velocity is measured and used as input for Release Planning. 
Perfection 
Retrospectives 
My team changes the way of working based on the results of retrospectives 
Elements 
brought 
by Lean 
Thinking
 
Value and 
value stream 
Customer value 
Everything that we do in the organizations is adding value to our customer. 
Seeing-the-whole 
Teams see the big picture and take resp
onsibility of the pr
oduct as a whole. 
Eliminating waste  
No unnecessary handover is performed along the development process. 
Flow and 
Pull 
Kanban 
Kanban runs within a 4 week release cycle 
WIP limits 
There is not excess WIP inventory [also a source of waste] 
Discontinuities 
Decision making outside my Implementation Team don’t causes delays in my work. 
Perfection 
Root cause analysis 
The same issues/problems are not repeated from Sprint to Sprint. 
Learning  
We actively share learning and best practices in the organization 
Other 
key 
elements 
Transparency 
Feedback loops  
Feedback loops between implementation teams and business owners are short enough 
Tools support 
Information in JIRA /wikis or similar tools can be understood by all team members. 
People
 
Respect people
 
 
Differences between individuals are respected in my team. 
Appendix A. A fragment of the Lean and 
Agile assessment survey (including coding) 
4779