   Coordination in Large-Scale Agile Software Development:  
A Multiteam Systems Perspective 
 Alexander Scheerer 
SAP AG &  
Institute for Enterprise Systems, 
University of Mannheim 
 alexander.scheerer@sap.com
Tobias Hildenbrand 
SAP AG 
 tobias.hildenbrand@sap.com  
Thomas Kude 
University of Mannheim 
 kude@uni-mannheim.de  
  Abstract
 The widespread use of lean and agile development 
methods shows a fundamental shift in how 

organizations try to cope with complexity and volatility 

issues. In large-scale settings, the coordination of 
many people often results in a team of teams setup. We 
introduce the multiteam systems perspective to 

describe different conceptual strategy types for inter-

team coordination. These types are illustrated with 

examples from a large enterprise software 
development organization.  
 1. Introduction  
Lean and agile development methods have become 
widespread in use and are the de facto standard in large 

parts of many software organizations of different sizes 

[7,18,31,41,52,65,66]. The introduction of these 
approaches shows a fundamental shift in how 
organizations try to cope with complexity and volatility 

issues [13]. 
Previous development processes have tried to cope 
with these problems by 
“risk minimization
” measures 
in the form of large upfront planning and rigid stage-

gated process steps and structures. This led to 
inflexible requirements management, long time-to-
market and a fear of delivery, as markets evolved in the 

months from project start [29]. 
The introduction of agile development and lean 
principles over the last decade [6,45,46] have shifted 
coping strategies for complexity and volatility towards 

more collaborative and cooperative approaches [19] 
with empirical process controls [55]. Self-empowered 
teams are one of the main changes regarding this issue. 

Planning Poker, Pair Programming, User Story 

Mapping [44] and other cooperative approaches in the 

development process are only a few examples of the 

methodological shift. Many of these new approaches 
have been regarded in light of small company or single 
team settings, or with student developer teams. 
However, these development methods have gained 

prominence in large-scale settings as well. These 
contexts show particular challenges as large groups of 
people need to be coordinated, which usually results in 
a hierarchical team of teams setup [24] where several 
teams have to work closely together in order to release 

a single software product. This organizational setup 

has been defined as a multiteam system (MTS) by 

Mathieu et al. [36] 
who assert that MTSs are “two or 
more teams that interface directly and interdependently 

in response to environmental contingencies toward the 
accomplishment of collective goals”
 [36:290]. 
As the beginnings of Agile Development lie in 
small team contexts, the available literature on inter-
team coordination in large-scale setups is sparse. The 
main inter-team coordination mechanism in these types 

of development environments is, according to 

practitioner literature, the Scrum-of-Scrums approach 
[25,56]. Previous publications on this topic remain 
scarce, only seven papers could be identified by the 

authors [5,26,42,43,57,60,61] that come to the 

conclusion that coordination on an inter-team level 

remains extremely challenging [42]. 
Previous studies found that the theoretical 
understanding in the field of agile development is 
lacking and have called for more studies on the 
underlying fundamental concepts of agile software 
development [1,2,13]. With this work, we intend to 

advance the conceptual understanding of coordination 

in multiteam agile software development systems and 

try to answer the research question: 
How can coordination theoretically be achieved in 
large-scale software development systems? 
In order to do so, this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 gives an overview of the literature streams 

which need to be incorporated for a comprehensive 

view on the above research question. Section 3 derives 
possible coordination archetypes within MTS contexts 
in agile IS development and gives an illustrative 
example for two coordination types. Section 4 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5874780   concludes this paper with implications and future 
work. 
2. Foundations  
Starting with the environment in which large-scale 
development finds itself, we briefly show how 

complex adaptive systems theory and Agile 

Development fit together. Subsequently, we introduce 

the concept of multiteam systems from organizational 

psychology and finish with the conceptual 
fundamentals of coordination. 
2.1.
 Large-Scale Software Development  
The previously dominant scientific management 
[62] oriented methods and the move towards more 

cooperative lean and agile development methods 

signify a shift in coping strategies for complexity and 
volatility. The full scope of the problem space where 
software development finds itself was not captured by 

previous approaches. Incomplete and ever-changing 

requirements together with complex interdependencies 

in the requirements as well as the existing software 

stack are only a few attributes of this problem domain. 

First steps in describing this problem context have 
been made by DeGrace and Stahl [12] in referring to 
Software Development as wicked problems [50]. More 

recently the Cynefin Framework (see Figure 1) 
[58] 
has laid out the relationship between work contexts and 

possible solution approaches based on, among others, 

complex adaptive systems theory [20].  
 Figure 1. The Cynefin Framework [58] 
 The framework provides five contexts which are 
defined by their relationship between cause and effect. 
The simple, complicated, complex, and chaotic 
domains necessitate contextually appropriate  
responses, while disorder is prevalent when it is 
uncertain which other context seems dominant.[58] 
Within the framework the move towards agile and 
lean development can be viewed as a shift from a 
complicated environment to understanding software 
development as a complex environment [49]. The 
leadership paradigm of probe, sense, respond can 
clearly be seen in agile’s quest for shorter intervals 

with working software to validate customer 

requirements early. According to the Cynefin 

Framework, complex domains require more interaction 

and communication of actors than any other, which 
shows the clear push towards more 
collaborative/cooperative work as mentioned earlier 

[58]. 
2.2.
 Multiteam Systems Research 
The type of large-scale development system 
examined is one in which several teams have to work 
together in order to complete a release of a software 

product. This type of organizational setup has been 

described within the organizational psychology domain 

as a multiteam system (MTS). The collective goal of 

this system can be broken down into a goal hierarchy 

and constitutes a key characteristic of any MTS. The 
goal hierarchy marks the boundary of a MTS in that all 
teams within the system share at least a distal goal 

while the individual teams pursue their more proximal 
goals individually. This structure of goals leads to 
teams displaying input, process and outcome 

interdependence with at least one other team [36]. 
While MTS have received increasing attention in 
organizational psychology over the last decade 
[3,10,11,23,33,34,37], the aspect of coordination is 

underdeveloped. So far, especially the areas of 

compositional attributes and linkages have been 

explored. Marks et al. [33] found that cross-team 

processes had the most value in MTSs with a high 

interdependent goal hierarchy. Well-managed MTS 
transition processes influenced MTS performance 
positively, but did not support team-level action 
processes. Decentralized planning led to enhanced 

multiteam performance by fostering proactivity and 

higher aspiration levels. Nevertheless, strong negative 

effects were found in excessive risk seeking and 

coordination failures [23]. 
Asencio et al. [3] propose multiteam charters as a 
means to develop efficient leadership structures and 
communication networks. Boundary spanners and 

communication norms across teams are mentioned as 

important considerations in MTS collaboration. These 
differentiated team roles are viewed by Davison et al. 
[10] as a key factor in performance. Teams which 
included boundary spanning roles consistently 
4781   outperformed teams which had not. The reasoning lies 
in the information processing complexity inherent in 

large organizations which lead to the need for 

formalized boundary spanning [10]. 
In their study of leadership in multiteam systems 
DeChurch and Marks [11] trained leader teams in two 
ways, either by facilitating strategy development or 
coordination. They found that strategy training was 

positively related to explicit coordination, with 

coordination training affecting implicit coordination 
 (see section 2.3) stronger. However, an unidentified 
mechanism, such as shared mental models, seem to be 
influencing inter-team coordination. They conclude 
that the study of mental models in MTSs constitutes an 

interesting path for future research [11].  
2.3.
 Coordination Research 
Coordination is a multi-faceted research area which 
takes its inputs from a variety of fields including but 
not limited to Economics, Organization Theory and 

Computer Science. Coordination Theory presents a 

framework for analysis of coordination in that it 

defines coordination as the management of 

dependencies. These dependencies are to be managed 

by coordination mechanisms [30]. However, no 
predictive power arises from this theory as no 
hypotheses or propositions are stated [59]. Crowston et 

al. [9] recognizes these limitations and calls for future 
research to develop testable hypotheses.   
The study of coordination in organizational theory 
has identified several mechanisms to coordinate 

workers [32,38,63,64]. Thompson [63] who cites 
March and Simon [32] in his description of three key 
generic coordination approaches: standardization or 

rules, plans and schedules, and mutual adjustment. Van 

De Ven  et al. [64] added a fourth dimension of team, 

which extends mutual adjustment by joint 

simultaneous interactions within a usually collocated 

team. Similarly, Mintzberg [38] proposes mutual 
adjustment, direct supervision, and standardization (of 
work processes, of work outputs, of norms and of 
worker skills) as basic mechanisms for coordination. 
The mix of mechanisms according to situational 
context factors is of interest when regarding 

coordination strategies [28,59]. Strode et al. [59] 

present first insights into the combination of 

coordination mechanisms in agile development. They 
present a coordination strategy which includes 
synchronization, structure and boundary spanning as 

key elements which influence coordination 

effectiveness [59]. Furthermore, intensified 
communication was observed as a facilitator of mutual 
trust and shared cognition by Li and Maedche [28]. 
In an effort to classify coordination mechanisms, 
Espinosa et al. [14] present three types of coordination: 

mechanistic, organic and cognitive coordination. While 

mechanistic coordination includes coordination by plan 
or rules with little communication, organic 
coordination refers to coordination by means of mutual 
adjustment or feedback via interaction. This 
communication can be formal and planned or informal 

and spontaneous. Cognitive coordination, on the other 

hand, is based on knowledge the actors have about 

each other and is achieved implicitly. Shared mental 

models [8,15] and transactive memory systems [39] are 
two examples of this type of mechanism. Cognitive 
Coordination is viewed by Espinosa et al. as a key 

enhancer of mechanistic and organic coordination [14]. 
This position is also supported by Rentsch and 
Staniewicz [48], who emphasize the role of cognitive 

coordination by suggesting cognitive similarity as the 
key driving component of coordination mechanisms in 
multiteam systems. These cognitive similarity types are 
identified by the form of similarity, the form of 

cognition, and the cognitive content domain.  
The form of similarity among individuals includes 
congruence, accuracy and complementarity. The 

emergence of cognitive congruence among teams 

constitutes the matching of cognitions between 
individual team members when there is no correct 
value or target. Accuracy reflects exactly this degree of 

fit towards a predetermined target value. 
Complementarity, on the other hand, represents the 
differing cognitions of team members that fit together 

like puzzle pieces 
[48]. These types of similarities have 
been found to positively influence team performance, 

e.g. via shared mental models [8,15,16,27,35,51], as an 
example of a congruent cognition, or through 
transactive memory systems [17,21,22,39,40], which 

depicts a complimentary cognition. 
Lastly, the form of cognition pertains to the type of 
information in consideration, with the cognitive 

content domain referring to the knowledge areas which 

are dealt with [47]. 
Our conceptual framework (Figure 2) shows the 
process theoretical view of inter-team coordination 

effectiveness and especially the interplay of 

mechanistic, organic and cognitive coordination 

mechanisms within the coordination strategy. 
4782     Figure 2. Conceptual Framework 
Adapted from [14,16] 
3. Archetypes of Coordination in MTS 
According to our previously introduced 
coordination framework of mechanistic, organic and 
cognitive coordination, we introduce conceptual 
archetypes of coordination modes within MTSs. Table 
1 shows all possible strategy types when considering 
only low and high degrees within the three 

coordination types. This reduced view was chosen in 

order to keep the overview simple. Further subtypes 

mentioned in Section 3.1 can be seen in Table 2. 
Table 1.
 Strategy Types 
3.1.
 Coordination Strategy Types 
Out of the identified possible configurations, only 
some appear plausible, as will be discussed next. 
Hence we first discuss in the following section 
plausible types 1, 2 and possible subtypes of 2 which 
differ in their combination of mechanistic and 

cognitive coordination but remain high in their organic 

coordination. After that, we will continue with the 

plausible types 3, 4 and 5 which have significant 

drawbacks in practice and finish with the implausible 

types 6, 7 and 8. 
Strategy type 1 
(“The Perfect Plan”)
 is 
characterized by high mechanistic, low organic and 

low cognitive coordination. This archetype depicts the 

perfect plan-based approach to software development. 
While within teams, coordination may well be 
achieved through organic or cognitive mechanisms, the 

focus of multiteam coordination in this strategy lies 
solely on mechanistic coordination with little 
communication between individual actors. This type 

assumes that software development can be 

“programmed” from a coordination perspective, e.g. 

through complete upfront planning all dependencies as 

well as all contingencies can be resolved and 

accounted for. Since the coordination is programmed 
through upfront planning with little communication, 
one person or a very small set of people, needs to have 
a deep insight into the full technical details of the 
entire software system in order to specify all details 

necessary for individual work packages and correct 

integration. While this type, taking aforementioned 

assumptions into account, is entirely plausible from a 
theoretic viewpoint, it has deep implications for large-
scale software development, especially in the 

enterprise software domain where requirements are 

often in a state of flux. In an environment where large 

existing codebases have complex interdependencies 

within and to other software modules and products, the 
assumption of an omniscient person or small group 
who has the capability to plan an entire software 
release down to individual work packages with their 
respective technical dependencies seems elusive. This 

type can be illustrated with the previously introduced 

complicated domain of the Cynefin Framework (see 

Chapter 2.1). The leadership paradigm of sense, 

analyze and respond is the core of strategy type 1. 

First, the problem space of the software is understood 
(sensed). Typically a small set of people (including the 
chief architect for example), will analyze the problem 

and develop a technical plan (architecture) and a 
sequence plan (schedule). The enactment of both plans, 
e.g. the actual development phase, is then considered 
the response in this case. 
Strategy 
Type 
Coordination type 
plausible 
Mechanistic 
Organic 
Cognitive 
1 high
 low
 low
  2 low
 high
 high
  3 low
 low
 high
 () 4 high
 high
 high
 () 5 low
 low
 low
 () 6 low
 high
 low
 - 7 high
 high
 low
 - 8 high
 low
 high
 - 4783   Strategy type 2 
can be viewed as the
 antipode to 
type 1. Through the low to medium occurrence of 

mechanistic coordination, this strategy relies on 

organic and cognitive mechanisms in order to achieve 
coordination effectiveness. This type includes three 
subtypes which differ in their amount of mechanistic 
and cognitive mechanisms but remain high on organic 
coordination throughout.  
Table 2. Strategy Type 2 Subtypes 
 Strategy Type 2.1 
(“Organic Planning”)
 relies on 
high organic and cognitive coordination with medium 
mechanistic coordination. An assumption inherent in 
this type is that there are limits to the planning 
capability of individuals and small groups. 

Nevertheless, a certain amount of planning is seen as 

required in order to achieve a general alignment 

between individual teams and to reduce unnecessary 

rework and communication overhead introduced by 
organic coordination.  
Strategy Type 2.2 
(“Communication Focused
”) shows little to no mechanistic and a maximum amount 

of organic and cognitive coordination. The lack of 

planning and other mechanistic coordination is based 
on the assumption that any type of investment in plans 
and rules goes to waste as they will need to be adjusted 
continuously anyway. In order to achieve coordination 
effectiveness teams need to communicate 

comprehensively and adjust their actions mutually 

which relies heavily on feedback and a common 

understanding or shared knowledge base, thus 

questioning the initial subdivision into a team of teams 

setting. 
Strategy Type 2.3 
(“Selective Communication
”) is 
characterized by low-medium mechanistic, high 

organic and medium cognitive coordination. Inherent 
in this type of coordination is the notion that organic 
coordination has limits to the amount of people or 

teams that can be effectively coordinated. In order to 

lower the necessary shared understanding among 
participants and thus increase organic coordination 
effectiveness, only subparts of the development system 

engage in “costly” coordination activities
 and system 
wide coordination is established via hierarchical 

procedures where the amount of involved people is 

reduced the more subparts or teams are involved. 
Overall, the lower reliance on upfront planning and 
rigid rules allows for a leadership paradigm 

comparable to the complex domain in the Cynefin 

Framework of probe, sense and respond. Fitting to the 
lean principle of customer value, it is possible to 
quickly experiment with requirements and present 
prototypes to the customer for idea validation and 
respond to the feedback given. 
The following types remain plausible but have 
significant disadvantages in a practical setting. 
Strategy type 3 
(“Coordination Heaven
”) A hypothetical type, in which only cognitive coordination 
is high. This cannot be achieved in reality as one would 
have to employ people that already have a high 

cognitive coordination without using the other types, 

e.g. by developing the exact same piece of software 

with the same people. As cognitive coordination needs 

to be established between the actors somehow, the 
prohibited use of mechanistic and organic coordination 
also prevents the establishment of cognitive 
coordination. 
Strategy type 4 (
“Extensive Coordination
”) in 
which every coordination type is high will most likely 

be very well coordinated. However, coordination is not 

an end in itself. Its right to exist is dependent on the 

actual tasks and work to be done. To deliberately 
implement this coordination strategy would mean to 
accept high overhead costs for coordination with 

unclear benefits in comparison to other strategies. 
Strategy type 5 
(“Coordination Deficit
”) shows 
little coordination activities in any of the three 

coordination types. While theoretically plausible and 

perhaps also practically present, the absence of 

coordination activities in a discussion on coordination 
strategies seems unrewarding and can hardly lead to 
coordination effectiveness.
 The following three types are implausible from a 
conceptual standpoint.
 Strategy type 6
 shows low mechanistic, high 
organic and low cognitive coordination. If only 

implementing organic coordination activities without 
some sort of common understanding or knowledge 
sharing to base communication on, this strategy 

promotes aimless communication and feedback. While 

not plausible as a desirable strategy to achieve 

coordination effectiveness, this coordination strategy 

might depict an intermediate state for attaining strategy 

type 2.2 or 2.3. 
 Strategy type 7
 promotes high mechanistic and high 
organic coordination. If we think back to the 

definitions of both coordination types, we see that 

mechanistic relies heavily on plans and rules with little 
or no communication, while organic coordination is 
based upon communication. This is a direct 
Strategy 
Type 
Coordination type 
plausible 
Mechanistic 
Organic 
Cognitive 
2.1 
medium 
high
 high
  2.2 
very 
low 
high
 high
  2.3 
low
-medium 
high
 medium 
 4784   contradiction and implausible from a theoretic 
standpoint.
 Strategy type 8,
 with high mechanistic, low organic 
and high cognitive coordination is equally implausible 
as high cognitive coordination (e.g. shared 
understanding) among the teams is mainly established 
through communication which is not desirable here, as 
the amount of organic coordination is low. 
3.2.
 Illustrative Examples 
Two illustrative examples from a large-scale 
development organization will be used to demonstrate 
the previously discussed archetypes of coordination in 

multiteam systems. 
 3.2.1 Example for strategy type 1.
 The software 
company in our example followed this strategy for a 
long time before introducing lean management and 
agile development in 2009. As the company grew 
massively since the 1970s, a process framework 

needed to be in place in order to (a) coordinate 

development projects with 10.000 and more person 

days and (b) establish a quality management system to 

achieve an ISO certification. This process framework 

followed a typical “waterfall pattern” when it was 
introduced in the mid-1990s, i.e. there was a phase 
with basic portfolio decisions, then requirements were 

specified, the architecture was designed and refined 
and then development across multiple teams started. 
When the software was put into code, testing started, 

often by a central testing department located offshore 

as well as with consultants and customers. The tested 
software was validated by another central team that 
adopted the role of first customer, i.e. they installed, 

configured and re-tested the software in their lab. Only 

after this sequential process of about 12 to 18 months 

the software released to market 
– a market that often 
changed substantially in the meantime. [54] 

 3.2.2 Examples for strategy type 2. 
Working 
according to strategy type 1 led to numerous problems 
as the company grew further and the product portfolio 

became even broader. Among other things, a high 

degree of bureaucracy emerged due to the division of 

labor along the process. Moreover, it took too long 

until software could be evaluated with customers to get 

feedback and minimize planning risks. Therefore, 
starting in 2009 after a longer pilot phase, the company 
implemented lean management and agile development 

[53]. One major change was the introduction of Scrum 

as process framework on the team level. Along with 
Scrum there was no longer a “project manager” but the 
roles 
of “
Scrum M
aster”
, responsible for the team 
process, 
and “Product Owner”
, responsible for the 
product towards customers.   
As most enterprise applications are built by more 
than one single team, inter-team coordination and 
scaling was a key issue. Therefore, the role 
of “Chief 
Product Owner” (CPO)
 was established. The CPO is 
responsible for an entire application or solution. 
Depending on the size of the product, there are 1-2 

levels of (area) product owners, i.e. the overall product 

is divided 
into several “product areas” and then feature 
sets on team level. Within these teams, architects, 

developers, user interface designers, documentation 
writers, etc. are included to implement features end-to-
end. In this setting the coordination follows a mixture 

of type 2.1 and 2.3 depending on the respective product 

development area. Some departments tend to lean more 

towards a centrally focused coordination, e.g. CPO, 

APOs and POs are responsible for inter-team 
coordination in a “product team” who then carry 
decisions into the individual teams. Other departments 
implemented a Scrum hierarchy, e.g. Scrum-of-Scrums 

in which delegates from the teams manage 

coordination tasks together with the APOs and POs. 

The strategy 2.2 (“Communication Focused”) is only 

seen in areas of high exploratory nature. Here teams 

decide to participate in “open spaces”, meetings which 
have little predefined structure and purely serve the 
purpose of increasing cognitive coordination and thus 

promote organic coordination. 
4. Discussion and Future Research 
The presented archetypes of coordination in MTS 
constitute a first step to establish the multiteam level of 
analysis in studies of software development 

organizations. The described coordination strategies lie 

on a continuum between organic and mechanistic 

coordination types. On the far side of pure 
organic/cognitive coordination (see strategy type 2.2), 
one has to recognize the absurdity of dividing the 

system in individual teams if the communication 
network is completely interconnected between teams. 
This goes against the initial reasoning to divide the 

systems into teams, e.g. to reduce overhead 

communication and coordination through establishing 

modularity [4]. On the other side of the spectrum, the 

purely mechanistic strategy (see strategy type 1), 

contradicts the lean and agile principles of empowered 
teams and embracing change. The problems addressed 
by lean/agile methods in small settings are only lifted 
to the inter-team level in large-scale settings.  
The described trade-off can only be managed by a 
balanced approach to coordination within MTSs. One 
possible tactic is to institutionalize cognitive 
coordination via boundary spanners. First insights into 
4785   this strategy have been published by Davison et al. 
[10], albeit in a military setting. The differences in the 

environment, e.g. task types or dependencies between 

teams, associated with software development are 
sufficient to necessitate an exploratory approach for 
this research area. 
Based on the understanding gathered from these 
conceptual insights, we see a high value in pursuing an 

exploratory approach to shed light on coordination in 

large-scale software development. The exploration of 

coordination could be based on our conceptual 

framework (Figure 2), in which the core part depicts 
the reciprocal influence of mechanistic, organic and 
cognitive coordination within the coordination 

strategy. A focus on the link between organic and 

cognitive coordination seems promising, as cognitive 

similarities are likely to influence mutual adjustment 

and feedback processes. In addition, the impact of the 
environment, e.g. multiteam characteristics [67], may 
affect the entire coordination system. We deem the 
multiteam system level of analysis appropriate, in 

order to make sense of the multi-level data to be 

gathered, as cognition rests exclusively within 

individuals [47] while cognitive similarity 

configurations are a multiteam emergent state which in 

turn drives a multiteam process, namely coordination 
[48]. 
5. References  
[1] Abrahamsson, P., Conboy, K., and Wang, X. ‘Lots done, 
more to do’: the current state of agile systems development 

research. 
European Journal of Information Systems 18
, 4 
(2009), 281
–284. 
[2] Ågerfalk, P.J., Fitzgerald, B., and Slaughter, S. Flexible 
and distributed information systems development: State of 

the art and research challenges. 
Information systems research 
20, 3 (2009), 317
–328. 
[3] Asencio, R., Carter, D.R., DeChurch, L.A., Zaccaro, S.J., 
and Fiore, S.M. Charting a course for collaboration: a 
multiteam perspective. 
Translational Behavioral Medicine 2
, 2 (2012). 
[4] Baldwin, C.Y. and Clark, K.B. 
Design rules: The power 
of modularity
. The MIT Press, 2000. 
[5] Bannerman, P.L., Hossain, E., and Jeffery, R. Scrum 
Practice Mitigation of Global Software Development 
Coordination Challenges: A Distinctive Advantage? 
System 
Science (HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii International 

Conference on
, (2012), 5309
–5318. 
[6] Beck, K. 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2001. 
[7] Begel, A. and Nagappan, N. Usage and Perceptions of 
Agile Software Development in an Industrial Context: An 

Exploratory Study. 
International Symposium on Empirical 
Software Engineering and Measurement
, IEEE Computer 
Society (2007), 255
–264. 
[8] Cannon-Bowers, J.A., Salas, E., and Converse, S. Shared 
mental models in expert team decision making. 
Current 
issues in individual and group decision making
, (1993), 221
–246. 
[9] Crowston, K., Rubleske, J., and Howison, J. Coordination 
theory: A ten-year retrospective. In P. Zhang and D. Galletta, 
eds., 
Human-Computer Interaction in Management 
Information Systems
. M. E. Sharpe, Inc., 2006, 120
–138. 
[10] Davison, R.B., Hollenbeck, J.R., Barnes, C.M., 
Sleesman, D.J., and Ilgen, D.R. Coordinated Action in 

Multiteam Systems. 
The Journal of applied psychology 97
, 4 
(2012), 808
–24. 
[11] DeChurch, L.A. and Marks, M.A. Leadership in 
Multiteam Systems. 
The Journal of applied psychology 91
, 2 
(2006), 311
–29. 
[12] DeGrace, P. and Stahl, L.H. 
Wicked Problems, 
Righteous Solutions
. Yourdon Press, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 
USA, 1990. 
[13] Dybå, T. and Dingsøyr, T. Empirical studies of agile 
software development: A systematic review. 
Information and 
Software Technology 50
, 9-10 (2008), 833
–859. 
[14] Espinosa, J.A., Armour, F., and Boh, W.F. Coordination 
in enterprise architecting: an interview study. 
System 
Sciences (HICSS), 2010 43rd Hawaii International 
Conference on
, (2010), 1
–10. 
[15] Espinosa, J.A., Kraut, R., Lerch, J., Slaughter, S., 
Herbsleb, J., and Mockus, A. Shared mental models and 

coordination in large-scale, distributed software 

development. 
Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Information Systems (ICIS 2001)
, (2001), 64. 
[16] Espinosa, J.A., Lerch, F.J., Kraut, R.E., Salas, E., and 
Fiore, S.M. Explicit vs. implicit coordination mechanisms 

and task dependencies: one size does not fit all. In 
Team 
cognition: understanding the factors that drive process and 
performance.
 American Psychological Association, 
Washington, DC, 2004, 107
–129. 
[17] Faraj, S. and Sproull, L. Coordinating Expertise in 
Software Development Teams. 
Management Science 46
, 12 
(2000), 1554
–1568. 
[18] Fry, C. and Greene, S. Large Scale Agile 
Transformation in an On-Demand World. 
Proceedings of the 
AGILE Conference 2007
, (2007), pp. 136 
– 142. 
4786   [19] Hildenbrand, T., Rothlauf, F., Geisser, M., Heinzl, A., 
and Kude, T. Approaches to collaborative software 

development. 
Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive 
Systems, 2008. CISIS 2008. International Conference on
, (2008), 523
–528. 
[20] Holland, J.H. 
Adaptation in Natural and Artificial 
Systems: An Introductory Analysis with Applications to 

Biology, Control and Artificial Intelligence
. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, USA, 1992. 
[21] Hollingshead, A.B. Retrieval processes in transactive 
memory systems. 
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 74
, 3 (1998), 659. 
[22] Kanawattanachai, P. and Yoo, Y. The impact of 
knowledge coordination on virtual team performance over 
time. 
MIS quarterly 31
, 4 (2007), 783
–808. 
[23] Lanaj, K., Hollenbeck, J.R., Ilgen, D.R., Barnes, C.M., 
and Harmon, S.J. The Double-Edged Sword of Decentralized 
Planning in Multiteam Systems. 
Academy of Management 
Journal of Management Journal
, (2012), 1
–61. 
[24] Larman, C. and Vodde, B. 
Scaling Lean & Agile 
Development: Thinking and Organizational Tools for Large-
Scale Scrum
. Addison-Wesley Professional, Upper Saddle 
River, N.J, 2008. 
[25] Larman, C. and Vodde, B. 
Practices for Scaling Lean 
and Agile Development: Large, Multisite, and Offshore 

Product Development with Large-Scale Scrum
. Addison-
Wesley Professional, Upper Saddle River, N.J, 2010. 
[26] Lee, E.C. Forming to performing: Transitioning large-
scale project into agile. 
Agile, 2008. AGILE’08. Conference
, (2008), 106
–111. 
[27] Levesque, L.L., Wilson, J.M., and Wholey, D.R. 
Cognitive divergence and shared mental models in software 

development project teams. 
Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 22
, 2 (2001), 135
–144. 
[28] Li, Y. and Maedche, A. Formulating Effective 
Coordination Strategies in Agile Global Software 
Development Teams. 
Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Information Systems (ICIS 2012)
, (2012). 
[29] Mackert, O., Hildenbrand, T., and Podbicanin, A. Vom 
Projekt zum Produkt - 
SAP’s Weg zum “Lean Software 
Product Development”. 
Vom Projekt zum Produkt. 
Fachtagung des GI-Fachausschusses Management der 
Anwendungsentwicklung und -wartung im Fachbereich 
Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI-MAW), 01.-03. Dezember 2010 in 

Aachen
, (2010), 13
–25. 
[30] Malone, T.W. and Crowston, K. The interdisciplinary 
study of coordination. 
ACM Computing Surveys 26
, 1 (1994), 
87–119. 
[31] Mangalaraj, G., Mahapatra, R., and Nerur, S.P. 
Acceptance of software process innovations 
– the case of 
extreme programming. 
European Journal of Information 
Systems 18
, 4 (2009), 344
–354. 
[32] March, J.G. and Simon, H.A. 
Organizations
. Wiley, 
New York, 1958. 
[33] Marks, M.A., DeChurch, L.A., Mathieu, J.E., Panzer, 
F.J., and Alonso, A. Teamwork in Multiteam Systems. 
The 
Journal of applied psychology 90
, 5 (2005), 964
–71. 
[34] Mathieu, J.E., Gilson, L.L., and Ruddy, T.M. 
Empowerment and Team Effectiveness: An Empirical Test 
of an Integrated Model. 
The Journal of applied psychology 
91, 1 (2006), 97
–108. 
[35] Mathieu, J.E., Heffner, T.S., Goodwin, G.F., Salas, E., 
and Cannon-Bowers, J.A. The influence of shared mental 

models on team process and performance. 
Journal of Applied 
Psychology 85
, 2 (2000), 273
–283. 
[36] Mathieu, J.E., Marks, M.A., and Zaccaro, S.J. Multiteam 
systems. In N. Anderson, D.S. Ones, H.K. Sinangil and C. 

Viswesvaran, eds., 
Handbook of Industrial, Work and 
Organizational Psychology Volume 2 Organizational 
Psychology
. Sage Publications Ltd, London, 2001, 289
–313. 
[37] Mathieu, J.E., Maynard, M.T., Taylor, S.R., Gilson, 
L.L., and Ruddy, T.M. An examination of the effects of 

organizational district and team contexts on team processes 

and performance: a meso-mediational model. 
Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 28
, (2007), 891
–910. 
[38] Mintzberg, H
. Structure in 5’s: A Synthesis of the 
Research on Organization Design. 
Management science 26
, 3 
(1980), 322
–341. 
[39] Moreland, R., Argote, L., and Krishnan, R. Socially 
shared cognition at work: Transactive memory and group 

performance. In 
What’s social 
about social cognition? 
Research on socially shared cognition in small groups
. Sage 
Publications, Inc, 1996, 57 
– 84. 
[40] Moreland, R.L. and Myaskovsky, L. Exploring the 
performance benefits of group training: Transactive memory 

or improved communication? 
Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 82
, 1 (2000), 117
–133. 
[41] Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R.K., and Mangalaraj, G. 
Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies. 

Communications of the ACM 48
, 5 (2005), 72
–78. 
[42] Paasivaara, M., Lassenius, C., and Heikkila, V.T. Inter-
team coordination in large-scale globally distributed scrum: 

Do Scrum-of-Scrums really work? 
Empirical Software 
Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), 2012 ACM-IEEE 
International Symposium on
, (2012), 235
–238. 
4787   [43] Paasivaara, M. and Lassenius, C. Scaling scrum in a 
large distributed project. 
Empirical Software Engineering 
and Measurement (ESEM), 2011 International Symposium 

on, (2011), 363
–367. 
[44] Patton, J. User Story Mapping. 2008. 
http://guide.agilealliance.org/guide/storymap.html. 
[45] Poppendieck, M. and Poppendieck, T. 
Lean software 
development: an agile toolkit
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2003. 
[46] Reinertsen, D.G. 
The Principles of Product 
Development Flow: Second Generation Lean Product 
Development
. Celeritas Publishing, 2009. 
[47] Rentsch, J.R., Delise, L.A., and Hutchison, S. Cognitive 
Similarity Configurations in Teams: In Search of the Team 
MindMeld. In E. Salas, G.F. Goodwin and C.S. Burke, eds., 

Team Effectiveness in Complex Organizations: Cross-
Disciplinary Perspectives and Approaches
. Psychology 
Press, New York, NY, 2009, 241. 
[48] Rentsch, J.R. and Staniewicz, M.J. Cognitive similarity 
configurations in multiteam systems. In 
Multiteam system: 
an organization form for dynamic and complex 
environments
. Routledge, New York, NY, 2012, 225
–252. 
[49] Rikkila, J., Abrahamsson, P., and Wang, X. The 
Implications of a Complexity Perspective for Software 

Engineering Practice and Research. 
Journal of Computer 
Engineering & Information Technology
, (2012). 
[50] Rittel, H.W.J. and Webber, M.M. Dilemmas in a 
General Theory of Planning. 
Policy Sciences 4
, 2 (1973), pp. 
155–169. 
[51] Rouse, W.B., Cannon-Bowers, J.A., and Salas, E. The 
role of mental models in team performance in complex 

systems. 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions 
on 22
, 6 (1992), 1296
–1308. 
[52] Rudorfer, A., Stenzel, T., and Herold, G. Case for 
Feature-Oriented Requirements Engineering. 
IEEE Software 
29, 5 (2012), 54
–59. 
[53] Scheerer, A., Schmidt, C.T., Heinzl, A., Hildenbrand, 
T., and Voelz, D. Agile Software Engineering Techniques: 
The Missing Link in Large Scale Lean Product Development. 
Proceedings of the “Multikonferenz Software Engineering”
, (2013). 
[54] Schnitter, J. and Mackert, O. Introduncing Agile 
Software Development At SAP AG - Change Procedures and 

Observations in a Global Software Company. 
Proceedings of 
the 5th International Conference on Evaluation of Novel 

Approaches to Software Engineering (ENASE)
, (2010). 
[55] Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. 
Agile Software 
Development with Scrum
. Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[56] Schwaber, K. 
Agile project management with Scrum
. Microsoft Press, 2004. 
[57] Smits, H. and Pshigoda, G. Implementing scrum in a 
distributed software development organization. 
Agile 
Conference (AGILE), 2007
, (2007), 371
–375. 
[58] Snow
den, D.J. and Boone, M.E. A leader’s framework 
for decision making. 
harvard business review 85
, 11 (2007), 
68. 
[59] Strode, D.E., Huff, S.L., Hope, B., and Link, S. 
Coordination in co-located agile software development 

projects. 
Journal of Systems and Software 85
, 6 (2012), 
1222–1238. 
[60] Sutherland, J., Schoonheim, G., and Rijk, M. Fully 
distributed scrum: Replicating local productivity and quality 
with offshore teams. 
System Sciences, 2009. HICSS’09. 42nd 
Hawaii International Conference on
, (2009), 1
–8. 
[61] Sutherland, J., Schoonheim, G., Rustenburg, E., and 
Rijk, M. Fully distributed scrum: The secret sauce for 

hyperproductive offshored development teams. 
Agile, 2008. 
AGILE’08. Conference
, (2008), 339
–344. 
[62] Taylor, F.W. 
The principles of scientific management
. Harper & Brothers, New York, London, 1911. 
[63] Thompson, J.D. 
Organizations in Action: Social Science 
Bases of Administrative Theory
. McGraw-Hill, 1967. 
[64] Van De Ven, A.H., Delbecq, A.L., and Koenig Richard, 
J. Determinants of Coordination Modes within 
Organizations. 
American Sociological Review 41
, 2 (1976), 
322–338. 
[65] VersionOne Inc. 7th Annual State of Agile Development 
Survey. 2012. http://
www.versionone.com/pdf/7th-A
nnual-
State-of-Agile-Development-Survey.pdf. 
[66] West, D., Grant, T
., Gerush, M., and D’Silva, D. Agile 
Development: Mainstream Adoption Has Changed Agility. 

Forrester Research
, (2010). 
[67] Zaccaro, S.J., Marks, M.A., and DeChurch, L.A. 
Multiteam Systems: An Introduction. In S.J. Zaccaro, M.A. 
Marks and L.A. DeChurch, eds., 
Multiteam Systems An 
Organization Form for Dynamic and Complex Environments
. Routledge, New York, NY, USA, 2012, 3
–32.  
  4788