 The Effects of Team Backlog Dependencies on Agile Multiteam Systems: 
A Graph Theoretical Approach
Alexander Scheerer 
SAP SE &  
UniversityMannheim
scheerer@uni-mannheim.de
Saskia Bick
SAP SE &  
UniversityMannheim
bick@uni-mannheim.de
Tobias Hildenbrand
SAP SE 
tobias.hildenbrand@sap.com
Armin Heinzl 
University Mannheim 
heinzl@uni-mannheim.de 
Abstract
 
Inagile software development, the prioritization of 
backlog items is the mission-critical responsibility of 
the product owners in order to maximize the customer 
value created by development teams. However, in the 
reality of large-scale development, the degree of free-
dom for such a prioritization is substantially restricted 
by various types of interdependencies between backlog 
items. In this work, we show, using a graph theoretical 
approach, the relation between the degree of freedom 
for prioritization and the occurrence of dependencies. 
To the best of our knowledge, the breadth and depth of 
such consequences has never been modeled or investi-
gated up until now. Based on our results, we derive 
implications for real-world large-scale software devel-
opment in agile environments. 
1.Introduction  
In agile software development, the prioritization of 
requirements in the form of 
backlog items
 is the mis-
sion-critical responsibility of 
product owners
(
“
the sole 
person responsible for managing the backlog
” 
[41:5]),
both on a small scale, starting with a single team, as 
well as on a larger scale, i.e. in a multiteam system 
setting [25,38]. Single or multiteam, a backlog 
“is an 
ordered list of everyth
ing that might be needed […] 
and is the single source of requirements for any chang-
es to be made” 
[41:12]. The degree of freedom (DoF), 
i.e. the relative amount of choice, compared to a back-
log without dependencies, to freely prioritize team 
backlog items, is an essential instrument regarding not 
only team empowerment but also customer centricity 
in order to maximize the customer value created by 
development teams [38]. In reality, however, large-
scale agile software development, and accordingly the 
DoF while prioritizing team backlog items, is substan-
tially restricted by various types of dependencies be-
tween items.
Ideally, empowered development teams in a mul-
titeam system setting should face a low degree of inter-
team dependencies and a higher degree of intra-team 
dependencies to allow for effective multiteam system 
coordination and efficient intra-team work [45]. Yet, in 
real-world examples of large-scale agile development 
environments, product owners are often complaining 
about being responsible for prioritizing requirements 
and creating value for customers, while the stage is 
already set due to given dependencies. As described in 
the Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe) by Leffingwell 
[26], cross-team features in the shared program back-
log are split into single-team backlog items, i.e. user 
stories, with tentative allocations to individual sprints, 
which limits the product owners and their teams in 
their “free choice” of backlog item prioritization. 
According to the agile development paradigm, 
maximizing customer value and thus ensuring econom-
ic product viability for the company is a key principle 
[38]. Nevertheless, products are rarely built from 
scratch and 
–
 as a timely delivery of new functionality 
for standard solutions is often based on existing plat-
forms, components and frameworks 
–
 legacy code may 
impose several restrictions for the development of new 
code [17].
These constraints on the product o
wner’s possibi
l-
ity to influence the order of the backlog are not only a 
highly relevant practical problem [4,24,26],but previ-
ous research has also called for more studies on the 
underlying fundamental concepts of agile software 
development [1,2,16]. Dependencies on an inter-team 
level are an under-researched fundamental concept 
which still lacks scientific depth [cf. 4,8,14]. The re-
search question we seek to answer is:
What are the 
impacts of dependencies in the team backlog and how 
do these effects emerge on a multiteam level?
As a first step towards solving this problem, our re-
search aims at providing insights into consequences of 
dependencies in team backlogs in large-scale agile 
software development and suggesting two main ap-
proaches how to deal with existing dependencies. In 
this work, we show 
–
 using a simulative graph theory 
approach 
–
 the relation between level of dependencies 
and the degree of freedom for prioritization of backlog 
items. Based on our results, we derive implications for 
real-world large-scale software development in agile 
2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2015.6065124 environment in that we highlight the severity of de-
pendencies in general and for multiteam systems in 
particular. 
Our paper is structured as follows. In the founda-
tions chapter, we depict current findings on agile soft-
ware development, dependencies and coordination 
theory in order to provide the necessary knowledge for 
the subsequent modeling approach chapter. Here, as-
sumptions and modeling items as well as the mathe-
matical procedure are explained. The results are criti-
cally reflected thereafter in the discussion section. We 
conclude our work with future research implications. 
2.Foundations  
Starting with a brief overview on agile software de-
velopment, we illustrate the environment surrounding 
our simulative study. After introducing large-scale 
agile and multiteam systems, a concept stemming from 
organizational psychology research, we provide a short 
overview on dependencies. Subsequently, we introduce 
the conceptual fundamentals of coordination. 
2.1.Agile Software Development  
In 2001, several prominent advocates of light-
weight development methods gathered to create the 
Agile Manifesto [6]. They proposed four values which 
constitute the essence of agile development methods: 
individuals and interactions, working software, cus-
tomer collaboration and responding to change. These 
values illustrate the considerable mind shift in agile 
software development. They emphasize cross-
functional and empowered teams with time-boxed 
development iterations and continuous management of 
requirements.  
Agile project management frameworks, such as the 
Scrum approach [40], and large-scale agile develop-
ment approaches, e.g. the SAFe [26], which builds 
upon the former, both suggest work management 
through ordered backlogs. On a team level, such a 
backlog contains all items one team will directly work 
on. In agile software development, these backlog items 
are often represented as 
user stories
, which describe a 
feature from the perspective of a certain user role in-
cluding the value it provides in his/her context and 
gives the development team enough freedom to work 
out the details in implementation. The team can pull 
one or more of these items from the team backlog into 
their 
sprint backlog,
 i.e. for a timeframe of two to four 
weeks. After discussing the user stories and estimating 
the efforts, the team then commits these items for the 
sprint. A unique prioritization is recommended [41].
This prioritization is carried out by the product 
owner, who serves as the representative of the custom-
ers and thus should be able to order the backlog ac-
cording to customer priority and value. The prioritiza-
tion of requirements is one of the key functions in 
assuring customer focus, mitigating risk, fast value 
delivery and successful steering of a project. However, 
this job is strongly affected by dependencies between 
individual backlog items or user stories in particular. 
Regarding this field of research, a considerable 
number of studies have been conducted concerning 
agility on a team level, some of which are still asking 
for more rigorous research and detailed insights as 
opposed to reports of mere anecdotal evidence 
[1,2,16].Concerning large-scale agile development 
research, insights are even more limited [15]. 
2.2.Large-Scale Agile Development and Mul-
titeam Systems 
Large-scale agile development very closely builds 
upon the agile software development paradigm de-
scribed before. In fact,it extends the latter by implying 
the collaboration of multiple teams which all make use 
of agile methodologies. On the practical side, several 
approaches, e.g. Scrum-of-Scrums [23];Dynamic 
Systems Development Method [12] or Disciplined 
Agile Delivery [3],have been developed to provide a 
guiding structure for a multiteam setup. In our consid-
eration of the research question, we will utilize the 
Scaled Agile Framework as an example [26]. Here, a
program backlog contains potential product features 
which are further broken down into smaller user stories 
to nourish the team backlogs.User stories of one larger 
feature can be worked on by several different devel-
opment teams. The individual product owner of a de-
velopment team is henceforth provided with user sto-
ries coming from the higher level program backlog. 
Accordingly, he/she has to deal with pre-determined, 
and partly unknown, dependencies in the team backlog 
and is therefore limited in the DoF to prioritize the 
backlog [26]. 
Coming from organizational theory, another view 
on large-scale development systems emerged. This 
type of organizational setup, where several teams have 
to work together in order to complete a release of a 
development product, has been described within the 
organizational psychology domain as a multiteam 
system (MTS). The collective goal of this system can 
be broken down into a goal hierarchy and constitutes a 
key characteristic of any MTS. The goal hierarchy 
marks the boundary of an MTS in that all teams within 
the system share at least a distal goal while the indi-
vidual teams pursue their more proximal goals individ-
ually. This structure of goals leads to teams displaying 
input, process and outcome interdependence with at 
least one other team [29,39]. 
5125 Whereas a certain level of research in the organiza-
tional psychology community already exists to provide 
us with insights on multiteam systems and resulting 
dependencies in general, research on dependencies in 
the large-scale agile development setting in particular 
is still rather scarce [4,5,15,24].Learning from extant 
research, we aim to deepen the knowledge in the agile 
software development context as well as transfer our 
insights to real-world large-scale development settings.
2.3.Requirements Prioritization and Ordering 
The term 
priority
 has historically been used in 
ambiguous ways, implying different concepts to differ-
ent stakeholders. The definition of priority according to 
two English language dictionaries exemplifies this 
statement (see Table 1). While (2), (3) and (5) deal 
with a certain order in time or scheduling, (1) and (4) 
describe 
relative
 importance. These two concepts can 
also be seen as the basis for the prevalent views on 
prioritization. A widespread conception for require-
ments prioritization is to attach a priority to individual 
activities based on value, risk or cost (among many 
others). An example of this approach is the MoSCoW 
method [9], which describes four categories of deliver-
ables: must, should, could and won’t. It becomes a
p-
parent that this approach describes the relative im-
portance between individual requirements. However, 
Firesmith [18:37] 
argues, that “requirements prioritiz
a-
tion is determining the implementation order of re-
quirements and that prioritization by importance is 
merely one means to that end”. 
As such it has been 
suggested to use the term 
order
 to be more precise, 
which of the two meanings of prioritization is intended. 
Orders
’
 sole meaning, as can be seen in Table 1, is the 
arrangement of activities in time. 
This focus can also be seen in the decision of the 
authors of the Scrum Guide [41] to change the wording 
from 
priority
 or 
prioritized backlog
 to 
ordered back-
log
. This emphasizes the goal of creating a list which 
has a 
unique
 order in which to process backlog items 
[13]. 
For this paper, we make use of the following con-
ceptualization: Prioritization means to assign a relative 
value/importance to one particular activity. Ordering 
refers to a unique sequence of several activities. It is 
the job of the product owner to first assign priorities 
(and he is limited in doing so in a completely free 
manner by pre-determined dependencies) and then to 
order these prioritized backlog items in a unique way. 
Table 1. 
Definitions of key terms.
Priority
(1)a preferential rating
(2)the quality or state of being prior
(3)something given or meriting atten-
tion before competing alternatives
[31]
(4)A thing that is regarded as more 
important than another
(5)The right to take precedence or to 
proceed before others
[34]
Order
The arrangement or sequence of ob-
jects or of events in time. 
[32]
The arrangement or disposition of 
people or things in relation to each 
other according to a particular se-
quence, pattern, or method. [35]
Dependency
A situation wherein an activity cannot 
proceed until another activity is 
complete. [44:6]
dependent
(1)Unable to do without
(2)Contingent on or determined by
[36]
2.4.Dependencies and Coordination 
We view the previously sketched research problem 
through the lens of coordination theory, which defines 
coordination as the management of dependencies [28]. 
In the literature, the terms 
dependency
 and 
interde-
pendency
 are used interchangeably and refer both to a 
unilateral relationship, i.e. 
a
 is dependent on 
b
 but not 
the other way round. Accompanying and resulting 
from coordination theory, there are different taxonomic 
approaches to characterize dependencies, the most 
important of which we present subsequently. The 
widely used term 
task
 is to be understood as 
work 
or
activity
 in this context. A traditional view was pro-
posed by Thompson [45], who classified task depend-
encies into 
pooled
,
sequential
 and 
reciprocal
 types.In
this typology, interdependence is conceptualized as a 
need for activity alignment. Based on this taxonomy, 
Van de Ven et al. [46] further specified the participat-
ing entities as workers within an organizational unit 
who are dependent upon each other in order to fulfil 
their individual tasks. Furthermore, the authors intro-
duced a fourth type of interdependence: 
team
 interde-
pendence. This state is present when work is done 
jointly and simultaneously by employees of one organ-
izational unit at the same time. Yet another dependency 
taxonomy provided by Crowston [14] focuses on the 
relationship between 
tasks
 and 
resources
 which can 
5126 arise in organizational settings and proposes different 
combinations of these two entities, namely shared 
resources, producer-consumer and common output.
Strode et al. [44] view dependencies as the ant
ecedent 
of potential or actual constraints which might impact 
the success of a specific activity. The authors name 
three types of dependencies: 
knowledge
,
task
 and 
re-
source
 dependencies, which each comprise multiple 
sub-categories.  
Figure 1.
Categorization of Task  
Interdependencies [22,45]
  
In our research, we view a dependency as “a situ
a-
tion wherein an activity cannot proceed until another 
activity is complete” 
[44:6], i.e. backlog item A must 
be implemented first, as it depends on backlog item B 
(see also Table 1). 
For this study, in the context of MTS in large-scale 
agile development, we make use of the relatively new 
concept of 
integration interdependence
 [22], as this 
addresses the integration challenges of several teams 
working together on one software product.Kumar et 
al. describe four characterizing aspects of integration 
interdependence. First, the overall work activity, in our 
case the program backlog feature, is subdivided into 
several sub-activities for multiple parties to work on 
separately. Second, not the individual activities them-
selves, but the whole, aggregated sum of the parts is of 
value. Third, to reintegrate the parallel working 
streams, an integration process is needed. Fourth, all 
members of the system collaborating in a setting of 
integration interdependence have to be aware of the 
status, potential issues and the progress of their co-
teams as their own output is heavily dependent on the 
work of the others. Figure 1 shows the three classical 
interdependence types by Thompson [45] as well as the 
recent concept of integration interdependence by Ku-
mar et al. [22]. 
As already described in chapter 2.2, these circum-
stances influence the degree offreedom to prioritize 
the team backlog items for the product owner. To be 
more precise, out of these integration interdependen-
cies, other order dependencies, i.e. unilateral depend-
encies that express constraints and a specific direction-
ality, arise in the team backlog and have to be consid-
ered when prioritizing a specific work sequence. In 
order to manage these dependencies, coordination
mechanisms are needed to actively manage the back-
log.Yet, before exploring resolution and prevention 
strategies, it is of importance to first closely investigate 
consequences of dependencies in agile backlogs. To 
the best of our knowledge, the breadth and depth of 
such consequences has never been modeled or investi-
gated up until now.  
In the next chapter, we introduce our modeling ap-
proach and present guiding assumptions and used pa-
rameters. 
3.Modeling Approach  
The approach taken within this research, to model a 
team backlog in a large-scale agile setting, is a simula-
tive graph theoretical one. We initially chose this path 
as the problem presented itself to be of amulti-
dimensional nature. Further understanding was needed 
in order to analytically tackle this complex issue. For 
our modeling approach, we consider the backlog of one 
team, as the multiteam system consists of several indi-
vidual teams working together. In order to fully com-
prehend dependencies in the multiteam system, one has 
to first understand the dependencies emerging at the 
individual team which originate from the multiteam 
setting. We view this as the first step in understanding 
the complex dependencies in the full MTS. 
The following paragraphs explain how we model 
the different entities relevant to this research and their 
representation in graph theoretical terms. Details on the 
calculations conclude this chapter. 
workers
Workunits
Sequential
Interdependence
Integration
Interdependence
Reciprocal
Interdependence
Pooled
Interdependence
work enters
work leaves 
work enters
work leaves
work enters
work leaves
work enters
work leaves
5127 3.1.Team Backlogs, Backlog Items and De-
pendencies 
The 
team backlog 
is modeled as a directed acyclic 
graph (DAG), i.e. a graph with no cyclical arrangement 
of vertices. We model each 
backlog item
 as vertices 
within the DAG. Further, we view any kind of relation-
ship between backlog items which necessitates that one 
be finished before a different one as a dependency 
between these two items. The edges between vertices 
in our DAG represent the 
orderdependencies
 between 
individual backlog items. 
In summary, we model each team backlog with 
v
items and 
e
 dependencies as a directed acyclic graph 
with unlabeled nodes and 
v
 vertices as well as 
e
 edges. 
We represent the backlog as a graph with unlabeled 
nodes, as the backlog items are all of the same type, in 
our case a user story, and the structure of the graph is 
essential, not the naming of nodes. Hence, we only 
consider one graph of each isomorphism class in our 
approach. The number of DAGs with unlabeled nodes 
is shown in Table 2.  
We limit our simulative examination to backlogs 
with a maximum amount of ten items due to reasons of 
super-exponential growth of this integer sequence. 
Table 2.
Number of acyclic digraphs with n unla-
beled nodes [42]
n
A(n)
0
1
1
1
2
2
3
6
4
31
5
302
6
5984
7
243668
8
20286025
9
3424938010
10
1165948612902
3.2.Calculating the Degree of Freedom  
Degree of Freedom
.We view the relative amount 
of choice, compared to a backlog without dependen-
cies, to freely prioritize team backlog items as the 
degree of freedom
. This is defined as the ratio of valid 
permutations 


 in a backlog with dependencies to all 
possible permutations 


, reﬂecting the portion of 
independent prioritization available such that 
=
 




. 
Implicit or Transitive Dependencies.
 By specifying 
dependencies within the backlog it is possible to have 
implicitly generated more dependencies as the initial 
specification would suggest. This situation can be seen 
inFigure 2.To account for transitive dependencies, we 
calculated the transitive closure of each 
DAG, which 
adds these implicitly specified dependencies to the 
graph representation of each backlog. 
Figure 2. 
Implicit (Transitive) Dependencies
Valid Permutations.
 A permutation which respects 
the dependencies such that for each directed edge 
v1v2
from vertex 
v1
 to vertex 
v2
,
v1
 comes before 
v2
 is 
defined as a topological order. Thus, the amount of 
topological orders for each transitive closure is the 
amount of valid permutations for the specified 
DAG. 
At least one, but usually several orders can be calculat-
ed, which represent the ways in which the backlog can 
be processed while fulfilling the dependencies speci-
fied.  
In summary, we establish the DoF by calculating 
the ratio of the number of topological orderings of each 
transitive closure of the specified DAG with edges and 
the number of topological orderings of the DAG with-
out edges (see Figure 3).
= 
#
˙ 
˛
˙ 
˝˛
Figure 3. 
Definition of the Degree of Freedom
We have generated our data set with the help of 
Sage Mathematics Software [33,43]. Hereby, we calcu-
lated the topological orderings for all unlabeled 
DAGs 
with nodes 1 to 8 [30] and created 18 million random 
DAGs with 9 vertices as well as 20 
million random 
DAGs with 10 vertices. The previously mentioned 
super-exponential growth of increasingly larger DAGs 
makes the smaller subset of DAGs with 9 and 10 verti-
ces necessary. In total, we calculated the DoF of 58 
658 547 representations of a backlog with dependen-
cies. 
backlog item
explicit dependency
implicit (transitive) dependency
5128 4.Results and Discussion 
The degrees of freedom, including a trend line for 
increasing amounts of dependencies, can be seen for 2 
to 10 item backlogs in Figure 5.  
In answering the question of dependency impact on 
the team backlog, our main findings are (1) the DoF 
exhibits very strong decay, (2) this decay is independ-
ent of backlog size and (3) the structure of dependen-
cies seems to be essential as only ranges of DoF could 
be identified for most combinations of parameters.  
One dependency already decreases the DoF by 50% 
and this number drops below 20% as soon as we pass 
four dependencies (see Figure 5). The data shows strik-
ingly, an increased amount of dependencies dramati-
cally lowers the DoF.This confirms our initial expecta-
tion in chapter 2.2, that predetermined dependencies 
have a significant impact on the prioritization ability of 
the team product owner. In fact, the product owner is 
drastically limited in freely assigning priorities to the 
backlog items and subsequently ordering them accord-
ingly. One dependency between two backlog items, for 
example, will already reduce his freedom of choice in
how to prioritize the backlog by 50%.  
The independence of DoF from backlog size initial-
ly seems counterintuitive, but can be explained by our 
definition of DoF, which normalizes the number of 
topological orderings of the backlog with dependencies 
by the topological orderings of the same backlog with-
out dependencies. 
What quickly becomes obvious is that for the tuple 
backlog size 
–
 dependency amount
, only a range of 
possible DoF can be specified. This also holds true for 
the combination of other parameters which we calcu-
lated (Connected Components, Density, average Dis-
tance, Diameter, Radius, max In/Out-Degree, min 
In/Out-Degree, In/Out-Degree Sequence). In Figure 4
we provide an excerpt of the DoF for an8 item backlog 
based on the number of bound items and the amount of 
dependencies which clearly shows the previously men-
tioned ranges. These ranges suggest that the structure 
of the order dependencies is essential in understanding 
the exact consequences of dependencies in team back-
logs.  
With regard to our initially stated research question, 
we see that the previously discussed effects emerge on 
the multiteam system level in a way that the greater the 
interdependence between work activities, the higher 
the coordination effort resulting in a higher chance of 
failure and delay [22]. Due to the system of integration 
interdependencies, delays on a team level have direct 
effects on the higher multiteam system level. If one 
team cannot deliver in time what it committed to for 
the sprint, other teams and thus the whole multiteam 
system might experience delays in a cascading manner.  
Influenced by the level of existing dependencies in 
a team backlog, the resulting degree of freedom im-
pacts the team’s planning complexity and thus its c
o-
ordination effort. This impact is particularly severe as a 
certain level of remaining flexibility in the product 
owner’s freedom to prioritize 
items in the team back-
log is needed to be able to react to unforeseen events as 
one of the key values of agile development [21].This 
in turn affects the overall multiteam system predictabil-
ity and delivery reliability [22]. 
Figure 4.
Excerpt showing minimum, average and 
maximum DoF for a 8 item backlog 
5.Implications and Future Research 
We have managed to gain first insights into the conse-
quences of dependencies in team and program back-
logs in large-scale agile software development systems. 
Even few dependencies in the team backlog dramati-
cally reduce the DoF for prioritization of the team 
product owner. This impact is independent of backlog 
size and has a severe impact on the DoF. 
The surrounding MTS setting has an impact on its 
embedded teams regarding the dependencies in team 
backlogs, as the team product owner has to consider 
pre-determined dependencies coming from assigned 
user stories in his/her team backlog. In the other direc-
tion, the effects of dependencies in the team backlog 
and the according prioritization in turn strongly influ-
ence the MTS level through the integrative nature of 
dependencies on the program backlog level. It is there-
fore essential to consider ways in which to deal with 
these types of dependencies 
5129 The findings so far suggest two approaches how to 
deal with dependencies in large-scale settings. The first 
one refers to the management of dependencies of 
which a few heuristics and methods have emerged 
lately. Splitting requirements (“user stories”) in smaller 
chunks [25,38] as well as approaches which attempt to 
generate an overview of the connections between re-
quirements (e.g. user story mapping [37] or walking 
skeleton [11]) are mechanisms which make require-
ment dependencies transparent early on.  
Creativity techniques in upfront software develop-
ment stages, such as Design Thinking [10], in combi-
nation with user story mapping are said to help creating 
a more solid product vision and more relevant re-
quirements to start with [19]. This in turn helps to 
minimize functional dependencies and make them 
transparent across development teams and business 
units. The described techniques used in the context of 
larger features can also help to split and resolve user 
stories in the course of a project. There are also ap-
proaches to capture dependencies collaboratively in the 
course of the project while providing visual analysis 
and editing functions in real time [20].  
Once requirements have been defined, many com-
panies use backlog management and tracking tools to 
further improve transparency and coordinate work 
across multiple teams. 
Figure 5. 
Degrees of freedom in 2 - 10 item backlogs
5130 The other approach advocates the avoidance of de-
pendencies altogether. Especially strategies concerning 
the composition of multiteam systems and teams in 
particular are worth mentioning. The current discussion 
on feature vs. component teams is a step in this direc-
tion (cf. [8]). The architecture of the software also 
plays a strong role in dependency avoidance. Here, 
modularization strategies from open source develop-
ment, i.e. plug-in architectures, could help in this re-
gard (cf. [27]).  
Besides these highly relevant practical implications, 
our study also provides theoretical contributions. First, 
based on a literature review on agile development and 
dependencies, our study required carving out the sub-
tleties of the existing interdependency taxonomies. In 
particular, applying our findings to the multiteam level 
contributes to the body of knowledge on the concept of 
integration interdependence. Doing so, we have been 
able to deepen the knowledge on interdependencies on 
different analytical levels. Furthermore, we sought to 
answer the persistent call for more rigorous studies on 
agility in software development by examining the 
under-researched, yet tremendously important phe-
nomenon of dependencies in agile backlogs. While the 
amount and quality of studies on agility in large-scale 
development settings constantly increases, the effects 
of dependencies at the core of agile work teams, name-
ly their ordered list of requirements, have mostly been 
disregarded.  
Future studies could build upon the presented find-
ings and pursue an analytical approach to mitigate the 
limitations of the previously discussed interval results. 
In our research, this approach has so far proved unsuc-
cessful as the parameters to determine a distinct degree 
of freedom remained elusive.At the same time, specif-
ic dependency patterns, i.e. the structure of order de-
pendencies in simulative calculations could be of im-
mense interest. 
Speaking of limitations, the simulative character of 
our study could be regarded as such. Furthermore, we 
only looked at one type of dependency at this point. 
Reciprocal dependencies are just one potential other 
type of dependencies which might be of interest in the 
future. In addition, our focus on the team backlog, 
although justified, implies certain limitations for the 
generalizability of our findings. 
Future research should therefore concentrate on the 
following main areas: on the one hand, the need for 
deeper insights on inter-team dependencies, in large-
scale development requires more empirical studies in a 
real-life setting. With respect to this organizational 
structure, the effect of different types of coordination 
and dependencies as well as mitigation strategies and 
how they affect each other and the development system 
seem to be a promising line of inquiry.  
In this light, the actual impact of certain methods 
for resolving and avoiding dependencies, e.g. splitting 
requirements and user story mapping need to be re-
searched more in depth. So far, only practitioner re-
ports are available which state positive effects of these 
methods over numerous projects. 
6.References  
[1] Abrahamsson, P., Conboy, K., and Wang, X. ‘Lots 
done, more to do’: the current state of agile systems 
development research. 
European Journal of Information 
Systems 18
, 4 (2009), 281
–
284. 
[2] Ågerfalk, P.J., Fitzgerald, B., and Slaughter, S. 
Flexible and distributed information systems development: 
State of the art and research challenges. 
Information systems 
research 20
, 3 (2009), 317
–
328. 
[3] Ambler, S.W. and Lines, M. 
Disciplined Agile 
Delivery: A Practitioner’s Guide to Agile Software Delivery 
in the Enterprise
. Pearson Education, 2012. 
[4] Bannerman, P.L., Hossain, E., and Jeffery, R. Scrum 
Practice Mitigation of Global Software Development 
Coordination Challenges: A Distinctive Advantage? 
System 
Science (HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii International 
Conference on
, (2012), 5309
–
5318. 
[5] Barlow, J.B., Giboney, J.S., Keith, M.J., Wilson, 
D.W., and Schuetzler, R.M. Overview and Guidance on 
Agile Development in Large Organizations. 
Communications 
of the Association for Information Systems 29
, 2 (2011), 25
–
44. 
[6] Beck, K., Beedle, M., Bennekum, A. van, et al. 
Manifesto for Agile Software Development. 
Agile Alliance
,
2001. 
[7] Begel, A., Nagappan, N., Poile, C., and Layman, L. 
Coordination in Large-Scale Software Teams. 
Proceedings of 
the 2009 ICSE Workshop on Cooperative and Human 
Aspects on Software Engineering (CHASE ’09)
, (2009), 1
–
7.
[8] Blau, B. and Hildenbrand, T. Product Line 
Engineering in Large-Scale Lean and Agile Software Product 
Development Environments - Towards a Hybrid Approach to 
Decentral Control and Managed Reuse. 
Availability, 
Reliability and Security (ARES), 2011 Sixth International 
Conference on
, 2011, 404
–
408. 
[9] Brennan, K. 
A Guide to the Business Analysis Body of 
Knowledge
. International Institute of Business Analysis, 
2009. 
[10] Brown, T. 
Change by Design
. HarperCollins, 2009. 
[11] Cockburn, A. 
Crystal clear: A Human-Powered 
Methodology for Small Teams
. Addison-Wesley 
Professional, Amsterdam, 2004. 
[12] Consortium, D. DSDM Atern Handbook. 2014. 
http://www.dsdm.org/dig-deeper/book/dsdm-atern-handbook. 
5131 [13] Coplien, J. It’s Ordered 
-- Not Prioritized! 2011. 
https://www.scrumalliance.org/community/articles/
2011/aug
ust/
it’s
-ordered-
—
-not-prioritized! 
[14] Crowston, K. 
A Taxonomy of Organizational 
Dependencies and Coordination Mechanisms
. 1994. 
[15] Dingsøyr, T. and Moe, N.B. Research Challenges in 
Large-Scale Agile Software Development. 
ACM SIGSOFT 
Software Engineering Notes
, (2013), 38
–
39. 
[16] Dybå, T. and Dingsøyr, T. Empirical studies of agile 
software development: A systematic review. 
Information and 
Software Technology 50
, 9-10 (2008), 833
–
859. 
[17] Feathers, M. 
Working Effectively with Legacy Code
.
Prentice Hall, 2007. 
[18] Firesmith, D. Prioritizing Requirements. 
Journal of 
Object Technology 3
, 8 (2004), 35
–
47. 
[19] Hildenbrand, T. and Meyer, J. Intertwining Lean and 
Design Thinking: Software Product Development from 
Empathy to Shipment. In 
Software for People
. Springer, 
2012, 217
–
237. 
[20] Hildenbrand, T. 
Improving Traceability in 
Distributed Collaborative Software Development: A Design 
Science Approach
. 2008. 
[21] Kude, T., Bick, S., Schmidt, C., and Heinzl, A. 
Adaptation Patterns in Agile Information Systems 
Development Teams. 
22nd European Conference on 
Information Systems (ECIS)
, (2014), 1
–
15. 
[22] Kumar, K., van Fenema, P.C., and von Glinow, 
M.A. Offshoring and the global distribution of work: 
Implications for task interdependence theory and practice. 
J
Int Bus Stud 40
, 4 (2008), 642
–
667. 
[23] Larman, C. and Vodde, B. 
Practices for Scaling 
Lean and Agile Development: Large, Multisite, and Offshore 
Product Development with Large-Scale Scrum
. Addison-
Wesley Professional, Upper Saddle River, N.J, 2010. 
[24] Lee, E.C. Forming to performing: Transitioning 
large-scale project into agile. 
Agile, 2008. AGILE’08. 
Conference
, (2008), 106
–
111. 
[25] Leffingwell, D. 
Agile Software Requirements: Lean 
Requirements Practices for Teams, Programs, and the 
Enterprise
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2011. 
[26] Leffingwell, D. Scaled Agile Framework. 2014. 
[27] MacCormack, A., Rusnak, J., and Baldwin, C.Y. 
Exploring the Structure of Complex Software Designs: An 
Empirical Study of Open Source and Proprietary Code. 
Management Science 52
,7 (2006), 1015
–
1030. 
[28] Malone, T.W. and Crowston, K. The 
interdisciplinary study of coordination. 
ACM Computing 
Surveys 26
, 1 (1994), 87
–
119. 
[29] Mathieu, J.E., Marks, M.A., and Zaccaro, S.J. 
Multiteam systems. In N. Anderson, D.S. Ones, H.K. 
Sinangil and C. Viswesvaran, eds., 
Handbook of Industrial, 
Work and Organizational Psychology Volume 2 
Organizational Psychology
. Sage Publications Ltd, London, 
2001, 289
–
313
. 
[30]
 Mc
Kay, B. (Research S. of C.S.N.U.). 
Combinatorial Data. 
http://cs.anu.edu.au/people/bdm/data/digraphs.html. 
[31] Merriam-Webster.com. priority. 2014. 
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/priority. 
[32] Merriam-Webster.com. order. 2014. 
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/order. 
[33] Oliphant, T.E. Python for Scientific Computing. 
Computing in Science & Engineering 9
, 3 (2007), 10
–
20. 
[34] oxforddictionaries.com. priority. 2014. 
http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/american_engli
sh/priority. 
[35] oxforddictionaries.com. order. 2014. 
http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/order. 
[36] oxforddictionaries.com. dependent. 2014. 
http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/depend
ent. 
[37] Patton, J. User Story Mapping. 2008. 
http://guide.agilealliance.org/guide/storymap.html. 
[38] Reinertsen, D.G. 
The Principles of Product 
Development Flow
. Celeritas Publishing, 2009. 
[39] Scheerer, A., Hildenbrand, T., and Kude, T. 
Coordination in Large-Scale Agile Software Development: A 
Multiteam Systems Perspective. 
47th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS)
, (2014), 4780
–
4788. 
[40] Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. 
Agile Software 
Development with Scrum
. Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[41] Schwaber, K. and Sutherland, J. The Scrum Guide. 
2013. https://
www.scrum.org/Portals/0/Documents/Scrum 
Guides/2013/Scrum-Guide.pdf. 
[42] Sloane, N.J.A. Number of acyclic digraphs with n 
unlabeled nodes. http://oeis.org/A003087. 
[43] Stein, W.A. and others. Sage Mathematics Software 
(Version 5.4.1). 2012. 
[44] Strode, D.E. and Huff, S.L. A taxonomy of 
dependencies in agile software development. 
23rd 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems (ACIS)
,
(2012), 1
–
10. 
[45] Thompson, J.D. 
Organizations in Action: Social 
Science Bases of Administrative Theory
. McGraw-Hill, 1967. 
[46] Ven, A. Van de, Delbecq, A., and Jr, R.K. 
Determinants of coordination modes within organizations. 
American sociological review 41
, 2 (1976), 322
–
338. 
5132