 Risk Management in Video Game Development Projects
Marc Schmalz
University of Washington 
Information School
mschmalz@uw.edu
Aimee Finn
University of Washington 
Information School
aemeyer@uw.edu  
Hazel Taylor
University of Washington 
Information School
hztaylor@uw.edu
Abstract
The video game software industry has a 
reputation for volatile, chaotic projects yet, in spite 
of dramatic growth in gl
obal revenues, surprisingly 
little academic work has examined these projects. 
This study reports a preliminary investigation into 
this under-researched area. We interviewed eight 
video game producers from a range of companies, 
using a critical incident 
method to explore risk 
management practices and risk perceptions. Our 
results revealed that in lieu of formalrisk 
management practices, these managers relied on 
prototyping, pre-production decision points, and 
agile approaches to contain risk on their projects. 
Among the risk factors mentioned, two are specific to 
the unique context of vi
deo game development. The
risk of failing to match th
e development strategy to 
the project was identified as a major cause of 
problems during the develop
ment process, and a new 
risk Œ the ‚fun factor™ Œ was a key element 
threatening the success of the final game release.  
1. Introduction 
In May 2012, entertainment company 38 Studios 
experienced a high-profile collapse, laying off nearly 
400 employees when the company was unable to 
make payments on a government-backed loan[6].
While the failure of 38 Stud
ios is exceptional inscale 
and public visibility, this kind of problem is not 
uncommon in the video gameindustry, which has a 
reputation for volatile, chaotic projects. Many 
become ﬁvaporware,ﬂ never seeing the light of day, 
while others eschew the traditional success measures 
of schedule, budget, and performance[11].
Surprisingly little academic attention has been paid to 
management of entertainment software projects 
despite reported global revenues for this industry of 
$65 billio
n[5]. 
Projects in the entertainment software industry Œ 
typically involving the development and production 
of video games Œ may not have been the focus of 
academic research, but there is an abundance of work 
on project management in general, and on 
information technology (IT) projects in particular.
While IT project failures are not uncommon [16, 18],
we do have a lot of guidance on how to minimize the 
risks that threaten these projects, both in the 
practitionerandacademicliteratures[see, for 
example, 13, 17, 21].However, little work has 
examined how risk management is used on projects 
in the entertainment soft
ware industry. Thus the 
purpose of this research was to investigatethe 
practices of entertainment software project managers, 
and particularly to describe their approach to risk 
managementon their projects. We were interested to 
understand more about what risk management 
techniques they use and the challenges they face in 
anticipating and mitigating threats to their projects.
2.Literature review
The role of project manager has been known for 
millennia, though the term was first popularized in 
the 1950s. In the ancient world, a project may have 
been the creation of a public structure, managed by a 
master builder. Today, project management is often 
performed by certified professionals, but any 
individual charged with the success of a project can 
be considered a project manager, regardless of title 
[2]. While project management is rooted in older 
concepts of engineering, the processes and best 
practices for software development project 
management have been studied for decades and are 
still constantly evolving. Very little work, however,
has addressed management of projects in the specific 
context of entertainment software studios.
At entertainment software studios, project 
management means bringing a game from concept to 
market.A game™sproject manager Œ usually called 
the producer Œ must bring together the art, technical, 
and management aspects of the process to 
successfully create a game. In addition to the 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.5344325 employees and management directly involved in 
producing the game, the producer mustalso 
coordinate with external stakeholders such as a 
licensor and financier, and external play-testers.
Thus, while entertainment software projects face 
many of the same risk factors that threaten traditional 
ITprojects, new risks are introduced by the creative 
aspects of game development, relationships with 
additional external stakeh
olders, and th
e external 
environment in whichthese firms operate.
2.1. Entertainment software development
Creators of entertainment software often view 
their occupation as a mergi
ng of art and technology. 
In their articles of incor
poration, the International 
Game Developers Associatio
n (IGDA) states that one 
of their goals is to ﬁincrease the recognition and 
respect of digital game developers and the 
art form
of 
digital gamesﬂ (emphasis added) [4]. The focus on 
the ‚art form™ suggests that management of 
entertainment projects may share more in common 
with research projects than with standard 
development projects, in th
at thecreativity required 
for entertainment projects is similar to the 
requirements for originality and innovation that are 
hallmarks of research projects [8]. Entertainment 
software has many creative components, often 
involving the creation of graphics, audio,and user 
interface elements, and managementof these creative 
components is an important aspect of the game and 
entertainment development endeavor[22]. 
The creative context and external environment of 
entertainment software development projects 
introduces a number of specialized project team 
roles. While these roles exist for practically every 
game creation project, a single individual or 
organization can play several of these roles, 
depending on the specific project. Key roles include 
the following:

Financier:the entity providing capital for the 
project

Licensor:the entity owning the intellectual 
property used in the project

Publisher:the entity responsible for distribution 
of the game in electronic and/or physical form

Platform Owner:the entity owning the platform 
on which the game will bereleased (e.g.,
Facebook for the Facebook Web site, Apple for 
iOS devices, and Microsoft for the Xbox game 
console)  

Producer: the individual(s) with project 
management responsibilities on the project

Game Designer: the individual(s) responsible for 
designing the game™s rules Œ ormechanics Œ and 
general flavor

Software Engineer:the individual(s) responsible 
for producing the code assets for the project

Audio Engineer:the individual(s) responsible for 
producing theaudio assets for the project

GraphicArtist: the individual(s) responsible for 
producing the user interface (UI) and graphical 
elements for the project.
While publishers have been historically important 
to the industry, serving as financiers and distributors 
of entertainment software, their role may be 
diminishing. Platform owners have implemented 
electronic marketplaces (Microsoft™s Xbox Live 
Marketplace, Apple™s iOS App Store, Nintendo™s Wii 
Shop Channel, Sony™s PlayStation Store), Facebook 
emerged as a major online game platform [14], and 
crowd-funding has grown in popularity and 
effectiveness [12], reducing the need forthird-party 
finance and physical distribution. 
2.2. Game project management: The 
producer role and context
In the entertainment soft
ware industry, the job 
title of producer is often assigned to an individual 
with project management responsibilities for a game 
creation project. Sometimes working on a team with 
other producers, the producer coordinates the 
activities of game designers, artists, audio engineers, 
and software engineers working on a game project 
[9]. In addition to his or her own employer, a 
producer is often responsible to a publisher and, 
when working on a game based on another 
company™s intellectual property, a licensor. A
producer may also coordinate the process of earning 
a platform owner™s approval (such as Nintendo Co., 
Ltd. approvinga title forthe Wii home video game 
console) and the game™s rating from the 
Entertainment Software Ratings Board (ESRB), 
depending on how the final title will be marketed and 
distributed.
Producers often wear multiple hats, especially 
when working on smaller projects. For one of the 
game titles included in this research, a single 
individual was company co-owner, publisher, 
designer, and artist as well as executing the role of 
producer. Producers typically have a broad and 
poorly defined skill set. ﬁHistorically, many 
programmers and artists got promoted into producer 
and project management roles which they were ill-
equipped to fulfillﬂ [9, p. 91].  
4326 2.3. The current study
As discussed above, while there is a strong body 
of knowledge about the management of risk on IT 
projects in general, little a
ttention has been paid to 
projects in the specific context of the entertainment 
software industry. Thus the aim of the current study 
was to begin an exploration of the practice of 
entertainment software project management, with a 
view to surfacing similarities and differences for this 
specific type of project that could contribute to a 
better understanding of the management of these 
projects. In this first, exploratory study, we chose to 
focus specifically on risk management in video game 
projects, with the expectation that understanding 
more about how practitioners in this area manage risk 
on their projects can provide a starting point for 
further theoretical and best practice development.
3.Method
Since the goal of this research was exploratory 
and descriptive, we chose an in-depth interview 
method in order to surface contextual details and gain 
a rich understanding of the dynamics of risk 
management on video game projects. We applied an 
interpretive persp
ective to the data
 analysis, to 
develop insights into the practice of video game 
project management. By comparing these insights 
with a framework of risk factors drawn from the 
literature [21], we were able to highlight key 
similarities with other types of IT projects, and 
identify context-specific differences in risk 
management of video game projects.  
3.1. Sample 
Our research sample included eight producers in 
the entertainment software industry who manage 
video game design and development projects.  To 
find our participants, we used personal contacts as a 
starting point, and then relied on referrals from 
snowball sampling to find other participants who 
would be appropriate for this research [15].
In order to gain a breadth of insight about these 
types of project, we sought participants from a range 
of companies, seeking variation in size, types of 
games produced, and length of time in the industry. 
Participants ranged from an
 independent contractor 
employed by a game publisher and working with 
contract developers to producers employed as part of 
a large development team by a company which self-
financed and self-published.  Only one of the eight
participants was female, and five of the eight had 
more than 10 years™ experience in the industry. 
Interestingly, none of the producers had a
background in computers or technology: one had an 
MBA and the others were humanities graduates. The 
trend noted above towards reduced publisher 
involvement was reflected in the current study, where 
sixof the elevenprojects discussed involvedself-
published games and five of the games were self-
financed, removing management of a publisher 
relationship and contract from the producers™ 
responsibilities.
3.2. Data collection
Data collection was in the form of critical 
decision interviews [10, 20]in which we asked 
interviewees a series of questions aboutan applicable 
project that they had recently managed and the 
challenges they faced in the course of that project. 
This process aimsto elicit ﬁexpert knowledge in 
situations where the experts have difficulty accessing 
their knowledgeﬂ [21, pg. 52]and also reveals 
differences in perspectives by focusing on the context
of a critical situation. To ensure consistency in the 
interview structure, we used
 a semi-structured script.
Thefirst two interviews were conducted by the two 
lead authors,afterwhich all three authors reviewed 
the two interviewtranscripts and agreed on
clarifications to the script. The first or second author
individuallyconducted the remaining interviews.
The interviews were professionally transcribed, 
identifying information was removed, and each 
participant given the opportunity to review his or her
transcript for accuracy. No 
participants requested any 
major changes, although some offered minor 
clarifications, which we adopted. The final report was 
reviewed with one producer, who commented that the 
findings ‚ring true™.
3.3. Coding and analysis 
The large body of work on risks in IT projects 
suggestedthat a thematic analysis approach to coding 
would be appropriate, drawing on previous research 
rather than allowing codes to surface through an 
emergent grounded theory approach. However, most 
prior studies focus on risks in in-house IT projects 
[see, for example, 17]and as noted above the 
entertainment software indus
try operates in the very 
different context of development by a producer for 
the purposes of sale to ga
me-playing customers. One 
prior ITproject risk study, [21],focusedon risks for 
IT projects implemented by vendors for clients, a 
situation whichdoes have some similarity to that of 
4327 the producers in the current 
study, although it lacks 
the external customer aspect. Hence, we developed 
an initial coding framework from Taylor™s 
framework, with modifications to better fit the unique 
context of our study, where software studios are 
working to develop video game software for sale to 
customers, often in association with external partners 
such as financiers.  
Taylor™s original framework [21] considered risk 
factors within four broad themes of risks Œ project 
management, relationships, solution ambiguity, and 
environment Œ arising from three different sources Œ 
vendor, third party, and client.  These source 
designations were determined by the specific 
business context of the study: Taylor™s project 
managers all worked for software vendors, handled 
projects that involved fulfilling a contract for the 
vendor™s product with a client company, and 
frequently managed interactions with third-party 
companies that were used to execute portions of the 
project. We adapted these risk sources for the current 
study, as shown in Table 1. Software studio (vendor) 
designates the business directly employing the 
producer being interviewed, and contractor (third 
party) refers to any external business over which the 
software studiohas control. Rather than clients, the 
software studios have partners and users. Partners are 
businesses, such as licensors, publishers, financiers, 
and platform owners, with some measure ofexternal 
control over the software studio or the project. Users, 
rather than being employees of the client, are any 
customers or players of the finished game.  
The specific risk factors identified in Taylor™s 
framework were used initially without modification,
but, as discussed below, some definitions were 
modified and extra factors were added as coding 
progressed to better reflect the particular contexts of 
our respondents and their projects.We used the risk 
themes primarily as a coding tool to assist with a 
broad classification of a risk factor before attempting 
a specific factor identification, which turned debate 
over classification into a two-step process, positively 
limiting term choices and easing final risk factor 
selection. In cases where the researchers were 
initially uncertain about how to code a statement, the 
risk theme could be debated and agreed upon first 
and the risk factor then followed more readily.
In the first pass of coding, the first and second 
authors coded each transcript separately, and then all 
three authors compared the 
versions to reconcile any 
differences. Disagreements between coders on the 
exact nature of an identified risk factor sometimes 
resulted in more careful definition of a risk factor as 
it applied in the context of 
the software entertainment 
industry. For example, the 
competition
risk factor™s 
definition was refined to focus on ﬁthe need to be 
competitive with other games in the marketplaceﬂ 
rather than on ﬁover-sellingand under-bidding to get 
projectsﬂ. In total, we made similar minor 
modifications to the definitions of six of the original 
43 risk factors (
top management support, 
development strategy, competition, business changes, 
understanding of requirements
, and
staffing
) in order 
to focus these factors more fully on the software 
entertainment context.
Table 1: Risk source definitions
Risk Source 
- current 
study
Risk 
Source Œ 
Taylor[21]
Definition
Software 
studio
VendorThe organization 
employing the producer 
(project manager)
User
ClientThe expected end user, 
player, or consumer of the 
finished entertainment 
software project
PartnerClientAny external organization 
having a measure of 
control over the producer 
or the producer™s 
organization, such as 
investor, licensor, 
publisher, or platform 
owner
ContractorThird partyAn external organization 
contributing to the project 
but under the control of 
producer
In other cases, we realized that our consistent 
disagreement arose because no strong match could be 
identified with any existing risk factor, thus 
indicating the need for a new factor and definition.
We addedthree new factors, two arising from the 
user source Œ 
audience match
and 
‚fun factor™
 Œ and 
one arising from the software studio source Œ 
extent 
of originality
. The 
audience match
factor was defined 
as ﬁrisks associated with reaching the intended 
audience, gaining their participation, and matching 
the level of game difficulty with the desired 
audienceﬂ. The 
‚fun factor™
referred to ﬁrisks 
associated with ensuring that the game is enjoyable 
and ‚fun™ for the desired audience, and with 
generating sufficient ‚fun™ to ensure audience 
willingness to be monetizedﬂ.Finally, the 
extent of 
originality
factor refers to ﬁrisks arising from the 
degree of original development required, ranging 
from the relatively low risk associated with 
modifying an existing title, to the high risk of aiming 
to create something entirely new and innovativeﬂ.
4328 Once all transcripts had received an initial coding 
pass, the researchers completed a second pass to 
identify any inconsistencies that may have arisen as 
the researchers™ understanding and the coding 
framework evolved. Outstanding disagreements in 
early coding work were often solved with the 
application of terms which em
erged late in the initial 
coding pass. The goal was to use Taylor™s framework 
accurately while adapting it to accommodate risks 
outside of those encountered in the context of 
Taylor™s vendor-driven IT projects. The final coding 
framework is available from the authors on request.
In order to facilitate ouranalysis, each transcript 
was color coded to easily id
entify which project the 
subject was discussing. In addition to the discussion 
of specific projects, each transcript also had a 
ﬁgeneralﬂ subject to identify comments made outside 
the context of a specific project. A spreadsheet was 
created to track the findings, with each row 
consisting of a source-theme-factor triad and each 
column a specific project that had been discussed, 
plus a ﬁgeneralﬂ column for each participant. Each 
factor appearing one or more times in the context of a 
project was counted as one occurrence in the 
respondent™s project-specific context.Similarly, each 
factor appearing one or more times in a respondent™s 
general comments was counted as one occurrence in 
the respondent™s general context.
4. Results  
The team™s analysis involved identifying all risk
factorsobserved inrespondents™ descriptions of their 
projects or in their general comments. We compared 
the risk factorsidentified by respondents with 
Taylor™s findings for vendor-driven projects. We also 
examined the transcripts for evidence of formal and 
informal risk management practices. From this 
particular group of respon
dents we found very little 
evidence of any formal procedures, but informal 
strategies were frequently applied in lieu of a formal 
process. We first describe some summary findings 
about the occurrence of factors, and then examine 
key factors in more detail. Finally, we describe the 
informal strategies used by these respondents to keep 
their projects on track and to mitigate key context-
specific risks that are particularly prevalent in this 
video game development environment.
4.1. High occurrence risk factors
As shown in Table 3, nine factors were identified 
in specific project contexts by at least half the 
respondents. The source of six of these factors was 
the software studio, with one factor arising from user 
sources and two from partner sources. 
For the most part, and not surprisingly, these 
factors correspond closely 
to the top risk factors
identified in Taylor™s study. Two of Taylor™s top 
eight factors are missing here: 
client understanding of 
requirements
and 
vendor competition
. The first of 
these missing factors has diminished correspondence 
in the current study because software studios are not 
necessarily working with a client to meet client 
requirements. Even when 
working for a client, the 
goal is to produce a product for market, and hence the 
key specifier of requirements is often the software 
studio itself, based on its knowledge of market 
demand. The second missing factor, 
competition
, was 
observed in three of our producers™ project-specific 
comments. Also similar to Taylor™s findings, no 
contractor (third party) risk factors appeared among 
our top factors. 
Table 3:Top nine risks noted by at least four 
respondents in specific project contexts
Rank
(Taylor 
rank)
Risk 
source
Risk factorInterview 
count, 
project 
context
Project 
count
1    Software
Studio
Development 
strategy 
810
2 (4)Software
Studio
Staffing
710
3 (1)Software
Studio
Schedule 
and budget 
management
78
3 (6)Software
Studio
Inadequate 
specification
78
5User 
‚Fun factor™
55
5(2)Software
Studio
Change 
management
55
5(2)Partners
Expectations
55
8 (6)Partners 
Trust
45
8Software
Studio
Top 
management 
support
45
There are, however, two interesting and context-
specific factors shown in Table 3. The first is the 
highest ranked factor in our study, the software 
studio-sourced risk, 
development strategy
. This risk 
factor, while identified in the Taylor study, did not 
rank in any of the top 17 spots. The second factor is 
the new user-sourced risk, the 
‚funfactor™
, observed 
4329 in five of our eight respondents, and not identified at 
all in Taylor™s study. We discuss these factors in 
moredetail below. Finally the 
top management 
support
factor, which features highly in most risk 
factor studies [see, for example, 17], rounded out our 
list, but was not ranked in the Taylor study.
4.2. Key risk factors 
4.2.1. Software Studio: 
Development strategy
.
The 
original Taylor definition[19] referred to committing 
to the wrong development strategy. We expanded this 
definition slightly to provide examples of 
development strategy issues, such as choosing the 
wrong development platform, incorrectly prioritizing 
work,implementing an inefficient project structure, 
failure to allocate time for quality assurance, and
insufficient prototyping before production. In such 
cases, while the specification for the game may have 
been well designed to captu
re the original
 intent and 
requirements, the underlying decisions about the 
development approach created problems later in 
delivering on the intent and the requirements.The
development strategy
riskfactor was observed in all 
eight of our respondents and clearly represented a 
significant concern for them as they navigated their 
project developments and reflected on their 
experiences. Much of theentertainment software 
industry operates at an intensive pace, with market 
pressures often dictating the launch schedule. In this 
environment, development strategy decisions are 
often made in haste, and key steps such as pre-
production prototyping, quality assurance and testing 
are frequently short-changed: 
I told them, ﬁYou guys are going to want this 
stuff later.ﬂ  But, you know, it was a case of, 
my feature could not impact the overall 
launch schedule of the project. [–]So, the 
outcome was, we shipped basically a robust, 
very functional shopping experience that 
simply didn't have the extended feature set 
that I wanted.  And it did cause issues later 
on, where management was like, you know, 
ﬁLet's do a sale!ﬂ  And I'm like, ﬁI can do a 
sale, and it will go live in a week to 10 days.  
You can't get a sale tomorrow, because we 
didn't engineer the system for that.ﬂ  So there 
were consequences[–.] ŒM05
4.2.2. Software Studio: 
Staffing
.
This factor was 
modified slightly from the original Taylor definition: 
ﬁAll problems with s/w studio staffing Œ not enough, 
wrong skills, staff turnover, size of team,
interpersonal issues amongstaff
ﬂ (addition shown in 
italics).Staffing concerns were raised by seven of the 
eight respondents, and mentioned in ten of the eleven 
projects. While most concerns revolved around 
problems related to engaging enough suitably 
qualified staff, this category also included producers™ 
criticisms of theirown skills in addition to those of 
other project staff. None of the producers had a 
background that included formal training in the 
industry or in project management methodologies. 
Three producers specificallymentioned theirlack of 
technical and programming skills, noting thatthis 
prevented them from being able perform or, more 
importantly,to evaluate software engineering duties.
In one case, this inability to
 evaluate the work of a 
programmer almost doomed the project. One 
producer (M02) notedthat while staff in other 
positions were evaluated fo
r their suitability for the 
project, producers were not:
M02: [...We] identified 
road blocks, either 
between functional groups or between 
experience levels with
in those functional 
groups.  So, we may not get art as pretty as we 
want it to be because we don't have a high 
quality artist, or the animations as fluid as 
they need to be because we don't have 
experienced animators.  So 
there's that sort of 
risk assessment that's done for the internal 
part [....] 
Interviewer: It sounds like you were analyzing 
things like whether or not the art staff was up 
to the project as specified.  Was there an 
analysis of whether or not the producing staff 
was experienced enough?
M02:Uh, no.  No. 
Concerns about staffing, and particularly the 
suitability of staff skill-sets, were also raised with 
respect to partner and contractor staff, though less 
frequently. One subject speculated that the high level 
of concern for staff competency was caused, in part, 
by the low level of standardization in industry jobs 
and job titles.
4.2.3. Software Studio: 
Schedule & Budget
.
This
factor and its definition remained unchanged from the 
original Taylor definition [19]: ﬁRisks associated 
with keeping to preset schedule and budget, including 
failure to develop work breakdown structure; failure 
to adequately monitor progress on tasks; and blow-
outs caused by unexpected problems, beyond the pre-
set contingenciesﬂ. And, as in the Taylor study, 
schedule andbudget risks were of frequent concern, 
being observed in seven of our eight respondents.
4330 With little variation, producers referred exclusively to 
labor costs when asked about project budgets:
[We] outsource to other countries where the 
exchange rate helps.  So we're getting these 
done for about [external labor cost]per, plus 
my salary, plus the internal resources of the 
team, so I'd probably say it comes inŠthe 
total cost of the project with everybody's pay 
and whatever, probably come
s to about [total 
cost], because those guys live in California, so 
they make a decent check.ŒA01
However, the entertainment software projects in 
this study varied greatly in budget, schedule, and 
features, and we did observe differences with the 
schedule and budget factor interms of the type of 
project being discussed. Projects which received 
funds from a publishing partner were seen as most 
sensitive, with great attention applied to budget and 
schedule while protecting a minimum feature set.  In
contrast, inself-funded projects, schedule and budget 
were given low priority compared to ensuring a 
desirable feature setand maximizing the audience 
appeal of the game:
The risk, that we all understood, was that it's 
going to be more money and more time.  It's 
going to be harder to recoup our investment in 
this thing. [–] But for a long time, we didn't 
have a publisher, so we didn't have anyone, 
any outside check on what we were doing.  
There were no outside expectations for ship 
date or anything else going on.  So we were 
just kind of our own weird little autonomous 
unit. ŒM06
4.2.4. Software Studio: 
Inadequate Specification
.
This factor is based on Taylor™s 
understanding of 
requirements
factor, with the addition shown in 
italics to reflect key concerns raised by current study 
respondents: ﬁSoftware studiohas inadequate grasp 
of requirements, e.g. specification is at too high a 
level, or unclear, 
or fails to identify features that are 
required,
or has omissions, or is based on unfounded 
assumptionsﬂ. Seven of the eight respondentsreferred 
to this as a risk that aros
e frequently in their projects.
The 
inadequate specification
 factor focuses 
primarily on the specification, often referred to as a 
game design document (GDD) in entertainment 
software. Participants had a wide variety ofoptions 
for defining their game, from small projects with no 
formal documentation to large, formal GDDs for 
massively multiplayer games based on a partner™s 
intellectual property. Lighter specificationsseemed 
generally preferable at all scales as producers traded 
strongly boundeddesigns for flexibility. However, 
precise specifications are 
requiredwhen dealing with 
a licensed property or outside sources of funding. 
[When]I was working for-hire, it was a 
traditional waterfall-type approach.  This is 
ourschedule, these are our tasks, these are 
our completion dates, this is when we deliver 
it, this is the milestone schedule, these are the 
things that I will give to you in order to get 
paid.  When you're working for the publisher, 
we kind of drifted into amuch more agile 
scrum type of thing.  These are things that we 
want to focus on this week, and the following 
week, okay, well, let's iterate on this, and what 
about this other thing?  It was a much more 
fluid kind of developm
ent process. ŒM01
4.2.5. User:
‚Fun Factor™
. 
A key component to 
building a successful video game is the ﬁfun factor.ﬂ 
Producers not only had to worry about delivering a 
completed project, but they also had to chase an 
elusive quality of fun that would draw in an audience. 
Sevenof theeight producers interviewed in this study 
mentioned 
‚fun factor™
as a key risk, either in a 
specific project context, or in their general comments.
Making a game ﬁfunﬂ was seen as key to success and 
was an ongoing concern for the producers. This 
concern relates not only tousability aspects of a 
product, which are present in all software 
development, but, we believe, also to a unique aspect 
of developing entertainment software because of the 
artistic elements that must be fostered. A video game 
producer balances technology and art, trying to make 
the best game with the technology they have to use.
Producers must not only deliver a strong creative 
product, but have to create a product that their 
audience will buy. This involves targeting an 
audience and making products that will appeal to 
them. The game must be designed and calibratedso 
that it is challenging, but not too difficult. A style that 
will appeal to the target audience must be selected for 
the art, and the characters must beengaging. Game 
play must be smooth and intuitive and draw the 
player into the world constructed by the game. All of 
these things must be done withinthe constraints of 
the development technology. Additionally, producers 
must liaise with marketing sp
ecialists to ensure that 
these key aspects are well communicated to the target 
user audience.Even with all these efforts, ‚fun™ is an 
ephemeral trait, and thechallenge of finding and 
attracting an audience that 
will enjoy the game is a 
foremost issue as producers develop their games, as 
M04 explained:
4331 A design risk is a market utility risk.  It's a, 
ﬁDo I makeŠﬂ?  It's both a creative risk and 
a technical risk and a business risk all mushed 
into one.  Because the question is, ﬁWill I 
make a product that the market will love and 
find acceptable and want 
more of?ﬂ  And it's 
really, really easy, particularly in game 
development, to get, to start developing in 
your own little universe, never test the game 
externally, and end up with some horrible 
piece of crap.  And so, by iterating regularly, 
by play-testing regularly, you end up ensuring 
that the thing that you make is appealing to 
the outside world. -M04
4.3. Strategies for Managing Risks 
Participants indicated info
rmal risk practices at 
most studios. Rather than formal risk management
techniques, producers used an indirect approach to 
risk management through project structure and 
development practices. Most indicated an emphasis 
on prototyping and pre-production phases of 
development to reduce budget and schedule risks. 
Since production includes costly art and audio asset 
generation, a pre-production phase which generates a 
thorough design will minimize production overruns 
due to revisions. One subject, with nineyears of 
experience in the producer ro
le, rejected the utility of 
formal risk management even though he performed a 
required risk analysis for the project we discussed: 
This notion of risk management iscoming at it 
from, ﬁHow are we going to handle risks?ﬂ is 
kind of coming at it from the wrong angle, 
because the only way to handle risk is either 
to cut scope or to just not have a product.  
And when you're dealing with physical media, 
when you're dealing with console developers, 
you can't cut scope.  There's a floor to the 
point of cutting scope, and so you can have a 
viable game that will pass theircertification 
standards, with Nintendo or Microsoft, or 
Playstation or whatnot.  So I always laugh 
when someone says, ﬁWell, what's your risk 
assessment?ﬂ  Well, my risk assessment is, I 
have a game or not, and here's what I need to
have those things. ŒA02
4.3.1.Prototyping and ﬁWasteﬂ.
As noted above, 
theproducers interviewed fo
r this study did not use 
many formal risk management practices. However, 
the project structure itself often mitigated risk by 
emphasizing prototyping, pre-production and the 
early jettison of troubled projects. One producer 
estimated that as much as 75% of the games at the 
studio were cut before they went into production. 
Another made a similar estimate, adding that ideas 
that failed once were often filed away in case they 
could be revisited later. This indicates a huge amount 
of waste, in terms of the number of projects that are 
started but do not make it 
to production. But this 
approach also allows studios to take risks without 
having to move forward if the investment becomes 
too great.
I read, and at first when I read it I couldn't 
believe it.  Seventy-four percent of games that 
get started never see the light of day.  They 
never get published.  I thought, ﬁGod, that 
seems really high.ﬂ  Then I started thinking 
about the places I've worked, and yeah, that's 
probably, probably true.  I mean, a lot of 
companies will spend a certain amount of time 
doing a prototype, a beta, a demo, that for 
whatever reason they never get published and 
never make it all the way through. -M01
[It]seemsvery radical, but these are also very 
small projects.  So canceling projects when we 
have five or six going on at once, cancelingŠ
my expectation going into making this 
company was that we would cancel four out of 
five projects, that four out of five projects 
would be bad games, and we would just 
cancel them.  That hasn't ended up being the 
case; we've canceled maybeone out of five.  
But it's not a crazy thing, it's not an unknown 
thing to cancel a project. -M04
With the rise of Internet gamedistribution,
studios can make small-budget games and release
them online. If the game becomes popular and is 
bringing in profits based on different schemes for 
monetization, then the studio will keep developing it 
and adding features. This isa lower-risk way to test
ideas and see what sticks with the audience: 
And we also kind of have a unique business 
model.  We're a premium company.  Basically, 
we create this game and you can download it 
and play it for free.  Totally free.  But there 
are things in the game that, hey, you want the 
magic unicorn?  Oh, well, that'll cost you a 
quarter.  You want to go to the new level?  
Oh, that'll cost you a quarter.  So the idea is 
that I provide you with entertainment, and 
hopefully it's compelling and addictive enough 
that you want to actually spend some money to 
play that game.  So, that's new. That's 
different.  I'm used to getting paid up front for 
4332 delivering the game.  It's a much different 
thing. -M01
The project was a mobile game, smallŠthe 
intention was to release on iOS and then 
branch into Android. -M02
4.3.2. Agilepractices. 
Agile practices Œ though 
rarely implemented in a strict manner - were 
indicated as a risk mitigatorby four of the eight 
producers. Agile software development ﬁpromise[s] 
increased customer satisfaction, lower defect rates, 
faster development times, and a solution to rapidly 
changing requirementsﬂ [1]. Many consider agile to 
be a response to risk in software development by 
giving designers tools to combat unforeseen 
challenges.Agile development is designed for 
flexibility, but it brings its own inherent risks, such as 
losing sight of a project™s original purpose through 
constant adaptation[7]. Some scholars and 
professionals have offered suggestions for 
overcoming the potential risks of agile adoption. For 
example, Concha, Visconti, & Astudillo [3]suggest a 
ﬁcommitments frameworkﬂ for agile project 
managers, designed to help developers stay on course 
to fulfill client needs.In th
e current study, we rarely 
observed ‚pure™ agile pract
ices, but the modified 
practices used by these producers worked well with 
the emphasis on pre-production and prototyping as 
risk mitigation approaches. Producers took what they 
knew about agile and designed a system to meet their 
project managementneeds. In addition to mitigating 
risk, agile practices seem
 to fit well with the 
emerging process of publishing a game and then 
continuing to develop it even after it is live, 
responding to user feedback to improve the game:
They had the agile backlog andburn-down 
charts and things like that, to show just how 
the teams were performing, but there was not 
any true risk management. -M05
In more agile methods... these things can 
overlap.  For example, one of your, one part 
of your project may be in productionŠfor 
example, level design or art assetsŠand
another part may continue to be in pre-
productionŠfor example, you might have 
some of the core combat mechanics that are 
actually, you're tuning and figuring out if 
they're fun for a reasonably long period of 
time. - M04
5. Discussion
While entertainment software projects have a lot 
in common with other types of IT projects, their 
emphasis on creativity and the ‚art form™ coupled 
with their focus on delivering a product for sale result 
in a unique development environment, which is 
reflected in the different risk concerns found in this 
study. In particular, the three new risk factors 
identified - 
audience match,‚fun factor™
and 
extent of 
originality
 Œ illustrate the critical
 challenges for video 
game developers of operating in a highly competitive 
market environment with heavy dependence on 
volatile consumer sentiment and demand.
Perhaps the most surprising finding was that we 
found very little evidence of any formal risk 
managementin this environment. However, although 
participants eschewed notions of formal risk 
management, we found considerable evidence of 
informal practices at most studios. Specifically, 
producers used an indirect approach to risk 
management through project structuring and 
development practices. For example, most 
respondents indicated an emphasis on prototyping 
and pre-production phases of development, in order 
to clarify requirements and demonstrate proof of 
concept. Since video game production includes costly 
art and audio asset generation, this pre-production 
phase, which generated a thorough design, also 
helped to reduce overall budget and schedule risk by 
minimizing production over-runs due to revisions.
There was also a clear distinction between 
projects funded by a publishing partner andthose that 
were self-funded. When a partner was involved, 
producers reported greater sensitivity to the need for 
control of budget and schedule while still protecting a
minimum feature set. In self-funded projects, 
schedule and budget were given low priority, and 
emphasis was placed on incl
uding features that would 
best support the ‚fun factor™. 
In general, studios which internalize the roles of 
licensor (by creating a new intellectual property), 
financier, and publisher tend to have much greater 
flexibility in terms of schedule and game features 
while accepting full exposure to project profits or 
losses. In contrast, work-for-hire studios have the 
comfort of a known return on their labor investments, 
but have contractual obligations to one or more 
external organizations for a game™s features and 
schedule. For independent studios, the economy, 
flexibility, and adaptability afforded by electronic 
distribution have allowed them to shift from big-
budget, contract-defined games to smaller games that 
can be treated as eterna
l prototypes and later 
modified to be released on multiple platforms. 
4333 6. Conclusions 
The entertainment software
 developers in this 
study placed a relatively low value on formal risk 
management, but informal practices, such as the 
prototyping, agile approaches, and pre-production 
decision points observed here, were well suited to the 
particular demands of producing a product for market 
rather than developing or implementing systems for 
in-house or client use. Of course, conclusions cannot 
be drawn from such a limited sample, but the results 
here do point up the need for further investigation 
into how best to match project management and risk 
management methodologies to the type of project 
work being undertaken. 
The volatility of the entertainment software 
industry may necessitate informal project 
management practices in order to allow for rapid and 
flexible adaptations and responses to the market. 
However, other factors observed among this set of 
producers may indicate areas that software studios 
couldfocus on in order to increase project success. 
These include the need for project management and 
technical training for internally promoted personnel, 
and recognition that while agile development 
practices may address the demand for flexibility in
response to the marketplace, careful risk management 
is still required to ensure projects meet their success 
targets. Finally, the view of entertainment software as 
a blend of art and technology suggests the need for 
careful constitution of development teams to ensure 
the right balance of skills. 
7. References 
[1] Boehm, B. and R. Turner, ﬁUsing Risk to Balance Agile 
and Plan-Driven Methods.ﬂ Computer, 2003.36, (6) pp. 
57-66.
[2] Chiu, Y. C., An Introduction to the History of Project 
Management: From the earliest times to A.D. 1900. 
Eburon, Delft,2010.
[3] Concha, M., M. Visconti, andH. Astudillo, ﬁAgile 
Commitments: Enhancing Business Risk Management in 
Agile Development Projects.ﬂ Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science,2007.4536, pp. 149-152.
[4] GameDevelopers™ Association, Inc., ﬁAmended and 
Restated Articles of Incorporation of International Game 
Developers™ Association, Inc.ﬂ2005.[Available from:
http://www.igda.org/sites/default/files/IGDA_ArticlesOfInc
orporation_05.pdf
]  
[5] Gaudiosi, J., ﬁNewReports Forecast Global Video 
Game Industry Will R
each $82 Billion By 2017.ﬂ July 18, 
2012. [Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/
johngaudiosi/2012/07/18/new-reports-forecasts-global-
video-game-industry-will-r
each-82-billion-by-2017/
]
[6] Hidalgo, J., ﬁFallen Kingdom: 38 Studios' collapse and 
the pitfalls of using public money to support tech 
companies.ﬂ September 7, 2012. [Retrieved from 
http://www.engadget.com/2012/09/07/38-studios-collapse-
and-risk-of-public-private-partnerships/
]
[7] Hijazi, H., T. Khdour, andA. Alarabeyyat, ﬁA Review 
of Risk Management in Different Software Development 
Methodologies.ﬂ International Journal of Computer 
Applications, 2012. 45 (7), pp. 8-12.
[8] Keller, R. T., ﬁTransformational Leadership, Initiating 
Structure, and Substitutes for Leadership: A longitudinal 
study of research and development project team 
performance.ﬂ Journal of Applied Psychology,2006.91(1)
pp. 202-210. 
[9] Kerr, A., The Business and Culture of Digital Games: 
Gamework/gameplay, Sage, London,2006. 
[10] Klein, G. A., R. Calderwood, andD. MacGregor, 
ﬁCritical Decision Method for Eliciting Knowledgeﬂ. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1989. 
19(3),pp. 462-472. 
[11] Kohler, C., ﬁHi, I™m the Game Industry, and I™m 
addicted to Vaporware.ﬂ Wired Magazine. January 25, 
2013. [Retrieved from 
http://www.wired.com/gamelife/
2013/01/vaporware-addiction/
]
[12] The New York Times Company, ﬁThree Years of 
Kickstarter Projectsﬂ,April 30, 2012. [Retrieved from 
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/04/30/technology
/three-years-of-kickstarter-
projects.html?ref=technology&_r=0
]
[13] Project Management Institute,AGuide to the Project 
Management Body ofKnowledge(4th ed.),Project 
Management Institute,Newton Square, PA, 2008.
[14] Rose, M., ﬁAs EA Bows Out, Facebook Says Games 
are Strong as Everﬂ, April 16, 2013.[Retrieved from 
http://gamasutra.com/view/news/190577/As_EA_bows_out
_Facebook_says_games_are_strong_as_ever.php
]
[15] Sarantakos, S., Social Research, Macmillan,
Basingstoke, 1998. 
[16] Sauer, C., A. Gemino, and B. H. Reich, ﬁThe Impact 
of Size and Volatility on IT Project Performanceﬂ,
Communications of the ACM, 2007. 50(11), pp. 79-84. 
[17]Schmidt, R., K. Lyytinen, M. Keil, and P. Cule, 
ﬁIdentifying Software Project Risks: An international 
Delphi studyﬂ,Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 2001, 17(4), pp. 5-36. 
[18] Standish Group,Chaos Rising. West Yarmouth, MA,
2005. 
[19] Taylor, H., Risk Management and Tacit Knowledge in 
IT Projects: Making the implicit explicit.(PhD 
Dissertation), Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, 2004.  
[20] Taylor, H., ﬁACritical Decision Interview Approach 
to Capturing Tacit Knowledge: Principles and application. 
International Journal of Knowledge Management, 2005. 
1(3), pp. 25-39. 
[21] Taylor, H., ﬁRisk Management and Problem 
Resolution Strategies for IT Projects: Prescription and 
practice. Project Management Journal, 2006. 37(5), 49-63.
[22] Zackariasson, P., M. Walfisz,andT. Wilson, 
"Management of Creativity in Video Game Development". 
Services Marketing Quarterly. 2006. 27 (4) pp. 73-97.
4334