 Bringing Contextual Dimensions into The improvement of Information 
System Development Practices 
Ulf Seigerroth     Mikael Lind 
Jönköping International Business School  University College of Borås 
ulf.seigerroth@ihh.hj.se
     
mikael.lind@hb.se
   Abstract
  Significant attention has been paid to the 
improvement of system development practices. There 
are theories and methods that are to be used for such 
improvement purposes. The criticism towards these 
theories and methods is that many of them have a 

narrow focus on the system development process, 

methods, and tools. Too little attention is paid to 

business orientation, organisational aspects and social 

factors. In this paper we present a framework that goes 
beyond this narrow focus in order to serve as a support 
for directing focus during improvement of system 

development practices. The development of the 

framework has been driven by experiences derived 

from four action research projects focusing on the 

improvement of system development practices. 
Generated categories from these experiences have 
been validated theoretically and internally through a 
multi-grounded theory development process in order to 
arrive at a practical theory. 
1. Introduction Significant attention has been paid to the 
improvement of system development practices. 
Examples of contemporary areas for such attention are 
Software Engineering, Method Engineering, and 
Software Process Improvement (SPI). As a 
professional and academic area information systems 

development is a challenging domain because 
information systems development is a complex and 
multi-dimensional phenomenon [8] [30]. 

Consequently, the improvement of system 

development practices also is a challenging issue to 

deal with [32]. Some challenges that are mentioned 

are: 1) the improvement of system development 
practice is quite a young discipline [30], 2) too few 
theories that can guide improvement initiatives. [36], 
3) improvement initiatives often focus on the system 

development process, methods and tools which is a 

narrow focus that leaves out important aspects, such as 
business orientation [11], organisation and social 
factors [5] [8]. A majority of system development 
organisations express that they do not get any direct 
strategic value from software process improvement 

initiatives. [37]. Butler and Fitzgerald [8] argue that 

there is a need for both researchers and practitioners to 
better understand system development organisations, 
their practices and their development. 
In this paper our point of departure is the need for 
increased understanding of system development 

practices and increased strategic value from such 

improvement initiatives. One way to deal with this is to 

go beyond the focus of system development process, 
methods and tools by taking aspects such as business 
orientation, organisation, and human and social factors 

into account. These aspects are also well recognised in 

organisational theories [7], strategy theories [25] and 
project management theories [38], which claim the 
need to be holistic and acknowledge the actual practice 
and context when dealing with change. 
Based on the arguments above the purpose with this 
paper is to present a framework going beyond the 
narrow focus and to serve as a support for focusing 
aspects that need to be dealt with during the 

improvement of system development practices. The 
framework is a result of a Multi Grounded Theory 
(MGT) analysis of four action research projects. 
The paper proceeds as follows. First, we deepen the 
discussion about how the improvement of system 

development practice is treated in research and the 
identification of different aspects addressed in different 
improvement initiatives. Following this we introduce 
our ontological base and its implications on how to 
conceive the system development practice (focus 

areas). This is followed by a description of our method 

in which action research has been chosen. Then, we 
present four action research projects as experiences 
from improvement initiatives in four different system 

development organisations. The short presentation of 

these projects is followed by a discussion where the 

emerging framework is discussed in relation to earlier 

presented theories. The paper is concluded with 
implications of the presented framework and issues for 
further research. 
 Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20091978-0-7695-3450-3/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE 2. Related research: The improvement of 
system development practice 
There are a number of theories and methods that 
put forward recommendations about how to conduct 
improvement of system development practices. These 
recommendations do also, to some extent, include what 
aspects (categories) to focus on in the system 

development practice. In this section we therefore give 

a summary of the recommendations in these theories 

and methods. 
2.1. Theory-informed improvement 
Mathiassen et al. [32] presents five principles that a 
system development organisation should adopt to 
succeed with their improvement ambitions. These 
principles are, 1) focus on problems, 2) emphasise 
knowledge creation, 3) encourage participation, 4) 
integrate leadership and 5) plan for continuous 

improvement [32]. The authors claim that the big 

challenge is to understand and bridge differences 
between formal and real practice (c.f. e.g. espoused 
theories and theories-in-use by Argyris & Schön, [3]). 
To set the focus on practical problems is also in line 

with more recent approaches for improvement of 

system development practices like 
the High Way 
initiative
 [10]. This approach is, among three other 
approaches (Country Road, Cross Road, and Dead 
End), the one that is recommended [10]. An important 
dimension of knowledge creation is that there is a need 

to elucidate and share knowledge about the system 

development practice. Knowledge sharing needs to be 

both declarative (know-what) as well as procedural 
(know-how) [36] [33] [35]. Encouraging participation 
is an important ingredient to make changes happen 

[32]. Resistance to change is pointed out in 
the High 
Way
 approach and it is claimed that this can be 
reduced through involving those who will be affected 

by the change in the process (c.f. [9]). Integrating 
leadership means that several levels of the system 
development organisation should be involved. The 
system development practice also needs to be aligned 
with different strategic and business oriented goals [9]. 

Management and leadership should both motivate and 

engage as well as put up guidelines for how to reach 
different goals [9] [24]. To have a plan for continuous 
improvement gives an opportunity to continuously stop 

and evaluate the progress in the present improvement 

initiative [32]. 
In addition and partly overlapping these five 
principles both Ravichandran [36] and Mathiassen et 
al. [32] present other aspects that need to be dealt with 
during an improvement initiative. One of these aspects 
is 
state-of-the-art
 which means that an effective 
system development process should be designed in a 
way that makes it possible to benefit and learn from 
new insights and modern models, methods and tools 

[36, 32]. The learning dimension is not restricted to 
models, methods and tools, though. Learning is a 
dimension spanning both the actual system 

development practice and the actual improvement 
initiative [32, 40]. Learning also includes competence 
development for encouraging staff members 

contributing both during the usage and the adaptation 
of the improved system development process [40]. 
None of the aspects above are isolated focus areas 

where we might ignore the context. The system 

development practice is maintained and developed 

through interaction between the system development 

process and the environment. It is the context of the 
system development process that, for each element in 
the process, clarifies why things are done, how things 

are done and when they are done [40]. 
2.2. Method-informed improvement 
In addition to and often clo
sely related to theories,  
different change concepts (methods) designed to be 

used for the improvement of system development 

practices can be identified. Examples of such change 

concepts are, Capability Maturity Model (CMM), 
IDEAL (Initiate, Diagnose, Establish, Act and Learn), 
Bootstrap and SPICE (Software Process Improvement 

and Capability determination). These change concepts 

build on the principle of diagnosing the system 

development practice as a base for improvement. In 

three of these change concepts (CMM, Bootstrap and 
SPICE) this is done by using different maturity levels 
as ideals [35, 45]. The main purpose with CMM, 

Bootstrap and SPICE is to learn about the current 

maturity level, to bring improvements to higher levels 

and to support the continuous evaluation of the 
improvement process. IDEAL, on the other hand, does 
not have these maturity levels. IDEAL is a change 

concept which in relation to th
e other three concepts is 
more prescriptive in character [11]. IDEAL is more 

explicit about 
how 
to perform different development 
activities while CMM, Bootstrap and SPICE have a 
stronger focus on 
what aspects 
to deal with in the 
system development practice. To give an idea of the 

aspects that are in focus in maturity levels CMM is 
used as a summarizing example. 
CMM defines five levels of process maturity [24]. 
At level 1, the practice does not make or follow plans. 
None or few processes are defined and/or followed. 
Formal management practice and control is more or 

less nonexistent. At level 2, basic standard planning 

practices are followed. Procedures for sharing 

knowledge and best practices are emerging. The 
system development process is understood and the 
usage of formal support (models, methods, tools, etc) is 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20092 initiated. At level 3, the foundation for effective 
measurement is established. Procedures for knowledge 

sharing and best practices are established. The system 
development process is defined. System development 
processes are also customised based on project-specific 
characteristics. At level 4, quality and management 

systems and common practices are established. 

Business-oriented strategies, goals and procedures are 
integrated in different measurements. At level 5, the 
focus is on process management. Continuous 
adaptation of the system development process is 

established. All members feel responsible for the 

system development practice. 
In addition to these change concepts for software 
development, one can also use more general change 
concepts. One example of such a method is Change 
Analysis according to SIMM (CA/SIMM) [18]. 

CA/SIMM is a change concept for the early stages of 

information systems development. CA/SIMM is based 

on a participative perspective with a focus on situation-

adaptable business development. CA/SIMM has a 
framework with a number of phases where the phases 
are made up of different method components that can 

be situatively applied. Examples of method 

components in CA/SIMM are: Problem analysis, Goal 

analysis, Strength analysis, Resource analysis, Concept 
analysis and Process analysis. The concepts and 
categories that constitute the method components in 

CA/SIMM are not as specialised as the categories in 

the other change concepts. In CA/SIMM it is rather the 

specific content of problems, goals, strengths and 

processes that makes CA/SIMM situation-specific. 
CA/SIMM is the method that has been used as a 
change concept in the four action research projects that 

will be presented later. 
2.3. Summary 
The two sections above describe different aspects 
(what
) to focus on and to deal with in system 
development practices during improvement initiatives. 

In short these aspects can be summarised into the 

following categories: 
• Business strategies and goals 
• Environment and context 
• Instrumental support (model, methods, tools, etc.) 
• Knowledge (creation, sharing and learning) 
• Leadership and management 
• Planning, coordination and follow-up 
• System development process 
A different dimension that is also described in the 
sections above is 
how
 to deal with improvement 
initiatives, which can be summarised as follows: 
• Focus on actual problems in the system 
development practice 
• Participation in the improvement initiative 
• Facilitation of learning and knowledge creation 
• Continuous improvements 
3. Ontological foundation for system 
development practices 
The task of improving system development 
practices requires an understanding of what to direct 

attention to during such initiatives. In this paper, 

frameworks for guiding such improving initiatives are 

conceived as a domain ontology [23] covering areas to 

focus on. This requires a congruent ontology for 
categorising essential aspects to be acknowledged. 
Since system development practices are to be 

conceived as actions in which both human beings and 

artefacts have a central role, a common (base) ontology 

capturing both social and instrumental dimensions is 
needed. Work practices are constituted by actions 
performed by human beings and artefacts, and the 

purpose of these actions is new/refined artefacts in 
conjunction with the work practice in which the 

artefact is a part.  Such an ontology would also be an 

aid in the aspiration to expand the scope of what we 
pay attention to during the improvement of system 
development practices. In this section a (base) 

ontology [23] will be introduced. The (base) ontology, 

socio-instrumental pragmatism (SIP), describes general 

social domain concepts.
 Socio-instrumental pragmatism (c.f. [19, 16]) 
incorporates human, organisational, and IT-enabled 
actions in a coherent ontology. This foundation stresses 

the importance of viewing the world through 
lenses
 of actions. Actions performed by humans, 

organisations and artefacts can be captured in this way. 

Such an ontology is needed to capture and structure 
categories in the emerging framework, which will be 
presented later, to direct focus during the improvement 

of information system development practices. The 

concern of theorising action has also been 
acknowledged by actor-network theory (ANT) (c.f. 
[26]), where technology and people are both seen as 
social actants. Goldkuhl and Ågerfalk [21] do however 

posit that there is a need to acknowledge the social in 

the technical and the technical in the social. As 

identified by several scholars (e.g. [21, 34]) the 

specific character of artefacts, in this study models, 
methods, tools, handbooks etc. used in system 
development practices, must be acknowledged.  Within 

socio-instrumental pragmatism similar and diverse 

properties of human and artefact-enabled actions are 

acknowledged. 
According to socio-instrumental pragmatism an 
action is a purposeful and meaningful behaviour of a 
human being or artefact acting on behalf of a human 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20093 being. Humans act in order to achieve ends [43], often 
with the purpose of achieving material changes. This 

gives rise to different types of actions, such as 
strategic, tactic, and operative actions in relation to the 
focused area of concern. An enterprise consists of 
humans, artefacts and other resources, and its 

performance of actions. Humans (often supported by 

artefacts) perform actions on behalf of the organisation 
[2, 42] which therefore also needs to be captured in a 
framework for directing focus. Human action is about 
making a difference and impact in the social world as 

well as in the material world [43]. From an 

organisational point of view this means that the result 

of the development practice becomes a concern. A 

social action is an action oriented towards other 
persons [44], and actions can be communicative or 
material. Austin [4] and Searle [39] claim that to 

communicate is also to act. 
A social view on system development practice has 
a long tradition in IS research. Resulting IS/IT 

solutions and architecture are closely related to human 
actions, which in turn are closely related to business 
plans and strategic goals. Since information is 

something that is said by someone to somebody, such a 

view on system development practice, IS/IT solutions 

and architecture becomes closely related to 
communication and business languages (c.f. [29]). A 
social and organisational view for understanding 

information systems development has been handled 

based on linguistics [13, 17, 46] and semiotics [41].  
4. Research method 
 Our choice of method was in all four cases action 
research because this method has proven to be useful in 
a certain type of research settings (cf. e.g. [28]). Action 
research has been described as a research method 
suited to study technology in a human context [6], 

which is a core focus in the IS discipline. In this case, 

this means the study of practices in which development 

of information technology as an integrated part of 
another practice is performed. The improvement of a 
system development practice thus has to be considered 

in a human context. Our aim with this paper has been 
to develop knowledge that is useful for both research 

and practice - an initial framework for directing focus 
during the improvement of information systems 
development practices. We rely on the same arguments 

that are put forward by Lindgren et al. [28] where they 
express (based on Mathiassen [31], pp. 441) 
Merely 
studying a real-world problem without assisting to 

resolve or ameliorate it is perceived as unhelpful. In 
other words, action researchers see it as their 
responsibility to assist practitioners by not only 

developing but also applying knowledge
. As pragmatists we see the goals of social science to be 
oriented towards creating scientific knowledge that is 
of practical value. Such a view has its roots in practical 

inquiry mainly inspired by Dewey [12], and as stated 
by Goldkuhl [14]: practical inquiry and action research 
resemble each other to a high degree. Given this 

epistemological stance research should be done by 

inter-related processes of action, design, interaction, 

and reflection.  
Validity claims raised for our scientific contribution 
are in accordance with multi-grounded theory (MGT) 
[15], i.e. that the knowledge is internally, empirically 

and theoretically validated. In this paper we raise such 

claims for categorical knowledge about what aspects to 
focus on during improvement initiatives. These 

categories are derived from the action research projects 
as well as from theoretical standpoints held by others. 
MGT has thus been adopted in a combined inductive 

and deductive research approach for the analysis. MGT 

is a reaction to grounded theory and its purer inductive 

approach. MGT is a process for theory development in 

three integrated steps that also include steps like 
theory-informed open, axial and selective coding. The 
first step is theory generation, the second step is 

explicit grounding and the final step is research 

interest, reflection and revision (cf. [15]). Given the 

fact that a pragmatist view on knowledge is adopted 
the result of an MGT process is knowledge as practical 
theories. A framework for directing focus, as a 
practical theory, is a prescriptive concept to be 
categorised as a theory for design and action according 

to Gregor [22]. The categories constituting the 

framework are empirically derived from the action 
research projects, theoretically validated, and internally 
validated through the (base) ontology.  
5. Improvement initiatives in four system 
development practices 
The empirical findings that are presented in this 
section are the result of a MGT analysis of four action 
research projects and the improvement initiatives in 
four different system development organisations. 
 The four cases will be referred to as, the Public 
Authority, the Pharmaceutical Company, the Software 

Engineering Company and the Consultant Firm. The 
projects in each of these system development 

organisations are spanning different time periods; the 
public authority (33 months during 1997 
 2000), the 
pharmaceutical company (6 months during 1998), the 

software engineering company (21 months during 1999 
 2001) and the consultant firm (19 months during 
1999 
 2001). Their system development practices 
have both similarities and differences. Table 1 below is 
a summary of what part of the organisation that was 
concerned and their main practice. 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20094  In all these improvement initiatives there is just a 
part of each total organisation that has been involved. 

In the two first cases (the public authority and the 
pharmaceutical company) the main purpose of the 
system development practice was to support their own 

organisation
s operative work. In the other two cases 
(software engineering company and consultant firm) 
products and services were developed for external 
clients. In all of these four improvement initiatives 

there are a number of aspects that have been in focus in 

the task of improving each system development 

practice. As pointed out in section four above the 

analysis of the cases has followed the principles of 
MGT which has generated a number of aspects that 
have been grouped into categories. Examples of two 
such categories and their contents are presented in 
table 2 below. 
After having analysed (through MGT) the actions 
taken and the aspects that were in focus in these 
change projects there were 11 main categories that 

emerged as important aspects to focus on during 

improvement initiatives. These categories do not, 
however, stand alone. They have different relations to 
each other since they as parts make up a wholeness 
related to system development. Due to space 

limitations these relations between categories are not 

discussed explicitly in this paper. 
Strategic planning:
 This category addresses 
different types of plans that need to be set to guide 
future actions. Aspects of strategic planning that have 
Table 1: Part of organization and their main practice 
Part of organisation 
Main system development practice 
Public authority: 
System development 
division 
• Development and maintenance of operational support  systems for EU applications 
• Refinement and maintenance of methods and work procedures for system 
development 
Pharmaceutical 
company: 
System development 
section 
• Development and maintenance of administrative information systems to support the 
research and development process for drugs 
• Evaluation of information systems 
• Knowledge procurement within the organisation 
• Refinement and maintenance of methods and work procedures for system 
development 
Software engineering company: 
System development 
department 
• Development and maintenance of administrative and technical support systems 
(Operation Support System, OSS) for the Tele communication sector 
• Development and maintenance of methods and work procedure for system 
development 
• System responsibility for the product and the development of OSS 
Consultant firm: 
System development 
team 
• Development of internet based IT-solutions for customers: 
o Business to Business 
o Business to Business & Customer to Business 
o Customer Relation Management 
o Customer to Business & Customer Relation Management 
Table 2: Example categories from the MGT analysis 
Category 
Aspects in focus 
System development 
process 
• Model, method and tools (existing and new) 
• Knowledge about the system development process 
• Knowledge about new conditions (platform, architecture etc.) 
• Transfer and management of knowledge and experiences 
• Quality goals: lead time, productivity, efficiency etc. 
• Development process, phases, action lo
gic, prerequisites, result, roles, 
responsibility 
• Decision process and decision structure 
•  Instrumental support for 
system development 
• Models (existing and new) 
• Methods (existing and new) 
• Tools (existing and new) 
• Templates (existing and new) 
• Checklists (existing and new) 
• Patterns (existing and new) 
•  Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20095 shown to be important for system development 
practices are for instance, products, services and 

concepts that should be produced for different (internal 
and/or external) clients. Strategic planning also 
includes formulated goals for improvements and what 
to strive for. Strategies are often more long term while 

business planning often is made for one year at a time. 

Since these aspects affect the system development 
practice they also need to be elaborated during the 
improvement initiatives. 
 Products and services:
 Products and services that 
a system development organisation offers are a part of 

strategic planning and they will have certain 

characteristics. These characteristics will govern how it 

is possible for people to perform, and how people 
should conduct different activities in the system 
development process. Depending on how people 

behave in the system development practice this will 

affect the characteristics of the products and services 

that are delivered. The result of a system development 

process usually is not just about a new or changed 
artefact. In many cases this type of development effort 
also includes development of the practice as a whole 

where the artefact is one part of the total change.  
System development process:
 Not surprisingly, 
this category has emerged as a category of its own. 
This category and the category 
Project management
, see below, are the two core categories in the system 

development practice. System development processes 

are often the first aspect of the system development 

practice that is focused. This is however a rather 

complex category that involves a lot of aspects (other 
categories) of the system development practice. 
Related to the system develo
pment process there is for 
instance often a need to address different types of 
instrumental support for the process, e.g. theories, 
models, methods and tools. Instrumental support gives 

guidelines for what, how and why actions should be 
performed. Another important aspect related to this 
category is know-how which is an important ingredient 

in the system development process and the other 

categories.  
Project management:
 Within project management 
there are also different types of support that need to be 
addressed. Know-how is an important aspect of project 
management and there can be different needs to 
reconstruct and develop procedures to share know-how 

about project management. The same goes for the 

system development process category above. Another 
aspect that is an issue is the alignment of the system 
development process and project management. 

Different milestones and tollgates in the project 
management process need to be aligned with different 

phases in the system development process. 
Collaboration and communication:
 This category 
deals with the need to provide arenas and procedures 

for collaboration and communication. An important 
aspect of this is to address different forums where 
people can meet to share information and 

communicate. Another aspect of this is to visualise 

information and make the information itself as well as 

decisions accessible. 
Decision making:
 Decisions often constitute an 
important prerequisite for continuous system 
development work. Important aspects concerning 

decisions are: which decisions have been taken, who is 

making the decisions, where are they made, decision 

consequences on system development work and 

incentives as motivation to accept and respect taken 
decisions. 
Know-how:
 Know-how is a critical resource for 
system development and concerns activities, such as 

utilisation, development, sharing and maintenance. 

Individuals can have know-how related to all presented 
categories. Know-how is a prerequisite for all actions 
in a system development project and is therefore also 
an important aspect to elaborate. 
Development resources:
 A critical recourse for 
system development is know-how. Other resources that 

also need to be taken into consideration are time, 
financial resources and accessibility of resources. 
Development tools:
 Development tools are 
different types of support that can be used during 

system development. Development tools can take 

different shapes, such as theories, models, methods, 

check lists, templates etc. Since different types of tools 
are used during system development there is a need to 
direct attention towards these tools during 

improvement initiatives. 
Technical infrastructure:
 Technical infrastructure 
can facilitate and restrict what is possible to do in the 

system development process. Technical infrastructure 
that might need to be addressed is: system architecture, 
platforms and base software. Technical infrastructure 

can also be a part of the product that is being 
developed and a prerequisite for developing the 

product. 
Organisational context:
 This category addresses 
aspects such as, organisation, geographic spread, 

leadership, culture, work environment etc. All these 
aspects are traditional organisational aspects but 
nevertheless they need to be dealt with during 

improvement initiatives. The organisation and its 
context will always have an effect on how people 
behave and what is possible to do and achieve in the 
system development practice. For instance, if 

rewarding structures are only based on how individuals 

perform, they will then probably need to be revised if 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20096 one goal of the system development practice is to 
develop sharing and spreading of know-how. 
6. Discussion: towards a framework for 
directing focus in information systems 

development practices  
 In the history of the improvement of system 
development practices there have been different things 
in focus during different time periods. Mathiassen [30] 

describes this as three eras with different challenges for 

system development. The first era starts in the early 

60´s to the middle of the 70´s. During this era the focus 

was on methods, tools and project management. 
During the second era, mid 70´s to the late 80´s, the 
attention was on quality assurance and CASE tools. 

During the third era, late 80´s until today, the focus has 

been on Software Process Improvement (SPI). In the 

criticism of SPI we can recognise that improvement 

initiatives are not believed to have had a significant 
effect on many software development practices [11]. 
The recommendation is that we need to widen our 

scope in a couple of dimensions if we want to succeed 

in the quest for improving system development 

practices. The first dimension is the lack of business 
orientation [11]. The second dimension is the need to 
deal with organisational and social aspects [5] [8]. The 
third dimension is the choice of implementation 

strategy [10]. The implementation strategy should have 
a clear focus on solving actual problems and a clear 
management support [10] [1]. A fourth dimension is 
the need for resources for improvement initiatives and 
know-how about how to improve these types of 

practices [1]. 
In the dimensions that are presented above and the 
summary of categories in section 2.3, there are actually 

two levels that are more or less intertwined and 
overlapping with each other: 
• What aspects to focus on and how to deal with the 
improvement project (meta-development level) 
• What aspects to focus on and to deal with in the 
system development practice (development level) 
Our experiences from a number of different SPI 
projects are that these are more or less 
two sides of 
the same coin
. This means that the categories that 
have been presented in section 2 (related research) and 
section 5 (four action research projects) to a great 
extent are relevant for both levels. 
 Figure 1: Two sides of the same coin 
In a comparison between the categories from theory 
(section 2) and the four cases (section 5) one can 

observe both similarities and differences. After a 
comparative analysis of the categories from section 2 
and 5 we have come up with the following suggestion 

of categories that we need to deal with during the 

improvement of system development practices: 
• Collaboration, Communication & Learning 
• Development resources 
• Development tools 
• Know-how 
• Leadership, Management & Decision making 
• Organisational context 
• Products and Services 
• Project management 
• Strategic planning 
• System development process 
• Technical infrastructure 
The empirically generated categories have been 
theoretically validated through the MGT analysis. This 
process has refined the empirically generated 

categories. This refinement means, for instance, that 

the first category 
Collaboration and Communication
 has been complemented with learning and the fifth 

category 
Decision making
 has been complemented 
with Leadership and Management. What can be 
revealed from this comparison is that we have 

extended the existing scientific body of knowledge by 
adding developed dimensions to the improvement of 
system development practices. 
Based on the metaphor 
two sides of the same 
coin some comment can be made about these 
categories. There are, for instance, three categories that 
do not have a clear relevance on the meta-development 
level of the improvement project; 
Products and 
services
, Strategic planning
 and 
Technical 
infrastructure
. The actual improvement project does 
not have predefined and articulated products and 
services that should be developed. It is rather the 
situatively defined results from the improvement 

initiative that need to be addressed. We might 

nevertheless argue that the changed system 
development practice is a product, the refinement of a 
client
s practice, which would fit on the meta-
development level. Strategic planning is an activity 

that you do for the system development practice level 

but it is not usual that you make a strategic plan for the 
total structure of improvement initiatives in the same 
way. It is also a bit unclear if you actually have a 
technical infrastructure for delivering results in the 
improvement projects as such (meta-development 

level). In one of our action research projects (the 

consultancy firm) we could however observe this in 

what was called 
The handbook
. This was an actual 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20097 result that was to be used by the consultancy firm in 
their real project and at the same time the handbook 

served as an important generative and structuring 
facilitator for the improvement project. 
The categories have also been grounded in the base 
ontology (SIP) presented earlier where the ontology 

has served as a basic generative foundation for what to 

acknowledge in the categories and how to structure 
them in the emerging framework. The structure of the 
framework has also been grounded in a generic 
practice theory (ToP), which distinguishes between 

infrastructural and transactional dimensions (cf. [20] 

for ToP). Since system development in many aspects is 

regarded as a process we have also adopted a process 

theory as a generative source in structuring the 
framework (cf. [27] for process types). The framework 
that we suggest is according to the figure below: 
 Figure 2: Framework for directing focus 
In the upper part of the framework we have put 
forward prerequisites and abilities that are needed for 
system development practices based on the 
infrastructural dimension in the practice theory (ToP) 

[20],. Aspects that are expressed here are 
know-how
, development resources
, development tools and 
technical infrastructure
. These categories are 
important to address in order to realize desired and 
expected results in terms of different 
products
 and 
services
. We adopt process-oriented thinking, relying 
on both transformational and coordinative foundations 
(c.f. [23]), in the realisation process which evidently 

results in categories such as 
system development 
process
 (as transformational dimension) and 
project 
management
 (as coordinative dimension). From the 
process perspective and in connection to realisation we 
also need to handle conditional processes such as 

strategic planning
 and the result of the process in terms 
of 
Products & services
. In relation to these process 
categories we also need to address the lower part of the 

framework. The lower left part is about management in 

general but leadership and decision making are also put 
forward as important. On the right side social and 
communicative aspects founded in the applied (base) 

ontology (SIP) is accentuated when we are focusing 
collaboration
, communication
 and 
learning
. The 
system development practice is then always performed 

in a social and organisational setting that also affects 

all other categories in the framework. This is expressed 

through the category 
organisational context
. This 
category has partly been refined and made explicit 
through the other categories in the framework but there 
are still a number of dimensions left in the 

organisational context to qualify as an own category. 

Organisational context can involve a number of 

different aspects such as organisational structure, 

reward systems, social factors, culture, norms, rules 
etc. These factors can be formally expressed or tacitly 
understood in the organisation but regardless of their 
character they need to be addressed and evaluated. 
7. Conclusion  An important lesson from having analysed four 
action research projects, SPI theories and SPI methods 
is the obvious need to go beyond a narrow focus and 
expand the scope. It is not enough to just focus on the 

categories that are utilised in existing SPI methods. 

The presented framework is an attempt to meet this and 

to structure and refine a number of categories that need 

to be focused and dealt with during improvement 
initiatives. Through its elaborated structure and 
categories the framework operationalise what is needed 

to deal with during improvement initiatives. Through 
its structure and categories parts of the organisational 

context are made less fuzzy by making some 

organisational aspects become explicit categories. 
Since the framework is more exhaustive than existing 
methods it also makes it easier to evaluate what to 

focus and how to deal with different aspects during 
planning and realisation of an improvement initiative. 

The improvement projects will always require you to 

take the actual situation into consideration and make 
adaptations. 
The framework with its categories has a dualistic 
role during the improvement of system development 

practices. The categories in the framework are relevant 

for what we need to focus on and deal with on both the 
meta-development level and the development level 
(c.f. figure 3 below). This conclusion is quite natural 
since both practices deal with development, but have 

different objects (practices) in focus for the 

development effort. It is therefore important to be 

serious about both levels since the success will be 
dependent on that we can manage both levels. On the 
actual meta-development level, in addition to the 
framework, we also need to deal with work procedures 

such as focusing on actual problems, ensuring 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20098 participation, facilitating learning and preparing the 
practice for handling continuous improvements. 
Focus on actual problems
Participation
Learning
Continuous improvements 
System development practice
Improvement project
Meta-development level
Development level
Focus on actual problems
Participation
Learning
Continuous improvements 
System development practice
Improvement project
Meta-development level
Development level
 Figure 3: The framework a
nd development levels In the generation of the framework it has been 
fruitful to use a base ontology (SIP) as a generative and 

structuring base for the framework, i.e. to understand 

and structure the role of humans, actions, artefacts and 

the social world in a context of improvement of 
systems development practices. It has been supportive 
to utilise a solid ontological foundation for coping with 
a too narrow focus on system development practices 

during improvement initiatives. In the same way it has 
also been beneficial to use a practice theory (ToP) and 
a process theory as a generative and structuring base 
for the framework. Theory of practice has helped to 
elucidate actions, prerequisites and abilities for actions 

and results of actions. The process theory has helped us 

to elucidate transformation and coordination 
dimensions of the framework.   
Given the fact that the categories constituting the 
framework have been generated on empirical, 
theoretical and ontological basis it can be claimed that 

the probability of being successful in taken initiatives 

to improve system development practices will be 

raised. 
Rational arguments for the presented framework 
has been generated on solid scientific foundations by 
adopting a Multi Grounded Theory approach. The next 

step in this research endeavor is to empirically validate 

the framework by putting it into application and use it 

in combination with different methods. One part of 
such validation process would be to validate the 
relevance of each category and thereby generate 

theoretical and empirical arguments for the value of 

adopting such framework during improvement of 

system development practices. 
8. References 
[1] Aaen I., Damsgaard J. (1998) Software process the 
improvement: what management tend to forget, IFIP WG8.2 

& WG8.6 
Joint Working Conference on Information Systems
: Current Issues and Future Changes, Helsinki, Finland, 
December 10-13 
[2] Ahrne G. (1994) Social Organizations. Interaction Inside, 
Outside and Between Organization, Sage, London  
[3] Argyris C. Schön D. A. (1996) 
Organisational Learning: 
A theory of action perspective
, Addison-Wesley, Reading, 
Massachusetts (1996) 
[4] Austin J. L. (1962) How to do things with words, Oxford 
University Press 
[5] Baddoo N., Hall T. (2002) Practitioner Roles in Software 
Process The improvement: An Analysis using Grid 

Technique, in 
Journal Software Process The improvement 
and Practice
, 7 (2002) 17-31 (DOI: 10.1002/spip.151) 
[6] Baskerville R. L., Wood-Harper, A. T. (1996) A Critical 
Perspective on Action Research as a Method for Information 

Systems Research, 
Journal of Information Technology 
(11), 
1996, pp. 235-246. 
[7] Bengtsson M., Müllern T., Söderholm A., Wåhlin N. 
(2007) A Grammar of Organizing, Edward Elgar Publishing, 

UK [8] Butler T., Fitzgerald B. (1997) En empirical model of the 
information systems development process, in proceedings of 
Fifth 
International Conference on Information Systems 
Methodologies
, Eds: Jayaratna N, Fitzgerald B, Wood-
Harper T & Larrasquet J-M (1997): Training and Education 
of Methodology Practitioners and Researchers, Springer, 
London 
[9] Börjesson A. (2003) Making SPI Happen: The Impact of 
Iterations in Implementing Success, in proceedings of 26
th Information Systems Research Seminar in Scaninavia
, Haikko Manor, Finland, August 9 
 12 
[10] Börjesson A., Mathiassen L. (2003) Making SPI 
Happen: The Roads to Process Implementation, in 
proceedings of 26
th  [11] Cattaneo F., Fugetta A., Sciuto D. (2001) Pursuing 
Coherence in Software Process Assessment and The 

improvement, 
Softw. Process Improve
. 6 (2001) 3-22, John 
Wiley & Sons 
[12] Dewey J (1938) 
Logic: The theory of inquiry
, Henry 
Holt, New York 
[13] Dietz J.L.G., Widdershoven G.A.M. (1991)  A 
Comparison of the Linguistic Theories of  Searle and 
Habermas as a Basis for Communication Support Systems, 
Proceedings of the 1991 Workshop on Linguistic Instruments 

in Knowledge Engineering. Elsevier 
[14] Goldkuhl G. (2006) What does it mean to serve the 
citizen? - Towards a practical theory on public e-services 
founded in socio-instrumental pragmatism, in 
Proceedings of 
the International Workshop on E-services in Public 

Administration
, Borås 
[15] Goldkuhl G. & Cronholm S. (2003) Multi-grounded 
theory - adding theoretical grounding to grounded theory, 

Presented at 2nd European Conference on Research Methods 

in Business (2ECRM), Reading 
[16] Goldkuhl G., Lind M. (2008) Coordination and 
transformation in business processes: Towards an integrated 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20099 view, 
Business Process Management Journal
, Vol 14 (6) (to 
appear) 
[17] Goldkuhl G., Lyytinen K. (1982) A Language Action 
View of Information Systems. Syslab, Stockholm University 
[18] Goldkuhl G., Röstlinger A. (1993) Joint Elicitation of 
Problems: An Important Aspect of Change Analysis 
[19] Goldkuhl G., Röstlinger A. (2002) The practice of 
knowledge 
 investigation of function and sources, accepted 
at 3
rd European Conference on Knowledge Management
 (3ECKM), 24-25 September, Dublin 
[20] Goldkuhl G., Röstlinger A. (2006) Context in Focus: 
Transaction and Infrastructure in Workpractices, Action in 
Language, Organisations and Information Systems (ALOIS), 

2006 
[21] Goldkuhl G., Ågerfalk P. J. (2005) IT Artefacts as 
Socio-Pragmatic Instruments: Reconciling the Pragmatic, 
Semiotic, and Technical, International Journal of Technology 

and Human Interaction, 1(3), 29-43, July-September 2005 
[22] Gregor S. (2006): The Nature of Theory in Information 
Systems, MIS Quarterly Vol. 30 No. 3, pp. 611-
642/September 2006 
[23] Guarino N. (1998) Formal Ontology and Information 
Systems, Proceedings of FOIS
98, Trento, Italy 
[24] Humphrey W. S. (2007) Software Process The 
improvement 
 A Personal View: How it Started and Where 
it is Going, Software Process The improvement and Practice, 

2007; 12: 223-227 
[25] Jarzabkowski P. (2005) Strategy as practice 
 an 
activity-based approach, SAGE Publications, UK 
[26] Latour, B. (1991). Technology is society made durable. 
In J. Law (Ed.), A sociology of monsters: Essays on power, 
technology and domination (pp. 103-131). London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul 
[27] Lind M. (2006) Determination of business process types 
founded in transformation and coordination, Systems, Signs 

& Actions, Vol. 2 (1), pp. 60*81 
[28] Lindgren R., Henfridsson O., Schultze U. (2004) Design 
Principles for Competence Management Systems: A 

Synthesis of Action Research Study, MIS Quarterly Vol. 28 

No. 3/September 2004 
[29] Lyytinen, K. (1981) Language Oriented Development of 
Information Systems 
 Methodological and Theoretical 
Foundations. Licentiate Thesis, University of Jyväskylä 
[30] Mathiassen L. (1997) 
Reflective Systems Development 
 Position summary
, Department of Computer Science, 
Aalborg University, Denmark 
[31] Mathiassen L. (2002) Collaborative Practice Research, 
Information Technology & People (14:1), 2002, pp. 321-345. 
[32] Mathiassen L., Pries-Heje J., Ngwenyama O., (2002) 
Improving Software Organizations
  From Principles to 
Practice, Adisson-Wesley 
[33] Meehan B., Richardson I. (2002) Identification of 
Software Process Knowledge Management, in 
Journal of 
Software Process The improvement and Practice
, 7 (2002) 
47-55 (DOI: 10.1002/spip.154) 
[34] Orlikowski W.J., Iaccono S. (2001) Research 
commentary: Desperately seeking the 
IT in IT research 
 A call to theorizing the IT artefact. Information Systems 

Research, 12(2), 121- 134. 
[35] Pourkomeylian P. (2002) 
Software Practice The 
improvement
, Gothenburg Studies in Informatics Report 22, 
Doctoral Dessertation, Göteborg University 
[36] Ravichandran T. (2000), Software Process Management 
 An Organizational Learning Perspektive, in proceedings of 
8th European Conference of Information Systems
 (ECIS 2000), Track Development Methodologies II 
[37] Raynus J. (1999) 
Software Process The improvement 
With CMM
, Artech House, Inc. 
[38] Sahlin-Andersson K., Söderholm A. (2002) Beyond 
project management : New perspectives on the temporary 
 permanent dilemma, Liber, Sweden 
[39] Searle J. R. (1969) Speech Acts. An Essay in the 
Philosophy of Language, Cambridge University Press, 
London 
[40] Seigerroth U., Lind M. (2005) 
Facilitating learning in 
SPI through co-design
 in Nilsson A. G., Gustas 
R.,Wojtkowski W., Wojtkowski G., Wrycza S., Zuan
i J. 
(2005, Eds): Advances in Information Systems Development 

 Briging the Gap between Academia and Industry, Springer, 
USA 
[41] Stamper, R. (2000) 
Organisational Semiotics: 
Informatics without the Computer?
 in Liu K., Clarke R.J., 
Andersen P.B., Stamper R.K. (2001, Eds): Information, 

Organisation and Technology: Studies in Organisational 
Semiotics. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, USA 
[42] Taylor J. R. (1993) Rethinking the Theory of 
Organizational Communication: How to Read an 

Organisation, Ablex, Norwood  
[43] von Wright G. H. (1971) Explanation and 
Understanding, Rouledge & Kegan Paul, London 
[44] Weber M. (1978) Economy and society. University of 
California Press, Berkeley 
[45] Wilson D. W. (1997) Could maturity models inform 
information systems curricula development
?, in proceedings 
of Fifth International Conference on Information Systems 

Methodologies, Eds: Jayaratna N, Fitzgerald B, Wood-

Harper T & Larrasquet J-M (1997): 
Training and Education 
of Methodology Practitioners and Researchers
, Springer, 
London 
[46] Winograd T., Flores F. (1986)  Understanding 
Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design, 
Ablex, Norwood NJA 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200910