 Usability Evaluation Practices within Agile Development 
Tiago Silva da Silva 
ICT/UNIFESP 
Universidade Federal de São 
Paulo 
São Paulo, SP, Brazil 
silvadasilva@unifesp.br
 
 
Milene Selbach Silveira 
FACIN/PUCRS 
Pontifícia Universidade Católica 
do Rio Grande do Sul 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil 
milene.silveira@pucrs.br
 
 
 
Frank Maurer 
CPSC/UofC 
University of Calgary 
Calgary, AB, Canada 
frank.maurer@ucalgary.ca
 
 
Abstract
 
Despite having different underlying concepts, agile 
methods and User-Centered Design aim ultimately at 
producing high quality software. Aiming at providing 
better understanding on how usability evaluation is 
addressed within agile environments, we carried out 
multiple-case studies in two large IT companies. On 
the one hand, our studies corroborate the literature 
with regards to the execution of usability inspection 
evaluations on lightweight prototypes, taking 
advantage of the iterative nature of Agile. On the other 
hand, we observed contrary to the literature that this 
iterative nature of Agile has not facilitated the 
execution of user testing sessions. Furthermore, we 
noticed that it is extremely difficult to perform 
traditional user testing sessions due to the tight 
schedules inherent to Agile. Finally, we describe a set 
of practices that can help improve specific artifacts in 
different stages of an agile process in order to 
successfully evaluate software product usability. 
 
1. Introduction  
Agile methods have transformed how teams 
organize the development of a software project. Rather 
than months of development, followed by months of 
field test leading up to a release, agile methods 
organize software development into short iterations 
with continuous testing and a flexible release date [1]. 
The agile approach promises to quickly produce more 
useful and reliable software, and with better control 
than traditional development methods. 
User-centered design (UCD) or Human-centered 
design is characterised by active involvement of users 
and a clear understanding of users and their tasks; an 
appropriate distribution of work between users and 
technology; the iteration of design solutions; and multi-
disciplinary design [2]. 
Moreover, according to Kumar and Herger [3], 
UCD is an approach that puts the user and their goals 
at the center of the design and development process. It 
strives to develop products that are tightly aligned with 
the user’s needs instead of products that are 
technology-centered. 
By integrating UCD and Agile we can increase the 
chances that the software produced adds value to the 
business and is desirable to the end user. There is no 
point in using software if it does not deliver value [4]. 
Integrating Agile and UCD is not only possible but 
it is beneficial to the success of agile teams developing 
interactive systems. Agile and UCD are a natural fit 
[5]. 
Unfortunately, there are still a large number of 
companies that do not realize the importance of their 
products’ usability. Some companies still focus only on 
the usability evaluation at the end of development 
rather than following a user-centered approach from 
the start. 
However, usability evaluations are better than 
ignoring usability concern completely. They are often 
the first step for companies that are aiming at adopting 
a user-centered development cycle and allow 
companies to determine usability issues of their 
products.  
In order to understand how usability evaluation is 
addressed in agile projects – which methods are used 
on, which artifacts are created and at what stage, we 
carried out multiple case studies in two large 
Information Technology (IT) companies. 
As this paper is part of a longitudinal study that 
aims at providing a better understanding of the 
integration between UCD and agile [5] [6], it focuses 
on usability evaluation within agile processes. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
in Section 2, we review related work on agile 
development and usability evaluation. Section 3 details 
the research method and describes how the studies 
were carried out. Section 4 presents our findings with 
respect to usability evaluation within agile 
2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2015.6075133 environments. In Section 5, we discuss our results. We 
conclude the paper in Section 6 with some remarks on 
what we have achieved as well as suggestions for 
future work. 
 
2. Related Work 
 
Recently, Silva et al. [5] conducted a systematic 
literature review on User-Centered Design and agile 
methods. The review addressed topics like usability 
evaluation of prototypes and of working software as 
well as user testing, just to mention a few. 
The related work reports a combination of usability 
evaluation methods depending on the artifacts 
available and on the stage of the development the 
product. 
Fox et al. [7] indicate that at different stages of the 
development cycle different UCD methods can be 
observed, The study describes that once the User 
Interface (UI) features have been implemented, the UI 
is passed back to the User eXperience (UX) designer 
for verification and usability testing. According to their 
findings, verification consisted of determining if the 
development team had followed the design rules set 
out by the designer. If the implemented features are 
verified as correct and they pass the usability tests, 
they are marked as finished features and await release 
to the customer. 
Accordingly, Sy [8] repor
ts three stages of usability 
design: the Early Design Cycle; the Mid-Release 
Design Cycle; and the Late Design Cycle. According 
to her, breaking design down into chunks gives them 
the freedom to mix and match different types of 
usability investigations into the same session, which 
enables them to juggle more than one design, and more 
than one type of usability investigation at the same 
time. Design chunks are what allow them to elicit more 
data from fewer users. 
Furthermore, UX Designers often evaluate the 
products from a qualitative viewpoint regardless the 
name they give to the evaluation method. 
Federoff and Courage [9] report that once the UX 
team has designs ready for feedback, they are rapidly 
taken into the laboratory for testing with users who 
represent those who will actually use the product. 
According to their report, the UX team conducts a 
tremendous amount of formative testing due to the 
nature of their business. Formative test or evaluation is 
a collection of “find and fix” usability engineering 
methods, focused on identifying usability problems 
before a product is implemented [10]. 
Federoff and Courage [9] also reported that, since 
moving to agile, the UX team at the company had only 
on rare occasions conducted a standard usability test. 
According to Federoff and Courage [9], Rapid Iterative 
Test and Evaluation (RITE) [11] is almost always the 
method employed to evaluate designs. According to 
these authors, RITE is based on the principle of 
iterating the design as each participant test the system, 
and the problems are fixed before the next participant 
tests the system. This differs from a traditional 
usability test by emphasizing extremely rapid changes 
and verification of the effectiveness of these changes 
[11]. In a traditional usability test, changes are only 
made after a full set of participants has evaluated the 
design [11]. 
Ferreira et al. [12] report that after the first two-
week iteration, UX designers try and test the 
application with their client. They mentioned that one 
of the strong themes that emerged was the relationship 
between iterations and user testing. Although usability 
was seen as beneficial, participants admitted that 
sometimes its techniques were traded off against 
development time. 
Other times, usability evaluations are performed on 
lightweight prototypes rather than on functional 
software. There are several studies using paper 
prototypes to validate assumptions and to perform 
early evaluations with users. 
Hodgets [13] reports that desi
gners sketch views on 
paper and do early usability testing with users. This 
does not require an expensive usability laboratory or 
video recordings, just someone who is familiar with the 
process, plus the paper prototypes, some real users and 
a notebook. Ideally there is a usability specialist in the 
team for performing this task, because it is not 
recommended using staff that have worked on the 
designs, as they are too familiar with the issues. The 
author also states that most of the activity is early in 
the project, with usability testing taking place 
throughout. Having a user or a representative of the 
user in the team is said to be better than no contact 
with users. However, he states that it is not the same as 
understanding real users’ needs. To do so, he suggests 
the use of Contextual Inquiry [14] to observe and 
interview users. 
Miller [15] reports that usability tests are used to 
evaluate a product design by watching the intended 
users of the product try it – or a prototype of it – for its 
proposed use, and seeing what problems can be found. 
The author claims that usability tests are good for 
discovering issues with learning, discoverability, error 
rates, and speed of use, and also that they uncover 
issues with incorrect or omitted feedback. Usability 
tests can also uncover missing features that are needed 
to complete a workflow. Along with the usability test 
data, the author reports that the team gathered customer 
input from their discussion forums, and visited 
customers to conduct interviews and collect contextual 
inquiry data. As can be seen, some reports [15] [13] 
state that development iterations drive usability testing 
5134 in agile environments, and the results of user testing 
sessions from the previous sprint may be an input for 
the next sprint.  
In their experience report, Meszaros and Aston [16] 
report that usability testing based on paper prototypes 
and early versions of the software were added to the 
agile development process for their system’s second 
release resulting in a significant reduction of usability-
related rework. The paper prototype became a tangible 
representation of the project vision that was used in 
many ways that contributed to the success of the 
project. According to the authors, conducting usability 
testing once an application has been built is reasonably 
obvious even if some of the detailed practices are less 
than well known to agile practitioners. They claim that 
usability testing on an application that has not even 
been built yet might seem foreign to those uninitiated 
in the ways of User or Usage-Centered Design, but it is 
in fact quite easy to do. 
While some authors report on user testing are part 
of agile processes, more report on evaluations in which 
there is no user participation, such as heuristic 
evaluation and expert reviews. 
For instance, Hussain et al. [17] reported that in 
projects involving XP, expert-based user experience 
evaluations solve the problem of ad-hoc input. Mock-
ups – in early phases – and screens – in later phases – 
are sent to the Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) 
experts who then give ad-hoc input by using the 
different communication channels like instant 
messaging, email and video conferencing. UCD 
methods had to be tweaked in a way to be less time and 
cost intensive by involving less experts or users than 
recommended by UCD experts. However, in agile 
processes, these tests are done much more frequently 
and, therefore, the results can be accumulated. 
Chamberlaim et al. [18] report that in their Scrum 
process user evaluation of the product is encouraged on 
a monthly basis, as users are ideally present during the 
sprint. The authors reported only one user test during 
their observation period and this test was carried out 
with an internal user within the organization. 
According to their report, this user was testing a part of 
the system to ensure it fulfilled the team’s 
requirements before it was released. The Product 
Owner attended the sprint review where a demo of the 
work carried out. This allowed the product owner to 
prioritize fixing of usability issues for the next sprint. 
All related work is in line with the statement of 
Nielsen [19] that agile software development methods 
force the usability professionals to change and develop 
new ways of performing usability evaluation. 
In order to verify how usability evaluation has 
changed – which methods are applied to which 
artifacts in which stages – in agile projects, we carried 
out multiple case studies. We observed a set of 
practices – organized according to the different stages 
of agile development – to allow a smooth integration 
between usability evaluation and agile methods. 
 
3. Research Method
 
As aforementioned, multiple case studies were 
carried out in two large IT companies, two studies in a 
company in Canada and two in a company in Brazil. 
Our studies’ goal was to investigate how User-
Centered Design is addressed within agile 
environments. Usability evaluation is inherent to this 
goal and was carefully studied. 
We adopted an ethnographically-informed 
approach [20]. According to Robinson et al. [20], in 
classic ethnography, the researcher studies practice by 
immersing themselves in the area under study for 
several months if not years, documenting what takes 
place via a range of means. According to these authors 
[20], it has become quite common to adapt 
ethnographic traditions in order to conduct shorter 
studies that fit more easily with a software product 
development cycle. 
In some of our studies, audio and video recording 
in the setting of practice was not possible because of 
considerations of time or of commercial 
confidentiality.  
Therefore, we collected our data by observations 
and interviews with practitioners, but we did not 
attempt to influence the practice during the study. In 
order to ensure data confidentiality between the 
researchers and companies, we signed a non-disclosure 
agreement with the companies. This restricts our 
reporting on the details of the companies’ products but 
does not encumber any discussion of their processes. 
In the following, we describe the organizational 
settings, the projects, the participants, as well as the 
data collection and analysis. 
3.1. Organizational Settings 
 
In 
Company 1
, the analyzed development team 
was one of several Scrum teams in the company 
working on software development
1
. At the time of the 
study, this company had followed the Scrum [21] 
methodology for two years. The developers and 
designers were seated in an open-plan office space 
located in the same building, though they were not 
jointly seated. 
In 
Company 2
 there are no separated UX team and 
Developers team. This company had followed the 
Scrum methodology for at least one year. Teams did 
not share developers or UX designers with other teams. 
The teams were selected for the study because they 
                                                
 
1
 The company also has teams working on hardware 
development. 
5135 were the most experienced agile teams in the company. 
Developers and designers were co-located, seated in an 
open-plan office space located in the same building.  
3.2. Projects 
We followed two projects in 
Company 1
: 
Project 
X
 consists of the development of new features for an 
existing product of the company; and 
Project Y
 
consists of the development a mobile version for an 
existing product of the company. 
Company 2
 is not structured by projects, but by 
digital products. We studied two different teams 
developing two different products: 
Product X
 consists 
of a web portal about agribusiness in the country; and 
Product Y
 consists of a web portal of services and 
opportunities providing addresses and data about 
companies and services. 
3.3. Participants 
In
 Company 
1, our study involved a team of seven 
“developers” and one UX designer that worked on both 
projects aforementioned. The developers were part of 
the ‘Development Team’ and the designers were part 
of the ‘UX Team’. The developers had been 
developing software with Scrum for approximately two 
years. Even though called developers, different 
individuals in the team have their own roles according 
to their area and skills. The roles were Project 
Manager/Scrum Master, Product Owner, Technical 
Leader, Developer, and Tester.
 
Information architects, graphical designers, and 
interaction designers compose the UX team. Each 
project has one UX designer, but a UX designer 
usually work with more than one development team. 
The same goes for Project Managers, and they are also 
known as Scrum Masters in the teams. 
In 
Company 2
, our study involved UX designers 
and their interactions with an agile team working on 
the same product. The teams are composed of a 
Product Leader/Product Owner, a UX Designer, a 
Developer, a Tester, and one person responsible for 
Search Engine Optimization (SEO). 
One team – 
Product X
 – has two individuals 
focused on UX, a UX Designer and a Graphical 
Designer, whereas the other team – 
Product Y
 – has 
just one UX Designer who performs the role of a 
Graphical Designer as well. 
Table 
1
 summarizes the background and context 
of the UX designer on the teams. 
3.4. Data Collection 
We used two first-degree techniques [22] for data 
collection: observations and interviews. 
During observations, we manually took notes of the 
observations during meetings in both companies. In 
Company 1
, we also shadowed a UX designer during 
his activities and observed meetings in which he was 
involved. For instance, we observed 4 UX group 
meetings. During 3 months, we also observed: 2 
requirements meetings and 1 retrospective meeting in 
Project X
; 1 demo meeting, 3 planning meetings, 3 
retrospective meetings and 2 user testing sessions in 
Project Y
. 
We interviewed 3 members of the UX Team that 
work in different projects and one Project Manager
2
. 
In 
Company 2
, we observed 5 daily meetings of 
Product A
, 5 daily meetings of 
Product B
 and 
interviewed the UX Designer and the Product Leader 
of the two selected teams during 25 working days. 
3.5. Data Analysis 
Our data analysis was inspired by grounded theory 
[23]. Qualitative analysis provides a general 
characterization based on the researchers’ coding 
schemes, instead of quantitative analysis that rely on 
quantitative measures to describe the data. The way the 
data is coded will affect its interpretation and the 
possible courses for its evaluation. Therefore, it is 
important to ensure that the coding scheme reflects the 
research goals. 
In our research, as suggested by Davison [24], we 
triangulated the data from different sources and 
different approaches – observations and interviews 
were performed in different projects with people with 
different roles in the company. 
Analysis of the qualitative data was conducted in a 
series of steps. First, we performed an open coding by 
extracting initial codes – 
Use of Prototypes
, 
Usability 
Inspection
, 
User Testing –
 from the field notes using a 
grounded theory approach that starts without any codes 
but generates them from the field notes. When these 
codes saturated, we started the focused coding and 
applied the list of codes generated in the systematic 
literature review (SLR) [5] – 
Design Up Front, 
Prototyping, Usability Evaluation
. 
 
4. Results  
In this section, we present the studies’ results 
according to our themes: 
the use of prototypes
 to 
perform usability evaluation, 
usability inspection 
and 
user testing
. 
4.1. Use of prototypes 
In 
Company 1
, we noticed that the UX team uses 
prototypes
3
 of different fidelities to perform different  
 
 
 
                                                
 
2
 They are also called Scrum Masters or Product Leaders 
depending on the team. 
3
A prototype can be used to test big or small ideas and it can 
range from lower fidelity, meaning it is conceptual, 
unpolished, and spare of detailto higher fidelity, precisely 
representing part or all of a final user interface [28].
 
5136 Table 1. Summary of the analyzed organization settings 
 Context UX resources 
for project 
Co-located with 
developers 
MethodExperience 
with agile (in 
Years) 
Background
UX1 
In-house 1 (shared) No (same 
building) 
Scrum 2 Design 
UX2 
In-house 1 (shared) No (same 
building) 
Scrum 2 Psychology 
UX3 
In-house 2 (dedicated) Yes (same 
room) 
Scrum 1 Design 
UX4 
In-house 1 (dedicated) Yes (same 
room) 
Scrum 1 Design 
 
types of usability evaluations iteratively along the 
entire process development. 
Depending on the project’s needs and on the 
Designer’s background, 
Company 1
 used paper 
prototypes, low-fidelity prototypes or high-fidelity 
prototypes to perform both usability inspection 
evaluation and user testing to validate their ideas. 
Inspection evaluation consists of experts using 
different methods to evaluate a user interface without 
involving users. In contrast, user – or usability – testing 
is a technique used to evaluate a product by testing it 
on users [25]. 
For instance, UX1 stated: “
We used to use paper 
prototype, high fidelity prototype, product... some 
prototyping tools, sometimes high-fi prototypes, 
sometimes low-fi
” [UX1]. 
We also noticed that since the members of the UX 
team have different backgrounds, some of them can 
code some functional – high-fidelity – prototypes and 
some of them just cannot do it, as we can see at: “
It’s 
tricky for UX people to code
” [UX2]. 
In 
Company 2
, we noticed that the UX Designers 
use high-fidelity and low-fidelity prototypes. 
Concerning low-fidelity prototypes: “
Once the product 
is defined, I prototype it in two or three weeks. Paper 
prototype to communicate between us and some HTML 
to present to directors.
” [UX4]. 
In this company, UX Designers used low-fidelity 
prototype to represent and validate some ideas with the 
Product Leaders. High-fidelity prototypes, in turn, are 
used to test issues related to graphical design and to 
verify workflows: “
As we work close (UX Designer 
and Business Analyst), we validate our ideas together 
by prototyping and then specifying User Stories
” 
[UX4]; “
We put an effort to build an HTML version, 
then the effort to add some links and build a functional 
prototype is minimal, th
en we can present them to...
” 
[UX3]. These quotations also reveal that UX Designers 
are an integral part of the team, as previously 
described. 
We also observed the use of low and high fidelity 
prototypes to validate concepts through some usability 
inspection evaluations. 
4.2. Usability inspection  
In 
Company 1
, we observed that the UX team 
performs some usability inspection evaluations: a 
member of the UX team designs a prototype and then 
another member evaluates it. Even though they do not 
follow a specific evaluation method, we observed 
throughout the studies that it works well for them: “
We 
perform some experts evaluations, peer review
” 
[UX1]; “
We perform some inspection evaluations, peer 
review with some UX member
” [UX2]. 
In 
Company 2
, teams conducted some peer 
reviews. Sometimes with the Graphical Designer and 
sometimes with the Product Leader, according to the 
following quotes
4
: “
Me and UX peer review the UIs
” 
[PL1]; “
We perform a lot of informal evaluations. Me 
and the Graphical Designer
” [UX3]. 
4.3. User testing 
In 
Company 1
, we could observe that user testing 
sessions with real users are rarely performed, even 
when the project is in its final stages. The Designers 
used to perform user testing with internal users, 
justifying that there is always new and old employees 
with different profiles and backgrounds: “
Internal 
studies... new people and old people from inside the 
Company (...) With real users just at the final stages of 
the project
” [UX2]. 
In 
Company 2
, although they mention that they 
understand the importance of user testing, they could 
not fit them into their process yet. They only mention 
the use of web analytics tools: “
We used some tracking 
tools. But we did not perform any User Testing yet
” 
[UX3]. 
One of the studied teams in 
Company 2
 has a 
database of users that they can call to participate in 
focus groups: “
As we have a set of users (database of 
volunteers), we can call them and carry out some focus 
groups. We have 4 different personas with them
” 
[UX4]. Having a database of users is an interesting 
practice that facilitates recruitment for user testing. 
                                                
 
4
 Noteworthy that since the study in Company 2 was carried 
out in Brazil and the meetings as well as the interviews were 
performed in Portuguese, these were translated to English by 
the researchers. 
5137 However, this team is not performing user testing 
sessions yet. According to the participants, the 
company is interested in checking the system’s 
usability with real users, however they could not fit 
user test sessions into their cycle yet. “
We did not 
perform any User Testing
” [UX3]; “
We don’t perform 
User Testing yet.
” [UX4]. 
4.4. Summary of Results 
Some results from our studies corroborate the 
literature review [5]. The use of prototypes to validate 
assumptions and to perform usability inspection 
evaluations is a clear example. 
Nevertheless, we noticed a practice not mentioned 
in the literature that is conducting expert peer reviews 
on prototypes, leading to an evolutionary design. The 
closest practice observed in the literature was the 
expert evaluation mentioned by Hussain et al. [17]. 
The observed teams rarely perform user testing 
sessions, not even on lightweight prototypes. Only a 
few user testing sessions were observed in 
Company 
1
. This issue confirms statements from the literature 
that report on the difficulty of integrating user testing 
into short iterations [13]. 
The main feedback from UX designers is that they 
do not have time to perform user testing sessions. 
However, whenever they are able to perform some 
kind of evaluation, their results are useful and serve as 
input for planning the next iteration. 
We believe that the main similarity between the 
companies studied is the fact that they perform peer 
reviews on prototypes to validate ideas and designs. 
The main difference between the companies is with 
regards the dedication of the UX Designers to a single 
team. 
Company 2
 has a UX designer as a full-time team 
member, allowing a greater involvement of the 
designer with the project, whereas in 
Company 1
 the 
UX designers works for multiple teams concurrently. 
Even though there is a UX team within the company, 
UX members are not full time members of a specific 
development team, therefore they are always working 
on many projects at the same time: “
We usually work 
on multiple projects, but it’s really easier to work on 
only one product. It’s so much easier to get involved; 
you know what’s going on. Your attention is right 
directed
” [UX2]. 
In 
Company 1, e
ven the Project Managers 
complain about the results provided by UX Designers: 
“
UX people should be more committed, not just 
involved
” [PM]. Looking at this statement from the 
perspective of usability evaluations, we noticed that 
sometimes the designers are not able to find the proper 
time slot to perform usability evaluations and provide 
useful feedback to the rest of the team. Also, when 
working on too many projects with limited time for 
each, UX Designers cannot even plan user testing 
sessions. This indicates a shortcoming of the actual 
process as the literature [15] [13] reports that the 
results of usability tests can guide the development 
process. Most of the time, designers have barely 
enough time to perform some expert evaluations. Only 
rarely they carry out user test sessions, and even these 
are then sessions with internal users. 
Company 2
 does not perform user testing sessions. 
Although this company has a database of users – 
Design Partners –, they could not find the right time to 
perform user testing sessions. These users have so far 
only participated in focus groups. 
In the following section, we discuss our findings 
with regards to usability evaluation according to the 
different stages of an agile development cycle, 
considering Early Design stage, Mid-Release Design 
stage, and Late Design stage, as reported by Sy [8]. 
 
5. Observed Practices for Usability 
Evaluation within Agile Processes 
Combining our literature review [5] and multiple 
case studies carried out in the two companies, we 
determined a set of practices that have been applied to 
different artifacts, in the different stages of an agile 
process, in order to evaluate the usability of a product. 
These practices are summarized in 
Table 
2
. In the 
next sections, we define and detail each of these stages. 
5.1. Early Design Stage 
By “Early Design Stage” we mean the first iteration 
of the agile cycle and a pre-iteration cycle, also 
referred in the literature as Iteration 0, see [7] and [8]. 
Iteration 0 is a research stage and provides an 
opportunity for UX designers to work close with the 
Business Analyst. Thus, improving their understanding 
both of the business – by the UX designers – and of the 
users – by the Business Analysts. Assuming that this is 
the first release of the project, it is more about setting 
up the environment, gather requirements, and 
understand users and their needs. Rapid Contextual 
Design [14] is a good option to perform these research 
tasks [13]. 
Also some usability inspection evaluations are 
recommended in order to check ideas and assumptions 
for the design in a peer review, as summarized in the 
first row of 
Table 
2
. We have to keep in mind that 
these suggested practices are ideal if the companies 
involved have their main focus on the user. 
It is unlikely to have user testing sessions in this 
stage, even on lightweight prototypes. However, some 
positive reports [12] suggested early user testing 
sessions in order to validate design ideas with target 
users. 
5138 Iteration 1 receives as input data gathered in the 
previous iteration as well as initial UI designs. UX 
designers may perform usability inspection evaluations 
on lightweight prototypes – low-fidelity or high-
fidelity prototypes – or even on what has been coded in 
the current iteration to pr
ovide feed-back to 
developers. 
At this stage, RITE is a good option to evaluate the 
usability through user testing sessions [9]. This testing 
relies mainly on lightweight prototypes, because they 
are easy to handle, change, and adapt. RITE testing 
acknowledges that initial designs will be flawed, but 
that a successful design will be achieved through user 
input and iteration [11]. 
RITE and agile development go hand in hand [9]. 
RITE is fast, iterative, inclusive of the team, 
collaborative, and in the end produces a prototype that 
acts as a design specification for development. UX 
designers often make changes after seeing one 
participant having a problem. In RITE, the designer is 
empowered to change the interface if (
i
) the participant 
is believed to be a representative user for that feature; 
(
ii
) the problem is believed to be understood and; (
iii
) a 
solution can be proposed. 
In an attempt to map the usability goals described 
by Rogers et al. [26] – effective to use; efficient to use; 
safe to use; have good utility; easy to learn; easy to 
remember how to use –, we believe that we can draw 
some conclusions.
 
With regards to early design evaluation, we 
observed that the teams have used informal methods to 
validate business ideas and check assumptions for 
design. Regarding usability goals, at this stage, they 
were trying to check if the product has good utility and 
if it is effective to use. 
5.2. Mid-Release Design Stage 
At this stage of the project, usability inspection can 
also be performed both on prototypes and on the code 
produced in this iteration. However, at this stage, UX 
designers already have some working software from 
the previous iterations to evaluate. Even when carrying 
out test sessions with internal users, the team is still 
able to find and possibly fix potential problems.  
UX designers should keep carrying out Contextual 
Inquiry because they will need a basis for designing the 
upcoming iterations and releases. Furthermore, the 
results of usability evaluations performed at this stage 
will provide information for the next iteration and 
drive product development. 
With regards to the usability goals for the mid 
release stage, UX designers performed usability 
inspections of prototypes to check if the product has 
good utility and if it is safe to use. With regards to 
usability inspection evaluations of working software, 
the UX designers were checking if the product is 
effective and safe to use, and if it is easy to learn. UX 
designers were using usability tests on prototypes to 
check if the product is effective to use, easy to learn, 
and safe to use. However, user test sessions on working 
software were also used to check if the product is 
efficient to use and easy to remember. 
5.3. Late Design Stage 
Considering this stage as the last iteration before the 
next product release, usability inspection may not be 
too useful for concerns of the current release. 
However, this feedback may be useful for the next 
iteration and release, since there are usually many 
releases. Moreover, usability inspection methods like 
guidelines reviews are a good opportunity to check UI 
standards compliance. Also, UX designers may use 
RITE to evaluate the code from this current iteration. 
According to the literature and based on our results, 
we observed no complaints about the usability of the 
product due to a lack of user testing. 
Even though we did not observe any of the 
companies carrying out user testing sessions before the 
actual release, we hypothesize that the demo meeting is 
a fair opportunity for gathering feedback on the 
system’s usability. Instead of presenting a demo of the 
developed features, the agile team could observe the 
users or users representative using the product by 
themselves. Developers are usually present during the 
demos and having them watching a user handling the 
system during test sessions might provide insights into 
usability issues.  
Before the product is released, evaluations must be 
focused on identifying issues in the working in order to 
check if it is efficient to use, safe to use, easy to learn; 
easy to remember how to use. 
 
6. Discussion  
Our studies could not strictly state that there are 
benefits from inserting the results of user testing into 
the next iteration because this did not happen in the 
observed projects due to the tight schedule of agile 
development. Unlike, we noticed many usability 
inspection evaluations. 
With regards to usability inspection evaluations, 
our studies corroborate the literature in the sense of 
that agile development methods have been forcing 
usability professionals to develop new ways of 
performing usability evaluations. 
As depicted in the studies, some “new usability 
evaluation methods” emerged within agile. For 
instance, peer review usability evaluations by pairing 
with Business Analysts, Product Owners or even with 
other Designers. 
 
 
5139 Table 2. Summary of practices - usability evaluation methods -, artifacts and goals to evaluate usability at the 
different stages of an agile cycle, based on the literature and on the studies' results. 
Design Stage Usability Evaluation MethodUsed ArtifactsGoals 
Early 
Inspection 
Peer review with 
Business Analysts 
Paper prototypes, sketches Validate business ideas 
Peer Review with UX 
Designers 
Low-fi prototypes, wireframes Check assumptions for 
the design 
User 
Testing 
High-fi prototypes, wireframes, 
mock-ups 
Validate ideas with target 
users 
Mid-Release
 
Inspection 
Peer review with UX 
Designers 
 
Low-fi prototypes, wireframes, 
mock-ups 
Validate ideas for the next 
iteration 
Peer review with UX 
Designers
 
Working software Check standards 
compliance 
User 
Testing 
High-fi prototypes Prepare the system to be 
released 
Working software Prepare the system to be 
released 
Late
 
 
Inspection 
Guideline 
review
 
Working software Check standards 
compliance 
User 
Testing 
Working software Get the system ready to 
release 
 
Furthermore, there are methods applied to different 
artifacts, like paper prototypes, low and high-fidelity 
prototypes, working software from the previous sprint 
and from the current one. 
This is interesting because UX designers we 
observed have diverse backgrounds. As previously 
mentioned, some designers can code and some cannot. 
Thus, these different designers’ background reveals 
that regardless of the artifact created, designers find a 
way to evaluate them from the usability perspective by 
adapting usability evaluation methods to each artifact 
produced. 
In this sense, Ferreira et al. [12] state that even 
when much UX design has been done up front, 
interleaving development iterations allows usability 
testing of working software, i.e., usability testing is 
done more often at a time when changes can still be 
incorporated more easily into the software product. 
However, to make it practical in an agile process, UX 
designers need to use lightweight prototypes as well as 
lightweight evaluation methods, for instance, Discount 
Usability Engineering [25]. 
RITE is an interesting approach because it is based 
on the principle of iterating the design as you test each 
participant. This is in contrast to a traditional usability 
test, where changes are only made after a full set of 
participants has evaluated the design [11]. 
Furthermore, in traditional usability tests, by the third 
or fourth user, everyone knows what most of the 
problems are, so there really is little value in 
continuing to test [27]. 
Nevertheless, in the analyzed projects, UX 
designers could not carry out user testing sessions 
during the iteration. Hence, they used usability 
inspection evaluations, in order to guide the teams in 
order for the development of the product. Moreover, 
based on the results of our studies we hypothesize that 
their approach – usability inspection evaluations and 
expert peer reviews iteratively throughout the 
development process – may reduce the need for 
expensive traditional usability test sessions at the end 
of the process. 
We believe that the scheduling issues are in part 
due to the fact that UX designers were working on too 
many projects at the same time. This limits their ability 
to properly plan, perform, and report the usability tests. 
However, as already mentioned, usability inspection 
evaluations as well as user testing sessions with 
internal users reveal problems. Real target users might 
be required in order to
 reveal additional problems 
resulting from a misunderstanding of the actual work 
process. 
With regards to evaluating the usability of the 
product for the next iteration, we believe that the demo 
meeting is a good opportunity to perform user test 
sessions. By definition, in a demo meeting, designers 
and developers demonstrate the product. Rather, they 
5140 should allow the user or the user representative to 
experience the product. 
It is important to bear in mind that none of the 
previously- mentioned suggestions – neither those 
derived from the literature nor those from the case 
studies – will work if the company does not provide 
the right environment. For instance, Miller [15] states 
that not all companies organize their usability 
resources in ways that allow the previously-described 
methods and artifacts. Companies should enable their 
UX and development teams to work together more 
closely, saving design and development time and 
effort, and producing a better product for the end-user. 
With regards to the limitations of our study, we did 
not follow the entire development processes of the 
projects. Therefore, we cannot affirm that usability 
tests were not necessary, although we did not observe 
any complaints about the products’ usability. Also, we 
are careful on generalizing from our findings. 
Although the teams analyzed in these studies are 
considered not atypical, these studies do not cover all 
the possibilities and the contexts can vary widely. 
 
7. Conclusion  
In recent years several authors have addressed the 
integration between agile and User-Centered Design 
and the overall picture is firm enough for researchers 
and practitioners. For instance, Sy [8] Ferreira et al. 
[12], Fox et al. [7] and Silva et al. [5] arrived at very 
similar proposals. Now we need to confirm these 
studies, for instance, how usability evaluation has been 
performed in agile environments. 
In order to address this issue in real-life projects, 
we carried out multiple case studies in two large agile 
companies from Canada and Brazil. As already 
mentioned, one of our goal was to better understand 
how usability evaluation occurs within agile 
environments. 
We observed that usability evaluations are mainly 
inspection evaluations performed by experts and that 
they are performed on an ongoing basis starting from 
Iteration 0. UX designers are evaluating low-fidelity 
prototypes to check design ideas, business goals, 
effectiveness of use and utility of the product. 
The usability evaluation, as well as the UCD 
process, is a recurrent and iterative process, and the 
iterative nature of agile methods support these 
activities that may guide the product development 
process by improving design and prioritizing tasks. 
At the final stage, UX designers focus on what 
must be delivered, fixing what is possible for the 
upcoming product release. These short iterations 
require competencies not much explored of the UX 
designers, that is, breaking down tasks into smaller 
pieces and then prioritizing them. 
Performing more usability inspection evaluations 
and not too many user testing sessions helps to drive 
the product development and is better than having 
usability evaluation results only at the end of the 
development. 
We hypothesize that the close collaboration plus 
usability inspections reduce the need for expensive 
usability studies as the team gets constant feedback on 
the system and fixes usability issues on ongoing basis. 
Our data does not raise any concerns about the 
usability of the four different systems that we studied, 
although all four projects did not run large scale 
usability tests. Maybe they are simply not needed. In a 
future study, we will try to compare the usability of 
systems developed with the integrated Agile UCD 
approach with a more traditional approach where 
usability tests are conducted late in the development 
process. 
We believe that agile teams will ask for systematic 
usability and user experience evaluations as they begin 
to understand the value of the evaluation results as 
input for the next iterations. This will lead ultimately to 
improving the quality of the product under 
development and reducing costs. We see inviting 
developers to observe usability testing as a means to 
raise awareness of UX issues. We propose to include a 
user test to be included in iteration planning meetings 
as an alternative or addition to a system demo. 
It is worthwhile to mention that the challenge is not 
only which usability evaluation method to use, but also 
which artifacts are available to perform usability 
evaluations, how much time the team has and how 
these evaluations will be helpful for the rest of the 
product development. This is one of the really 
interesting topics that are left for future research. 
Finally, to operate successfully in the agile 
environment, UX designers need to understand the 
agile culture. We believe much of this culture to be 
helpful and supportive for addressing usability 
concerns. Conversely, agile developers must 
understand the importance of having usability 
evaluation throughout the process. 
 
References 
[1]Hugh Beyer, 
User-Centered Agile Methods
, John M. 
Carrol, Ed.: Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2010. 
[2]ISO:13407, "Human-centred design processes for 
interactive systems," International Organization for 
Standardization, Standard 1999. 
[3]Janaki Mythily Kumar and Mario Herger, 
Gamification 
at Work: Designing Engaging Business Software
. 
Aarhus, Denmark : The Interaction Design Foundation, 
2013. 
[4]Lindsay Ratcliffe and Marc McNeill, 
Agile Experience 
Design: A Digital Designer's Guide to Agile, Lean and 
5141 Continuous
. Berkeley, CA, United States: New Riders, 
2012. 
[5] Tiago Silva da Silva, Angela Martin, Frank Maurer, and 
Milene Silveira, "User-Centered Design and Agile 
Methods: A Systematic Review," in 
AGILE
, Salt Lake 
City, 2011, pp. 77-86. 
[6] Tiago Silva da Silva, M. Silveira, F. Maurer, and T. 
Hellmann, "User experience design and agile 
development: From theory to practice," 
Journal of 
Software Engineering and Applications
, vol. 5, no. 10, 
pp. 743-751, October 2012. 
[7] David Fox, Jonathan Sillito, and Frank Maurer, "Agile 
Methods and User-Centered Design: How These Two 
Methodologies are Being Successfully Integrated in 
Industry," in 
Agile
, Washington, 2008, pp. 63-72. 
[8] Desirée Sy, "Adapting Usability Investigations for Agile 
User-centered Design," 
Journal of Usability Studies
, 
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 112-132, May 2007. 
[9] Melissa Federoff et al., "Extreme usability: adapting 
research approaches for agile development," , New 
York, NY, USA, 2008, pp. 2269-2272. 
[10] Janice (Ginny) Redish et al., "Usability in Practice: 
Formative Usability Evaluations - Evolution and 
Revolution," in 
CHI '02 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems
, Minneapolis, 2002, pp. 
885-890. 
[11] M. C. Medlock, D. Wixon, M. McGee, and D. Weish, 
"The Rapid Iterative Test and Evaluation Method: 
Better Product in Less Time," in 
Cost-Justifying 
Usability: An Update for the Internet Age
. San 
Francisco, California, United States: Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, 2005. 
[12] Jennifer Ferreira, James Noble, and Robert Biddle, 
"Agile Development Iterations and UI Design," in 
Agile 
Conference
, Washington, DC, USA, 2007, pp. 50-58. 
[13] Paul Hodgetts, "Experiences Integrating Sophisticated 
User Experience Design Practices into Agile Processes," 
in 
Agile Development Conference - ADC
, Washington, 
DC, USA, 2005, pp. 235-242. 
[14] Hugh Beyer, Karen Holtzblatt, and Lisa Baker, "An 
Agile Customer-Centered Method: Rapid Contextual 
Design," in 
XP/Agile
, 2004, pp. 527-554. 
[15] Lynn Miller, "Case Study of Customer Input For a 
Successful Product," , Washington, DC, USA, 2005, pp. 
225-234. 
[16] Gerard Meszaros and Janice Aston, "Adding Usability 
Testing to an Agile Project," in 
Agile Conference
, 
Washington, DC, USA, 2006, pp. 289-294. 
[17] Zahid Hussain et al., "Agile User-Centered Design 
Applied to a Mobile Multimedia Streaming 
Application," in 
USAB
, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 
313-330. 
[18] Stephanie Chamberlain, Helen Sharp, and Neil Maiden, 
"Towards a framework for integrating agile 
development and user-centred design," in 
XP
, 2006, pp. 
143-153. 
[19] L. Nielsen, "Usability Expert’s Fear of Agility – An 
Empirical Study of Global Trends and Emerging 
Practices," in 
7th Nordic Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction: Making Sense T, NordiCHI ’12
, 
Copenhagen, 2012, pp. 261-264. 
[20]H. Robinson, J. Segal, and H. Sharp, "Ethnographically-
informed empirical studies of software practice," 
Information and Software Technology
, vol. 49, no. 6, 
pp. 540-551, February 2007. 
[21]Ken Schwaber and Mike Beedle, 
Agile Software 
Development with Scrum
.: Prentice Hall, 2001, vol. 18. 
[22]Tomothy C. Lethbridge, Susan Elliot Sim, and Janice 
Singer, "Studying Software Engineers: Data Collection 
Techniques for Software Field Studies," 
Empirical 
Softw. Eng.
, pp. 311-341, 2005. 
[23]J. Corbin and A. Strauss, 
Basics of Qualitative 
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing 
Grounded Theory
. London, United Kingdom: SAGE 
Publications, 2008. 
[24]Robert M. Davison, Maris G. Martinsons, and Ned 
Kock, "Principles of canonical action research," 
Information Systems Journal
, vol. 14, pp. 65-86, 2004. 
[25]J. Nielsen, 
Usability Engineering
. San Francisco, CA, 
United States: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1993.
[26]Jenny Preece et al., 
Human-Computer Interaction
. 
Harlow: Addison-Wesley, 1994. 
[27]J. Nielsen, "Usability engineering at a discount ," in 
Third International Conference on Human-computer 
Interaction on Designing and Using Human-computer 
Interfaces and Knowledge Based Systems
, New York, 
1989, pp. 394–401. 
[28]Jonathan Arnowitz, Michael Arent, and Nevin Berger, 
Effective Prototyping for Software Makers
. San 
Fracisco, CA, United States: Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers Inc., 2006. 
 
 
5142