  Reconciling the irreconcilable? A software development approach that 
combines Agile with Formal. 
  José Gonçalo A. Oliveira Basto da Silva 
Critical Software, S.A. 
Parque Industrial de Taveiro, Lote 48 
3045-504 Coimbra, Portugal 
jsilva@criticalsoftware.com  
   Paulo Rupino da Cunha 
Departamento de Engenharia Informática 
Universidade de Coimbra 
3030-290 Coimbra, Portugal 
rupino@dei.uc.pt 
  Abstract
 Unstable software requirements are common and 
call for Agile practices. On the other hand, quality 
standards and recommendations, to which companies 
must adhere to play in selected markets, enforce 
formality in the development process. We present an 
approach, tailored for a real company, which 
reconciles these extremes. We used as inputs the 

original software development process and its 

formality constraints, the difficulties felt by the 

company, and various agile approaches. The outcome 

has been tested in various cases with encouraging 

results regarding awareness over project progress, 
requirements management, control of allocated effort 
and time, and product quality. Although the approach 

was customized for a specific company, it may be 
insightful to others facing similar challenges.  
. 1. Introduction 
 Critical Software develops “innovative and reliable 
solutions, systems and information technologies for 
enterprise Customers and partners’ business critical 
systems”. It was started by three Ph. D. students from 

the University of Coimbra in 1998, but it quickly 

expanded to more than one hundred staff with offices 
in Portugal, USA and UK [11][13]. Its Customers 
include NASA, the European Space Agency, Alcatel, 
Vodafone, Siemens, among other distinguished 

companies and public sector institutions all over the 
world. 
The strong will to make a difference in the 
international market, where other competitors held a 
solid position, led Critical’s top management to a 
strong commitment to Quality. This strategic decision 
and its implications earned the company several 

prizes and distinctions [11] and worldwide 

recognition, patent in the numerous case studies about 

it. Critical Software’s Quality Management System 
(QMS) conforms to several standards, namely ISO 
9001’s business independent guidelines, norms that 

define software life cycle processes (ISO 12207), 
Software Process Improvement and Capability 
mEasurement (SPICE), European Community for 

Space Standardization (ECSS) and, finally, National 
Aeronautics Space Agency – Software Engineering 

Laboratory (NASA-SEL) recommendations. 
According to ISO 12207’s recommendations, there 
is a Projects Life Cycle Management (PLCM) 

process, which defines the types of projects that are 

developed at Critical Software and their specific life 

cycle models. Currently the following types of 

projects are considered: software development; 

product/process evaluation; product selection and 
deployment; optimization; product development and 
support; maintenance; and generic consulting projects 

[10]. For software development projects, the PLCM 

hands over to the Software Development Process 

(SDP). The SDP defines one generic life cycle, which 

is comprised of six phases: system requirements 

engineering phase; software requirements engineering 

phase; design phase; validation phase; acceptance 

phase; and support and maintenance phase. 

Additionally, four tailorings exist for four different 

contexts: prototyping; new development; high-reuse; 
and enterprise application integration (EAI). 
In the first few years, most of Critical’s clients 
came from the Space sector. Their requirements were 

fairly stable and development followed the plans 

without major changes. However, as Critical got more 

involved with the industrial sector, specific 

difficulties emerged, combined with new problems 

related to the growth of the company. These can be 

summarized as follows: 
• Evolving requirements
. Industrial Customers are 
constantly changing their requirements in order to 
keep up with evolving business needs [1][5][17]. 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200610-7695-2507-5/06/$20.00 (C) 2006 IEEE  This turbulence is, nowadays, a fact that must be 
assumed and dealt with. 

Also, Customers often have only a rough idea of 

what they want, or they are not specific enough 

when stating their needs. According to Critical’s 

experience, sometimes Customers even make 
conflicting declarations when asked about the 
same requirement at different times. 
• Lack of Customer involvement
. The Customer 
pays for the project, therefore, as far as they are 
concerned, it is the project team’s job to develop 

the solution. The Customer rarely allocates any 

effort for support activities. However, it is known 

that, the less support is given by the Customer, the 

higher are the chances of project failure 

[8][17][19][20]. 
 • Tight deadlines, high demands, low tolerance 
and low budgets
. Due to the worldwide economic 
slowdown, Customers are less tolerant to failure. 
Not only the pressure and demands rose over the 

last few years, but also the budgets have decreased 
due to the aggressive competitiveness from other 
software houses.
 • Miscommunication between developers and 
Customers
. When talking to each other, 
Customers and developers often use their own 

jargon, which is frequently not common-ground 

for both parties [14]. On the other hand, 

excessively informal discussions of requirements 
between developers occasionally lead to different 
and imprecise understandings of the actual 
objective [16]. 
 This is the context in which a highly formal 
software development process, strongly influenced by 

several quality standards, must be used to meet 

requirements from Customers. Additionally, top 
management demands agility and calls for metrics to 
help monitor project progress continuously and in a 

more effective way (Figure 1). 
ISO 
9001:2000 
ISO 12207 
ISO 
15504 
TickIT 
ECSS 
NASA-SEL 
QMS 
Custome
rTop  
Management 
Problems / 
difficulties 
Project 
! ! Need for 
agility 
Need for metrics 
and indicators  
PLCM 
SDP 
Requirements
 Figure 1 - Context of application of the software development process 
Due to its nature, Critical Software’s formal 
software development process can’t easily be adjusted 

ad hoc. Apparently minor changes may easily trigger 

unexpected overhead and non conformities, 

eventually leading to falling Quality Audits. On the 

other hand, due to the aggressiveness of deadlines and 

the high probability of missing them, project 

managers tend to reject using agile practices, in fear 

of not being in complete control of the situation. The 

required metrics, on the other hand, must be collected 
without increasing project overhead significantly.  
Although most industrial projects are claiming for 
the introduction of agile practices, none of the 
existing methodologies can be used, unmodified, in 

Critical’s context. On one hand, there are the various 
quality certifications, which must be maintained to be 
able to play in selected markets. On the other hand, 

the company wishes to keep several procedures, 

templates and tools that have already proven their 

effectiveness and are embedded into the company’s 
workflows. 
The solution points to an apparent paradox: trying 
to reconcile the agility of recent methodologies with 
the necessary degree of formality imposed by quality 
management standards and recommendations, to 
come up with a process capable of managing evolving 
requirements to ensure the delivery of software to the 
Customer on time, on effort and on quality. To this 

end, agile methodologies were studied and selected 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20062  practices were introduced in a new tailoring of 
Critical’s software development process. 
A new life cycle model was created to allow 
iterative and incremental development without the 

need of formal milestone meetings in between. The 

Enterprise Architect CASE tool [22] was tailored to 
help manage projects requirements more effectively 
through the use of relationships matrices and 
automatic document generation. A new testing tool is 

being evaluated, so that unit tests will be widely used, 
with as little overhead as possible.  
To ensure rigor and validity in the definition of 
Critical’s custom agile approach to software 
development, action-research is being used, since it is 
recognized as one of the few research approaches that 
can be legitimately employed to study the effects of 

specific alterations in systems development 

methodologies [2][3][12]. Action-research possesses a 
cyclic nature: an intervention is planned, the 
corresponding action is taken, and a critical reflection 

on the results is carried out, providing insight for 

adjustments that can be made before the next cycle. 

The researcher has been involved in the process as the 

Quality Assurance Engineer for four projects. Three 

of the projects comprised one Project Manager and 

two Project Engineers and the other project comprised 

one Project Manager and three Project Engineers. So 

far, the custom agile methodology that Critical is 

developing has been used in three cycles.  
As illustrated in Figure 2, the first cycle 
encompassed one project. Its findings had significant 

impact and required reflection and planning for a 

second cycle. The second cycle spanned two projects 

and more interesting findings emerged, resulting in 

the need for more reflection and planning for a third 

cycle. Meanwhile, one of the projects ended, while 
the other three are still on-going. The present article 
describes the process in its third cycle and all related 

findings.  
 Figure 2 – Action-research cycles and related 
projects in the study, so far. 
 The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows: section 2 describes the proposed software 

development process. Section 3 discusses some 

preliminary results, by comparing two similar 

projects, one of which used the old formal process 

and the other the new, more agile, approach. Finally, 
Section 4 presents some conclusions. Due to space 
constraints, the state-of-the-art on agile 
methodologies is not included in this paper. 

 2. An approach that balances agile with 
formal 
 Since it would not be feasible to examine all agile 
methodologies and their practices in the required time 
frame, we sought inspiration in three of the most 
popular and documented methodologies: eXtreme 
Programming, Adaptive Software Development and 
Scrum. In a second round of analysis, some practices 
used in these approaches were discarded, mainly due 

to the very small size of the teams: pair programming 

and daily stand-up meetings were ineffective in 

groups of two programmers. Another interesting fact 
is that the scrum sprint backlog was not efficiently 

implemented until the third project, and it only 

returned effective results in three of four projects 
because of one team’s lack of discipline. 
In order to comply with the overarching norms 
defined in the software development process life cycle 
model for which Critical Software holds a 
certification, the agile approach was designed as a 
particular tailoring for use in cases of unstable 

requirements. It is composed of four phases, as 

illustrated in figure 3: 
• Requirements Phase
. Dedicated to project 
preparation and specification of high-level 
requirements. 
• Design, Engineering and Validation Phase
. Where development occurs, iteratively.  
• Acceptance Phase
. Where acceptance tests are 
performed by the Customer before closure. 
• Operations and Maintenance Phase
. Eventual 
bugs and fixes are addressed in this period. 
 
Phases are delimited by milestones where key 
objectives and tasks are validated. It is during the 
milestone meetings that project members evaluate 
whether or not the project team is prepared to move 

on to the next phase.   
Project 1 
Project 4 
………Cycle 
#1 Cycle 
#2 Cycle 
#3 Project 2 
Project 3 
time 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20063    Operations and 
Maintenance 
Phase 
 
  Acceptance 
Phase 
   Design, Engineering and Validation Phase 
Requirements 
Phase 
Time
0% 
Preliminary Design Review 
Kick-Off Meeting 
Qualification Review 
Acceptance Review  
Milestones 
 Figure 3 - Agile Software Development Process life cycle model. 
The project initiates with a Kick-Off Meeting, 
where the Project Manager formally presents major 

artifacts (e.g. project proposal details, project master 

plan, project folder, main roles and responsibilities, 
and quality assurance plan). All milestone meetings 
are monitored by a Quality Assurance Engineer, 

whose role is to ensure that quality tasks are 

performed and objectives are met. 
It is important that the whole project team is 
identified. It consists not only of Critical’s staff, but 

also of Customers’ stakeholders, co-responsible for 

project success. Customers’ liaisons should be able to 

help in requirements specification, decision making 
and final approval. They are in charge of making sure 
that Customers’ tasks with impact on the project 
progress are performed within a reasonable period 
(e.g. three days in a one month project). Penalty 
clauses are included in the project proposal to account 

for delays. 
The Requirements Phase main objective is to 
identify functionalities desired by the Customer. 
Customers tend to understand functionalities better 

than lower level software requirements [7][17]. 
Functionalities should be described by simple and 
unambiguous phrases using the SMART technique 
[18]:  
• Specific
. Functionalities should be unambiguous 
and clear. The writer should specify things in a 

clear, consistent, simple way, and at an 
appropriate level of detail. 
• Measurable
. Once the functionality has been 
implemented, it should be verifiable, in order to 
ensure that the requirement was met. 
• Attainable
. By an attainable requirement we 
mean it is possible physically for the system to 
exhibit that requirement under the given 

conditions. Some requirements may be beyond 

the bounds of human knowledge. Others may 
have theoretical solutions but be beyond what is 
currently achievable.” 
• Realizable
. Functionalities should be feasible 
under the described conditions, given resources 
and time frame. 
• Traceable
. Requirements should be traceable 
from the initial discussion with the Customer, 

subsequent formalization into a document, 

through design, implementation and test, to 
ensure coding and testing are exhaustive
.  SMART requirements help avoiding diverging 
understandings from Customers and project 

developers regarding the same issues, while 

promoting the ability to grasp new and abstract 

concepts quickly. Whenever needed, the “I Know It 
When I See It” (IKIWISI) technique should also be 
applied, resorting to working prototypes to help 
Customers shed light over ambiguous 

requirements[5][21].  
Requirements are managed in a CASE tool called 
Enterprise Architect. This tool helps the project team 

keep relationship matrices between functionalities and 

lower level requirements (Figure 4), for analysis of 

impact of change requests (“what is the effort 

involved in the requested change?”), and between 

requirements and tests for analysis of requirements 

coverage (“are the tests covering all requirements?”) 
[14][15]. 
  100%Project Close-down Meeting / 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20064   Figure 4 - Enterprise Architect relationship matrices between functionalities and lower level requirements. 
 The Enterprise Architect case tool is capable of 
handling several attributes such as requirements 
priority, risk, difficulty, effort, type (functional, non-
functional, interface, performance, printing, reporting, 
testing, validation), status (proposed, draft, approved, 
implemented, and reviewed) and author (member of 

the Customer team that requested the functionality), it 

keeps an history of changes (through comparison of 

requirements against the baseline) and it is also 

capable of automated document generation. In this 
case, the requirements specification document, in 
Word, Rich Text or HTML format.  
When all functionalities have been documented, 
this information is reviewed with the Customer using 

a Powerpoint presentation. A formal specification 

document should be signed after clarifying eventual 

outstanding issues.
  Before the beginning of the next phase, a 
Preliminary Design Review (PDR) meeting held by 
the project team. This meeting is conducted by the 
Project Manager and monitored by a Software Quality 
Assurance Engineer. The PDR is a milestone to check 
whether or not goals defined at the beginning were 

met: were the expected deliverables produced and 

reviewed as planned? Was reuse analysis performed? 

Are there any process improvement suggestions? 

Were test cases defined? Were the matrices produced? 
And, in conclusion, is the project prepared to move on 
to the next phase? 
Figure 5 illustrates the procedures just described, 
from project beginning until the Preliminary Design 

Review milestone meeting. 
 Figure 5- Requirements phase 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20065  Development takes place, iteratively and 
incrementally, in the Design, Engineering and 

Validation Phase (Figure 6). An increment is 

composed of one or more iterations and results in a 

working fragment of the desired final product. The 

Design, Engineering and Validation phase is 
composed of three major sub-phases: 
• Adaptive Cycle Planning
. This sub-phase marks 
the beginning of a new iteration. The first activity 
is to schedule a workshop with the Customer, 

who is asked to define a timeframe within which 

a working increment must be available. This is 

called timeboxing [6][17]. Timeboxes (iterations) 

should have duration of no less that one week and 

no longer than four weeks. Short iterations lead 
to a higher focus on the requirements by the 
development teams [8][17]. They are forced to 
develop less and quicker. As a direct result, the 
outcome is easier to maintain, test, and eventually 
change [6]. According to [19], shorter time 

frames increase project success. This practice not 
only assures higher focus on objectives, but also 
quick steering in case of deviations. All the 
functionalities identified in the previous phase are 
laid down on the table and the Project Manager, 

Senior Engineer(s) and the Customer 
Representative(s) prioritize them according to 

their risks and dependencies. 
  Figure 6 - Design, Engineering and Validation phase  
 At this stage, the Project Manager and the Senior 

Engineers perform a brainstorming in order to 

design detailed components. This is a critical 

step, because good component engineering 
allows the implementation of simple, yet robust 
solutions, with high and yet effective rates of 

reuse, which allows easier modification of the 

code in case of change requests [17]. 

Functionalities and components are related in a 

matrix using the Enterprise Architect tool. 

Based on the brainstorming results, the project 
manager creates a detailed iteration plan to guide 
the development team in the implementation of 
all the components underlying the chosen 

functionalities for the current iteration.  
In the beginning of the each iteration, the 
Software Quality Assurance Engineer creates a 

backlog for the current iteration requirements – a 

list of all outstanding work. This should then be 
updated on a daily basis, keeping track of the 
effort spent. The use of a backlog is a practice 

taken from SCRUM [17]. 
• Design and Engineering
. Actual development, 
according the detailed project plan, starts in this 
sub-phase. Remaining technical details are 

clarified on an on-going basis. As 

implementation advances, test cases are defined 

and executed in parallel using an automated 

testing tool as well as manual tests whenever 

automation is not possible or reasonable.  
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20066  Once an iteration has started, requirements under 
development cannot be changed. It is the Project 

Manager’s role to manage communication with 

the Customer and restrain change requests. If the 

Customer demands modifications to the original 

requirements, its impact is analyzed by the 
Project Manager using the functionalities vs. 
components matrix. Since functionalities are 
characterized in terms of effort, eventual 

financial and time implications can be accurately 
reported back for approval. Nevertheless, the 
current iteration is not affected, since changes 
will only be accounted for in following iterations 
or increments. The Project Manager has also the 
concurrent responsibility of preparing the next 
iteration, following the activities described for 

the Adaptive Cycle Planning, in order to ensure 

the that programmers are not idle in-between 
sprints. 
The implementation activity is supported by 

Cruise Control – an open source, highly 

configurable continuous integration tool – that 

provides automated build construction, e-mail 

notification on error detection, automated 

execution of test scripts and metrics such as 

percentage of successful builds. 
 • Validation
. Upon conclusion, the increment is 
subjected to system tests and presented to the 
Customer at a workshop, where, together with the 

project manager, an evaluation is done to check if 
it meets the expected results. Based on the 
conclusions, both parties decide whether the 

increment is ready to be deployed at Customer’s 
premises for acceptance tests. 
 If the increment needs no further iterations, the 
Project Manager fills a Reuse Sum-up document 

describing which existing components were reused, 

and which new ones can be added to the company’s 

Repository. Using this information, the Reuse 

Administrator can report to top management on effort 

saved and invested across all projects. 
The next step in the Qualification Review 
Milestone is to hold a meeting to confirm that all 

increments are implemented and deployed at 
Customer’s premises, that a snapshot of the physical 
architecture of any databases related to the project is 

recorded, and that acceptance tests are appropriately 

specified and ready to be used in forthcoming 

Acceptance Phase. 
As shown in Figure 7, each software increment is 
tested and evaluated in a formal meeting with the 

Customer. If any problems are detected they must be 

fixed and the tests re-applied. 
 Figure 7 - Acceptance phase 
If the deployed increment was not the last one, the 
project continues in the Adaptive Cycle Planning task 
of the Design, Engineering and Validation phase. 
Upon completion of all increments, the Customer 

acknowledges project conclusion by signing an 
acceptance form. That same day, the team holds a 
Project Close Down meeting, where the whole project 
is reviewed and process improvement suggestions are 

discussed. The Project Manager records all related 

information into an optical disc for safe keeping and 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20067  configuration management purposes. A liaison is 
assigned to handle any future Customer requests 

during the Operations and Maintenance Phase. 
 3. Preliminary results 
 We have been experimenting with the described 
Agile Software Development Process in four projects. 
Initially, only a subset of the practices and tools were 
used, to draw partial conclusions and refine different 

ideas. Recently, the full proposal has been used to 

manage a delicate project – still under way – to which 
we will refer as X2. 
Project X2 is the evolution of a previously released 
project X1 which was managed with the old formal 
methodology and suffered a series of problems (see 
Table 1). It consisted of a workflow system designed 

to manage trouble tickets and work orders throughout 

the whole lifecycle - from initial issuing to task 

conclusion - while ensuring user and time tracking as 

well as recording of results. 
For project X2 the requirements called for a more 
ambitious version of this workflow system, capable of 

being shared by several other companies across 

Europe, which are part of the same financial group of 

the initial company.  
Table 1 shows how similar issues were played out 
in project X1 and in project X2. 

  Table 1 – Comparison between Project X1 and Project X2. 
  Project X1 
Project X2 
Neither the development team nor the Customers could 
clearly understand the requirements specification. They were 
poorly defined. Both parties though there was tacit agreement 
on what the requirements were. 
Requirements were defined with Customer's involvement. 
The team used the practices described in the new agile 
process to specify requirements. 
Requirements 
The Requirements Phase finished on time, as specified in the 

project plan, albeit requirements later revealed unclear and 
imprecise. 
The Requirements Phase failed to meet the Preliminary 
Design Review (PDR) milestone according to the plan, but 
the understanding of the requirements proved more effective. 
No traceability matrices between functionalities and lower 
level requirements were used. The project manager was 
unable to correctly evaluate the impact of change requests in 

terms of effort to address them. 
 The use of the Enterprise Architect CASE tool helped 
managing supporting information, relationship matrices and 
automatic document generation. 
Quality  
Assurance 
The project was reviewed and lessons learned only at the end, 
in a single Project Close Down meeting,. 
The project is reviewed at the end of each iteration. Problems 
are detected earlier and appropriate corrective measures 

implemented. 
 Tests were defined on the fly, during implementation, and 
executed manually. As soon as the project started to miss 
deadlines, project members started to skip testing activities in 
order to speed up implementation. The project had an 

unacceptable number of bugs. 
Acceptance tests were defined before the Preliminary Design 
Review milestone. The project used unit tests from the 
previous version and new ones were developed for the 
current version. Tests were performed during 

implementation, and integration tests executed after the 
conclusion of each iteration. 
Testing 
The testing environment was not a concern. Neither the 
environment nor the data were realistic. The executed tests 
passed in spite of the project having an unacceptable number 
of bugs. 
The project team prepared a realistic testing environment and 
set up a database populated with real data. Tests were 
planned and executed rigorously. 
Team  

Empowerment 
The project members were not empowered. They had strict 
orders from the project manager. New ideas were not 
welcomed. 
The team contributed positively with ideas. Morale and 
enthusiasm towards the project are higher than in the 
previous version. 
Change  

request 
Customer change requests were managed informally, using e-

mails and phone calls. No change log was maintained. In 
some cases, the Customer even requested the team to change 

things back to the original state. 
A change request procedure was defined in the contract. 
Time and effort estimates are calculated for each one and 
formal approval is called for. 

 Monitoring 
The project progress was not properly monitored. Top 

management only knew about project delay near the end. 
 The Software Quality Assurance Engineer keeps a backlog 
of each iterations. Top management has access to progress 

data independent from the Project Managers point of view. 
This backlog also helps predict how much longer the project 
is going to take before all increments are finished, based on 
the project teams performance. 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20068   A striking question regarding the above 
comparison is: how could Project X1 suffer so many 

problems in a software development company with a 

quality-certified formal process? The answer lies in 

the overhead of the process itself, which renders it 
unusable in cases of unstable requirements and highly 
aggressive deadlines. Being unable to apply the 
process, the Project Manager is left without reliable 

instruments and ends up improvising as issues arise. 
Planning small increments in project X2 allows the 
development team to be more focused on immediate 
implementation needs and the Customer is able to test 
the project earlier. Conversely, in project X1, the bugs 
were found only when the full project was deployed, 
after all functionalities were implemented. Using 

automatic unit tests and early integrations of the 

project at the Customer’s facility, the project team is 
able to address problems at an early stage. As project 
X2 progresses, a reduction in change requests and risk 

is being noticed as is an increase in Customer 

satisfaction. 
The monitoring of project progress also improved 
in terms of efficiency and effectiveness. The Software 

Quality Assurance Engineer ensures an autonomous 

and independent project monitoring in parallel with 

the Project Manager. 
According to the latest report to top management, 
project X2 is presently fully on quality, which means 
that all expected quality records are being produced as 
required by Critical Software’s Quality Management 

System. It is however neither on time nor on effort 

due to late approvals of change requests by the 

Customer, who acknowledges this responsibility.  
The current project is being released seamlessly.  
So far, two of the three increments were deployed in 
the production line with zero bugs. In spite of the 
small delays which resulted in response to Customer’s 

changing needs, their expectations are being fulfilled, 

and the team morale is high. 
Project X2 is also becoming notorious inside 
Critical Software, raising curiosity about the Agile 
Approach among other Project Managers. 
 4. Conclusion 
 We presented a software development process that 
is, simultaneously, agile enough to deal with unstable 
requirements and formal enough to meet quality 
certifications. It has been custom tailored for a 

company whose traditional clients demand strict 

methodologies to handle their stable but critical 

requirements; but whose newer clients demand 

flexibility to change requirements without missing 
aggressive deadlines. The approach has been tested in 
several real cases with encouraging results. In those 
cases where the deadlines were missed, the Customer 

acknowledges the responsibility for not having 

responded promptly to the development team.  
The proposed approach meets most of the 
challenges raised in the introduction, namely the need 
for an adjusted iterative and incremental approach 
which allowed facing evolving requirements in a 
responsive way. The Customer’s participation in 
requirements specification, reviews and workshops, 
not only in key moments of the project but also 

between sprints gave the Customer a sense of 
ownership over what was actually being produced. 
The fact that the project was being delivered 
incrementally allowed the Customer to see results 
sooner, raising its enthusiasm. It also allowed the 

Customer to sense Critical’s speed of development, 

allowing request for changes and budgets estimating 
to become more accurate. 
Future work will look into the Customer 
relationship in search of ways to speed up decisions, 

and experiment additional agile practices, such as the 
use story cards to handle miscommunication issues. 
The current practices will continue to be refined 

according to lessons learned on new and existing 

projects. 
 5. Acknowledgements 
 
The authors would like to thank the reviewers for 
their insightful comments. Some of their suggestions 

were not included exclusively due to time and space 

constraints, but they will be pursued in subsequent 

work. 

 6. References
  [1]
 Austin, R., ‘Project Management: Part I – Methods, 
Models, and Practices’, Benchmark Review, Analyzing 

IT Metrics for Informed Management Decisions, 
Vol.4, No.2, Cutter Consortium, 2004.  
[2]
 Baskerville, R.L. "Investigating Information Systems 
with Action Research," Communications of the 

Association for Information Systems (2, Article 19), 

1999. 
[3]
 Baskerville, R.L. and Wood-Harper, A.T. "A Critical 
Perspective on Action Research as a Method for 
Information Systems Research," Journal of Information 

Technology (3:11), 1996, pp. 235-246. 
[4]
 Berry, D., ‘The Inevitable Pain of Software 
Development, Including of Extreme Programming, 

Caused by Requirements Volatility’, University of 
Waterloo, Canada, 2002. 
[5]
 Boehm, B. ‘Requirements that Handle IKIWISI, 
COTS, and Rapid Change’, Computer, IEEE, pp.99-

102, 2000. 
Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20069  [6]
 Boehm, B. and Turner, R., ‘Balancing Agility and 
Discipline – A Guide for the Perplexed’Addison-

Wesley, Pearson Education, Boston, USA, 2004. 
[7]
 Cockburn, A., 'Surviving Object-Oriented Projects', 
The Agile Software Development Series, Addison-
Wesley, 1998. 
[8]
 Cohn, M. and Ford, D., ‘Introducing an Agile Process 
to an Organization’, Cover Feature, Computer 

Magazine, pp.74-78, 2003. 
[9]
 Control Chaos, 
http://www.controlchaos.com/resources, current 2005.  
[10]
 Cordeiro, R., ‘Project Life Cycle Management’, 
Critical Software SA, Portugal, 2003. 
[11]
 Critical Software, S.A., 
http://www.criticalsoftware.com, current 
2005. 
[12]
 Cunha, P. R. and Figueiredo, A. F., ‘Action-Research 
and Critical Rationalism: A Virtuous Marriage’, 

Proceedings of the Xth European Conference on 

Information Systems, ECIS, Gdansk, Poland, 2002. 
[13]
 Deusdado, D., “Homens à prova de ‘crashes’”, Ideias 
& Negócios, 1998, pp. 30-33. 
[14]
 Eigner, M., ‘Requirements Management and 
Traceability’, An Agile PLM Whitepaper, Agile 

Software Corporation (current 2005). 
[15]
 Hull, E., Jackson, K., Dick, J., ‘Requirements 
Engineering – second edition’, Springer, 2004.  
[16]
 Hutinski, Z., Vrcek, N. and Bubas, G., 
‘Communication Problems in Complex Information 

System Development Projects’, University of Zagreb, 

Croatia, 2001. 
[17]
 Larman, C., 'Agile & Iterative Development - A 
Manager's Guide', Agile Sofware Development Series, 
Addison Wesley, 2004. 
[18]
 Mannion, M. and Keepence, B., ‘SMART 
Requirements’, ACM SIGSOFT, SE Notes Vol 20, No. 

2, 1995. 
[19]
 Standish Group, ‘Chaos’, The Standish Group Inc, 
West Yarmouth, MA, USA, 1994. 
[20]
 Standish Group, ‘Extreme Chaos’, The Standish Group 
Inc, West Yarmouth, MA, USA, 2001. 
[21]
 Tomayko, J., ‘Engineering of Unstable Requirements 
Using Agile Methods’, Carnegie Mellon University, 
USA, (current 2005). 
[22]
 Enterprise Architect, Sparx Systems, Australia, 
http://www.sparxsystems.com.au/ 
 Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200610