 Integrating Security into Agile Development Methods 
  Mikko Siponen
a, Richard Baskerville
b and Tapio Kuivalainen
a aUniversity of Oulu, Department of Information 
Processing Science, Linnanmaa, PO BOX 3000, FIN-
90014 Oulun yliopisto, FINLAND.  
bCIS Department, Georgia State University, 35 Broad Street, PO Box 4015, Atlanta, GA 30302 
  Abstract 
 Software developers can use agile software 
development methods to build secure information systems.  
Current agile methods have few (if any) explicit security 
features.  While several discrete security methods (such as 
checklists and management standards) can supplement 

agile methods, few of these integrate seamlessly into other 
software development methods. Because of the severe 
constraints imposed by agile methods, these discrete 
security techniques integrate very poorly into agile 
approaches.  This article demonstrates how the security 

features can be integrated into agile methods. 
 1. INTRODUCTION 
 The software industry has formalized agile product 
development [24] in various forms of agile software 
development methods [1]. For competitive reasons, 
developers often use these methods for web and network 
applications where security risks are prominent.  Despite 

the prominent risks, the existing agile methods have few 
features specifically addressing security risks.  As a result, 
agile software products will lack security protection unless 
such protection is added afterwards.  Subsequently adding 
of security features to software requires courage from 
software developers and administrators. One reason why 
the agile methods ignore security issues may stem from a 
misconception that it is, indeed, security that hinders the 
development [25]. This is true with most of the existing 
security methods [3, 4, 22]. Our research indicates that 
developers can integrate security seamlessly in agile 
software development. For this purpose, security 
techniques need to meet several requirements, including 
that the security techniques must be adaptable and agile in 
order to operate in unstable conditions [3, 5].  
This article describes the requirements for security 
techniques to integrate seamlessly into agile methods. We 
demonstrate these requirements with an example of an 
approach for adding security into agile software 
development methods. In practice, this solution has been 
successfully tested in early design phases [22]. We see 

that this approach also offers a workable solution for 
adding security in agile software development. We show 
how this approach can be adapted to the phases of agile 
methods. 

 2. SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR 
AGILE DEVELOPMENT METHODS 
 Agile software methods are characterized by 
nimbleness to rapid changes, multiple incremental 
iterations and a fast development pace [1]. This raises four 
requirements for security methods that are targeted to be 
integrated into agile software methods: 
 1. Security approach must be adaptive to the agile 
software development methods; 
2. They must be simple; they should not hinder to 
the development project; 
3. Security approach, to be integrated successfully 
with agile development methods, should offer concrete 
guidance and tools at all phases of development, i.e., from 
requirements capture to testing.  
4. A successful security component should be able 
to adapt rapidly to ever-changing requirements owing to a 
fast-paced business environment, including support for 
handling several incremental iterations.  
 Several alternative security techniques have been 
proposed for the purposes of adding security 
considerations to general software development methods 

[4, 11, 21]. These include logical modeling [4], a soft 
approach [12], a security spiral [9], responsibility 
modeling [2], information modeling [16, 17, 18], abuse 
cases [13], an information systems security planning 
methodology [23]. None of these previous approaches 
particularly address these agile requirements [5]. To 
address these issues, we propose a set of key security 
elements, derived from on our earlier work [22], which 
form a generic but modifiable security process, which can 
be added seamlessly to agile software development 
methods. 
  0-7695-2268-8/05/$20.00 (C) 2005 IEEEProceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20051 3. KEY SECURITY ELEMENTS IN AGILE 
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
 Table 1. Key security elements in agile software 
development. 
Key security elements  
Security-relevant subjects 
Security-relevant objects 
Security classification of objects and subjects 
Risk management 
 The key security element stems from information security 
ﬁmeta-notation,ﬂ or notation for notations, [22] and 
database security [20].  We use a risk management 
framework in modified form from Saltmarsh and Browne 
[19]. We apply these key security elements to a process 
aimed at developing secure software in an agile manner. 

This generic security process consists of these key 
security elements in different phases of software 
development (requirements analysis, design, 
implementation and testing). These steps are not 
necessarily sequential and in any case, every step is 
optional.  
 
Requirements analysis phase 
 1. Identify security-relevant objects from 
requirements analysis
.   
In the requirements analysis phase developers identify the 
key assets of the organizations. Discussions with 
customers reveal the security sensitive assets of the 
organization and enables developers to list these assets. 
These assets are candidate security objects, and are 

denoted in the notation of the agile method, e.g., security 
enriched use cases [22]. This notation documents the 
security-relevant objects.  
 2. 
Identify security-relevant subjects from 
requirements analysis
.  In the requirements analysis phase there is a need to 
identify the authorized persons or groups who may 
accidentally or intentionally compromise the software 
security. Further customer discussions reveal the 
authorized persons in the organization. These persons are 
candidate security subjects.  Again, these are denoted in 
the notation of the agile method such as the security 
enriched use cases.  This notation consequently 
documents the basis for determining the security-relevant 

objects and the actors who are the potential security 
subjects. 
 3. 
Determine the security classification of these 
security-relevant subjects and objects
.  Developers also need to determine the most crucial or 
sensitive security objects. They classify these security 
objects so that the most sensitive security objects (i.e., the 

assets of the organization) are labeled, e.g., ﬁtop secretﬂ or 
ﬁconfidentialﬂ or ﬁunclassifiedﬂ.  Developers then analyze 
which security subjects, i.e., authorized persons, should 

have access to which security objects (i.e., assets of the 
organization). In our example, use case notation is also 
useful for this case. By constructing candidate use cases at 
the same time as checking security classification, 
developers ensure that the classification of the security 
objects and security subjects are correct. 
 4. Do risk analysis and management 
 Having identified the necessary security subjects 

(authorized people) and security objects (security 
sensitive assets of the organization), as well as the security 
classification of each according to its security sensitivity, 
developers must then analyze potential threats. For agile 
methods, we have found ﬁabuse casesﬂ effectively 

document potential threat scenarios [13, 14] and help 
identify non-permissible situations during software use. 
We also represent the estimated cost of recovery from an 
occurred attack to security objects (security-sensitive 
assets of the organization) to the abuse case scenario. This 
cost value enables a simple risk analysis and management 
process. The following risk analysis and management 
process summarized from Saltmarsh and Browne [19] to 
suit agile development: 
 i) What unwanted actions Œ risks Œ could happen to 
the assets of the organization i.e., what are the risks? 
ii) If those risks, possibly listed in terms of abuse 
scenarios, would occur, what damage would they cause? 
Here the replacement costs of assets are calculated and 
added to the abuse cases. 

iii) How often may the threat scenario be expected to 
happen? How reliable is this information? 
iv) What can be done (countermeasures) in order to 
minimize the occurrence of these risks? 
v) What costs would be incurred by these 
countermeasures? Is the implementation of these 
countermeasures economically and rationally feasible and 
relevant?  
  Design phase 

 5. Ensure that security requirements are 
included in the design phase
. 0-7695-2268-8/05/$20.00 (C) 2005 IEEEProceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20052  Designers include security subjects and security objects 

using the notation of agile design diagrams. They 
incorporate the security classification of security subjects 
and objects to the modeling notation. They apply risk 
management as necessary to prioritize the features. 
 Implementation phase 
 6. Ensure that the wanted security features are 
implemented
.   The security requirements and countermeasures to the 
threats must be implemented according to their security 
sensitivity. An implementation priority list is needed that 

indicates the priority of the functions to be implemented. 
The functions having a higher priority will be tested first. 
 Testing phase 
 7. Test that the selected features work as 
wanted. 
 Developers employ both use cases and abuse cases to 
check that the software satisfies selected (and designed) 
tests before the software is given to the customer. There 
must be a test list that indicates the priority of the cases to 
be tested. The features having a higher priority will be 
tested first. 
 
 4. AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE 
APPLICATION OF THE KEY SECURITY 

ELEMENTS 
 Abrahamsson 
et al
. [1] review the existing agile 
methods, including Feature Driven Development [15], 

Internet-speed or short-cycle time systems development 
[6, 7] and extreme programming [8]. In the following 
example we illustrate how the key security elements are 
added into Feature Driven Development (FDD), described 
by Palmer and Felsing [15]. This agile method was chosen 

as an example of the application of the security process as 
it offers the most concrete modeling techniques for agile 
development [1]. 
    4.1
 Feature Driven Development 
 Feature Driven Development (FDD) consists of six 
phases [15]. 
1) Requirements analysis; 
2) Develop an overall model; 
3) Build a feature list; 

4) Plan by feature; 
5) Design by feature; 
6) Build by feature. 
  Requirements analysis 
 According to FDD, developers capture requirements 
with use cases. In each use case, the actors are potential 
security subjects and the targets of the ﬁuseﬂ (the assets 
that the actors access) are potential security objects (see 
Figure 1). 
 Figure 1. Textual use case scenario modified 
from [10] with security elements that are 
described in bold.
  In Figure 1, the security elements (security subjects, 
security objects), as well as the version number and 
preliminary priority of this feature, are added to the use 

case description of Cockburn [10]. After sketching the 
security enriched use cases, the analyst lists potential 
abuse case scenarios. These can be divided into two 
categories.  
The first category is unwanted actions carried out by 
the authorized persons (e.g., the employees of a 
company), and the use case scenarios reveal these 
authorized persons. For example, in the use case presented 
in Figure 1, we can sketch an abuse case scenario where 
the authorized user tries to access secret level documents. 
The second category of abuse cases is outsiders (see 
Figure 2). 
     Primary actor
/security subject
: User 
Version:
 1.0 
Main success scenario
:  User access document X 
Security classification: confidential 
Security objects: 
document X
 Priority 1-10: 5
0-7695-2268-8/05/$20.00 (C) 2005 IEEEProceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20053 Figure 2. An abuse case scenario modified from 
McDermott and Fox [13].
  Figure 2 describes an abuse case scenario (hackers 
attempt to break into the system). It shows the assumed 
frequency of that action, presumed abuse subject, and the 
security object that is the target of the abuse. We also find 
the total costs of recovering from the abuse (N USD in 
Figure 2). Analysts need this ﬁtotal costs of recoveringﬂ 
along with the frequency of the abuse scenario for 
prioritizing the abuse scenarios (Priority in Figure 2). At 
the requirements analysis phase, the abuse cases are at a 

high level of abstraction. Developers specify the abuse 
case scenarios during other phases of the development. 
 Develop an overall model 
 An overall model is derived from the use cases (cf., 
requirements analysis phase). First, candidate classes are 
made in the level of names only. The security levels of 
classes are derived from use cases (Figure 3). 
           Document  
 - Confidential
 User 
 - Confidential
 A security 
subject (user) 
A security 
object 
(document
) Security 
classification 
Access 
 Figure 3. Listing of candidate classes and their 
security sensitivity, added to class diagrams of 
FDD [15]. 
 Designers incorporate the security classification of the 
classes into the candidate classes (see Figure 3). In this 
way, the security classification is included informally 
within the object notation. 
  Build a feature list 
 In this phase, designers specify the abuse case scenario 
to include countermeasures to prevent the abuse case (i.e., 

the risk) from occurring (see Figure 4). 
 Figure 4. An abuse case scenario modified from 
McDermott and Fox [13]. 
 Designers may also need to determine at which 
iteration/version number, if any, is the point at which the 

software must be able to prevent the abuse case from 
occurring. For example, one may postpone the 
implementation of certain countermeasures for later 
versions due to e.g., time or budget limits. In Figure 5, we 
add the ﬁNumber of the version/iteration where this abuse 
case is preventedﬂ element to the abuse cases. 
    
   
 
 
 
 
   
  Figure 5. Security classifications and 
countermeasures to abuse scenarios are added 
to the feature list.
 Figure 5 also presents the relationships of use cases and 
abuse cases to features. Use cases may include all features 
(major feature set, feature set, feature). Features are 
derived from use cases and abuse cases. The domain area 

may consist of one or more use cases, major feature set, 
feature set, and feature. The domain walk-through refers 
to the action of going through a certain area in the 
Abuse case: 
Hacker 
Version:
 1.0 
Possible abuse scenario:
 A hacker breaks in to the system and 
access to the customer file. 
Frequency:
 several times a day 
Abuse
 subject: 
a hacker  
Security objects/target of abuse:
 customer file 
Total costs of recovering: 
N USD 
Priority 1-10: 5
 Abuse case: 
Hacker 
Version:
 1.0 
Possible abuse scenario:
 A hacker breaks in to the system and 
gains access to the customer file. 
Frequency:
 several times a day 
Abuse
 subject: 
a hacker  
Security objects/target of abuse:
 customer file 
Total costs of recovering: 
N USD 
Countermeasures: 
firewalls (only certain IP-addresses are 
allowed), encryption of passwords (at least 128-bit encryption), 

limit of login attempts per login name (three maximum 
attempts). 
 Number of the version/iteration where this abuse case is 
prevented: 
version 1.0
 Priority 1-10: 
10 - must be avoided!
 1..* 
    
          
   
       
   
  Abuse case: 
Hacker 
Version:
 1.0 
Possible abuse scenario:
 A hacker 
breaks-in to the system by 
guessing the password and have 
access to the customer file.  
Frequency:
 several times a day 
Abuse
 subject: 
a hacker      
Security objects/target of abuse: 
customer file. 
Total costs of recovering: 
N USD
Countermeasures: 
limit of login 
attempts per login name (three 
maximum attempts). 
 Number o
f the version where this 
abuse case is prevented: 
version 
1.0
 Priorit
y 1-10: 
9  Major Feature Set
 Feature Set
 Feature 
Action <limit login attempts 
per account (3)> 

Result <account is logged> 
Object <a customerfile (C)>
1 1 1..* 
may include 0..*  
0..*
0..*
0..* may include  0 
 may include  0 
0-7695-2268-8/05/$20.00 (C) 2005 IEEEProceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20054 software to be built. Abuse cases stand for a particular 
small area of the domain. Each feature belongs to only 
one feature set, and each feature set belongs to only one 
major feature set (area). Each feature includes <action>, 

<result> and <object>. Features are classified into sets. 
The feature set refers to a certain activity, such as a billing 
a service. The security elements can be added to the 
features as follows. 
 
Designers incorporate abuse cases into the ‘build a feature 
list’ stage (Figure 5). Abuse cases in this stage include 
countermeasures on how the abuse case scenario is 
prevented from occurring. This prevention activity is also 
presented as a feature (to be implemented). To illustrate 

this, Figure 5 describes an abuse case where an abuse 
target is the customer file and countermeasures are 
described in the abuse case, including limit of log-in 
attempts to three per the same account. These security 
countermeasure features are as follows: Action is: <limit 
log-in attempts>, result is:
 <account is
 logged> and 
(security) object is <the customer file>. It is also possible 
to add security classifications of the security objects (e.g., 
customer file in Figure 5) to
 the feature. This security 
classification can be added to the end of the security 
object (cf., Figure 5). The aim of including the security 
classification in the feature list is to ensure that the 
security classification and security features do not 

disappear when moving between different phases. For 
example, in Figure 5, the customer file is labeled as 
confidential (C); see “Object <a customerfile (C)>” in 
Figure 5. The feature list is then described as a feature 
database (Table 2).  

 Table 2 describes the feature number (5 in this case), 
feature name (Limit of login attempts), and requirements 
cross-reference (Abuse case “hacker” priority: 9). 
Table 2. Feature database table.
   Plan by feature 
 In this stage, designers put forth a development plan that 
guides the order of the features to be developed. They also 
prioritize security countermea
sures (described as features) 
in order to decide the coding and testing order/priority of 
such features. Table 3 sketches this priority list. 
 Table 3. Security countermeasure feature priority 
list. In this table, ‘priority’ means priority number 
of a feature, ‘nro’ stands for a feature number, 
‘release number’ is same as iteration number, 

and ‘name’ is the name of a feature. ‘CP’ refers to 
chief programmer, a term used by FDD method 
[15].
 Priority  
 Nro 
 Release 
number 
 Name 
 CP 
 Date 
 Requirements 
Cross-ref 
 10 1 1 
….. … …. 
….. 
9 5 1 Limit 
of 
login 
attemp

ts 
John 
Doe 
 12/04 
 Abuse case 
“hacker” 
priority: 9 
 Table 3 lists security countermeasures listed in terms of 
their priority. Otherwise, the Security countermeasure 
feature priority list follows the notation of the Feature 
Database Table (cf., Table 2). The priority list also 
describes the iteration/release number (referring to the 
number of the iteration where this countermeasure must 

take place). CP is the name of the chief programmer who 
has the responsibility for the development of the feature. 
The date is the deadline of the feature development.  
 Design by feature 
 In this stage, we add the attributes to the classes. Figure 6 
shows how we incorporate security classification into 

objects as attributes (e.g., Secclass: string). 
         
  Document  
 Secclass: string
 User 
 Secclass: string
 A security 
subject (user) 
A security 
object 
(document
)Security 
classification 
Access 
 Figure 6. Adding security classification into the 
classes. 

 According to FDD, sequence diagram is also sketched in 
this stage (Figure 7). 
   Feature nro 
 Feature name 
 Requirements Cross-ref 
 5 Limit of login 
attempts
 Abuse case “hacker” priority: 
9 0-7695-2268-8/05/$20.00 (C) 2005 IEEEProceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20055  Figure 7. A sequence diagram.
  Figure 7 present a sequence diagram representing a 
security feature: after three login attempts a user account 
is locked. In picture 7, a user refers to a person who wants 
to login to the system. The system represents a part of 
software that needs a login and password represents a 
class, which asks and validates passwords of the users. In 
this simple sequence diagram example, the user logs in to 
the system and the system calls password class to verify a 
password. In this case, password class asks for a password 

from the user (Give password) and user types in the 
password. Password class checks if the password is 
correct (validate password), and if the password is correct, 
then access is granted. If the password is incorrect the user 
account is locked, in our example. 

 Build by feature 
 In this stage the developers code and test the software. In 
the coding phase, they ensure that the security 
requirements are also included in the software to be built. 
In order to ensure that the security countermeasures are 
added according to their priority, developers follow the 

security countermeasure feature priority list in the coding 
phase. This procedure ensures that developers add the 
most important security features first when implementing 
the software.  Later, developers can implement the 
security countermeasures having a lower level of priority 
are implemented, and so forth through the priority list. In 
the testing stage, developers test the selected abuse case 
scenarios starting with the cases that are deemed to be the 
most sensitive. This sensitivity priority is seen from the 
priority number of the abuse cases, and the testing is done 
following the security countermeasure feature priority list 
(see Table 3). 
   
 6. Summary 
 Agile software development methods generally lack 
specific software security features.  While several separate 
security methods, such as checklists and management 
standards are possible, only a few of them can be 

seamlessly integrated to traditional software development 
methods. We believe that these security methods are even 
more difficult to integrate into agile software 
development. This article has provided an example of how 
security techniques can be added seamlessly to agile 

software development methods. We illustrated the 
addition of this solution to an agile development method, 
called Feature Driven Development. While further 

research and practical experiences are needed to test and 
fine-tune the approach presented in this paper, we see that 
our approach provides a promising solution to a critical 
problem in information systems and software 
development. 
 7. References 
 [1] Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M.T. & 
Ronkainen, J., (2003), New directions on agile 
methods: A comparative analysis. International 
Conference on Software Engineering.  
[2] Backhouse, J., & Dhillon, G. (1996). Structures 
of responsibilities and security of information 
systems. European Journal of Information 
Systems. 5(1), 2-10. 
[3] Baskerville, R., (1992), The Developmental 
Duality of Information Systems Security. 
Journal of Management Systems. Vol. 4, no. 1, 
pp. 1-12. 
[4] Baskerville, R., (1993), Information Systems 
Security Design Methods: Implications for 
Information Systems Development. ACM 
Computing Surveys 25, (4) December, pp. 375-
414. 
[5] Baskerville, R., (2004), Agile security for 
information warfare: a call for research. 

Proceedings of the European Conferences on 
Information Systems (ECIS2004), 13-16 June, 
Turku, Finland.  
[6] Baskerville, R., Ramesh, B., Levine, L., Pries-
Heje, J., & Slaughter, S., (2003), Is Internet 
Speed Software Development Different? IEEE 
Software, Nov-Dec, pp. 70-78. 
[7] Baskerville, R., & Pries-Heje, J., (2004), Short 
cycle time systems development. Information 
Systems Journal, Vol. 14 Issue 3. 
[8] Beck K. (1999): Extreme Programming 
explained. Addison-Wesley. 
[9] Booysen, H.A.S., & Eloff, J.H.P. (1995). A 
Methodology for the development of secure 
Application Systems. Proceeding of the 11th 
                                        .   User   System
   Password
 Login
   Verify password
   Give password
     Password
 Access granted / User account is locked
   Validate 
password
 0-7695-2268-8/05/$20.00 (C) 2005 IEEEProceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20056 IFIP TC11 international conference on 
information security. 
[10] Cockburn, A., (2001), Writing Effective Use 
Cases. Addison-Wesley,  
[11] Dhillon, G. and Backhouse, J., (2001), Current 
directions in IS security research: toward socio-
organizational perspectives. Information 

Systems Journal. Vol 11, No 2. 
[12] James, H.L. (1996). Managing information 
systems security: a soft approach. Proceedings 
of the Information Systems Conference of New 
Zealand. IEEE Society Press. 
[13] McDermott, J. & Fox, C., (1999), Using abuse 
case models for security requirements, 
Proceedings of the 15th Annual Computer 
Security Applications Conference (ACSAC). 
IEEE Computer Society Press. 
[14] McDermott, J., (2003), Abuse-case-based 
assurance arguments. Proceedings 17th Annual 
Computer Security Applications Conference. 
[15] Palmer S.R. and J.M. Felsing, (2002): A 
Practical Guide to Feature Driven 
Development. Prentice Hall. 
[16] Pernul, G. (1992). Security constraint 
processing during multilevel secure database 
design. Proceedings of the 8th Annual 
Computer Security Applications Conference.  
[17] Pernul, G. & Quirchmayr, G. (1994). 
Organizing MLS databases from a data 

modeling point of view. Proceedings of the 
10th Annual Computer Security Applications 
Conference.  
[18] Pernul, G., Tjoa A.M. & Winiwarter, W. 
(1998). Modeling Data Secrecy and Integrity. 
Data & Knowledge Engineering. 26, 291-308. 
North Holland. 
[19] Saltmarsh, T.J., and Browne, P.S., (1983), Data 
Processing Œ Risk Assessment. In M. M. 
Wofsey (ed.): Advances in Computer Security 
Management, vol. 2, pp. 93-116, John Wiley 
and Sons Ltd. 
[20] Sandhu, R., and Samarati, P., (1994), Access 
Control: Principle and Practice. IEEE 

Communications vol. 32, issue 9, pp. 40-48. 
[21] Siponen, M.T., (2001), An analysis of the 
recent IS security development approaches: 
descriptive and prescriptive implications. In: G. 
Dhillon (eds:) Information Security 
Management - Global Challenges in the Next 
Millennium, Idea Group (2001). 
[22] Siponen, M.T. and Baskerville, R. (2001)ﬁA 
New Paradigm For Adding Security Into IS 
Development Methodsﬂ in Eloff, J., 
Labuschagne, L, von Solms, R. and Dhillon, G. 

(eds): 
Advances in information security 
management & small systems security
. MA: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
[23] Straub, D.W, Welke, R.J, (1998), Coping with 
systems risk: security planning models for 
management decision making. MIS Quarterly, 
22, 4, 441-64. 
[24] Thomke, S., & Reinertsen, D. (1998). Agile 
product development: Managing development 
flexibility in uncertain environments. 
California Management Review, 41
(1), pp. 8-
30. 
[25] Zurko, M.E, Simon, R.T, (1996), User-
Centered Security. ACM New Security 
Paradigms Workshop, Lake Arrowhead, CA. 
  
   0-7695-2268-8/05/$20.00 (C) 2005 IEEEProceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20057