  
 
Adaptive Finance & Control: Combining Lean, Agile and Beyond Budgeting 
for Financial and Organizational Flexibility 
 
Rami Sirkiä 
Nokia 
ramisirkiä@ovi.com
 
Maarit Laanti 
Nitor Delta 
 
maarit.laanti@nitor.fi
 
 
Abstract
 
Enterprises that approach uncertainty and 
risk in software development based on lean and agile 
methods [1] often do experience financial planning of 
projects as a restricti
on. Traditional budgeting and 
cost reporting is a system based on rigid frames, and it 
– along with the process of 
project cost accounting – 
burdens the lean and agile enterprise with unnecessary 
and counterproductive overhead and friction. The 
traditional system provides, at best, a false sense of 
cost control to any enterprise.  
In this paper we share insights related to how 
project-based cost accounting can be transformed to a 
structure based on agile and lean finance and control. 
Our insights and examples are intended to remove a 
key impediment to transform
ing the finance function of 
your enterprise to something measurably more lean 
and agile. This work is based both on an actual case 
completed with our employer and on our knowledge of 
financial processes at major Finnish companies. 
1
 
Background  
Agile SW (software) development and traditional 
cost accounting don’t match. Firstly, traditional cost 
center accounting expects a long horizon with detailed 
cost
 
estimates that must be frequently updated. Simply 
put, agile SW development avoids this detailed and 
long horizon planning. [2] S
econdly, traditional cost 
accounting values planning accuracy and executes 
variance analysis against the original estimate. Agile 
development instead allows for uncertainty: the final 
content delivery and total cost may be impacted by the 
empirical feedback receive
d.  Thirdly, traditional 
budgeting draws attention to budget overruns. In agile 
development, if the initial feedback proves to be 
positive we want to allow – and even encourage – 
further investments. In la
rger enterprises the division 
of investment can be cont
rolled via the hierarchy of 
backlogs – the level of inve
stment is dictated by the 
changing backlog priorities, which means the teams 
allocate tasks flexibly. Fourth
ly, traditional project cost 
accounting requires a re-approval for any delays that 
increase the project budget. Rigid approval limits pose 
an unnecessary control, and thus, in agile development, 
delays that would traditionally be caused by the 
budgetary approval process means teams can now take 
their order of development fl
exibly from the prioritized 
backlogs. 
 
We had an opportunity to witness our 
organization’s (a large global R&D unit in 
telecommunication’s sector) transition to this lean and 
agile way of working. What we soon noticed was that 
the financial function would need to change in 
response to it, in order to benefit from this adaptive 
approach. The following changes were implemented in 
our R&D unit, resulting in demonstrably leaner and 
more agile finance and control processes: 

 
Cost center planning was simplified as part of 
the company wide initiative and we 
additionally removed project level cost 
control altogether. 

 
Instead of planning cost centers we created 
enhanced visibility for deliverables (projects). 

 
Instead of focusing on OPEX limitations, we 
focused on competence limitations. 

 
Strategically important but longer lead-time 
investments were mandated a separate 
allocation. 

 
People were encouraged to be transparent 
with regard to the planning uncertainties. 
Clear roles and responsibilities for financial 
planning, content planni
ng and resourcing were 
defined, following the lean and agile principles. 
 
1.1
 
The problem 
During the transition to lean and agile in our 
R&D unit there emerged issues with our organization’s 
structure based planning. 
While we had organized a 
2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2015.5965030  
 
prioritized backlog on the portfolio and team level, we 
still had difficulties getting resources allocated 
promptly. Each product owne
r on the functional unit or 
team level was focusing on his or her own deliverables, 
even though the key driver in portfolio prioritization 
was to maximize customer value. If one of the key 
deliverables was being delayed, there was no automatic 
resource reallocation method 
available. The possible 
delay in deliveries was clearly indicated in our metrics 
dashboards. The rigid organi
zational structure, narrow 
competence profiles and detailed level of projects with 
dedicated resources prevented prompt and flexible 
resource reallocation. The idea of allowing more 
flexible organization struct
ure with empowered teams 
[3] was born and supported by our R&D management 
team roughly at the same time when the idea of more 
flexible investment pla
nning and control was born. 
There were also issues detected on the financial 
planning side. The tradition had been that R&D 
planners had been asked to provide estimates for the 
next 18 months. Although estimating such a long 
period had always been problematic, the argument was 
that strategic investment allocation was needed – and 
thus some kind of data had 
always been provided. Yet 
now that the R&D became familiar with agile and lean 
estimating and planning this argumentation was 
becoming significantly more difficult. Referring to 
agile principles the R&D planners took the position 
that they could plan only a few months ahead.  
Traditionally, there was also a requirement to 
state how many person-months were to be spent on 
which projects, and when. In order to provide this 
information, a detailed resource profile at the 
individual level was necessary. That resource profile 
defined in which project each person would be 
allocated for next 18 months. Yet an agile R&D 
planner would refuse to create such a profile, because 
approval of the idea of content flexibility automatically 
means that one cannot plan a large-scale 
implementation plan ahead in such detail, as the 
content will almost surely change – even on the  
detailed SW  feature
1
 level. [4] Thus it is impossible to 
provide a detailed investment profile per higher level. 
[4] The same principle is true for any agile project – 
thus cost planning being one 
of the inhibitors in many 
companies with regard to the adoption of agile 
methods. 
The investment data had been updated on a 
monthly basis in order to improve the data quality, 
follow trends more closely and to get quick feedback 
on any investment realloca
tions taking place. In the 
                                                
1
 
Here we refer ‘epic – feature – stor
y’ as a hierarchical structure of 
the SW work items.
 
new agile and lean setting these updates were seen as 
significant and non-value adding overhead.  
Naturally, the initial data was changed as a 
result of these monthly investment data updates. 
However, only the content e
xperts, i.e. the original 
contributors, were able to explain why the data had 
changed. Most typical explan
ations were that the team 
had learned more about the topic and the required 
features had been clarified, or that the architecture was 
now better understood, or the execution velocity was 
lower than expected. When more forward-looking 
information was needed for performance management 
– to set up the traditional performance targets – we 
discovered that efficiency was not improved by the use 
of targets or with the efficiency metrics. People just 
didn’t know that much about the future – and 
performance improvement required more than just an 
ambitious target.  
After we took the Scaled Agile Framework 
model into use [4] with its 
hierarchy of backlogs – and 
the decision was made to allow these backlogs to 
dictate and guide more flexible resourcing, we soon 
realized that there was no way traditional cost center 
control practices could scope with the rapid content 
changes. 
We realized that any cost center control or 
deliverable-based way to approve, track and reapprove 
resourcing was not adding any value. Instead, we 
accepted that it is normal to move resources from one 
project to another and to spend an extra month or two 
on the project. 
This is often case in other companies that have 
a portfolio of agile projects as well. While agile 
development has largely been adopted around the 
globe, traditional management methods need to be 
changed in response. This is true also for industries in 
which software is only part of the solution or the 
product. For the most part, the value of the service or 
product is dictated by how usable that service or 
product is for the customers – a factor that we can only 
measure via customer feedback. The real value of agile 
portfolio management is to take in this feedback in 
order to improve the existing product – and then 
identify the characteristics that actually result in a good 
product. 
This kind of adaptability in how the product is – 
and how it is built – requires a new type of 
management that understands the underlying lean and 
agile principles. Ignoring either the customer feedback 
or these principles impacts negatively the 
competitiveness of the product, at least regarding the 
software side of it. Finance and controlling is a 
function that is partially driven by rules and regulations 
(financial accounting), and the part of it that has more 
5031  
 
flexibility (management accoun
ting) is struggling to 
see the need for the change. [5] 
2
 
An Agile Approach to Financial 
Planning and Control 
Our idea was to comply with lean and agile 
principles and practices. [3] We were well equipped to 
cross the chasm of two different functions, Maarit 
entering from software development angle and Rami 
from accounting point of view. We didn’t believe that 
any organization structure, 
or any finance or planning 
process should hinder, impede or add an overhead to 
how software is actually made. We understood that 
agile and lean principles provide tools and processes to 
manage content as well as to support performance and 
efficiency. We trusted that teams would be as efficient 
as possible. We acknowledged that when you follow 
the agile way of working, the content must be kept 
flexible. We knew that total cost is mostly driven by 
headcount and thus is pretty stable across all of 
organizations. We accepted that SW developers didn’t 
know what they were going to do in the mid/long term 
future. So we removed the control and relied on trust. 
For many this would seem to be a radical approach, but 
we knew that our leap of faith would be rewarded by 
transparency, and any potential errors would be 
corrected by rapid feedback. What we did is 
summarized here: 
•
 
We created resource pools and more generic 
competences instead of small cost centers and 
detailed profiling.  
•
 
We simplified the cost center planning by 
taking it to a higher level of granularity. Cost 
centers of 30-50 persons no longer provided 
rolling forecasts for the next 13 months for 
selected accounts. Forecasts were expected 
one or two levels up in the organization 
structure, i.e. cost center for 300-500 persons. 
•
 
We downplayed cost center planning and 
implemented visibility for deliverables. Cost 
center plans – for cost centers of 300-500 
persons – were built after the deliverables had 
been resourced, based on the deliverable 
view. 
•
 
We promoted a culture of transparency 
regarding what we know and what we don’t 
know. We showed unallocated resources after 
the four to six months. So if teams and 
planners did not yet know what they were 
going to do, they marked their resources as 
unallocated in the capacity planning.  
•
 
We highlighted the role of competence 
management as a constraint instead of OPEX. 
Portfolio planning focused on bottleneck 
resources, OPEX planning was secondary. 
•
 
We redefined the roles for the capacity 
management and cost center planning. Cost 
center planning provided visibility to OPEX 
run rate on a higher (cost center) level, and 
deliverable -based capacity management 
details on an effort profile for each epic
. 
•
 
Task fluidity. We lifted the project level cost 
control: content management was done by 
project office and efficiency metrics was left 
to the teams themselves. No changes in the 
epic schedule or resourcing required 
centralized re-approval. Our project 
management office had the authority to 
reallocate tasks between teams. 
•
 
We created business plans based on minimum 
content, and nice-to-have’s were just extra. 
Additionally we allocated a specific lump sum 
to support innovation and quality. 
•
 
Our company had already earlier separated 
forecasting from target-setting, which allows 
for more realistic forecasting and more 
ambitious target setting. 
These changes enabled our finance and planning 
function to become more agile and lean – in terms of 
needed resources as well: we were able to remove 
planning related work worth of 50 man days per 
month. These changes are also a true enabler of agile 
and lean development. They don’t just remove the 
impediments that traditi
onal finance and planning 
impose on an agile and lean organization, but, together 
with a flexible organization, also enable deferred 
decision making when pla
nning the investments. 
Deferred decision making or real options here means 
that based on a feedback, an agile and lean 
organization may balance their investment portfolio 
based on the field feedback simply by reprioritizing the 
backlog priorities. A rising priority indicates that more 
work must be done to the prioritized epic or feature. A 
company with multiple agile projects may thus flexibly 
balance the resources and the investments across the 
projects based on received feedback and needs, as well 
as estimated payback functions. This is true option 
thinking. 
3
 
Shorter Planning Horizon and Room 
for Uncertainty 
A requirement to collect 
long-term estimates for 
epics comes from a waterfall approach to planning. 
5032  
 
Traditionally, it is expected that we would be able to 
accurately estimate the resource needs, the content 
(value added to user / consumer) and the completion 
date for each requirement. The same was now expected 
for epics, although on the financial planning side. 
  
 
 
Figure 1.
 Cone of uncertainty [5] 
 
The Cone of Uncertainty (Figure 1) states that the 
further we try to estimate 
into the future, the more 
uncertainty there is in these estimates. The cone of 
uncertainty states that there are only two ways that the 
estimates can be more accurate – that we advance in 
time and gain more information on the project or that 
we estimate over shorter periods of time. [5] 
The agile approach suggests that since change is 
inevitable, we should try to make estimates across 
shorter time periods. Some agile teams are thus 
refusing to give any long-t
erm estimates, claiming this 
is simply wasted effort. Scaled Agile Framework 
points toward a two-level l
ean way of planning: plan 
roughly for the longer time horizon, and more 
accurately for the shorter time period. 
An additional, complexity-based explanation to 
planning is also available:
 the smaller the time-window 
we use for estimation, the less internal and external 
coherence is happening.  Software development is an 
art for solving extremely 
difficult problems – and the 
solutions themselves cause additional problems, with 
the system under development thus constantly 
interacting with itself. 
Agile software development is an attempt to solve 
the problems encountered in traditional development. 
While traditionally projects fail to deliver on-time or 
on-budget, and fail to fulfill customer needs for quality 
within the holistic project timeframe, agile introduces 
adaptive, self-corrective c
ontrol mechanisms that are 
based both on internal and external feedback and on 
measurements of the intermediate results. In this way 
the quality promise can be kept. 
We decided to abandon the cost center or 
deliverable-based approach for budget approvals or 
controlling. We did coll
ect the long-term epic 
estimates, but centralized this effort to a few 
experienced planners. We were also very cautious with 
regard to how this piece of data was used: we 
acknowledged that the estimates were not accurate, and 
were not intended to be treated as an agreement on 
resource availability, consumption, or as a promise of 
the content.  
The estimates from experienced planners were 
used to calculate the OPEX distribution of the 
deliverables. This deliverable
-based view was valuable 
to both the R&D management team as well for 
frequent ad hoc analysis. After all, epics and HW 
(hardware) deliverables were exactly the content most 
cared about and talked about, and having an investment 
number next to a list of items gave insight to 
investment distribution. 
Traditionally, cost center accounting as well as 
project accounting forms a baseline against which the 
actual numbers and latest estimates are compared to.  
The problem with this kind of reactive tracking is that 
it only reveals problems when the gap between the 
originally planned baseline and the actuals grow big 
enough. It’s only then that you need someone to 
explain whether the changes are acceptable or not. For 
a traditional company this approach may seem feasible 
– the more software you develop, and the more you 
want your content to evolve to satisfy the customer 
needs, the less you want to
 prematurely define your 
investments and opportunities for the future. The more 
software-driven a company is, the more it wants to 
adapt to emerging needs, a
nd the more it would like to 
preserve room for changes. Another way to put this is 
that the more uncertainty there is, the more real option 
thinking needs to be allowed to
 play a role in the future 
planning. 
The agile way of working thus changes how 
uncertainty is approached. In
stead of using historical 
actuals to forecast the effort estimation error factor, or 
planning if smaller details, we started using shorter 
term planning (which is still somewhat accurate) and 
only rough long-term planni
ng at the project level. 
Why it is then so hard to estimate accurately? One 
reason is that the old way of planning with 100% 
utilization rate leaves no room for unexpected changes. 
Whenever an error happens, there is no mechanism to 
make the corrections.  Secondly, our portfolio has 
often consisted of multiple parallel projects, and 
changing between projects creates extra overhead, and 
delays all of the ongoing projects. The better way is to 
sequence the projects one after the other, and to use 
pull-based scheduling. This way one can optimize the 
portfolio of projects based on the cost of delay – a 
good concept for the project prioritization that we 
didn’t take into practice. Thir
dly, when a new project is 
started, it is never started from an “empty table” – 
traditionally, we have not given any attention to the 
projects already started. In 
agile portfolio management 
all new projects are planned in smaller batches – from 
a single project we create 1-3 epics – and all epics are 
prioritized based on existing work and existing 
5033  
 
priorities. A project may also have to prove it is 
executable. If a project 
does not show promising 
progress, it will drop in our priorities hierarchy and in 
resourcing.  
The pull-based scheduling works naturally with 
queuing principles. Instead of 100% utilization rate we 
plan for lesser utilization rate
.  This allows for better 
tolerance for errors and small changes or surprises 
along the way. According to DeMarco the slack is also 
an enabler for all innovations. [6] 
4
 
Delivery Window 
Organizations give a range of revenue estimates 
for the upcoming year. However, traditionally project 
completion dates are given as specific dates. We 
wanted to find a way to allow uncertainty be included 
in completion dates as a range, as is the case with the 
revenue estimates. 
Our solution was to allow ‘delivery windows’ in 
the product roadmap. Naturally, marketing, hardware 
deliverables and manufacturing need a target date – 
and typically they prefer a fixed, committed date. 
However, if this launch date has been fixed too early – 
given the inherent uncertainty of SW and HW 
development – lots of resources are wasted if the 
launch date is missed, such as already booked 
marketing campaigns or manufacturing capacity.  
Now with the ‘delivery window’ all stakeholders 
are able to see the level of accuracy in the planning: 
how long the window was, wh
en did it start and end, 
and also the documented rational for the related 
uncertainty. Revenue planning was based on the end 
date of the window as a safe and conservative estimate. 
The rest of the portfolio was kept open and only when 
the maturity increased was the schedule fixed and 
resources promised for next project in the prioritized 
backlog. 
Another part of our solution was to enable 
’unallocated’ classification in our capacity plans.  This 
new classification was explai
ned to planners so that 
they would not have reason to hide the uncertainty but 
rather keep transparency throughout the planning and 
reporting phases, and align the plans with the reality. 
Our plans reflected exactly the uncertainty that the 
management was talking about in their meetings – the 
range of risks, delays and consequences. 
5
 
Abandon Detailed Cost Center 
Management as Waste 
Our third and fourth issues were about attention 
to budget overrun and resourcing re-approval upon an 
unavoidable change in the epic projects. We define 
epic project here as a group of (Potentially Shippable 
Increments i.e. PSIs [4] or trains, targeting a single 
delivery and launch. In traditional projects, the project 
cost, scope and/or schedule usually fail at some point 
of time.  Sandbagging (i.e. the multiplication of the 
estimates with concealed num
bers) is sometimes used 
so that problems might be hi
dden, but sooner or later – 
usually after a few rounds of cat-and-mouse regarding 
the target setting – people must come out with a fixed 
number and approve a budget where no surprises are 
allowed. That means that when further changes 
happen, the whole budget needs to be re-done and re-
approved.  
A company with a portfolio with multiple agile 
projects may need to keep a few “firemen” in order to 
be able to rescue a project that has run into a trouble. 
Our organization allowed the teams to self-organize 
when needed in order to be able to ship the 
deliverables that were requested via the prioritized 
backlogs. We had a hierarchy of product owners to 
help prioritize the backlogs, and who took part in agile 
release train (ART) planning [5] to ensure that 
everyone worked towards the shared vision. 
The theory of constraints tells us that any system 
is capable of delivering at the throughput rate of its 
weakest link. Hence, the key point is to understand the 
limiting factor at each business/ level/ function in order 
to execute proper resource allocation. Any effort to 
understand details in a non-bottleneck part of the 
project should be challenge
d – as the decision would 
be made based on the bottleneck resources anyway. 
This approach is adapted from Theory of Constraints 
[7, 8], in which one should first identify system’s 
constraints and then make efforts to maximize the 
output of that limited resource.  
R&D costs come mainly from two sources – the 
headcount driven resource costs (internal or external) 
and investments on development environment 
(indirect) or prototypes (dir
ect). The investments are 
known, and can be planned at the same time when 
backlog priorities are decided 
and epic projects started. 
In our R&D the total cost comes mainly from 
headcount, and the overall annual cost remains quite 
steady from period to period. 
We abandoned the project-level budgets that 
needed continuous updating and re-approvals. Thus 
there were no project overruns, and no variance 
analysis against to the original plans. We realized that 
5034  
 
even if a project’s execution velocity would be slower 
than expected or the project’s scope would be changed, 
i.e. the project’s cost would increase significantly; we 
could keep the project priority high, which would 
“automatically” allocate more resources onto it. This 
would need no re-approvals from any controllers. The 
total cost of the whole organization would not change, 
only the least prioritized 
projects would not get any 
resources and thus would not
 get done – at least, not 
now. 
The priorities between Epic projects impact how 
much total value is created on each PSI e.g. 8 week 
period which targets delivering something shippable). 
It does not add any real value 
if the cost of each project 
is followed separately and re-stamped by management. 
If a project looked promisi
ng, but needed a bit more 
resourcing, the priority wa
s kept high and resourcing 
was secured with that priority decision. If the value 
added from extended work was less than with other 
projects, priority was droppe
d and thus other projects 
were resourced. Release tr
ain backlog provides a good 
control mechanism – having 
traditional project cost 
control on top of that does not add any value. Refer to 
Figure 2.  
Even though it is hard to estimate the total cost 
per project beforehand, it is easy to track the cost once 
the PSI gets done. You simply need to see from the 
team backlogs how many days each individual spent 
on which feature. For us, there typically exists one-to-
one mapping between features
 and projects. But we 
didn’t have mandatory individual level update 
requirement, thus we used earlier described resource 
data collection to create visi
bility for epic level costs. 
 
 
Figure 2.
 From cost control to content management 
 
In agile development we typically want to flex the 
content, not the resources or schedule. So in this classic 
triangle (resources – schedule – content) you have the 
two corners fixed, and the third one is floating, as 
presented in Figure 3. The resources in our 
organization were fixed, as
 we were constrained by 
competences, and thus unable to increase resources on 
demand. The schedule is also fixed because we have 
timeboxed the deliveries into sprints and PSIs.  Quality 
is not scarified, but all Sprint and PSI releases ship 
with good quality. 
The third corner: scope, c
ontent, customer value – 
is floating. The controllers may also label that corner 
as revenue. This turns around the entire traditional 
project revenue-cost planning: traditionally, we had 
fixed content and thus fixed revenue, but upon delay 
we added resources and thus created additional costs to 
a project. Traditionally, the revenue estimate has not 
been changed.  
 
 
 
Figure 3
. Agile transfers variability from cost and 
schedule to revenue 
 
Flexible revenue – like flexible output from the 
outsourced project – is a challenging concept to any 
business-oriented person. But in real life the revenue 
typically depends on not just
 what we do but also on 
what the overall market situation is. The flexible 
revenue model raised the question of whether the 
teams were working as hard as possible if they had not 
committed to a fixed scope.  
We made several attempts to measure the 
effectiveness of the softwa
re development teams. But 
at the same time there seemed to be so many major 
architectural and way-of-w
orking changes that we 
never reached a stable environment for any velocity or 
cycle-time metrics.  
In an environment where velocity is going up all 
the time the best way to measure completeness of a PSI 
is to use cumulative flow diagrams on feature / week 
basis. The shape of the CFD enabled us to estimate 
when a project would be complete. Alternatively, if the 
CFD curve was too flat – as was the case in some of 
our projects – it enabled the management to take the 
5035  
 
necessary actions: to raise the project priority or to cut 
the content or the feature inflow. 
We now have a set-up where agility replaces 
detailed planning and trust replaces the central control. 
It is far more important to get visibility via information 
radiators and focus on removing bottlenecks, rather 
than explaining variances to original effort estimates. 
Backlogs enable the decentralization of decisions so 
that decisions happen in timely manner rather than 
creating situations in which teams are left waiting for 
permission to proceed. 
6
 
Results and Conclusions  
Our R&D has the freedom to manage content 
according to the pace of execution velocity and latest 
priorities without excessive reporting or re-approval 
processes required. The entire solution is powered by 
tool automation.  
Our finance and control process is not an 
impediment for the journey to agile and lean. Instead, 
finance and control as a function is pretty lean itself, as 
it focuses on total R&D level cost and leaves content 
management to agile ways of working. Resources tied 
to finance and controlling are now much less than they 
earlier were, in adherence with the lean principle of 
value versus waste. 
We are observing that many other organizations 
are becoming aware of the impact of the finance and 
control on agile software development. The awareness 
is increasing amongst SW related personnel – yet not 
with the finance function. We would be thrilled to 
learn of just how many other companies are facing 
similar issues, and then see role of finance changed. 
Additionally, further work would need to 
happen in the area of system support. For example 
having the SAP R/3 finance and control module update 
to support ranges instead of
 single value points only – 
and likewise updating reward and bonus systems to 
align with the agile way of working. 
 
 
6.1
 
Discussion 
The paper suggests a new way of doing 
adaptive finance and control in an agile enterprise. The 
suggested method requires abandoning detailed cost 
centre accounting, approaching uncertainty using agile 
and lean planning and moving to task fluidity, which 
enables an flexible organization. Our solution is based 
on lean and agile thinking, scaled agile framework and 
beyond budgeting ideas. We have proposed a new way 
of defining fixed delivery dates as more flexible 
delivery windows. We have also proposed a new 
interpretation from financia
l point of view from the 
traditional project triangle of resources, schedule and 
content. 
Currently, the results are validated in one 
organization only, but we believe a similar approach 
would work in other organizations too. The agile 
concept provides good tools to control SW portfolio 
and resource allocation in a modern, more rational 
way. Traditional finance and control methods and tools 
designed for the industrial age should not be used, as 
these are largely in contradiction with the lean and 
agile paradigm. 
 
6.1
 
Acknowledgements and Related Work  
During our journey to lean and agile we learned 
about the Beyond Budgeting [9, 10] concept. We found 
the principles matched perfectly with agile software 
development principles in many ways. [11] We also 
met smart and kind people both from Handelsbanken 
and from Statoil, and their insights into modern 
management accounting were 
useful and enlightening. 
We brainstormed all the ideas with our unit Finance & 
Control directors, and I received key guidance and 
support from our boss. We got the approval and go 
ahead from the R&D unit head. Under the corporate 
policy these persons will remain unnamed. 
We would also like to give a big thank to 
whoever in our large organization initiated Simplified 
Planning. This approach enabled lots of documented 
changes. 
 
References 
[1] Abrahamsson P, Oza N, Siponen M, 2010. Agile 
Software Development methods: A Comparative Review. 
Agile Software Development: Current Research and Future 
Directions. Springer , ISBN 978-3-642-12574-4. 
[2] Smiths H, 2007. The Impact of Scaling on Planning 
Activities in an Agile Software Development Center. System 
Sciences, 2007. HICSS 2007. 40th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences.  
[3] Laanti M, 2013. Agile Methods in large-scale software 
development organizations : applicability and model for 
adoption. Dissertation, Acta Universitatis Ouluensis. Series 
A, Scientiae rerum naturalium 605. ISBN: 978-952-62-0034-
7. 
http://urn.fi/urn:isbn:9789526200347

 
[4] Leffingwell, D. 2011. Agile Software Requirements. 
Lean Requirements Practices for Teams, Programs, and the 
Enterprise. Addison-Wesley, ISBN-10: 0-321-63584-1, 
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-63584-6. 
5036  
 
[5] Boehm B, 1981. Software
 Engineering Economics. 
Prentice Hall, ISBN-10: 0138221227.  
[6] DeMarco T, 2001. Getting Past Burnout, Busywork, and 
the Myth of Total Efficiency. Dorset House, ISBN-10: 
0932633617.  
[7] Goldratt E M, Cox J, 1992. The Goal: A Process of 
Ongoing Improvement. North River Press; 2 Revised edition. 
ISBN-10: 0884270610. 
[8]  Shams-ur Rahman, 1998. Theory of constraints: A 
review of the philosophy and its applications, International 
Journal of Operations & Production Management, Vol. 18 
Iss: 4, pp.336 - 355.  
[9] Hope J, Fraser R, 2003. Who needs budgets? Harvard 
Business Review [2003, 81(2):108-15,126] 
 [10] Hope J, Fraser R, 2003. Beyond Budgeting: How 
Managers Can Break Free from the Annual Performance 
Trap. Harvard Business Review Press, ISBN-10: 
1578518660.  
[11] Lohan, Garry, 2012. Extending Agile Systems 
Development: An Application of the Beyond Budgeting 
Model. Business Information Systems, J.E. Cairnes School of 
Business and Economics, National University of Ireland, 
Galway. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5037