  Organizational Transformation with Scrum: How a Venture Capital Group 
Gets Twice as Much Done
 with Half the Work 
                             Jeff Sutherland, Ph.D.                                
Scrum Training Institute 
jeff@scruminc.com 
 Igor Altman 
OpenView Labs 
ialtman@openviewpartners.com
 Abstract 
OpenView Venture Partners is a venture capital 
fund that uses Scrum as best practice in software 
development and for project 
management in all other 
parts of the organization. OpenView is the first high-

performance non-software Scrums that has documented 
twice as much value produced in fewer working hours. 
The model at OpenView provides a working manual on 

how to do Scrum outside of software development. 

Their aggressive removal of impediments (take no 

prisoners!) distinguishes them from Scrum 

implementations that are captive of their 
institutionalized waste.  Th
e founder of OpenView saw 
that maximum productivity in Scrum occurs at a 
sustainable pace with less hou
rs of work per week than 
without Scrum. He set the goal of reducing hours of 

work while doubling production and the Scrum teams 

exceeded his expectations. 
Focus on removal of 
impediments led to reorganiza
tion of the teams several 
times a year and showed how to capitalize on Scrum as 

a powerful organizational transformation tool.  
 1. Introduction 
We introduce a successful model for implementing 
Scrum throughout at organization. At OpenView Labs, a 
division of OpenView Venture Partners, we support a 

growing number of portfolio companies using Scrum for 

all our work.  Our teams support more than software 

development. They use Scrum as best practice for 

consulting projects in management, sales, marketing, 

finance, and customer support for portfolio companies. 

Their Scrum implementation is repeatable, proven 

across many projects, and recommended for teams in all 

areas of business. 
Previous work on organizational Scrum was 
documented for a professional services firm [1].
 Using 
a Type C Scrum model developed by the author [2], 
new responsibilities, teams, a
nd interactions settled into 
patterns of self-organized (and mostly self-optimized) 

behavior. Customer alignment improved, teams were 

empowered, innovation and creative energy were 

released and focused to the betterment of customers™ 
projects. Most important, project results improved, 

quality issues were identified internally before 

customers were impacted. 
Dramatic scaling of the 
organization occurred without negatively impacting the 

benefits accruing from the model. This model was so 

effective administrative and operational support 

departments also adopted Scrum. 
One year later, the professional services firm 
underwent dramatic reorganization and reported Scrum 
was driving innovation and leaning out the organization 

[3]. Lean initiatives were more effectively implemented 

by Scrum than traditional approaches. The CEO had 
daily standup meetings and the services organization 
introduced organizational Scrum to client companies.  
More recently, a Senior Minister reported on 
implemention of Scrum in churches in four regions of 

the United States [4]. Benefits were increased 

transparency, siloed specialists beginning to work as a 
team, clarity and focus, iterations and continuous 
improvement. However, the most significant impact of 

Scrum was its use as a tool for organizational change. 
The theme of organizational transformation is 
dominant in Scrum implementation outside of software 

development. Here we report on what happens when a 
team of highly organized institutional development 
experts in a venture capital firm implements Scrum. 

They include every employee in the venture group, 

aggressively eliminate all known impediments, and 

drive Scrum into all portfolio companies. Their rate of 
institutional transformation accelerates dramatically. A 
complete reorganization of OpenView Labs occurred 4 

times since Scrum implementation began in January of 

2008, with corresponding improvements in velocity and 
quality of production.  
1.1. The Context 
OpenView Venture Partners was founded in 2006 
with nine team members and an initial $107M 
investment fund. A second fund was closed in 2009. A 

new kind of venture capital fund, OpenView provides 

hands-on operational value to each portfolio company in 

addition to investing in the best software companies and 

taking seats on their Boards.  
1Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010978-0-7695-3869-3/10 $26.00 €© 2010 IEEE By third quarter of 2007, the OpenView Venture 
Partners core team grew to thirteen professionals, and an 
investment portfolio of six software companies. The 

new portfolio companies brought high demands for 

value-add projects from the operational experts. Long 

work hours that extended into late nights and weekends 

became common.  The combination of new value-add 

projects, unprecedented deal activity, and new team 

members resulted in OpenViews™s founder, Scott 

Maxwell, having to spend increasing amounts of time 

managing individuals and their projects within a flat 

hierarchy.   
OpenView decided to shift a team member from the 
investment effort to create a new organization, 

OpenView Labs, focused entirely on value-added 
projects with portfolio companies and due diligence on 
new investments.  This helped, but the answer to scaling 

OpenView over the next 12 months while 
reducing
 the 
time Scott needed to devote to managing people and 

increasing
 the value added to each portfolio company 
remained elusive.   
1.2. OpenView Meets Scrum 
OpenView first encountered Agile Development 
when we invested in VersionOne, an Agile Project 

Management tool company (
www.versionone.com
).  
Most OpenView team members thought Agile relevant 

only to software development and never considered it 

for internal consumption.  This perception changed after 

Jeff Sutherland [5] met with Scott Maxwell.  In Scrum, 

Scott saw simple principles and ideas that could be 

applied to make OpenView more productive and self-

managed.  A few months after the meeting, a Scrum 

Master Certification course for everyone completed the 

introduction of Scrum into OpenView Venture Partners.      
Here we describe two phases of Scrum adoption by 
OpenView during 2008: 
• Phase I Œ Getting Started with Scrum 
• Phase II - Scaling up Scrum  
Phase III was implemented at the time of writing of this 

paper and caused a reorganization of Scrum teams. High 

team velocities caused the Product Owner function to be 

a bottleneck and forced restructuring. Phase IV has 

begun while finalizing this paper. A less organized team 

was disbanded and members put on self-organized 

Scrum teams. The rate of change resembles the speed of 

refactoring seen on high performance software teams. 

Phase III and IV will be topics for a future paper. 
2. Getting Started with Scrum:  Trial by 
Fire 
Phase I of our Scrum implementation started with a 
one week sprint in January 2008.    
2.1. Team structure 
Two Scrum Teams were formed, the OpenView 
Labs value-add team and the deal team that searches 

worldwide for new company investments. (NOTE: The 
rest of this case study will focus only on the OpenView 
Labs team)  
Four people formed the Labs team and three people 
were on the Deal team. Each team had its own 
ScrumMaster, though in both cases the ScrumMaster is 

a key member of the team and is in the critical path 

working on Sprint Backlog.  
Sprints were established at one week lengths, from 
Monday through Friday. 
2.2. Product Ownership & Backlog 
Scott Maxwell, the founding partner, is Chief 
Product Owner, although the OpenView Labs Scrum 

team is effectively a Product Owner Scrum Team as 

well as an implementation Scrum team and generates the 

majority of the stories, with the Chief Product Owner 

adding a minority of the stories and prioritizing the 

entire backlog.   
The Labs team originally had a story backlog in an 
online spreadsheet in Central Desktop 
(www.centraldesktop.com), a hosted collaboration tool 
and an OpenView portfolio company. The backlog is a 

collection of each team member™s individual projects in 

progress. 
The OpenView Labs Scrum team focused on three 
objectives: 
• Execute operational value-add projects for 
OpenView™s portfolio companies.  These projects 

are coordinated by OpenView senior point people 

who also sit on the companies™ Boards and are 

outside of OpenView Labs. 
• Execute due diligence on OpenView prospect 

portfolio companies.  These projects are 

coordinated by the deal team.  
• Execute projects to institutionalize and build out 

OpenView™s value-add capabilities.  These projects 

are coordinated directly by the Chief Product 

Owner.   
Value-add projects for each portfolio company are 
discussed at the Monday morning Investment 
Committee meeting that includes all the portfolio 
company OpenView senior point people and Labs senior 

team members.  Labs team members both add projects 

and receive them. 
2.3. Stories 
Stories were vague and unclear in this early phase of 
Scrum adoption.  Definition of done was different for 
every story and typically unclear. 
2Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 Understanding the specifications of each story took a 
lot of back-and-forth discussion during the week 
between the Labs team members, portfolio companies, 

the senior point people, and Scott Maxwell, our Chief 

Product Owner. 
2.4. Sizing and Planning 
The Labs team has a Sizing meeting every Monday 
where stories for the next sprint are sized and unclear 

stories are sent back to the product owners. 
Sizing is done in ‚perfect hours™.  This is the amount 
of hours it should take an average team member to 

complete the story under ideal conditions with no 

interruptions.  A perfect hour is only counted as done if 

the entire story is done. 
Perfect hours are used instead of points because: 
• They are conceptually easier for the team to 

understand 
• A significant number of Labs stories are time-

based, like meetings, calls, and time-boxed research 

stories 
This measurement creates an ongoing problem in 
determining velocity as there are no standard reference 

stories that are stable in size. 
Sizing is done in a fashion similar to planning poker.  
On a count of three, each team members indicates using 

their hands how many ‚perfect hours™ they think a story 

is, and differences are discussed.  No story should be 

more than two days of work.   
After sizing, Scott prioritizes the stories, and the 
Labs team indicates which stories it plans to get done 

this sprint. The Labs team then plans the stories, 

breaking them down into tasks, identifying 

dependencies and impediments, and team members 

decide which stories they will do.   
2.5. Daily Scrums 
Each team has a daily Scrum. In the meeting, the 
Scrum Master asks each member: 
• What did you do yesterday? 
• What will you do today? 
• What are your impediments?   
Everything is run off of the online spreadsheets in 
Central Desktop.   
2.6. Retrospective 
A retrospective is held every Monday morning to 
review last week™s sprint.  The team discusses what 
went right, what went wrong, and determines what the 

team can do better.  
2.7. Velocity 
Initial velocity is estimated by assuming that each 
team member can take on approximately 20 perfect 

hours per sprint, giving Labs a starting velocity of 80. 
Thus, velocity is really equivalent to a focus factor of 
50% for a 40 hour work week [6].
 Unplanned stories are 
tracked separately.   
 Figure 1. 
 Scrum gets more done with less work 
Velocity stays relatively flat at around 80 from sprint 
to sprint.  The Labs team takes on too many stories and 
does not complete all tasks in Sprints successfully. 
The team and Scott recognize that using perfect 
hours instead of story points means that the measured 

velocity can only increase if: 
• The team removes impediments that increase its 
focus factor on the stories (i.e. spend less time on 
overhead and more time getting high impact work 

done)
 • The team works more hours
 Furthermore, improvements and impediment 
removal that decreases the amount of time spent on 
individual stories simply shrink the story size and 

increase the amount of work the team can do in the same 

amount of time without increasing the velocity. Yet the 

team is comfortable with these issues and continues to 

use perfect hours.  
Within months, as the team™s productivity improves 
and more gets done in less time, Scott initiates a culture 

of working fewer hours and no weekends.  Within a few 

months, our founding partner had discovered that Scrum 

can double output by working less. He introduced the 

concept of the Maxwell Curve (note: The numbers on 

the curve do not represent actual data, but are there to 

help explain the concept). 
Investors typically drive companies to work hard and 
long as the peak of production in a traditional company 

requires more than a 40 hour week. Our teams were 
typically working well over 50 hours a week, working 
3Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 late and on weekends. But Scott noticed that Scrum is 
intense. The peak of production is probably less than 50-

60 hours a week. So he instructed the teams to work at a 

sustainable pace and avoid night and weekend work. At 

the same time, he set the expectation that production 

would double. 
Ultimately, the focus on higher velocity in perfect 
hours with less actual hours worked drives the team to 

remove overhead, communication gaps, and increase 

story clarity to increase the number of perfect hours 

completed.   
2.8. Benefits 
While the Scrum implementation is far from perfect, 
benefits emerge immediately. The team is now self-

managing, and Scott™s time dedicated to managing 

individual Labs team members and projects drops. 

Communication within the Labs team goes from 

virtually zero to a significant level.  Communication 

saturation is a key indicator of productivity [7] on teams 

and a strong feature of Scrum. Once each team 

member™s projects become transparent to the team, 

about 30% of projects are seen as low value and 

eliminated, making more room for high value projects. 
Many impediments emerge and are removed.  Early 
on, each impediment is easy to remove and removal has 

a high impact on improving the productivity and quality 

of life of the team members.  Common impediments 

include lack of clarity, lack of communication, and low 

value work.  A common issue is that a given project is 

producing lots of outputs that no one cares about and is 

not producing the few outputs that people do care about.  

This issue is resolved by the Scrum team clarifying each 

project, and the ScrumMaster scheduling calls with 

stake holders of each project and zeroing in on its exact 
requirements.   
While team members are still working as 
individuals, they start helping each other, and some 
collaboration develops. Team members who were 

overwhelmed with working 10-20 projects 

simultaneously see a reduction in stress because the 

projects are now broken up into smaller stories with an 

online Scrum board, making things easier to manage, 

and low value projects go away 
2.9. Challenges 
Labs team members are still working mainly as 
individuals. Team members are specialized and lacking 

cross-training.  
• Specialized experts chose stories for themselves at 
the beginning of the sprint crippling self-

organization. 
• There were stories that could only be done by one 
person. This further prevents self-organization and 
causes bottlenecks reducing throughput. 
 The daily Scrums are taking up to 45 minutes for a 
four member team.  
It is increasingly difficult for a four member team to 
both be product owners and executers. The work days 

are intense, and long hours start to become exhausting.   
Communication between the Scrum team and its 
project stakeholdersŠthe portfolio companies and the 

OpenView senior point people who manage those 

portfolio companies and sit on their BoardsŠis poor. It 

is unclear how the stories for any given portfolio 

company fit together.  The Scrum team is unsure of the 

true impact of the stories.   
While all team members were thrilled with help on 
their projects and other Scrum benefits early on, some 
are starting to show discomfort with functioning as 
members of a team rather than as individuals.  
Transparency and management by the team, as well as 

the existence of a Scrum Master, start to become sources 

of conflict, especially for one team member.   
Several team members are still unsure that Scrum, 
which was designed for software development, makes 
sense for the work at OpenView Labs.  They embrace 

some aspects of Scrum but reject others and prefer to 

stop the implementation where it is at that time.   
The ability to take large projects and make them 
manageable by breaking them up into smaller stories 

creates the temptation to take on many projects. While 

early on the Labs team takes on 80 points and completes 

sprints successfully, as the team tries to push itself it 

stops landing the sprint.  It falls into a habit of taking on 

stretch goals and not landing, and velocity remains flat 

sprint to sprint.   
An ongoing impediment is that the team cannot 
define reference stories and estimate stories in story 
points rather than perfect hours. Going from 100 to 120 

perfect hours completed might simply mean that focus 
factor had increased from 50% to 60%. 
 However, it was also observed that the team was 

focused on improving the quality of stories 

entering the sprint in order to reduce the cycling 

back and forth to the point person and portfolio 

company during the sprint to clarify the story.  
 Recent research has shown that reducing the 

calendar time to complete a story (increasing story 

process efficiency) actually reduces the amount of 

work needed to complete a story [8]. Doubling the 

process efficiency actually doubles team velocity.  
 Some of that was going on here, but it was 

impossible to quantify this because of the 

impediment of estimating in perfect hours. 

The Product Owner was also the manager and there 
was pressure on the system. It was difficult for the 

ScrumMaster to push back and protect the team. 
Another issue was that the team was aggressively 
trying to remove waste but not doing adequate root 

cause analysis. They discovered that eliminating 
4Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 impediments without eliminating the root cause resulted 
in impediments coming back in another form. It was 

like swatting mosquitos. For every one they killed, 
more came back.  
From a lean point of view, 
muri
 (smoothing out the 
flow), 
mura
 (eliminating pressure points), and 
mudah
 (removing waste) are the key principles. There were 
disruptions in flow because of specialization and 

pressure on the system because of the product 
owner/manager.  
Fortunately, the product owner/manager was 
carefully studying the lean literature and becoming a 
student of Taichi Ohno, inventor of the Toyota 

Production System [9]. Books on Toyota were 

recommended reading for the senior management of 
portfolio companies and the OpenView staff.  While 
this did not immediately lead to strong root cause 

analysis, it set the stage for it later on.   
2.10. Retrospective 
Retrospectives are held every Monday, and team 

members discuss their sprints.  
  While impediments are surfaced, documented, and 
typically removed, there was no formal closed loop for 
removing the impediments in Phase I.
 3. Scaling up: Finding the Rhythm 
Once most of the basics of Scrum were in place, the 
Labs team started to experiment with different 
components. Team velocity was higher and put pressure 

on the Product Owner role to produce more and higher 

quality stories. 
3.1. Team Structure 
As the team grew from four to six and ultimately 
nine members, it became too large to be efficient. All 

meetings, from the Sizing to the Daily Scrums, took too 

long. It is increasingly difficult for any team member to 

be heard in a large group
 The team split into two and the team was allowed to 
decide how it will split. Members organized into two 

teams whereby more functionally specialized team 

members are on one team and the newer team members 

are on another. A new Scrum Master is appointed to the 

more specialized team. 
3.2. Sprint Length 
After experimenting with two-week sprints, the Labs 
team and Investment Committee settled back on one-

week sprints.  In two-week sprints, the Scrum team 
found it more difficult to stay focused on the key goals 
and the number of unplanned stories grew.   
3.3. Product Ownership & Backlog 
Scott Maxwell is the Chief Product Owner across the 
firm.  Product ownership for portfolio value-add projects 
shifted out of the Labs Scrum team and is formalized as 

the role of OpenView senior point people.   
Each portfolio company now had its own backlog, 
housed in an online spreadsheet in Central Desktop. 

Each backlog was discussed in the Investment 

Committee meeting where priorities were reviewed and 

stories clarified. The Labs Scrum team still provides 

feedback into the backlogs but now every story and any 

changes must go through the senior point person.     
Projects to institutionalize and build out OpenView™s 
value-add capabilities are formalized. OpenView™s 

value-add capabilities are organized around Practice 

Development Areas, by function (i.e. Sales, Marketing, 

Customer Service, R&D, etc.) 
Each Practice Development Area has a point person, 
or product owner, in the Labs team and its own backlog. 

Every Monday, Scott holds a meeting where every 

Practice Development backlog is reviewed, prioritized, 

and clarified.   
Labs team members now wear their Product Owner 
hats when preparing the Practice Development backlogs, 

speaking with the senior point people about the Portfolio 

company backlogs, and in the Monday Practice 

Development and Investment Committee meetings.  

They wear their Scrum team hats the rest of the sprint.   
3.4. Stories 
Story clarity improved.  Less communication during 
the sprint is required between the Labs team and the 

portfolio companies and the senior point people / 

product owners.   
Definition of DONE is now specified and the same 
for every story.  The story is DONE when the 

deliverable (whether an analysis or notes from a call or 

meeting) is posted to Central Desktop and all the 

stakeholders (the point people/product owners) are 

notified. Next steps are specified. This definition of 

DONE was created in response to the Labs team 

completing stories but not communicating effectively 

back to the point people what had been done and what 

remained to be done in the initiative.  Note that this 

change, which increases the amount of work for every 

story, is not incorporated into sizing, and does not show 

up as increased velocity.   
3.5. Sizing and Planning 
Sizing and Planning was now done in the Scrum 
Room, whose walls have been turned into product 
5Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 backlogs and a Scrum board.  While 
aan online spreadsheet on Central 
Dwritten on post-it notes and end up on t
hAs part of planning, the Scrum
Msurface all dependencies and possible i
the ScrumMaster works to remove all 

sprint, and ideally by end of Monday.  
 Figure 2. 
 OpenView Labs Scru
mAfter experimenting with having 
aon Thursdays, the Labs team settles 
bmeeting every Monday primarily bec
achanged too much between Thursd
aSizing continues to be done in the 
before, using fingers on hands instead 
oFor a 
period of time, the Labs team 
to sizing stories in Story Points rather t
hAfter a while the meaning of a Stor
yunclear, and it seems like they are just 
perfect hours.  The team goes back 
hours.    
In discussions with Jeff Sutherl
abehind the confusion become clear: 
• Many Labs stories are small eno
uwhich in Scrum are sized in hours. 
• Many stories are time-
based.  For 
hour call with Jim to discuss 
mMany research type stories are als
oAs a result, it™s difficult to size a 
backlog in hours while sizing anothe
rstory points.    No changes are 
mprioritization and planning are done.  
3.6. Daily Scrums 
Daily Scrums now last only 15 
msame three questions asked.   
all stories start in 
Desktop, they™re 
he walls. 
Master and team 
mpediments, and 
of them by mid 
  m Boar
d a Sizing meeting 
back on a Sizing 
ause the backlog 
ay and Monday.   
same fashion as 
of planning cards.  
tries to transition 
han perfect hours. 
y Point becomes 
tanother time for 
to using perfect 
and, the reasons 
ugh to be Tasks, 
example, ﬁA one 
marketing plan.ﬂ  
o time boxed.   
large part of the 
r part in relative 
made to the way 
minutes, with the 
3.7. Retrospective 
Plenty of impediments still su
rRetrospective.  There is now an i
mthe impediment cannot be removed 
i3.8. Velocity 
Velocity for a sprint is set by th
the previous sprint.  After many fa
iis now landing almost every sprint. 
Through trial and error, t
hdiscovered that the more it takes on 
sprint™s velocity, the less it actually 
current sprint and velocity falls.  
Won less, it gets more done and pulls 
fWhile calculating velocity in pe
rstory 
points makes it difficult to us
eof improved output productivity, 
hours with other metrics and 
aassumptions demonstrates sign
iimprovement in comparison to earl
yVelocity in 
perfect hours 
approximately 80 for four team m
e50-70 hours per week in Ja
napproximately 190-200 for nine 
tworking 40-50 hours per week i
nrepresenting a 40-70% increase. 
Timproved focus factor. If standard r
eused to calculate story point
simprovement in velocity could be d
eOn the chief Product Owner™s 
team does not hold sizes of the s
aover time but reduces the size as 

faster at doing certain stories or 

execution.  Some stories go from a 

to 0.  Others go from 5 to 1, a
ndefinition of done is also generally 

the story sizing. 
If one assumes that reducing t
hstories over time due to process i
man impact of at least 20%, and the 

has increased the actual size of sto
rone can assume a conser
vimprovement of approximately 
8January to October of 2008.   
This does not account for the 
generated by the Scrum teams.  

Owner feels this has gone up sig
nelimination of low priority storie
spriority ones.  Scott Maxwell say
svalue has gone up by ﬁ150%, ba
rScrum teams believe they are doin
gwork as well, and morale is higher.  
 rface in the weekly 
mpediment backlog if 
immediately.  
e team™s velocity for 
iled sprints, the team 
he Labs team has 
beyond the previous 
gets done during the 
When the team takes 
forward.  
rfect hours instead of 
e velocity as a gauge 
combining perfect 
a few conservative 
ificant productivity 
y 2008.   
has risen from 
embers each working 
nuary of 2008 to 
team members each 
n October of 2008, 
This is primarily an 
eference stories were 
s a much bigger 
emonstrated. 
request, the Scrum 
ame stories constant 
the team has gotten 
has automated their 
size of 1 story point 
nd so on. The new 
not accounted for in 
he sizes of the same 
mprovements has had 
definition of DONE 
ries by a
t least 10%, 
vative productivity 
80-100% from late 
total business value 
The Chief Product 
nificantly due to the 
s and focus on high 
s output in terms of 
re minimumﬂ.  The 
g much higher value 
 6Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 3.9. Benefits 
Now that the team is utilizing Scrum to surface and 
remove impediments, there is more transparency within 
the Labs team and between the Labs team and the 
portfolio company point people / product owners.  Every 
team member now knows exactly what to do at the 
beginning of every week, allowing everyone to focus on 

execution. Team members are now getting more done 

working less hours.  Late nights and weekend work are 

now frowned upon.  Sustainable pace is the goal. 
The Labs team has gone from working with six 
portfolio companies to working with ten without getting 

overwhelmed or drop-off in quality. Improving 

OpenView™s value-add capabilities is now receiving 

significant attention, and there are now ten practice 

development backlogs.     
New team members are integrated into the team and 
workflow extremely quickly via Scrum.  They carry a 

full workload within three weeks of starting without 

extensive training. Team collaboration and cross-

training increase.  
Labs Scrum team is executing more stories across 
more portfolio companies and practice development 

areas while working less, producing higher quality, 

more value, and requiring less outside management.     
3.10. Challenges 
At the beginning of this phase, the Labs 
ScrumMaster was concerned about two issues : 
1. The team is working a normal work week and 

concerned that the team has not doubled velocity. 
2. The team member that is stressed because of 

Scrum™s transparency and competitive nature of the 

team members is complaining about the 
ScrumMaster. 
The ScrumMaster asked Jeff Sutherland to do an 
independent retrospective with the team.  He discovered 

that team velocity had gone from 100 points with 

current staffing (up from 80 points) to 120 points. In 

addition the team has discovered about 30% of their 
stories were delivered little or no added value to the 
portfolio companies. They were no longer doing these 

stories. 
So the 100 points they were delivering had 30% 
low value stories and only 66 points of high value were 
delivered. Now they were delivering 120 points of high 
value. The Chief Product Owner confirmed that he was 

getting at least twice as much value out of the team.  As 

described in the Velocity section, this trend continued 

as the team grew and its velocity went up to 190-200.   
The one Labs team member who is stressed by 
transparency and other aspects of team work could not 
work within the team.  He was a strong individualist and 

prefers answering to one clear manager rather than a 
team of peers.  After experimenting with different 

ScrumMasters and team organizations, he ultimately 

leaves the Labs team and works for OpenView outside 

the Scrum process.     
As this phase of implementation comes to a close, 
the overall product quality is higher, but the Labs team 

oscillates between focusing on velocity and focusing on 

quality, with spikes in velocity leading to reduced 

quality and focus on quality leading to reduced velocity.   
While the impact of most stories is now clear, the 
big picture context is still lacking for some team 

members.  Some team members become too focused on 

getting ‚perfect hours™ done and driving velocity rather 

than on the ultimate impact of the story.  While team 

collaboration has grown significantly, a good number of 
team members still work as individuals within the team.   
Insufficient cross-training among the Scrum team 
members is still a bottleneck, especially with three brand 
new team members. 
Long-term projects drag out over long periods of 
time because too many projects are being worked on 

simultaneously.   
4. Where we are in November 2008 
OpenView has twenty-two full-time employees, 
actively works with ten portfolio companies, and is 

working on ten practice development areas. The Labs 

consists of two Scrum teams, both with four people, 

with a velocity of approximately 180. The Labs Scrum 

teams have high morale and have embraced continuous 

improvement.   
The current main initiatives include better focus and 
more team collaboration and cross-training: 
• Focusing on higher impact stories rather than tasks.   
• Focusing on FEWER goals and long-term projects 
at a given time and working to complete them more 

quickly.   
• Weekly lunch-and-learn sessions allow senior team 

members to educate the newer ones on topics 

chosen by the new team members. 
• Each Friday, all the portfolio company point people 

/ product owners attend a debriefing meeting with 

the Labs teams, discuss the results of the sprint™s 

stories, and get sharper on next sprint™s goals and 

stories.  This helps remove impediments resulting 

from lack of clarity between the point people and 

the Labs Scrum teams.   
OpenView implemented the Scrum tool VersionOne 
(www.versionone.com) to meet the need for a more 
sophisticated backlog/sprint management vehicle instead 
of using Central Desktop online spreadsheets.  The firm 

still uses Central Desktop for online content 

management, collaboration, and for organizing 
meetings.  
7Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 4.1. Retrospective 
As the Scrum teams start to establish a pace and 
increase velocity it puts pressure on the Product Owner 
role. This causes a reorganization of Labs as the initial 
version of this paper is finalized. 
5.  Key Lessons Learned 
From an external point of view the OpenView labs 
teams have clarified several important points for the 
Scrum community by developing a high velocity sprint 

that aggressively removes impediments: 

1. Dependencies between tasks need to be tagged on 

the Scrum board and removed by mid-sprint or the 

story will fail. 
2. Increasing the definition of DONE improves quality 

which increases velocity by eliminating low value 

stories or features never used by the customer. 
3. Estimating in hours will make it impossible to know 

actual velocity and difficult to assess process 

improvements. 
4. Improving readiness of the product backlog will 

improve story process efficiency, reduce the 

amount of work required, and increase velocity. 
5. Some critical impediments require reorganizing the 

company to resolve. 
6. ﬁTake No Prisonersﬂ Scrum will radically change 

the organization on a regular basis. 
7. Realizing that there are four key components that 

need focus in Scrum. 

a) Direction (the backlog) 
b) Speed 
c) Quality 
d) Sustainability/Predictability 
8. Major challenges emerged when the team focused 

on just a single area. 
9. For Scrum to work, you must have trust, openness 
to conflict, commitment, accountability, and 
attention to results on a team [10].   
10.
 Scrum is very good at revealing areas in which a 
team needs to improve.  The self-organized team 

nature of Scrum immediately surfaces negative 

outcomes from lack of trust, fear of conflict, lack of 

commitment and accountability, and inattention to 

results.  The Scrum Master must identify and clarify 

these impediments and then work with the team and 

Management to remove them.    
11.
 Aggressive removal of impediments without doing 

root cause analysis leads to extra work. 

Impediments come back in the same or modified 

form until root cause is eliminated. Study of the 

Shewhart/Deming cycle and implementation of the 

Toyota A3 Process will be used to solve this 

problem [11].  
12.
 Scrum is not for everyone.  Some very capable 

people are so individualistic that Scrum kills their 
productivity and causes them to hurt the 
productivity of the Scrum team.  If they cannot 

change, it is best to remove them from the Scrum 

team.   
Experiences at OpenView Labs are generalizable to 
portfolio company development groups and other parts 

of the organizations Œ senior management, marketing, 

sales, support, and finance. We have Scrum teams in 

many different departments in many companies that 

have already benefited from the OpenView experience. 
6. Conclusions 
Repeatedly and systematically removing 
impediments leads to refactoring of the organization. 

This paper has reviewed an initial and transformed 

implementation of Scrum at OpenView Venture 

Partners. The Phase II implementation of Scrum has 

recently been radically transformed into a Phase III 
Scrum organization that will be the topic of future study. 
OpenView has gone through a classical Scrum 
pattern. The Phase I implementation surfaced problems 
with the definition of DONE. This was fixed by the 

Phase II implementation and velocity doubled. Increased 

velocity puts pressure on the Product Owner to create 

more and better stories. A key feature of the new Phase 

III organization is creation of a Product Owner team 

with more rigorous attention to story formation, 

prioritization, and READY state of user stories before 

allowing them into a sprint. There are already 

indications that the team is on their way to the second 

doubling of productivity using this strategy. This Scrum 

pattern of repeated doubling of productivity has been 

carefully researched at Systematic Software Engineering 

[8] for software projects. Here we see the same 

phenomenon in non-software Scrum. 
It is possible to utilize Scrum for non-software 
project management and execution and to achieve 

significant productivity gains.  This approach has gained 

traction with OpenView portfolio companies and at least 

three have begun to implement variations of Scrum to 

run multiple functions outside of Software 

Development.  One is emulating OpenView Venture 

Partners by implementing Scrum in every area of the 
business. 
7. About OpenView Labs 
OpenView Labs' mission is to gather, create, store, 
and disseminate best practices and expertise for the 
benefit of OpenView Venture Partners, its prospects, 
portfolio companies, and its community and provide 
high impact execution assistance to the portfolio 
companies.  They execute their mission through a 

combination of best practice documents, online and in-

person forums, and on-site consulting engagements 

using both full time operational staff and a growing 
8Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010 network of functional experts. Their  goal is to achieve 
significantly higher investment returns using industry 

best practices. Scrum is a valuable tool for them to 

improve organizational efficiency and production, to 

enhance customer satisfaction, and to create a rewarding 

work environment for employees.
 8. References 
[1] B. Barton and E. Campbell, "Implementing a Professional 
Services Organization Using Type C Scrum," in 40th 
Hawaii Intrnational Conference on System Sciences, 
Hawaii, 2007. 
[2] J. Sutherland, "Future of Scrum: Parallel Pipelining of 
Sprints in Complex Projects," in AGILE 2005 Conference 
Denver, CO: IEEE, 2005. 
[3] B. Barton, "All Out Organizational Scrum," in 42nd 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
Waikaloa, Hawaii, 2009. 
[4] A. Sutherland, J. Sutherland, and C. Hegarty, "Scrum in 
Church: Saving the World One Team at a Time," in Agile 
2009, Chicago, 2009. 
[5] J. Sutherland and K. Schwaber, The Scrum Papers: Nuts, 
Bolts, and Origins of an Agile Method. Boston: Scrum, 
Inc., 2007. 
[6] M. Cohn, Agile Estimation and Planning: Addison-
Wesley, 2005. 
[7] J. O. Coplien, "Borland Software Craftsmanship: A New 
Look at Process, Quality and Productivity," in 5th Annual 
Borland International Conference, Orlando, FL, 1994. 
[8] C. Jakobsen and J. Sutherland, "Scrum and CMMI  Œ 
Going from Good to Great:  are you ready-ready to be 
done-done?," in Agile 2009, Chicago, 2009. 
[9] T. Ohno, Toyota Production System: Beyond Large Scale 
Production: Productivity Press, 1988. 
[10] P. M. Lencioni, The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: 
A Leadership Fable: Jossey-Bass, 2002. 
[11] D. K. Sobek and A. Smalley, Understanding A3 
Thinking: A Critical Component of Toyota's PDCA 
Management System: CRC Press, 2008. 
   9Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2010