 Scrum and CMMI Level 5: The Magic Potion for Code Warriors
  Jeff Sutherland, Ph.D. 
Patientkeeper Inc. 
jeff.sutherland@computer.org 
Carsten Ruseng Jakobsen 
Systematic Software Engineering 
crj@systematic.dk 
Kent Johnson 
AgileDigm Inc. 
kent.johnson@agiledigm.com 
 
Abstract 

Projects combining agile methods with CMMI
1 are more successful in producing higher 
quality software that more effectively meets customer needs at a faster pace. Syste
matic 
Software Engineering works at CMMI level 5 and uses Lean product development as a 

driver for optimizing software processes. Valuable experience has been gained by 

combining Agile practices from Scrum with CMMI. 

 
Early pilot projects at Systematic showed productivity on Scrum teams almost twice that 

of traditional teams. Other projects demonstrated a story based test driven approach to 

software development reduced defects found during final test by 40%. 

 
We assert that Scrum and CMMI together bring a more powerful combination of 

adaptability and predictability to the marketplace than either one alone and suggest how 

other companies can combine them. 

Introduction 

One of the trends in the software industry is software projects are more comprehensive 

and complex while customers at the same time request faster delivery and more 

flexibility. Successful software development is challenged by the supplierÕs ability to 

manage complexity, technology innovation, and requirements change. Customers 
continually requests solutions faster, better and more cost-effective. Agile and CMMI 

methods both address these challenges but have very different approach and perspective 

in methods applied.  

 
Management of complexity requires process discipline, and management of increased 

speed of change requires adaptability. CMMI primarily provides process discipline and 

Scrum enhances adaptability. This leads to the question, whether or not it is possible to 

integrate CMMI and agile practices like Scrum to achieve the benefits from both Ð or 

even more? 

 
This paper provides an analysis of the effect of introducing Agile practices like Scrum 

and  story based test driven software development and knowledge gained on what is 

required to be CMMI compliant, while running an Agile company. 

                                                
1 ¨ Capability Maturity Model, CMM and CMMI are regist
ered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
  CMMI 

The Capability Maturity Model (CMM) has existed since 1991, as a model based on best 

practices for software development. It describes an evolutionary method for improving an 

organization from one that is ad hoc and immature to one that is disciplined and mature 

[71]. The CMM is internationally recognized and was developed by the Software 

Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. 

 
In 2002, a new and significantly extended version called CMMI was announced, where 

the ÔIÕ stands for ÔIntegrationÕ [72]. This model integrates software engineering, systems 

engineering disciplines, and software acquisition practices into one maturity model. 

CMMI defines 25 process areas to implement. For each process area required goals, 

expected practices and recommended sub-practices are defined. In addition a set of 

generic practices must be applied for all processes. 

 
The past 15 years of experience with CMM and CMMI, demonstrates that organizations 

appraised to higher levels of CMM or CMMI improve the ability to deliver on schedule, 

cost, and agreed quality. Increasingly, the industry requires suppliers to be appraised to 

CMM or CMMI level 3 or higher [73]. A number of governmental organizations 

worldwide, have established CMMI maturity requirements. Recently the Danish Minister 

of Science proposed regulations to require public organizations to request documentation 

of their supplierÕs maturity [74]. 

Scrum 

Scrum for software development teams began at Easel Corporation in 1993 [21] and 

emerged as a formal method at OOPSLAÕ95 [22]. A development process was needed to 

support enterprise teams where visualization of design immediately generated working 

code. Fundamental problems inherent in software development influenced the 

introduction of Scrum:  

 
¥ Uncertainty is inherent and inevitable in software development processes and 

products - ZivÕs Uncertainty Principle [53] 
¥ For a new software system the requirements will not be completely known until after 

the users have used it - HumphreyÕs Requirements Uncertainty Principle [58]  
¥ It is not possible to completely specify an interactive system Ð WegnerÕs Lemma [54] 
¥ Ambiguous and changing requirements, combined with evolving tools and 

technologies make implementation strategies unpredictable. 
 
ÒAll
-at-OnceÓ models of software development uniquely fit object-oriented 
implementation of software and help resolve these challenges. They assume the creation 

of software involves simultaneous work on requirements, analysis, design, coding, and 

testing, then delivering the entire system all at once [31]. 

 
Sutherland and Schwaber, co-creators of Scrum joined forces with creators of other Agile 

processes in 2001 to write the Agile Manifesto [57]. A common focus on working 
 software, team interactions, customer collaboration, and adapting to change were agreed 

upon as central principles essential to optimizing software productivity and quality. 

CMMI and Agile methods 

Soon after publication of the Agile Manifesto in 2001, Mark Paulk principal contributor 

and editor of Capability Maturity Model Version 1.0 [71], observed that Agile practices 

are intended to maximize the benefits of good practice [75, 76]. 
ÒThe SW-CMM tells 
what to do in general terms, but does not say how to do it; agile methodologies provide a 

set of best practices that contain fairly specific how-to information Ð an implementation 

model Ð for a particular kind of environment.Ó
 However, Paulk noted that aligning the 
implementation of agile methods with the interests of the customer and other stakeholders 

in a government contracting environment for software acquisition might be an impossible 

task, where high customer interaction  is difficult. 

Surdu [77] and McMahon [78] reported positive experiences in 2006 using agile 

processes on government contracts while noting the need for process discipline, good 

system engineering practices, and development of self-motivated teams. Collaboration 

with customers was achieved through agile education and negotiation. These studies 

provide practical confirmation of PaulkÕs analysis of the applicability of agile practices
 in 
a CMM environment. 

 
Paulk [76] points out that 
ÒWhen rationally implemented in an appropriate environment, 
agile methodologies address many CMM level 2 and level 3 practices.Ó 
Similarly Kane 
and Ornburn present a mapping of Scrum and XP to CMMI [79] demonstrating that a 

majority of the CMMI process areas related to Project Management can be addressed 

with Scrum and the majority of process areas related to software engineering can be 

addressed with XP. CMMI expects that processes are optimized and perhaps replaced 

over time and states: 
ÒOptimizing processes that are agile and innovative depends on the 
participation of an empowered workforce aligned with the business values and objectives 

of the organization.Ó
 [72] (page 49). 
 
We agree with the authors above that Agile methodologies advocate good engineering 

practices that can be integrated in the CMMI framework, and consider the largest 

drawback of most Agile methodologies is a limited concept of institution-wide 

deployment.  Institutionalization is key to implementation of all processes in CMMI, and 

is strongly supported by a set of Generic Practices. It is our belief that these practices 

could be used to ensure that Agile methodologies are institutionalized in any 

organization. 

 
Agile methods like Scrum and XP are practical methods that can support different parts 

of CMMI. Combining Scrum and CMMI practices can produce a more powerful result 

than either alone and can be done in way where CMMI compliance is maintained.  A 

more detailed analysis of a full implementation of the Scrum development process along 

with some XP engineering practices used at Systematic shows quantitative results of 

introducing good agile practices and how to maintain CMMI compliance in an Agile 

company. 
 Scrum and CMMI: a magic potion 

Systematic was established in 1985 and employs 371 people worldwide with offices in 

Denmark, USA and the UK. It is an independent software and systems company focusing 

on complex and critical IT solutions within information and communication systems. 

Often these systems are mission critical with high demands on reliability, safety, 

accuracy and usability.  

Customers are typically professional IT-departments in public institutions and large 

companies with longstanding experience in acquiring complex software and systems. 

Solutions developed by Systematic are used by tens of thousands of people in the 

defense, healthcare, manufacturing, and service industries. Systematic was appraised 11 

November 2005 using the SCAMPI
SM2 method and found to be CMMI level 5 compliant. 
Working at CMMI level 5 brings many advantages. Systematic has first hand experience 

of reduction in rework by 38% to 42% over earlier levels, estimation precision deviation 

less than 10%, and 92% of all milestones delivered early or on time. At the same time, 

extra work on projects has been significantly reduced.  

More importantly, Systematic has transformed over twenty years of experience into a 

unified set of processes used by all software projects. Historical data are systemat
ically 
collected and analyzed to continuously provide insight into the capability and 

performance of the organization.  

The use of a shared common process makes it easier for people to move from project to 

project and share experiences and lessons learned between projects. Insight into the 

capability and performance of processes makes it possible to evaluate performance of 

new processes to performance of existing processes. And this forms the foundation for 

continuous improvement. 

                                                  
2 SM Capability Maturity Model Integration, and SCAMPI are
 service marks of Carnegie Mellon University
 10%
20%
a30%
50%

40%
60%
CMMI 1CMMI 5
70%
80%
90%
100%
CMMI 5
SCRUM
CMMI 1
Project effort
Rework
Work
Proces focus
CMMI
SCRUM
50 %
50 %
50 %
10 %
9 %
6 %
25 %
4 %
100 %
69 %
35 %
10%
20%
a30%
50%

40%
60%
CMMI 1CMMI 5
70%
80%
90%
100%
CMMI 5
SCRUM
CMMI 1
Project effort
Rework
Work
Proces focus
CMMI
SCRUM
50 %
50 %
50 %
10 %
9 %
6 %
25 %
4 %
100 %
69 %
35 %
 Figure 1: CMMI and Scrum Productivity Gains 

 
In short, Systematic is able to deliver what the customer has ordered on schedule, cost 

and quality using 69% effort compared to a CMMI Level 1 company [80, 81]. This 

benefit comes at the minimal cost of 9% process focus in project management and 

engineering. CMMI Level 5 is increasingly a requirement from customers and key to 

obtaining large contracts, especially within defence and healthcare. Customers recogniz
e that CMMI Level 5 gives high predictability and better-engineered product for 

scalability, maintainability, adaptability, and reliability. 

Early results indicate that when CMMI traditional processes are optimized using Scrum, 

the productivity for large projects is doubled and the amount of rework is reduced an 

additional 40% over that of CMMI Level 5 companies. It is important to note that th
e optimized process is a mixed process, using traditional CMMI processes to establish a 

project baseline expressed as a product backlog combined with Scrum as the preferred 

way to implement the project in iterations of one month Sprints. The combination of the 

CMMI and Scrum into the optimized CMMI Scrum process includes the proper activities 

to establish sufficient planning needed by both customer and supplier, and at the same 

time the flexibility and adaptability provided by Scrum. This combined process is treated 

similarly to any other process in CMMI.  

 
CMMI provides insight into what processes are needed to maintain a 
disciplined mature 
organization capable of predicting and improving performance of the organization and 

projects. Scrum provides guidance for efficient management of projects in a way that 

allows for high flexibility and 
adaptability
. When mixing the two, a magic potion 
emerges, where the mindset from Scrum ensures that processes are implemented 

efficiently while embracing change, and CMMI ensures that all relevant processes are 

considered.  

 
Individually CMMI and Scrum has proven benefits but also pitfalls. An Agile company 

may implement Scrum correctly but fail due to lack of institutionalization, (see section 
0) or inconsistent or insufficient execution of engineering or management processes. CMMI 

can help Agile companies to institutionalize Agile methods more consistently and 

understand what processes to address.   

 
A company can comply with CMMI, but fail to reach optimal performance due to 

inadequate implementation of processes. Scrum and other Agile methodologies can guide 

such companies towards more efficient implementation of CMMI process requirements.  

 
How Systematic adopted Scrum 

Here we describe the generic steps of the process Systematic executed that resulted in t
he 
adoption of Scrum, early testing, and story based development. 

 
Identify Business Objectives and Needs.
 CMMI states [72] (page 55) that Òsuccessful 
process-improvement initiatives must be driven by the business objectives of the 
 organizationÓ. Business objectives and needs are addressed by the strategy of the 

organization. 

 
Systematic made a strategic decision to use Lean as the dominant paradigm for future 

improvements. Lean has demonstrated notable results for many years in domains such as 

auto manufacturing, and due to itÕs popularity, has been adapted to other domains, 

including product and software development. It was expected that adoption of a Lean 

mindset would facilitate a more efficient implementation of CMMI.  

 
The strategic decision to use Lean as a dominant tool for optimization of processes, is 

input to CMMI Organizational Process Focus  (OPF) and driven by an organizational 

shared function for process improvements.  

 
Analysis.
 Different Lean dialects were evaluated and Lean Software Development [8] 
was identified as the dialect most relevant to Systematic. Lean Software Development is
 an agile toolkit. A careful interpretation of the Agile Manifesto shows that this is not 

necessarily in conflict with CMMI Level 5.
   
The Agile Manifesto recognizes that processes, tools, comprehensive documentation, 

contract negotiation and following a plan have value, but emphasizes people, interactions, 

working software, customer collaboration and responding to change to have more value. 

ÒThe agile methodology movement is not anti-methodology; in fact, many of us want to 

restore credibility to the word. We also want to restore a balance: We embrace modeling, 

but not merely to file some diagram in a dusty corporate repository. We embrace 

documentation, but not to waste reams of paper in never-maintained and rarely used 

tomes. We plan, but recognize the limits of planning in a turbulent environment.Ó [57] 

 
Successful application of Lean Software Development - an agile toolkit, depends on the 

adoption of an agile mindset to supplement the process focus. Systematic values are 

consistent with the Agile Manifesto, and special focus was placed on the following 

aspects for new improvements: 
 
Individuals and interactions. 
Empowerment: the person executing the process is also 
responsible for updating the process.  

 
Working software over documentation.
 Critical evaluation of what parts of the 
documentation or process can be removed or refined to increase the customers perceived 

value of the activities is essential.  

 
Responding to change. 
Determining how the process could be improved to support 
reduced cycle time drove customer value.   

 
Lean competences were established, through handout of books, formal and informal 

training, and walk-the-talk activities. Project Managers were trained in Lean Software 

Development, and Mary Poppendieck [8] visited Systematic for a management seminar 

on Lean Software Development.  
  
This seminar established an understanding of the Agile and Lean mindset. Based on this 

training, causal dependencies between the principles and tools in Lean Software 

Development were analyzed, and as a result test practices and reduced cycle time were 

identified as good candidates for initial activities. They represented a good starting point 

for implementing Lean and at the same time focused on processes where improvements 

would have significant effect on efficiency.  

 
Pilot. 
Lean advocates that the people performing a process should be responsible and 
empowered to maintain that process. In the introduction to the CMMI OPF process area 

CMMI says the same thing. 

 
An analysis of the causal dependencies in Lean Software Development led to the decision 

to seek improvements based on the principles of Amplify Learning, Deliver Fast, and 

Build Integrity In. 

 
Selected projects were asked if they would like to pilot improved processes related to test 

and reduced cycle time respectively. Project staff were trained in the Lean mindset and 

asked to suggest how to adopt Lean into their processes. The result was a selection of 

Scrum and early testing based on story-based development.  

 
The result of the pilots were two-fold: it confirmed the general idea of using Lean 

mindset as source for identification of new improvements, and secondly it provided two 

specific successful improvements showing how agile methods can be adopted while 

maintaining CMMI compliance.  

 
Implementation.  
It was decided to adopt Scrum and story based software development 
in the organization. Process Action Teams (PATs) were formed to integrate the 

experience and knowledge gained from the pilots, into the processes shared by all 

projects in the organization. The PATs were staffed with people that would be expected to 

execute the new process when released.  

 
The largest change to project planning is that features and work are planned in sufficient 

detail as opposed to a complete initial detailed analysis. The result is a Scrum Product
 Backlog with a complete prioritized list of features/work for the project. All features have 

a qualified estimate, established with a documented process and through the use of 

historical data, but the granularity of the features increase as the priority falls. The 

uncertainty that remains is handled through risk management activities.  

 
The primary change to project execution processes, was to integrate Scrum as method for 

completing small iterations (Sprints), on a selected subset of the work with highest 

priority.  

This work verified that Scrum could be adopted in project management while 

maintaining CMMI compliance. This is important because, one of the first steps to 

embrace change is to ensure that project management processes support and allow agility. 

In addition the people executing the process were trained and certified as ScrumMasters 
 by Jeff Sutherland [82], who also did a management seminar on Scrum at Systematic. 

Concurrent to the above pilots, Lean was considered by all projects and shared functions 

as one of several ways to identify possible improvements.  

 
Result. The first step for Systematic in adapting a Lean mindset resulted in the adoption 
of Scrum and story based development as the recommended way of working. Systematic 

provides a default implementation of a Projects Defined Process (PDP) known as PDP 

Common. The PDP Common has been updated to integrate Scrum and story based 

development into the relevant processes.  

 
The apparent result of adopting agile methods into existing CMMI compliant processes, 

has led to integration of processes or process areas that initially were implemented 

separately.  The new processes are more efficient, and the changes have improved 

quality, customer and employee satisfaction.  

 
Risk. 
Some of the risks of applying Agile mindset to a CMMI organization include
: 
 
¥ Degrading CMMI compliant processes to non-compliance. 
¥ Local optimizations increasing project efficiency at the expense of inefficiency at
 the 
organizational level, e.g. due to lack of organizational coordination. 
 
These risks were handled by a central process team that kept the organization on track 

with respect to the risks and change management. The process team was responsible for: 

¥ Build and share competencies on Lean, Agile and Scrum with the organization. 
¥ Define and communicate vision, constraints and measures for adoption of a Lean 

mindset. 
¥ Encourage and empower different parts of the organization to challenge current 

process implementations with a Lean mindset, in search of improvement 

opportunities. 
¥ Collect experiences from the organization and consolidate improvements at the 

organizational level. 
 
The dominant risk for failure in adapting Lean is insufficient understanding or adoption 

of Lean or Agile mindset. Systematic has addressed this risk by inviting Jeff Sutherland 

and Mary Poppendieck to Systematic to establish a good understanding of Lean, Scrum 

and Agile.  

 
Systematic experience from pilots 

In a period of approximately 4 months, two small projects piloted Scrum and early testing 

in story based development. 

 
Scrum. 
The first pilot was initiated on a request for proposal, where Systematic inspired 
by Lean principles suggested a delivery plan with bi-weekly deliveries and stated explicit
 expectations to customer involvement and feedback. 
  
One of the main reasons that Systematic was awarded the contract was the commitme
nt 
to deliver working code bi-weekly and thereby providing a very transparent process to 

the customer. During project execution, a high communication bandwidth was kept 

between the team, the customer and users. This was identified as one of the main reasons 

for achieving high customer satisfaction. 

 
The delivery plan and customer involvement resulted in early detection of technological 

issues. Had a traditional approach been used these issues would have been identified 

much later with negative impacts on cost and schedule performance. 

 
However, productivity of this small project was at the expected level compared to the 

productivity performance baseline for small projects. Another small project using Scrum 

shows a similar productivity and the same indications on high quality and customer 

satisfaction. 

 
At Systematic, productivity for a project is defined as the total number of lines of code 

produced divided by the total project effort spent in hours. These numbers are gathered 

from the configuration and version control system. Data are attributed with information 

related to programming language, type of code: new, reuse or test. This definition of 

productivity has been chosen because it provides sufficient insight and is very simple and 

efficient to collect. 

Systematic has established and maintains a productivity performance baseline (PPB) for 

productivity compared to project size estimated in hours, from data collected on 

completed projects [83]. The data shows that productivity is high on small projects and 

declines with the size of the project with traditional CMMI Level 5. The productivity 

performance baseline in Systematic is divided into two groups: small projects less than 

4000 hours and large projects above 4000 hours.  Productivity of small projects is 181% 

the productivity of large projects. 

When comparing the projects using Scrum to the current productivity baseline it is seen 

that productivity for small projects is insignificantly changed, but the productivity for 

large projects shows 201% increase in productivity. As mentioned above, the large 

projects did additional improvements, and it is therefore not possible to attribute the 

benefit solely to Scrum. However the people involved all agree that Scrum was a 

significant part of this improvement. 

 
There is a strong indication that large projects in Systematic using Scrum will double 

productivity going forward. Small projects in Systematic already show a high 

productivity. We believe that this is because small projects in Systematic always ha
ve 
been managed in a way similar to Scrum. However quality and customer satisfaction 

seems to be improved and we believe this is because Scrum has facilitated a better 

understanding of how small projects are managed efficiently. 

 
Early testing.
 Two different approaches were used to facilitate early test. One large 
project decided to use a story based approach to software development and another 

project decided to focus on comprehensive testing during development.
    
The idea of story-based development was to subdivide features of work, typically 

estimated to hundreds of hours of work into smaller stories of 20-40 hours of work. The 

implementation of a story followed a new procedure, where the first activity would be to 

decide how the story could be tested before any code was written. This test could then be 

used as the exit criteria for implementation of the story.  

 
In order to ensure that the new procedure was followed, the procedure included a few 

checkpoints where an inspector would inspect the work produced, and decide whether or 

not the developer could proceed to the next activity in the procedure. These inspections 

are lightweight, and could typically be done in less than 5 minutes. 

 
Many benefits from story-based development were immediately apparent. The 

combination of a good definition of when a story was complete, and early incremental 

testing of the features, provided a very precise overview of status and progress for both 

team and other stakeholders. 

Developing a series of small stories rather than parts of a big feature is more satisfact
ory, and creates a better focus on completing a feature until it fulfills all the criteria f
or being 
ÒdoneÓ. 

This project finished early, and reduced the number of coding defects in final test by 38% 

compared to previous processes.  

 
The project using comprehensive testing placed test specialists together with the 

developers. As in the story based approach, this caused discussion and reflection between 

testers, developers, user experience engineers and software architects, before or very 

early in the development of new functionality. As a consequence the amount of 

remaining coding defects in final test were reduced by 42%.  

Based on these two projects test activities should be an integrated activity through out the 

projects lifetime. Scrum inherently supports this, through cross-functional teams and 

frequent deliveries to the customer.  

 
Real needs. 
A customer sent a request for proposal on a fixed set of requirements. When 
Systematic responded, we expressed our concern that the scope and contents expressed in 

the requirements were beyond the customerÕs real needs.
   
Systematic decided to openly share the internal estimation of the requirements with the 

customer, for the purpose of narrowing scope by removing requirements not needed or 

too expensive compared to the customers budget. The customer agreed to re-evaluate the 

requirement specification, and the result was that requirements and price were reduced by 

50%. 
 
This experience supports results in a Standish Group Study reported at XP2002 by 

chairman Jim Johnson, showing that 64% of features in a fixed price contract are never or 

rarely used by end-users. 

 
We believe that this illustrates how important it is to have a high communication 

bandwidth with the customer, in order to find out what the real needs are. Success is not 
 achieved by doing the largest project, but by doing the project that provides the most 

value for the customer, leaving time for software developers to work with other 

customers with real needs. It gives motivation to developers to provide solutions to real 

need, which in turn benefits dedication and productivity. 

Even though this experience is related to activities before the project is started, the 

challenge of maintaining close communication with the customer, to ensure that the 

project delivers the most value within the agreed constraints, continues and is strongly 

supported by Scrum. 

Guide for mixing CMM
I and Agile The previous section has described how Systematic, an organization appraised to CMMI 

Level 5, has adopted agile methods. This section presents our advice to the agile 

organizations on how to adopt the concept of institutionalization.  

How CMMI can improve Agile 

Our focus is on using CMMI to help an organization institutionalize Agile Methods.  We 

have all heard Agile Methods described by some as just another disguise for 

undisciplined hacking and of some individuals who claim to be Agile just because they 

ÒdonÕt document.Ó  We believe the value from Agile Methods can only be obtained 

through disciplined use. CMMI has a concept of 
Institutionalization 
that can help 
establish this needed discipline.   

 
Institutionalization
 is defined in CMMI as Òthe ingrained way of doing business that an 
organization follows routinely as part of its corporate culture.Ó   Others have described 

institutionalization as simply Òthis is the way we do things around here.Ó  Note that 

institutionalization is an organizational-level concept that supports multiple projects
. 
 
CMMI supports institutionalization through the Generic Practices (GP) associated with 

all process areas.  For the purposes of our discussion, we will look at the 12 generic 

practices associated with maturity levels 2 and 3 in the CMMI [72] pp. 39-44 and how 

they might help an organization use Agile Methods.  We have paraphrased the generic 

practices (
shown in bold text below
) to match our recommended usage with Agile 
Methods.  In CMMI terms, the projects in an organization would be 
expected
 to perform 
an activity that accomplished each of these generic practices.  We have used Scrum as the 

example Agile Method to describe some of the activities that relate to these practic
es.  
Establish and maintain an organizational policy for planning and performing Agile 

Methods (GP 2.1).  
The first step toward institutionalization of Agile Methods is to 
establish how and when they will be used in the organization.  An organization might 

determine that Agile Methods will be used on all projects or some subset of projects 

based on size, type of product, technology, or other factors.  This policy is a way to 

clearly communicate the organizationÕs intent regarding Agile Methods.  In keeping with 

the Agile Principle of face-
to-face conversions at Òall hands meetingÓ or a visit by a 
senior manager during a projectÕs kick off could be used to communicate the policy. 

 
Establish and maintain the plan for performing Agile Methods (GP2.2). 
This pract
ice can help ensure that Agile Methods do not degrade into undisciplined hacking.  The 
 expectation is that Agile Methods are planned and that a defined process exists and is 

followed.  The defined process should include a sequence of steps capturing the 

minimum essential information needed to describe what a project really does.  The plan 
would also capture the essential aspects of how the other 10 generic practices are to be 

implemented in the project.  In Scrum, some of this planning is likely to be captured in a 

product backlog and/or sprint backlog, most likely within a tool as opposed to a 

document.
  
Provide adequate resources for performing Agile Methods (GP2.3). 
Every project 
wants, needs, and expects competent professionals, adequate funding, and appropriate 

facilities and tools.  Implementing an activity to explicitly manage these wants and nee
ds 
has proved useful. In Scrum, for example, these needs may be reviewed and addressed at 

the Sprint Planning Meeting and reconsidered when significant changes occur. 

 
Assign responsibility and authority for performing Agile Methods (GP 2.4). 
For a 
project to be successful, clear responsibility and authority need to be defined.  Usually 

this includes a combination of role descriptions and assignments.  The definitions of these 

roles identify a level of responsibility and authority.  For example, a Scrum Project would 

assign an individual or individuals to the roles of Product Owner, ScrumMaster, and 

Team.  Furthermore, the roles in the Team are likely to include a mix of domain experts, 

system engineers, software engineers, architects, programmers, analysts, QA experts, 

testers, UI designers, etc. Expertise in the Team is likely to include a mix of domain 

experts, system engineers, software engineers, architects, programmers, analysts, QA 

experts, testers, UI designers, etc. Scrum assigns the team as a whole the responsibility 

for delivering working software. The Product Owner is responsible for specifying and 

prioritizing the work. The ScrumMaster is responsible for assuring the Scrum process is 

followed. Management is responsible for providing the right expertise to the team. 

 
Train the people performing Agile Methods (GP 2.5).  
The right training can increase 
the performance of competent professionals and supports introducing new methods into 

an organization.  People need to receive consistent training in the Agile Method being 

used in order to ensure institutionalization.  This practice includes determining the 

individuals to train, defining the exact training to provide, and performing the needed 

training.  Training can be provided using many different approaches, including 

programmed instruction, formalized on-the-job training, mentoring, and formal and 

classroom training.  It is important that a mechanism be defined to ensure that training 

has occurred and is beneficial.  

 
Place designated work products under appropriate level of configuration 

management (GP 2.6). 
The purpose of a project is to produce a deliverable product (or 
products).  This product is often a collection of a number of intermediate or supporting 

work products (code, manuals, software systems, build files, etc.).  Each of these work 

products has a value and often goes through a series of steps that increase their value.  

The concept of configuration management is intended to protect these valuable work 

products by defining the level of control, for example, version control or baseline control 

and perhaps multiple levels of baseline control to use within the project. 
  
Identify and involve the relevant stakeholders as planned (GP 2.7). 
Involving the 
customer as a relevant stakeholder is a strength of Agile Methods. This practice further 

identifies the need to ensure that the expected level of stakeholder involvement occurs.  

For example, if the project depends on customer feedback with each increment, build, or 

sprint, and involvement falls short of expectations it is then necessary to communicate to 

the appropriate level, individual, or group in the organization to allow for corrective 

action.  This is because corrective action may be beyond the scope of the project team. In 

advanced Scrum implementations, this is often formalized as a MetaScrum [40] where 

stakeholders serve as a board of directors for the Product Owner. 

 
Monitor and control Agile Methods against the plan and take appropriate 

corrective action (GP 2.8). 
This practice involves measuring actual performance against 
the projectÕs plan and taking corrective action.  The direct day-
to-day monitoring is a 
strong feature of the Daily Scrum Meeting.  Further, examples of this can be seen in 

Scrum with the use of the Product Burndown Chart showing how much work is left to do 

at the beginning of each Sprint and the Sprint Burndown Chart showing the total task 

hours remaining per day. Scrum enhances the effectiveness of the plan by allowing the 

Product Owner to inspect and adapt to maximize ROI, rather than merely assuring plan 

accuracy. 

 
Objectively evaluate adherence to the Agile Methods and address noncompliance 

(GP2.9). 
This practice is based on having someone not directly responsible for managing 
or performing project activities evaluate the actual activities of the project.  Some 

organizations implement this practice as both an assurance activity and coaching activity.  

The coaching concept matches many Agile Methods. The ScrumMaster has primary 

responsibility for adherence to Scrum practices, tracking progress, removing 

impediments, resolving personnel problems, and is usually not engaged in 

implementation of project tasks. The Product Owner has primary responsibility for 

assuring software meets requirements and is high quality. 

 
Review the activities, status, and results of the Agile Methods with hig
her-level 
management and resolve issues (GP2.10).
 The purpose of this practice is to ensure that 
higher-level management has appropriate visibility into the project activities.  Differe
nt 
managers have different needs for information.  Agile Methods have a high level of 

interaction, for example, Scrum has a Sprint Planning Meeting, Daily Scrum Meetings, a 

Sprint Review Meeting, and a Sprint Retrospective Meeting.  Management needs are 

supported by transparency of status data produced by the Scrum Burndown Chart. This, 

in combination with defect data can be used to produce a customized management 

dashboard for project status. Management responsibilities are to (1) provide strategic 

vision, business strategy, and resources, (2) remove impediments surfaced by Scrum 

teams that the teams cannot remove themselves, (3) ensure growth and career path of 

staff, and (4) challenge the Scrum teams to move beyond mediocrity. The list of 

impediments generated by the Scrum teams is transparent to management and it is their 

responsibility to assure they are removed in order to improve organizational performance. 

  Establish and maintain the description of Agile Methods (GP 3.1). 
This practice is a 
refinement of GP2.2 above.  The only real difference is that description of Agile Methods 

in this practice is expected to be organization-wide and not unique to a project.  The 

result is that variability in how Agile Methods are performed would be reduced across the 

organization; and therefore more exchange between projects of people, tools, information 

and products can be supported. 

 
Collect the results from using Agile Methods to support future use and 

improvement the organizationÕs approach to Agile Methods (GP 3.2).
 This practice 
supports the goal of learning across projects by collecting the results from individual 

projects.  The Scrum Sprint Retrospective Meeting could be used as the mechanism for 

this practice. 

 
All of these generic practices have been useful in organizations implementing other 

processes.  We have seen that a number of these generic practices have at least partial 

support in Scrum or other Agile Methods.  We believe that implementing these practices 

can help establish needed discipline to any Agile Method.   

Critiques of CMM 

In research funded by the Danish government, Rose et. al. surveyed the literature on 

critiques of CMM [84]. They observed that the chief criticism of CMM is not the process 

itself, but the effects of focus on process orientation. While side effects of process foc
us 
may be viewed as simply poor CMM implementation, organizations with heavyweight 

processes are highly prone to poor execution.  

 
As with any other model, good and bad implementations of CMM exist. We believe that 

bad implementations are one of the main reasons for the existence of many negative 

criticisms of CMM. Such implementations are often characterized as in the table bel
ow, 
whereas many good CMM implementations address most of the criticism. 

 
One way to enhance chances for a good CMM or CMMI implementation is to use Scrum. 

Applying Scrum and agile mindset while implementing CMMI will help to recognize that 

CMMI addresses people and technology aspects, in a way fully supportive of an agile 

mindset.  

More importantly, the work in this paper has shown that the mix of CMMI and Scrum 

blends a magic potion for software development that is even better than the sum of the 

two alone.  

We acknowledge that the CMM criticism listed in the table below exist, but from our 

knowledge of CMMI we consider it to be incorrect. But a bad implementation of CMMI 

may be perceived this way. Even though good CMMI implementations can be done 

without agile methods, the table shows that Scrum will contribute with a beneficial focus
 on issues stemming from ÒbadÓ CMMI implementation. 

 CMM criticism 
Scrum support 
 CMM reveres process but ignores people. 
Scrum is the first development process to 

treat people issues the same as other project 

management issues [85].   
Does not focus on underlying 

organizational problems that should be 

solved. 
A primary responsibility of the 

ScrumMaster is to maintain and resolve an 

impediment list that contains 

organizational issues, personal issues, and 

technical problems. 
Ignores quality in the software product 

assuming an unproven link between quality 

in the process and quality in the resulting 

product. Differing project and 

organizational circumstances may mean 

that a process that delivers a good product 

in one context delivers a poor product in 

another context.   
The Scrum Product Owner is responsible 

for continuously reprioritizing the Product 

Backlog to maximize business value in 

current context. 
Lack of business orientation 
The primary focus of Scrum is on 

delivering business value. 
Poor awareness of organizational context. 
Creation and prioritization of features, 

tasks, and impediments is always done in 

organizational context by inspected and 

adapting. 
Ignores technical and organizational 

infrastructures. 
Daily inspection and adaptation in Scrum 

meetings focuses on technical and 

organizational issues. 
Encourages an internal efficiency focus and 

thus market and competition blindness. 
Focus is on delivering business value. Type 

C Scrum allows an entire company to 

dominate a market segment through 

inspecting and adapting in real time to 

competition [40]. 
 
Conclusions This paper shows that CMMI and Scrum can be successfully mixed. The mix results in 

significantly improved performance while maintaining compliance to CMMI Level 5 as 

compared to performance with either CMMI or Scrum alone. 

 
Scrum pilot projects showed significant gains in productivity and quality over traditional 

methods. These results led to an ROI based decision to more widely introduce Scrum and 

consider other Agile practices in Systematic. Scrum now reduces every category of work 

(defects, rework, total work required, and process overhead) by almost 50%. 

 
This paper has outlined how Systematic adopted Scrum and story based development into 

its CMMI processes inspired from a strategic focus on Lean. For Agile companies the 

article has presented how Generic Practices from CMMI can be used to institutionalize 
 agile practices. Furthermore the article has presented Lean Software Development [8] 
as an operational tool to identify improvement opportunities in a CMMI 5 company. 

 
We think companies in defense, aerospace, and other industries that require high maturity 

of processes, should carefully consider introducing Agile practices into the workplace 

and all software companies should consider introducing CMMI practices into their 

environment. 

Our recommendation to the Agile community is to use the CMMI generic practices from 

CMMI Level 3 to amplify the benefits from Agile methods. The efficiencies of agile 

practice can lower the cost of CMMI process improvements making the benefits more 

widely available. Our recommendation to the CMMI community is that Agile methods 

can fit into your CMMI framework and will provide exciting improvements to your 

organization. 

 