   Incorporating Lean Development Practices into Agile Software Development 
                   Jeff Sutherland, Ph.D.                                                              Jean Tabaka                         Patientkeeper                                                         Rally Software Development
                      Newton, MA, USA                                                           Boulder, CO, USA          
jeff.sutherland@computer.org                                            jean.tabaka@gmail.com   Agile software development processes have been 
influenced by best practices in Japanese industry, 
particularly by lean development principles [1] 
implemented at companie
s like Toyota [2], and 
knowledge management strategies developed by 
Takeuchi and Nonaka [3], now at the Hitotsubashi 
Business School in Japan, and Peter Senge [4] at MIT. 
This minitrack will focus on advancing the state of the art 
or presenting innovative ideas related to agile methods, 
individual practices and tools. Accepted papers will 
potentially enrich the body of knowledge and influence 
the framework of thought in the field by investigating 
Agile methods in a rigorous fashion.  
 The track is open to research papers on multiple aspects 
of agile methods, particularly those that bring best 
practices in knowledge management and lean 
development to scalable, distributed, and outsourced 
Scrum, eXtreme Programming (XP), and other agile 
practices [5]: 
  Agile methods and processes 
 Business and social facets of agile software 
development 
 Technical facets of agile software engineering 
 Agile usability 
 Tools for agile developers and teams 
 Empirical studies of agile methods 
 Topics include: 
  Research on existing or new methodologies and 
approaches: informal modeling techniques and 
practices, adapting/trimming existing methods, 
and special projects. 
 Research on existing or new techniques or 
practices: pairing, war-rooms, test-first design, 
paper-based prototyping, early acceptance test 
driven development, exploratory testing, 
refactoring, or others. 
 Research on special topics or tools: 
configuration and resource management, testing, 
project steering, user involvement, design for 
agility, virtual teams or others.  
 Research on integrating ideas from other fields, 
e.g. interaction design, requirements engineering, 
cognitive science, organizational psychology, 
usability testing, software security, into agile 
processes. 
 Research studies of development teams using 
ethnographic or social 
research techniques. 
 Research on agile software engineering 
economics. 
 Quantitative and qualitative studies of agile 
methods, practices, and tools. 
Papers are particularly relevant when lean thinking, lean 
development, and lean product development are shown as 
the means through which knowledge-based, knowledge-
creating companies and organizations effectively 
implement agile software development principles and 
practices.  [1] M. Poppendieck, "A 
History of Lean: From 
Manufacturing to Softwa
re Development," in 
JAOO Conference
, Aarhus, Denmark, 2005. 
[2] J. K. Liker, 
The Toyota way : 14 management principles from the world's greatest manufacturer
. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
[3] H. Takeuchi and I. Nonaka, 
Hitotsubashi on Knowledge 
Management. Singapore: John Wile
y & Sons (Asia), 
2004. [4] P. M. Senge, 
The Fifth Discipline: the Art and Practice 
of the Learning Organization
. New York: Currency, 
1990. [5] J. Sutherland, "Future of 
Scrum: Parallel Pipelining of 
Sprints in Complex Projects," in 
AGILE 2005 Conference
, Denver, CO, 2005. 
  