 From Traditional, to Lean, to Agile Development:  
Finding the Optimal Software Engineering Cycle 
 
Jay Trimble 
NASA Ames Research Center 
jay.p.trimble@nasa.gov 
 
Christopher Webster 
Intel Corporation 
christopher.webster@intel.com  
  
Abstract
 
In 2008, our team at NASA Ames Research 
Center launched a five-year project to deliver a user-
centric software platform for mission control. We 
began with a six-month delivery cycle. Within two 
years we were delivering functional software every 
three weeks. 
Our evolution from traditional, to lean, then agile, 
did not happen because of a focused goal to become 
lean or agile. Rather, we responded iteratively to 
problems; we were disconn
ected from our customer, 
the long delivery cycles created issues with testing and 
verification, and we were una
ble to effectively measure 
our progress. 
We changed our delivery cycle first to six weeks, 
then three, with the t
eam focused on the highest-
priority features and bug fixes. Our one measure of 
progress became working code. We delivered a nightly 
build to our customer. Our QA team tested features as 
they rolled out. 
In our journey from traditional to agile, we 
tailored our processes to our team culture and our 
context of work. We found that agile methods 
increased customer and team
 satisfaction, and enabled 
us to use limited team resources where they were most 
effective – the design and development of the software. 
1. Introduction 
We detail our experience and lessons learned in 
going from a traditional to a lean to an agile software 
engineering practice for delivery of a mission control 
user application architecture.
 We explore the impact on 
the development team, cu
stomer relations, product 
quality, and cost. A noteworthy aspect of this journey 
is that it was not the result of an intentional switch 
from traditional to agile. Rather, by iteratively solving 
problems with the traditi
onal development methods 
with which we began, we became lean, then agile 
[1,2,3,4]. 
In late 2007, the user centered technology team at 
NASA Ames Research Center began a collaborative 
project with NASA’s Johnson 
Space Center to develop 
a user-composable software technology that would 
allow NASA flight controllers to compose their own 
displays using certified software objects representing 
real-world domain objects on board the International 
Space Station. 
Fresh off a successful prototype, in which the team 
demonstrated the core concepts of user object 
composition and acceptable engineering performance 
in the mission control test facility, the team set out to 
build the real product. Unlike the prototype, this 
product would need to be certified for flight operations, 
and would need to follow a software engineering 
process that provided accountability. We were given 
two years by our customer to deliver a first version of a 
working product, which we called Module 1. The total 
project lifecycle was to be five years, with a delivery 
every six months. 
We quickly ran into problems. Over the course of 
six months, we could not eff
ectively verify the state of 
the software. Customer interaction was limited. The 
long cycle required extensive testing. There was a 
significant lag time between designing the software 
functional specifications a
nd rolling those functions 
out. The period of months between specification of 
features with the customer and delivery of those 
features to the customer created a mismatch in 
expectations.  Worse, the early deliveries were 
platform services, ofte
n with no user-facing 
components. 
2. Traditional Methods: A Six-Month 
Cycle 
At project kickoff our team (Table 1) was 
composed primarily of developers (the number of 
developers fluctuated, nine
 was the peak number), two 
user experience designers, a project manager (PM), and 
the group lead/principal inves
tigator (PI). The term PI 
is a holdover from the original NASA proposal 
process. The user experience designers used 
participatory design methods to work with the 
customer to design and specify the product features 
and functions. The PM was responsible for maintaining 
2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.23748242013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.2374826 the schedule and associated internal processes and for 
implementation issues. The PI, who had duties on 
multiple projects, was responsible for project definition 
and strategic objectives and maintaining relations with 
the customer. The PI was the final decision authority if 
conflicts arose. 
Our initial delivery cycle was six months. Figure 1 
shows the six-month cycle as it would have looked 
over a two-year period. Each delivery focused on 
completion of a subsystem rather than verifiable and 
meaningful end-user functionality. In part, this was 
because we were building a platform and core 
underlying capabilities needed to be developed to make 
the user-facing components func
tion. However, in this 
plan lay the roots of some classic software delivery 
issues, including a lack of 
customer connection to the 
product, complicated testing and verification issues, 
and an inability to respond to situational changes in a 
timely manner. 
Our software functionality was detailed in a user 
experience (UE) specification. We defined the key UE 
elements at the start of 
Module 1. The UE functions 
were divided into subsystem deliveries. However, the 
focus of attention during 
customer discussions was 
Module 1, and most issues th
at arose were discussed in 
the context of the completed Module 1 delivery, which 
was two years away. This allowed important issues to 
be deferred because the perception was that if a feature 
or function was not ready, 
it would somehow be fixed 
within the Module 1 timefra
me. The lack of user-
facing components in the initial six-month subsystem 
deliverables made it impossible to effectively verify 
what was working and what 
was not, and whether what 
we were building would satisfy the customer 
requirements. The combination of long time frames 
and the inability of the customer to see our progress by 
trying out the software creat
ed a growing mismatch in 
expectations between the customer and the 
development team. In the 
customer’s mind the product 
became a series of specs and promises, not grounded in 
the reality of working software. 
Further complicating this situation was the reality 
that mission control software must be tested in mission 
control for users to understand functionality in context. 
It quickly became clear that
 four six-month cycles 
were insufficient to deploy, test, and verify 
functionality. 
 
Traditional Lean Agile 
Developers (5-9) Developers (7) Developers (4)
 
User Experience Design 
(2) 
User Experience Design 
(2) 
User Experience 
Design (1)
 
Quality 
Assurance/Process Build 
Engineers (2) 
Quality 
Assurance/Process Build 
Engineers (2)
 
Quality 
Assurance/Process 
Build Engineers (.5)
 
Project Manager (1) Project Manager (1)
 
Project Manager role 
done by developer
 
Principal Investigator 
(Part Time) 
Principal Investigator 
(Part Time)
 
Principal Investigator 
(Part Time)
 
Interns Interns
 
Interns
 
Table 1. Team Composition 
 
Figure 1. Our initial delivery cycl
e, linear, six months per delivery 
48254827 3. Getting Lean: A Shorter Delivery Cycle 
Our initial goal was simple – to shorten the 
delivery cycle. We thought 
the shorter cycle would 
facilitate more frequent customer interaction, a more 
manageable test load for each deliverable, and the 
capability to verify our deliveries and their 
functionality. 
The team composition changed to include first 
one, then two quality assurance (QA) engineers. One 
of our QA engineers also took the lead in setting up 
build and check-in processes and exit criteria for 
delivery. We adopted a team policy that the only true 
measure of progress is working code. 
During the six-month deliveries we frequently 
had to present our status to management and our 
customer. Short of demonstr
able working code, it’s a 
challenge to measure, let alone present, the state of a 
software project. The short delivery cycle enabled us 
to show our progress with working deliveries, rather 
than through a series of status briefings. 
Figure 2. Shorter delivery cycle 
Shortening the delivery cycle gave our team and 
our customer increased insight into product status. 
However, the shorter cycles lacked focus. By only 
shortening the cycles, as shown in Figure 2, we 
simply divided our existing pl
an into smaller parts. It 
was a start, but we found that the cycles lacked 
clarity of purpose; they were merely incremental 
subsystem deliveries. We 
still lacked the ability to 
deliver meaningful and measurable functionality with 
which to measure our progress in a way that was 
meaningful to the customer. 
The next step was to clarify the purpose for each 
cycle. To do this we created a strategic road map with 
milestones for each year, and within that we 
developed a focal point for each cycle rooted in end-
user functionality visible to the customer. We labeled 
the cycles as 
iterations
, each with a name, such as 
“plotting” or “tables.” The name reflected the 
primary functional goals of the cycle, which we 
would verify through user 
testing every six weeks. 
The iterations lead up to a release, which, as of that 
point in time, was still Module 1. We had been given 
two years from the start da
te to complete Module 1, 
and that was not going to change. 
4. Integration of User-Centered Design 
and Prioritization 
Figure 3 shows our updated 
six-week cycle. The 
primary goals of this updated cycle were to 
incorporate our user-centered design practice and to 
develop a common understanding between 
developers, the user experience team, and the 
customer as to what the highest-priority items were, 
and to assign work based on those priorities. 
Prioritization and UE are inseparable. As the 
purpose of our software is to meet user needs, these 
needs must be understood to create a meaningful 
prioritization of work. 
Code (3.5 weeks)
UE Speciﬁcation
UE 
Spec
Stack 
Rank
Pre-
Stack 
Rank 1
Pre-
Stack 
Rank 2
JIRA Updates/Priorities
Iteration n-1
Iteration n
Kickoff
Eng design & 
spec (3 days)
Coding/UE Spec Revisions/Daily Acceptance Test
UE Testing Iteration n-1 (delivered s/w)
UE Design/Testing Iteration n+1 (paper)
Develop Test Plan
Rls
Docs
Demo
Demo new features
for QA
Test (2 weeks)
PS 
Review
Pre-Ship 
Review, 
exit critera, 
customer demo
Deliver
De-
Brief
Iteration n+1
 
Figure 3. Updated and refined six-week process,
 with focus on constant pr
ioritization of work 
48264828  
4.1. Prioritization 
It sounds simple and obvi
ous – always work on 
the most important issues first. But what is required 
to achieve this? The team must know the priority of 
the issues, the issues must be assigned, and changes 
must be tracked. The natural human tendency to do 
the easy things first must be resisted. We adopted a 
two-pronged approach, utilizing both tools and the 
social structure of the team. 
To support prioritization, we added the 
Greenhopper plug-in to our issue tracking system, 
JIRA [5]. Greenhopper shows issues ordered by 
priority and assisted in our prioritization process 
called stack ranking. Du
ring stack ranking, we 
created an overall priority for each iteration, then an 
individual list for each developer showing the issues 
assigned to them in order of priority. The developers 
were responsible for time estimates for their issues, 
and for committing to getting them done in the time 
allotted. Because this was a stack ranking, and 
software estimation is an inexact science, we tended 
to assign more work than the developers could 
complete, with the idea that the ranked list functions 
as a rollover to-do list. The key goal was getting the 
whole team focused on working in priority order. 
4.2. Ranking Lessons 
We learned several lessons along the way. First, 
don’t over-rank. It is typically not necessary to rank 
every issue in exact order; rather, it is necessary that 
developers know their priorities. Next, we started out 
viewing the ranked list as a rolling to-do list, with the 
idea that it was okay if the list was much longer than 
what could be done. Long lists that couldn’t be 
completed demoralized the team, so we began cutting 
the lists down to what we thought was achievable in 
the time allocated to the iteration. We learned that a 
shorter “can-do” developer list often resulted in an 
“all-done” list with no rollovers. 
The developers’ estimates for time to complete 
their features were often done at a high level because 
estimates take time that can be used for coding. On 
the other hand, a good estimate leads to success, and 
the developers learned to find the right investment 
level for time estimates. 
The scheduled stack ranking session required 
significant preparation; we
 often scheduled two pre-
ranking sessions before the final stack ranking. While 
we had the whole team present for the final ranking 
session, we did not find it necessary to have the 
whole team present for pre-rankings. 
 
4.3. Scrum-like meetings 
The traditional team mee
tings were gradually 
replaced with short tag-up meetings [6]. These 
meetings are held on Monday, Tuesday, and 
Thursday mornings and are kept to 15 minutes. Each 
engineer summarizes his or 
her tasks, that is, what 
was accomplished yesterday, what is planned for 
tomorrow, and whether any blockers are inhibiting 
progress. Our team lead ma
y interrupt statuses that 
take too long. (Individual 
follow-up meetings often 
occur afterwards.) 
5. Iteration Flow 
Officially, we allocated 3.5 weeks per six-week 
iteration for coding. In practice, the developers were 
always writing code. Duri
ng the “official” coding 
time, the QA team wrote thei
r test plans, and the UE 
team developed the UE spec for the next iteration. 
The coding time could also be used for user testing of 
the previous iteration. 
5.1 Technical Design 
Before the start of coding we allocated four days 
for the engineers to write a technical spec. This is a 
simple one-to-two-page de
scription of the feature 
implementation. It typica
lly describes design trade-
offs and the justification as to why a design is chosen. 
It may also contain use cases
 and test scenarios. The 
primary customer for the tech spec was our QA team, 
who used it to build test plans. The tech spec also 
served as a vehicle to drive communications within 
the engineering team as well as providing 
documentation for the software design required by 
formal software processes such as concept maturity 
model integration (CMMI) [7]. 
5.2 User-Centered Design 
Our software is user centered, and we have a 
series of interactions with users ranging from design 
sessions to user testing.  In Figure 3 you can see how 
we integrated agile and user-centered design over the 
six-week cycle. Before the start of each iteration, a 
UE specification was due. The spec was the 
developers’ map of what they needed to build. It was 
supplemented by direct and ongoing interaction with 
the UE team. During the codi
ng part of our cycle, the 
UE team was able to conduct user testing and design 
sessions. The user testing showed users’ responses to 
the previous iteration(s). We could also user test 
48274829 future designs using paper prototypes. Design 
sessions with users facilitated a common language 
and mental model, the output of which was variable-
fidelity mockups used to specify and refine the 
design of upcoming features.
 
6. Reporting 
Our customer wanted to know what we would 
deliver when, and how long each feature set would 
take to implement. Traditional forecasting methods 
for software would have had us estimating lines of 
code and creating detailed estimates for how long it 
would take to develop each key feature set, then 
using those estimates as a c
ontract with our customer. 
Rather than expending limited team resources with 
software estimates, we chose to have the team focus 
on designing and building software. Instead of 
committing to specific time estimates for each feature 
set, we showed our customer exactly where we were 
every six weeks, with working code. We replaced 
detailed contractual delivery estimates with a close 
collaboration that allowed the customer to see our 
progress. 
Our JIRA issue tracking system is automatically 
linked to our code repository, our tech specs, and test 
scenarios (Figure 4). Each customer requirement is 
represented as JIRA “requirement” issue, which is 
linked to a JIRA “task” issue. We have a trace from 
customer requirement to test cases and to code, 
allowing us to provide requirement traceability as 
well as support CMMI audits. 
 
 
Figure 4. Traceability 
7. Automation 
We use automated unit testing and continuous 
integration. With each check-in to our code base, the 
product is built and unit tests are executed. The 
resulting distribution – the nightly build – is ready for 
testing by our customer and our QA. 
Our product has extensive user-facing features. 
New features need to be tested and existing features 
need to be regression tested, but GUI testing is 
always tricky to automate. Our first attempt at GUI 
test automation used fixed robot scripting of 
scenarios. We ultimately rejected this approach 
because it relied on fixed scenarios. Instead, we now 
use FestSwing in our automated unit tests. While this 
does not replace a system-level suite, it achieves 
some coverage of our GUI elements with high 
flexibility and simple dependencies. 
8. Issues 
An important part of lean or agile development is 
the ability to respond quickly to issues that arise 
during short delivery cycles. 
8.1. Quality Assurance 
Our quality assurance team developed test plans 
based on the UE and tech specs available at the start 
of a six-week iteration. If things changed after those 
wiki-based documents were “complete,” which they 
almost always did, then 
parts of QA’s test plans 
would be invalid. This raised the broader issue of 
how to perform testing in a lean environment. Our 
QA team was building a t
est plan based on specs, 
then testing after code freeze. Waiting until the code 
is frozen to start testing increases the probability of a 
shipment delay as the time between the bug 
introduction and detection increases, which in turn 
increases the time to fix the bug. 
This is more a compressed waterfall than a lean 
or agile model. Our interim solution was to inform 
QA of any changes in the UE or the tech spec. We 
came to an internal agr
eement that if anything 
changed in either the UE or the tech spec, the 
person(s) responsible for the change would notify QA 
in writing by e-mail. Our ultimate solution was 
replace our testing process with integrated “gorilla 
testing,” highly integrated
 with our development 
team. Our QA tester followed the features of each 
developer and tested upon each feature’s completion. 
This integrated testing model served us well as we 
moved into a truly agile process. 
8.2. Pre-Ship Review
The pre-ship review was intended to be a final 
review with the whole team, where we asked 
ourselves if we were really ready to ship. Because the 
pre-ship review came just before shipping, if we 
found a serious problem it w
as too late to do anything 
about it without delaying sh
ipping, and that had its 
own repercussions. We needed to know if we were in 
trouble before the pre-ship review. 
48284830  
8.3. Shipping Delays 
We occasionally delayed shipping to fix an issue 
or finish features. This irregularity caused more 
problems than it solved. For 
example, the team could 
not be fully utilized, as the next iteration planning 
activities had not yet occurred. 
9. Getting Agile 
As we moved toward agile, our team size shrank 
due to budget issues. The smaller team was 
composed of four developers, one user experience 
designer, one half-time QA engineer, and the PI part 
time. The project manager became a role within the 
team, but not a full-tim
e position. A developer 
typically performed PM duties. With our automated 
build and QA processes in place, a half-time QA 
engineer was sufficient for internal testing. 
The agile cycle is made up of four iterations with 
three-week durations, as shown in Figure 5. Four 
iterations is enough to add meaningful functionality 
for space operations, hence that constitutes a release. 
Note that the last iteration of a release focuses on 
bugs, usability, and testing, not feature additions. 
It is important to start the highest priority and 
most difficult features in the first two iterations, as it 
can take multiple iterations to complete features. 
Leaving the hardest features for last increases the 
possibility that they will not be completed by the end 
of the release. For mission control operations, the 
customer conducts a certification of the software for 
operational readiness after we deliver the release. 
Release 
3 Weeks
Iteration 1
Iteration 2
Iteration 3
Iteration 4 Bugs/
Usability/More Testing
6 Weeks
9 Weeks
12 Weeks
Release to Customer
for Mission Control 
Certiﬁcation
Release to Mission 
Control User test
Community
Coding/UE Specs
Issue Tracking Updates/Priorities/Rankings
Build/Internal testing as features roll out
Customer Feature
Veriﬁcation
Release to Mission 
Control User test
Community
Customer Feature
Veriﬁcation
Release to Mission 
Control User test
Community
Customer Feature
Veriﬁcation
Agile Release Into Operations
 
Figure 5. The agile release cycle
Figure 6 shows a close-up of
 an iteration, and the 
relationship of iteration 
n
 to 
n+1
 and 
n-1
. The choice 
of iteration length was driven by several factors. We 
adopted a strict shipment policy, with delays allowed 
only in extreme circumstances such as a product that 
does not work. Any features that are not complete 
simply don’t ship in that iteration [8]. Having a short 
iteration cycle supports this, because features that 
miss one shipment have another chance in only three 
weeks. 
Note that the agile cycle has fewer discrete 
events than the lean model. 
The UE specs, rather than 
being due at the start of an iteration, have due dates 
set by the developers per feature, meaning the 
48294831  
developers tell UE when a spec for a particular 
feature needs to be ready so they can start coding. 
Stack rankings take place as needed, with continuous 
updates to priorities set in ongoing interactions 
between developers, UE, a
nd the customer, with the 
UE and the development teams co-located and mostly 
remote customer participation. 
We replaced testing after code freeze with a 
continuous testing model in which our internal QA 
tests each feature as it rolls out, the customer tests 
features as they roll out using the nightly build, and 
the customer verifies delivered features with each 
iteration. 
Once and sometimes twice per iteration we hold 
a “hackathon,” where a half dozen or more people 
use the product together in our lab. Our product is 
tested against large sets of real customer data, and 
installed on hardware that matches – as closely as 
possible – our target deployment. This tests 
scalability, performance, and concurrency, and 
exposes problems that individual testing did not. In 
addition to the ad hoc scalability tests done during a 
hackathon, a long-duration stress test is conducted on 
a build of the software that passed the hackathon to 
ensure continuous operations under the expected 
load. Each delivery to mission operations must pass 
this test before it is shipped. 
 
User Feedback
3 Weeks Iteration n
Daily iteration n
Build to 
Customer
Test
Feature mods/additions,
bug ﬁxes
Optional Mid-Iteration 
Hackathon tests big
features
Pre-Ship
Hackathon
Priorities/JIRA
Rankings
Nightly Build/Internal testing as features roll out
Coding
Issue Tracking Updates/Priorities/Rankings
UE & Tech Spec dates driven by coding dependencies
Deliver 
to customer
Agile Development Iteration
Code Freeze 
(-3 days)
Feature 
Freeze
(-7 days)
Customer triages 
issues it discovered
Customer 
acceptance test
Customer veriﬁcation 
of closed JIRA issues
Customer 
installs
iteration n-1
Optionally, hot 
patch
Iteration n+1
Start 24 hour test (-2 day)
 
Figure 6. The agile
 iteration cycle 
 
Our customer deliveries have three phases: 
•
 
A nightly build, used by our customer to test 
features as they roll out and provide 
immediate feedback. This process replaced 
the discrete event user testing from the lean 
model. 
•
 
An iteration every three weeks, installed into 
the operations test area, used for testing in 
the mission control environment and for 
feature verification by the customer. 
•
 
A release, ready for operational certification. 
48304832  
10. Conclusion 
Our journey from traditional development to lean 
to agile was driven at each step by the need to 
address issues we were facing. By iteratively refining 
our process over two-years, we achieved our key 
objectives:  
•
 
A close relationship with our customer in 
which both they and we could had open 
continuous visibility into the state of the 
product.  
•
 
An development team
 making maximum use 
of limited resources, focused on the highest 
priority objectives, with minimal 
documentation 
•
 
The capability to measure and verify 
progress relative to a tactical plan and a 
strategic road map 
 
It took multiple iterations of our process over 
two years to achieve relative stability. While we 
continue to make small adjustments, the fundamental 
process appears stable. 
As a team, we found that agile increased the 
satisfaction of both the customers and the developers. 
With agile, we were able to delivery meaningful 
functionality to the customer and get immediate 
feedback; we were able to measure our progress 
daily. Over time, the customer-developer team 
because highly integrated. 
In our experience the cornerstones of agile are 
•
 
The measure of progress is working code 
•
 
Rank issues, always focus on the highest 
priorities 
•
 
Demonstrations, not presentations 
•
 
Customer interaction, instead of extensive 
documentation of requirements 
•
 
Progress always visible – nightly builds, 
regular fully functional deliveries 
•
 
Always ship on time unless the product does 
not work. Features that are not ready go into 
a later delivery 
•
 
Process automation supports the team 
•
 
Verification of function begins with internal 
QA, final verification and issue closure 
comes with customer acceptance 
 
Using agile methods, the team resources are 
focused on the highest priorities; designing and 
building the most important features of the product. 
Agile techniques such as designing and implementing 
only what will be used immediately help eliminate 
unnecessary work. Distractions to development, such 
as documentation and repor
ting, are minimized. We 
have a continuous feedback loop with our customer 
for testing and feature verification. 
Software engineering processes, whether agile, 
lean, or traditional, must be tailored to fit the team 
culture, goals, and the context of work. There is no 
one right way to do it. 
 
 
References 
 
[1]  A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development: The 
Cooperative Game
, Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2006. 
 
[2]  J. Highsmith, 
Agile Software Development 
Ecosystems
, Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing 
Co., Inc., 2002. 
 
[3]  Multidisciplinarity in an Agile, Web 2.0 World. 
Presentation at Ames Research Center by Karel 
Vredenburg, IBM 
 
[4] Agile Manifesto, 
http://agilemanifesto.org
 
 
[5]  
http://www.atlassian.com/software/greenhopper/
 
 
[6]  Scrum.org, 
http://www.scrum.org/
 
 
[7]  “CMMI or Agile: Why Not Embrace Both!, 
http://www.
sei.cmu.edu/library/abstracts/reports/08tn
003.cfm
 
 
[8]  A. Laforge, Google Chrome Release Cycle, 
https://docs.google.com/present/view?id=dg63dpc6_
4d7vkk6ch
 
 
48314833