 Toward an Understanding of Job Satisfaction on Agile Teams: 
Agile Development as Work Redesign 
 
John F. Tripp 
Baylor University 
john_tripp@baylor.edu 
 
Cynthia K. Riemenschneider 
Baylor University 
c_riemenschneider@baylor.edu 
 
 
Abstract
 
Agile methodologists have cl
aimed that a key value 
proposition for the adoption of agile methods is that 
the methods’ practices, processes, and philosophy 
make people more motivated and satisfied with their 
jobs. However, while several studies have found 
evidence for this impact, there has not been extensive 
theoretical support to explain why. In this study, we 
use the lens of Hackman & Oldham’s job 
characteristics model to motivate a theory of 
motivation and satisfaction amongst agile development 
teams. We propose that agile teams are, in fact, 
redesigning work in the very way that Hackman & 
Oldham propose will increase job perceptions, and 
lead to greater job satisfaction. We report the initial 
results of a research-in-progress study. Using a 
quantitative survey of 104 software professionals, we 
test the theory and find preliminary support for our 
model and hypotheses. 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Over the past decade, agile software development 
methods have become extensively used and, according 
to a recent Forrester report, have now been adopted to 
some extent by a majority of companies [24]. The 
proponents of agile methods have made two particular 
claims about the impacts of 
their use. First, they claim 
that the methods produce better software. This claim 
has been researched to a great extent, and support has 
been found as to the impact of some agile practices on 
project success. The second key claim of agile 
practitioners is that people who work on agile teams 
are more motivated and satisfied. Specifically, they 
claim that when agile methods are used, people “want 
to work there” [11]. While initial research has been 
performed on the impacts of particular agile practices 
on motivation [e.g., 13] , research on this claim of agile 
impacts is still in its infancy. 
To explore this issue, we utilize the Job 
Characteristics Model  [JCM; 10] as a lens through 
which to view the impacts of agile software 
development method use on 
individuals’ perceptions 
and attitudes they develop about their jobs. The JCM 
proposes that the characteristics of a job influence a 
person’s perceptions of the job, and their attitudes 
about it. The JCM has been used as a lens to study the 
impact of job design on job satisfaction [e.g., 10],  
turnover intention [e.g., 1], work exhaustion [14] and 
more. While there is substantial empirical support on 
the impacts of job characteristics on job attitudes in 
many IS contexts, far less research has been performed 
on how the design of work in IS teams may impact the 
perceptions of job characteristics. Given that agile 
practitioners have made particular claims about the fact 
that their methods produce th
e by-product of higher job 
satisfaction amongst the team members, it is 
reasonable to assume that the use of the methods may 
impact job perceptions. 
The previous research on motivation and job 
satisfaction on agile teams has been largely executed 
using a case study approach. Tessem & Maurer [21] 
used a case study of a team using the Extreme 
Programming (XP) agile 
method. Their findings 
suggested that the JCM constructs were observable, 
and while some interviewees stated that they were 
satisfied, their data couldn’t support testing this. 
McHugh et al. [13] investigated the impact of the use 
of agile practices on agile team motivation. Using 
Beecham et al.’s [4] factors of IS worker motivation, 
they observed and identified the impact of three 
feedback mechanisms of agile methods – iteration 
planning, daily stand up meeting, and the iteration 
retrospective as being associated with perceptions of 
JCM constructs. The presence of this initial evidence 
warrants further study of our research question: 
 
How does agile method use impact job 
satisfaction? 
 
Broadly, our research objective is to adapt and 
expand the JCM to the context of agile method use. 
Using the JCM as our starting point, we develop a 
model that proposes that the use of agile methods 
impacts job satisfaction, mediated by its impact on job 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science978-1-4799-2504-9/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2014.4943993 perceptions. Further, we propose moderating effects of 
iteration speed and previous experience using non-
agile methods. This model contributes to the previous 
IS literature by focusing on the antecedents of job 
perceptions, and by recognizi
ng that ISD methods are, 
to a great extent, engines of work redesign. Further, 
this model contributes to the literature by providing a 
theoretical lens through which to explain the impacts 
of agile methods on job attitudes. 
 
2. Theoretical Background  
 
2.1. The Job Characteristics Model and Job 
Satisfaction 
Hackman and Oldham’s [10]
 Job Characteristics 
Model (JCM) is one of the most tested theoretical 
models in social science. It defines five job 
characteristic perceptions that impact a person’s 
attitude about their job. Th
ey are: task significance, 
which is defined as the extent to which a person 
believes that their job has impact on the lives of people 
– either society at large or in an organization; task 
identity, which means the extent to which a job’s tasks 
are “whole”, or involve the 
completion of a complete 
and identifiable outcome; skill variety, which is 
defined as the extent to which a job is perceived as 
requiring the use of multiple skills, talents and 
experience; autonomy: the extent to which an 
employee is given discretion as to how to complete the 
work required, and set a schedule for completion; and 
finally, feedback, which is the extent to which the 
process of completing the work provides a person with 
information through which an employee can evaluate 
his performance. 
Perceptions of job characteristics impact affective 
states such as job satisfaction and work exhaustion. 
These are well-tested consequents of job characteristic 
perceptions. Further, str
ong claims by agile proponents 
[e.g., 11], and some initial evidence of impacts [21] 
indicate that these constructs
 may be directly impacted 
by agile method use. Job satisfaction is an affective 
response that is associated with one’s experiences at 
work [23], Work exhaustion is defined as the depletion 
of one’s emotional, mental, and physical resources due 
to work experiences [14]. Work exhaustion has been 
shown to be associated w
ith lower job satisfaction 
[5,18], and higher turnover [14]. 
 
2.2. Job Design Principl
es and their Impact on 
Job Characteristics 
The influential relationship of job characteristics on 
job satisfaction and work exhaustion is well established 
[e.g., 1,2,14,15,18]. Hackma
n & Oldham [10] also 
propose that there are principles
 of work design that , if 
followed, can influence perceptions of job 
characteristics. They argue that by designing work 
according to these principles, job perceptions and 
therefore job attitudes can be improved. The five 
principles are 1) Combining 
Tasks, 2) Forming Natural 
Work Units, 3) Establishing Client Relationships, 4) 
Vertically Loading the Job, and 5) Opening Feedback 
Channels. We present a short explanation of each 
below. 
Combining tasks.
 Hackman & Oldham argue that 
many of the issues with work design emerged as a 
result of the fractionalization of jobs that arose out of 
the principles of “scientific management”. They argue 
that if job tasks are recombined, workers will develop 
and exercise a broader range of skills. In addition, they 
will better understand how their work relates to the 
completion of a “whole” product.  
Software development can, in a certain sense, take 
a work fractionalization approach. By dividing the 
work of software development across teams who focus 
on particular “layers” of the software (database, 
business logic, user interface), the ability to see the 
results of tasks being related to a completed product is 
reduced.  
Forming natural work units
. Hackman & Oldham 
suggest that in a quest for efficiency, work has been 
divided without care for the impact on worker 
satisfaction. This may lead 
to seemingly unrelated and 
unnatural set of tasks that a worker may address in a 
given time period. This leads to lower task identity and 
task significance. 
Hackman & Oldham argue that by creating natural 
work units, employees develop an “ownership” 
response. Rather than identifying their work as “data 
access layer coding”, programmers in the above 
example should being to identify their work as “data 
access layer coding for the XYZ module”. Developing 
this ownership mentality can increase the perceived 
meaningfulness and perceived value of the work. As 
such, forming natural work units is expected to 
increase task significance and task identity. 
Establishing client relationships
. When work is 
fractured and specialized, many workers do not have 
contact with the actual client for whom the work is 
completed. If employees lack
 direct contact with the 
customer, feedback is filtered through others, and 
employees lose a key source of information through 
which they can understand the impacts of their work, 
which reduces task significance.
 Further, direct client 
feedback is likely to provide the clearest information 
through which an employee can evaluate the quality of 
their work. 
Besides the impact of 
direct communication on 
feedback, Hackman & Oldham argue that skill variety 
3994 and autonomy also increase due to establishing client 
relationships.  
In the traditional software development context, the 
potential division between the 
“analyst”, “architect”, 
“coder” and the “tester” often creates several layers of 
hierarchy between an employee and the actual client.  
Vertical loading
. Hackman et al. [9]  consider this 
to be potentially the most crucial job design principle. 
Due to specialization, jobs 
responsibilities have been 
split between the doing and the planning and 
controlling of the work. This creates a gap between 
these components of the job. By vertically loading the 
job, Hackman and his co-authors propose to reduce the 
distance between the doing and the planning and 
controlling of a given piece of work. “When a job is 
vertically loaded, responsibilities and controls that 
formerly were reserved for higher levels of 
management are added to the job.” [10:64] 
In a traditional software 
development environment, 
decisions regarding the design and implementation of 
the system may be made by one group of employees, 
while the “doing” of the implementation may be 
completed by another set of employees, indicating a 
lack of vertical loading.  
Finally, by 
opening feedback channels, 
employees 
are able to obtain additional information relevant to the 
planning, doing, and results of their work. As 
feedback
 
is one of the JCM constructs, providing additional 
opportunities and avenues through which to obtain 
feedback should increase this perception. While 
establishing client relationships provides a source of 
client-supplied information, additional opportunities 
for feedback can be designed into the work itself. By 
adding the task of quality control to an employee’s job 
of making a product or delivering a service, the 
employee can obtain direct
 feedback about their 
performance. Further, automated procedures can check 
the quality of a product, and provide feedback directly 
to the individual who created it. 
The remainder of our study is based on the 
proposition that the philosophy and the widely used 
practices of agile methods address each of the job 
design principles presented above and, because of this, 
impacts job characteristic perceptions and attitudes 
such as job satisfaction and work exhaustion.  
 
2.3. Agile Methods As Job Redesign 
Agile methods prescribe a wide range of practices. 
In this study we focus on those most widely used and 
those where research has shown a potential impact on 
job perceptions. According to source data provided by 
VersionOne from the State of Agile Survey (2011), the 
eleven most used agile practices (in rank order) are: 
 
1.
 
Daily Stand Up Meeting 
2.
 
Iteration Planning 
3.
 
Unit Testing 
4.
 
Retrospectives 
5.
 
Burndown 
6.
 
Release Planning  
7.
 
Velocity 
8.
 
Automated Builds 
9.
 
Continuous Integration 
10.
 
Coding Standards 
11.
 
Refactoring 
As the level of reported use drop significantly after 
these initial 11 practices, we focus primarily on these 
practices. In addition to these top 11 practices, we will 
consider the use of pair programming (rank order 16) 
due to evidence from the literature [e.g., 21] that 
suggests an impact on job characteristic perceptions. 
Further, due to the similarity and interrelatedness of 
release planning, iteration planning, and velocity, we 
combine these practices into the concept of “work 
planning” Definitions of each of these practices, as 
well as mappings to job desi
gn principles are provided 
in Table 1. 
Daily Stand Up Meeting
: The daily stand up 
meeting helps to both establish client relationships, and 
to open feedback channels. The team as a whole 
performs this practice each day. Each member of the 
team attends, and provides information to the team 
regarding the work performed the previous day, the 
work planned for the day, and any blocking or 
coordination issues he or she has encountered [19]. 
Agile methods also prescribe that, when possible, the 
business owner should attend this meeting daily. 
Several job design principles are in play during the 
daily stand up meeting. By
 providing the opportunity 
for direct discussion of the cu
rrent status of the project, 
each team member is able to 
directly interact with the 
customer, and with each other. Questions can be asked 
of the customer, establishing client relationships. 
Further, team members can 
bring up issues that may 
have been created due to the work previously 
performed by another team member. In this manner, 
feedback channels are opened, allowing team members 
to better judge the quality of their previous work.  
Work Planning
. Release planning, Iteration 
planning, and Velocity are congruent with three of the 
job design principles as not
ed in Table 1. Release 
planning defines at a high level the order in which 
features will be deployed. Iteration planning is 
performed before each work cycle, as the team and 
customer together define the features included in the 
next cycle, divide the featur
es into tasks, and estimate 
the work to be performed.  
Further, work planning supports establishing client 
relationships by including both the client 
representatives and team members in the planning. 
3995 According to both Scrum and XP, the client is 
responsible for choosing the priorities of tasks to 
include in the release and iteration, while the 
developers are responsible for estimating the work to 
complete those priorities. The team uses its defined 
velocity [3] in order to es
tablish the amount of work 
that can fit into a work cycle.  
 
Table 1: Job Design Princi
ples and Agile Practices
 
Agile Practice 
CT 
FNWU 
ECR 
VL 
OFC 
Daily Standup 
Meeting 
  
X  
X 
Work Planning: 
 Release 
Planning 
 Iteration 
Planning 
 Velocity 
 
X 
X 
X  
Unit Testing 
X   
 
X 
Retrospectives 
   
X 
X 
Burndown 
   
X 
X 
Automated Builds 
X   
X 
X 
Continuous 
Integration 
X   
X 
X 
Coding Standards 
   
X  
Refactoring 
X   
X  
Pair Programming 
X   
X 
X 
CT- Combining Tasks , FNWU – Form Natural Work 
Units, ECR – Establish Customer Relationships, VL – 
Vertical Loading the Job, OFC – Opening Feedback 
Channels 
 
Finally, by including the tasks of planning and 
estimating in the jobs of th
e team members, agile team 
members’ roles are expanded. Planning and estimating 
were often the purview of management or others 
outside the team. The inclusion of these tasks that are 
related to the management of the project vertically load 
agile team members’ jobs. 
Unit Testing.
 Unit testing refers to the process of 
writing a separate suite of code that is not part of the 
system that is designed to exercise and test system 
code [12]. This practice both combines tasks, and 
opens feedback channels. 
Initial unit testing of software has always been a 
task that developers completed. However, most 
developers did not write persistent code suites to test 
software systems. With the emergence of unit testing 
frameworks, teams now write unit tests that are 
preserved for use by all members of the team. These 
tests combine tasks in two ways. First, the code is an 
example of documentation in practice, as the tests 
themselves provide guidance as to the functionality of 
the system. Further, these te
sts can be run at any time, 
allowing a developer to test the consequences of a code 
change across the entire system. In this way, unit tests 
combine tasks previously performed by the business 
analyst role and the tester role. 
Further, feedback channels are opened due to the 
immediate information that is provided to a developer 
via a failed test. Many development teams require 
coders to run the full suite of tests before committing 
code changes to the team repository. By running all of 
the tests until they pass, developers can receive 
information that allows them to immediately validate 
the quality of the code they have written. 
Retrospectives.
 Retrospective meetings occur at the 
end of a work cycle. This meeting is specifically 
intended to allow the team to reflect on the work 
process used in the previous iteration, and give the 
team an opportunity to propose and adopt 
modifications to the process in the next work cycle. 
This process allows the team to be self-directed, and 
vertically loads the team with the responsibility of 
defining its own development process. Further, it 
provides a feedback channel to evaluate the quality of 
work for the entire team. 
Burndown
. The burndown chart provides a 
graphical representation that
 compares the amount of 
work planned at a given point in a work cycle with the 
amount of work actually completed [20]. Providing 
this information to the 
entire team, rather than 
restricting it to a project manager, allows the team to 
take action to ensure that the project does not fall 
behind. By opening this feedback channel to the team, 
the team is empowered and 
their jobs are vertically 
loaded. 
Automated Builds and Continuous Integration
. 
Each of these practices comb
ine tasks, vertically load, 
and open feedback channels. Automated builds refer to 
the process of creating scripts to generate a complete 
and deployable build [12]. This process can be 
executed as needed by the team, and reduces the need 
for a dedicated configuration manager role or team, 
and places the responsibility for ensuring that the 
packages are complete and deployable onto the agile 
team. 
Continuous integration refers to the process of 
systematically and regularly both building and 
deploying the code to a test server [7]. This process 
opens a feedback channel that allows the team to 
determine if a change has been completed incorrectly. 
It provides feedback above and beyond the process of 
automated builds, as it ensures not only that the code 
runs on a developer’s machine, but that all of the 
configuration changes necessary have been committed 
to the code repository.  
3996 Coding Standards
. Coding standards refers to the 
group’s established norms as to code-naming and 
consistency [3]. This practice vertically loads the job of 
an agile team member, as it is an established set of 
rules by which the team will develop software. These 
standards are not imposed on the team, but rather are a 
form of self-management. Further, each member of the 
team is empowered to suggest
 changes to the standards 
either at a retrospective, or during a work cycle. 
Refactoring
. Refactoring refers to any number of 
practices that lead to the removal of redundancy, 
elimination of unused functionality, and refresh 
obsolete designs [8]. The pr
actice of refactoring both 
combines tasks and vertically loads. Refactoring refers 
to the commitment of the team to improve the structure 
and reduce the complexity of the code whenever 
necessary.   
Importantly, refactoring is performed by the entire 
team, whenever necessary, rather than by a particular 
group, or in a process requiri
ng architectural oversight.  
Pair Programming
. Pair programming refers to the 
practice of two developers wo
rking together to develop 
a portion of code [6]. Pair programming combines 
tasks, vertically loads the job, and opens feedback 
channels.  
When pair programming, it is assumed that the pair 
work together to first design the software, and then 
build it. In some cases, writing the tests is considered a 
light implementation of a de
sign specification. In these 
cases, some advocate that the first programmer write 
the tests for the code, while the second provides 
feedback. When programming the actual system code, 
the pair reverses roles. Assigning authority for design, 
development, and testing to the pair combines tasks, 
and vertically loads.  
In addition, the act of working in pairs allows for 
mistakes to be identified in the act of coding. When the 
observing coder notices a mistake in progress, 
immediate feedback can be given to correct it. Further, 
as pairs are intended to be fluid structures, recombining 
regularly, feedback channels are opened across the 
team to ensure that coding standards are being 
implemented consistently across the team. 
In this section of the paper, we described Hackman 
& Oldham’s job characteris
tics model and job design 
principles. Further, we illustrated the numerous ways 
in which agile methods’ practices implement the job 
design principled. In the next section of the paper we 
present our research model and hypotheses. 
3. Hypothesis Development 
Our research model is presented in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1: Research Model 
 
 
Our research model builds on previous research. 
Our first hypothesis is well tested in the literature [e.g., 
1,15]. As our research model is incremental in nature, 
we include this hypothesis as part of the established 
nomological network. Each of
 the construct definitions 
is included in Table 2. 
H1. Higher perceptions of job characteristics are 
positively related to job satisfaction. 
As described in the previous section of the paper, 
the use of the agile practices is highly congruent with 
the job design principles
 proposed by Hackman & 
Oldham. Because the use of the job design principles is 
posited to increase the positive perceptions of work 
characteristics, we propose: 
H2: The level of agile method use will positively 
impact job characteristic perceptions. 
Additionally, we propose direct effects of agile use 
on the outcome variables. 
Agile methodologists report 
and some research has supported that agile teams have 
higher engagement with the client, higher developer 
motivation, and deliver software of higher quality and 
with shorter project timelines. Because agile teams 
experience higher project success rates 
H3: The extent of agile use will positively impact 
job satisfaction. 
In the next section we present a research-in-
progress study that tests the hypotheses noted above. 
 
4. Methodology 
 
In order to test this preliminary model, we collected 
survey data in June 2013, consisting of 104 
respondents who were software development 
professionals. We utilized the Empanel, Inc. software 
developer panel to obtain our respondents. 
Respondents were screened to ensure that they were 
part of a software development team, and played a 
non-management, non-customer role on the team. 
Further, we screened for developers with more than 1 
year of total experience, and 
at least six months at their 
current organization. 
In order to assure quality responses, we positioned 
“quality assurance (QA)” questions such as “if you are 
still paying attention, sel
ect ‘strongly disagree’” at 
several points in the survey. If these QA questions 
were not properly answered, the respondent was 
removed from the sample. Fi
nally, as the questionnaire 
was long, and to provide additional assurance that 
3997 respondents were paying attention, we dropped any 
respondents who completed the questionnaire in less 
than 10 minutes. 
Table 2: Construct Definitions
 
Construct Name 
Definition 
Outcome Variables: 
Job Satisfaction The extent of positive 
emotional response to the job 
resulting from an employee’s 
appraisal of the job as fulfilling 
or congruent with the 
individual’s values. (Morris & 
Venkatesh 2010) 
Perceptions of Job Characteristics: 
Skill Variety The extent to which a job 
requires the use of different 
talents. (Hackman & Oldham 
1980; Morris & Venkatesh 
2012) 
Task Identity The extent to which a job 
involves completing a whole 
identifiable outcome. 
(Hackman & Oldham 1980; 
Morris & Venkatesh 2012) 
Task 
Significance 
The extent to which a job has 
impact on the lives of people in 
an organization or society in 
general. (Hackman & Oldham 
1980; Morris & Venkatesh 
2012) 
Autonomy The extent to which a job 
provides the employee with 
discretion to choose how the 
work is done and to set the 
schedule for completing the 
work activities. (Hackman & 
Oldham 1980; Morris & 
Venkatesh 2012) 
Feedback The extent to which carrying 
out the work activities provides 
the employee with clear 
information about his or her 
performance. (Hackman & 
Oldham 1980; Morris & 
Venkatesh 2012) 
Independent Variable 
Use of Agile 
Practices 
The extent to which the 
respondent’s team utilizes the 
12 practices defined in this 
study. 
362 respondents began the survey. Of these, 159 
were screened out due to the initial screen questions 
regarding team role and tenure. 125 more were 
disqualified based upon the quality assurance tests 
described above. The remaining 104 respondents 
completed the entire questionnaire. Respondents who 
completed the entire survey were compensated by 
Empanel with points redeemable for cash, merchandise 
or services. A breakdown of the sample is presented in 
Table 3. 
Table 3. Sample Breakdown 
Team Role 
N 
Avg. Dev. 
Exp. 
Avg. Org. 
Tenure 
Team Lead 27 8.35 6.22 
Architect 6 12.25 11.05 
Developer 57 8.47 6.11 
PM/Scrum 
Master 
6 9.93 9.30 
QA/Testing 5 5.98 9.28 
Business 
Analyst 
3 4.4 5.9 
 
 We adapted some scales from previous research: 
job satisfaction and job characteristics were measured 
using scales slightly m
odified from the Hackman & 
Oldham scales as used by Morris and Venkatesh [15].  
To measure agile method use, we developed a new 
set of items. Practitioners may use similar terms to 
describe their practices in use, even as those practices 
are not executed in the same manner. Because of this, 
we attempted to develop scales that reflected practices 
as described by the agile lite
rature [e.g., 3,19]. In order 
to develop this scale, one of the authors used agile 
development publications and the input of an external 
agile researcher, and an agile practitioner to develop an 
initial set of items for each of the 12 agile practices of 
interest. Once these items were developed, a sorting 
exercise was performed using two additional agile 
practitioners. Initial agreement on the scales was 
approximately 60%. The items that did not perform 
well were discussed with the practitioners who did the 
sort. Based upon this discussion, the items were 
modified or replaced, and 
a second round of sorting 
was performed using three a
dditional agile developers. 
The agreement in this sorting exercise was over 85%. 
These items were used for the study. Representative 
sample questions from the questionnaire are shown in 
Appendix B. 
Further we measured negative affectivity as a 
control [14]. Negative affectivity is a state factor; 
individuals who measure high in negative affectivity 
are more likely to experience dissatisfaction with 
themselves and their lives
 than those who measure 
lower [22]. Finally, we control for six demographic 
variables: age, organizational tenure, gender, 
3998 education, organizational tenure and total work 
experience. 
All statistical analysis fo
r this study was performed 
using STATA Version 12. Initially, we performed an 
exploratory factor analysis
 using principal components 
factors for only the items that were developed for the 
agile practices. Because we 
did not expect the factors 
to be orthogonal, we used oblique oblimin rotation. We 
performed item culling (**), and due to the fact that the 
items are new, we retained items that loaded at .6 or 
higher, and had no cross loadings over .4. While we 
developed measures for 12 agile practices, the items 
loaded onto seven factors:
 Coding Standards, Daily 
Standup, Refactoring, Pair 
Programming, Unit Testing, 
Iterative Planning, and Automated Builds. All of the 
factors retained mapped to the initial sorting exercise 
except iterative planning. As indicated in our 
discussion in section three, we grouped release 
planning, iteration planning and velocity into a meta-
category called “work planning”. As such, it is not 
surprising that the constructs were very similar and did 
not discriminate. Iterative pl
anning consists of two of 
the items initially conceptualized as iteration planning, 
and two of the items conceptualized into velocity. The 
remaining items for all agile practices loaded on 
multiple factors or failed to load and were dropped. 
We then performed a full factor analysis using the 
retained agile practices as well as the job 
characteristics model and job satisfaction. When 
performing the full factor analysis, two more agile 
factors (coding standards and unit testing) failed to 
discriminate and were dr
opped. Surprisingly, job 
autonomy also failed to load independently from task 
identity. We propose that this may be due to the 
incongruity between Hackman & Oldham’s concept of 
job autonomy and agile method philosophy. Hackman 
& Oldham propose that job autonomy is the ability to 
act alone without management interference. In 
contrast, agile teams take a strongly team-oriented 
rather than individually autonomous approach to 
action. Because of this, we
 dropped job autonomy from 
the analysis.  The final EFA factor loading along with 
the Cronbach’s alpha for each construct is presented in 
Appendix A.  Each of the Cronbach’s alphas was 
greater than the recommended .70. 
Finally, we performed a confirmatory factor 
analysis on the retained measurement model. The CFA 
indicated an acceptable fit 
(CFI = .933, RMSEA=.056, 
SRMR=.064). 
We assessed common method variance by using 
Harman’s single-factor test 
[16], finding that the first 
factor did not account for a 
majority of the explained 
variance explained (only 32% of the 84% explained). 
Based on this, common method variance was not 
identified. Further, we took several steps to prevent 
common method bias. We used
 different scale headers 
for different constructs, and we grouped items by 
construct so as not to disrupt the instrument’s logical 
flow [16]. 
We tested for variance inflation factors (VIF) of the 
agile factors, and the perceptions of job characteristics 
factors. The highest VIF was 
1.77, indicating that there 
was not an issue with multicollinearity. 
For this preliminary analys
is, we created an index 
for the use of agile methods by averaging the factor 
scores for the five retained agile factors. We also 
created an index for the JCM by averaging the four 
retained JCM factors.  
We performed path regression to test our model 
with results presented in table 4. 
We tested the moderating effect of JCM on AGILE 
using the Sobel-Goodman t
est with bootstrapping [17]. 
This test confirmed the results of the path regression, 
indicating that approximately 19% of the effect of 
AGILE on JOBSAT is mediated by JCM. 
These preliminary results of our study show that 
there is a significant, partially mediated relationship 
between the use of agile methods and job satisfaction. 
 
6. Discussion and Next Steps 
 
We developed an initial model of the impacts of 
agile method use on job satisfaction. We found 
preliminary support for our hypotheses of both the 
direct effect of agile me
thod use and the mediating 
effect of the job characteristics perceptions on job 
satisfaction. These results are summarized in Table 5. 
In a test of 104 software professionals, the model 
explains 39% of the variati
on in job satisfaction, and 
30% of the variation on the perceptions of job 
characteristics. Further, the model supports the partial 
mediation of the impact of agile method use on job 
satisfaction. The model contributes to the agile 
software development and job satisfaction literature by 
providing a theoretical lens through which to view the 
impact of agile method use on job satisfaction, as well 
as to provide evidence of the job design principles 
effect on the perceptions of job characteristics. We 
discuss next steps below. 
One of the next steps in this research project is to 
look more deeply into the relationships between the 
individual agile method constructs and the job 
characteristics constructs. We intend to collect 
approximately 200 additional responses during the 
summer of 2013 in order to perform more robust 
analyses utilizing SEM techniques. Further, we intend 
to investigate several moderation effects in order to 
attempt to establish boundaries for the relevance of the 
theory.  
3999 Table 4: Regression Results 
 
Path I 
Path II 
DV: Job Sat
 
JCM (H1) 
.227** 
 
AGILE (H2) .299*** 
 
Negative Affect. -.253***  
Age .012  
Education .100  
Gender .106  
Ethnicity -.029  
Org Tenure -.068  
Experience -.071  
DV: JCM 
AGILE (H3)  
.446*** 
Negative Affect.  
-.134 
Age  -.092 
Education  -.034 
Gender  .156 
Ethnicity  .071 
Org Tenure  
.091 
Experience  .148 
 
  
N  
104 
104 
F 
(9, 94) = 6.74 (8, 95) = 5.15 
Prob > F 
0.000 0.000 
R
2
 0.3922 0.3027 
**p<.01, ***p<.001 
 
Table 5: Hypothesis Results 
Construct 
Coeff. 
Support? 
H1: JCM 

 JOBSAT(+) 
.227** Yes 
H2: AGILE 

 JCM (+) 
.446*** Yes 
H3: AGILE 

 
JOBSAT(+) 
.299*** Yes 
 
In addition to furthering our knowledge of the 
impact of agile method use on job satisfaction, future 
research could also explore how the use of agile 
methods impacts other relevant job perceptions such as 
perceived work overload and/
or turnover intention.  
Further, the fact that the classic Hackman & 
Oldham construct of Job Au
tonomy did not emerge as 
a discriminant construct in this context is an 
unexpected finding. As posited above, this may be 
potentially due to the heavy team-orientation of agile 
teams. Future research should investigate whether 
constructs such as team autonomy may better reflect 
the perception of agile teams. 
From a practice perspective, the findings also 
provide some initial evidence that may be utilized in 
the field. Whether or not 
an organization chooses to 
implement agile deve
lopment methods, the 
mechanisms of the practices investigated in this study 
may still be applied. Provi
ding teams with greater 
control over the way that they perform work, greater 
transparency regarding the project goals and objectives 
via more frequent feedback from the customer, and 
investing in automated testing can be achieved whether 
an organization uses agile methods or not.  
 
7. Limitations  
 
As with all studies, there are a few limitations of 
this study. The first limitati
on is with regard to the 
generalizability of our findings. The sample drawn for 
this study consisted of IS professionals working in 
various organizations and industries throughout the 
United States and should be fairly generalizable. 
However, there are potential cultural and other 
differences that may make this study less generalizable 
across non-US contexts. 
Further, while we conceptualized this study at the 
individual level, there is some evidence from our 
findings that this concept may be appropriately studied 
at the team level, or with a multi-level model. As we 
do not have multiple respondents from teams, we 
cannot pursue a multi-level analysis with this data.  
However, future research should include multiple 
respondents from the same team. 
 
8. Conclusion  
 
We have described the preliminary findings of an 
exploratory study on the use of agile information 
systems development methods and job satisfaction.  
Using a sample of 104 software development 
professionals surveyed, our study finds evidence of the 
positive impact of agile method use on perceptions of 
job characteristics, and job 
satisfaction. We conclude 
that there are complex relations still to be discovered 
regarding the impact of agile method use on job 
perceptions, and that the use of agile methods has the 
4000 potential to make non-trivial impacts on the well-being 
of software professionals.  
 
9. References  
 
[1] Ahuja, M.K., Chudoba, K.M
., Kacmar, C.J., McKnight, 
D.H., and George, J.F. IT road warriors: Balancing work-
family conflict, job autonomy, 
and work overload to mitigate 
turnover intentions. 
MIS Quarterly 31
, 1 (2007), 1–17. 
[2] Ang, S. and Slaughter, S.A. Work outcomes and job 
design for contract versus pe
rmanent information systems 
professionals on software development teams. 
MIS Quarterly 
25
, 3 (2001), 321–350. 
[3] Beck, K. 
Extreme programming explained: embrace 
change
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2000. 
[4] Beecham, S., Baddoo, N., Hall, T., Robinson, H., and 
Sharp, H. Motivation in Software Engineering: A systematic 
literature review. 
Information and Software Technology 50
, 9 
(2008), 860–878. 
[5] Burke, R.J. and Greenglass, E. A longitudinal study of 
psychological burnout in teachers. 
Human Relations 48
, 2 
(1995), 187–202. 
[6] Cockburn, A. and Williams, L. The costs and benefits of 
pair programming. (2001), 223–248. 
[7] Duvall, P.M., Matyas, S., and Glover, A. 
Continuous 
integration: improving software quality and reducing risk
. 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2007. 
[8] Fowler, M. 
Refactoring. Improving the design of Exiting 
Code
. Addison Wesley Longman, Reading, MA, 1999. 
[9] Hackman, J.R., Brousseau, K.R., and Weiss, J.A. The 
interaction of task design and group performance strategies in 
determining group effectiveness. 
Organizational Behavior 
and Human Performance 16
, 2 (1976), 350–365. 
[10] Hackman, J. and Oldham, G. 
Work Redesign
. Addison 
Wesley, 1980. 
[11] Highsmith, J. 
Agile Software Development Ecosystems
. 
Addison Wesley, Boston, 2002. 
[12] Küster, J., Gschwind, T., and Zimmermann, O. 
Incremental development of 
model transformation chains 
using automated testing. 
Model Driven Engineering 
Languages and Systems
, (2009), 733–747. 
[13] McHugh, O., Conboy, K., and Lang, M. Using agile 
practices to influence motivation within it project teams. 
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 23
, 2 (2011), 
85–110. 
[14] Moore, J.E. One road to turnover: An examination of 
work exhaustion in technology professionals. 
Management 
Information Systems Quarterly 24
, 1 (2000), 141–168. 
[15] Morris, M.G. and Venkatesh, V. Job characteristics and 
job satisfaction: Understanding the role of enterprise resource 
planning system implementation. 
MIS Quarterly 34
, 1 
(2010), 143. 
[16] Podsakoff, P.M., MacKen
zie, S.B., Lee, J.Y., and 
Podsakoff, N.P. Common method biases in behavioral 
research: A critical review of the literature and recommended 
remedies. 
Journal of Applied Psychology 88
, 5 (2003), 879. 
[17] Preacher, K.J. and Hayes, A.F. Asymptotic and 
resampling strategies for assessi
ng and comparing indirect 
effects in multiple mediator models. 
Behavior Research 
Methods 40
, 3, 879–891. 
[18] Rutner, P.S., Hardgrave, B.C., and McKnight, D.H. 
Emotional dissonance and the information technology 
professional. 
MIS Quarterly 32
, 3 (2008), 635–652. 
[19] Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. 
Agile software 
development with Scrum
. Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 2002. 
[20] Sutherland, J. Agile can scale: Inventing and reinventing 
scrum in five companies. 
Cutter IT Journal 14
, 12 (2001), 5–
11. 
[21] Tessem, B. and M
aurer, F. Job satisfaction and 
motivation in a large agile team. In 
Agile Processes in 
Software Engineering and Extreme Programming
. Springer, 
2007, 54–61. 
[22] Watson, D. and Clark, L.A. Negative affectivity: the 
disposition to experience aversive emotional states. 
Psychological bulletin 96
, 3 (1984), 465. 
[23] Weiss, H.M. and Cropanzano, R. Affective Events 
Theory: A theoretical discussion of the structure, causes and 
consequences of affective experiences at work. (1996). 
[24] West, D., Grant, T., Gerush, M., and D’Silva, D. Agile 
development: Mainstream adoption has changed agility. 
Forrester Research
, (2010). 
 
  
4001 Appendix A. Factor Loading Table 
 
 
PAIR 
STAND-
UP 
REFAC 
ITER 
PLAN 
AUTO 
BUILD 
FEED- 
BACK 
TASK 
SIG 
TASK 
ID 
SKILL 
VAR 
JOB 
SAT 
Pair1 0.8120 
0.3017 
        
Pair2 0.8173 
         
Pair3 0.7993 
         
StandUp1 
 
0.8609 
        
StandUp2 
 
0.8328 
        
StandUp3 
 
0.8634 
        
Refac1 
  
0.7374 
 
      
Refac2 
  
0.8171 
       
Refac3 
  
0.7902 
       
IterPlan1 
   
0.7480 
      
IterPlan2 
   
0.7178 
      
IterPlan3 
   
0.6800 
      
AutoBuild1 
0.3435 
   
0.7423 
     
AutoBuild2 
    
0.8043 
     
AutoBuild3 
    
0.8511 
     
Feedback1 
     
0.7613 
    
Feedback2 
     
0.7615 
    
Feedback3 
     
0.7533 
    
TaskSig1 
      
0.7147 
   
TaskSig2 
      
0.8734 
   
TaskSig3 
      
0.6951 
   
TaskID1 
       
0.8896 
  
TaskID2 
       
0.8754 
  
TaskID3 
       
0.8064 
  
Skillvar1 
        
0.8102 
 
Skillvar2 
        
0.8377 
 
Skillvar3 
    
.3041 
   
0.6471 
 
JobSat1 
         
0.8421 
JobSat2 
         
0.8495 
JobSat3 
         
0.7656 
 
Cronbach’s 
Alpha 
0.8552 0.9086 0.8344 0.7963 0.8161 
0.8115 0.7623 0.8950 0.7741 0.8830 
Exploratory factor analysis results, oblique oblim
in rotation. Cross loadings over .3 included. 
 
Appendix B. Sample Agile Method Use Questions 
Agile Method Use  
(7-point scale anchored at (1) 
Strongly Disagree, (4) C
ould Agree or Disagree,
 (7) Strongly Agree) 
 
Agile Method Use: Daily Stand Up   
1.
 
The team has a short meeting every day to
 discuss what is going on with the project. 
 
Agile Method Use: Pair Programming   
1.
 
Our code is created by two people work
ing together at a single computer. 
 
Agile Method Use: Refactoring   

 
Whenever we see the need, we improve the design of the code we have written previously.

4002