 Experiences of Using Pair Programming in an Agile Project 
Jari Vanhanen 
Helsinki University of Technology, SoberIT 
jari.vanhanen@tkk.fi
Harri Korpi 
Helsinki University of Technology, SoberIT 
hhkorpi@cc.hut.fi
Abstract 
The interest in pair programming (PP) has in-
creased recently, e.g. by the popularization of agile 
software development. However, many practicalities of 
PP are poorly understood. We present experiences of 
using PP extensively in an industrial project. The fact 
that the team had a limited number of high-end work-
stations forced it in a positive way to quick deployment 
and rigorous use of PP. The developers liked PP and 
learned it easily. Initially, the pairs were not rotated 
frequently but adopting daily, random rotation im-
proved the situation. Frequent rotation seemed to im-
prove knowledge transfer. The driver/navigator roles 
were switched seldom, but still the partners communi-
cated actively. The navigator rarely spotted defects 
during coding, but the released code contained almost 
no defects. Test-driven development and design in 
pairs possibly decreased defects. The developers con-
sidered that PP improved quality and knowledge trans-
fer, and was better suited for complex tasks than for 
easy tasks. 
1.Introduction 
In pair programming (PP) two persons design, code 
and test software together at one computer. The driver 
controls the keyboard and the navigator observes the 
driver™s work and thinks at a more strategic level. The 
persons should communicate actively and switch the 
roles periodically. [1] 
PP seems to produce better designs with fewer de-
fects in the code, in shorter elapsed time and more en-
joyably than solo programming, and it also seems to 
benefit teamwork, knowledge transfer and learning [2, 
3, 4, 5]. It seems that PP requires somewhat more de-
velopment effort [2, 3, 4, 6, 7]. PP can be very intense 
and mentally exhaustive [1]. 
Anecdotes of developing software together dating 
back to the 1950s are reported in [1]. The first two ex-
periments studying a similar practice calling it mere 
collaboration [8] or collaborative programming [3] 
were reported in the 1990s. Being one of the manda-
tory practices in the popular Extreme Programming 
(XP) software development approach [9] has made PP 
better known lately. XP™s characterization of PP is 
similar to [1], but XP requires using it for all produc-
tion code. However, PP can be used in a less disci-
plined way and in any development approach. Accord-
ing to a global survey PP was used in 35% of develop-
ment projects [10] indicating a high interest in PP even 
though the research on PP is still inconclusive [11]. 
A PP research framework [11] proposes several 
context variables affecting the outcome of PP: educa-
tion, experience and personality of developers, roles, 
communication, switching partners, type of develop-
ment activity and task, development process and tools, 
and workspace facilities. Organizations adopting PP 
often have the possibility to control many of these vari-
ables, but they seem to understand poorly what would 
be a good context for PP. The difficulty can be seen in 
the practical questions we have faced when observing 
the adoption of PP in non-XP, i
ndustrial contexts: 
-Which tasks are performed using PP? 
-– and which activities of the tasks (analysis, 
design, code, test)? 
-Who proposes the use of PP for a task and when? 
-managers, developers or both? 
-Who pairs with whom considering e.g. compe-
tencies, experience and personalities? 
-How long does the same pair work together? 
-If a pair does not do a whole task together: 
-How much do they work together? 
-Do they work separately with the same task? 
-How do they synchronize after separation?  
-How do they communicate during separation? 
-What kind of infrastructure is good for PP? 
-How does one behave during a PP session? 
-How often are the roles switched? 
XP gives some extreme answers, e.g., everyone 
should use PP for all development tasks from the start 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20071©1530-1605/07 $20.00     2007 IEEE to the end. The guidelines and examples in [1] also 
mostly assume using PP in the XP way. However, as 
discussed in Section 2.1, it seems than even XP pro-
jects seldom apply such an extreme approach and 
therefore the answers from XP are not enough. 
Generally, the answers are likely to depend on the 
goals set for the use of PP, e.g. ensuring high quality 
vs. mentoring a novice, and on the fixed context vari-
ables, e.g. the characteristics of the developers. Differ-
ent answers lead to different flavors of PP. 
Having better guidelines for answering this kind of 
questions especially in non-XP projects would be valu-
able. Detailed case studies about using different flavors 
of PP in different contexts would allow researchers and 
practitioners to gradually increase their understanding 
and create better guidelines. This paper attempts to 
provide detailed insights into applying PP in a small, 
agile team. We also report some data that has not usu-
ally been reported, such as the amount of knowledge 
transfer within the team and the amounts of time spent 
together by the different pairs. 
The paper is structured as follows. Chapter 2 pre-
sents experiences of the practicalities of PP from litera-
ture. Chapter 3 describes the research methodology of 
our case study. Chapter 4 introduces the context of the 
case study. Chapters 5 and 6 present and discuss the 
results from the case study related to the practicalities 
and effects of PP. Chapter 7 concludes the paper. 
2.Related work 
In this chapter we present and discuss experiences 
from literature related to the areas we discuss in our 
case study, i.e. adopting PP, pair formation and PP 
sessions. We searched carefully for scientific papers 
from IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital library and the 
INSPEC database using keywords ﬁpair programmingﬂ 
or ﬁcollaborative programmingﬂ also going through the 
reference lists of the found papers. We excluded papers 
discussing PP used by students, because most of them 
discuss novices performing small development tasks, 
i.e. the context for PP is different from that of PP in 
industry. Many papers were about XP projects and in 
some of them PP was discussed only shortly among 
other practices. Probably due to the concise form of 
reporting, most papers discuss only some practicalities 
of PP. The published reports may be biased towards 
more positive experiences, because less successful 
adoptions may be less likely published. 
2.1.Adopting pair programming 
At wotif.com, a three person team first used all XP 
practices except PP. PP was not used because they ex-
pected it to require additional effort which was not in-
cluded in the effort estimates for the project. However, 
the team started to think about adopting PP after they 
faced a critical problem, which might have been 
avoided with PP. Full PP use was still out of question 
due to the expected increase in effort. Even after this 
the developers did not really adopt PP. Only after the 
team coach persuaded the developers into interacting 
and the team lead started holding both partners respon-
sible for code quality did the use of PP improve. The 
team used PP for all design work, but less for pro-
gramming work. A pair met several times a day and the 
author updated the partner and they discussed prob-
lems. It is not explicitly mentioned in the paper, but it 
seems that only one person worked with the task when 
the pair was detached. They programmed together a 
few times per week the reason being that the partner 
had much knowledge about the task or the code was 
very subtle, complex or involved high risk. When the 
author finished a task the partner reviewed the work 
with the author. Code reviews worked well because the 
partner was familiar with the design and code. Devel-
opers enjoyed the flexibility of pairing. [12] 
For a team developing firmware for Intel processors, 
increasing knowledge transfer between too specialized 
developers gave a reason for adopting PP. The team 
ended up using PP for detailed design and initial cod-
ing, but splitting when coding got tedious. They had 
problems in getting PP in frequent use due to the pres-
sure from stringent deadlines. The developers felt it 
would be quicker to work alone in the area of their own 
expertise, i.e. PP could increase effort and lead to miss-
ing a deadline. In order to ensure some use of PP they 
started to require everyone to work one day per week 
with something else than their core expertise. [13] 
In Guidant Corporation PP was added to a quite tra-
ditional development process. Rules for the practicali-
ties of PP were established but the developers were 
allowed to choose between PP and their old way. How-
ever, as a reward of using PP, the code from a pair did 
not require a formal peer review. Five out of nine de-
velopers started using PP immediately and in a couple 
of months the rest of the team agreed to adopt PP after 
seeing the positive results. All tasks were jointly per-
formed by a pair. However, the pair was free to choose 
its own style of working. Some worked very closely 
together, whereas others split up the work , did it sepa-
rately, and then came together to share and review. [14] 
At IBM in a team moving from a waterfall process 
to XP the degree of PP increased from roughly 11% to 
about 50% when PP was given as an alternative to for-
mal inspections. Cultural resistance was mentioned as a 
reason preventing further increase of PP. [15] 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20072 In a ten-person XP team at Sabre the developers 
ended up using PP for about 50% of their time. Most 
developers saw no value in using PP for trivial tasks, 
but all considered it valuable for solving problems and 
overcoming technical difficulties. [15] 
Secure Trading had a nine-person XP team. The de-
velopers spent about 30% of their time with a pair. Af-
ter initial experiences 28% of the developers reported 
they prefer to work alone. About half of the developers 
thought that they could not work with everyone.  [16] 
In an organization the staff agreed with the given 
motivation for using PP but in practice they continued 
coding alone and then reviewed the changes with the 
partner before code check-in. After four months, things 
started to move towards real PP. The developers real-
ized that it was more efficient to sit together all the 
time than to update the partner and review changes. 
The developers™ personal experiences were the key to 
the move to systematic use of PP. [5] 
At FJA Odateam an XP team used PP for difficult 
tasks and for teaching new people, but otherwise they 
tended to work alone. After the workspace was 
changed to an open office and ownership of worksta-
tions was dropped they started to use PP for all 
tasks. [7] 
Aiken [17] presents experiences from three people 
who have used some PP or followed its use. According 
to them the organization™s culture may have a huge 
impact on the success of PP. Reducing any potential 
fears of judgment is important, and the developers™ 
learning styles and personal preferences should be re-
spected. PP creates issues initially and there are de-
creases in productivity when people are adjusting to it. 
The main findings are summarized in 
Table 1
. The 
slow start for adopting PP was mentioned often. One 
reason was the expected increase in effort. Several spe-
cial measures were used for increasing the use of PP. 
Reserving one day per week for PP ensures a certain 
amount of PP. The managers could persuade to its use 
or emphasize that both partners are responsible for the 
quality of a task. Others provided rewards for the use 
of PP in the form of avoiding formal reviews or inspec-
tions. Moving to an open office and dropping the own-
ership of work stations also improved the use of PP. 
Seeing the good results of PP was also a good motiva-
tor. Williams and Kessler [1] also report that most peo-
ple resist transitioning to PP, but almost all who try it 
consider it better than working alone. 
The amount of PP varied a lot between the cases. In 
two papers on XP context, figures of 30% and 50% for 
time spent with a pair were reported. This is much less 
that proposed by XP. In one XP team PP was reported 
to be used for all tasks. 
Table 1. Experiences of adoption 
Topic Experiences 
amount
50% of time (two different cases) [15] 
30% of time [16] 
applica-
tion 
all design and some programming [12] 
detailed design and initial coding [13] 
each task was assigned to a pair, but the degree 
of working together varied [14] 
solving problems and technical difficulties, not 
for trivial tasks [15] 
difficult tasks and teaching, later all tasks [7] 
limiting 
factors 
expected effort increase [12] 
no time for PP due to deadline pressure [13] 
only peer reviews before check-in [5] 
developers cannot work with everyone [16] 
organization™s culture [15, 17]  
2.2.Pair formation 
Two ways for pair formation are described in [1]. 
First, a short, daily meeting where the developers dis-
cuss their plans for the day and the possible problems 
they are having. During the meeting people can volun-
teer as partners to people who they think they can best 
help. If some developers are still without a pair after 
the meeting, a manager can form the most appropriate 
pairs out of them. Alternatively, a task owner can ask 
help from anyone and nobody can say no. The assump-
tion seems to be that everyone works with a partner. 
Pair rotation should be periodic [1]. It often occurs 
very casually the developers themselves knowing the 
optimal partners [1]. It works only if the tasks are bro-
ken into small, half day to one week chunks which are 
assigned to an owner, who can then recruit a partner for 
the task [1]. XP proposes rotation even every couple of 
hours switching at natural breaks in the work [9]. 
Forming pairs in a daily meeting is common [18, 19, 
20]. The daily rotation in a ten-person team made eve-
ryone pair with everyone at least once during a three-
week iteration [20]. In [14] the pairs were formed 
based on the skill-set required and rotated when new 
tasks arrived. 
At Silver Platter Software a six-person XP team ex-
perimented with different attributes of PP. They found 
that rotating pairs very often, e.g. every 90 minutes, 
was most productive. Removing the person who had 
been working longer with the task was most productive. 
Initially most developers felt that switching was too 
frequent but after a few weeks they realized the effects 
on learning and got exited. The experimenters assume 
that the reasons for the surprising results were that 1) 
the developers worked with a ﬁbeginner™s mindﬂ all the 
time and 2) the most important information is usually 
passed during the first hour of pairing. [21] 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20073 Bryant [22] observed 14 one-hour PP sessions. She 
was surprised about the fluidity of pair rotation. Often a 
pair did not finish their task, but re-grouped easily 
when another pairing was more appropriate. Overhear-
ing what other pairs were doing helped to realize when 
more appropriate pairs could be formed.  
Chong [18] also found that the dialogue produced in 
the pairs made other developers aware of what the pairs 
were working with. This allowed a developer to join 
the pair when the pair was caught with a problem he 
could solve easily. Probably as a consequence of this 
the PP sessions were often interrupted when one or 
both persons turned their attention to help others. 
Experiences of pair formation are summarized in 
Table 2
. It seems that usually the pairs are formed 
casually, and in some cases pairs are rotated very fre-
quently. There seemed to be no problems in forming 
and rotating pairs. 
Table 2. Experiences of pair formation 
Topic Experiences 
means 
and 
frequency 
in daily meetings [1, 18, 19, 20] 
change the person who joined the task earlier 
every 1.5 hours [21]  
when new tasks arrive [14] 
overhearing allowed discovering situations when 
another pairing was more appropriate [18, 22] 
There are context-specific benefits and drawbacks 
for different pairings with regard to e.g. skill levels and 
personality. Some pairings do not work even though PP 
works with most partners. Problems may occur, e.g. 
with a person who has excess ego or when pairing a 
novice with an expert having no mentoring attitude. [1] 
PP experts warn about many possibly problematic 
pairings. A novice can slow down and frustrate an ex-
pert who may lower the self-esteem of the former; two 
experts can be inefficient, e.g. when the lack of in-
volvement frustrates the navigator, or when there is 
constant ‚clashing of the minds™; two novices have the 
risk of ‚the blind leading the blind™. [23] 
Jensen [24] reports than in his experiment the most 
troublesome pairings were those in which the partners 
had about the same capability level. On the other hand 
at Sabre large differences in expertise and age caused 
resistance for using PP [15]. 
Table 3. Experiences of pairing 
Topic Experiences 
possibly 
chal-
lenging 
pairings 
similar expertise [23, 24] 
large differences in expertise [15, 23], when the 
expert has no mentoring attitude [1]  
large differences in age [15] 
one of the persons having excess ego [1] 
Experiences of pairings are summarized in 
Table 
3. 
It seems that there may be some issues with several 
pairings, but the experiences are quite limited and to 
some degree contradictory. 
2.3.Pair programming sessions 
According to Williams and Kessler [1] switching 
roles periodically between the driver and navigator is 
very important. It activates a possibly passive navigator 
by letting him write. 
When observing PP in four companies the research-
ers found that the roles were switched mostly when the 
driver slid the keyboard over to the navigator. The 
navigator seldom initiated control of the keyboard. [25] 
In one XP team, switching did not happen. Even the 
frequent intervention by the team coach did not help. 
As a result, the driver™s attention would drift away and 
also the knowledge transfer suffered. [19] 
Bryant [22] observed the degree and type of interac-
tions within different pairs. Pairs formed of more ex-
pert pair programmers (PPers) had 27% fewer interac-
tions than pairs formed from novice PPers. She sug-
gests that expert PPers might be more selective about 
their interactions and may have a better understanding 
of the role and knowledge of themselves and their part-
ner. Bryant noticed that expert PPers spent time resolv-
ing differences in opinion, whereas novice PPers often 
trashed between different strategies, depending on who 
was driving. It seemed that all expert PPers behaved in 
a certain role (driver or navigator) in a similar way to 
each other. Novice PPers also changed their behavior 
when changing the role, but each novice PPer had 
his/her own style of behavior in a role. Therefore, Bry-
ant proposed that novice PPers might learn PP from 
observing how expert PPers work in a PP session. 
Cockburn and Williams report that encouraging the 
developers to think aloud improved the interaction be-
tween the partners [5]. In another case the PP practice 
matured after introducing a team coach, whose task 
according to XP is to take care that the XP team uses 
certain practices [16]. 
In an XP team several developers mentioned that the 
only way to solve communication problems with the 
partner is to show more courage in criticizing the part-
ner™s work and more acceptance of the criticism. Fre-
quent pair rotation is needed for increasing learning 
and the feeling of collective code ownership. [26] 
At FJA Odateam in a PP experiment of about six 
hours, the developers were found to switch roles very 
often, from 6 to 42 times. The pairs formed of more 
experienced developers switched roles more often. [7] 
Experiences of PP sessions are summarized in 
Table 
4. There seemed to be problems with switching the 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20074 roles during a PP session in many cases. Both this and 
the lack of thinking aloud by the driver could lead to 
insufficient interaction between the partners. 
Table 4. Experiences of PP sessions 
Topic Experiences 
role 
switching  
periodic switching is very important [1] 
mostly initiated by the driver [25] 
did not happen and the navigator™s attention 
would drift away [19]  
roles were switched 6-42 times in different 
pairs during a six-hour PP session [7] 
more experienced developers switched roles 
more often [7] 
interaction 
pairs of more expert PPers had 27% fewer 
interactions than pairs of novice PPers [22] 
overseeing needed for making PP work [5, 16]
solving communication problems by showing 
more courage in criticizing the partner™s work 
and more acceptance of the criticism
[26] 
3.Research methodology 
This study was a single case study [27]. The case 
was chosen based on its availability, i.e. a quite rare 
opportunity emerged to closely observe an industrial 
project using pair programming.  
The research questions for the case study were: 
1.How does the team apply PP during the project? 
2.What are the effects of using PP? 
Question 1 covers all the practicalities described in 
Chapter 1 and Question 2 evaluates the effects on qual-
ity, effort, knowledge transfer and work enjoyment.  
We used several data collection methods. These in-
cluded interviewing, inquiries, reporting requirements 
and observation, as shown in 
Table 5
.The first author observed the project from the out-
side, and the second author participated in it as a de-
veloper, who also took responsibility for disciplined 
collection of data from the team. 
The developers tracked effort per task on a paper 
and the second author collected the data at least 
weekly. The customer reported to the team all defects 
he or the end-users found and the second author 
counted them.  
After iterations I1, I2 and I3, each developer per-
formed an evaluation for each module in the system 
with the question ﬁHow good is your knowledge about 
module X?ﬂ (Questionnaires KQ1-KQ3). This data 
allows evaluating knowledge transfer within the team. 
After I4, the first author conducted a semi-structured 
team interview (TI4). It gave insights into the practi-
calities of PP and its effects. After the interview, each 
developer filled out a short questionnaire (IQ4) about 
the perceived effects of PP and how well they liked it. 
After I4, the developers evaluated the difficulty of 
using certain practices on scale of ﬁ1=easyﬂŒ
ﬁ5=difficultﬂ. They also ranked the practices based on 
their effect on quality, knowledge transfer, productivity 
etc. (questionnaire RQ4).  
Table 5. Data collection instruments 
What When How 
effort daily 
individual time reporting, 
collected weekly 
defects daily second author kept count 
knowledge transfer after I1-I3 questionnaire (KQ1-KQ3) 
practicalities of PP after I4 team interview (TI4) 
effects and feelings 
of PP 
after I4 questionnaire (IQ4) 
importance and dif-
ficulty of  practices 
after I4 questionnaire (RQ4) 
The first author analyzed all the data. The qualita-
tive data from Interview TI4 and Questionnaire IQ4 
was grouped and synthesized thematically, and finally 
the correctness of the interpretation of the data and 
missing details were discussed with a developer, who 
was not the second author. 
4.Case study description 
The observed project was carried out in a large tele-
communications company in Finland. The goal of the 
project was to develop an internal reporting system for 
the company using Java technologies. Another goal 
was to pilot agile practices.  
All four developers of the project team were males. 
They had not worked before with each other or in the 
case organization. Their willingness to use agile prac-
tices was ensured when recruiting the developers. The 
developers had 4-10 years of programming experience 
of which 1.5-4.0 years with the technologies used in the 
project. Three developers had not used PP before the 
project and one had used it for about a month. Before 
the project the attitudes of the developers towards PP 
varied from slightly negative to quite positive. 
 In practice all the developers were equal, even 
though one of them acted as a team leader who took 
care of, e.g. arranging the daily meetings. The second 
author was one of the developers and he observed the 
use of agile practices for his master™s thesis.  
The development was done in six consecutive itera-
tions, usually lasting two weeks. They were preceded 
by a two-week pre-project iteration, where the team 
was given lectures about agile development covering 
also PP. In the pre-project iteration, the team decided 
about the process, selected the technologies, and ex-
perimented with both. The process was a collection of 
practices from several agile methodologies. 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20075 The team had a coach who helped in issues related 
to the work practices. In the beginning of the project 
the coach visited the team daily, e.g. by participating in 
the daily meeting. However, the developers themselves 
had the power to decide on the used practices. They 
actually had a reflection meeting after each iteration 
and thus continuously improved the used set of prac-
tices to better meet their needs. 
The developers had an open workspace i.e. they 
shared the same room and had visual contact with each 
other. There were no private workstations available. 
The coach and a person acting in the customer role had 
their own rooms close to the team. 
Each task was usually self-assigned to a pair who 
worked together with it. If a pair separated the partners 
either continued with the task separately or sometimes 
one of them could start another task.  
5.Experiences of pair programming 
5.1.Adopting pair programming 
The pre-project iteration consisted of eight hours of 
PP by each developer during four days. The developers 
considered this was sufficient to start doing PP effi-
ciently. This is quite a short time considering that the 
developers had to learn pair programming and to get 
familiar with each other. Williams and Kessler [1] pro-
pose that it may take even some weeks before a pair 
gets into the flow of PP. 
The developers adopted PP thoroughly from the 
start of the project, which contrasts heavily with the 
adoption problems described in Section 2.1. The team 
had only two high-end workstations and one (later two) 
low-end workstations. This practically forced them to 
use a lot of PP. The developers did not criticize the 
setting, probably because of their approval of experi-
mentation with agile practices, but also because PP was 
soon accepted as a good practice. 
The developers™ opinions on the difficulty of using 
certain practices (Questionnaire RQ4) are shown in 
Table 6
. Everyone considered using PP easy both abso-
lutely and compared to the other evaluated practices. 
Table 6. Difficulty of using certain practices  
Practice Answers 
Pair programming 1, 1, 1, 2 
Test-driven development 2, 2, 2, 3 
Writing unit tests 2, 2, 3, 3 
Working without real requirements 2, 2, 3, 3 
Planning game 3, 3, 4, 5 
Scale: 1=easy Œ 5=difficult
The degree of pair work in each iteration is shown 
inTable 7
. 72% of the programming effort in the pro-
ject and 52% of all effort was done in pairs. The use of 
PP was slightly lower in iterations I2, I5 and I6 because 
refactoring and fine-tuning activities took time away 
from developing new features. These activities were 
considered easier and therefore PP was used less. The 
team size also decreased to only two developers after 
I4. Iterations I1-I4 reflect the normal state of the pro-
ject better and for them the amounts of pair work were 
77% of the programming effort and 66% of all effort.  
The amount of pair work was quite high compared 
to the experiences discussed in Section 2.1. The limited 
number of high-end work stations was certainly an ex-
plaining factor and can be considered as a good tactic 
to make developers use PP actively. 
Table 7. Proportion of PP 
 Pre I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 
Persons 4 4 4 4 4 2 2  
Days 4 9 10 10 11 10 17 71 
All effort 
129h233h235h264h 274h 147h 222h 1505h
N/A 135h117h159h 140h 42h 37h 628h 
Pair work 
N/A 82%58%73% 57% 28% 16% 52% 
Pro-
gramming
32h 100h127h138h 107h 18h 60h 582h 
32h 91h79h109h 85h 12h 11h 419h 
Pair work 
100%91%63%79% 79% 67% 18% 72% 
Developers considered PP especially useful for 
complex tasks. Similar findings were reported in Sec-
tion 2.1. When doing simple copy and paste coding the 
navigator soon lost his interest in the work. Some 
straightforward tasks were done alone if they were easy 
to split into two parts where the other part could be 
performed at the low-end workstation by the partner. 
5.2.Pair formation 
Pairs were formed in the daily meetings. First the 
formation of pairs was affected by e.g. trying to avoid 
pairing the two most experienced developers, and 
maybe also by the frequent habit of smoking by two of 
the developers. In the first iterations the same two peo-
ple continued to pair the next day if the same task con-
tinued. After I1 the team considered that such an infre-
quent rotation was not sufficient for good 
knowledge 
transfer. Frequent rotation was emphasized more in I2, 
but it still did not happen very often. Therefore, starting 
in I3 the team formed the pairs by casting a lot each 
morning so that the pairs always rotated compared to 
the previous day. If a pair did not finish their task by 
the end of the previous day, one of them continued it 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20076 with a new partner. Regular rotation worked well and 
simplified pair formation, because in a four-person 
team rotating pairs after a task ends requires waiting 
until the other pair also finishes their task. 
Figure 1 shows how much the different pairs worked 
together. In I2 two pairs were not used. In I1 and I3 the 
pairing was more balanced. The distribution is similar 
in I1 and I3 even though in I1 the same pairs could 
continue several days together, whereas in I3 the pairs 
were often rotated on a daily basis. We have not seen 
industrial data from other researchers about this topic. 
01020304050Iteration 1Iteration 2Iteration 3
hours
D1&D2
D1&D3
D1&D4
D2&D3
D2&D4
D3&D4
Figure 1. Working hours of the different pairs 
5.3.Pair programming sessions 
When starting a new task the pair made some speci-
fication work and consulted the customer for the details 
of the task. Then the pair did some design work and 
started programming. Sometimes the opinions on the 
amount of design required before coding differed and 
this could cause disagreement between the partners. 
Communication was continuous with no silent mo-
ments. If a person was already familiar with the prob-
lem he acted as the driver and explained continuously 
what he did. The developers felt it impossible to act as 
the navigator without knowing what the code did. 
PP could last the whole day, interrupted only by 
lunch or other breaks every now and then. The roles 
were switched 2-3 times a day, typically after the lunch 
break or when the driver took a personal break and 
temporarily left the workstation. 
The use of PP got more loose later in the project. 
For example, the developers did not necessarily sit at 
the same workstation all the time when programming. 
Especially when very simple things were programmed 
the partner sometimes went to do other work or took a 
break. Choosing to work alone with simple code has 
been reported also by others [12, 13]. 
5.4.Dependencies with other practices 
The developers considered that PP supported some 
practices and was supported by some other practices. 
The findings were similar to those proposed in XP. 
The developers reported that as a pair they were 
more disciplined in using at least ﬁtest-driven develop-
mentﬂ, ﬁcoding standardﬂ and ﬁintegrate oftenﬂ prac-
tices because the navigator noticed the deviations from 
their use. The navigator also helped decide when it was 
truly appropriate not to use a practice instead of the 
decision being made based on the laziness of the driver 
to follow a practice. 
PP supported also collective code ownership be-
cause at least two persons participated in each task. 
Two persons were also better able to solve problems 
related to writing testable code and designing good unit 
tests. Test-driven development supported PP by in-
creasing communication of ideas between the partners. 
PP increased collective task ownership through in-
creased collective code ownership. This together with 
an information radiator, i.e. post-it notes moved on an 
office wall according to their progress, created a shared 
feeling of achievement when a task was finished.  
The importance of the daily meetings was quite low 
due to knowledge transfer through PP. However, the 
daily meetings were needed for forming the pairs. 
6.Effects of pair programming 
6.1.Quality
The number of defects found from each iteration re-
lease is shown in 
Table 8
. The numbers include defects 
found by the customer in the acceptance testing after 
the iteration and by the end users in production use. 
The very low numbers seem to be reliable, because 
after 1.5 years in active production use only five new 
defects have been found. Over 200 000 items are daily 
updated in the database, a few users generate small 
reports daily, and an operator generates critical reports 
distributed to dozens of managers every other week. 
Table 8. Defects found after development 
Variable I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 
Defects 1 4 3 4 3 2 
Defects/KLOC 0.51.1 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.2
The developers considered that PP improved the 
understandability of design. When the navigator could 
no more understand the written code he forced the 
driver to stop writing. Thus, most code was written so 
that at least two persons were able to understand it. The 
developers also considered that they underst
ood well 
even code that was not familiar to them if the code had 
been written by a pair.  
In Questionnaire IQ4 all developers reported that PP 
lowers the number of defects and the measured defect 
counts also showed a very low value. However, in 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20077 Team Interview (TI4), the developers were somewhat 
uncertain about the role of PP in decreasing the number 
of defects because the navigator did not spot many de-
fects during the programming. It may be that PP pre-
vents the bugs before they are even written and there-
fore the navigator cannot point them out. This could 
happen because the pair brainstorms the design and 
writes unit tests together and thus thinks about the solu-
tion more thoroughly before writing the actual code.  
The developers considered PP as the second most 
important practice after test-driven development for 
increasing the quality of the system and its design. 
The improvements in quality are parallel with the 
results of the experiments made by others [2, 3, 4]. 
6.2.Effort 
The developers considered the effect of PP on the 
development effort to be dependent on the type of task. 
For complex tasks, the use of PP might lower the total 
effort. The number of complex tasks was quite small, 
but they were big tasks requiring about 50% of the total 
project effort. The effort was considered higher for 
simple tasks than when using solo programming. Gen-
erally, PP was considered the most important practice 
affecting the project productivity positively. Others 
have reported that PP increases the development effort 
somewhat [2, 3, 4, 6, 7], but they have discussed this 
aspect in the context of individual tasks or small pro-
jects. 
Productivity as LOC/hour for each iteration is 
shown in 
Table 9
. Productivity was highest in I1 and 
I4. In I2, I5 and I6 the lower productivity is probably 
explained by the focus on refactoring and maintenance. 
A possible explanation for the lower productivity in I3 
compared to I1 and I4 is discussed in the next section. 
Table 9. Productivity 
 Pre I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 
LOC increase 517 2198 14111859 2290 248 7008706
LOC/h 4.0 9.4 6.07.1 8.4 1.7 3.25.8
LOC/progr. h 16.2 21.5 11.213.4 21.3 13.8 11.614.9
6.3.Knowledge transfer 
Each developer evaluated his knowledge of each 
module after iterations 1-3. The number of modules 
increased from 14 to 17 from I1 to I3.  
The average of the evaluations of a module charac-
terizes the team™s knowledge of the module. The aver-
age of these characterizes the team™s overall knowledge 
of the whole system (the first row in 
Table 10
). The 
changes in the team™s overall knowledge between the 
iterations were small. It indicates effective learning 
because the same knowledge was preserved even 
though the system grew and became more complex. 
We assume that the knowledge transfer within the 
team is high if the differences (standard deviation) be-
tween the developers™ knowledge of each module are 
small. The average of the differences from all the mod-
ules characterizes the overall differences (the last row 
inTable 10
) and thus the degree of knowledge transfer. 
The overall differences decreased considerably in I3 
indicating high knowledge transfer. The detailed data 
reveals that most of the decrease in the differences is 
explained by increases in the low values of knowledge 
and only little by decreases in the high values. 
In I3 the higher frequency of rotating pairs made the 
developers work with more modules in I3 but also 
spend less time with each individual module. There-
fore, the frequent rotation probably contributed both to 
the increases in the low values and decreases in the 
high values of knowledge.
 Table 9
 showed much lower 
productivity in I3 than in I4. It may be that the frequent 
rotation first decreased the productivity as the develop-
ers worked more with modules unfamiliar to them and 
spent time learning new things. The benefits of learning 
were probably realized in I4. 
Table 10. Team™s knowledge of the system 
Statistical value I1 I2 I3 
Average of averages of each module 3.82 3.74 3.91
Average of std.deviations of each module 1.04 0.96 0.69
Scale: 0=never heard Œ 5=like my own pockets
On a personal level there were large increases in 
knowledge for developers D1 and D2 in I3 (
Table 11
). 
D3 spent much less time for development than the oth-
ers during I3, which explains his decreased knowledge.   
Table 11. Personal knowledge of the system 
Developer I1 I2 I3 
D1 3.71 3.53 4.12 
D2 3.71 3.65 4.41 
D3 4.00 3.88 3.24 
D4 3.86 3.88 3.88 
Scale: 0=never heard Œ 5=like my own pockets
All developers considered that PP increased their 
knowledge of the system more than solo programming. 
Two developers considered that PP helped them learn 
the development tools better, but the other two found 
no difference in this knowledge transfer aspect. The 
developers ranked PP as the most important practice 
for increasing team communication. The next most 
important practices were the open workspace and daily 
meetings. 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20078 6.4.Work enjoyment  
The developers considered the team spirit very 
good. Some believed that co-location was a sufficient 
factor for this, but some considered PP to be more im-
portant. All agreed that PP promoted the formation of 
good team spirit in the beginning of the project. The 
information radiator and the open workspace were also 
mentioned as contributors to good team spirit. Two of 
the developers liked PP more than solo programming 
and two found no difference. 
7.Discussion and conclusions 
7.1.Lessons learned 
Our findings are discussed below. They increase the 
body of knowledge of PP, help others in industry to 
apply PP, and help the research community to build 
improved guidelines for PP.
 Learning PP took place quickly and developers 
considered its use very easy. Adoption seemed to be 
much easier than reported by other researchers. Having 
a smaller number of high-end workstations than there 
were developers certainly contributed to the quick 
adoption and rigorous use of PP. Surprisingly, the de-
velopers did not criticize the lack of own computers. 
It seems that PP was better suited for difficult tasks. 
The developers avoided its use for trivial tasks if it was 
possible to split the task in two parts, i.e. one for each 
partner. The development effort was considered lower 
for PP than for solo programming with complex tasks 
but for easy tasks the situation was reverse. Similar 
findings have been reported by others [13, 15]. 
Initially pair rotation occurred only after a task was 
finished. In order to improve knowledge transfer the 
team started to actively rotate pairs each morning even 
if their tasks were not finished. The data about the de-
velopers™ knowledge of the modules indicates that this 
change may really have increased the knowledge trans-
fer within the team. However, there was a drop in pro-
ductivity after the change, but the productivity rose 
again in the next iteration. 
The driver/navigator roles were switched only 2-3 
times a day. This may passivize the navigator [1, 19], 
but in our case study the partners maintained active 
communication. The use of PP became slightly more 
relaxed later in the project and the pairs could split up 
when the driver did some easy programming. 
PP and especially the presence of the navigator in-
creased discipline in using many other practices, such 
as test-driven development, coding standard and fre-
quent integration. On the other hand, collaborative task 
ownership, test-driven development and daily meetings 
supported the use of PP. 
The developers considered PP to be a contributing 
factor for the low defect counts in the system. This ef-
fect of PP has been identified also by others [2, 3, 4]. 
However, contrary to the literature, the navigator sel-
dom found defects during the programming, meaning 
that some other aspect of PP, such as designing and 
test-driven development together, probably helped to 
avoid injecting defects. 
The team spirit was very high, at least partially 
thanks to PP. Nobody was against PP and half of the 
developers liked it even more than solo programming.  
7.2.Limitations 
There were some factors that should be considered 
when generalizing the results of this study. All the de-
velopers were recruited based on their interest in using 
agile practices including PP, which can cause a positive 
bias towards the use of PP. The project started from 
scratch regarding the development process and prac-
tices. There was no old way of doing things that could 
have e.g. slowed down the adoption of PP. Because the 
project acted as a pilot for testing new practices, reflec-
tion of the practices and process measurement were 
more disciplined activities than in a typical project. The 
developed system was quite small and simple. 
Much of the data is based on the opinions of the de-
velopers because only some things, such as defects, 
could be measured objectively. The reliability of the 
data was improved by having a researcher participate in 
the project. This gave a detailed insight into the pro-
ject. In addition, the first author interviewed the team, 
did the data analysis and also discussed all results and 
conclusions afterwards with one more developer in 
order to ensure correct interpretation.   
The participating researcher may have affected the 
team. However, he was a developer just as the others, 
who additionally collected experiences of all practices 
used in the project. He did not have a bias towards any 
particular practice, and therefore the effect of his par-
ticipation to the team™s use of PP should be negligible.  
Measuring the knowledge of the system modules by 
asking about it of the developers and analyzing the 
knowledge transfer based on this data contains reliabil-
ity problems. However, it provides at least some in-
dicative data on a topic that is difficult to measure  
Measuring productivity by LOC/hour may be mis-
leading e.g. when doing lots of refactoring or copy and 
paste coding. However, if these kinds of issues are 
taken into account, its use to at least compare the 
changes in productivity between the iterations of the 
same project is justified. 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 20079 7.3.Future Work 
One must be careful when generalizing the findings 
of a single case study to other context. The research 
community needs to do new, detailed case studies and 
also experiment the use of PP in industry in many dif-
ferent contexts in order to provide better guidelines for 
organizations interested in adopting PP.  
8.Acknowledgements 
This study was part of the ITEA-AGILE research 
project. We would like to thank Nokia Technology 
Platforms for making the case project possible, and the 
coach Tuomo Kähkönen, the customer Jari E. Määttä, 
and the development team (Lasse Moisio and Timo 
Tenkanen from Affecto, and Seppo Sahi and Harri 
Korpi from HUT) for their participation in the study. 
References 
[1] L. Williams and R. Kessler, Pair Programming Illumi-
nated, Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
[2] L. Williams, The Collaborative Software Process, Ph.D. 
dissertation, University of Utah, 2000. 
[3] J. Nosek, ﬁThe Case for Collaborative Programmingﬂ, 
Communications of the ACM, 41(3), 1998, pp. 105-108. 
[4] J. Vanhanen and C. Lassenius, Effects of Pair Program-
ming at the Development Team Level: An Experiment, In 
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Empirical 
Software Engineering (ISESE2005), 2005. 
[5] A. Cockburn and L. Williams, The Costs and Benefits of 
Pair Programming, In Extreme programming examined, Ad-
dison-Wesley, 2001, pp. 223-243. 
[6] J. Nawrocki and A. Wojciechowski, Experimental 
Evaluation of Pair Programming, In Proceedings of the 12th 
European Software Control and Metrics Conference, 2001, 
pp. 269-276. 
[7] M. Rostaher and M. Hericko, Tracking Test First Pair 
Programming Œ An Experiment, Extreme Programming and 
Agile Methods - XP/Agile Universe 2002, pp. 174-184. 
[8] J. Wilson, N. Hoskin, and J. Nosek, The Benefits of Col-
laboration for Student Programmers, In Proceedings of the 
24th SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science 
Education, 1993, pp. 160-164. 
[9] K. Beck, Extreme Programming Explained, Addison-
Wesley, 2000. 
[10] M. Cusumano, A. MacCormack, C.F. Kemerer and B. 
Crandall, ﬁSoftware Development Worldwide: The State of 
the Practiceﬂ, IEEE Software, 20(6), 
2003, pp. 28-34. 
[11] H. Gallis, E. Arisholm, and T. Dybå, An Initial Frame-
work for Research on Pair Programming, In Proceedings of 
the International Symposium on Empirical Software Engi-
neering (ISESE2003), 2003. 
[12] G. Luck, Subclassing XP: Breaking its rules the right 
way, In Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference 
(ADC™04), 2004. 
[13] B. Greene, Agile Methods Applied to Embedded Firm-
ware Development, In Proceedings of the Agile Development 
Conference (ADC™04), 2004. 
[14] A. Pandey, N. Kameli and A. Eapen, Application of 
Tightly Coupled Engineering Team for Development of Test 
Automation Software Œ A Real World Experience, In Pro-
ceedings of the 27
th Annual International Computer Software 
and Applications Conference (COMPSAC™03), 2003.  
[15] L. Williams, Extreme Programming Practices: What™s 
on Top?, Agile Project Management, Executive Report, 
12(5), Cutter Consortium, 2004. 
[16] R. Gittins, S. Hope, and I Williams, Qualitative Studies 
of XP in a Medium Sized Business, In Proceedings of the XP 
2001 Conference, 2001. 
[17] J. Aiken, ﬁTechnical and Human Perspectives on Pair 
Programmingﬂ, ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes
29(5), 2004. 
[18] J. Chong, Social Behaviors on XP and non-XP teams: A 
Comparative Study, In Proceedings of the Agile Develop-
ment Conference (ADC™05), 2005. 
[19] A.J. Dick and B. Zarnett, Paired Programming & Per-
sonality Traits, In Proceedings of the XP 2002 Conference, 
2002. 
[20] H. Sharp and H. Robinson, ﬁAn Ethnographic Study of 
XP Practiceﬂ, Empirical Software 
Engineering, 9(1-2), 2004, 
pp. 353-375. 
[21] A. Belshee, Promiscuous Pairing and Beginner™s Mind: 
Embrace Inexperience, In Proceedings of the Agile Devel-
opment Conference (ADC™05), 2005. 
[22] S. Bryant, Double trouble: Mixing qualitative and quan-
titative methods in the study of eXtreme Programmers, In 
Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Symposium on Visual Lan-
guages and Human Centric Computing, 2004, pp. 55-61. 
[23] M. Ally, F. Darroch, and M. Toleman, A Framework for 
Understanding the Factors Influencing Pair Programming 
success, In Proceedings of the XP 2005 Conference, 2005.  
[24] R. Jensen, ﬁA Pair Programming Experienceﬂ, 
CrossTalk, 16(3), 2003, pp. 22-24. 
[25] S. Bryant, P. Romero, and B. du Boulay, Pair program-
ming and the re-appropriation of individual tools for collabo-
rative programming, In Proceedings of the 2005 international 
ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work, 
2005. 
[26] B. Tessem, Experiences in Learning XP Practices: A 
qualitative Study, In Proceedings of the XP 2003 Confer-
ence, 2003. 
[27] R.K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 
2nd ed., Sage Publications, 1994. 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 200710