 The adoption of agile management practices in a traditional project 
environment:  An IT/IS Case Study 
 
Hany Wells  
University of Hertfordshire  
 
H.1.Wells@herts.ac.uk 
   
 
Darren Dalcher  
University of Hertfordshire  
 
D.Dalcher2@herts.ac.uk
    
 
Hedley Smyth  
University College London  
 H.Smyth@ucl.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract
 
   Despite the growing interest in the usage and 
application of Agile Project Management 
Methodologies (PMMs), there is only scant research 
examining how and why organi
sations select agile 
approaches for managing and delivering Information 
Technology /Information System
s (IT/IS) projects. This 
paper reports on the findings of such research 
conducted within the context of a large technology-
focused case organisation. The findings identify 
significant variance between business lines, 
specifically between produc
t development and software 
development functions and their ability to follow agile 
guidelines. Generally across the organisation there 
was limited evidence of tailoring to context, an 
important organisational success factor, yet there was 
a more significant level of tailoring and responsiveness 
to client needs and wishes. Overall, there was a lack of 
clarity about the location 
of the decoupling points 
following the scoping of the project. Recommendations 
therefore require further attention and understanding 
of the implications of new practices employed by 
organisations, not least by senior management and for 
additional research underpinning such discovery.
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
   The aim of this paper is to explore agile as a “project 
management methodology”, or more precisely as a 
method for executing project 
management in practice. 
The first objective is to evaluate how agile project 
management methodologies (agile PMMs) are applied, 
specifically tailored to project
 context, client needs and 
how this is managed in relation to the decoupling point 
between traditional approaches and agility. The second 
objective is to evaluate the degree of success and the 
extent to which barriers exist in adopting agile PMMs. 
The empirical exploration is conducted in a large 
international IT/IS case company using an 
interpretative methodology based upon qualitative 
evidence. 
 
   The paper commences with the literature review 
covering, specifically in the IT/IS context. It then 
addresses the methodological approach and methods 
employed to investigate agile PMMs on an in-depth 
case-based approach. The findings and analysis are 
then reported.  The paper concludes with an overview 
of the main points arising from the research questions 
and several other issues that
 emerge from the analysis.  
The limitations and original contribution to knowledge 
are then addressed and the recommendations for 
research and practice complete the paper.
  
 
 
2. Theoretical Background  
 
   Agile production and service provision stand as a 
concept that exists in its
 own right. In recent years 
agile methodologies have been extensively adopted for 
the delivery of IT/IS project
s. According to Forrester 
Research [1] agile software development processes 
were in use at 14% of North American and European 
enterprises, and another 19% of enterprises were 
interested in their adoption.
 Recent research highlights 
the rationale for agile adoption as: Increasing 
productivity (66%), accelerating time to market (66%), 
reducing costs (48%), and improving quality (43%). 
While these reflect “traditional project criteria, they 
offer organisations a lighter, delivery-focus based on 
the principles of the Agile Manifesto” [2].  
   Agility advocates greater responsiveness to the 
customer and their needs, both in general and through 
customisation. Agile proj
ects thus offer a greater 
customer focus [3]. Being responsive to context and to 
customer demands requires management of the 
response so that it is built into the system in an 
organised fashion. Agility addresses many of the 
detrimental effects of uncertainties induced by system 
effects [4], including the so-called ”bullwhip effect” of 
worsening behaviour induced by upstream disturbances 
[5]. This is particularly the case for projects where the 
uncertainties comprise both known unknowns and 
2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences1530-1605/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/HICSS.2015.5324446 unknown unknowns [6]. Therefore, agility provides a 
semi-structured approach to respond to: 
•
 
Requirements that have not been articulated 
through business development; 
•
 
Emergent requirements over 
the project lifecycle, 
particularly in the earlier stages when less of the 
content is fixed or frozen; 
•
 
Change orders arising from change in the client 
organisation; and, 
•
 
Change orders arising from reflection on the 
project and its content through close supplier 
communication and relationship development. 
   Agile project management methodologies (PMMs) 
were introduced into IT/IS working, especially for 
software development [7]. They offered a good fit as 
IT/IS projects are often developed iteratively through 
multi-loop, multi-level, multi-agent and frequently 
multi-organisational feedback systems [8] [9] [10]. 
Quality and risk management have proved important to 
achieving agile objectives [11] in such environments.  
   Agile approaches provide valuable capacity for 
responding to emergent client requirements [12] and 
for adding service value. This 
is important in a project 
context too, as projects 
have historically been 
conducted with a task rather 
than customer focus [13]. 
As the customer focus has yet to develop from a 
goods- into a service-dominant logic in project sectors, 
agile provides a method for addressing the contextual 
effectiveness of project delivery. Indeed, [14] credits 
‘embracing customer need’ with the boldness of the 
promises of delivering success made by agile 
approaches. 
   A prime criticism of the agility concept is that its 
flexibility leads to an unstructured approach (e.g. [15]). 
This may be a reflection upon implementation, but 
conceptually it is a highly structured, albeit responsive 
approach, especially in the context of uncertain 
situations. It is argued the values behind agile simply 
give project management 
team members scope to do 
what they want and justify it as agile methodology 
[16]. It paradoxically allows them to become more 
focused upon expert tasks rather than benefits delivery, 
hence resulting misperceptions that agile PMMs are 
unstructured. Agile PMMs are unsuited for managing 
projects where criticality, reliability and safety form a 
major concern [17]. In examining how organisations 
select a particular type of PMM for delivery and 
management of projects, 
[18] suggest “that the 
selection and implementation of PMMs is usually 
mandated via strategic organizational directives, and 
that as a result of top-down approach PMMs are 
selected and applied in a type agnostic and context free 
manner”.  
 
   Indeed, [19] state that the conventional PMMs are: 
“traditionally associated with
 organisations that operate 
in software ‘engineering centric’ business domains. 
These view software activities as an engineering 
process, rather than a creative process based on the 
skill of individuals or small teams”. Moreover, 
creativity and problem solving can be easily structured 
through the agile approach to PMMs, offering a 
counter-balance to the focus on structure embedded in 
more traditional approaches. A summary of the 
fundamental differences between traditional and agile 
methodologies is presented in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Traditional Methodologies versus Agile 
Methodologies 
Traditional 
Methodologies 
Agile Methodologies 
Plan-driven prediction Adaptive response to 
emergent change 
Focus on planning the 
future in detail 
Emphasis on adapting 
quickly to changing 
realities 
Teams report on an 
exact planned set of 
actions 
Teams change direction 
when the project changes 
Inflexible division of 
projects into separate 
stages 
Each stage’s tasks emerge 
from the outcome of the 
previous 
Demand early detailed 
definition and 
commitments 
Focus on workable 
functionality required to 
deliver business benefit 
Depend on structure Embrace creativity 
Resist change 
Welcome change 
Slow to respond to 
requirement changes 
Responding immediately to 
requirement changes 
 
   As more organisations endeavour to adopt agile 
PMMs an increased recognition of the implications is 
needed. Yet, very little is cove
red in the literature. It is 
pointed out that the adoption of agile approaches as a 
“bolt-on” to existing systems requires awareness of the 
following factors [20]: 
•
 
Organisations must live with development team 
decisions. 
•
 
Organisational culture supports negotiations. 
•
 
Fewer and more competent people are needed (see 
also [21], [22] and [23]). 
•
 
People must be trustworthy. 
•
 
Rapid communication between team members is 
necessary, often facilitated through co-located 
teams.  
 
4447    Similar factors can be identified in using traditional 
PMMs [24], [25]; however, there is an absence of any 
reliable base data or in-depth empirical evidence, 
positive or negative underpinning such knowledge. To 
begin to address this absence, an evaluation of the 
experience of a single organisation engaged in 
adopting agile PMMs is presented as an extended case 
study. 
   The research questions examined the issues 
concerning the scope of agility found in PMM 
application addressing problems with applying agile 
PMMs for the case organisation: 
•
 
What were the barriers to adopting an agile 
PMM (particularly focusing on systems, 
procedural and attitudinal aspects)?  
•
 
To what extent was there evidence of tailoring 
to context? 
•
 
To what extent was there specific tailoring to 
emergent client needs? 
 
3. Research Methodology  
 
   Selecting an appropriate and suitable research 
perspective concerns beliefs about the physical and 
social reality of the research, alongside criteria for 
constructing knowledge and the methods. There is no 
unified theory of the management of projects [26], 
therefore an examination of agile PMM without a 
theoretical underpinning and within the complex 
business context [27], [28] requires a reasonably open-
ended rather than a project-bounded approach. 
 
   
Whilst positivism remains the most dominant 
methodological approach, its 
claims for independence 
pose problems when addressing socially constructed 
realities. Interpretivism allows for understanding of 
social processes and involves getting inside the world 
of those generating it [29]. From the different 
approaches of symbolic phenomenological, realist and 
hermeneutical interpretivism, the phenomenological 
approach [30], [31] is selected as suited to the 
interactive and reflexive socially constructed complex 
corporate management and PMMs (cf. [32], [33]).  
   
It is explained that prior specification of a construct 
can shape the initial research design, yet employment 
of inductive research methods for evidence collection 
and analysis can be used to build and develop theory 
[34]. Although the literature shows an association 
between PMMs and project performance, there is scant 
research examining the contribution of PMMs to 
performance [35]. Therefore, the initial point of this 
research was exploration of the role of PMM in 
practice through the use of a substantive case study 
(see [36], [37], [38],[39] and cf. [40]). Archive 
searching, company documents, interviews and some 
observation were sourced and a total of 13 interviews 
of
 
key decision-makers were conducted. The 
interviews lasted just over 90 minutes and the roles of 
the interviewees included: Head of tools and 
methodologies (1) Tools and Techniques team (1) 
Senior Agile Advocate (2) Senior IT project manager 
(3), Product Manger (3), Project Manager (3).  The 
interviews provided the primary source of evidence as 
the perceptions of those interviewed informed the 
actions taken in the implementation of agile PMMs.  
   The inductive analysis of the qualitative evidence 
involved breaking it down into small units of 
characteristic elements and structure [41], [31] through 
iterative examination in or
der to identify generalities 
whilst acknowledging context, a process akin to pattern 
coding [31]. A general inductive approach was 
employed for organising and 
analysing content of the 
qualitative data [42].  
 
4. Findings and analysis  
 
   The case organisation is a large telecommunications 
company, with a strong history of using traditional 
PMMs resembling the “Copper” stage-gate model 
approach to product delivery. In restructuring the 
organisation, it was endeavoured to expand the usage 
of agile approaches from the IT/IS department to other 
business units such as product development. In this 
company software systems were the core to the 
business and the majority of business functions were 
reliant upon them for operational support. Due to its 
size each line of business followed a slightly different 
governance and methodology for its project and 
product management. For this technology-intensive 
company the challenge of being able to compete on 
speed to market was achieved through the creation of a 
culture and mind-set ready to respond rapidly to 
change, external needs and technological 
developments. In understanding the issues faced by 
managers in using the stage-gate approach to project 
and product delivery three main limitations were 
highlighted: 1) weak customer engagement resulting in 
poor customer experience, 2) increased bureaucratic 
burdens, 3) too much emphasi
s on up-front estimation. 
The following quotes are exam
ples of responses from 
different interviewees reflecting cultural and 
organisational assumptions. 
 
“We never thought about the customer experience of the 
new products, we just assumed that if you were launching 
a new product and produced thick manuals to support the 
customer, then this should suffice and never used to 
consider the real user experience.” (Product Manager) 
 
4448 “You are asked to estimate an unknown, which is not 
necessarily the fault of the method but the nature of 
software development [and] does not lend itself well 
enough for this. As part of the business culture or the 
method employed you are expected to stick to those 
regardless. If you find that the solution would be harder 
or it is more complex than originally estimated, then it is 
almost seen as a failure.” (Project Manager) 
 
“Being a traditional company, the Waterfall method was 
the main method of use. For this reason our company 
would spend a lot of time capturing requirements in 
terms of upfront work and over-architect rather than 
doing the job.” (Project Manager) 
 
“There are very definite stages, almost monolithic - you 
have a big design section, big development section, 
which leads to inefficiencies. Where you find a 
development problem becomes a design problem that you 
have to go back all the way to those different 
groups...The requirements capture is proved to be 
inadequate in traditional methods.” (Product Manager) 
 
4.1. Barriers to adopt agile PMM 
 
   The introduction of an agile approach to management 
and delivery of projects brought about a cultural 
change as well as a number of questions that needed to 
be answered. Many managers, in particular product 
managers, were not comfortable with the idea that IT 
projects could produce a result in three months. The 
introduction of agile was tentative and problematic 
across all project business activities. As a result of this 
the senior managers chose to investigate whether agile 
methods could be incorporated into the stage-phased 
method.  
 
"Selecting and promoting agile is not a direct reason to 
be more innovative but it is a response to shortcomings 
of traditional methods." (Head of Tools and 
Methodology) 
 
   Transformation from more
 traditional approaches to 
agile can prove to be a difficult journey in practice. 
There was significant variance between the different 
business lines.  Despite the strategic intention to invest 
in agile, product development continued to adhere 
closely to traditional PMMs while the IT/IS business 
lines, covering software development and IT/IS 
projects for internal and external clients, were 
generally more diligent in trying to implement the agile 
PMMs.  
 
“One of the biggest problems with our development team 
is that after having the [Product Requirements], which 
say ‘these are all the things that we will deliver’, we are 
going to design and implement, and three quarters of the 
way through the designer will come back and says that 
they can’t deliver. Actually can’t deliver in the time 
specified, so can you prioritise the features that are more 
of importance and we will try to deliver those important 
features.” (Product Manager) 
 
“For instance initially after the changeover from 
Waterfall to agile, it became apparent that 80% of the 
work we were doing wasn’t going to add any value to the 
user. It had been defined by a manager who was not 
actually a user.” (Project Manager) 
 
   In effect one might say that while IT proved 
amenable and supportive to the agile concept, product 
delivery struggled with th
e implementation of agile 
ideas and would require a more fundamental 
perspective to re-align the asset life with agile delivery 
and management perspective.
 This might also reflect 
the on-going tension between creativity and structure 
as they apply through project management 
methodologies and philosophies [25]. The value of 
agile was questioned predominantly by product 
mangers, as they explained that the organisation’s 
structure and the way in which products were designed 
and developed was a major stumbling block for the full 
implementation of agile methodologies.  
 
“Agile is fine for software development, as opposed to 
product development where it doesn’t work as well. On a 
physical level, changing physical aspects of a product, 
that kind of development doesn’t lend itself to agile.” 
(Product Manager) 
 
“For agile to work effectively there is a need for working 
together, which is more difficult with off-shore teams and 
third party involvement. 
Sometimes customers don’t buy 
into using agile and they don’t get involved as much as 
they need to.” (Project Manager) 
 
   The comments also imply that the value and benefit 
offered by PMMS in increasing effectiveness is 
questioned at project level as opposed to the strategic 
level [35].  
   The task focus observed amongst the project 
managers, coupled with the attitudes of resistance 
show the problems companies face in shifting to a 
customer focus using agile and contributing towards 
the increasingly prevalent se
rvice-dominant logic [43]. 
It also identifies fundamental differences in approaches 
between different parts of the organisation, as shown 
by the following quotes: 
 
“The project delivery is more difficult using [agile 
approaches], with the external customer to push 
contracts and get the fixed price. For this to work there 
is a need for trust between suppliers and customer.” 
(Senior Project Manager) 
 
4449 “There is an issue with regards to managing projects 
with external clients such as government with 
PRINCE2 as a methodology, how does PRINCE2 work 
with agile? This can happen by bringing the customer 
to understand the agile method.” (Project Manager) 
 
   There clearly were substantial barriers to 
implementation across the company despite the fertile 
conditions provided by the overall agile strategy for the 
business.  
 
4.2. Tailoring to Context   
 
   In response to the specific research questions it was 
found that there was: (i) lim
ited tailoring to the general 
context, (ii) a greater level of specific tailoring and 
responsiveness to client needs, and (iii) a lack of clarity 
and therefore, ability to identify where the decoupling 
points were located or could be located to improve 
customer responsiveness.  
   Comprehensive documentation and guidelines for 
plan-driven methods are norma
lly prepared by experts. 
The comprehensive design is typically done with the 
intention that the method be 
tailorable-down
 for less 
complex situations. It is suggested that: “experts 
understand tailoring but unfortunately; less expert and 
less self-confident developers, customers and managers 
tend to see the full-up set of plans, specifications and 
standards as a security blanket” [17]. This does lead to 
the creation of inappropriate tailoring and the 
generation of high volumes of documentation, as 
observed by the interviewees: 
 
“A pointer towards one size does not fit all would be 
good. Recently everyone is encouraged to use PRINCE2 
and project management communities tend to go down 
this route of ‘we will define a methodology and all 
projects will have to be managed using this method’. If 
you take PRINCE2 at its intent which you use as much or 
as little as you see fit then it would not be so bad, but in 
reality the tendency in this document is that most 
managers comply with all the documents for even the 
smallest known quantity project which does not 
necessary need it.” (Product Manager) 
 
”This company is changing from waterfall to agile, we 
are gradually starting to introduce agile, part of the 
difficulty was getting the agreement with users.” (Senior 
IT Project Manager)  
 
   Three points are worth noting here. Firstly, managers 
relate some aspect of problematic project delivery with 
the misalignment between the project type and the 
PMM selected. Managers in this company either in 
product development or in IT argued for selection of an 
appropriate PMM based on project needs and 
characteristics. Secondly, the company was 
encouraging agile as a way forward with the aim to 
replace traditional legacy PMMs. Hence certain 
tailoring was in place as mentioned in the introduction 
in order to embed agile prin
ciples into their phase-gate 
method. Thirdly, at operational level, it was seen that 
this transition was left to the discretion of the product 
or project manager. One product manager interviewed 
showed his presentation made to senior managers, 
demonstrating how he embedded agile principles into 
his product development PMM. Some of the comments 
below reflect the issues: 
 
“I am responsible for implementing change and 
promoting agile throughout our organisation, this is not 
an easy task. There is no reward for being an expert 
agile developer and there is no reward for being an agile 
practitioner, whereas as a PRINCE2 practitioner there 
are recognised incentives.” (Head of Tools and 
Methodologies) 
 
“Selecting agile is not a direct reason to be more 
innovative but it is a response to shortcomings of 
traditional methods.” (Head of Tools and 
Methodologies) 
 
“The reaction on modifying and tailoring gate-phased 
method was ‘over our dead body’, so ultimately we had 
to backtrack; we had to stick with a six stage process and 
incorporate [agile] in the six phase process.” (Product 
Manager) 
 
4.3 Tailoring to Em
ergent Client Needs 
 
   Tailoring to the emergent 
customer or client needs is 
at the heart of agile thinking and a key component of 
agile PMMs. Tailoring projects to client product needs 
resulted in the putting in place several services: an 
ordering process Lead-to-C
ash (L2C) to introduce a 
proposed product to the customer base; and, concept to 
market (C2M) which initiates production and Trouble-
to-Resolve (T2R) thus inducing problem-solving as an 
iterative aspect. However, there is nothing intrinsic to 
these to force decision-makers to be customer focused 
in addressing ordering, entering production and 
refining solutions. An agile focus on the customer was 
overridden by assessing how well the customer has 
experienced L2C and T2R by 
measuring the right-first-
time rate, which cuts across the iterative development 
of project services. In addition the focus was on the 
product and not the organisation of the agile PMM.  
   Whilst product development arguably carries less 
inherent uncertainty compared to the requirements 
capture for IT/IS projects, guidance to follow the agile 
business strategy and employment of agile PMMs was 
4450 largely ignored amongst the Product Managers and in 
the product development business line.  
 
4.4 Locating the Decoupling Points 
 
   In the IT/IS project line the decoupling point is 
guided by SCRUM and XP for IT/IS projects and 
software development respectively. This is guided 
under the project stages and Sprint-like activities. 
There will tend to be a decoupling point following 
scoping the project at th
e front-end, then minor 
decoupling points for elements within each stage and 
Sprint activity. 
   In the product development business line, the ability 
to locate decoupling points was considerably 
constrained by the processes adopted. This applies as 
much to the analysis as for practitioners on the ground. 
When the company developed new products one 
initiative was agile hot-housing, aimed at introducing 
agile elements to the trad
itional PMM approach. Agile 
hot-housing was set up where two competitive teams 
continually worked in parallel 
for three days in order to 
create a feasible solution a
nd the team with the best 
solution won the project. This occurred once the scope 
was established, hence after the decoupling point. It 
substituted some degree of iteration previously applied 
for parallel working. It has the advantage of 
accelerating work and echoes traditional PMM 
procedures of keeping plan-driven linear development. 
It follows agile intent if the teams are working to a 
detailed understanding of the customer base and end-
users, which was not necessarily the case, as the 
subsequent analysis demons
trates. Hot-housing has the 
effect of freezing or reducing the ability to 
subsequently respond to better team understanding of 
emergent customer needs. The commencement of hot-
housing tended to become the decoupling point and 
rigidities were formed by its end. 
   In addition, the L2C and T2R protocols were not 
structured to adhere to any decoupling points or, when 
a project element finally needed to be fixed, to place 
orders. L2C could also be used to freeze content to 
instigate orders. 
   In principle, product managers could have re-
introduced iterative development subsequently. The 
agile PMM was perceived as difficult to govern by 
most product managers. Product managers adhered 
rigidly to stage-gate deci
sion-making, restricting 
iterative development between stage-gates regardless 
of emergent customer needs at later stages. Five core 
practices were introduced to fit customer requirements 
whilst retaining the stage-gates. These were claimed to 
be customer involvement, user stories, iterative 
development, automated testing and continuous 
integration. User stories were used to engage 
customers through a round table practice at the 
Concept stage, where marketing, customer, product 
manager and designer explore the customer 
requirements and tease out late
nt and tacit expectations 
through the language of user stories
 
– these follow a 
specific format with the sole objective of capturing and 
prioritising requirements. The round table and user 
stories accelerated requirements capture, but could be 
used to fix content subsequently. 
   Whilst agile processes, following the five core 
practices remained possible, activities tended to fix, or 
freeze, content at the first opportunity. Hot-housing 
could reduce the scope for agile practice, framing or 
reducing opportunity for responsiveness between each 
subsequent stage-gate, which further reduced agility 
within any Sprint and for ke
y elements of content. This 
renders analysis of decoupling points difficult. Overall, 
the commencement of hot-housing represents the 
primary decoupling point with its end inducing fixity. 
Each stage and Sprint has its own decoupling point on 
a reduced basis. 
 
5. Conclusions and Recommendations  
 
   The research considered the agile PMM in one large 
case organisation. In response to the specific research 
questions addressed it was found that there was: (i) 
limited tailoring to the general context, (ii) a greater 
level of specific tailoring and responsiveness to client 
needs, (iii) a lack of clarity and therefore ability to 
identify where the decoupling points were located or 
could be located to improve customer responsiveness. 
There was significant variance between business lines.  
Product development adhered closely to traditional 
PMMs, while the IT/IS business lines covering 
software development and IT/IS projects for internal 
and external clients were generally more diligent in 
trying to implement the agile PMMs, SCRUM and XP. 
   There were barriers to
 implementation across the 
company despite the fertile conditions provided by the 
overall agile strategy for the business. Systems and 
procedures were unaligned, sometimes in order to 
retain the plan-driven linear approach of traditional 
PMMs, particularly a Waterfall PMM; while, 
sometimes the misalignment seemed arbitrary, 
especially for procedures. Attitudes of product 
managers and project managers posed resistance, 
particularly amongst the product managers. 
   The findings posed a range 
of analytical issues. Some 
of those cited or implied are as follows. Inconsistent 
implementation of PMM in the case company had 
sufficient awareness and committed adequate resources 
to implementation. It may ha
ve been anticipated that 
the shortfalls in investment
 may have yielded problems 
4451 and posed barriers, but the management assessed the 
net gains to be beneficial. Further investigation is 
necessary. 
   The task focus observed amongst the project 
managers, coupled with the attitudes of resistance 
confirm the problems companies face in shifting to a 
customer focus using agile and contributing towards 
the increasingly prevalent se
rvice-dominant logic [43]. 
However, exploration of th
is dimension is beyond the 
scope of this paper. 
   The weak systems and 
procedures applied between 
the corporate centre and 
individual projects are 
endemic problem in temporar
y organisations linked to 
both the previous points on investment and service. 
They give rise to the aut
onomy of the project manager, 
empowering them to flout the strategies and policies 
for implementation, which at worst is for their personal 
comfort rather than the benefit of their employer, client 
and other stakeholders (cf.[13]). Further investigation 
on the power of such attitudes is beyond the scope of 
this paper.  
   Apart from the limits 
described above, the primary 
limitation of paper is the single case study 
organisation. Whilst this provides opportunities for in-
depth exploration and interpretation, generalities for 
other agile PMM contexts and companies cannot be 
made and there is scant literature covering this specific 
focus.  This provides a w
eakness, but also highlights 
the original contribution to research this paper is 
making.  The implementation of PMMs has been 
neglected, especially in relation to how project 
execution is conducted on the ground specifically to 
deliver customer benefits. The contribution shows 
successful execution is frequently judged by 
practitioners according to internal efficiency and 
effective fit with prevailing attitudes, rather than 
customer and stakeholder needs. 
   Recommendations for practice are that companies 
adopting new management
 ideas should thoroughly 
investigate the investment and maintenance costs of 
implementing new ideas such as agile concept, agile 
PMM and indeed other capabilities and competencies. 
Aligning the customer base to competencies and 
capabilities is important as new services need to be 
valued by clients in target markets. This requires 
careful consideration prior to introducing a new 
capability and set of competencies. Developing 
capabilities and competencies needs vigorous attention 
by senior management and it is recommended that the 
investments in social cap
ital should be taken more 
seriously (cf. [44]).  
   The primary recommendations for research are to 
explore and examine agile PMMs in comparison to 
other PMM applications in organisations; compare 
agile PMM implementation across different 
companies, and finally to explore PMM application in 
relation to investment, service delivery and decision-
maker attitudes to enhance the emerging body of 
evidence. 
 
6. References 
 
  
[1] Forrester, J.W. (1961), Industrial Dynamics, MIT Press, 
Cambridge.
 
[2] West, D. and Grant T. (2010), Agile Development: 
Mainstream Adoption has Changed Agility, Forrester 
Research. 
[3] Naim, M. and Barlow, J. (2003), “An innovative supply 
chain strategy for customized housing”, Construction 
Management and Economics, Vol. 21, pp. 593-602. 
[4] Towill, D.R. and McCullen, P. (1999), The Impact of 
Agile Manufacturing on Supply Chain Dynamics, The 
International Journal of Logistics Management, Vol. 10, pp. 
83-96. 
[5] Lee, H.L., Padmanabhan, V. and Whang, S. (1997), 
Information distortion in a supply chain: the bullwhip effect, 
Management Science, Vol. 43, pp. 546-558. 
[6] Winch, G.M. (2011), Ma
naging Complex Projects, 2nd 
ed., Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester. 
[7] Gobb, C. (2011), Making Sense of Agile Project 
Management – Balancing, Control and Agility. Wiley. 
[8] Lehman, M. (1998), Software’s Future: Managing 
Evolution, IEEE Software, Vo
l. 15, no. 1, pp. 40-44. 
[9] Dalcher, D. (2003), Beyond Normal Failures: Dynamic 
Management of Software Proj
ects, Technology Analysis and 
Strategic Management, Vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 421-439. 
[10] Augustine, S., Payne, B., Sencindiver, F. and 
Woodcock, S. (2005), “Agile project management: steering 
from the edges”’ Communications on the ACM, Vol.48, pp. 
85-89. 
[11] Chen, C.C., Law, C.C.H. and Yang, S.C. (2009), 
“Managing ERP implementation failure: a project 
management perspective”, IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Management, Vol. 56, pp, 157-170.  
[12] Mason-Jones, R., Naylor, B.J. and Towill, D.R. (2000), 
“Lean, agile or leagile? Matching your supply chain to the 
marketplace”, International Journal of Production Research, 
Vol. 38, pp. 4061-4070. 
[13] Pryke, S. and Smyth, H.
 (2006), “Scoping a relationship 
approach to the management of projects” in The 
Management of Complex Project
s, S. Pryke and H. Smyth 
(eds.), Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 21-46. 
[14] DeCarlo, D. (2004), eXtreme Project Management: 
Using leadership, Principles and Tools to Deliver Value in 
the Face of Volatility. Jossey-Bass , San Francisco 
4452 [15] Robinson, H. and Sharp, 
H. (2004), “The characteristics 
of XP teams, Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in 
Software Engineering”, in J. Eckstein and H. Baumeister 
(eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 139-147. 
[16] Rakitin, S. (2001). Manifesto Elicits Cynicism, IEEE 
Computer, Vol. 34, pp. 4. 
[17] Boehm, B. and Turner, R. (2004), Balancing Agility and 
Discipline a Guide for the Perplexed, Addison-Wesley, 
Boston. 
 
[18] Wells, H. 2013. “An exploratory examination into the 
implications of type-agnostic selection and application of 
project management met
hodologies (PMMs) for managing 
and delivering IT/IS projects”. BI - IRNOP – Oslo  
[19] Carayannis, E.G., and Kwa
k, Y.H., (2002), The Story of 
Managing Projects: A Global Cr
oss – Disciplinary Collection 
of Perspectives, Greenwood Press/Quorum Books, Niwot, 
Colorado.  
[20] Cohen, D., Lindvall,M,. & Costa, P. (2004). An 
introduction to agile methods. In Advances in Computers, 
Elsevier Science, New York, pp. 1-66. 
 
[21] Ambler, S. (2002), Agile Modelling: Effective Practices 
for Extreme Programming and Unified Process, John Wiley 
& Sons, New York. 
[22] Poppendieck, M., and Poppendieck,T., (2007), 
Implementing Lean Software De
velopment: From Concept to 
Cash, Addison Wesley, Boston. 
[23] Beck, K. (2000), Extreme Programming Explained: 
embrace change, Addison-Wesley, Boston. 
[24] Dalcher, D. and Brodie, L. (2007), Successful IT 
Projects, Thomson Publishing, London. 
[25] Dalcher, D. (2008), Beyond Agile Project Management: 
The Way Forward, Cutter IT Journal, Vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 28-
34. 
[26] Smyth, H. J. and Morris, P. W. G. (2007), An 
epistemological evaluation of research into projects and their 
management: methodological issues, International Journal of 
Project Management, 25, (4), pp. 423-436. 
[27] Pryke, S. and Smyth, H. (2006), “Scoping a relationship 
approach to the management of projects” in The 
Management of Complex Project
s, S. Pryke and H. Smyth 
(eds.), Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 21-46. 
[28] Fitzgerald, B. Russo, N.L. and Stolterman, E. (2002), 
Information Systems Development: Method-in-action. 
McGraw Hill. 
[29] Rosen, M. (1991), Coming to terms with the field: 
Understanding and Doing Organisational Ethnography, 
Journal of Management Studies. Vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1-24. 
[30] Tuan, Y. (1977), Space and place: the perspective of 
experience. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
[31] Miles,M. B. and Huberman, A. M. (1994), Qualitative 
Data Analysis, 2
nd
 edn. Thousand Oaks CA: Sage. 
[32] Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. (1967), The Social 
Construction of Reality, Doubleday, New York. 
[33] Wheatley, M. J. (1992). Leadership and the New 
Science: Learning about Organization from an Orderly 
Universe. San Francisco: Berrett-Keohler. 
[34] Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989), ‘Building Theories from Case 
Study Research’ Academy of Management Review, 14 (4), 
pp. 532-50 
[35] Wells, H. 2012 How Effec
tive are Project Management 
Methodologies? An explorative Evaluation of Their Benefits 
in Practice. Project Management Journal, 43, 43-48. 
[36] Robson, C. (2002), Real World Research 2nd edition. 
Oxford, Blackwell. 
[37] Collis, J. and Hussey, R. (2003), Business Research: A 
Practical guide for undergraduate and postgraduate students. 
2
nd  
edn, NY. Palgrave Macmillan. 
[38] Yin, R.K. (2003), Case Study Research: Design and 
Methods, 3
rd
 edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
[39] Remenyi, D. Williams, B., Money, A and Swartz, E. 
(2002). Doing Research in Business and Management – An 
introduction to Process and Method. Sage Publications. 
[40] Yin, R. K. (1993), Appli
cation of Case Study Research – 
Design and Methods. Sage Publications, Newbury Park, C.A. 
[41] Dey, I. (1993), Qualitative Data Analysis: A User-
Friendly Guide for Social Scientists. London: Routledge. 
[42] Thomas, R., 2006. A General Inductive Approach for 
Analysing Qualitative Evaluation Data’, American Journal of 
Evaluation. 2006 27:237. SAGE
 publication. American 
Evaluation Association 
[43] Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2004), “The four service 
marketing myths: remnants of a goods-based, manufacturing 
model”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 6, pp. 324-335. 
[44] Ghoshal, S. and Nahapiet, J. (1998), Social capital, 
intellectual capital, and the organizational advantage, 
Academy of Management Review, Vol. 22, pp. 242-266. 
 
4453