 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    vMessage From SIMThis issue of 
MISQE addresses a number of 
innovative IT management challenges, including 
the Shared Services approach, social media, 

collaborative work practices, and agile software 

development projects. 
MISQE
 research seeks 

to propose frameworks and concepts that will 

enable practitioners to understand best practices 

and lessons learned with respect to these 

innovative applications of information technology. 

Research that impacts practice can be of value 

to both academic professionals and IT industry 

leaders.In their paper, ﬁEmbracing System Complexity 
in a Shared Service Center Collaboration,ﬂ 

Tomasino, Fedorowicz, Williams, Gentner, and 

Hughes provide a case study of how a local 

government developed a criminal justice court 

and case management system as a shared service. 

Using this case, the authors describe how shared 

services supporting multiple functional areas can 

be effectively managed.
Agile software development is an emerging 
methodology which promises to facilitate the 

development of software that meets the evolving 

needs of end-users. Customer representatives 



agile development. Based upon interviews 

with customer representatives, authors Sabine 

Matook and Likoebe Maruping propose a model 

with competencies which are grouped into three 

areas. These three areas include Business, Socio-

Relational, and Systems. IT leaders can use 

this model to communicate, educate, and train 

participants in the agile development process.

challenge and opportunity. In their article, 

ﬁGenerating Capital from Social Media,ﬂ 

Mandviwalla and Watson provide a roadmap 

for understanding social media strategy. They 

describe four tactics, including Listening and 

Branding, Mining and Deciding, Conversing and 

Sharing, and Co-creating and Innovating.
Collaboration Engineering enables 
organizations to streamline collaborative 

work practices. In the article entitled, ﬁTwo 

Case Studies of Achieving Repeatable Team 

Performance through Collaboration Engineering,ﬂ 

Gert-Jan de Vreede describes two pilot 

collaboration engineering projects. In both 

projects, participants found collaborative work 

to be more effective than traditional work. The 
article provides insight into how to deploy 

collaboration engineering successfully.
Highlights from SIMEach year, the Society for Information 
Management recognizes research describing IT 

initiatives that drive measurable results. If you 

have researched an important and successful IT-

related business initiative, the SIM 2014 Paper 

Competition Committee invites you to submit an 

abstract and a paper describing this initiative. 

Winning papers will be a collaboration between 

academics and practitioners. Since SIM™s focus is 

toward executive management, the work should 

describe an initiative of interest to senior IS 

executives.
 Recognition will be given to up to two papers 
at SIMposium 2014 in Denver and all winning 

papers will be featured on SIMnet. All winning 

papers will also be considered for publication 

in MIS Quarterly Executive
. Papers will be due 
August 1, 2014. Please submit an abstract 

in advance to SIM VP for Academic Affairs, 

Mary Sumner (msumner@siue.edu) 
and to 
Paper Competition Coordinator, Butler 
Cooper (bcooper@simnet.org). Evaluation 
criteria will 
include:Innovation
: Are any new strategies and/or 
approaches described? Do they add to leading 

practices?
Impact: Does the paper address the real 
problem? Is the problem solved or diminished? 

Is it a managerial (not technical) issue? Is a 





principles exist that could enhance that body of 

information management knowledge?
 Implementation: Is the innovation 
operational? What is the breadth of the 

implementation? Does the organization plan to 

extend the innovation?
 Re-applicability
: Is the approach applicable 
to others? Can knowledge be transferred to 

others?Appeal and Readability
: Is there broad 
interest in the problem across industries 

and cultures? Will the paper appeal to SIM 

membership? Is the paper brief, clear, and to the 

point? Is the paper written with empathy for the 

reader?
 vi    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2)We also want to extend an invitation to 
SIMposium 2014, to be held in Denver, November 
2-4, 2014. See 
www.simnet.org
 for registration 

details. SIMposium is the premier practitioner-

driven conference designed for and by CIOs 

for peer-to-peer exchange on technology and 

business integration best practices. Highly 



gather to discuss, learn and engage with each 

other on their current business issues and 

identify industry best practices.
Steve Hufford 
SIM Chief Executive
