 European Journal of Information Systems {2006) 15, 225-238 
ti 2006 Operational Research Society Ltd. 
All rights reserved 0960-0SSX/06 S30.00 
* www.palgrave-journals.com/ejis A framework for understanding how a unique 
and local IS development method emerges 
practice . 1n Sabine Madsen 
1, Karlheinz Kautz
1 and Richard Vidgen
2 1 Department of Informatics, Copenhagen 
Business School, Copenhagen, Denmark; 
2School of Management, University of Bath, Bath, U. 
K. Correspondence: Sabine Madsen, Department of Informatics, 
Copenhagen Business School, Howitzvej 60, 
Copenhagen DK·2000, Denmark. Tel: +45 3815 2400; E·mail: Sma.inf@cbs.dk Received: 17 December 2004 
Revised: 5 August 2005 
Accepted: 12 December 2005 
Abstract Within the field of information systems development (ISO) most contributions 
concern formalised development methods and focus either on how they 
should be or on how they are used. In contrast, this paper explores the 
relationship between what influences and shapes a unique and local method 
and how it consequently emerges. Based on a synthesis of prominent 
IS literature, an analytical framework is developed using three perspectives: (1) 
the structuralist, (2) the individualist and (3) the interactive process 
perspective. Each perspective supplies a set of key concepts for conceptual 
understanding and empirical exploration of method emergence in practice. 
The analytical framework is applied to a longitudinal case study of method 
emergence in a web-based ISO project in a case company where the 
view methodology was adopted. The case study account is supported by the 
development and use of a graphical mapping technique, called method 
emergence mapping for representing the complex interplay between structural 

elements, human action and the emergent method as it unfolded over time. 
The contribution of this paper to ISO theory is the development of an analytical 
framework that can be applied as a lens for explaining how a unique and local 
method emerges in practice. Also lessons for 
150 practice are identified: no 
'one' is in control of an ISO project, projects should organise around a vision 

rather than a fixed plan; and methods should be used as guiding frameworks 
for action rather than prescriptions. 
European Journal af Information Systems 
(2006) 15, 225-238. doi: I 0.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000593 
Keywords: information systems development; methods; emergence; framework 
Introduction In the information systems development (ISD) literature, the concept of 

method is often used to refer to an orderly, predictable and universally 
applicable process (Truex 
et al., 
2000, pp. 54). Lyytinen (1987) defines 
a method as an organised collection of concepts, beliefs, values, and 

normative principles supported by material resources, while Andersen 
et al. 
(1990) and Mathiassen (1997) declare that a method consists of 
tions for performing a certain type of work process with the help of 
principles, techniques and computer-based tools and is characterised by its 

application area and its perspective
1 that is, a set of assumptions on the 
nature of the work processes and their environment. In line with these 
definitions, Fitzgerald 
et al. 
(2002, pp. 13) put forward the term formalised 
method and define 
it as any formally documented in-house or 
cially available method. This definition also includes computer-aided 
 226 IS development method 
software engineering 
(CASE) tools as a type of formalised 
method (Fitzgerald 
et al., 
2002). Most contributions within the field of ISD focus on 
formalised development methods: the prescriptive 
ture emphasise how they 
should be used, while 
cally grounded writings focus on how they actually 
are used. A number of method authors recommend that 
the development process should be tailored to fit the 
contingencies of the particular situation (Avison 
et al.
1 1998; Jacobsen et al., 1999). In line with this, empirical 
studies show that in practice IS developers rarely adopt 
methods in their entirety, instead they adapt and apply 
method elements in a pragmatic way (see e.g. Stolterman
1 1991, 1992, 1994; Bansler & B¢dker, 1993; Fitzgerald, 1997, 1998; 
Fitzgerald et al., 
2002; Madsen 
& Kautz, 2002). Others argue that the formalised method is just 
one ingredient among many that influence and shape the 
actual unfolding development process and situated use 
of methods -what has been referred to as the unique 
method (Truex 
et al., 2000), the local methodology 
(Vidgen, 2002; Vidgen 
et al., 2002) or the 
action (Fitzgerald 
et al., 2002). The notion method-in-action has been introduced by 
Fitzgerald (1997) and Fitzgerald 
et al. (2002) to account 
for the relationship and tension between formalised 
methods and their use in practice, how 
in-action reflect contextual factors, and how they are 
uniquely enacted by the developer (Fitzgerald 
et al., 2002). Without providing a strict definition of the 

concept Fitzgerald 
et al. (2002, pp. 13) contrast the 
form.alised and the method-in-action and state that 
'while some kind of method-in-action will be used
1 a formalised method may be the basis but is not essential
1 and illustrate their argument through a number of 
empirical examples at a broad level. Equally generally, 
Truex et al. (2000) propose that the unique method, while 
always present
1 may never even be identified. Both Truex 
et al. (2000) and Fitzgerald 
et al. 
(2002) stress the 
importance of understanding the myriad of factors 

relevant to the ISD context and the effect they have on 
the development outcome. However
1 so far little research 
has addressed the details of how the unique and local 
method emerges and why it takes the form it does. The 
purpose of this paper is therefore to contribute to ISD 
theory and practice by exploring the relationship 

between what influences and shapes the unique method 
in practice and 
how it emerges. 
As our object of study we focus on 
the emergent 
method1 which we define as 
the actual unfolding 
ment process and the activities, and applied method elements 
that comprise this process. 
This definition addresses 
the development process as a sequence of activities 
(Sambamurthy & Kirsch, 2000). It builds on existing 
research in formalised methods and their use in practice, 
but goes beyond the concept of method-in-action 
as it places more emphasis on what actually happens 
over time than on the relationship between the 
prescribed and the actual. 
European Journal of Information Systems 
Sabine Mad5en et al Our choice of the concepts 
emergent method, 
when we 
describe and analyse the concrete case under 
tion, and 
method emergence, 
when we relate to the 
phenomenon on a general level, is inspired by Pettigrew 
(1987). Studying change processes in firms, he argues 
that from a more holistic and systemic perspective the 
language of process is characterised by verb forms such 
as emerging, elaborating, mobilising
1 changing, 
ving and transforming, whereas at the level of the 

individual actor the emphasis is on enacting, acting, 
reacting, interacting, and adapting (Pettigrew, 1987). 
Thus, while we take the individual actor into account, 
we assume a more holistic stand and go beyond this 
level: we are interested in the unfolding of the actual 
development process as an outcome of a complex 
web and interplay of enacting and interacting actors 
and structures. 
The paper is organised as follows. In the next section, 
our research approach is described and in the third 
section we develop an analytical framework for 
standing method emergence in practice. The framework 
consists of three perspectives: the structuralist
1 the individualist and the interactive process perspective, 
which each supply a set of key concepts for conceptual 
and empirical appreciation. In section four, the emergent 
method as it unfolded in the case company is presented 
and depicted visually with the graphical MEM technique. 
In section five, the features of the emergent method are 

reviewed and thoroughly explained through the lens of 
the analytical framework. Finally, the findings and their 
implications are discussed in section six and conclusions 
are drawn in the last section. 
Research approach 
The research presented in this paper is interpretive. It is 
based on an empirical case study in the Market Research 
Compan)', a UK-based small to medium-sized 
tancy, where an in-house web-based ISD project was 
undertaken. The development project was conducted in 
order to improve the Market Research Company's 
nal work practices and to support online sales to its 
customers by creating a research data repository (RDR) 
that would contain details of companies and production 
volumes in the drinks industry. The project started in 

October. 2001 and delivered a first production version 

of the information system in September 2003. Our 

research comprises this time period, but takes also further 

development activities until February 2004 into account. 
The roles and length of stay in the field have varied for 
the three authors of this paper. One author has been 
involved in the project as an action researcher 
out the 2-year time period. This author was involved 

in the hands-on development in the early stages of 

the project and had the title of Academic Supervisor. A 

second researcher participated as an 
1action case' (Braa 
& Vidgen, 1999) or 'involved' researcher (Walsham, 
1995) for 6 months from March to September 2002, 

ing primarily to the information analysis activity. A third 
 IS development method 
researcher acted as an 
1outside observer' (Walsham, 
1995) and conducted interviews with employees of the case 
organisation, as well as with the action researcher and 
the involved researcher. The interviews were carried out 

in November 
2002. The combination of intervention, 
interpretation, and collaboration between three 
demic researchers with different levels of involvement 
was chosen to bring interpretive rigour to the project. 

This design counters a specific critici_sm of action 
research, which puts forward that it may be little more 
than consultancy (Baskerville 
& Wood-Harper, 1996). 
The formal project organisation of the RDR project 
required quarterly steering committee and monthly 

technical meetings. During these meetings both the 
action researcher and the involved researcher captured 
data by taking hand-written notes, and as soon as 
possible after the meeting, the written notes and as 
many details as possible were recorded in two separate 

and personal project diaries. For each diary entry, 
the date, participants, location, and events as well as 
immediate interpretations and personal comments were 
logged. Furthermore, a variety of documents such as the 

original project proposal, minutes of steering committee 

and technical meetings, company documents as well as 
project reports and deliverables were collected. In 
tion, the study draws on the third researcher
1s 
dent analysis of the two project diaries and seven 

structured, tape-recorded and transcribed interviews 

performed with five project participants, that is, the 

Company Chairman, the Market Research Director, the 
Developer, the Academic Supervisor and the Involved 
Researcher, and two future end users, that is, two Market 
Researchers. In line with the research topic and the interpretive 
approach, our understanding of method emergence has 

come about through an iterative process of 
tion, comparison and interlacing of prior research and 
empirical data. The arguments for and choice of the 

theories and approaches that constitute the analytical 
framework are therefore equally informed by both 
literature and practice, by deduction as well as induction. 
The analytical framework 
In this section, we develop an analytical framework for 
understanding method emergence in practice. The 
work will 
be-used to structure and perform a detailed 
analysis of the Market Research Company case. 
The ISD literature reveals a lack of cumulative 
works that integrate the theoretical and empirical 
ings from the many existing studies about ISD and ISD 

methods in practice. Notable exceptions are: the NIMSAD 

framework which is based on both theory and practice 
and can be used to select and evaluate primarily 
formalised methods Oayaratna, 
1994); the social action 
model of situated IS design, which was derived from a 
case study of a practical design process (Gasson, 
1999); an integrative framework of the information system 
development process developed from a literature study 
Sabine Madsen et al 
227 (Sambamurthy & Kirsch, 2000); and the 
action framework that incorporates past and 

rary thinking and empirical findings about !SD methods 
into one conceptual frame (Fitzgerald 
et al., 
2002). Common to these frameworks is that they stress the 
importance of understanding the context, the formalised 
method(s), the 
developer:S:' preconceptions and actions 
and their interactions with other stakeholders, as well 

as the influence that these concepts have on the ISD 
process. Our work builds on the insight provided by these 

frameworks and models. We use similar concepts and 

share similar assumptions about their inter-relations. 

However, our framework extends the line of thinking 
by providing more, and more comprehensive constructs 
and a clear and strong focus on the temporal dimension 
of the development process to support analysis. The 
increased emphasis on 
detail and sequence concerns the 
object of study, which addresses the emergent method as 
a sequence of activities that unfold over time. 
For the analytical framework we draw on three 
perspectives: the structuralist, the individualist and the 

interactive process perspectives delineated and originally 

used by Slappendel (1996) to analyse research on 

innovations in organisations. Markus 
& Robey (1988) apply similar perspectives in their work on causal 

structure in theory and practice
1 and Kautz 
& Ntelsen (2004) use the framework as a basis for for understanding 
Software Process Improvement in practice. Kautz 
(2004) also applied it to study the actual use of a method in a 
systems development project. The three perspectives 

provide a frame for focusing on structural characteristics, 

individual action, and the complex and dynamic 

play between socially constructed structure and 
ful human action over time (Slappendel, 
1996; Kautz, 2004; Kautz 
& Nielsen, 2004). Addressing one of the 
major discussions in the social sciences and IS, namely 
that of structure and agency (see e.g. Rose 
et al., 
2005), Slappendel's framework has a general relevance and has 
already shown its suitability for ISD and ISD research. 
We have further developed and refined the elements 
constituting the three perspectives to combine and 
integrate existing contributions from
1 or previously used 
in, the field of ISD into a coherent framework for 

understanding what influences and shapes the emergent 
method in practice. From the 
structuralist perspective, structural 
istics influence and shape the emergent method. The 

perspective is inspired by the concepts in Fitzgerald 
et al.'s. 
(2002) method-in-action framework and their main tenet 
that contextual factors and elements, the developers
1 and the information system under development as well 
as the formalised method and the rational and politJcal 
roles it plays all affect and mould the method-in-action 
(Fitzgerald et al., 
2002). We take the structuralist 
perspective to comprise a focus on the key concepts of: 
context, developers, information system 
and formalised method and their structural characteristics. These 
cepts introduce the particular development setting, the 
European Journal of Information Systems 
 228 IS development method 
project under study and allow for an understanding of 
how certain structural characteristics affect the emergent 
method. The emphasis is on descriptive and static 
characteristics, and the structuralist perspective does 
not as such address the impact of the individual 
developers' actions or of the interaction between 
ture and individual action over time. 
Within the 
individualist perspective, 
the actions of the 
individual IS developers are seen to influence and shape 

the emergent method. The perspective is inspired 
by Sch6n1s concept of the reflective practitioner (Sch6n, 
1983) and his notion that the practitioner uses his entire 
repertoire of prior knowledge, language and media to 
engage in a reflective conversation with the particular 
situation. The individualist view draws on Sch6n (1983) 
to suggest that the individual developer's repertoire 

of prior methodical and practical knowledge, language 

and media preferences shape his actions and that these 
actions in turn influence the emergent method. As such, 
the individualist perspective does not adhere to the 
traditional perspective on method
1 that is, as something 
which is applied in a straight-forward and easily 
observable way, but it also goes against the abandonment 

of the concept of method as a whole, as might be put 

forward by the proponents of tinkering, improvisation 
· and amethodical !SD (see 
e.g. Baskerville et al., 1992; Ciborra, 1998, 1999; Truex 
et al., 2000). The key concepts 
of the individualist perspective are: 
repertoire, language 
and media. These concepts allow for an in-depth 
standing of the individual developers and their influence 

on the emergent method, but lack a focus on the 
emerging method as an inherently social change 
process/ which may also be influenced and moulded by the 
actions of many other involved or affected actors and 
organisations. The interactive process perspective 
is based on the 
assumption that the emergent method comes about over 
time through the interaction between structural 
ences, the actions of individuals and the content of 

change1 that is, the emergent method and information 
system under development. The perspective builds on 
and supplements the structuralist and the individualist 
perspectives through a focus on the key concepts of 
social context, social process 
and content of change 
(Walsham1 1993) as inter-linked units of analysis (Pettigrew, 1987; 
Kautz, 2004; Kautz 
& Nielsen, 2004). Social context addresses social relations
1 infrastructure and the history 
of previous procedures, structures and commitments 

(Walsham, 1993). Social process focuses on the political 
(i.e. the distribution of power and balance between 
autonomy and control) and the cultural (i.e. sub-cultures 

and the interaction between sub-cultures) aspects of ISD 
(Walsham, 1993). Content of change refers to how the 
planned and actual development process and the product 
of change (Kautz 
& Nielsen, 2004) emerge in interaction 
with the social context and social process. Thus, the 
interactive process perspective allows for an 
i~g of the development process as a complex, dynamic 
European Journal of Information Systems 
Sabine Madsen et al and social process of change, in which political and 
cultural aspects play a central role. 
The three perspectives constitute a narrative and 
analytical structure that proceeds from introducing the 

case through a focus on structural characteristics, over 

understanding the individual developers
1 backgrounds and actions, to a full appreciation of the complex 
interaction between all involved actors and structures. 
It provides the sequence for presenting and supporting 
the understanding of the emergent method. 
The formalised method and its unfolding 
in practice: the emergent method 
The contingency approach Multiview/WISDM (Vidgen 
et al., 
2002) was chosen as the overall methodical 
structure for the RDR development project. Multiview/ 
WISDM is based on the original Multiview Methodology 
(Avison & Wood-Harper, 1990; Avison et al., 
1998), but it 
has been adapted to web development by including 
methods and techniques that address issues related to the 
web-based user interface and user/customer satisfaction. 
Multiview/WISDM offers a framework for web-based 
ISD that facilitates the construction of a situation-specific 
method. It is based on the assumption that a locally 
situated method is emerging throughout the process 
as a result of the IS developers' engagement with the 
particular problem situation. This engagement informs 

the choice of formalised methods and techniques from 
the Multiview/WISDM method matrix (Figure 1) and 
provides a practical basis to perform development 

activities in order to improve the problem situation 
(Vidgen et al., 2002). · The method matrix (Figure 
1) comprises a collection of 
formalised methods and techniques organised according 

to five different aspects of ISD. It aims to support a 
technical approach to !SD by including methods that 
emphasise design and construction of technical artefacts 

as well as methods that address the social and contextual 
aspects of !SD (Vidgen, 
2002). The archetypical methods 
in the matrix are soft systems methodology (SSM, 
Checkland & Scholes, 1990) for organisational analysis, 
the unified modelling language (UML, Booch 
et al., 1999) for information analysis and technical design, ETHICS 
(Mumford, 1995) for work design, and web usability 
Organizational Analysis [OAJ 
Value creation Work Design [WDJ 
User 
satisfaction HCI User interface 
Information Analysis [IA] 
Requirements specification Technical Design [TD] 
Software model Figure 1 
The Multiview/WISDM methods matrix (Vidgen 
et al., 
2002).  IS development method 
(Nielsen1 2000) for the human-computer interface. 
However, Multiview/WISDM is not supported by a 
specified process model. Instead the method authors 

suggest that the focus of attention changes during the 

process as the developers zoom in and out of the five 

aspects of the method matrix .and that while one aspect 

might be the focus of attention at a particular time, the 

other aspects can still be present in the minds of the 

developers (Vidgen 
et al., 
2002). The actual development process under investigation 
here unfolded over a period of more than 
2½ years and consisted of 13 key activities. Table 2 shows the sequence 

and duration of activities
1 for each development activity 
the· start and end times of the activity are given together 
with an activity number and a brief description. 

tudinal process research generates large quantities of data 
(Langley & Truax, 1994) and 
the presentation of the 
emergent method in Table 2 is, of course, a simplified 

presentation of the project; a severe condensing of 
interviews, research diaries, and project documents, and 
so on. Table 2 does thus not discern a pattern to the 
unfolding of the emergent method. For such cases visual 
displays have been recognised as very useful (Miles 
& Huberman, 1984). In Figure 3 we therefore present the 
complex interaction between structural elements, the 
involved human actors and the emerging method 
graphically with a technique, the method emergence 
mapping (MEM) technique (Vidgen 
et al., 
2004), which 
has been developed for this purpose. 
The notation used in Figure 3 is explained in detail 
in Figure 2. 
It takes elements from Langley 
& Truax's (1994) process flow chart and Thorp's (1998) results chain 
modelling and extends them into a graphical notation 
that supports a process language that is used to depict the 
unfolding of the emergent method. The process language 
is designed to support the analytical framework used in 
this paper and the resulting method emergence map is 
itself one of the inputs to the analysis. The activity 
numbers, which identified the key activities in Table 2, 
are also used in the method emergence map and later in 

section 5 to cross-reference to specific development 
activities. Sabine Madsen 
et al 
229 Hexagons represent motivating beliefs held by 
dual project team members and are therefore related to 
the individualist perspective 
(see Table 1). Ovals represent 
things of significance that were outside the control of the 
project team, but which can be understood in terms of 

the social context and social process, and hence, ovals are 

related to the 
interactive process perspective 
(see Table 1). 
The structuralist perspective (see 
Table 1) is represented 
by the solid arrow labelled 
1pre-existing structures' in 
Figure 2, activity number 0, thus reflecting the essentially 

static nature of this perspective. 
From the initiatives and outcomes in Figure 3 it is 
possible to identify the major phases that emerged in the 

project: exploration; database development; 

tion of business process and job satisfaction; design of 
D D 11 0 0 C) ' +: ' T Square-edged baxes 
represent activities. Activities are labeled 
according lo the Multiview methods matrix: 
QA= organisational analysis, IA= information analysis, WD 
= wark design, TD 
"'technical design, HCI "' human computer interface design. SD is used to 
indicate software development. 
Rounded boxes represent outcomes. 
Solid horizontal arrows 
represent precedence and influence, but not 
necessarily cause and effect. Three weights of 
line are used to show 
different strengths of connection -the thicker the line the more 
influential the connection. 
A zig-zag line is used 
ta show an initiative that has been terminated 
or is temporarily in abeyance. 
A lozenge symba/is attached to solid arrows to indicate a reorienting 
impact. Hexagons represent motivating beliefs held by individual project 
team members that informed decisions/actions and had a significant 
influence on the system development activities. 
Ovals represent external events 
-lhings of significance that were 
outside !he control of the project team. 
Dotted vertical arrows connect the actions and events 
lo relevant initiatives. A plus sign{+) indicales that the connection is facilitating 
and a minus sign(·) that 
it is inhibiting. Figure 2 The method emergence mapping notation. 
Table 1 The analytical framework 
Object of study/three perspectives 
Object of study 
Structuralist (structural 
characteristics) Individualist (individual action) 
Interactive process (structure, 
action and the issue of time) 
Key concepts 
The emergent method 
-the actual unfolding development process and the activities, and applied 
method elements that 
constitute this process Structural context, developers, information system, formalised method 
-characteristics hereof influence 
and shape the emergent method 
Repertoire, language, media-
influence and shape the individual developer's actions, which in turn 
influence the emergent method 
Social context-
social relations, infrastructure and the history of previous procedures, structures and 
commitments influence and shape the emergent method 
Social process 
-political and cultural aspects of ISO influence and shape the emerging method 
Content of change-
the planned and the actual method and information system emerge in interaction 
with the social context and social process 
European Journal of Information Systems 
 230 * Academic supervisor Academic supervisor ' :+ IS development method 
ersonne! Dept 
refuse permission to use Job 
Sat instn.Jment Sabine Madsen 
et al Chairman wants 
e facsimile of current 
paper reports 
' Market research 
director needs a 
deliverable ' ' ' +Ł L------,---~--,'c~ Investigation Job Job satisfaction ! of job ~atislaction to be reŁ 1 ' ' 
' 
' 
' satisfaction m5lrument evaluated : [WO] (5) 
rejected following full 1 
PRE-EXISTING STRUCTURES (0) 
,+ ' ' 0 Development Job implementation 
: Build First Company revenue 
' 
' of Job Satisfaction 
: SaVUse analysis 1 OT rectory 
stream report [SD] (9) 
from ROA ' Cases accepted 
1 (WD/lA) (5) 
~---~' ---''-, Formalised specification of 
1--------+1 requirements 1-----------+i Develop Company detail reporling [IA/TD/SO] (7) 
Develop Market 
summary analysis [IA/TD/SD] (10) 
{ON1A]{4) Develop database design [INTO/SD] (2) 
Database design stabilized Definition of technical 
architeclure [TD] (6) 
Four-tier XML architecture adopted 0 G) Pr'ototypo ~------>! development 2 [HCI/SD] (8) Prototype development 3 
(HCI/SDJ(11} Dovolopmont 11ctlvltlo1.1 OA Orgnnlznllonol Analysis IA lnfOfmntion Ano!ysls Logond + Build online 
access facilities for customers [SD] (13) ' 
' 
' +' ' ' WD Work Doslgn 
TD Tochn!cnl 
Dos!gn SD Soflwaro Dovolopmonl RDA Research Dato. Repoollory CMS Cootent M1mogemont System CLAP Online Ana!yllca! Processing Phase 3: Business 
process and 
Job <J-~'~'~"'~''~'~tio~o _ _,[> Academic supervisor, Developer OLAP used successfully on separate project 
Phase 1: ex /oration Oc\2001 Feb 2002 
Phase 2: database dova/o mont Ju1y2002 Figure 3 Method emergence map,(MEM) for the RDR project. 
software architecture and development of core 
tional software; live use of software to produce market 
reports; extension of software (e.g., provision of Internet 
access for by clients to RDR). The phases as well as 
the explicit connections between the key activities 
and the Multiview framework were only identifiable 
with the .benefit of hindsight
1 that is, as a result of the 
textualisation and MEM exercise. During development 
-that is during the flow of events -the emergent method 
was only partially identified 
(cf. Truex et al., 
2000). Moreover, in keeping with Walz 
et al.'s 
(1993) tions1 even though the traditional activities of ISD such 

as requirements analysis and design were undertaken 

in the RDR project, they were not performed according 

to the traditional methodical sequence
1 they were not 
independent of each other, and they did not have a clear 
start and end. 
An analysis of the emergent method 
Now, we analyse the elements and interactions that 
contributed to the method emergence with the aim of 
providing an explanation of why the emergent method 
took the form that it did. The following three sections 
European Journal of Information Systems 
Phase 4: Archilec/uro/ design/Software development May 2003 Phase 5: Live production of 
market repor1s Phase 6: extension Fob 2004 
emphasise different aspects of the case according to the 

structuralist, the individualist, and the interactive process 

perspective and their key concepts
1 with reference to the 
development activities shown in Table 2 and Figure 3, 
respectively. The structuralist perspective 
The setting for the RDR project was the market research 
department, which consists of six full-time employees, 

including the Market Research Director. Each year the 

department produces a number of market reports, with 

the two most important ones being the 'Bottled Water' 

and 'Water Coolers' reports. The reports are based on data 

gathered from as many companies as possible in a line 
of business, such as bottled water. The reports are then 
sold to companies in the drinks industry
1 such as 
manufacturers (who provided the original detail data)
1 packagers, and distributors. From initiation to 

tion, each report takes around 
3-4 months to produce. 
Each report is led by a single market researcher who does 
the bulk of the work and gains a deep insight into the 
data and manages the structure of the report. A large 
volume of data has to be collected, stored, processed and 
 Elapsed time 
October 2001-January 2002 
February 2002-July 2002 
April 2002-May 2002 
May 2002-June 2002 
July 2002 
August 2002-December 2002 
September 2002-January 2003 
January 2003-February 2003 
March 2003-May 2003 
June 2003-July 2003 
July 2003-September 2003 
October 2003-]anuary 2004 
February 2004 onward 
IS development method 
Sabine Madsen 
et al 231 Table 2 
Emergent method for the 
RDR project Activity No. Activity 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Initiation: newly employed Developer trained in technology used by Market Research Company. 
The review of the content management (CMS) and the online analytical processing (OLAP) 
software conducted leads to decision to custom build software. 
Database design: 
the database is recognised as core to RDR. The plan allowed for six weeks 
elapsed time to design database on the assumption that a CMS would be implemented -due to 
the complexity of the RDR data structures analysis and design took 
five months to reach a 
stabilised database. 
Prototype development 
1: an early prototype was developed to provide the users with a tangible 
output, allowing feedback on look and feel and a first test of the database structure. 
Formalised specification of requirements: 
the informal notes and analysis of business processes 
were written up using flow charts and UML use cases. 
Investigation of job satisfaction: 
application of the Multiview framework suggested that attention 
be given to job satisfaction of market researchers. The ETHICS questionnaire was rejected by the 
Human resources manager 
in the personnel department; A revised questionnaire combining job 
satisfaction and use cases was developed and this highlighted that users felt they spent too 
much time collecting and formatting market data as opposed to analysing, summarising and 
commenting. Technical architecture design: 
the original three-tier architecture was superseded by a four-tier 
architecture based on XML This was a response to the complexity of the RDR application and 

the desire to 
build a flexible platform for data sharing. 
Development of company detail reporting: 
the emphasis of the project was on Web delivery, but 
the Company Chairman wanted the RDR to produce an exact facsimile of the current paper 
reports. This required the introduction of a more sophisticated formatting technology, XML-FO 

(formatting objects), to deal with page headers, page breaks, etc. for output in PDF format. 
Prototype development 2: 
the Market Research Director needed and demanded a deliverable 
from the RDR project to sustain interest and credibility within company. If company detail data 
were entered into the database then a directory of companies in the water cooler industry could 
be generated. To support data entry of company detail data the user interface was redeveloped. 
Company directory reporting: 
company detail data entered into the database, the water cooler 
directory report produced automatically in PDF format, and marketed and sold to clients. 
Market summary analysis: 
detailed company volume data summarised into market overviews 
(e.g., top 50 bottled water companies in Europe). 
Prototype development 
3: testing of interface with users identifies extensive modification needed 
to support needs of market researchers in the production of live reports. Some rewriting of code 
needed to support an XML based four-tier architecture. 
Market report production: 
the first full market report, West Europe Bottled Water, is produced 
using the RDR. 
Extension: further reports produced from the RDR, new technologies explored (e.g., 
online analytical processing -OLAP), external access for clients via the Internet, and new business 
initiatives (e.g., sales data pooling) launched. 
formatted and information overload is the norm: 
'We've got loads of information on paper, on Excel files, all 
floating around' (Market researcher, interview quote, 
November 2002). 
active participation of academic researchers. The active 
involvement of academic researchers in the formal 

project organisation and the developers' high level of 

methodical knowledge and their practical experience 

explain the choice of the framework Multiview/WISDM 

as the overall methodical structure and provided a 
ground for the emergence of the local method 
out the process. 
The RDR project was undertaken as in-house 
ment by a relative small project organisation, where 
the steering committee involved 
6-8 people and the 
project team consisted of 
3-4 people with one full-time 
Developer and the others being involved in the actual 
development activities to varying degrees. The project 
concerned the development of a technically complex 
web-based information system. 
It was performed 
boratively by the Market Research Company and Bath 
University within the Teaching Company Scheme (TCS, a 
government funded programme that promotes 
tion between industry and university) and involved the 
The Market Research Company had already used the 
combination of Microsoft SQLServer and Macromedia 
ColdFusion, a high-level Web development language, to 
implement an interactive Web site (for full details see 
Vidgen, 2002). Given the availability of this software 
within the company, a lack of resource to acquire further 
expensive software platforms, and the previous 
ence of the RDR team with this technology the context 
European Journal of Information Systems 
 232 IS development method 
dictated that there would need to be compelling reasons 
for not using this combination on the RDR project. As the 
project unfolded additional software was needed to create 
XML documents suitable for printing to paper, but this 
software acquisition cost was relatively insignificant. 
The focus on database modelling led the project team to 
identify the need for computer-aided systems engineering 
(CASE) support. The RDR team reviewed a range of CASE 
and diagramming tools, including Microsoft's Visio 

Professional, before settling on the ERwin data modeller 

from Computer Associates. ERwin is a top-end database 

design tool that integrates fully with the target database, 
Microsoft SQLServer. Bundled with ERwin were UML 
modelling tools that were used for the production of use 

case diagrams. In this context, CASE tools were used in an 
instrumental way, that is, to support the agreed approach 
to analysis and design for the RDR rather than being part 

of a broader programme of organisational change in the IS 
development process (Orlikowski, 1993). Prototyping of 
the user interface was done 
Using Macromedia's sion, with the benefit that the same programming 
environment was used for prototyping and production. 
Before project 
initiation, Multiview/WISDM was used 
to inform the construction of a situation-specific method 
Sabine Madsen 
et al outlined in the form of a detailed project plan (i.e. the 
planned method), which was included in the original 

project proposal (i.e. TCS project proposal) and formally 
approved by the TCS programme, However, during 

lopment, the planned method was not enforced. As the 
Academic Supervisor explains: 'We don't sit on a plan and 
say what's 
in the plan and then just follow through' 
(Academic Supervisor, interview quote, November 2002). 
Instead, the project plan was updated at quarterly intervals 
to reflect what had already taken place. Thus, rather than 
following the pre-planned method, the actual method 
emerged as a time-boxed prototype driven approach, where 
techniques such as E/R (entity-relationship) diagramming, 
use cases, flow charts, think 'aloud' tests and a job 
satisfaction survey were chosen and used at the discretion 
of the project team, when and as they thought it relevant 

during the course of the project. In this continuous process 

of situated method emergence, Multiview/WISDM played a 
role as an individual 'framework for thinking', but also as 
an explicit structure that was used to inform the project 

team1s choice of the job satisfaction survey. 
I think that [the Academic Supervisor] used Multiview/WISDM 
and I 
think that I also used Multiview/WISDM 
. not as an 
Table 3 The structuralist perspective 
Elements Structural context Developers Information system Formalised 
method Characteristics In-house development; Small project organisation 
(6-8 people involved, 
3-4 people in the project team); 
Joint university -company collaboration within the 
Teaching Company Scheme (TCS) 
Long formal educations, from 
0-15 years of practical 
experience Technically complex web-based system 
Multiview/WISDM framework supports the choice of 
formalised methods and techniques; no pre-specified 
process model supplied 
European Journal of Information Systems 
lnffuence on emergent method (development activities) 
The involvement of academic researchers explains choice of 
view/WISDM and the application of a job satisfaction survey (0, 5) 
TCS specified the project duration and the project organisation 
(0) The choice of target technology platform was influenced directly by 
team member experience and availability of software in the 
company (Microsoft SQLServer and Macromedia ColdFusion) 
(0) The high level of methodical knowledge and practical experience 
explains the choice of Multiview/WISDM framework 
(0) and provides the ground for the emergence of the local method 
throughout the process 
(1-1 3) 
Emphasis on database modelling, back-end functionality and 
systems architecture 
(2, 6) 
Before project initiation, Multiview/WISDM was used to inform the 

construction of a situation-specific method, manifested in the form 
of a project plan 
(0) During development, the project plan (i.e. the planned method) was 
not enforced, but updated at intervals to reflect what had happened 
(i.e. the actual method: 
1-13) During development, Multiview/WISDM was used as an individual 
'framework for thinking' and to inform the choice of a job 
satisfaction survey 
(0, 5) 
The perceived complexity of the database structure led to the 
adoption of the ERwin CASE tool 
(1, 2) 
 IS development method 
explicit framework ... saying this is what the model says, now we 
are going to do this. It was more like, I'm sure [the Academic 
Supervisor] just had it in mind, thinking we have to do the 
technical design, we have to do the information analysis and the 
same thing for me. It was more just a framework for thinking ... 
' (Involved Researcher, interview quote, November 2002). 
Table 3 shows which and how structural characteristics 
influenced and shaped the emergent method. The 
structuralist perspective on the Market Research 

pany case provides valuable insight into the case study 
setting, the project under study and the choice and use of 
Multiview/WISDM. However, the descriptive 
istics do not in themselves explain why the project team 
chose a prototyping approach, why the prototypes were 

conceptualised, scoped and developed as they were or 
why data modelling was chosen as the critical point of 
departure. This is examined in more detail from the 
individualist and interactive process perspective. 
The Individualist perspective 
Together, the project team members' repertoire of prior 
knowledge explains the choice of methods and 

ques. Especially, the Academic Supervisor's background 

played a significant role in shaping the emergent 

method. His way of thinking about and taking action in 

the RDR project were influenced by (1) his knowledge 
of !SD methods in general, and Multiview/WISDM in 
particular as one of the method authors hereof, (2) his 

preconceptions of and practical experience with 
ISD, that is, he favours tangible prototyping results as well as a data 
and technology driven approach, and by 
(3) his 
edge about the Market Research Company, the cyclic 
nature of the report production processes, the 
based reports and the amourit of data they contain. 
Sabine Madsen 
et al 
233 'I had it 
very clear in my mind. There was no doubt that we had 
to start by 
getting the database structure right, because my 
approach to systems development is data driven and really when 
you looked at the output of the [ market] research process, at the 
[paper-based market] report, you know that you have to add 
a whole lot of data' (Academic Supervisor, interview quote, 
November 2002). 
The full-time Developer had little prior practical 
experience and relied on the guidance by the Academic 
Supervisor, whereas a third developer, who was 
rily involved in the project, favoured process modelling 
and requirements specification. 
As such, the RDR team members' and especially the 
Academic Supervisor's background allows for an 
standing of why a prototyping approach was chosen and 
used as the dominant method, why data modelling and 
the database model were considered the natural starting 
point and critical success factor and why other analysis 
and design activities were 'squeezed 
in' or performed in 
parallel with the prototype development. The project 

team members' background also explains the choice and 

use of the already mentioned analysis and design 

techniques. The project team members' background and 

even more so their media preferences for code and 

spoken language further explicate why the only 

ment that was frequently revisited and used throughout 

the development process was the E/R diagram. Other 

documents, such as the written project plan and the 
requirements specification, were used marginally and 
infrequently, if at all. The written project plan was 

updated right before steering committee meetings and 
not otherwise used, and while the requirements 
cation shaped and explicated the project team members' 
understanding of the RDR application at the specific 

moment in time in which the analysis was conducted, 
Table 4 
The individualist perspective 
Elements Repertoire and language Media preferences Project team 
Project team members repertoire and 
language shaped by: 

Ł Academic Supervisor: prototyping, data 

modelling and technology 
Ł Developer: no practical experience, 
guided by the Academic Supervisor. 
volved researcher: requirements 
tion and process modelling 
Little use of written documents to control 
and perform the work 
Preference for code and spoken language as 
medium for reflection-in-action 
Influence on emergent method (development activities) 
Together the project team members' and in particular the Academic 
visor's background explains the choice and use of prototyping as dominant 
method to develop the information system (0, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12) 
Together the project team members' background explains the sequence of the 
unfolding development process, where prototyping was dominant in time and 
effort (2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12) with analysis activities 'squeezed in' or 
performed in parallel (2, 4, 5) 
Together the project team members' background explains the choice and use 
of analysis techniques, that is E/R diagramming, use cases, flow charts, job 

satisfaction survey and think aloud tests (2, 4, 5) 
The E/R diagram was used throughout the process (2) and its importance is 
underlined by the adoption of the ERwin CASE tool; Other planning, analysis 

and design documents were only marginally used and maintained once 
developed (4, 5, 6) 
The project team members media preferences explain the choice of and 
extensive reliance on prototype-driven software development (2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 
11, 12) 
European Journal of Information Systems 
 234 IS development method 
the project team quickly moved forward without 
tempting to keep the specification updated in accordance 
with new discoveries, decisions and events. Table 4 
provides an overview of how the indiVidual developers' 
repertoire of knowledge, language and media preferences 
influenced and shaped the emergent method. 
The interactive process perspective 
When the RDR project commenced, the social context 
was already well-established and structured. It had been 
shaped by long-term, trust-based social relations and the 
existing social infrastructure between company 
ment and the Academic Supervisor. Management and 

the Academic Supervisor shared an understanding of the 
project vision, the appropriate development approach, 
the information technology to be used and the required 
project organisation specified by the TCS. This social 
context also influenced the political aspects of the project 

so that the distribution of power was in favour of 

company management and the Academic Supervisor. 
The project vision and development approach were 
defined by management and Academic Supervisor and 

management influenced the emergent method through 

participation in steering committee meetings and daily 
contact with Developer. Furthermore, the Academic 
Supervisor had 
exti?nsive influence through his role as 
project manager, hands-on developer and supervisor for 
the Developer. The Developer had discretion in daily 
work, but was strongly influenced by management and 
the Academic Supervisor. Thus, the social process and its 
content1 that is, the emerging process and the RDR 
application, were guided by the actions of the influential 
company management and the Academic Supervisor as 
well as the significant meaning that they and the market 
research d~partment assigned to the paper-based market 
reports and the market report production process. The 

paper-based reports were consequently used first to 

evaluate and discard commercially available web content 
management systems. Subsequently, they were utilised as 
direct specifications for the RDR application's 
build database model and reporting facilities and the 
report production process was used to divide the 
lopment process into prototypes and formalised 
ments specification. 
Moreover, the project team drew on their 
ing of the report production process to conceptualise, 
verbalise and scope the emerging development process 
and prototypes. The social process was further shaped 
by the formal project organisation, which consisted of 
representatives from different sub-cultures, each with 
their own views and interests, but also with the shared 
goal of developing an information system. The company 
managemenfs strategic concerns meant that the RDR 
application was developed to produce paper-based 
ports and not just on-line delivery of market 
data; the involvement of academic researchers meant that a 
technical job satisfaction survey was performed; while 
TCS participation meant that the project plan was 
European Journal of Information Systems 
Sabine Madsen et al brought up to date before the quarterly steering 
tee meetings. The interaction between the sub-cultures 
was facilitated by the formal project organisation and 
informal dialogue. Within the project team, techniques 

such as E/R diagramming, use cases and flow charts were 
used to engage in a reflective conversation with the 
situation and with each other. However
1 the project team 
preferred to use working prototypes and spoken dialogue 
when interacting with the other stakeholder groups. 

Therefore, textual descriptions and graphic 
tions were used very little outside the boundaries of the 

project team. Throughout this process and within this 

context a custom-made information system with a focus 
on supporting the internal production process, which 
implemented a paper-based report with a possibility of 
running online queries
1 was put into operation. 
The original plan had been to build the system through 
a prototyping process supported by CMS and OLAP 
software based on the bottled water and water cooler 
reports as point of departure. The focus was on a 
webM based front-end and business process redesign, both of 
which would lead to consequent organisational changes. 
The emergent method was broadly similar in that it 
still relied on prototyping, but the reports now served as 

specifications and their production process was used to 

envision the prototypes. Rather than use CMS/OLAP 

software the project used the Erwin CASE tool to focus on 
database modelling, which in turn led to a need for a 
sophisticated systems architecture. Table 5 presents the 

influence of the social context, social process and content 

of change on the emergent method. 
Discussion and implications 
On first inspection, the RDR application development 

could have been seen as a straightforward exercise: the 

automation of pre-existing paper-based market reports. 
That is, the requirements looked to be clear in terms of 
data structures, which were given by the paper reports, 
and in terms of process, which seemed to be a relatively 
simple exercise in data input, processing, and output. 

In practice this was not the case. The application of the 
analytical framework led to a deep appreciation of the 
Market Research Company case, where 
(1) structural characteristics helped explain the choice of and extent to 

which the formalised method Multiview/WISDM was 

used1 (2) the individual project team members' repertoire 
of prior knowledge, language and media preferences 
helped explain the selection of and sequence in which 
method elements were pasted together to form the 
unique method, while (3) the focus on the interactive 

process facilitated identification of the structural 

ments and influential actors that played.a major role 
in shaping the resulting information system and the 
emergent method over time. The three perspectives 
provide different types of insight yet they complement 
rather than exclude each other
1 thereby allowing for an 
in-depth understanding of method emergence in 
tice. We propose that the analytical framework developed 
 IS development method 
Sabine Madsen 
et al 235 Table 5 
The interactive process perspective 
Elements Social context 
Social relations Infrastructure History Social process 
Politics Culture Characteristics Long-term social relations between 
agement and Academic Supervisor; Have 
previously worked together in a similar TCS 

project Social infrastructure characterised by 
volved management and Academic 
visor Management and Academic Supervisors' 

long-term relation 
Market research department defines itself in 
terms of the paper-based reports and report 
production process; two market reports 

chosen for implementation 
Power distribution in favour of management 
and Academic Supervisor 
A number of sub cultures involved; 
culture interaction mediated by formal 
project organisation and informal dialogue 
Content of change 
RDR applica-Planned: Based on web CMS; Focus on both 
tion internal process and external sale; 
Online delivery Emergent method Planned: Bottled water and water cooler 
reports as point of departure; Focus on web 
front-end and organisational change; 
typing based on CMS and OLAP software 
Influence on emergent method (development activities) 
Management and Academic Supervisor defined the project and its 
boundaries through decisions about project vision, development approach 
and technology (0, 1) 
TCS-specified formal project organisation, thereby shaping the social 
relations and rules of interaction (0) 
Shared understanding of company, project vision and established work 
practices passed on from management and Academic Supervisor to newly 
employed Developer 
(1) Shared understanding of what (vision) and how (project organisation and 
work practices) to develop (1) 
Paper-based reports used as direct specification for data model and 

automatically formatted reporting (2, 6) 
Report production process used to divide the development process into 
prototypes and formalised requirements specification (4) 
Project vision and development approach defined by management and 
Academic Supervisor {l) 
Management influenced emergent method through participation in 
steering committee meetings and daily contact with Developer 
{l-13) The Academic Supervisor had extensive influence through his role as project 
manager, hands-on developer and supervisor for the Developer 
(1-13) The Developer had discretion in 
daily work, but was strongly influenced by 
management and Academic Supervisor 
{1-13) Management interests in tactical and strategic benefits led to the 

production of paper-based reports and 
online delivery of market data (9); 
The Academic researchers' interests in academic results led to the job 
satisfaction survey (5); Teaching Company Scheme interests in knowledge 
development and exchange led to regular updates of the project plan 
Methods and techniques used for reflective interaction within project team; 
The project team relied on prototyped and spoken dialogue; Little use of 
methods and techniques at steering committee meetings 
Performed: Custom-made; Focus on internal process; Implementation of 
paper·based report with possibility of running online queries (1, 7) 
Performed: Bottled water and water cooler reports as specification; Report 
production process used to envision process and future prototypes; Focus 
on DB 
modelling, back-end functionality and systems architecture; 
Prototyping based on ERwin CASE tool (2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12) 
and demonstrated in this paper is relevant for both ISD 
practice and research. 
anticipation of potential opportunities and obstacles, 
which structural characteristics
1 individual developers 
and the interactive process might represent in the given 
situation, (2) for coping with the interactive process 
,In practice, the framework can be used for (1) planning 
the emergence of the unique and local method through 
European Journal of Information 
Systems  236 IS development method 
during development and (3) for after-the-fact reflection 
and collection of lessons learnt. 
For the researcher, the analytical framework can be 
used to perform, analyse, present and compare 
itudinal case studies of how the method emerges in 
practice and over time. As Checkland (1991) points 
out, the complexity of practice is such that an explicit 
framework of ideas is necessary as a vehicle for data 

collection and identification of important research 
ings. In line with 
Schon (1983), we argue that detailed 
studies of practice and subsequent formulation· of 

empirically grounded theories serve to enhance the 

researcher's and the practitioner's repertoire of 
edge and introduce new concepts and distinctions into 
the language they bring to their practice. This in turn will 
cultivate their ability to pay attention to and act in 

accordance with the myriad of characteristics, actors 
and events that shape the unique and emerging method 
in practice. We acknowledge that knowledge gained 
through case studies might not be formally generalisable, 
but, in line with Flyberg (1992), we argue that this does 
not mean that it does not contribute to the collective 
body of knowledge, both academic and practical, of a 
discipline. Thus, we propose that unique cases and 
abstracted theories, frameworks and concepts concerned 
with the relationship between the 'whats' and 
1hows1 of method emergence allow researchers 
-and practitioners -to build up a repertoire of knowledge about what can 
be expected in practice and what can be done to cope 

with the situation. Such contributions -whether 
rily about the unique
1 the abstract, or both 
-will instil a 
vigilance and capacity for problem spotting as well as 
problem solving. 
The application of the analytical framework 
has, however, not been entirely unproblematic. It has 
been complicated to determine what falls into each of 
the perspectives and to decide on clear-cut 

tions between certain concepts, such as between context 

and social context, between developer characteristics 
and their repertoire of knowledge, language and media
1 and between social context and social process. Yet
1 as the 
emphasis lies on understanding the interplay and 
influence of structures, activities, and events, such 
difficulties seem less significant. The analytical 
work's ultimate strength is the way in which it 
facilitates a focus on the complexity of relationships that are often 
viewed much more simplistically. In the main stream ISD 
literature it is, for example, still commonly assumed that 
the formalised method is applied in a straightforward 
manner, consciously adapted according to 
lished contingency criteria, and that the IS developer is 
or should be able to control the development process 
(Truex et al., 2000). The unfolding of the project sheds light on the 
theory and practice of control, as in fact no 'one' in the 
RDR project was in ultimate control. Traditionally 
being 'in 
controI1 as a manager or developer means 
selecting1 designing, planning a course of action
1 correc-European Journal of Information Systems 
Sabine Madsen et al ting deviation
1 working in a stable environment with 
regular patterns, conformity
1 and consensus forming; 
while 'not in control
1 means being in an unstable 
and unpredictable environment with diversity and 

flict where action is evoked, provoked, emerging, 
fying deviation (Streatfield, 2001). Rather than consent 
to one or other of these poles IS managers and 

lopers should accept and even embrace the paradox of 
control, that is, they are simultaneously 
1in control' 
and 'not in control' and need the courage to live with 

the resulting anxiety. This view of control as emergent 

describes well the experience of the RDR project. 

On a day to day basis much of the control was in the 

hands of the Developer, but there were also strong 

hierarchical influences from the Academic Supervisor 
concerning the development method elements and 
the technology, and from management with regard to 

business issues. Furthermore, the mix of control changed 

over time as the Developer gained technical skills 
and confidence in her abilities. Thus, in a traditional 
managerial sense it is difficult to say, who was in control 
of this project; control was an emergent property 

and an outcome rather than a causal input and was 

treated as such. 
The research also underlines the importance for ISD 
projects to have a clearly articulated vision that is 

couched in terms of the value to be created for the 
organisation (Vidgen 
et al., 
2004). Highsmith (2000) 
calls this the project mission 
-'anything that helps the 
project team define the desired results of the effort 
at a summary level' (p. 44). Success is then judged on 
the basis of how well the vision is achieved, not by 
how well the plan was implemented. With regard to 
the RDR project, the project description on the cover 
page of the project proposal gave a clear statement 
of the vision: 
'To create an enterprise repository (or [Market Research 
pany]'s research data, using a web content management 
sofrware solution, to support internal knowledge development and external 
sales of research data.' (TCS Project Proposal). 
This vision remained constant throughout the project, 
because it had a strong focus on 'what' was to be achieved 
in broad terms, and it provided a sense of direction 

whenever there was a danger of the project drifting or 

becoming mired in technical issues. However
1 by 
ing a statement of 'how' this would be achieved, that is, 

through the use of content management software, which 
actually was rejected in the course of the project, the 
clarity of the vision and its potential as a governing 
means was weakened. 
Organising around a vision emphasises the need 
for an IS project to be guided toward a desirable outcome 

rather than the blind pursuit of a planned result. As 

such1 the case analysis also reinforces the value of the 
Multiview framework as an aid to guiding the 
lopment process and influencing mental models 
rather than a prescription (Vidgen 
et al., 
2004). Without 
 IS development method 
a guiding framework it is quite likely that the 
technical aspect of systems development, for example, 
which was taken into account by investigating the 

market researchers' job satisfaction with an instrument 

combing a questionnaire with use cases, would have 
been neglected. 
Conclusion In this paper
1 we have developed an analytical framework 
to help explain how a situated method emerges in 
practice. The analytical framework is supported by the 
MEM technique that helps a researcher describe 
cinctly the unfolding of the method over time. The 
analysis of the case shows the great extent to which past 
history and on-going events influence and shape the 
.emergent method, that is, history matters (North, 1990). 
Pre-existing structures
1 such as project characteristics, the 
individual team members
1 prior experiences and 
tions, and social relationships create the contours of the 
landscape within which the situated method emerges in 

an only partly predictable way. Such structures and the 
path dependence they induce should not be ignored. 
The analytical framework presented in this paper can be 
used to identify an appropriate starting point for an 
initial method outline and design that takes pre-existing 

conditions into account
1 while recognising that the 
actual emergent method will and must evolve with 
the situation. Therefore
1 an adaptive ability is needed 
About the authors 
Sabine Madsen is Assistant Professor at the 
ment of Informatics at Copenhagen Business School, 
Denmark. She has been employed as a project manager 

in the Danish IT-industry before joining the 

ment of Informatics in 2001. She completed her Ph.D. 
about process and method emergence in 
tion system development practice in 2004. Her research 
interests concern (emergent) IS development processes, 
methods, and the relationship between research 

and practice. 

Karlheinz Kautz is Professor in Systems Development 

and Software Engineering at Department of Informatics 
at the Copenhagen Business School, Denmark and until 
recently Director of Studies for the course programme 
on Computer Science and Business Administration. 
Previously he has been employed as a senior researcher 
at the Norwegian Computing Center and as a lecturer at 
universities in Germany, Norway
1 England and Denmark. 
He is the chairman of the IFIP TCS WG 8.6 on Diffusion, 
Transfer, and Implementation of Information 
logy. His research interests are in the diffusion and 

adoption of information technology innovations, 
tionary systems development and system development 
methodologies for advanced application areas, ·the orga-
Sabine Madsen et 
al 237 throughout the process to respond to: (1) technical 
discoveries1 e.g. in the investigated case the 
tion that web content management software is not 
sophisticated enough to meet the needs of the RDR 

development, and (2) changing or unexpected 

tional and business circumstances, for example, the 

intervention of the Market Research Company's human 

resources department, the demand for a paper report, 

and pressure for an early win in the form of an 
operational deliverable. 
The implications of the case for practice are that 
managers and developers should establish a clear 
business vision of what a project is to achieve and 
should organise work around this vision rather than 
around fixed project plans. Any formalised method
1 such as Multiview, is better thought of as a guide to 
organisation for the achievement of the vision rather 
than a prescriptive basis for project planning and action. 
Finally/ managers and developers may have to accept 
that they are not entirely in control. This is not to say 
that they are powerless or that the project is out of 
control, but rather that control is an emergent property 

of the !SD situation. 
Future work will involve the analysis of more cases to 
refine the theoretical ideas and the MEM technique and 

to identify patterns in the emergence of ISD projects that 

can be avoided or exploited depending on situational 

factors and interactions. 
nisational impact of IT, knowledge management and 
software quality and process improvement. He has 
published in these areas in journals like Information 

and Software Technology, Information, Technology 
& People, the Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 

Software Process: Improvement and Practice
1 IEEE 
ware, Journal of Knowledge Management and is a 

member of ACM and IEEE. 

Richard Vidgen is Professor of Information Systeins in 

the School of Management at the University of Bath. He 
worked in information systems development in industry 
for 15 years, during which time he was employed by a 

large US software firm, a high street bank
1 and as a 
consultant. Richard holds a first degree in Computer 

Science and Accounting, an M.Sc. in Accounting. In 1992 
he left industry to join the University of Salford, where he 
completed a Ph.D. in systems thinking and information 
system quality. His current research interests include 

systems theory, information system development 

odologies, business process modelling, and e-commerce 
quality. He has published the books 
Data Modelling 
for Information Systems 
(1996) and 
Developing Web 
mation Systems 
(2002) as well as many book chapters 
and journal papers. 
European Journal of Information Systems 
 238 IS development method 
References ANDERSEN NE, KENS1NG F, LUNDING 
J, MATHIASSEN L, MUNK-MADSEN A, 
RASECH M and 
S0RGMRD P (1990) 
Professional Systems Development: 
Experience, Ideas, and Action. 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., NJ, USA. 
AVISON DE and WOOD-HARPER AT (1990) 
Multiview: an Exploration in 
Information Systems Development. 
Blackwell Scientific Publications, 
Oxford, AVISON DE, WOOD-HARPER AT, VIDGEN RT and WOOD JRG (1998) A further 
exploration into information systems development: the evolution of 
Multiview2. Information Technology 
& People 11 (2), 124-1 39. 
BANSLER J and B0DKER K (1993) A reappraisal of structured analysis: design 
in an organizational context. 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems 
11(2), 165-193. 
BASKERVILLE R, TRAVIS / and TRUEX D (1992) Systems without method: the 
impact of new technologies on information systems development 
projects, In 
IFIP Transactions AB, The Impact of Computer Supported 
Technologies on Information Systems Development 
(KENDALL KE, 
LYYTINEN Kand DEGROSS/, 
Eds), pp 241-269, Elsevier Science Publishers, 
Holland, Amsterdam. 
BASKERVILLE Rand WOOD-HARPER AT (1996) A critical perspective on action 
research as a method for information systems research. 
Journal of 
Information Technology 
11, 235-246. 
8DOCH G, RUMBAUGH 
J and JACOBSON I (1999) 
The Unified Modeling 
Language. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. 
BRM Kand VIDGEN RT (1999) Interpretation, intervention and reduction 
in the organizational laboratory: a framework for in-context 
tion systems research. 
Accounting, Management and Information 
Technologies 9, 25-47. 
CHECKLAND P (1991) From framework through experience to learning: 
the essential nature of action research. In 
Information Systems Research: 
Contemporary Approaches and Emergent Traditions 
(NISSEN H-E, 
KLEIN H and HrnscHHEIM R, Eds), pp 397-403, Elsevier Science Publishers, 
Holland, Amsterdam. 
CHECKlAND P and SCHOLES 
J (1990) Soft Systems Methodology in Action. 
Wiley, Chichester, 
CIBORRA CU (1998) Crisis and foundation: an inquiry into the nature and 
limits of models and methods in the information systems discipline. 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems 
7, 5-
16. CIBORRA CU (1999) Notes on improvisation and time in 
zations. Accounting, Management and Information Technologies 
9, 77-94. FITZGERALD B (1997) The use of systems development methodologies in 
practice: a field study. 
Information Systems Journal 
7(3), 201-212. 
FITZGERALD B (1998) An empirical investigation into the adoption of 
systems development methodologies. 
Information & Management 34, 317-328. FITZGERALD B, Russo NL and STOLTERMAN E (2002) 
Information Systems 
Development, Methods in Action. 
McGraw-Hill, London, UK. 
FLYBERG B (1992) 
Rationality and Power 
-the Science of the Concrete (In 
Danish). Akademisk Forlag, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
GASSON S (1999) A social action model of situated information systems 
design. Data Base 
30(2), 82-97. 
HIGHSMITH J (2000) Adaptive Software Development: a Collaborative 
Approach to managing Complex Systems. 
Dorset House, NY, 
JACOBSEN 1, BoOCH G and RUMBAUGH 
J (1999) The Unified Software 
Development Process. 
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. 
/AYARATNA N (1994) Understanding and Evaluating Methodologies, 
NIMSAD: a Systemic Framework. 
McGraw-Hill, London. KAUTZ K (2004) The enactment of methodology-the case of developing 
a multimedia information system. In 
Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Information Systems. 
Washington, DC, USA, December 
12-15. KAUTZ K and NIELSEN PA (2004) Understanding the implementation of 
software process improvement innovations in software organisations. 
Information Systems Journal 
14(1), 3-22. 
LANGLEY A and TRUAX 
J (1 994) A process study of new technology 
adoption in smaller manufacturing firms. 
Journal of Management 
Studies 33(5), 619-652. 
European Journal of Information Systems 
Sabine Madsen et al 
LYYTINEN K (1987) A taxonomic perspective of information systems 
development, theoretical constructs and recommendations. In 
Critical Issues in Information System Research 
(BOLAND RJ and HIRSCHHEIM 
RA, Eds), John Wiley, Chichester. 
MADSEN S and KAUTZ K (2002) Applying systems development methods 
in practice -The RUP example. In 
Information Systems Development: 
Advances in Methodologies, Components and Management 
(KIRIKOVA M, GRUNDSPENKIS J and WOJTKOWSKI 
w, Eds), pp 267-278, Kluwer Press, 
Dordrecht, MA. 
MARKUS ML and 
RoB£Y D (1988) Information technology and 
tional change: causal structure in theory and research. 
Management Science 34(5), 583-598. 
MATHIASSEN L (1997) 
Reflective Systems Development. 
Aalborg University, 
Denmark. MILES M and HUBERMAN A (1984) 
Qualitative Data Analysis. 
Sage, CA, 
MUMFORD E (1995) 
Effective Systems Design and Requirements Analysis: the 
ETHICS Approach to Computer Systems Design. 
Macmillan, London. 
N!ELSEN J (2000) Designing Web Usability. 
New Riders Publishing, Indiana. 
NORTH D (1990) 
Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic 
mance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
ORLIKOWSKI WJ (1993) CASE tools as organizational change: investigating 
incremental and radical changes in systems development. 
MIS Quarterly 17(3), 309-340. 
Pm!GREW AM (1987) Context and action in the transformation of the 
firm. Journal of Management Studies 
24(6), 649-670, 
ROSE J, JONES M and TRUEX D (2005) Socio-theoretic accounts of IS: the 
problem of agency. 
Scandinavian Journal af Information Systems 
17. SAMBAMURTHY V and KIRSCH LJ (2000) An integrative framework of the 
information systems development process. 
Decision Sciences 
31(2), 391-411 ABI/INFORM, Global. 
SCHON DA (1983) The Reflective Practitioner, How Professionals Think in 
Action. Basic Books, USA. 
SLAPPENDEL C (1996) Perspectives on innovation in organizations. 
Organization Studies 
17(1), 107-129. 
STOL TERMAN E (1991) The Hidden Rationality of Design Work 
-a Study in 
the Methodology and Practice of System Development, Doctoral 
Thesis at Institute of Information Processing, University of 
Umea, Sweden. STOLTERMAN E (1992) How system designers think about design and 
methods 7 some reflections based on an interview study, 
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 
4, 137-150. 
STOLTERMAN E (1994) The 'transfer of rationality', acceptability, 
ability and transparency of methods. 
Proceedings of the Second 
European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS). 
Nijehrode 
versity Press, Breukeln, pp 533-540. 
STREATF!ELD P (2001) 
The Paradox of 
Control in Organizations. 
Routledge, London. THORP J (1998) 
The Information Paradox, 
McGraw-Hill, Montreal. 
TRUEX D, BASKERVILLE R and TRAVIS J (2000) Amethodical systems 
development: the deferred meaning of systems development methods. 
Accounting Management 
& Information Technologies 
10(1), 53-79. 
VIDGEN RT (2002) WISDM: constructing a web information system 
development methodology. 
Information Systems Journal 
12(3), 247-261. VIDGEN RT, AVISON DE, WOOD JRG and WOOD-HARPER TA (2002) 
Developing Web Information Systems. 
Elsevier, Oxford, UK, 
VIDGEN RT, MADSEN S and KAUTZ K (2004) Adaptive information systems 
development. In 
IT Innovation for Adaptability and Competitiveness, 
Proceedings of the IF/P 
WG 8.6 Conference 
(FITZGERALD B and WYNN E, 
Eds), pp 157-172, Springer, Berlin. 
WALSHAM G (1993) 
Interpreting Information Systems in Organisations. 
Wiley Serles on Information Systems, Chichester, 
UK. WALSHAM G (1995) Interpretive case studies in is research: nature and 
method. European Journal of Information Systems 
4, 74-81. 
WALZ DB, 
ElAM JJ and CURTIS B (1993) Inside a software design team: 
knowledge acquisition, sharing, and integration. 
Communications of 
the ACM 
36(10), 63-77. 
