 Special Issue Editorial 
 ﬁLots Done, More To Doﬂ: The Current State of Agile
 Systems 
Development Research 
Agile systems development methods emerged as a resp
onse to the inability of previous plan-
driven approaches to handle rapidly changing enviro
nments (Highsmith 2002). Originating 
from so-called ﬁlight-weightﬂ methods and promoted 
through the publication of the Agile 
Manifesto (2001), the agile method family have beco
me highly prevalent in recent years. 
Meantime, agile system development research has gai
ned momentum, as is evident from the 
increasing number of dedicated journal special issu
es, conferences, conference tracks and 
workshops. However, practitioners and consultants h
ave largely driven the creation and 
dissemination of these methods. Agile research has 
lagged behind practice, as is often the 
case with new and emerging phenomena in Information
 Systems Development (ISD). 
Current shortcomings in agile systems development r
esearch 
Despite the fact that existing agile system develop
ment research should be lauded in that it is 
very applied and relevant to industry, the current 
body of knowledge has several 
shortcomings. Conboy (2009) and Dyba and Dingsoyr (
2008) conducted two studies in 
particular which surface issues including clarity r
egarding what constitutes agility, more 
research required into the adaptability and extensi
on of agile methods, a deeper understanding 
of how agile methods are deployed in practice, and 
an overall necessity to improve the level 
of rigor in agile system development research. Befo
re introducing the papers in this special 
issue it is worth summarising these issues, so one 
can then get an appreciation for the 
contribution the special issue papers add to the cu
rrent body of knowledge. 
The need for a better understanding of what constit
utes ‚agility™
: Any good concept needs a 
strong underlying logic and rationale which serves 
as a ‚theoretical glue™ and binds all of the 
factors together (Whetten 1989). However, the curre
nt body of agile method knowledge 
suffers from a lack of clarity as to what constitut
es agility. It seems almost every piece of 
 research adoptes a unique interpretation of agility
. This is to be expected to some degree; 
Lyytinen and Rose (2006) argue that, in the context
 of ISD, agility as a concept needs to be 
multifaceted and contextual, and that agility is ac
hieved through various different means 
dependinging on the project environment. Based on t
his argument, every organisation needs 
to adopt their own individual interpretation of wha
t agility means to them, as opposed to 
relying on a single commercial version such as XP o
r Scrum. However, in order to 
significantly advance this area of research, it is 
important to have some solid platform on 
which to build a coihesive body of knowledge.  

The need to extend the applicability of agile metho
ds: 
Agile methods are sometimes seen as 
largely restricted to small, co-located development
 teams, non-critical system development, 
with on demand access to developers, and other such
 constraints (e.g. Stephens and 
Rosenberg 2003). While this view has been contradic
ted by some, Conboy (2009) suggests 
this may not be the case, pointing to the significa
nt volume of research attempting to rebuild 
and tailor these methods so they can operate in oth
er environments (e.g. Bowers, May et al. 
2002; Crispin and House 2003; Stotts, Williams et a
l. 2003; Cao, Mohan et al. 2004; 
Kahkonen 2004; Lindvall, Muthig et al. 2004). It re
flects a persistent demand on extending 
the applicability of agile methods in broader conte
xts. 
The need for a better understanding of agile method
s beyond the adoption stage: 
One of the 
main focuses of agile method research has been the 
introduction and adoption of agile 
methods (Dybå and Dingsøyr 2008). In contrast, the 
studies of issues associated with post-
adoption use of agile methods are much less in numb
er, even though there is increasing need 
to have a better understanding of agile methods in 
use as many organisations have completed 
adoption stage and agile methods start to become we
ll-established processes of these 
organisations. Specific needs of organisations and 
human nature inevitably lead to diverse 
interpretations and implementations of a method, wh
ich in turn lead to different, sometimes 
surprising, effects and consequences of use of agil
e methods and associated practices.  
 The need for more rigorous studies
: Dybå and Dingsøyr™s (2008) systematic review of 3
3 
primary empirical studies of agile software develop
ment (up to and including 2005) reveals a 
need for more rigorous studies in agile research. T
hey have discovered that the research 
methods used in these studies were not described we
ll in general; bias, validity, and reliability 
issues were not always addressed; and data collecti
on and analysis processes were often not 
explained well. Consequently, the contribution of t
he existing agile studies regarding the 
benefits and limitations of agile methods and for d
ecisions related to their adoption is 
ﬁvery 
low
ﬂ 
and 
ﬁvery uncertain
ﬂ 
(Dybå and Dingsøyr 2008, p.851).  
Advancing agile software development: contribution 
of the special issue 
The seven papers of the special issue on agile soft
ware development have addressed the 
abovementioned issues to various extents and from d
ifferent angles.  
A better understanding of what constitutes ‚agility
™ 
One paper in the special issue, ﬁAssessing the Rela
tive Contribution of the Facets of Agility 
to Distributed ISD Success: an Analytic Hierarchy P
rocess Approachﬂ, helps to gain a better 
understanding of agility concepts in a distributed 
systems development context. Based on the 
observation that previous research has not attempte
d to assess the relative importance of the 
various types of agility with respect to different 
systems development success measures, in 
this paper Sarker, Munson, Sarker and Chakraborty i
dentify which agility facets facilitate 
success of distributed systems development projects
 from the perspective of managers and 
technical members as well as from an integrated vie
w of both stakeholder groups. Their work 
enriches our understanding of agility concept throu
gh empirical evidences of the specific 
effect of agility elements on software development 
effectiveness. 
Extending the applicability of agile methods
 Across the papers in this special issue, we can see
 three diverse approaches to implementing 
agile development in environments to which they wou
ld not normally be suited. Firstly, 
Karlsson and Agerfalk illustrate a formal and metho
dological approach where the method is 
constructed ‚from the ground up™. Preserving and em
phasising agile goals and values in a 
 method can help avoid that method being ﬁreduced to
 a series of steps executed by roteﬂ 
(Highsmith 2002, p.14). Drawing on the Method for M
ethod Configuration, a method 
engineering approach to tailoring software developm
ent methods, their paper ﬁExploring 
Agile Values in Method Configurationﬂ provides insi
ghts and examples of tailoring an agile 
method while maintaining and promoting agile goals 
and values of the base method.  
Combining agile methods with other existing approac
hes is also a promising avenue to extend 
the applicability of agile methods. In their paper 
ﬁSimulating Mixed Agile and Plan-based 
Requirements Prioritization Strategies: Proof-of-Co
ncept and Practical Implicationsﬂ, Port 
and Bui discuss the efficacy of mixing two strategi
es for requirements prioritization to 
incorporate the benefits of agile development metho
ds and the plan-based approaches. They 
argue that a mixed strategy for requirement priorit
isation outperform either agile or plan-
based strategies, surprisingly, even within their r
espective home-grounds. They also provided 
two instances of the mixed strategies, and outline 
a framework for analyzing and assessing 
their effectiveness. 

The third paper, ﬁA Framework for Adapting Agile De
velopment Methodologiesﬂ, authored 
by Cao, Mohan, Xu and Ramesh, examines how the stru
cture of agile methods, projects and 
organizations affect the adaptation of agile method
s. While a substantial amount of existing 
research has examined sole case studies describing 
how a particular method was forcefully 
tailored to suit an environment, this paper examine
s how the structure of agile methods, 
projects, and organizations affect the adaptation o
f agile methodologies, and the factors that 
should be considered in such an environment. 

A better understanding of agile methods beyond adop
tion stage 
From a perspective of innovation diffusion, there a
re three papers of the special issue going 
beyond agile adoption and adaptation stages by exam
ining the use of agile methods in various 
real-world settings. In ﬁAcceptance of Software Pro
cess Innovations - The Case of Extreme 
Programmingﬂ, Mangalaraj, Mahapatra and Nerur focus
 on the acceptance of agile practices 
in terms of the innovation diffusion cycle (Kwon an
d Zmud, 1987), and aim at providing 
 insights into individual, team, technological, task
 and environmental factors that expedite or 
impede the acceptance of various practices of eXtre
me Programming (XP). They 
demonstrated that how the same set of XP practices 
are used differently by two teams in the 
same company. 

In contrast, ﬁRole of Collective Ownership and Codi
ng Standards in Coordinating Expertise 
in Software Project Teamsﬂ is concentrated on two X
P practices only: collective ownership 
and coding standards. Based on the understanding th
at the ability of expertise coordination is 
critical in an increasingly dynamic environment, Ma
ruping, Zhang and Venkatesh examine 
the relationship between collective ownership, codi
ng standards and expertise coordination 
and software project technical quality. They demons
trate the positive role played by the two 
practices in improving the technical quality of sof
tware projects and different moderating 
effects of the two on the relationship between the 
quality and expertise coordination. 
Unlike other papers in this special issue that argu
e for the effectiveness of agile methods and 
practices, John McAvoy and Tom Butler unveil the in
effectiveness of agile methods in terms 
of decision making. In their paper ﬁThe Role of Pro
ject Management in Ineffective Decision 
Making within Agile software Development Projectsﬂ,
 they discover several potential factors 
in agile projects that can negatively affect the ef
ficacy of decision making by agile teams. For 
example, the high level of empowerment of a cohesiv
e agile team can exhibit groupthink or 
Abilene Paradox. Therefore, rather than acting as a
 facilitator, the role of project manager in 
agile teams may well be re-oriented as devil™s advo
cate. 
Increasing research rigor 

The seven papers in the special issue have been sel
ected not only because of their 
contribution to a better understanding of various p
henomena in agile system development. 
They are included in this volume also because of th
e rigor with which the studies reported in 
these papers have been conducted. The rigor is demo
nstrated firstly through the well crafted 
research methods that have been applied in these st
udies Across the seven papers, the 
deployed research methods include simulation (Port 
and Bui), multi-case study (Cao et al., 
 Karlssona and Ågerfalk, and Mangalaraj et al.), sin
gle longitudinal case study (McAvoy and 
Butler) and survey method (Sarker et al. and Marupi
ng et al.). The applications of the 
research methods are all argued with adequacy and p
resented with clarity in the papers. 
Secondly, the rigor of the studies is shown through
 the sound theoretical base upon which the 
studies have been conceived and the findings drawn.
 The theoretical base has been 
constructed with the same merits as the research me
thods in these papers. Adaptive 
Structuration Theory (Cao et al.), Innovation Diffu
sion (Mangalaraj et al.), Method for 
Method Configuration (Karlssona and Ågerfalk), etc.
, have inspired and provided the studies 
with sound theoretical grounding.
 Emerging research directions: beyond the special is
sue 
Agile system development is a highly dynamic domain
 with constantly changing and 
emerging phenomena that are worth of research effor
ts. The papers in the special issue are 
addressing the research topics that have high relev
ancy currently, as demonstrated in the 
previous section, meanwhile indicating the future d
irections to explore.  The empirical studies 
of agile system development published up to and inc
luding 2005, reviewed in Dybå and 
Dingsøyr (2008), covered four main groups of resear
ch topics: introduction and adoption, 
human and social factors, customer and developer pe
rceptions and comparative studies. Most 
of the papers included in this special issue have a
ddressed one or more than one topics in 
these groups. In this sense, the special issue can 
be seen as a continuation of the research 
efforts of agile research community.  

Meanwhile, the special issue also provides insights
 on the aspects of the body of knowledge 
of agile research which could be improved by future
 studies and a number of potentially new 
avenues for research. 

Early in this discussion we stressed the need to un
derstand what constitutes agility. If a better 
understanding of agility concept can be achieved, w
e need this be taken forward into 
something measurable. The need is ensued for resear
chers to identify rigorous ways in which 
agility can be measured and assessed. Obvious benef
its of measurability include the ability to 
 compare agility across projects, and identify impro
vements or decline in agility over time. A 
further step would then to link measured agility to
 measured outcomes, such as project or 
product success. For example, Sarker et al.™s work 
can be taken as an initial step to bridge the 
understanding of agility to constructs that can be 
measured (even though they have not done 
so in their study), then link them to system develo
pment success. Another type of link for 
which supporting evidence is much needed is between
 the true 
ability of agile methods and 
practices and innovation
. While many of the proprietary agile methods texts
 do explicitly 
state that facilitating innovation is a key motivat
ion underpinning the emergence and use of 
agile approaches, rigorous research evaluating inno
vation in an agile context is desired and 
could be highly valuable. 

Another future direction is implied by the increasi
ng number of studies on agile methods 
beyond the adoption stage, including the papers in 
this special issue, which look into the 
actual use of agile practices and issues and challe
nges around it. With agile methods being 
routinised and infused in the adopting organisation
s, one of the most pressing issues is the 
need to develop a better understanding of 
the implementation of agile at the organisational 
level
. Mangalaraj et al. suggest that there are myriad i
ssues and challenges that an 
organisation needs to overcome to sustain agile met
hods. Agile adoption usually takes place 
from the ‚bottom up™, within small development team
s and championed by a small number of 
highly effective people. Despite initial success at
 the team level, some of these teams are then 
finding it difficult if not impossible to implement
 agile beyond their own boundaries. As a 
result, they are constrained by many of the functio
ns they are dependent on to get work done. 
Future research could examine the typical dependenc
ies faced by agile ISD teams, current 
best practices regarding synchronisation of agile a
nd non-agile functions, and strategies for 
organisational level implementation of agility in I
SD environments. Specific functions can 
include finance, contracting, legal and human resou
rces. 
References 

AGILE MANIFESTO (2001). http://www.agilemanifesto.o
rg/, last visit June 2009. 
 CONBOY K (2009) Agility From First Principles: Reco
nstructing the Concept of Agility in  
Information Systems Development. 
Information Systems Research
 (forthcoming 2009) 
DYBÅ T and DINGSØYR T (2008) Empirical Studies of A
gile Software Development: A 
Systematic Review. 
Information & Software Technology
 50(9-10), 833-859. 
LYYTINEN K and ROSE GM (2006) Information System De
velopment Agility as 
Organizational Learning. 
European Journal of Information Systems
 15(2), 183-199. 
HIGHSMITH J (2002) 
Agile Software Development Ecosystems
. Addison-Wesley, Boston. 
 
BENBASAT, I. AND R. ZMUD (1999). "Empirical Researc
h in Information Systems: The 
Practice of Relevance." MIS Quarterly 
23
(1): 3-16. 
BOWERS, J., J. MAY, ET AL. (2002). Tailoring XP for
 Large Mission Critical Software 
Development. XP/Agile Universe, Chicago, IL. 
CAO, L., K. MOHAN, ET AL. (2004). How Extreme Does 
Extreme Programming Have To 
Be? Adapting XP Practices to Large-Scale Projects. 
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii
, IEEE Computer Society Press. 
CRISPIN, L. AND T. HOUSE (2003). Testing Extreme Pr
ogramming. Boston, MA, Pearson. 
GALLIERS, B. (1994). Relevance and Rigour in Inform
ation Systems Research: Some 
Personal reflections on Issues Facing the Informati
on Systems Research Community. 
Proceedings of the IFIP TC8 Open Conference on Busi
ness Process Re-engineering. B. 
Glasson, I. Hawryszkiewycz, B. Underwood and R. Web
er. NY, Elsevier
: 
93-101. 
KAHKONEN, T. (2004). Agile Methods for Large Organi
sations- Building Communities of 
Practice. Proceedings of the Agile Development Conf
erence 2004, Salt Lake City, IEEE 
Computer Society. 
LINDVALL, M., D. MUTHIG, ET AL. (2004). "Agile Soft
ware Development in Large 
Organisations." IEEE Computer 
37
(12): 27-34. 
STEPHENS, M. AND D. ROSENBERG (2003). Extreme Progr
amming Refactored, Apress, 
ISBN 1-59059-096-1. 
 STOTTS, D., L. WILLIAMS, ET AL. (2003). Virtual Tea
ming: Experiments and 
Experiences with Distributed Pair Programming. Extr
eme Programming/ Agile Universe 
2003, New Orleans, Springer. 
WHETTEN, D. (1989). "What Constitute a Theoretical 
Contribution." Academy of 
Management Review 
14
(4): 490-495. 
