 IEEE TRANSACTIONS 
ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, 
VOL. 22, NO. 10, OCTOBER 1996 75 1 A Validation of Object-Oriented Design 
Metrics as Quality Indicators 
Victor R. Basili, Fellow, I•••, Lionel C. Briand, and Walcelio L. Melo, Member, IEEE Computer Society 
Abstract-This paper presents the results 
of a study 
in which we empirically investigated the suite 
of object-oriented (00) design metrics introduced 
in [13]. More specifically, our goal is 
to assess these metrics as predictors 
of fault-prone classes 
and, therefore, 
determine whether they can be used as 
early quality indicators. This 
study is complementary to the work described in 
[30] where the same suite of metrics had been used 
to assess frequencies 
of maintenance changes 
to classes. To perform our validation 
accurately, we 
collected data 
on the development 
of eight medium-sized information 
management systems based 
on identical requirements. All eight projects 
were developed using 
a sequential life cycle 
model, a 
well-known 00 analysis/design method 
and the C++ programming language. Based on empirical and quantitative analysis, the advantages and drawbacks 
of these 00 metrics are discussed. Several of Chidamber and Kemerer™s 00 metrics appear 
to be useful 
to predict class fault-proneness during the 
early phases 
of the life-cycle. 
Also, on our data set, they are better predictors 
than ﬁtraditionalﬂ 
code metrics, which 
can only be 
collected at a 
later phase 
of the software 
development processes. 
Index Terms-Object-oriented design 
metrics, error 
prediction model, object-oriented software development, 
C++ programming language. 1 INTRODUCTION 1 .I Motivation HE development of a large software system 
is a time- T and resource-consuming 
activity. Even with the in- 
creasing automation of software development 
activities, resources are still scarce. Therefore, 
we need 
to be able to provide accurate information 
and guidelines to managers to help them make 
decisions, plan and schedule 
activities, and allocate resources for the different 
software activities that take place during software development. 
Software metrics are, 
thus, necessary to identify 
where the resources are needed; they are a 
crucial source of information for de- cision-making [22]. Testing of large systems is an example of a resource- and 
time-consuming activity. 
Applying equal 
testing and verifi- cation effort 
to all parts of a software system 
has become cost-prohibitive. Therefore, 
one needs 
to be able to identify 
fault-prone modules so that testing 
/ verification effort 
can be concentrated 
on these modules [21]. The availability 
of adequate product design 
metrics for 
characterizing error- 
prone modules 
is, thus, vital. V.X. Basili is with the University of Maryland, Institute for Advanced Computer Studies 
and Computer Science Dept., 
A.V. Williams Bldg., College Park, 
MD 20742. E-mail: basili@cs.umd.edu. 
L.C. Briand is with Fraunhofer-Institute for Experimental Software Engi- neering, Technologiepark 
11, Sauerwiesen 6, 0-67661, Kaiserslautern, Germany. E-mail: briand@iese.fhg.de. 
McGill College Ave., Montrkal, Que%ec, H3A 2N4, Canada. E-mail: wmelo@crim.ca. W.L. Melo is with the Centre de Recherche Informatique de Montrial, 1801 Manuscript received Sept. 7,1995; accepted Aug. 30, 1996. Recommended for acceptance by 
H. Muller. For information on obtaining reprints 
of this article, 
please send e-mail to: transse@computer.org, and reference IEEECS Log Number S95819. Many product metrics have been proposed [16], [26], used, and, sometimes, empirically validated 
[3], [4], 
[19], [30], e.g., number of lines of code, McCabe complexity met- ric, etc. In fact, 
many companies have 
built their 
own cost, quality, and resource prediction models based on product 
metrics. TRW [7], the Software Engineering Laboratory 
(SEL) [31], and Hewlett 
Packard [20] are examples of soft- ware organizations 
that have been using product 
metrics to build their cost, resource, defect, and productivity models. 
1.2 Issues In the last 
decade, many companies have 
started to intro- 
duce object-oriented (00) technology into their 
software development environments. 
00 analysis / design methods, 00 languages, and 00 development environments 
are currently popular worldwide 
in both small 
and large soft- ware organizations. The insertion of 00 technology in the 
software industry, however, has created new 
challenges for 
companies which use product 
metrics as 
a tool for moni- toring, controlling, 
and improving 
the way they 
develop and maintain software. Therefore, metrics 
which reflect the specificities of the 00 paradigm must be defined and 
vali- dated in order to be used in industry. Some studies have concluded that ﬂtraditionalﬂ 
product metrics are not suffi- cient for characterizing, assessing, 
and predicting the qual- 
ity of 00 software systems. 
For example, in [12] it was re- ported that McCabe cyclomatic complexity 
appeared to be an inadequate metric 
for use in software development 
based on 00 technology. To address this issue, 00 metrics have recently been proposed in the literature 
[l], [6], [13]. However, with a 
few exceptions [lo], [30], most of them have not undergone 
an 0098-5589/96$05 .OO 01996 IEEE  752 IEEE TRANSACTIONS 
ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, 
VOL. 22, NO. IO, OCTOBER 1996 empirical validation 
(see [9] 
and [35] for further discussion 
of the empirical validation 
of measures). Empirical valida- 
tion aims at demonstrating the usefulness 
of a measure 
in practice and is, therefore, a 
crucial activity to establish the 
overall validity 
of a measure. 
A measure may be 
correct from a measurement theory perspective 
(i.e., be 
consistent with the agreed 
upon empirical relational system) 
but be of no practical relevance to the problem at 
hand. On the other 
hand, a measure may not 
be entirely satisfactory from a 
theoretical perspective 
but can be a good 
enough approxi- mation and work fine 
in practice. In this paper, we present the results 
of a study in 
which we performed an empirical validation 
of the 00 metric suite defined in [13] with regard to their 
ability to identify 
fault-prone classes. However, the theoretical validation 
of these metrics 
is not addressed here 
and, as a complement to 
this paper, the reader may 
refer to a discussion about 
the mathematical properties 
of Chidamber and Kemerer's met- rics in [ll], [24]. Data were 
collected during the development 
of eight medium-sized information management systems based 
on identical requirements. 
All eight projects were developed 
using a sequential 
life cycle model, a well-known 
Object- Oriented analysis/design method [33], and the C++ pro- gramming language 
[36]. Despite the 
fact that these 
projects were run in a university setting, 
we set up a framework 
that was representative of currently used technology 
in indus- 
trial settings. 
1.3 Outline This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the 
suite of 00 metrics proposed by Chidamber 
and Kemerer [13], offers the experimental hypotheses to be tested, 
and then shows a 
case study from which process 
and product 
data were collected allowing a quantitative validation 
of this suite 
of metrics. Section 3 presents the actual 
data col- lected together with the statistical analysis 
of the data. Sec- tion 4 compares our study with 
other works 
on the subject. Section 5 concludes the 
paper by presenting lessons learned 
and future 
work. 2 DESIGN OF THE EMPIRICAL STUDY 2.1 Dependent and independent Variables 
The goal of this study was 
to analyze empirically the 
00 design metrics proposed in [13] for the purpose of evaluat- ing whether 
or not these metrics are useful 
for predicting the probability 
of detecting faulty 
classes. Assuming testing 
was performed properly 
and thoroughly, the probability 
of fault detection 
in a class during acceptance testing 
should be a good indicator 
of its probability 
of containing a fault 
and, therefore, a relevant measure 
of fault-proneness. The construct validity 
of our dependent 
variable can, thus, be demonstrated. Other measures such as 
class fault density could have 
been used. However, the variability 
in terms of number of 1 1. Construct validity 
is discussed further in 
[27]. It is defined as the extent 
to which the theoretical construct 
of interest (e.g., our dependent 
variable: fault-proneness) is measured successfully, i.e , do we really measure 
what we purport to measure? faults in our data set is small: Faults were detected only 
in 36 percent of the classes and 84 percent of the classes con- tain less 
than three faults. 
Therefore, using a 
dependent variable with low variability 
would have affected our abil- ity to identify significant relationships between 
00 design metrics and ths dependent variable. In addition, it 
was difficult to decide what was 
the best 
way to measure the size 
of classes given the large number 
of alternatives (e.g., LOC, SLOC, 
number of methods, num- ber of attributes, etc.). 
The probability of fault detection 
was, therefore, the most straightforward 
and practical measure of fault-proneness and, therefore, a suitable de- 
pendent variable for our study. 
Based on [13], [14], 
and [15], it is 
clear that the definitions 
of these metrics are not 
language independent. As a consequence, we had to slightly adjust some 
of Chidamber and Kemerer's metrics in order to 
reflect the specificities of C++. These metrics are 
as follows: 
0 Weighted Methods per 
Class (WMC). WMC measures the complexity of an individual 
class. Based on [13], if we consider 
all methods of a class to 
be equally 
com- plex, then WMC is simply the number 
of methods de- fined in each class. In this study, 
we adopted 
this ap- 
proach for the sake 
of simplicity and because the 
choice of a complexity metric 
would be somewhat ar- 
bitrary since it is not fully 
specified in the metric suite. 
Thus, WMC is defined as being the number 
of all member functions 
and operators defined 
in each class. However, "friend operators (C++ specific con- 
struct) are not counted. 
Member functions and op- erators inherited from the ancestors 
of a class are also not counted. 
This definition is identical to the one de- 
scribed in [14]. In [E], Churcher and Shepperd have 
argued that 
WMC can be measured in different ways 
depending on how member functions 
and operations defined 
in a C++ class are counted. 
We believe that the different 
counting rules proposed 
in [15] correspond to 
differ- ent metrics, similar to the 
WMC metric, and which must be empirically validated as well. A validation 
of Churcher and Shepperd's WMC-like metrics is, how- ever, beyond the scope 
of this paper. 0 Depth of Inheritance Tree of a class (DIT)-DIT is de- 
fined as the maximum 
depth of the inheritance 
graph of each class. 
C++ allows multiple inheritance and, 
therefore, classes can be organized into a directed 
acyclic graph instead of trees. DIT, in our 
case, meas- ures the number 
of ancestors of a class. Number Of Children of a Class (N0C)-This is the number of direct descendants 
for each class. 
0 Coupling Between Object classes (CB0)-A class is coupled to another one 
if it uses its member functions 
and/ or instance variables. 
CBO provides the number 
of classes to 
which a given 
class is coupled. 0 Response For a Class (RFC)-T~IS is the number of methods that 
can potentially be 
executed in response to 
a message received by 
an object of that class. In our study, RFC is the number of C++ functions directly 
in- voked by member functions or operators of a C++ class.  BASIL1 ET AL.: A VALIDATION 
OF OBJECT-ORIENTED DESIGN METRICS 
AS QUALITY INDICATORS 
753 Lack of Cohesion 
on Methods 
(LC0M)-This is the number of pairs of member functions without shared 
instance variables, minus the number 
of pairs of member functions with shared instance 
variables. However, the metric is set to zero whenever the 
above subtraction is negative. Readers acquainted with 
C++ can see 
that some par- 
ticularities of C++ are not taken into 
account by 
Chidamber and Kemerer™s metrics, e.g., 
C++ templates, friend 
classes, etc. In fact, additional work 
is necessary 
in order to extend 
the proposed 
00 metric set with 
metrics specifically tai- 
lored to C++. 
2.2 Hypotheses In order to 
validate the above metrics as quality indicators, 
their expected relationship with fault-proneness (or rather the measure we 
selected for 
this attribute: probability 
of fault detection) must be validated. The experimental hypotheses 
to be statistically tested 
are, for each 
metric, as follows: H-WMC: A class with significantly more member functions than its peers 
is more complex 
and, by con- 
sequence, tends to be more fault-prone. 
H-DIT: Well-designed 00 systems are 
those struc- tured as forests 
of classes, rather than as one very 
large inheritance 
lattice. In other words, a 
class lo- cated deeper in a 
class inheritance lattice is 
supposed to be more fault-prone 
because the class inherits a 
large number 
of definitions from its ancestors. In 
ad- dition, deep hierarchies often imply problems 
of con- ceptual integrity, i.e., it becomes unclear which class 
to specialize from 
in order to include a subclass in the 
inheritance hierarchy 
[17]. H-NOC: Classes 
with large number 
of children (i.e., subclasses) are difficult to modify and usually 
require more testing because the class 
potentially af- fects all 
of its children. Furthermore, a 
class with nu- merous children 
may have 
to provide 
services in a 
larger number 
of contexts and must 
be more flexible. We expect this to introduce more complexity 
into the 
class design and, 
therefore, we expect classes 
with large number 
of children to 
be more fault-prone. 
H-CBO: Highly coupled 
classes are more fault-prone 
than weakly coupled classes because 
they depend 
more heavily 
on methods and 
objects defined in other 
classes. H-RFC: Classes with larger response sets implement 
more complex functionalities and 
are, therefore, 
more fault-prone. H-LCOM: Classes with low cohesion 
among its meth- 
ods suggests an inappropriate design 
(i.e., the encap- 
sulation of unrelated program 
objects and member functions that should not 
be together) which is likely 
to be more fault-prone. 2.3 Study Participants In order to validate the hypotheses stated in the previous 
section, we 
ran an empirical study 
over four months (from 
September to December 1994). The study participants were 
the students of an upper division undergraduate 
/ graduate level course offered by 
the Department 
of Computer Sci- ence at the University of Maryland. The objective of this class was to 
teach 00 software analysis and design. 
The students were not required to have previous 
experience or 
training in the application domain 
or 00 methods. A11 stu- dents had 
some experience 
with C 
or C++ programming 
and relational databases and, 
therefore, had the basic skills 
necessary for 
such a 
study. In order to control 
for differences in skills and experience among students, 
the students were randomly 
grouped into eight teams 
of three students. Furthermore, in order to ensure 
the groups were comparable 
with respect to the ability of their members, the following procedure (i.e., known as ﬂblockingﬂ [27]) was used to assign students to 
groups: First, the level of experience of each student was characterized at the beginning 
of the study. We used questionnaires and performed interviews. 
We asked the students information regarding their previous 
working experience, their student status (part-time, 
full-time student), their computer 
science degree (BS, MSc, PhD), their previous 
experiences with analy- sis / design methods, and their skill 
regarding various 
programming languages. 
Second, each of the eight 
most experienced 
students was randomly assigned to a different group 
(i.e., team). Students 
considered most experienced 
were computer 
science PhD candidates who had 
al- ready implemented large 
(2 10 thousands source 
lines of code, KSLOC) C or C++ programs and 
those with industrial experience greater than two years in C pro- 
gramming. None 
of the students had 
significant expe- 
rience in Object-Oriented software analysis and de- 
sign methods. 
Similarly, each of the eight 
next most 
experienced students were randomly assigned to 
dif- ferent groups and this was repeated 
for the remaining 
eight students. 
2.4 The Development Process 
~ Each team was asked to develop a medium-sized manage- 
ment information system that supports the rental 
/ return process of a hypothetical video rental 
business, and main- tains customer and video databases. 
Such an application 
domain had the advantage 
of being easily comprehensible 
and, therefore, we could make 
sure that system require- 
ments could be easily interpreted by students regardless 
of their educational background. 
The development process was performed 
according to a sequential software engineering 
life-cycle model derived 
from the Waterfall model. This model includes the 
follow- ing phases: 
analysis, design, implementation, 
testing, and repair. At the end 
of each phase, 
a document was delivered: 
Analysis document, design document, 
code, error report, 
and finally, modified code, respectively. Requirement 
specifications and design documents were 
checked to verify that they matched the system requirements. Errors found in 
these first two phases were reported to 
the students. This maximized the chances that the implementation began with 
a correct 00 analysis/ design. 
Acceptance testing was per- 
formed by an independent 
group (see Section 
2.5). During  754 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, 
VOL. 22, NO. IO, OCTOBER 1996 the repair phase, the students were asked 
to correct their system based on the 
errors found by the 
independent test group. OMT, an 00 Analysis/Design method, was used during 
the analysis and design phases 
[33]. The C++ 
programming language, the GNU software development environment, 
and OSF / MOTIF were used 
during the implementation. Sparc Sun stations were used 
as the implementation 
plat- form. Therefore, the development environment 
and tech- nology we used 
are representative of what is currently used 
in industry and 
academia. Our 
results are, thus, more likely to be generalizable 
to other development environments 
(external validity). 
The following libraries were provided 
to the 
students: 1) MotvApp. This public domain 
library provides a set of C++ classes on top of OSF/MOTIF for 
manipulation of windows, dialogues, menus, 
etc. [37]. The MotifApp library provides a way to use the OSF/Motif widgets 
in an 
00 programming/design style. 2) GNU library. This public 
domain library is provided 
in the 
GNU C++ programming environment. 
It contains functions 
for manipulation of string, files, lists, etc. 
3) C++ database library. 
This library provides a C++ im- plementation of multi-indexed B-Trees. We also provided a specific domain application library in order to make our study 
more representative 
of indus- trial conditions. 
This library implemented the graphical 
user interface for insertion/removal of customers and was implemented in such 
a way that the main 
resources of the OSF / Motif widgets and MotifApp library were used. Therefore, this library 
contained a small part of the im- plementation required 
for the development 
of the rental 
system. No special training 
was provided for the students to teach them 
how to use these 
libraries. However, a tutorial 
describing how 
to implement OSF / Motif applications was given to the students. In addition, a 
C++ programmer, 
fa- miliar with OSFIMotif applications, was available to an- 
swer questions about the use 
of OSF/Motif widgets and the libraries. A hundred small programs exemplifying 
how to 
use OSF/Motif widgets were 
also provided. In 
addition, the source code 
and the complete documentation 
of the libraries were made available. Finally, it is 
important to note the students were not required 
to use the libraries and, depending on the particular design they adopted, 
different reuse choices were expected. 
2.5 Testing The testing phase was accomplished by 
an independent group composed of experienced software 
professionals. This group tested all systems according 
to similar test 
plans and using functional 
testing techniques, spending eight hours testing each system. 
2.6 Nature of the Study Our empirical study is not what could be 
called formally a controlled experiment since the independent variables (i.e., 00 design metrics) are 
not controlled for and not 
as- signed randomly 
to classes. Such a design would not be 
implementable. Rather, our study is more observational 
in nature. However, it is 
important to note that we 
have tried to make the 
results of our study as generalizable as possible (i.e./ maximizing external validity) 
by a careful selection 
of the study participants, the study material, and the devel- opment process. Nevertheless, there is 
a greater danger that the study 
be exposed 
to confounding variables and all sig- nificant relationships should be 
carefully interpreted. 
2.7 Data Collection Procedures 
and Measurement We collected: Instruments 1) the source code 
of the C++ programs delivered 
at the 2) data about these programs, 
3) data about errors found during 
the testing phase and 
4) the repaired source code 
of the C++ programs deliv- GEN++ [18] was used to extract 
Chidamber and Kemerer™s 00 design metrics 
directly from the source code 
of the pro- grams delivered 
at the 
end of the implementation phase. 
To collect items 2) and 3), we used the following forms, which 
have been 
tailored from those used by the Software 
Engi- neering Laboratory 
[23]: * Fault Report Form. 
* Component Origination Form. 
In the following sections, we comment on the purpose of the Component Origination 
and Fault Report forms used 
in our study 
and the data they helped 
collect. 2.7. I Data Collection Forms end of the implementation phase, 
fixes during the repair phase, and ered at the 
end of the life cycle. 
A fault report form 
was used to gather data about 1) the faults found during 
the testing phase, 2) classes changed to correct such faults, and 3) the effort in correcting them. The latter was not used 
in this study. Further details can be 
found in 
[5]. A component origination form 
was used 
to record in- formation that characterizes each class under development in the project at the time 
it goes into configuration man- 
agement. First, this form was used to capture whether 
the class has been developed from 
scratch or has been devel- 
oped from a reused class. In the latter case, we collected the amount of modification needed 
to meet the system re- quirements and design: none, slight (less 
than 25 percent of code changed), or extensive (more 
than 25 percent of code change) as well as the name 
of the reused class. Classes 
reused without modification were 
labeled: verbatim reused. In addition, the name 
of the sub-system 
to which the 
class belonged was also collected. 
In our study, we 
had two types of sub-systems: user 
interface (UI) 
and database pro- 
cessing (DB). 
2.7.2 Data Collected Chidamber and Kemerer™s 00 design metrics were 
col- lected for 
each of the 180 classes across the eight systems under study. In 
addition, all faults detected during testing  BASIL1 ET AL.: A 
VALIDATION OF OBJECT-ORIENTED DESIGN METRICS AS QUALITY INDICATORS 
755 .......................................... 80 60 40 20 0 ..... .____..-. ..................... 0 10 20 30 
40 50 60 70 80 YO 100 WMC 60 I 0 11 22 33 44 55 66 77 88 99 110 
RFC 200 1 0 45 YO 135 180 225 270 315 360 405 
450 LCOM Fig. 1. Distribution of the analyzed 00 metrics. The 
X axes represents 
activities were located 
in the systems and, 
therefore, associ- 
ated with one 
or several of their classes. 3 DATA ANALYSIS In this 
section, we will assess empirically whether the 
00 design metrics defined 
in [13] are useful 
predictors of fault-prone classes. This will 
help us assess these metrics 
as quality indicators 
and how 
they compare to common 
code metrics. 
We intend to provide the type 
of empirical validation that we 
think is necessary before any 
attempt to use such 
metrics as objective and early indicators 
of quality is made 
[9]. Section 3.1 shows the descriptive distri- 
butions of the 00 metrics in the studied sample whereas 
Section 3.2 provides the results 
of univariate and multivari- ate analyses 
of the relationships between 
00 metrics and fault-proneness. 3.1 Distribution and Correlation Analyses Fig. 1 shows the distributions 
of the analyzed 
00 metrics based on 
180 classes present in the studied systems. Table 1 provides common descriptive statistics 
of the metric distri- 
butions. These results indicate that inheritance hierarchies 
are somewhat flat 
(DIT) and that classes have, 
in general, few children (NOC) (this result is similar to 
what was 
found in [13]). In addition, most 
classes show a lack of 120 , 1 0123456789 DIT 160 I .............. , 60 I I 
0 3 6 
Y 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 CBO the values 
of the metric. The 
Y axes represents the number 
of class. cohesion (LCOM) near zero. 
This latter metric does not 
seem to differentiate 
classes well 
and this may stem from its 
definition which prevents any negative measure. 
This issue will be 
discussed further 
in Section 3.2. TABLE 1 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE 
180 STUDIED c++ CLASSES WMC DIT RFC NOC 
LCOM CBO Maximum 99.00 9.00 105.00 13.00 
426.00 30.00 
Minimum 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Median 9.50 0.00 19.50 0.00 0.00 5.00 Mean 13.40 1.32 33.91 0.23 9.70 6.80 Std Dev 14.90 1.99 33.37 1.54 63.77 7.56 
Descriptive statistics will be useful to help us interpret 
the results of the analysis in the remainder 
of this section. In addition, they will facilitate com- parisons of resultsfromfuture similar studies. TABLE 2 CORRELATION ANALYSIS R~ Values WMC DIT RFC NOC LCOM - NMC DIT RFC NOC LCOM CBO 1 0.02 0.24 0 0.38 0.13 0.01 0 1 0 0 1 0 0.09 0.31 1 0 0 
1 0.01  756 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, NO. 10, OCTOBER 1996 Table 2 shows very 
clearly that linear 
Pearson's correla- tions (R': Coefficient of determination) between 
the studied 00 metrics are, in general, very 
weak. Three coefficients of determination appear somewhat more 
significant (bold co- efficients in Table 2). However, when looking at the scat- 
terplots, only the relationship 
between CBO and RFC seems not to be due to outliers. 
We conclude that these metrics 
are mostly statistically independent and, therefore, do not capture a great 
deal of redundant information. 3.2 The Relationships Between Fault Probability and 
3.2. I Analysis Methodology The response variable we use 
to validate 
the 00 design metrics is binary, i.e., was a fault 
detected in a class during testing phases? We used logistic regression, 
a standard technique based 
on maximum likelihood 
estimation, to 
analyze the relationships 
between metrics 
and the fault- 
proneness of classes. Currently, logistic regression is a 
standard classification technique [25] used in experimental sciences. It 
has already been used 
in software engineering 
to predict error-prone components 
[8], [29], [32]. Other classification techniques such as classification trees [34], Optimized Set Reduction [8], or neural networks [28] could have been 
used. However, our goal here is not to compare multivariate 
analysis techniques (see [8] for a comparison study) but, based on a suitable 
and standard 
technique, to validate 
empirically a set 
of metrics. We first used univariate 
logistic regression, 
to evaluate the relationship of each of the metrics 
in isolation and fault- proneness. Then, 
we performed multivariate logistic re- 
gression, to 
evaluate the 
predictive capability of those metrics that had been assessed 
sufficiently significant 
in the univariate 
analysis. This modeling process 
is further 
described in [25]. A multivariate logistic regression model 
is based on the following relationship equation (the univariate logistic re- gression model 
is a special 
case of this, where only one variable appears): 00 Metrics where n is the 
probability that a fault 
was found in 
a class during the validation phase, 
and the X,s are the design met- 
rics included as explanatory variables in the model 
(called covaviates of the logistic regression equation). The curve between rc and any single XI-i.e., assuming that all other XJs are constant-takes a flexible S shape which ranges 
between two extreme 
cases: 1) when a variable is 
not significant, then the 
curve ap- 
proximates a horizontal line, i.e., 
7c does not 
depend on X,, and 2) when a variable entirely differentiates 
error-prone software parts, then the 
curve approximates 
a step function. Such a S shape is perfectly suitable 
as long as the 
relationshp between Xis and rc is monotonic, an assumption consistent with the empirical hypotheses 
to be 
tested in tlus study. Otherwise, higher degree 
terms have 
to be 
introduced in equation ("). The coefficients Cis will be estimated 
through the maxi- mization of a likelihood function, built 
in the usual fashion, i.e., as the 
product of the probabilities of the single 
obser- vations, which are functions of the covariates 
(whose values 
are known in the observations) 
and the coefficients (which are the unknowns). 
For mathematical convenience, 1 = In[L], the loglikelihood, is 
usually the function 
to be maximized. This procedure assumes 
that all observations are statistically 
independent. In our 
context, an observation is the (non)detection 
of a fault 
in a C++ class. Each (non) detection of a fault 
is assumed to be an event independent from other 
fault (non)detections. 
Each data vector in the data set describes an observation and has 
the following 
components: An event category 
(fault, no fault) and a set 
of 00 design metrics (described 
in Section 2.1) characterizing either the class where the fault 
was detected or 
a class where no 
fault was detected. The global measure of goodness of fit we will use for such a model is assessed via 
R2-not to be confused with 
the least-square regression R2-they are built 
upon very different formulae, even 
though they both range between 
zero and one and are similar 
from an intuitive perspective. 
The higher R2, the higher the effect of the model's explana- tory variables, the 
more accurate 
the model. However, 
as opposed to the 
R2 of least-square regression, 
high R2s are rare for logistic regression. 
For this reason, the reader should not 
interpret logistic regression R2s using the usual heuristics for least-square regression R2s. (The 
interested reader may 
refer to [21] for a detailed 
discussion of this issue.). Logistic regression R' is defined by the following 
ratio: LL, -LL LLS R= where 4 LL is the loglikelihood obtained by Maximum 
Likeli- hood Estimation 
of the model described 
in formula (") 4 LL, is the loglikelihood obtained by Maximum 
Likeli- hood Estimation 
of a model without any variables, i.e., with only Co. By carrying out all the calculations, it can be 
shown that LL, is given by 
where mo (resp., ml) represents the number of observations for which there are 
no faults (resp., there is a fault). 
Looking at the above formula, 
LLs/ (mo + ml) may be interpreted 
as the uncertainty associated with the 
distribution of the de- pendent variable Y, according to Information Theory 
con- cepts. It is the uncertainty 
left when the 
variable-less model is used. Likewise, LL/(mo + ml) may be interpreted as the 
uncertainty left when the model 
with the covariates is 
used. As a consequence, (LL, - LL) / (mo + ml) may be interpreted 
as the part of uncertainty that is 
explained by the model. 
Therefore, the ratio (LLs - LL)/LLs may be interpreted as the proportion of uncertainty explained by the model. 
Tables 3 and 4 contain the results 
we obtained through, 
respectively, univariate and multivariate logistic regression on all of the 180 classes. We report those related to the 
met- rics that turned out 
to be the most 
significant across all  BASIL1 ET AL.: A VALIDATION OF OBJECT-ORIENTED DESIGN METRICS 
AS QUALITY INDICATORS ~ 757 eight development projects. For each metric, we provide the following statistics: Coefzcient (appearing in Tables 3 and 4)™ the estimated regression coefficient. The 
larger the 
coefficient in absolute value, the stronger the impact (positive or negative, 
ac- cording to the 
sign of the coefficient) of the explanatory variable on the probability p of a fault to 
be detected 
in a class. TABLE 3 UNlVARlATE ANALYSIS-SUMMARY OF RESULTS Metrics Coefficient AV p -value R* Classes WMC (2) 0.086 9% 0.0003 0.024 New-Ext WMC (1) 0.022 2% 0.0607 0.007 
ALL WMC (3) 0.027 3% 0.0656 0.015 
DB WMC(4) 0.094 10% 
0.0019 0.047 UI DIT (1) 0.485 62% 0.0000 0.065 ALL DIT (2) 0.868 138% 0.0000 0.131 New-Ext DIT (3) 0.475 60% 0.043 0.019 DB RFC (2) 0.087 8% 0.0000 0.248 New-Ext DIT (4) 0.29 34% 0.024 0.017 UI RFC (1) 0.085 9% 0.0000 0.065 ALL RFC (3) 0.077 8% 0.0000 0.188 DB NOC (I) -3.3848 -96% 0.0000 0.143 ALL NOC(3) -2.05 -77% 0.0000 0.083 DB CBO (1) 0.142 15% 0.0000 0.068 ALL RFC (4) 0.108 11% 0.0000 0.362 UI NOC (2) -3.62 -97% 0.0011 0.362 New-Ext CBO (2) 0.079 8% 0.017 0.020 New-Ext CBO (3) 0.086 9% 0.006 0.034 DB ALL means all the classes. New-Ext standsfor classes which have been cre- 
atedfrom scratch or extensively modified. DB labels classes 
implementing database manipulations. UI labels classes 
implementing user interface 
functions. CBO (4) 0.284 33% 
0.0000 0.170 UI TABLE 4 MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS WITH 00 DESIGN METRICS Coefficient p-value 
Intercept 3.13 0.0000 DIT 0.50 0.0004 RFC 0.1 1 0.0000 NOC -2.01 0.01 78 CBO 0.13 0.0072 Class Origin 1.84 0.0000 Ay (appearing in Table 3 only), which is 
based on 
the notion of odd ratio [25], and provides 
an evaluation of the impact of the metric on the response variable. More specifically, 
the odds ratio y(X) represents the ratio between the probability 
of having a fault 
and the probability of not having a 
fault when the value of the metric is X. As an example, if, for a given value 
X, y(X) is two, then it is twice as likely 
that the 
class does contain a fault 
than that it 
does not contain 
a fault. 
The value of Ay is computed by means of the follow- ing formula: 
Therefore, Ay represents the reduction/ increase in the 
odds ratio (expressed as a 
percentage in Table 3) when the value X increases by one unit. This is 
designed to provide an 
intuitive insight into the 
impact of ex- planatory variables. The statistical significance (p-value, appearing in Tables 3 and 4) provides an insight into 
the accuracy of the coefficient estimates. It 
tells the reader about 
the probability 
of the coefficient being different from zero by chance. Historically, 
a significance threshold of a = 0.05 (i.e., 5 percent probability) has often been 
used to determine whether 
an explanatory variable was a significant predictor. However, the choice of a particular level of significance is 
ultimately a 
subjec- tive decision and other levels such as a = 0.01 or 0.1 are common. Also, the larger the 
level of significance, the larger the 
standard deviation of the estimated 
co- efficients, and the less believable 
the calculated im- 
pact of the explanatory variables. The significance test 
is based 
on a likelihood ratio test [25] commonly used in the framework of logistic regression. 3.2.2 Univariate Analysis In this section, we analyze 
the relationships 
between six 00 metrics introduced in 1131 (though slightly adapted to our context) and the probability 
of fault detection 
in a class during test phases. Thus, we intend 
to test the hypotheses stated in 
Section 2.2. Weighted Methods per 
Class (WMC) was shown 
to be somewhat significant (p-value = 0.06) overall. For new and 
extensively modified 
classes and for U1 (Graphical and Textual User Interface) classes, the re- sults are 
more significant: p-value = 0.0003 and p-value = 0.001, respectively. Therefore, 
the H-WMC hypothesis is supported by these results: The 
larger the WMC, the larger the probability 
of fault detection. 
These results can be explained 
by the fact that the in- ternal complexity does not have a strong impact 
if the class is 
reused verbatim 
or with very slight modifica- tions. In that 
case, the class interface 
properties will 
have the most significant 
impact. Depth of Inheritance Tree of a class (DIT) was shown 
to be very significant 
(p-value = 0.0000) overall. The H-DIT hypothesis is supported by the results: The larger the 
DIT, the larger the probability 
of fault de- tection. A ain, the strength of the relationship in- 
crease6 (R goes from 0.06 to 0.13) when only new and extensively modified classes are considered. 0 Response For a Class (RFC) was shown 
to be very significant overall (p-value = 0.0000). The H-RFC hy- pothesis is supported by the results: 
The larger the RFC, the larger the probability 
of fault detection. 
Again, R2 improved significantly for 
new and 
exten- sively modified classes and U1 classes (from 
0.06 to 0.24 and 0.36, respectively). Reasons 
are believed to be the same as for WMC for extensively modified 
classes. In addition, U1 classes show a distribution 
which is significantly 
different from that of DB classes: The mean and median are significantly 
higher. This, as a result, may strengthen 
the impact of RFC when performing the analysis. 
Number Of Children of a Class (NOC) appeared to be very significant (except 
in the case of U1 classes) but the observed trend is contrary to what was 
stated by B  75s IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE 
ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, NO. IO, OCTOBER 1996 the H-NOC hypothesis: 
The larger the 
NOC, the lower the probability 
of fault detection. 
This surpris- ing trend can be explained by the combined facts that 
most classes do not have more 
than one child and that 
verbatim reused 
classes are somewhat associated with 
a large 
NOC. Since we have observed that reuse was a 
significant negative 
factor on fault density 
[5], this explains why large NOC classes are less fault-prone. 
Moreover, there is some instability 
across class 
sub- sets with respect to the impact 
of NOC on the prob- 
ability of detecting a fault 
in a class (see 
A\vs in Table 3). This may be 
explained in part by the 
lack of vari- ability on the 
NOC measurement scale (see descriptive 
analysis in Table 1 and distribution in 
Fig. 1). Lack of Cohesion on Methods (LCOM) was shown 
to be insignificant 
in all cases 
(this is 
why the results are 
not shown in 
Table 3) and this should be expected 
since the distribution 
of LCOM shows a 
lack of vari- ability and a few very large outliers. 
This stems in part from the definition 
of LCOM where the metric is 
set to zero when the number 
of class pairs sharing 
variable instances 
is larger than that 
of the ones not 
sharing any instances. 
This definition is definitely not 
appropriate in our 
case since it sets cohesion to zero 
for classes 
with very different cohesions 
and keeps us from analyzing the actual impact 
of cohesion based on our data sample. 0 Coupling Between Object classes (CBO) is 
significant and more particularly 
so for U1 classes (p-value = 0.0000 and Rz = 0.17). No satisfactory explanation 
could be found for differences in pattern between U1 and DB classes. It is important to remember, 
when looking at the results 
in Table 3, that the various metrics have different units. 
Some of these units represent ﬂbig stepsﬂ on 
each respective measurement scale while others represent ﬂsmaller steps.ﬂ 
As a consequence, some coefficients show a very small 
im- pact (i.e., Avs) when compared to others. 
This, however, is 
not a valid criterion to evaluate the predictive usefulness 
of such metrics. Most importantly, aside from 
NOC, all metrics appear to 
have a very stable impact across various categories 
of classes (i.e., DB, UI, New-Ext, etc.). This is somewhat en- 
couraging since it tells 
us that, in that 
respect, the various 
types of components are comparable. If we were consider- 
ing different types 
of faults separately, the results might be 
different. Such a refinement 
is, however, part of our future 
research plans. 
3.2.3 Multivariate Analysis The 00 design metrics presented in the previous section 
can be used early 
in the life cycle 
(high- or 
low-level design) to build a predictive model 
of fault-prone classes. In order 
to obtain 
an optimal model, we included these metrics into 
a multivariate logistic regression model. However, only the 
metrics that significantly improve the predictive power 
of the multivariate model were included 
through a stepwise 
selection process. Another significant predictor 
of fault- proneness is the level 
of reuse of the class (called ﬂClass 
originﬂ in Table 4). This information is available at 
the end 
of the design phase 
when reuse candidates have been iden- 
tified in available libraries 
and the amount 
of change re- quired can 
be estimated. Table 4 describes the computed 
multivariate model. Using 
such a model for classification, 
the results 
shown in Table 5 
are obtained 
by using a clas- 
sification threshold of n(Fau1t detection) = 0.5, i.e., 
when TC > 0.5, the class is classified as faulty and, otherwise, as 
nonfaulty. As expected, classes predicted as faulty contain 
a large number 
of faults (250 faults on 48 classes) because 
those classes tend to 
show a better 
classification accuracy. TABLE 5 CLASSIFICATION RESULTS WITH 00 DESIGN METRICS Thefigures before parentheses zn the right column 
are the number of classes classlfed as faulty The figures 
within the parentheses 
are the faults contained zn those classes. 
We now assess the impact 
of using such a prediction 
model by 
assuming, in order to simplify computations, 
that inspections of classes are 100 percent effective in finding faults. In that 
case, 80 classes (predicted as faulty) out 
of 180 would be inspected and 
48 faulty classes out of 58 would be identified before 
testing. If we now 
take into account indi- vidual faults, 250 faults out 
of 258 would be detected 
during inspection. As mentioned above, such a 
good result 
stems from the fact that the prediction model 
is more accurate 
for multiple-faults classes. To summarize, results show that the 
studied 00 metrics are useful predictors of fault-proneness. In order 
to evaluate the predictive 
accuracy of these 00 design metrics, it would be interesting to compare their 
predictive capability 
and that 
of usual code metrics even 
though they can 
only be obtained later 
in the development 
life cycle. Three code metrics, 
from the set provided 
by the Amadeus tool™ [2], were selected through a stepwise 
logis- tic regression procedure. 
Table 6 shows the resulting pa- 
rameter estimations 
of the multivariate logistic regression 
model where: 
MaxStatNext is the maximum level 
of state- ment nesting 
in a class, FunctDefis the number 
of function declarations, and FuncfCall is the number 
of function calls. It should be noted that other multivariate models can 
be generated using different metrics provided by Amadeus 
and yield results 
of similar accuracy. 
The model in Table 6 happens to be, however, the one resulting from the use 
of a standard, stepwise logistic regression analysis procedure. 
TABLE 6 MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS WITH CODE METRICS Coefficient p-value Intercept 0.39 0.0384 MaxStatNest -0.286 0 0252 FunctDef 0.166 0.001 0 FunctCall -0.0277 0.0000 In addition to being 
collectable only later 
in the process, code metrics appear to be somewhat poorer 
as predictors of class fault-proneness (see 
Table 7). In this 
case, 112 classes 2. The Amadeus tool provides 35 code metrics, e.g., lines 
of code with and without 
blank, executable statements, declaration statements, function 
declaration, function definitions, function 
calls, cyclomatic complexity, loop statements, maximum class depth and width in 
a file, number of method declarations, definitions, 
and average number of methods.  BASIL1 ET AL.: A VALIDATION 
OF OBJECT-ORIENTED DESIGN METRICS AS QUALITY INDICATORS 
759 Actual No Fault Fault Predicted No fault Fault 61 61 
7 (37) 51 (231) TABLE 8 CLASSIFICATION ACCURACIES BASED ON 00 AND CODE METRICS SHOWN IN TABLE 3 AND TABLE 6 CRITERIA Suite of Metrics Typeof products Dependent variable Statistical technique Model Accuracy 00 metrics Code metrics 
Completeness 88% (93%) 83% (86Yo) Correctness 60% (92%) 45.5% (86Yo) 3.2.4 Threats to Validity Several threats to the external validity 
of our study 
may limit the generalizability 
of our results: 
Briand et al. [I 01 Li and Henry [30] ADT Cohesion CK metrics CK metrics and Coupling 
Ada 00 dialect of Ada C++ fault occurrence 
number of fault occurrence in 
in Ada packages changes in com- logistic least-square logistic regression 
regression regression 
Our work C++ classes ponent™s The programs developed 
lie between five KSLOC and 14 KSLOC. Those programs are small 
as compared to 
large industry systems. The relationships between 
the studied 00 design metrics 
and the fault introduction 
probability are 
the results of a complex psychological phenomenon and they may 
look very different 
in larger programs. 
The conceptual complexity 
of these systems 
was rather limited. 
Again, many different problems may 
arise in more complex systems. It is likely that the 
study participants were not 
as well trained and as experienced 
as average professional 
programmers. However, this was partially addressed 
as discussed 
in Section 2.4. 4 RELATED WORK In [lo], metrics 
for measuring abstract 
data type (ADT) co- hesion and coupling are proposed 
and are validated 
as predictors of faulty ADTs. The main differences and simi- larities between 
the work here 
and [lo] are as follows (see 
Table 9). They did not empirically validate their metrics 
on 00 programs in a context of inheritance but they used a 
similar validation approach. 
In both 
cases, statistical model 
were built to predict component 
(i.e., ADTs and classes, respectively) fault-proneness 
(i.e., probability of fault de- 
tection) by using multiple 
logistic regression. In [30], a validation 
of Chidamber and Kemerer™s 00 metrics studying the number 
of changes performed in two commercial systems 
implemented with 
an 00 dialect of Ada was conducted. 
They show that Chidamber 
and Kemerer™s 00 metrics appeared to 
be adequate in predicting the 
fre- quency of changes across 
classes during the maintenance phase. They provided a 
model to predict the number 
of modifications in a class, which they assume is proportional 
to change effort 
and is representative 
of class maintainability. The work described 
in [30] is comparable to 
our work in the following ways (see 
Table 9). Li and Henry [30] used the same suite 
of 00 metrics we used. They also 
used data 
from products implemented in 
an 00 language which pro- 
vides multiple inheritance, overloading, 
and polymor- phism. On the other hand, we used the probability 
of fault detection as the 
dependent variable of our statistical model. 
Thus, our goal was to assess whether Chidamber 
and Ke- merer™s 00 metrics were useful predictors 
of fault-prone classes. In addition, 
in [30] (multivariate) least-square linear 
regression was used to build a predictive model whereas 
we used logistic regression (i.e., a classification technique for binary dependent variables). The nature of our depend- 
ent variable (i.e., (non)occurrence of fault detection) 
has led us to use 
logistic regression [25]. TABLE 9 SOME DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES 
BETWEEN [I 01, [30], AND OUR WORK VALIDATION WORK 
5 CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK In this 
study, we collected data about faults found in 
object- oriented classes. Based on these data, 
we verified how much fault-proneness is influenced by internal 
(e.g., size, 
cohesion) and external (e.g., coupling) design characteris- 
tics of 00 classes. From 
the results presented 
above, five 
out of the six Chidamber and Kemerer™s 00 metrics appear to be useful to predict 
class fault-proneness during the high- and low-level design phases 
of the life-cycle. In addi- tion, Chidamber 
and Kemerer™s 00 metrics show to be better predictors 
than the best set 
of ﬂtraditionalﬂ code met- rics, which can only be collected 
during later phases 
of the software development processes. 
This empirical validation provides the practitioner with 
some empirical evidence demonstrating that most 
of Chi- damber and Kemerer™s 00 metrics can be 
useful quality 
 760 IEEE TRANSACTIONS 
ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, 
VOL 22, NO. 10, OCTOBER 1996 indicators. Furthermore, most of these metrics 
appear to be 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS __ complementary indicators which are relatively 
independent from each other. 
The results we obtained provide motiva- 
tion for further investigation and refinement of Chidamber and Kemerer™s 00 metrics. Finally, results seem to show that one would 
likely be able 
to make inspections 
of design or code artifacts more 
efficient if they were driven by models such 
as the one we built 
in Section 3.2.3, based on Chidamber 
and Kemerer™s 00 met- rics. However, how to help focus inspections 
on error-prone 
parts in large programs 
is still an important issue to be fur- ther investigated. Our results should be interpreted as 
maxi- mum possible gains 
and not as 
expected gains. Our future work 
includes: * Replicating this study in 
an industrial setting: A sam- 
ple of large-scale projects 
developed in C++ and We want to thank (1) Dr. Gianluigi Caldiera 
for helping us teach the 
OMT method; (2) A. Belkhelladi, 
K. El Emam, C. Kemerer, J. Kontio, C. Seaman, F. Shull, and R. Tesoriero for 
their suggestions that helped improve 
both the content 
and the form 
of this paper; 
and (3) the 
students of University of Maryland for their participation on this 
study. This work will not be possible without the help of Prem Devanbu 
(AT&T Labs). Finally, we wish 
to thank the anonymous 
reviewers and Hausi 
Muller, the editor 
of this paper, 
for their valuable comments. 
This work was 
supported, in 
part, by the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration un- 
der Grant No. NSG-5123, the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 01-5-24845, Fraunhofer Gesellschaft, UMIACS, and Westinghouse Corporation. 
Ida95 in thve framework of the NAsA Goddard Flight Dynamics Division (Software Engineering 
Labora- tory). This work should 
help us better l.lnderstand the prediction capabilities 
of the suite 
of 00 metrics de- 
scribed in this paper. Replication should help 
us achieve the following objectives: and provide guidance 
to improve the allocation 
of resources with respect to test 
and verification efforts. 
of the impact of 00 design strategies 
(e.g., single versus multi- 
ple inheritance) 
on different types 
of defects and rework. In this study, because the 
data collet- tion process was not fully adequate, 
we were unable to analyze 
the relationships of 00 de- sign metrics with rework 
and different defect REFERENCES [l] F.B. Abreu and R. Carapuca, ﬂCandidate Metrics for 
Object- Oriented Software 
within a Taxonomy Framework,ﬂ 
]. System and Software, vol. 26, no. l, pp. 87-96, Jan. 1994. [2] Amadeus Software Research, 
Gettzng Started With Amadeus, Amadeus Measurement System, 
1994. [3] V Basili and D Hutchens, ﬂAnalyzing a Syntactic Family 
of Complexity Metrics,ﬂ IEEE Trans. Software Eng, vol 9, no. 6, pp. 664-673, June 1982 V. Basili, R. Selby, and T.-Y. Phdips, ﬂMetric Analysis 
and Data Validahon Across Fortran 
Projects,ﬂ IEEE Trans Sofbare Eng , V. Basili, L Briand, and W. Melo, ﬂMeasuring the 
Impact of Reuse on Software Quallty 
and Producbvivlty,ﬂ Comm ACM, vol 39, no 10, pp: 106116, Oct. 1996. J M Bieman 
and B.-K. Kang, ﬂCohesion and Reuse in an Object- Oriented System,ﬂ Proc ACM SIGSOFT Symp Software Xeusabzhfy, Seattle, Wash., 
pp. 259-262,1995. * . ~~i~ a better [4] 9, no. 6, pp. 652-663, June 1983 [5] [6] ﬂ categories. With regard to rework, we 
believe that this drawback could 
be overcome by 
refin- ing our data 
collection process to capture the 
amount of effort spent debugging each 
class in- dividually. With regard to 
defect categories, 
we would need to 
collect additional information 
about defect origin 
(e.g., specification, 
design, implementation, previous change), 
defect type (e.g., omission/ commission), 
defect class (e.g., 
external interface, internal interface, etc.), etc. 
Investigating the prediction usefulness 
of Chi- damber and Kemerer™s 00 design metrics with 
regard to different types 
of faults, e.g., fault 
se- verity. The fault-proneness prediction capabili- 
ties of any suite 
of 00 may be different de- 
pending on the type 
of fault used. Studying the variations, 
in terms of metric definitions 
and experimental results, between different 
00 pro- gramming languages. 
The fault-proneness prediction 
capabilities of the suite 
of 00 metrics discussed 
in this paper can be different depending on the pro- gramming language used. 
Work must be undertaken to validate this suite 
of 00 design metrics across dif- 
ferent 00 languages, e.g., Ada95, 
Smalltalk, C++, etc. * Extending the empirical investigation to other 
00 metrics proposed 
in the literature 
and develop improved metrics, e.g., more language 
specific, based on more sophisticated hypotheses. 
[7] [8] B. Boehm, Softzkre Eng. Economics, Prentice-Hall, 1981. L. Briand, V. Basili, and C. Hetmanski, ﬂDeveloping 
Interpretable Models with Optimized 
Set Reduction for Identifying 
High Risk Software Components,ﬂ 
IEEE Trans. Software Eng., vol. 19, no. 11, L. Briand, K. El Emam, and S. Morasca, Theoretical and Empirical Validation of Software Product Measures, 
ISERN Technical Report 
[lo] L. Briand, S. Morasca, and V. Basili, De$ning and 
Vdidating High- Level Design Metrics, 
Techtucal Report 
CS-TR-3301, Univ. of Maryland, Dept. 
of Computer Science, College Park, Md., 
1994. [ll] L. Briand, S. Morasca, and V. Basili, ﬂProperty Based Software Engineering Measurement,ﬂ 
IEEE Trans. Software Eng., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 68-86, Jan. 1996. 1121 I. Brooks, ﬁObject-Oriented Metrics Collection 
and Evaluation with a Software 
Process,ﬂ Proc. OOPSLA ™93 Workshop Processes and Metrics for Object-Oriented Software Development, Washington, D.C., 1993. [13] S.R. Chidamber and C.F. Kemerer, ﬁA Metrics Suite for 
Object- Oriented Design,ﬂ IEEE Trans. Software Eng., 
vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 476493, June 1994. [14] S.R. Chidamber and C.F. Kemerer, ﬂAuthors Reply,ﬂ lEEE Trans. Software Eng., vol. 21, no. 3, p. 265, Mar. 1995. [15] N.I. Churcher 
and M.J. Shepperd, ﬂComments on ‚A Metrics Suite 
for Object-Oriented 
Design,ﬂ™ IEEE Trans. Software Eng., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 263-265, Mar. 1995. [16] S.D. Conte, H.E. Dunsmore, and V.Y. Shen, Software Eng. Metrics 
and Models, Benjamin/Cummings, 1989. [17] J. Daly, A. Brooks, 
J. Miller, M. Roper, and M. Wood, ﬂThe 
Effect of Inheritance Depth on the Maintainability of Object-Oriented Software,ﬂ Empirical Software 
Eng.: An Int™l ]., vol. 1, no. 2, Feb. 1996. 
[18] P. Devanbu, ﬂGENOA/ GENII-A Customizable Language and Front-End Independent Code 
Analyzer,ﬂ Proc. 14th Int™l Con$ Software Eng., Melbourne, Australia, 
1992. pp. 1,028-1,044, NOV. 1993. [9] 95-03,1995.  BASIL1 ET AL.: A VALIDATION OF OBJECT-ORIENTED DESIGN METRICS AS QUALITY INDICATORS 
76 1 [19] P. Devanbu, S. Karstu, W. Melo, and W. Thomas, ﬂAnalytical 
and Empirical Evaluation 
of Software Reuse 
Metrics,ﬂ Proc. 18th Int™l Con$ Software Eng., pp. 189-199, Berlin, Germany, 1996. [20] R.B. Grady, Practical Software Metrics for Project Management and Process Improvement, Prentice Hall, 1992. [21] W. Harrison, ﬂUsing Software Metrics 
to Allocate Testing 
Re- sources,ﬂ J. Management Information Systems, 
vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 93-105, Apr. 1988. [22] W. Harrison, ﬂSoftware Measurement: 
A Decision-Process Ap- 
proach,ﬂ Advances in Computers, vol. 39, pp. 51-105,1994, [23] G. Heller, 
J. Valett, and M. Wild, 
Data Collection Procedure 
for Soft- ware Eng. Laboratory (SEL) Database, SEL Series, SEL-92402,1992. [24] M. Hitz and B. Montazeri, ﬂChidamber 
and Kemerer‚s Metrics Suite: A Measurement Theory Perspective,ﬂ 
IEEE Trans. Software Eng., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 267-271, Apr. 1996. [25] D. Hosmer and S. Lemeshow, AppIied Logistic Regression, Wiley- Interscience, 1989. [26] N.E. Fenton, 
Software Metrics: A Rigorous Approach, 
Chapman & Hall, 1991. [27] C.M. Judd, E.R. Smith, and L.H. Kidder, 
Research Methods in Social Relations, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers, 
1991. [28] T.M. Khohgoftaar, AS. Panday, and H.B. More, ﬁA Neural Net- 
work Approach for Predicting Software Development Faults,ﬂ 
Proc. Third Int™l IEEE Symp. Software Reliability Eng., North Caro- lina, 1992. [29] F. Lanubile and G. Visaggio, 
ﬂEvaluating Predictive 
Quality Models Derived from Software Measures: Lessons Learned,ﬂ 
to appear in the 1. Soflware and Systems; also available 
as Technical Report CS-TR-3606, Univ. of Maryland, Computer Science Dept., College Park, 
Md., 1996. [30] W. Li and S. Henry, ﬂObject-Oriented Metrics 
that Predict Main- 
tainability,ﬂ J. Systems and Software, vol. 23, no. 2, ‚pp. 111-122, Feb. 1993. [31] F. McGarry, R. Pajersk, G. 
Page, S. Waligora, V. Basili, and M. Zelkowitz, Software Process Improvement in 
the NASA Software Eng. Laboratory. Camegie Mellon Univ., Software Eng. Inst., Technical 
Report CMU/SEI-95-TR-22, Dec. 
1994. [32] J. Munson and T. Khoshgoftaar, ﬂThe Detection 
of Fault-Prone Programs,ﬂ IEEE Trans. Software Eng., vol. 18, no. 5, May 1992. [33] J. Rumbaugh, M. Blaha, 
W. Premerlani, F. Eddy, and W. Lorensen, Object-Oriented Modeling and Design, Prentice Hall, 
1991. [34] R. Selby and A. Porter, ﬂLearning from Examples: Generation 
and Evaluation of Decision Trees for Software Resource Analysis,ﬂ 
IEEE Trans. Software Eng., 
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1,743-1,747, Feb. 1988. [35] N. Schneidewind, ﬂMethodology for Validating Software Met- 
rics,ﬂ IEEE Trans. Software Eng., 
vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 410-422, May 1992. [36] B. Stroustrup, The C++ Programming Language, 
Addison-Wesley Series in 
Computer Science, second edition, 
1991. [37] D.A. Young, 
Object-Oriented Programming 
with C++ and OSFIMO- TIF, Prentice Hall, 
1992. Victor R. Basili is a 
professor in the Institute for 
Advanced Computer Studies 
and the Computer 
Science Department at the University 
of Mary- land, College Park, Maryland, where he 
has served as chairman for six years. He is one 
of the founders and principals 
in the Software Engineering Laboratory, 
a joint venture 
between NASA Goddard Space 
Flight Center, the University 
of Maryland, and Computer Sci- ences Corporation, established 
in 1976. 
He is 
a recipient of the first 
Process Improvement Achievement Award 
by the 
IEEE and the SEI, and the 
NASA Group Achievement Award. 
He has served as 
editor-in-chief for the /•E• Transactions on 
Soff- ware Engineering; general chair of the 15th International Conference 
on Software Engineering in 
1993, in Baltimore, 
Maryland; program chair for 
the Sixth International Conference 
on Software Engineering in 
1982, in Japan; and generaVprogram chair for several other confer- 
ences. He 
is an IEEE 
fellow and member of the IEEE Computer 
Soci- ety and Golden 
Core. Lionel C. Briand received the 
BS degree in 
geophysics and the 
MS degree in computer science from the 
University of Paris VI, France, in 1985 and 
1987, respectively. He received the 
PhD degree, 
with high 
honors, in 
computer sci- 
ence from the University 
of Paris XI, France, in 1994. Dr. Briand started his career 
as a software 
engineer at CIS1 Ingenierie, France. Between 1989 and 
1994, he was a 
research scientist 
at the NASA Software Engineering Laboratory, 
a research consortium: 
NASA Goddard Space 
Flight Center, University of Maryland, and Computer Science Corpora- 
tion. He 
then held the position 
of lead researcher 
of the software engi- 
neering group 
at CRIM, 
the Computer Research Institute 
of Montreal, Canada. He is currently the head 
of the Quality and Process Engi- 
neering Department at 
the Fraunhofer Institute 
for Experimental Soft- 
ware Engineering, an 
industry-oriented research center located in 
Rheinland-Pfalz, Germany. His current research interests and indus- 
trial activities include 
measurement and modeling 
of software devel- opment products and processes, software quality 
assurance, domain- 
specific architectures, reuse, 
and reengineering. Walcelio L. Melo received the following 
degrees in computer science: 
BSc in 1983 from the Uni- 
versity of Brasilia, Brazil; MSc 
in 1988 from the 
Federal University 
of Rio Grande do 
SUI, Brazil; and a PhD in 
1993 from Joseph Fourier Univer- 
sity, Grenoble, France. He is now 
the lead re- 
searcher in software engineering at the Centre 
de Recherche lnformatique de Montreal 
(CRIM), Canada. At CRIM, he 
develops research and 
technology transfer projects related 
to software measurement, software reuse, object-oriented technology, software architecture, 
and software process 
modeling. He 
is also 
an adjunct professor 
at the McGill University 
School of Com- puter Science and a former member of the NASA Software Engineer- 
ing Laboratory. From 1983 
to 1989, he 
worked as 
a system analyst for 
the Brazilian Federal Bureau 
of Data Processing, where he 
developed several business-oriented 
software applications. From 1989 
to 1993, 
he developed research related 
to software process programming lan- 
guages at 
the Software Engineering Laboratory 
of Grenoble, France. From 1994 to 1996, he 
worked as 
a research associate 
at the Univer- 
sity of Maryland Institute 
for Advanced 
Computer Studies, where 
he developed research projects related 
to software maintenance, software 
metrics, and object-oriented 
technology. He 
is a member 
of the IEEE 
Computer Society. 