 





































  1 Short-term physiological strain and recovery among employees working with agile and lean methods in 
software and embedded ICT systems Seppo Tuomivaara
a*, Harri Lindholm
b and Marja Känsälä
c a and c
 Sociotechnical Change, Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland 
b Digital Health of NokiaTECH, Nokia, Helsinki, Finland 
*Corresponding author: Finni
sh Institute of Occupational Heal
th, Arinatie 3 A, PO Box 18, FI-
00370 Helsinki, Finland. E-mail: seppo.tuomivaara@ttl.fi 
Tuomivaara Seppo
, PhD. (psychol.), is Specialist Researcher at Finnish Institute of 
Occupational Health. His research activities has been focused on human ICT relations, work 
development practices, well-being at work of agile team members and well-being at work on 
constructing collaborative innovation practices. 
Lindholm Harri
, MD., PhD, was previously Chief Physician in Laboratory of Physiology at 
Finnish Institute of Occupational Health. He is presently working in Digital Health of 
NokiaTECH. His research activities have been 
focused on physiological regulation of stress and 
recovery among healthy and non-healthy population 
and diagnostics of cardiovascular disorders. 
Känsälä Marja
, D.Sc. (Econ.), works as Specialist Researcher at Finnish Institute of 
Occupational Health. Her research interests include agile methods, teamwork, project work, 
well-being at work, leadership
 and international work. She has published both nationally and 
internationally, and applied both qu
alitative and quantitative methods. 
Agile work practices have become popular. Al
though they hold great promise regarding well-
being at work, systematic scientific research on
 this connection is scarce. This paper aims to 
capture the current situation by measuring the 
state of mental workload using physiological 
indicators and by comparing high and low perceived agile work. Is the agile way of working 
associated with well-being at work? Three software teams and four embedded development 
teams were used in the different phases of applying agile methods. We conducted a baseline 
survey on perceived agile work in the team and carried out physiological measurements three 
  2 times in a working period. Repeated measure procedure was used to analyse the effects. The 
results provide evidence that agile work could even out workload during a working period, i.e. 

maintain sustainable pace.   The results of the lo
w agile work were in line with the assumption 
that work will accumulate
 at the end of the period because 
of loose planning and a lack of 
frequent checking. Therefore workers also felt more strain from the pressure of deadlines. 
Keywords: agile methods, physiological, strain, recovery, agile measure 
1. INTRODUCTION Agile work has become particularly popular in modern society. Agile methodologies originate 
from software process improvement and have roots in lean methods in industrial R&D 
(Abrahamsson, 2005; Takeuchi & Nonaka, 1986). Within software development, agile methods 

have gained popularity and have also been applied to other types of work. They have been 
developed in order to quickly respond to changing customer demands, and they enable 
systematic project management even when perfect planning is not possible at the beginning of a 

project (Williams, 2007). Agile and lean practices are realized through various methodologies, 
such as Scrum and Kanban (Kniberg, 2009; Law & Lárusdóttir 2015), including general project 
management guidelines and technical practices. 
Agile principles hold many promises as regards well-being at work. The four agile values 
presented in the agile manifesto are broken down into 12 principles (Agile Manifesto, 2013). 
Perhaps the most important value related to well-bei
ng at work is that of valuing individuals and 
interaction over processes and tools. Of these principles, the ones most related to well-being at 
  3 work are especially: 1) Motivated individuals who are given the required environment and 
support, and are trusted to get the work done; 2) 
Sustainable pace: ability to indefinitely maintain 
a constant pace; 3) Self-organized teams; and 4) Continuous improvement: teams™ regular 
reflection on when and how to improve. 
When applying an agile type of work, the methods may also challenge well-being at work and 
implicate strain, through for example, self-intensification (Porschen, 2012), diminished time for 
recovery and continuous reaction to changing customer needs. As working time at the workplace 
is restricted, employees might continue work-related activities at home and outside the 
workplace. This may lead to over-commitment and the extension of real working time. Despite 

attempts to optimize work-rest periods to preserve functioning, sudden changes in information 
flow, technical problems and alterations in team resources may hinder recovery and increase 
stress. Time pressure and cognitive strain due to the overflow of media inputs increase stress. 

New technology requires constant learning and the implementation of new working modalities as 

can be deduced from the Balance Theory of the work system model by Smith and Carayon 

(Carayon, 2009) and can causes an increase in experienced stress (Korunka, Zauchner & Weiss, 

1997). 
Human, people and social factors are one thematic group of agile literature (Dybå & Dingsøyr, 
2008; Lalsing, Kishnah, & Pudaruth, 2012), and indeed, agile teamwork, for example, has been 

widely studied (Hogdson & Briand, 2013). A great deal of literature on lean methods and well-

being at work is mainly based on the manufacturing context (e.g. Yauch, 2007; Raja, 2012). 
Although a number of studies focus on software
 engineering and motivation, feelings, happiness, 
  4 and commitment, they do not really look into links to agile methods (Abrahamsson, Salo, 
Ronkainen & Warsta, 2002; Graziotin, Wang & Abrahamsson, 2013; Graziotin, Wang & 

Abrahamsson, 2014; Misirli, Verner, Markkula 
& Oivo, 2014; Verner, Beecham & Cerpa, 2010). 
Systematic scientific research on agile methods and well-being at work is scarce, although a 

couple of studies exist that are related to agile 
methods and, for example, stress, motivation, and 
job satisfaction (Asproni, 2004; 
Laanti, 2013; Mann & Maurer, 2005; Melnik & Maurer, 2006; 
Mannaro, Melis & Marche
si, 2004; Succi, Marchesi & Willi
ams, 2002). These studies have 
focused on the psycho-social aspect of well-being at work. Lagerberg et al. (2013) found no 
correlation with the intentional implementation of agile principles and practices and the increases 
in pressure and stress in their study. 
In this study the implications of the agile way of working for well-being at work was 
examined by measuring the state of mental workload. There is not a single right way to measure 

mental workload. Three main classifications for measurement of workload are physiological, 

subjective and performance-based measures (Miller, 2001). Each of them give their own kind of 

and important information from workload in a situation (e.g. Paxion, Galy & Berthelon, 2014). 

This article is focused on physiological indicator
s. Physiological indicators can complete other 
kind of data and they allow a continuous on-line assessment which is important in this context. 

Also, they are sensitive to detect changes in levels of workload, non-intrusive and good and 
objective measure of workload. 
  5 2. WORK-RELATED PHYSIOLOGICAL STRESS Perceived task performance and objectively measured mental workload are often dissociated 
(Myrtek, Deutschmann-Janicke, Strohmaier, et al., 1994). A higher workload might mobilize 
more resources and thus improve performance. 
If workload constantly increases, functional 
reserves reach their limits, and performance an
d mental well-being decrease (Young, Brookhuis, 
Wickens & Hancock,   2015). Theoretically, the goal of agile work is to achieve a controlled and 
stable work flow, sometimes during a short working period called a sprint, and to prevent the 

excess use of resources. Attenuated recovery is a sign of overreaching functional reserves, and 
good recovery supports the positive flow of work (Debus, Sonnentag, Deutsch & Nussbeck, 
2014). Insufficient recovery may be caused by working overtime or by the prolonged cognitive 

effects of daily stressors (Van Hooff, Geurts
, Kompier & Taris, 2007). These stressors can 
change over working time but the physiological re
actions of the body reflect acute job events as 
well as the chronic state of work-stress reaction (Fujigaki & Mori, 1997). The detrimental effect 

of job stressors on the health and well-being of employees is well established. 
Heart rate variability (HRV) has been used to assess work-related physiological stress (Togo & 
Takahashi, 2009; Collins, Karasek & Costas, 2005). Stress-related attenuated HRV is caused by 

decreased parasympathetic tone, mainly vagally mediated, and/or increased sympathetic tone, in 

the autonomic nervous system. HRV and the balance between sympathetic and parasympathetic 
indices may serve as an indicator of mental overload (Durantin, Gagnon, Tremblay & Dehais, 
2014; Young, Brookhuis, Wickens & Hancock, 2015). Prolonged sympathetic drive and 

attenuated parasympathetic recovery is reflected by the decreased vagal modulation of heart rate 
  6 during sleep (Hall, Vasko, Buysse, et al., 2004). The reduction of relaxed periods between the 
active periods of the day can be assessed by new methods that measure heart rate variability 

(Teisala, Mutikainen, Tolvanen, et al., 2014). The shift to sympathetic dominance may be 
labelled as stress time (ST), and the shift to parasympathetic dominance as relaxation time (RT). 
Among hospital workers, higher effort during work was associated with lower daytime HRV and 

relaxation time assessed by HRV (Uusitalo, Mets, Martinmäki, et al., 2011). 
The aim of this study was to assess the connection between agile project management practices 
perceived by employees and short-term physiological stress reaction measured by HRV during a 

working period. As far as we know, this is the firs
t study to demonstrate the effects of agile work 
on physiologically measured stress. 
3. RESEARCH SETTING AND STUDY DESIGN This study examined three case organizations. (see flowchart of study design in Figure 1). 
Although the companies also had international activ
ities, the development sites studied in this 
article were mainly located in Finland. First, 
three teams of a software development unit in a 
large company that provides debt-related administrative services were studied. The reasoning 
behind this choice was that the relation between agile methods and well-being at work would 

first be studied in software development, fro
m which agile methods originate. The projects 
concerned software development and the maintenance of web-based services, such as credit-

related information and invoice and payment services, i.e. maintenance of an online self-service 

portal. The teams had different compositions of
 software developers, designers, solution 
  7 architects and testers, and also different facilitators and leads roles, such as a requirements 
manager, product owner and scrum master. It was 
also essential that agile methods were already 
somewhat established, i.e. had already been in place for a few years. However, the interviews of 
team leaders implicated that success in implementing agile working practices varied between 
teams. Two self-managed teams had been able to develop and maintain agile working well but 

the third had experienced setbacks. The business management directed the team to work in a 
more top-down and controlled manner. 
Second, we studied case companies within embedded systems development. ﬁAn embedded 
system is a specialized computer system designed for a dedicated task or a purpose which is 
embedded as a component of a larger system usually including hardware and mechanicsﬂ (Kaisti, 
Rantala, Mujunen, et al., 2013). Agile methods have also been applied to embedded systems 
development, but as they were originally developed for software development, they had to be 

applied to fit the development of hardware and mechanics. The study targets were one large team 

of a large telecom company that develops digital parts for modems. The team comprised a digital 

team, analogical team and software team in addi
tion to system designers. All developers in the 
team were involved in the same project at th
e time. There had been three pattern generations 
within a year, and in general projects were conti
nuum projects, of which multiple variants were 
made before the final product was released. At th
e time of the study, the 
team was in the process 
of transforming its development work into the agile way of working. According to the 

preliminary interviews of the team member in
 charge, the team, when working in a more 
traditional way, had had problems with, for example, communication, documentation and shared 
working practices. At the time of the study ag
ile transformation was conducted via iteration 
  8 planning, iteration review, retrospective, daily stand-up, detailed backlog and developing and 
implementing an interruption management tool. 
Embedded systems development was also studied in three small SME teams that develop 
products and systems for, for example, the medical sector. They develop products in close co-
operation with medical product suppliers including software, and electronic and mechanic 
design. The teams had already been applying agile methods and project management tools for a 

few years. Based on preliminary interviews the ma
in issues had concerned in the utilization of 
agile practices, process descriptions and customer collaboration. At the time of the study the 

teams took up more sophisticated agile practices, for example daily stand-ups with iteration-

specific burndown charts. 
The teams within these companies mainly used 
the Scrum and Kanban type of working, which 
are methods of realizing agile practices and principles. In Kanban, work is not divided into 

working phases i.e. sprints (that typically last 
for 1Œ4 weeks) in the same way as in Scrum. 
However, it was also for the most part possible to recognize a working period in the Kanban type 
of teams of this study. Some of their practices (e.g. retrospectives and reviews) were similar to 
those when sprints change in Scrum. Thus, in a way, their work was also periodical. 
3.1. Research Questions and Hypotheses 
Software and embedded systems developers and professionals perform boundary-spanning 
activities which makes the work environment mentally demanding. The psycho-social 

characteristics of work, such as strict deadlines, different time zones, the interdependency of 
  9 teams, increased interaction with customers, and extended working hours, can lead to 
occupational stress and exhaustion. Professionals need strong interpersonal, technical, and 

organizational knowledge as well as organizational support to perform well in this work 
environment and maintain a sustainable pace. We were interested to see whether agile methods 
can provide support and knowledge to master these demanding situations. Our main research 

question was: Does the agile way of working decrease work stress and maintain sustainable 
pace? 
Different people perceive the work environment and feel the impact of workload in different 
ways, even if they are in the same function. These differences in perceptions can be caused by 
individual factors, and personal and systemic work-related and organizational factors. Therefore 
we operationalized our research question as follows: Is the perceived agile way of working 
associated with well-being at work
 as measured by physiological indicators? In our context, this 
meant the connection between perceived agile work and HRV-measured stress and relaxation 

times. On the basis of many practitioners™ promises
 of agile principles and the results of studies 
focusing on the psycho-social aspect of well-being in agile work, our assumption was that there 

would also be a connection with the physiological indicators. 
To determine the value of a possible connection and to answer the main research question we 
examined the difference between the low and high realization of perceived agile work groups, in 

more detail as well as that between its realization at the beginning and at the end of the working 

period. These were treated as independent variables and the dependent variables were stress time 
and relaxation time. First we asked: Does the high perceived agile work group experience less 
  10 strain during a whole working period than the low agile group (Q1)? We presumed that in the 
high agile group, workload in terms of stress time would be lower (H1) and relaxation time 

higher (H2) than that in the low agile group. Our second question was: Does the agile way of 
working even out the strain experienced during a working period (Q2)? We formulated four 
hypotheses to answer this question. First, in th
e high agile group, the stress time does not vary 
between the beginning and the end of a working period (H3) but in the low agile group the stress 
time at the end is higher than that at the beginn
ing or in the middle of a working period (H4).  
Second, relaxation time does not vary from the beginning to the end of a working period in the 

high agile group (H5). However, in the low agile group relaxation time at the end is lower than 
that at the beginning or in the middle of a working period (H6). (Table 1.) 
3.2. Data and methods 
The data were gathered from embedded and software teams as mentioned via a questionnaire 
and physiological measurements of both types of teams. Because the aim of the study was to 

understand the connection between agile way of working and well-being at work intensively and 

the software teams were more familiar with agile 
methods, than the other teams, they were also 
interviewed. However, that qualitative data will
 reported elsewhere later.
 A survey concerning 
well-being at work and agile work was used to classify the participants according to their 
experience of how agile they considered their current way of working (see Figure 1: comparison 
between low and high realization). The physiological measurements reported here, i.e. heart rate 
and HRV, were taken to evaluate the change of stress and recovery of the participants during one 
working period, called a sprint in Scrum teams. 
  11 The survey also contained many questions on the psycho-social aspects of work, such as work 
organization, team communication, interruptions, workload, and so on. These results are not 
reported here because of their rich data, which are worthy of a separate article. Besides, the focus 
here was to determine a connection between agile perception and physiological reaction during a 
working period. Moreover the survey questions di
d not illustrate the work content itself. The 

understanding of the work content itself came from the interviews of the team leaders or persons 
in charge. This knowledge was used earlier in this
 text to describe the participating teams™ work 
and their agile orientation. Interviews also supp
lemented the understanding of the experiences of 
agile work, in addition to the classification based on the survey. 
3.2.1. Participants The participants were included in the study if they had answered the questionnaire at the 
beginning of a working period and had three successful physiological measurement periods 

during the working period observed. The total amount of participants included was 36; 3 female 
and 33 male. These were mainly software developers and embedded designers. Interviews were 
conducted among software developers only (See Table 2). 
The mean age of the participants was 34. They had worked in the organization for five years 
and in their present team for over two years on average (See Table 3). The youngest participant 
was 25 and the oldest 56 years old. 
  12 3.2.2. Measure of perceived agile working 
The questionnaire was conducted as a web-based survey, in which agile methods of software 
and embedded development were explored through the team members' experiences. It included 
questions on well-being at work concerning team work and work; and organizational and 
psychosocial factors such as commitment, flow of information, feedback, development of work 
and expertise, control, amount of workload, job satisfaction, stress, and recovery. The study 
focused on the experiences of working in an agile way and classifying the participants according 
to their participative interpretation
 of their team™s working practices. 
The questionnaire for examining the experien
ce of agile work was based on the Agile 
Manifesto, PAM Scale (So & Scholl, 2009) a
nd Nokia test (2015). The PAM Scale i.e. 
Perceptive Agile measurement by So and Scholl is an instrument for measuring social-
psychological effects via workers™ perception of eight agile practices in their work: iteration 
planning, iterative development, continuous integration and testing, stand-up meetings, customer 
access, customer acceptance tests, retrospectives, and co-location. 
In contrast, the Nokia test was developed to measure the teams™ adaptation of Scrum. The test 
consists of questions that ascertai
n if a team is following Scrum rules, such as iterations, testing, 
enabling specifications, product owner, product 
backlog, estimates, burndown, disruption and 
team. Here those concepts and instruments were used as a framework and question examples for 

formulating the questionnaire in this study™s mixed agile context. The questionnaire contained 25 
questions on agile principles such as iteration and incrementation, practices such as continuous 
improvement, and other dimensions. The questions that remained after analyses of the structure 
  13 of the questionnaire are shown in Table 4. The re
sponse options to statements were on a five-
point Likert scale: strongly agree = 1 to strongly disagree = 5. 
First, the structure of the 25 questions was analysed using explorative factor analysis 
(Nunnally, 1967). The analysis focused on the participants who answered the survey. Some 
questions were ruled out (4 questions) of the final factor solution due to diverse factor loadings. 
We also discarded a dimension that described the testing procedure of the product in the 

developmental process. The testing in software and embedded production differed. After this, 18 
questions remained, which comprised five dimensions: Continuous orientation practices, 
Incrementation, Iteration, Continuous improvemen
t, and Customer relations. The factors were 
analysed using Cronbach™s alpha (Cronbach, 1970).  All of the measures employed in this study 
demonstrated tolerable to good internal consistency, ranging from 0.77 to 0.89 (see Table 3), 
thereby exceeding recomme
nded reliability estimates (
 = 0.70), (Eisinga, Te Grotenhuis & 
Pelzer, 2012). 
3.2.3. Heart rate and heart 
rate variability recordings 
Twenty-four-hour heart rate and HRV recordi
ngs were performed at the beginning of a 
working period (sometimes called a sprint), in the middle of a one- or two-week working period 
and at the end of a working period. The recordings began in the morning of the working day and 
ended 24 hours later. HRV recordings included both working time and time of recovery, 

including sleep. The beat-to-beat R-R intervals of the human cardiac cycle were collected by 
electrocardiogram (ECG) based recorders (Bodygua
rd, 2015).  HRV is the normal variation in 
the time intervals between consecutive heartbeats
 (Heart rate variability, 1996). The estimation 
  14 of HRV from long-term electrocardiographi
c recordings is a non-invasive method for 
cardiovascular autonomic regulation, and provides information regarding the autonomic nervous 
system (ANS). Therefore, changes related to the psychophysiological strain and recovery of the 
ANS can be evaluated by HRV analyses. In addition, HRV analysis has shown to be an effective 
method for assessing work-related stressors an
d physiological recovery after work (van 
Amelsvoort, Schouten, Maan, et al., 2000). Age, ge
nder, cardiorespiratory fitness, general health, 
and medications should be considered, as these all influence HRV (Acharya, Paul, Kannathal, et 

al., 2006; Zanstra & Johnston, 2011).  Self-reported health was evaluated before the study using 
a short check-list. The participants were re-examined after a working period by an experienced 
physician during a personal contact session. All the participants fulfilled the criteria of suitable 

test participants. 
The indices of HRV in time and spectral domains (Table 5) were calculated using special 
software for HRV analyses (Firstbeat Oy, Finland, 2014). The indices of relaxation and stress 

were expressed as sliding balance in the parameters reflecting the activity of the sympathetic 

(stress) and parasympathetic (relaxation) parts of
 cardiac autonomic regulation. Stress percentage 
is the proportion of time labelled as increased
 sympathetic tone during the whole recording. 
Relaxation percentage is the proportion of time labelled as increased parasympathetic tone 

during the whole recording. During daytime, normal daily activities cause a shift to sympathetic 
dominance, and during sleep, the parasympathetic part is dominant. Stress balance is the 
mathematical expression for the difference between these two components of HRV (Firstbeat 

Oy, Finland, 2014). 
  15 The participants also kept diaries in which they recorded their level of physical activity, other 
activities, feelings of recovery and strain during the day, and also possible physiological harms 
or illnesses that could affect the valid
ity and feasibility of these measurements.  
3.2.4. Data analysis The process of analysis followed the study design (see Figure 1). First, the participants were 
classified into two groups according to their 
interpretation of agile 
working practices. The 
classification was executed by 
centroid-based clustering (Kaufm
an & Rousseeuw, 2009) in SPSS 
Statistics K-means clustering. The variables used in the grouping procedure were the previously 

presented dimensions. After clustering, each participant was placed in one of the two groups 
according to their results in all five agile dimensions. Each participant belonged to either the high 
or low agile group. All respondents of the survey were included in the clustering (n = 44). The 

results of the final cluster centres and their tested discriminant values are presented in Table 6. 
The dimensions that were used in the clustering operation were formulated by summing up 
the values of the variables that loaded in the same factor in the factor analysis previously 

described in this article. After this, the sum was divided by the amount of summed variables. 

This procedure was used to conduct the continuous variables by which the clustering was 
executed. The scale in each dimension was 1 to 5: 1 being a very high, and 5 a very low amount 
of the property. As shown in Ta
ble 5, small numbers in means re
present high perceived agility in 
team work, and large numbers low perceived agility
. According to the statistical tests, the final 
cluster centres of the emerged groups differed statistically significant at the level of p < 0,001 in 

four dimensions, and of p < 0,018 in one dimension. 
  16 In the second phase of the analysis, we esti
mated the difference between groups in terms of 
changes in the stress and relaxation of the participants during one working period. In this 
analysis, the amount of participants was 36 i.e. list-wise exclusion was conducted. The high agile 
group had 19 and the low agile group 17 memb
ers. SPSS™s GLM repeated measure procedure 
was used to analyse the data. In this Manova (Warne, 2014) analysis, there was one within-
participant and one between-participant factor. The within-participant effect was estimated from 
the changes in the stress percentage and relaxation percentage from the beginning, middle and 
end of a working period. As an independent factor we used the separation of the agile groups, 
which constituted the estimation of the between-p
articipant effect (See Figure 1 and Table 1). 
Even though the agile groups were almost homogenous as regards gender and age, in the 
analysis, gender and age were used as covariates because they were assumed to associate with 
relaxation and stress. 
4. RESULTS The results focus on the perceived agile way of working and its connections to stress and 
relaxation during a working period. The perceive
d high agile group contained 19 and the low 
agile group 17 participants. The first group had one and the second two female participants. 
Participants™ average age was 34 ye
ars in the first and 35 years in the second group. Both agility 
groups contained software developers as well as
 embedded designers. The participants of one 
case company in embedded system development were clustered in the high perceived agile 

group, and the participants of the other embedded company in the low perceived agile group. In 

the software company, the three teams were divided so that the participants of one of them 
  17 clustered in the low perceived agile group, and those of the other two in the high agile group. 
However, three people in the two mainly high agile
 teams clustered in th
e low agile group. These 
results of the dimensions™ clustering are in line
 with the observations and interviews of the 
researchers in the case companies. 
As Table 6 shows, the two groups differ from each other mostly in the dimensions of 
incrementation (F=41.663) and then customer relation (F=35.564) and continuous improvement 

(F=32.227). In the iteration principle, (F=6.085) their self-perceptions are quite close to each 
other, and in continuous orientation practices (F=13.112) a little further from each other. The 
differences of group means variations were between 0.54 and 1.56 on a five-point scale. It is also 

worth noticing that neither of these groups had either extremely high or extremely low perceived 
agility. According to the Manova results, conducted separately for the stress and relaxation 
percentages, perceived agility, as an independent variable, was connected to physiological 
reactions during a working period, measured as a dependent variable. The test of the between-
subjects effects shows that the agile groups did no
t differ from each other as regards their stress 
or relaxation times in general (Stress: F(1/32) = 0.35, p = 0.558; Relaxation: F(1/32) = 0.492, p = 
0.488). Multivariate tests show that measurement ti
me had no main effect on stress percentage in 
general (Wilks™ Lambda: F(2/29) = 1.613, p = 0.217). However, there was an almost statistically 

significant interaction effect between measurement time and perceived agility (Wilks™ Lambda: 

F(2/29) = 2.874, p = 0.073). Because Mauchly™s test of sphericity indicated that the variances 
between the measurements in time were equal, 
the within-participants test gave an almost 
  18 significant interaction effect (Sphericity assumed: F(2/60) = 3.139, p = 0.051). The perceived 
agile groups differed from each other in stress percentage during the working period (See Figure 

2.) 
The within-participants test contrasts also indicated that the effect of time on stress percentage 
was linear (F(1/30) = 5.888, p = 0.021). As seen in Figure 2, the mean stress percentage 

increased from the beginning (M = 10.42, SD = 16.72) of a working period to its end (M = 

27.14, SD = 34.00) among the low perceived agility group. At the same time, among the high 
perceived agility group, the mean of the stress pe
rcentage remained at the same level or even 
decreased (M = 16.37, SD = 19.54; M =10.36, SD = 14.58) during a working period. 
The second multivariate test also shows that measurement time had no main effect on the 
relaxation percentage in general (Wilks™ Lambda: F(2/29) = 0.678, p = 0.516). On this occasion, 

a statistically significant interaction effect emerged clearly between measurement time and 
perceived agility (Wilks™ Lambda: F(2/29) = 3.344,
 p = 0.049). In the within-participants test, 
assumed sphericity was F(2/60) = 3.926, p = 0.025, indicating a significant interaction effect. 
The perceived agile groups differed from each other in relaxation percentage during a working 
period (See Figure 3.) 
The effect of time on the relaxation percentage was also assumed to be linear (F(1/30) = 
6.882, p = 0.014). In Figure 3, the mean of the relaxation percentage increases from the 
beginning (M = 68.04, SD = 25.57) of a working period to its end (M = 77.42, SD = 25.47) 
among the high perceived agility group. Among the low perceived agility group, the mean of the 
  19 relaxation percentage decreases from the beginning (M = 75.57, SD = 21.73) to the end of a 
working period (M =57.19, SD = 37.37). 
5. DISCUSSION This study concentrated on the evidence of a connection between well-being at work and agile 
working methods. In our article we ask whether the agile way of working decreases work stress 

and maintains a sustainable pace. Our assumption was that it would. First we determined whether 

the perceived high agile work group experience less strain during a whole working period than 
the low agile group measured by physiological in
dicators (Q1). However, this hypothesis was 
not confirmed. The agile groups did not differ fr
om each other as regards their stress (H1) or 
relaxation (H2) times in general.  So, hypotheses 1 and 2 were rejected. According to the 

statistical analysis results, it was obvious that the groups with different amounts of perceived 
agility did not differ from each other in their well
-being at work in general, when measured by 
HRV. Measurements of the groups™ short-term physiological strain or recovery did not differ 

when the data was analysed as a whole. 
Second, we formulated four hypotheses to answer the question of whether the agile way of 
working evens out the strain experienced during a working period (Q2). Our hypothesis that in 

the low agile group the stress time is higher at the end than at the beginning of a working period 
received modest support (H4). So did the assumption that in the high agile group it did not vary 
between the beginning and the end of a working period (H3). However, in the high agile group, 

stress time decreased somewhat from beginning to end, even though the difference was not 
  20 statistically significant. According to the interac
tion effect these two groups seem to differ from 
each other in their stress reaction during a working period, as was assumed. Moreover, the 
difference in relaxation time from the beginning to the end of a working period was not 
statistically significant in the high agile group, therefore hypotheses five was supported. As in 
stress time, however better relaxation time was seen toward the end of a working period. Among 

the low agile members relaxation time at the end 
was lower than that at the beginning of a 
working period, thus confirming hypothesis 6. 
5.1. Interpretation of the results 
Previous research on agile methods and well-being at work has focused on experienced 
psycho-social aspects, and has shown that agile methods are associated with motivation at work 
(Asproni, 2004) and job satisfaction (Melnik & Maurer, 2006). People working in an agile way 

were more motivated and satisfied in their jobs. Perceived feelings of a sustainable pace and less 
stress are also related to agile working in an empowered manner (Laanti, 2013) and an agile way 
of working reduced the perceived stress during a work day (Mannaro, Melis & Marchesi, 2004). 

According to Mann and Maurer (2005) after the introduction of Scrum the amount of overtime 
decreased, work at a more sustainable pace increased, and at the same time customer satisfaction 
grew. Laanti (2013) also found no significant difference in feelings of stress and empowerment 

when working in Kanban or Scrum. 
The results of physiological measurements in this study are in line with the body of 
knowledge gained from the studies above and also with the promises given in the Agile 

Manifesto (2013). The results of the physiological indicators strengthen the results of subjective 
  21 feelings of stress and expand the perspective from strain to recovery. In addition, the data in this 
study consists of three time points and therefore provide us with knowledge regarding the 

changing experience of strain in a working period. As a whole, our study design and 
measurements are more precise indicators and provide a deeper insight than previous studies by 
revealing that agile methods enable a better workload balance and working at a sustainable pace. 
The interpretation of these results may be that
 these measured and perceived agile principles 
and practices are effective when we want the effect to be well-being at work in software and 
embedded development. The aspects we considered were continuous orientation practices, 
incrementation, iteration, continuous improvement 
practices, and customer relations. Previous 
studies have shown that the factors that influence job satisfaction are workers™ ability to 
influence decisions that affect them, the opportunity to work on interesting projects, and 
relationships with users. There is also evidence that agile methods increase productivity, lead to 

more satisfied customers and therefore increase motivation at work and appeal to developers. In 

this article, we did not study which kind or what
 factors of agile work most affect strain and 
recovery, but treated them as a whole, as the perceived agile working experience. 
When interpreting these results, we also have to keep in mind that the difference between the 
low and the high agile groups co
me from the interaction effect.  The high agile group had high 
stress percent means and low relaxation percent means at the beginning of a work period, even 

though slight statistical evidence existed of differences during a working period and against the 

low agile group. However, we can speculate on th
e interesting results of the high agile group, 
according to which they experienced more strain and less relaxation at the beginning of a period 
  22 than at its end. The agile method may cause more planning and work at the beginning, but foster 
a feeling of achievement later on during the period, and therefore a more relaxed mood. The 

results of the low agile group were in line with 
the assumption that work will accumulate at the 
end of the period because of loose planning and a lack of frequent checking. Therefore workers 

also felt more strain from the pressure of deadlines. 
5.2. Limitations and future research 
The results of this study are limited when th
ey are interpreted as the evidence of the 
connection between an agile way of working and well-being at work in general. First of all, the 

study was conducted in seven software and embedded teams in Finland. And even though they 
provided some evidence of agile working as a sustainable pace, further and longitudinal research 
is needed to establish these result
s in different contexts and groups. 
The control of confounding factors plays a very important role in field oriented studies. The 
information in free living settings reflect the psychological and physiological responses, which 
might be highly important in the assessment of oc
cupational well-being. In some cases externally 
strictly controlled set up might mask important findings and in a modern intensive working life 
can cause selection bias in a study group. In this study the medical evaluation included a 
standardized health questionnaire and a pre-test ev
aluation by a specialized 
researcher of clinical 
physiology. The findings were confirmed by a medical doctor with a long experience in the 
evaluation of autonomic nervous function. During the follow-up period the general instructions 
were to continue the own normal lifestyle and not to make changes, such as increase of the 
physical activity, alterations in the diet etc. The lifestyle factors were asked once again in the 
  23 personal feed-back session performed by a physician. A highly important role played the diaries 
during the recordings. The subjects 
were instructed to report their 
main daily activities, perceived 
sensations of stress, sleep time and abnormal symptoms, such as pain, fever, headache etc. 
As stated ahead, we controlled the reliability 
of HRV-based measuremen
ts to convince that 
there was no extraneous variables interfering w
ith our study. This was done in a systematic and 
consistent manner by using the information from 
several sources in the interpretation of the 
findings. Also, in the data analysis gender and age were used as covariates to control their effects 
because they were assumed to associate with relaxation and stress. The results seem to be 
internally valid, i.e. the state of perceived agility caused differences in both stress and relaxation 

procedures, during the time they were measured. 
However, both concepts, the agile way of working and well-being at work can also be defined 
differently. Well-being at work was operationalized via physiological stress and relaxation times, 

which are objective, reliable measures of well-being itself, but quite narrow when we consider 
the different aspects of well-being, such as subjective experiences and interpretations of the 
psycho-social aspects of work. They are indicators of physical reactions, as such. As this study 
concentrated on short-term physiological strain and recovery, we recommend further study of 

long-term physiological strain with different physiological methods. 
In the same way, the concept of perceived agile work could also be understood differently to 
the way in which we operationalized it. One possible aspect is a pleasant work environment in 

which agile practices such as test automation 
and emphasized collaboration and communication 
flourishes and provides good leverage for getting work done. We discarded a dimension that 
  24 described the testing procedure of the product in the developmental process because the testing 
in software and embedded production differed. These aspects are not covered in this article, but 

some of them will be clarified as the psycho-social aspects of teamwork in our next article which 
will analyse rich survey data.  In addition, di
fferent working cultures, 
for example, different 
speeds of development and customer environments, can affect the adaptation of agile practices 
and their impact on the well-being on employees. In any case, the development environment and 
the support it gives teams and their members™ well-being need further clarification and research 
in the agile context. 
6. CONCLUSION Our conclusion is that there was a connection between well-being at work and perceived 
agility, which depended on the phase of a working pe
riod. Strain and recovery in the groups with 
high and low agility differed from each other at th
e end of the working period. The stress time 
percentage of the high perceived agile group was lower, and its relaxation time percentage higher 

than that of the low perceived agile group. It 
seems that recovery is better when employees 
perceive they are working in an agile way. There is also some evidence that when they perceive 
that they are not so agile, stress increases towards the end of the working period. The results 
show that at the end of a working period, an agile way of working helps control work strain and 

sustain recovery (Karasek, 1979). Because stress and relaxation times were more stable in the 
high than the low agile group, our hypothesis that the agile way of working evens out strain 
during a working period was correct. Thus the assumption of a sustainable pace within agile 

methods seems to be true in terms of individual strain. 
  25 Implications: 
These results provide worthy evidence that agile work may even out workload 
during a working period, and in this way promot
e well-being at work. These results also support 
the view that HRV-based methods might, in cer
tain conditions, be useful in the stress 
management of mentally demanding work. Moreover, the survey method used is sufficient for 
evaluating the impact of agile work on well-be
ing, as it seems to match the results of 
physiological measurements quite well. The results underline that understanding psychosocial 
characteristics is crucial when physiological measurement is used to assess corporate well-being 
at either individual or team level. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This article is a part of the Agile and Lean
 Product Development Methods for Embedded ICT 
Systems project (2012Œ2014), funded by TEKES Œ the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology 
and Innovation. Partners of the project are: BA Group, Ericsson, Finnish Institute of 
Occupational Health, FiSMA, Lindorff Finland, 
Neoxen Systems, Nextfour Group, Nordic ID 
and University of Turku. 
We are also grateful to Senior Specialist Heli Sistonen from Finnish Institute of Occupational 
Health who was involved in conducting of the physiological measurements in practice. 
REFERENCES 
Abrahamsson, P. (2005). 
Agile software development introduction: Introduction, current status 
& future.
 Jyväskylä, Finland: VTT Electronics. 
  26 Abrahamsson, P., Salo, O., Ronkainen, J., & Warsta, J. (2002). 
Agile software development 
methods. Review and analysis
. (VTT Publications 478). Espoo: VTT. 
Acharya, U., Paul, K., Kannathal, N., Lim, C., & 
Suri, J. (2006). Heart ra
te variability: a review. 
Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 44
, 1031-1051. 
Agile Manifesto. (2013). 
Principles behind the Agile Manifesto
. Retrieved August 20, 2013, 
from http://www.agilemanifesto.org/principles.html 

Asproni, G. (2004, February). Motivation, teamwork, and agile development. 
Agile Times, 4
. Bodyguard, Firstbeat Oy, Finland. (2015). 
Development and validation of an ambulatory HRV-
measurement system.
 Retrieved August 18, 2015, from 
http://www.firstbeat.fi/userData/firstbeat/
download/Development-
and-validation-of-an-
ambulatory-HRV-measurement-system.pdf 

Carayon, P. (2009). The balance theory and th
e work system model – Twenty years later. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 25(5)
, 313-327. 
Collins, S., Karasek, R., & Costas, K. (2005). Job 
strain and autonomic indices of cardiovascular 
disease risk. 
American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 48,
 182-193. 
Cronbach, L. (1970). 
Essentials of psychological testing 
(3rd ed.). New York: Harper & Row. 
Debus, M., Sonnentag, S., Deutsch, W., & Nussbeck, F. (2014). Making flow happen: the effects 
of being recovered on work-related flow between and within days. 
Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 99
, 713-722. 
  27 Durantin, G., Gagnon, J., Tremblay, S., & Dehais, 
F. (2014). Using near infrared spectroscopy 
and heart rate variability to detect mental overload. 
Behavioral Brain Research, 259
, 16-23. 
Dybå, T., & Dingsøyr, T. (2008). Empirical studies of agile software development: A systematic 
review. Information and Software Technology, 50(9Œ10)
, 833Œ859. 
Eisinga, R., Te Grotenhuis, M., & Pelzer, B. (2012).
 The reliability of a two-item scale: Pearson, 
Cronbach or Spearman-Brown? 
International Journal of Public Health, 58(4)
, 637Œ642. 
doi:10.1007/s00038-012-0416-3. 
Firstbeat Oy, Finland. (2014). 
Firstbeat lifestyle assesmen:
 stress and recovery. 
 Retrieved 
August 6, 2015, from http://www.firstbeat.fi/userD
ata/firstbeat/research-
publications/Stress-and-
recovery_white-paper_2014.pdf 
Fujigaki, Y., & Mori, K. (1997). Longitudinal study of work stress among information system 
professionals. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 9
, 369-381. 
Graziotin, D., Wang X., & Abrahamsson, P. (2013
). Happy software developers solve problems 
better: psychological measurements in empirical software engineering. 
PeerJ 2:e289
. Retrieved 
August 19, 2015, from https://dx.doi.org/10.7717/peerj.289. 
Graziotin, D., Wang, X., & Abrahamsson, P. (2014
). Software developers, moods, emotions, and 
performance. 
IEEE Software, 31(4),
 24 - 27.  DOI:10.1109/MS.2014.94. 
Hall, M., Vasko, R., Buysse, D., Ombao, H., Chen, Q., Cashmere, J., Kupfer, D., & Thayer, J. 
(2004). Acute stress affects heart rate variability during sleep. 
Psychological Medicine, 66, 
56-62. 
  28 Heart rate variability (1996). Heart rate variabil
ity: standards of measurement, physiological 
interpretation and clinical use. Task Force of 
the European Society of Cardiology and the North 
American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. 
Circulation. 93,
 1043-1065. 
Hogdson, D., & Briand, L. (2013). Controlling th
e uncontrollable: ‚Agile™ teams and illusions of 
autonomy in creative work. 
Work Employment & Society, 27(2),
 308-325. 
Kaisti, M., Rantala, V., Mujunen, T., Hyrynsalmi, S., Könnölä, K., Mäkilä, T., & Lehtonen, T. 
(2013). Agile methods for embedded systems development - A literature review and a mapping 
study. 
EURASIP Journal on Embedded Systems, (1),
 1-16. 
Karasek, R.A. (1979). Job demand, job decision latitude, and mental strain: Implications for job 

redesign. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24,
 285Œ309. 
Kaufman, L., & Rousseeuw, P.J. (2009). Finding groups in data: An introduction to cluster 

analysis. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics, 344. 
Kniberg, H. (2009). 
Kanban and Scrum Œ Making the most of both.
 Retrieved August 20, 2013, 
from http://www.crisp.se/file-uploads/Kanban-vs-Scrum.pdf 

Korunka, C., Zauchner, S., & Weiss, A. (1997). New information technologies, job profiles, and 
external workload as predictors of subjectivel
y experienced stress and dissatisfaction at work. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 9(4),
 407-424. Published online: 13 Nov 
2009. 
Laanti, M. (2013). Agile and wellbeing Œ Stress, empowerment, and performance in Scrum and 
Kanban teams. 
Proceedings of 46th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS 2013), Wailea, Maui, HI,
 4761-4770. 
  29 Lagerberg, L., Skude, T., Emanuelsson, P., Sand
ahl, K., Stahl, D., & Ericsson AB, Linkoping, 
Sweden. (2013). The impact of agile principles and practices on large-scale software 
development projects: A multiple-case study of two projects at Ericsson. In: 
2013 ACM/IEEE 
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM).
 Baltimore, Maryland Oct. 10-11, 2013,
 348-356. 
Lalsing, V., Kishnah, S., & Pudaruth, S. (2012). People factors in agile software development 

and project management
. International Journal of Software Engineering & Applications (IJSEA), 
3(1),
 117-137. 
Law, E.L.C., & Lárusdóttir, M.K.
 (2015). Whose experience do we care about? Analysis of the 
fitness of Scrum and Kanban to User Experience. 
International Journal of Human-Computer 
Interaction, 31(9),
 584-602. 
Mann, C., & Maurer, M. (2005). A case study on the impact of Scrum on overtime and customer 
satisfaction. In 
The Agile Development Conference (ADC ™05), July, 2005,
 70Œ79. doi: 
10.1109/ADC.2005.1. 
Mannaro, K., Melis, M., & Marchesi
, M. (2004).  Empirical analysis on the satisfaction of IT 
employees comparing XP practices with other software development methodologies. In J. 
Eckstein &  H. Baumeister (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the fifth International Conference on eXtreme 
Programming and Agile Processes in Softw
are Engineering (XP 2004), Garmisch-
Partenkirchen, Germany, June 6-10. Berlin.
 Heidelberg: Springer. 
Melnik,, G., & Maurer, F. (2006). Comparative anal
ysis of job satisfaction in agile and non-agile 
software development teams. In P. Abrahamsson, M. Marchesi and G. Succi (Eds.), 
Extreme 
  30 Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering (XP 2006).
 Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer. Miller, S. (2001). 
Literature review. Workload measures
 (Document ID: N01-006). Iowa: The 
University of Iowa, National Advanced Driving, Simulator. 

Misirli, A.T., Verner, J., Markkula, J., & Oivo, 
M. (2014). A survey on project factors that 
motivate Finnish soft
ware engineers. In 
IEEE Eighth International Conference on Research 
Challenges in Information Science (RCIS),
 1-9. 
Myrtek, M., Deutschmann-Janicke, E., Strohmaier, H., Zimmermann, W., Lawerenz, S., 
Brügner, G., & Müller, W. (1994). Physical, mental, emotional, and subjective workload 
components in train drivers. 
Ergonomics, 37,
 1195-2003. 
Nokia test. (2015). Retrieved May 25, 2015, fr
om http://www.think-pi.de/Scrum-Nokia-test-
english 
Nunnally, J. (1967). 
Psychometric theory.
 New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Paxion, J., Galy, E., & Berthelon, C. (2014). Mental workload and driving. 
Frontiers in 
Psychology, 5, 
1344. 
Porschen, S. (2012). Management of the informal by cooperative transfer of experience. In F. 
Böhle, M. Bürgermeister,
 & S. Porschen (Eds.), 
Innovation management by promoting the 
informal: Artistic, experience-based, playful 
(pp. 105Œ142). Dordrecht: Springer. 
Raja, M.I. (2012). Lean manufacturing - an integrated socio-technical systems approach to work 

design. (Doctoral dissertation, Clemson University, 2012). 
UMI Dissertations Publishing.
   31 So, C., & Scholl, W. (2009). Perceptive agile 
measurement: New instruments for quantitative 
studies in the pursuit of the social-psychological effect of agile practices. In P. Abrahamsson, M. 
Marchesi & F. Maurer (Eds.), 
Agile Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme 
Programming. 10th International Conference, 
XP 2009, Pula, Sardinia, Italy, May 25-29
. Succi, G., Marchesi, M., & Williams, L. (2002). Preliminary analysis of the effects of pair 

programming on job satisfaction. 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Extreme 
Programming, 212-215. 
Takeuchi, H., & Nonaka, I. (1986). 
The new product development game.
 Retrieved May 7, 2010, 
from http://apln-ichmond.pbwiki.com/
f/New%20New%20Prod%20Devel%20Game.pdf 
Teisala, T., Mutikainen, S., Tolvanen, A., Rottensteiner, M., Leskinen, T., Kaprio, J., 
Kolehmainen, M., Rusko, H., & Kujala, U. (2014). Associations of physical activity, fitness, and 

body composition with heart rate variability-based indicators of stress and recovery on 
workdays: a cross-sectional study. 
Journal of Occupational Medicine and Toxicology, 9,
 16. 
doi:10.1186/1745-6673-9-16. 
Togo, F., & Takahashi, M. (2009). Heart rate vari
ability in occupational health Œ A systematic 
review. Industrial Health, 47,
 589-602. 
Uusitalo, A., Mets, T., Martinmäki, K., Mauno, S.
, Kinnunen, U., & Rusko, H. (2011).  Heart 
rate variability related to effort at work. 
Applied Ergonomics, 42,
 830-838. 
van Amelsvoort, L., Schouten, E., Maan, A., Swenne, C., & Kok, F. (2000). Occupational 
determinants of heart rate variability. 
International Archive of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, 73,
 255-262. 
  32 Van Hooff, M., Geurts, S., Kompier, M. & Taris, T. (2007). Workdays, in-between workdays 
and the weekend: a diary study on effort and recovery. 
International Archive of Occupational 
and Environmental Health, 80,
 599-613. 
Verner, J., Beecham, S., & Cerpa, N. (2010). St
akeholder Dissonance: Disagreements on project 
outcome and its impact on team motivation across three countries. In 
ACM SIGMIS-CPR10 May 
20-22, 2010, Vancouver, Canada,
 25-33. 
Warne, R.T. (2014) A Primer on Multivariate Analysis of Variance (MANOVA) for Behavioral 
Scientists. 
Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 19(17).
 Williams, L. (2007). 
A Survey of agile development methodologies.
 Retrieved August 20, 2013, 
from http://agile.csc.ncsu.edu/SEMaterials/AgileMethods.pdf 
Yauch, A. (2007). Team-based work and work system balance in the context of agile 
manufacturing. 
Applied Ergonomics, 38(1),
 19Œ27. 
Young, M., Brookhuis, K., Wickens, C., & Hancock, P. (2015). State of science: mental 
workload in ergonomics. 
Ergonomics, 58,
 1-17. 
Zanstra, Y., & Johnston, D. (2011). Cardiovascular 
reactivity in real life settings: measurement, 
mechanisms and meaning. 
Biological Psychology, 86,
 98-105. 
    33 TABLE 1 
Hypothesis of the study 
  Measurement time in a working period 
Measure Group BeginningMiddle End Total 
Stress time 
High agile normal normal normal  normal 
Low agile normal normal high high 
Relaxation time 
High agile normal normal normal normal 
Low agile normal normal low low 
In table: 
H1 (blue) = In the high agile group total stress time would be lower than in the low agile group. 
H2 (grey) = In the high agile group total relaxation time would be higher than in the low agile 
group. 
H3 (green) = In the high agile group, the stress time does not vary between the beginning and the 
end of a working period. 
  34 H4 (green) = In the low agile group the stress time at the end is higher than that at the beginning 
or in the middle of a working period. 
H5 (yellow) = The relaxation time does not vary from the beginning to the end of a working 
period in the high agile group. 
H6 (yellow) = In the low agil
e group relaxation time at the end is lower than that at the 
beginning or in the middle of a working period. 
    35 TABLE 2 
Distributions according to gender and work task (frequency, %) 
  Method
  Surve
y Physio

l. measures 
Both 
    
Varia
ble 
Categor

y f %f  %f %
Gend
er 
Female 5 113 7 3 8 
Male 
398940933392
Total 
4410
0 4310
0 3610
0   36    Wor
k task Develop
er 
(softwar
e) 
    1542
Designe
r 
(embedded)     1439
Other 
    2 5 
Superio
r     5 14
Total 
    3610
0   37 TABLE 3 
Means, standard deviations and range of age, time in organization and team. 
 Variable Unit n M SDMinMax 
Age 
year 36 34,3 7,125 56 
Worked in the 
organization 
year 36 5,2 4,01 18 
Worked in the 
team 
year 36 2,2 1,90,1 8 
     38 TABLE 4 
Statements on agile working, their di
mensions and scale reliabilities (rel.). 
 Statement  
rel.Dimension 
Regularly held meetings are extremely short (max. 15 minutes) 
In short meetings we concentrate on what we have been doing, 
what problems we have faced af
ter the last meeting, and what 
we are going to do before the next meeting 
From an updated task list we examine the remaining tasks in a 
working period (e.g. backlog, Kanban-table, burnup chart)

  ,77 
Continuous 

orientation practice 
In the development process, the big picture takes form at the 
beginning of the project, but the details are clarified during the 
process 
The working product or its increment is the primary measure of 
the progress of work 
At the end of each working period, we deliver a potentially 
shippable product to the customer (internal, external)  
,76 
Incrementation 
  39 Team members take part in defining the effort estimates and 
planning work for the next working period. 
The team works in short recurrent 1
 5-week periods (iterations) 
The team prefers to reduce the scope of tasks rather than delay 
the deadline 
We always keep to our timetables during working periods
  ,76 
Iteration 
We are continuously looking for new ways to make our work 
more productive and effective 
All team members actively participate in gathering lessons 
learned from our working methods 
We systematically apply the improvements that emerge from 
evaluations 
We intensively follow up the progress of each improvement 
,87 
Continuous 
improvement 
The needs and wishes of the customer direct the development 
process well 
,89 
Customer relation 
  40 I discuss the needs related to the project with the customer 
representative 
Developers take part in defining the requirements with the 
customers 
The team extensively and systematically receives information 
on the needs and wishes of the customer  
     41 TABLE 5 
Description of HRV parameters based on Task Force of the European Society of 
Cardiology and the North American Society of
 Pacing and Electrophysiology (1996) [42]. 
 HRV 
parameter 

(unit) 
Description  
Mean RR 

interval (ms) 
Mean of the selected 

beat-to-beat RR interval 

series, inversely 
proportional to mean 
heart rate 
Parameters estimating 
parasympathetic activation 
RMSSD (ms) The square root of the 
mean of the squares of 
differences between 
consecutive RR intervals 

(describes short-term 
  42 variations) 
HF power(ms
2) High-frequency power 

(frequency range 0.15
0.4 Hz) (synchronous 
with respiration)  
HF power 
(n.u.) 
High-frequency power in 

normalized units 
represents the relative 
power in proportion to 
the total power, minus 

the power of the very low 
frequency (VLF: 0-0.04 
Hz) component, HF 
power/ (Total power Œ 
VLF power). Parameters estimating both 
sympathetic and parasympathetic 
activation 
  43 SDNN (ms) Standard deviation of all 
normal RR (normal-to-
normal intervals, NN) 

intervals, the square root 
of variance 
(demonstrates overall 

HRV)  LF power 

(ms
2) Low-frequency power 

(frequency range 0.04

0.15 Hz)  
LF power 

(n.u.) 
Low-frequency power in 

normalized units 

represents the relative 

power in proportion to 

the total power, minus 

the power of the very low 
frequency (VLF: 0-0.04 
Hz) component, LF 
power/ (Total power Œ 
  44 VLF power). LF / HF  LF / HF ratio (estimates 
sympatho-vagal balance) 
     45 TABLE 6 
Final cluster centres (means) and statistical differences between group means (one 
way Anova) of the variables used in separation. 
 Variable
 Cluster ANOVA 
High Agile,n = 
21 
mean Low 
Agilen = 
23 
meanF Sig. 
Continuous 
orientation 
practice 
1,59 2,29 13,112,001 
Iteration 1,82 2,36 6,085 ,018 
Incrementation 
1,79 3,35 41,663,000 
Continuous 
improvement 
2,38 3,40 32,227,000 
  46 Customer relation
2,20 3,52 35,564,000 
     47 FIGURE 1
. Flow chart of study design and data collection. 
     48 FIGURE 2: 
Profile plots of measured physiological stress percentage at the beginning, middle 
and end of a working period in different agile groups (estimated marginal group means). 
     49 FIGURE 3: 
Profile plots of measured physiological relaxation percentage at beginning, middle 
and end of a working period in different agile groups (estimated marginal group means). 
  