  Info Systems J 
 (2007)  17 , 241Ð245
 © 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 241 Blackwell Publishing LtdOxford, UKISJInformation Systems Journal1350-1917© 2006 The Authors; Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwe
ll Publishing Ltd
 2007 17 241245 Original Article
 Contradictions of new software develop-
ment approachesR Baskerville 

et al. The enduring contradictions of new software 
development approaches: a response to 

‘Persistent Problems and Practices in ISD’
 Richard Baskerville,* Jan Pries-Heje
 €  & Balasubramaniam Ramesh
 à Department of Computer Information Systems, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, 
USA, *email: baskerville@acm.org, 
 à email: bramesh@gsu.edu, and 
 € The IT University of 
Copenhagen, Rued Langgaards vej 7, DK-2300, Copenhagen, Denmark, email: jph@itu.dk
 In ÔPersistent Problems and Practices in Information Systems DevelopmentÕ, Kautz 
 et al .(2007) offer a thoughtful and original perspective on the nature of high-speed software devel-

opment practices. They offer controversy over the degree to which the set of software devel-

opment practices, variously called agile methodology, internet speed methodology and short

cycle time development, are different from more traditional or plan-based development

approaches. We heartily welcome such published research and conference debates that
reßect the various views on this issue (Glass 2003; Merisalo-Rantanen 
 et al ., 2005).Kautz  et al . are provocative. They lead us to wonder how history might regard software
development agility. Will agile methods become a milestone in software development? Will

these methods mark a bifurcation of practice where agile methods will have offered a revolu-

tionary alternative to plan-based approaches? Or, will, instead, agile methods someday be

remembered as a bogus bait-and-switch? Have unwitting developers, desperate to overcome

incredibly competitive market conditions, actually adopted traditional plan-based systems

development practices in a deluded belief that these veteran practices were somehow novel

and revolutionary?
Kautz  et al . (2007) build insights from their argumentation and empirical research that call for
more extensive frameworks for considering these practices. They provide us with an example

of such an alternative framing of the problems and practices. Through this different analytical

framework, they illustrate how accentuated evolution is less than a revolution. This analysis

Þnds that the software development problems are basically the same as always and that the

ÔnewÕ practices are also basically the same as always. Such a result would indeed contradict

our Þndings (Baskerville 
 et al ., 2003).This is a new genre of software engineering process. Though many of the characteristics of
the development processes may be observed in traditional software development, the inten-

sity with which they apply and together distinguish Internet software development. In that

sense, Internet software development uses a process that is different from more traditional

software development processes, but surprisingly similar within its new genre (Ramesh
 et al ., 2002, p. 170).
  R Baskerville 
 et al. © 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 17 , 241Ð245
 242We suspect there are at least three basic reasons for the contradiction. First, the phenomena
being circumscribed for comparison may not be exactly the same. In hindsight, our use of the

term ÔInternet speedÕ and ÔInternet software developmentÕ reßected the language among prac-

titioners at the time. Others have used the term Ôagile developmentÕ and indeed we have also

used Ôshort cycle timeÕ and Ôhigh speedÕ development, terms borrowed from engineering, in a

search for the best label for the approaches we studied (Baskerville & Pries-Heje, 2004;

Baskerville 
 et al ., 2006). From our perspective, Web development which is the focus of Kautz
 et al . (2007) and the agile development approaches we studied are not equivalent. Agile devel-
opment does not necessarily imply the use of Web interfaces, and is successfully used for

other kinds of applications, such as developing process control applications, developing mid-

dleware software and other non-web applications. Similarly, the development of Web-based

software does not necessarily imply agile development, and Web applications have been

developed successfully using decidedly plan-based approaches, such as will frequently be the

case in banking and Þnance.
Further, signiÞcant distinguishing characteristics of Web projects are not necessarily found in
agile projects. Kautz 
 et al . (2007) identify the following as important/distinguishing features of
Web applications: Ôlook and feel, user interface, marketing capability, multimedia content and
content productionÕ. In contrast, the applicability of high-speed practices is typically evaluated

based on the following dimensions: number of people, criticality and project priorities (Cock-

burn, 2000). For example, these practices have been used successfully by small teams, in non-
mission critical projects which emphasize speed of development as a top priority. While these

practices are likely to work well in many web development projects, they may not be appro-

priate, for example, in mission critical Web projects. Second, the application of different ana-

lytical frameworks, even to the same underlying phenomena, can lead to contradictory results.

For example, they analyse the practices using dimensions of coping behaviour regarding diver-
sity, knowledge and structure. These dimensions are indeed excellent intellectual tools for

drawing forwards the similarity of software practices across time. In our studies, we have used

dimensions of coping behaviour regarding time, cost and scope. These dimensions, long

established as the three major constraints of software development (Humphrey, 1988), have

proven useful in highlighting the distinguishing characteristics of more recent practices. Kautz
 et al . (2007) provide a framework that highlights the similarities and, as a contrast to ours, that
highlights the differences; we regard their work as an insightful extension of research such as

ours, that has explored both the similarities and the differences among these classes of meth-

ods (Baskerville 
 et al ., 2003).We have provided strong evidence within our analytical frames that agile development is dif-
ferent in fundamental ways. We agree the problems are essentially the same, but we Þnd the
solutions are indeed different because of the intense focus on time. In particular, the combi-

nation of practices and the intensity with which they are applied is different. In Baskerville 
 et al .(2003), we link principles and practices, and show how some old practices have been dis-

carded in agile approaches, how some old practices have been adopted into the new frame-

work, and how some practices are entirely new. Older practices certainly persist in agile
approaches and Kautz 
 et al .Õs (2007) research helps us to understand this persistence better.
  Contradictions of new software development approaches
 © 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 17 , 241Ð245
 243Aside from these practical aspects of the contrasting development approaches, however,
there are even deeper strategic and economic differences that result from the availability and

applications of these approaches. For example, software project managers can align their port-
folio of projects with development strategies in new ways, representing the equivalent software
development alternatives to the production model (traditional) versus a job shop model (agile)

(Slaughter  et al ., 2006).Third, we do not think that the deÞnitions or analytical frames applied by the researcher are
the ultimate determinant of whether the problems and practices are the same or different. Our

claims rely strongly on the beliefs held by the software developers we studied, and their quite
certain assertions that they regarded their practices as different.
We develop a lot based on out-of-the-box applications. It has changed the way we develop
systems. We probably spend more time adapting and for example making them more open

that we did before.
Competition is driving the speed. We are always looking to keep up with and ahead of the
competition.We basically took a lot of current processes . . . and transferred them to the Internet . . . and
found that it didnÕt work.
It is  their  belief that their practices were different from traditional or plan-based development
practices. Across the three phases of this longitudinal study, our respondents included many

professionals who had moved from traditional development organizations (or departments

within their organizations) to join the agile development groups. Whether the distinction

between plan-based and agile is an objective reality, or a socially constructed reality, the effect

on software practices is the same nonetheless.
This fundamental underlying belief held by the subjects is reßected as an assumption in our
Þndings. One motive for our research has been our interest in discovering if software devel-

opers had simultaneously begun adopting a rather similar set of behaviours across many dif-

ferent organizations, and why they were doing this. They certainly did adopt such a set, and we
set about explaining how and why.
While we have succumbed to the temptation to seek ways to resolve the contradictions
between the Þndings and analyses of our study, and those of our esteemed colleagues

reported above, it is inevitable that these contradictions will endure both in opinion and in real-

ity. We concur with Robert GlassÕs evaluation of this debate:
There have always been important differences between software projects. Diversity is a key
part of what makes the software world go ÔroundÕ . . . Information systems have always been

developed differently from scientiÞc systems, and critical projects have been treated differ-

ently from more mundane ones. Why should we be surprised that the same condition holds

for Web and non-Web projects? There are important differences between the two, . . . but
those degrees of difference have always been a vital and even healthy part of what the soft-

ware world is all about (Glass, 2003, p. 23).
  R Baskerville 
 et al. © 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 17 , 241Ð245
 244Ultimately we agree with Kautz 
 et al .Õs (2007) conclusions on two very important points. One,
of course, is the need for further research in this area. As the dot-com era recedes into history,

such research as Kautz 
 et al .Õs will help shape our understanding of just how important (or
unimportant) the agile movement will prove. The second point is that observed practices may

be different from good practices, a point that they offer as insight to improve many empirical

studies of software development, including ours.
 REFERENCES Baskerville, R. & Pries-Heje, J. (2004) Short cycle time
systems development. 
 Information Systems Journal
 ,  14 ,237Ð264.Baskerville, R., Levine, L., Pries-Heje, J., Ramesh, B. &
Slaughter, S. (2003) Is internet-speed software develop-

ment different? 
 IEEE Software
 ,  20 , 70Ð77.Baskerville, R., Ramesh, B., Pries-Heje, J. & Levine, L.
(2006) High-speed software development practices:

What works, what doesnÕt. 
 IEEE IT Professional
 ,  8 , 29Ð36.Cockburn, A. (2000) Selecting a projectÕs methodology.
 IEEE Software
 ,  17 , 54Ð71.Glass, R.L. (2003) A mugwumpÕs-eye view of web work:
choosing a point of entry into a contemporary software
development debate. 
 Communications of the ACM
 ,  46 ,21Ð23.Humphrey, W.S. (1988) Characterizing the software pro-
cess: a maturity framework. 
 IEEE Software
 ,  5 , 73Ð79.Kautz, K., Madsen, S. & N¿rbjerg, J. (2007) Persistent
problems and practices in information systems develop-

ment.  Information Systems Journal
 ,  17 , 217Ð239.Merisalo-Rantanen, H., Tuunanen, T. & Rossi, M. (2005) Is
extreme programming just old wine in new bottles: a
comparison of two cases. 
 Journal of Database Manage-
ment ,  16 (4), 41Ð61.Ramesh, B., Pries-Heje, J. & Baskerville, R. (2002) Inter-
net software engineering: a different class of processes.
 Annals of Software Engineering
 ,  14 , 169Ð195.Slaughter, S., Levine, L., Ramesh, B., Pries-Heje, J. &
Baskerville, R. (2006) Aligning software processes with

strategy. 
 MIS Quarterly
 ,  30 , 891Ð918. Biographies
 Richard L. Baskerville
  is Professor of Information Sys-
tems and past Chairman in the Department of Computer
Information Systems, Robinson College of Business,
Georgia State University. His research specializes in secu-

rity of information systems, methods of information sys-

tems design and development, and the interaction of

information systems and organizations. His interest in

methods extends to qualitative research methods. Basker-

ville is the author of 
 Designing Information Systems Secu-
rity  (John Wiley & Sons) and more than 100 papers in
scholarly journals, professional magazines and edited

books. He is an Editor for 
 The European Journal of Infor-
mation Systems  and serves on the editorial boards of the
 Information Systems Journal
 ,  Journal of Information Sys-
tems Security , and the  International Journal of E-Collabo-
ration . Baskerville holds degrees from the University of
Maryland (B.S. summa cum laude, Management), and the

London School of Economics, University of London (MSc,
Analysis, Design and Management of Information Sys-
tems, PhD, Systems Analysis).
 Jan Pries-Heje  is an Associate Professor at The IT Uni-
versity of Copenhagen. His research specializes in orga-
nizational and managerial aspects of IT development, such

as software process improvement, software engineering

and Ð most recently Ð development of internet and Web

applications. He has published in these areas in journals
like 
 Annals of Software Engineering
 ,  Journal of Accounting
Management and Information Technology
 ,  The Data Basefor Advances in Information Systems
  and the  European
Journal of Information Systems
 . He is the Danish national
representative to IFIP Technical Committee 8 (TC 8) on

Information Systems, and Secretary for TC 8 since 1999.

Finally he is a member of the ACM, IEEE and the Danish

Computer Society.
 Balasubramaniam Ramesh
  is Professor of Computer
Information Systems at Georgia State University. His

research work has appeared in several leading confer-

ences and journals including the 
 IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering
 ,  MIS Quarterly, JAIS
 ,  Annals of Soft-
  Contradictions of new software development approaches
 © 2007 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
 Information Systems Journal 
 17 , 241Ð245
 245 ware Engineering ,  Communications of the ACM
 ,  IEEEComputer ,  IEEE Software
 ,  IEEE Internet Computing
 ,  IEEEIntelligent Systems ,  Decision Support Systems
 . Hisresearch interests include supporting complex organiza-

tional processes such as requirements management and
traceability with decision support systems, knowledge
management, data mining and e-services. His work has

been funded by several grants from leading government

and private industry sources such as the NSF, DARPA,

ONR, ARL and Accenture.
