   Yingqin Zheng, Will Venters, Tony CornfordCollective agility, paradox and organizational improvisation: the 
development of a particle physics grid  Article (Accepted version) (Refereed) Original citation: Zheng, Yingqin and Venters, Will and Cornford, Tony (2011) 
Collective agility, paradox and 
organizational improvisation: the development of a particle physics grid
. Information systems journal.  DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2575.2010.00360.x
 © 2011 Wiley
 This version available at: 
http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/30029/
 Available in LSE Research Online: November 2010 
 LSE has developed LSE Research Online so that users may access research output of the 
School. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual 
authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of any 

article(s) in LSE Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. 

You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities 

or any commercial gain. You may freely distribute the URL (
http://eprints.lse.ac.uk
) of the LSE 
Research Online website.  
 This document is the author™s final manuscrip
t accepted version of the journal article, 
incorporating any revisions agreed during the peer review process.  Some differences between 

this version and the published version may remain.  You are advised to consult the publisher™s 

version if you wish to cite from it. 
   1 COLLECTIVE 
AGILITY
, PARADOX AND 
ORGANISATIONAL 
IMPROVISATION
: 
THE 
DEVELOPMENT
 OF 
A PARTICLE PHYSICS 
GRID
  Yingqin Zheng, De Montfort University, yzheng@dmu.a
c.uk 
Will Venters, London School of Economics, w.venters
@lse.ac.uk 
Tony Cornford, London School of Economics, t.cornfo
rd@lse.ac.uk 
 Abstract 
This paper examines systems development in a global
 collaborative community of high energy physics 
and offers insights and implications for agile syst
ems development in other large scale and distribute
d 
settings. The paper studies the ongoing constructio
n of the UK™s computing grid for particle physics 
(GridPP), a grid that is itself part of the world™s
 largest grid, the Large Hadron Collider Computing 
Grid (LHC). We observe in this project a collective
, agile and distributed performance through which 
the Grid is constructed. We express this through th
e concept of ﬁcollective agilityﬂ which captures a 
large distributed performance rather than the more 
conventional sense of agility as small-group and 
deliberate systems development practices. The colle
ctive agility of GridPP is analysed as a process of
 
ﬁenacted emergenceﬂ expressed through the dynamics 
of six improvisation-paradoxes.  
Key words
: collective agility, improvisation, paradox, grid 
computing, particle physics  
     2  1. Introduction 
Much recent innovation in systems development has s
ought to legitimise a more fluid, exploratory and 
responsive style (Baskerville and Pries-Heje, 2004;
 Baskerville et al., 2006; Baskerville et al., 1992
; 
Fowler and Highsmith, 2001; Truex et al., 2000). Th
ese moves away from traditional formalism in 
systems development methodologies (e.g. Boehm 1988;
 DeMarco 1978) echo the long-standing 
observation from the field that traditional methodo
logies are neither effectively nor extensively used
 
(Avgerou and Cornford, 1993, Bansler and Bodker, 19
93), but often ﬁfakedﬂ (Parnas and Clements, 
1986) and used as a ﬁfictionﬂ to help create a sens
e of coherence in day-to-day activities 
(Nandhakumar and Avison, 1999). Such observations h
ave caused some to rethink the status of 
method and methodology in systems development. Cibo
rra (2002), for example, asks us to ﬁsuspend 
the belief that behind the messy everyday reality t
here is a geometric universeﬂ. Similarly, Truex and
 
associates argue that ﬁamethodicalﬂ development (Tr
uex et al., 2000) can better appreciate and support
 
innovation and organisational change, adaptation an
d experimentation, as well as exploiting new 
opportunities and accidents. If we understand organ
isational landscapes to be emergent or enacted 
(Weick, 2001, Weick, 1993b), and that technology is
 created ‚in-practice™ (Orlikowski, 2000), it 
makes sense to argue that the way we develop inform
ation systems should support a strong contextual 
contingency and allow for improvisational action an
d bricolage (Bansler and Havn, 2004).  
Agile Systems Development 

Many contemporary systems development practices are
 oriented towards speed, responsiveness and 
flexibility. These practices have been given names 
such as ﬁhigh speed software developmentﬂ 
(Baskerville et al., 2006), ﬁshort-cycle time syste
ms developmentﬂ (Baskerville and Pries-Heje, 2004),
 
ﬁweb-based system developmentﬂ (Kautz et al., 2007)
, and most influentially, agile systems 
development (Conboy and Fitzgerald, 2004; Fowler an
d Highsmith, 2001; Highsmith, 2002). Agile 
development has established a large research litera
ture in the past few years, and an extensive 
following within the practitioner community, based 
on principles characterised by quickness, lightness
 
and nimbleness (Highsmith, 2002) and on values such
 as collaboration, communication, simplicity and 
courage (Beck and Andres, 2005). The practitioner l
iterature includes many versions such as rapid 
prototyping or quick releases, placing emphasis fro
m predefined procedures, specification and 
systematic methods (Beck and Andres, 2005; Highsmit
h, 2002; Williams and Cockburn, 2003). But 
most studies of agile development still focus on mi
cro behaviour and related processes in designing 
and delivering software, and less attention is paid
 to organisational cultures, institutional conditio
ns 
and environmental constraints (Abrahamsson et al., 
2009). This is surprising since, from the days of 
Brooks™ classic ‚The Mythical Man Month™ (1979) and
 DeRamer and Kron™s (1975) concept of 
‚programming in the large™, it has been acknowledge
d that systems are developed within an 
   3 organisational environment, which is as significant
 in shaping the character of the project and its 
outcomes as any particular practices. There is thus
 a need to develop a better understanding of the 
implementation of agility at the organisational lev
el (Abrahamsson et al., 2009) acknowledging 
explicit linkages to institutional and cultural set
tings. 
Large-scale systems development projects in particu
lar are known to face many challenges as they 
span institutional and cultural settings. Curtis et
 al. (1988) suggest that the three most salient and
 
interrelated problems they face are: thin spread of
 application domain knowledge; fluctuating and 
conflicting requirements and; communication and coo
rdination breakdowns. To adopt a style of agile 
systems development in such settings entails partic
ular difficulties (Reifer et al., 2003), including 
communication, lack of control and lack of trust (R
amesh et al., 2006). The strategies proposed to 
‚scale-up™ agile development include developing col
laboration tools (Flor, 2006), aligning IT 
components (Lee et al., 2006), and managing careful
ly the balance between flexibility and rigour (Lee,
 
DeLone and Espinosa, 2006). Yet few attempts have b
een made to directly theorise agility and 
distributed organisational dynamics.  

The LCG Project 

In this paper we study an emergent form of agile pr
actice within a specific and distinctive large scal
e 
and distributed organisational context Œ the Large 
Hadron Collider Computing Grid (LCG) - one of 
the world™s largest computing grids. This started d
evelopment in 2001 and was formally put into use 
in 2010. The organisational context of the LCG, ref
lecting that of particle physics (Knorr-Cetina, 
1999; Traweek, 1988), is highly distributed with 17
0 computing centres in 34 countries. Mobilising to 
build this Grid was a grand systems development cha
llenge in technical, organisational, political and 
human terms; an example of large scale system devel
opment on a global basis and one which, as we 
will argue, seemed to exhibit a quality of agility.
 Thus we observed fluid practices that serve as a 
continuous response to external and internal change
s, and continual acts of trial and error matched 
with pragmatic problem-solving approaches. Bricolag
e and 
ad hoc
 activities dominate the day-to-day 
and there is minimal, though vital, use of formal m
ethodologies and centralised control. The people 
involved, mostly physicists or physicist-programmer
s, take pride not in methodological rigour but in 
their pragmatic approach to ﬁmake it workﬂ. As a la
rge distributed project, LCG has faced challenges 
as mentioned above, and yet their response has not 
been to employ rationalistic approaches or 
constraining tool-sets as most of the authors above
 propose, but rather to respond by maintaining thei
r 
commitment to a flexible and fluid approach Œ to ag
ility.  
The Concept of Agility 

The literature on agility reflects two common appro
aches. The first sees agility as empirically 
validated small group methods and practices. The se
cond sees agility as an organisational capability 
   4 (Sambamurthy et al. 2003; Lee et al., 2006; Mathias
sen and Pries-Heje, 2006), for example, a firms™ 
sense-and-respond capabilities, or dynamic capabili
ties (Williams and Cockburn 2003), or the 
organisational capability to learn, to explore and 
to exploit knowledge (Mathiassen and Vainio, 2007; 
Overby et al., 2006). We develop a third and distin
ct perspective, what we call 
collective agility
 seen 
as a ﬁstructuring propertyﬂ (Giddens, 1984) of a co
llective, instantiated in improvisational behaviour
 
of individuals and groups and in their social inter
actions. In other words, collective agility is an 
attribute emergent from the day-to-day practices of
 social actors. We thus explore agility as a 
performance
 (Ciborra, 1999; Dyba, 2000). 
It is important to make clear the ontological disti
nction implied by a focus on capability or 
performance: capability refers to the potential for
 achievement that an organisation has as it draws 
upon its resources, human, institutional and materi
al, a concept linked to the resource based view of 
the firm and core competencies (Wade and Hulland, 2
004). In contrast, a performance is an enactment 
within a context that can create, apply and sustain
 capabilities. Put another way, capabilities are no
t 
understood here as something held prior to a perfor
mance, rather they are the medium and outcome of 
it. The performative ontology (Pickering, 1995) ado
pted here sees agility as what social actors do 
when engaging with uncertainty and complexity, and 
as sustained by collective agency over time and 
space. Our focus is not a description of agile beha
viour or its precursors but on the performance of 
collective agility that embodies the LCG project. T
he emphasis is on agility™s emergence from 
disparate practices embedded in the organisational 
and cultural context. In simpler terms, it is not j
ust 
that agile system development can be sustained in p
articular supportive organisational or cultural 
contexts, but that a context or culture may itself 
demand (at times) and create a certain type of agil
e 
performance.  

Organisational Improvisation and Paradoxes 

To unpack the complexities of collective agility as
 an organisational performance, we draw upon the 
literature of organisational improvisation (Cunha e
t al., 1999; Weick, 1998) with a focus on collectiv
e, 
collaborative and coordinated improvisational activ
ity. Improvisation is essentially an individual or 
small group practice, immediate and situated, where
as the agility we study is that which emerges from 
a collective performance - an organisational improv
isation. This literature is reviewed and organised 
from the perspective of paradox (Mirvis 1998). It h
as been frequently noted that innovations such as 
short cycle time development or agile methods invol
ve tensions and paradoxical elements, for 
example, learning to ﬁplan not to planﬂ (Baskervill
e, 2006) or to achieve a ﬁdisciplined messinessﬂ 
(Highsmith, 2002) and Baskerville™s (2006) calls fo
r a rejection of polar distinctions between concept
s 
like planning and serendipity, or discipline and cr
eativity. The concept of paradox is not intended to
 
suggest logical impossibility or irresolvable confl
ict; rather paradox provides a means of presenting 
and analysing productive tensions, dynamics, and mo
tivating challenges of systems development. In 
constructing a set of improvisation-paradoxes and a
pplying them in the analysis, we reveal the 
   5 embracing and balancing of such paradoxical element
s as a key to understanding agility within 
distributed collaborative system development.  

In summary, this paper introduces collective agilit
y, a concept developed from a paradoxical 
perspective, to describe a particular genre of orga
nisational performance. The rest of the paper is 
organised as follows. Section 2 further develops th
e conceptual constructs, i.e. the improvisation-
paradoxes, from the literature of organisational im
provisation. Research methodology and case 
description can be found in Sections 3 and 4. Secti
on 5 presents an in-depth analysis of the case usin
g 
the improvisation-paradoxes, extended to discussion
s and implications in Section 6. Section 7 
concludes the article. 
2. Improvisation Paradoxes and Enacted Emergence 
Existing research on organisational improvisation m
ostly considers it as a creative group performance 
with little formal planning and minimal central con
trol, like a jazz performance (Barrett, 1998, Hatch
, 
1999) or improvisational theatre (Crossan, 1998). C
unha 
et al
 (1999) define improvisation as ﬁthe 
conception of action as it unfolds, by an organisat
ion and/or its members, drawing on available 
material, cognitive, affective and social resources
ﬂ. This definition emphasises two aspects. First, t
he 
convergence in time of conception and execution (Mo
orman and Miner, 1998), or ﬁreal-time 
planningﬂ (Miner et al., 2001). This resonates stro
ngly with the basic notion of agility as quickness,
 
lightness, and nimbleness (Highsmith, 2002). Second
, bricolage Œ the aspect of finding solutions from 
available rather than optimal resources Œ which is 
often implied or used interchangeably with 
improvisation (Weick 1993a, 1993b, Ciborra, 2002). 
 Within the field of information systems, ideas of i
mprovisation and bricolage have often been used to 
critique the dominant ontology of planning and cont
rol and the pervasive normative tendencies that 
follow (Ciborra, 1999, 2002, Lanzara, 1999, Orlikow
ski, 1996). Organisational improvisation 
literature does not deny or negate the value of suc
h concepts, but suggests that it is in the tension 
and 
interaction between these and their opposites: stru
cture and change, order and chaos, control and 
freedom, that creative attitudes, innovative outcom
es, and productive practices may be found. The 
performative view of agility adopted here reveals t
he ﬁtensions and oppositions between well-founded, 
well-reasoned, and well-supported alternative expla
nations of the same phenomenonﬂ (Poole and Van 
de Ven, 1989). Thus we draw on the established trad
ition of paradox as a dialectical device to examine
 
complex situations and to build theory (Lewis, 2000
; Poole and Van-de-Ven, 1989; Smith and 
Tushman, 2005). Lewis (2000) describes three catego
ries of paradoxes prevalent in organisational 
studies Œ learning (old/new), organising (control/f
lexibility), and belonging (self/other). We use the
se 
three categories to synthesise the literature on or
ganisational improvisation and propose a set of 
improvisation-paradoxes. Table 1 presents the six c
onstructed improvisation-paradoxes with examples 
of the concepts they are based on. These concepts a
re highlighted in italic in the following elaborati
on 
   6 of the improvisation-paradoxes. 

[Insert Table 1 about here] 

Paradoxes of Learning 

Paradoxes of learning arise from the tension betwee
n 
old 
and
 new
, ﬁthe struggle between the comfort 
of the past and the uncertainty of the futureﬂ, whi
ch are fundamental to processes of innovation, 
transformation and sensemaking (Lewis, 2000). On th
is basis, we identify two pairs of paradoxes of 
learning: 
Learned Improvisation
, i.e. improvisation drawing on past experience and
 situated within 
environmental constraints; and 
Reflective Spontaneity
, making sense by ex-post interpretation and 
rationalisation.
  
- Learned Improvisation: 
This paradox is related to the tension between the 
immediate (the here-
and-now environment and context) and the historic (
the understood, interpreted, documented and 
remembered past). ﬁLearning requires using, critiqu
ing, and often destroying past understandings and 
practices to construct new and more complicated fra
mes of referencesﬂ (Lewis, 2000). For example, 
jazz musicians recall music that has been performed
 and learn from it (Berliner, 1994). Improvisation 
is often a response to 
task uncertainty
, and 
environmental turbulence
 (Moorman and Miner, 1998). 
Unexpected and ﬁunplanned-forﬂ (Miner et al., 2001)
 occurrences or tasks can arise inside the 
collective too (Cunha et al., 1999), for example, w
hen 
task complexity
 seems to be beyond the scope 
of rational planning, accumulated knowledge or pred
etermined method (Hutchins, 1995). 
Organisational improvisation can also be linked to 
deliberate innovation
 Œ for example, visions which 
articulate a gap between reality and possibility ca
n induce actions which are partly planned yet 
significantly emergent (Mintzberg and McHugh, 1985)
 and improvised (Crossan et al., 1996).  
To cope with uncertainties and complexities of the 
environment, context or task, people need to draw 
upon a repertoire of 
organisational memories,
 ﬁlearned ways of thinking and behavingﬂ (Moorman 
and Miner, 1998). The paradox of Learned Improvisat
ion thus also reflects the tension between the 
reliance on ﬁhabits of thoughtﬂ and routines (Hutch
ins, 1995, Weick and Roberts, 1993) and a will to 
depart from organisational traditions and norms (Cu
nha et al., 1999) Œ to 
drop your tools
 (Weick, 
1993a)
. 
This balance is intricate, as successful improvisat
ions are often based on accumulated 
knowledge and experience from extensive 
practicing
 in the past (Moorman and Miner, 1998). The 
construct of ﬁhistoryﬂ here is also related to coll
ective understanding and organisational culture, e.
g. in 
our case, the experimental culture of particle phys
ics. 
- Reflective Spontaneity:
 ﬁReflective spontaneityﬂ is a paradox expressing 
ad hoc
 experimentation 
(spontaneity) and 
post hoc
 recovering of rationalisation by the collective, W
eick™s 
retrospective 
sensemaking
 (Weick, 1993a). Improvisers often have no choice b
ut to engage with the situation with 
no time for thorough reflection, and the significan
ce of the action is often only (re)discovered after
 the 
   7 event. As Weick (1998) suggests, ﬁto improve memory
 is to gain retrospective access to a greater 
range of resourcesﬂ. Retrospective sensemaking (Wei
ck, 1993a) can thus provide order, purpose, and 
coherence (Barrett, 1998) to practices of 
trial-and-error
 or 
bricolage 
(Lanzara, 1999). Meaning can 
arise from 
ex-post interpretation
 and sensemaking by a number of dispersed agents, r
ather than from 
ex ante
 planning and implementation by a central designer 
(ibid.). Such sensemaking can be facilitated 
by 
transient constructs
 (ibid), such as ﬁmakeshift artefacts, recombinant 
routines – ephemeral 
organisations, disposable symbols, fugitive meaning
sﬂ than can sustain some continuity and stability. 
Milestones and deadlines, for example, may serve th
ese purposes. Thus, at the macro-level, an 
unfolding improvisational performance and the refle
ctions on it, give rise to an 
emergent order
 (Miner 
et al., 2001) which in turn can be drawn upon by ot
hers (Orlikowski, 2000).  
Paradoxes of Organising 

Paradoxes of organising reflect tensions between co
ntrol and flexibility (Lewis, 2000), formal and 
informal, integration and differentiation (Chae and
 Bloodgood, 2006), denoting ﬁan ongoing process 
of equilibrating opposing forces that encourage com
mitment, trust, and creativity while maintaining 
efficiency, discipline, and orderﬂ (Lewis, 2000). T
wo paradoxes from the literature are summarised 
here as 
Planned Agility
 and 
Structured Chaos
. The former underlines the tension between the 
deliberate action of planning and the uncontrolled 
processes of drifting and unfolding; the latter ref
ers 
to the tension between chaotic day-to-day practices
 and minimal structures. 
- Planned Agility:
 As Weick (1998) puts it, ﬁimprovisation is a mixtur
e of the pre-composed and 
the 
spontaneous
ﬂ. Miner et al. (2001) suggests that organisations 
can plan to improvise and routinise 
processes to stimulate improvisation, without the a
ctual content of the improvisation being planned in
 
advance. This is related to what Baskerville (2006)
 refers to as 
artful planning
. Degrees of planning 
for improvisation encompasses two aspects; clearly 
articulated goals (Barrett, 1998; Crossan et al., 
1996; Orlikowski, 1996), and milestones and action 
deadlines (Cunha et al., 1999). Clearly articulated
 
goals can provide a sense of direction and shared 
vision
, often operating via culture or ideology 
(Mintzberg, 1995; Weick, 1993b), and serve as a ‚ma
gnetic field™ which, without prescribing 
individual action, is strongly normative in shaping
 such action (Cunha et al., 1999). Short-term 
milestones and deadlines build 
a sense of momentum and urgency
 (e.g. Crossan, 1998; Hutchins, 
1991; Mirvis, 1998) and sustain a ﬁstate of 
flow
ﬂ (Hatch, 1999). They provide opportunities to keep
 
track of the variations between dispersed innovativ
e actions and priorities within the collective goal
. In 
other words, even though day-to-day practices may b
e unplanned, 
ad hoc
, and 
drifting
 (Ciborra et al., 
2000), minimal strategic planning and management ca
n ensure that this is oriented towards the goal.  
- Structured Chaos
: Organisational improvisation might be seen as a f
orm of 
ﬁorganised anarchyﬂ
 characterised by problematic preferences, unclear t
echnology, and fractured participation (Hutchins, 
1991, Cohen et al., 1972). Cunha et al (1999) sugge
st ﬁ
minimal structure
ﬂ to express the controls 
   8 desired to achieve improvisations that progress (Cr
ossan, 1998; Orlikowski, 1996; Weick, 1998). 
Minimal structure refers to a shared sense of rules
, norms and identity among members of a 
community of practice (Brown and Duguid, 1991), and
 which can be drawn upon by members to 
mediate their 
knowing-in-practice 
(Orlikowski, 2000), yet allow them to depart from c
anonical 
practices and initiate changes. A 
collateral structure
 provides non-intrusive support to learning 
communities allowing space for fluid and interpreta
tive practices to take place across boundaries of 
groups (Cunha et al., 1999).  

Minimal and collateral structures allow the cultiva
tion of an 
experimental culture
 (Cunha et al., 1999) 
or 
pro-innovation culture
 (Miner et al., 2001; Mirvis, 1998; Weick, 1998), w
hich nurture individuality 
through features such as tolerance to error (Barret
t, 1998; Crossan, 1998; Hatch, 1999). Weick 
proposes an ﬁ
aesthetic of imperfection
ﬂ as an important condition for improvisation, base
d on an 
ﬁestimate of the degree of organisation and form th
at could have been extracted retrospectively from 
the materials at hand, given that they were generat
ed by a fallible human being acting publicly under 
time pressure, with fallible toolsﬂ (1999). Lanzara
 (1999) similarly talks of 
fractures, discontinuities, 
inconsistencies
, deviations from current routines and puzzling or 
random behaviours in innovative 
processes. Yet imperfection and murkiness can embod
y evolutionary opportunities for novel practices 
and forms, and lead to further productive combinati
ons and transformations.  
Paradoxes of Belonging 

Paradoxes of belonging emerge ﬁbecause actors striv
e for both self-expression and collective 
affiliationﬂ (Lewis, 2000). This tension is particu
larly distinctive in improvisational activity, beca
use 
by nature members of an improvisational collective 
tend to be self-driven, intelligent and creative 
people, yet they also have an acute appreciation th
at success relies on collaborative effort. It is th
rough 
trust and mutual support that they acquire confiden
ce and strength in face of pressure and challenges.
 
We adopt under this category Mirvis™ (1998) 
Collective Individuality
 and 
Anxious Confidence
, 
enriching them by linking them to organisational im
provisation literature and theory. 
- Collective individuality
: 
Creativity
 and 
individual skills
 (Barrett, 1998; Hatch, 1999; Kamoche et 
al., 2003) may be encouraged and supported, but ind
ividual freedom is inevitably bound by a level of 
group cohesion
 in order to achieve a collective goal, especially 
when task complexity is beyond the 
cognitive capacity of any individual (Hutchins, 199
5; Weick and Roberts, 1993). As Weick (1998) 
puts it, ﬁdiscussions of improvisation in groups ar
e built on images of call and response, give and ta
ke, 
transitions, exchange, complementing, negotiating a
 shared sense of the beat, offering harmonic 
possibilities to someone else, preserving continuit
y of mood, and cross-fertilisationﬂ. 
Facilitative 
leadership
 (Barrett, 1998; Crossan, 1998), 
trust
 (Crossan, 1998; Weick, 1993a), and 
fluid 
communication
 (Miner et al., 2001; Orlikowski, 1996) nurture gro
up performance. Such emotional ties 
do not have to stem from self-disclosed intimacy bu
t from shared actions, ﬁhanging outﬂ and a sense of
 
   9 membership in the collective (Barrett, 1998).  

- 
Anxious confidence
: Emotional ties also serve to provide a ﬁsafety-ne
tﬂ for members of a collective 
to cope with anxiety, or to deal with the affective
 element in their performance (Cunha et al., 1999).
 
Ciborra (2001) considers improvisation itself as a 
mood and contrasts it with conventional moods of 
the systems development context such as panic or bo
redom, both of which fog vision and conceal 
possibilities for action. Mirvis (1998) suggests ﬁ
anxious confidence
ﬂ as the means to live with the 
ambiguity, complexity, and challenges of working in
 an improvisational collective. Similarly, LaPorte 
(1996) (cited by Weick et al., 1999) speaks of ‚
prideful wariness™
 when discussing air traffic 
controllers. While Mirvis focuses mostly on individ
ual capability and confidence, confidence is not 
only experienced through individual knowledge and s
kills (Hutchins, 1991; Moorman and Miner, 
1998; Orlikowski, 1996) but also in aspects of orga
nisational cultures, such as a history of innovatio
n 
and ﬁ
aesthetics of imperfection
ﬂ (Weick, 1999), which can be drawn upon as ﬁlearne
d ways of 
thinking and behavingﬂ (Moorman and Miner, 1998). 

Paradoxes and Enacted Emergence 

The improvisation paradoxes explored above embody a
 sense of tensions found in an agile 
performance, particularly in a distributed context.
 To capture the dynamic duality we adopt two of 
Poole and Van de Ven™s (1989) four modes of working
 with paradoxes Œ to first accept the paradox 
and use them constructively, and then introduce a n
ew term or concept to resolve the paradox. In this 
spirit we propose the term ﬁenacted emergenceﬂ to p
ortray a paradoxical and agile performance that is 
both constructive and emergent.  

Indeed, it is often pointed out that information sy
stems development is an emergent socio-technical 
activity (Baskerville and Pries-Heje, 2004; Chae an
d Poole, 2005; Orlikowski, 1996; Truex and 
Baskerville, 1998). The improvisation-paradoxes dev
eloped here juxtapose and reveal the seemingly 
opposite elements of such improvisation, and can re
veal the tension between environment and history, 
spontaneity and reflexivity, unfolding and planning
, practices and structure, individual and collectiv
e, 
and anxiety and confidence. These elements are boun
d together in a constant mutual constitution. 
Enacting elements on one side of Table 1 give rise 
to elements on the other side, for example, high 
level planning, direction, and minimal structure pr
ovides the support, freedom and safety-net for 
people to explore through trial-and-error, improvis
e, and innovate. Seen the other way, seemingly 
disorderly and chaotic day-to-day practices can pro
duce order, direction and meaning through 
retrospective sensemaking. Individuals encouraged t
o embrace their individuality and thinking free 
cultivate a culture of democratic meritocracy, whil
e a high level of creativity and competence, as wel
l 
as common goals can inspire trust, commitment and v
oluntarism.  
Collective agility is then a phenomenon of enacted 
emergence in the sense that, while rooted in 
creative human agency, i.e. the improvisational pra
ctices (including the dimensions of planning, 
   10
 organising and structuring) of knowledgeable and re
flective social actors (individuals and teams), 
agility is an attribute of the distributed collecti
ve that emerges from the paradoxes and exists as a 
combination of intended and unintended consequences
 of these activity. In the following sections, we 
examine in detail how the particle physics communit
y enact these improvisation-paradoxes and sustain 
a level of collective agility. 
3. Research Methodology 
The Large Hadron Collider Computing Grid (LCG) prov
ides a distinctive case of distributed systems 
development (Venters and Cornford, 2006). This work
 focuses on the UK™s component of the project 
Œ GridPP. Core data collection took place from 2006
 to 2008 and included participant observations of 
weekly meetings, various UK and international GridP
P workshops and meetings, and relevant 
conferences. We had full access to the GridPP main 
documentation, and subscribed to its main mailing 
lists. 

Forty eight semi-structured qualitative interviews 
of between one and one and a half hours were 
undertaken at universities across the UK and at CER
N in Geneva. Table 2 provides details of the 
research activities undertaken while Table 3 shows 
a summary of the principal interviewees. Sampling 
was based on functional groups of GridPP, starting 
from the Project Management Board (PMB) for an 
overview, then proceeding to representatives from t
he three main activity areas: applications, 
middleware and infrastructure. Another group of int
erviewees were users from the LHC experiments, 
many of whom were involved in some development acti
vities. We interviewed managers and technical 
experts of the LCG at CERN to contextualise our obs
ervations. This showed that the practices of 
GridPP were not unique to the UK but have roots in 
an international Particle Physicist culture. When 
necessary, interviewees were revisited. Interviews 
were audio-recorded, transcribed and coded for 
analysis using the Atlas.Ti software, though not ri
gidly so as to avoid being restricted by the softwa
re. 
Data analysis was closely integrated with theoretic
al development in an iterative process, one feeding
 
into the other.  

[Insert Table 2 about here] 

[Insert Table 3 about here] 

We identify three stages of data analysis. The firs
t was open coding of the data, labelling aspects of
 the 
project, practices, and emerging ideas (Table 4 sho
ws an example). This exercise, combined with the 
embedded understanding acquired by the researchers 
from secondary material and during participant 
observation, provided an appreciation of the comple
xity of the project and gave a sense of the tension
s 
inherent in such work. For example, experimental ph
ysicists were not always keen to follow 
procedures. Similarly, while there might seem to be
 prevalent adhocracy and frequent fire-fighting, th
e 
project was unified in their confidence that the sy
stem would work. With these broad ideas in mind, 
   11
 our theoretical exploration led us to the literatur
e of organisational improvisation, which has a stro
ng 
resonance with the data, and already entails a para
doxical dimension (Weick, 1998). This process 
gives rise to a draft analytical framework of impro
visation-paradoxes. 
[Insert Table 4 about here] 

In the second round of data analysis, we used the c
onceptual constructs of the improvisation-
paradoxes as categories to set up and iteratively r
efine code families in a way similar to axial codin
g in 
grounded theory (Corbin and Strauss, 2008). These c
odes were presented in a network view, and 
relationships between the codes were identified. Bu
t relationships were not understood as indicating 
causality. These ﬁnetworksﬂ were verified and modif
ied against further observations and interviews. 
This was an iterative process until the key concept
ual constructs were sufficiently refined and 
saturated. We verified our findings with a survey, 
not reported here, which largely confirmed the 
themes.  

In summary, the analysis reported here is the resul
t of iterative reflections and ongoing discussions 
within the research team and with GridPP members, r
ather than a narrow machine-derived account Œ 
our own engagement with organisational improvisatio
n and sensemaking. While all the quotes given 
here are taken from interview transcripts, the idea
s have also been significantly reinforced by inform
al 
conversations and participant observations. 

This is not to say that the GridPP community is uni
fied in their opinions. Tensions, conflicts and 
different views are inevitable in any undertaking o
f this scale. Nevertheless, the research attempts t
o 
capture the distinctive features of GridPP, and thi
s account has been broadly supported by three 
GridPP PMB members who were presented with the key 
findings of this paper.  
4. The Particle Physics Grid  
In April 2010 the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) parti
cle accelerator at CERN, the European 
Laboratory for Particle Physics, started again afte
r a problematic public launch in 2009. The LHC 
collides Hadron particles at energies close to thos
e of the Big Bang in a search for the elusive ‚Higg
s-
Boson™ particle believed to be responsible for matt
er having mass. These collisions will produce data 
for the four LHC experiments. Since the Higgs-Boson
 is conjectured to be extremely difficult to find -
likened to searching for a ﬁneedle in twenty millio
n haystacksﬂ, the number of collisions, and the 
subsequent data produced, is vast. The LHC envisage
s producing 15 million gigabytes of data a year - 
equivalent to a DVD every 15 seconds or 1% of 2006 
global information production (Lee et al., 2006). 
To store and analyse this data the LHC requires the
 equivalent of 100,000 PCs spread across the globe 
and working as a Grid (Britton et al., 2004).  

A grid from a technical perspective is a computing 
platform for coordinated resource sharing and 
   12
 problem solving suitable in data-intensive and comp
ute-intensive applications (Foster et al., 2001). A
 
grid connects and coordinates diverse distributed a
nd heterogeneous computing resources, presenting 
itself to users as though it was a single resource.
  
[Insert Figure 1 about here] 

The GridPP project started in 2001 and has two main
 activities: developing software to allow users to 
submit computing jobs to the LCG, and developing an
d operating the UK™s component of LCG. 
GridPP is involved in developing applications and m
iddleware (the grid's ‚operating system™) as well 
as providing technical infrastructure including sto
rage and processing units. As shown in Figure 1, th
e 
LCG has a hierarchically tiered structure, with Tie
r 0 at CERN, Tier 1s consisting of the national IT 
centres in each of the major countries involved in 
the project, and Tier 2s being the regional centres
 in 
each country. GridPP consists of the Rutherford App
leton Laboratory (RAL) as the Tier 1 centre, and 
four Tier 2 centres, each coordinating a number of 
institutes in their region. 
[Insert Figure 2 about here] 

GridPP is managed, as with the wider LCG, by what o
ne interviewee described as a ﬁdemocratic 
meritocracyﬂ. Figure 2 shows GridPP™s management st
ructure which is best described as a network 
than any sort of hierarchy. The PMB is the heart of
 the network coordinating the project. It provides 
quarterly reports to the Collaboration Board which 
consists of representatives from the 19 institutes.
 
The participating institutes enter the collaboratio
n not under any legal obligation, but bound by a 
Memorandum of Understanding which specifies the amo
unt of resources and the level of service that 
each site is expected to provide, and the funding a
nd support they will receive from GridPP in return.
 
This document serves as a ﬁgentlemen™s agreementﬂ a
nd there are no formal lines of authority between 
GridPP and the member institutes other than this co
llaborative relationship. Decisions are made on a 
democratic or consensual basis and implemented by i
nfluence and persuasion.  
Developing LCG has been seen from the start as a hi
ghly distributed, complex and poorly defined 
systems development challenge. Cutting edge hardwar
e and software is used, new software standards 
have to be negotiated, and middleware along with a 
wide range of supporting software, developed in a 
range of countries and programming languages. LCG i
s developed with close involvement of members 
of the user community who exerts strong influence a
nd pressure for the completion of a working 
system, which has to be achieved with limited time 
and resources.  
The system development practices used within GridPP
 broadly coincide with the general principles of 
agile methods; ﬁindividuals and interactions over p
rocesses and tools; working software over 
comprehensive documentation; customer collaboration
 over contract negotiation; and responding to 
change over following a planﬂ (Fowler and Highsmith
, 2001). A technical expert with experience of 
GridPP described it as a ﬁbottom-up approachﬂ.  
   13
 The systems development practices observed in this 
case are similar to those described by Baskerville 
and Pries-Heje (2004) as ﬁshort cycle time systems 
developmentﬂ. Table 5 compares similarities and 
differences between the practices observed in the t
wo studies. The final column of the table indicates
 
underlying organisational implications related to t
he identified practices. Beyond these similarities 
with other agile or short-cycle development project
s, some challenges and characteristics of LCG and 
GridPP are distinctive, in particular, the scale of
 the system and the distributed nature of its own 
environment raises demands for scalability and inte
roperability. For example, LCG draws on several 
regional grids in Europe, North America and Scandin
avia each using different middleware stacks. 
Within the European project, the middleware is modu
larised and its components developed in a 
variety of programming languages. Middleware releas
es are tested in small-scale pre-production 
systems but they tend to be problematic when implem
ented across the whole system. The Grid 
therefore evolves as advanced users actively engage
 in using, testing and reporting problems. System 
development cycles are not only simultaneous or ove
rlapping activities of development, testing and 
use, but also include complete parallel solutions w
hich compete with each other. Finally, there are 
tensions around whether the Grid should be generic 
enough for other communities of users (which it is 
in part funded to be), or whether it should be tail
ored to particle physics (the main users and 
developers); and tensions between the powers of sys
tem administrators of local sites, who might wish 
to prioritise the needs of their local institute, a
nd the requirements of the LHC experiments. 
[Insert Table 5 about here] 
5. Enacting Paradoxes 
The enactment perspective proposed by Weick (1977) 
suggests that organisations ﬁconstructﬂ their 
environment before they ﬁrespondﬂ to it or try to c
ontrol it, and this can be understood as a process 
of 
interacting and sensemaking. Enactment embodies thi
s sense of action and of creation. In this case, th
e 
particle physicists ﬁreconstructﬂ the task of build
ing a new distributed technology as one that they a
re 
largely familiar with Œ a distributed experimental 
collaboration Œ and it is seen as just another task
 that 
they have to complete in order to achieve the share
d goal Œ doing new physics.  
As introduced above, we frame the systems developme
nt activity in GridPP as an organisational 
improvisation that is animated by various tensions.
 We present our analysis, drawing on 
improvisation-paradoxes but in a slightly different
 sequence to Lewis. In this case we see the nature 
of 
the grid development as being fundamentally driven 
by a sense of 
belonging
 and start with this 
concept. We then move to paradoxes of 
organising 
and conclude with 
learning
. 
5.1 Belonging to GridPP 

There is a sense of a strong community bond among G
ridPP members, which we express in the 
concept of 
collective individuality
 (Table 1 & 6). Most members of GridPP are particle
 physicists or 
   14
 have a physics background. One consequence is that 
members are motivated by both a shared history 
and a shared goal. This goal is not to build a grid
, but to discover new physics. They work for the sa
me 
vision despite strong competition between similar e
xperiments. As commented by one interviewee,  
ﬁI said I was proud of being a particle physicist, 
this is because particle physicists always get 
the job done; by and large because they are driven 
by one fundamental thing. They want their 
experiment to work when the beam gets into the acce
lerator, okay? And that transcends 
everything else they do. ﬂ  
Coupled with the shared goal is a high level of tru
st as shown very clearly from the interviews:  
ﬁEveryone trusts each other to be doing the best th
ey can– That fundamental trust drives our 
particle physics group. ﬂ  

ﬁYou have to trust that people will step up– and do
 the dirty work as well as doing the 
glamorous work.ﬂ 
Particle physicists have been encultured above all 
to respect intellectual capacity (Traweek, 1988). 
With a high level of trust, people generally enjoy 
a high level of autonomy at work, usually without 
clear instructions or strict supervision. Individua
ls will try to solve a problem, develop software, w
rite 
a document, not because their line manager told the
m to, but because they felt that it was something 
useful to do. Individuals are driven by individual 
motivations Œ but they also desire that their 
contribution be recognised as valuable. Key technol
ogies in particle physics have emerged in this 
manner Œ with the main analysis system for storing 
particle physics events (called ﬁRootﬂ) began with 
one developer trying to solve a problem in a new wa
y without institutional support, similar to their 
development of the Web. As one senior CERN employee
 who shared an office with Tim Berners-Lee 
recounted:  
ﬁTim had the freedom from this hierarchy, to spend 
a bit of time investigating something 
which was of interest to him and nobody else here s
aid Œ ‚oh it™s a waste of time, never mind™. 
He was working on remote procedure calls, and out o
f it popped the webﬂ. 
With members based in disparate institutes, it is i
mportant to develop social and emotional bonds 
among individual members. The deployment team provi
des a good example.  
ﬁWe have to work very well together as a team, in o
rder for GridPP to be successful. And – 
it's quite a complicated structure - there are mult
iple channels of communication, some of 
which are duplicated some of which are contradictor
y, and there are all sorts of ways in 
which information flows. And anything that you can 
do to oil the cogs of the machine is going 
to help. ... And I think for us to socialise togeth
er is a very important thing.ﬂ  
ﬁGoing to the pubﬂ when and wherever they meet is o
ne aspect of this since it ﬁfosters a bondﬂ 
between people and allows them to discuss their fru
strations caused by the size and complexity of the 
project. During such social occasions work is invar
iably discussed, people ﬁlet off steamﬂ and 
   15
 negotiations are made. These social meetings are sp
oradic and between them the constant 
communication through video conferencing, email, me
ssaging lists, blogs and instant messaging 
continue. Relationships develop between parties who
 have never met. Many attend the regular video-
conference meetings simply to get a feel for the ﬁm
oodﬂ and a sense of connection Œ often having the 
meeting running on their computer while undertaking
 other tasks. 
Communication supports a mood of 
anxious confidence
 (Tables 1 & 6), that mediates the pressure of 
the LHC switch-on and of showing the UK in a good l
ight among the worldwide particle physics 
community. Along the way GridPP has to face many un
planned-for occurrences and environmental 
turbulence in funding, human resources, external an
d internal technological changes, hardware and 
software configurations, technical requirements fro
m the experiments, computer market conditions, 
and other institutional and political factors. Inde
ed, the project is ﬁcommitted to something that it 
isn™t 
quite fundedﬂ (PMB member) and in March 2007 were a
llocated only 70% of the anticipated funding 
for Phase 3 (2007 to 2011), which resulted in suppo
rt posts being cut. Nevertheless, the collaboration
 
remains committed, engaged, and always ﬁjust aboutﬂ
 on top of things. They may appear to be 
constantly fire-fighting, discovering problems, man
aging crises, and negotiating solutions. But almost
 
everybody in the collaboration who we interviewed h
eld a firm belief that the Grid will work; maybe 
not perfectly, but it will work.  

A significant source of their confidence thus resid
es in a belief in the individual skill, competence 
and 
pragmatic creativity of physicists, as well as high
 energy physics™ formative context of collaboration
. 
While GridPP employs people from other fields, the 
majority come from this ﬁelite scienceﬂ (Traweek, 
1988) which is highly competitive to enter. When as
ked about the likely success of LCG, a technical 
coordinator boils it down to cleverness:  
ﬁ–because we are very clever people, we have a very
 clear and determined goal, we will 
make it workﬂ.  
Another source of confidence resides in the communi
ty™s long history of success in computing. CERN 
for example accepted the problems of working with p
re-production supercomputers from the days of 
the CDC 6600 through to the CRAY X-MP (Jones, 2004)
. Later they pioneered work on the Web 
(Berners-Lee and Fischetti, 1997), shifted early to
 use Open-source (Linux) server-farms, all driven b
y 
the need to do physics. Grid computing, it seems, i
s just another minor computing waypoint on the 
route to the truth about the universe. Equally impo
rtantly, the particle physics community enjoys an 
organisational culture which appreciates ﬁthe aesth
etic of imperfectionﬂ (Weick, 1999) and accepts 
failed attempts as part of a bigger process, foster
ing the confidence of individual innovators. 
 5.2 Organising GridPP 

Planned agility 
(Table 1 & 7) refers to planning to improvise and p
reparing for change. In GridPP it is 
recognised that 
ad hoc
 practices have to be supported by some financial p
lanning, risk management, 
project milestones and resource allocation mechanis
ms. For this reason extensive Gantt charts and 
schedules are produced, often in a preparation for 
research funding council reviews, but also serving 
as a minimal structure for the project. While a pro
ject manager was only appointed on the insistence o
f 
an IT industry representative sitting on the Oversi
ght Committee, and the PMB finally settled on 
appointing a particle physicist (and ﬁfriendﬂ of Gr
idPP) to the post, this role is now accepted as cru
cial 
   16
 to keeping the project on track. This is not howeve
r to say that the PM role focuses on traditional 
project management. Considering GridPP as in its es
sence ﬁexperimentalﬂ and undertaking ﬁgreen-
field researchﬂ, the PMB focuses on supporting and 
justifying change as at the core of their minimal 
planning process.  
ﬁWe wanted to establish the fact that we had the ri
ght to change our deliverables. So we set 
up this project map and we set up the formality of 
change forms. So this was to formalise our 
freedom to change the project – yes, we had a set o
f milestones but you know, we had a 
mechanism to change them because we have to be resp
onsive. ﬂ  
Although schedules are constantly in flux, the proj
ect seeks never to lose sight of where they are and
 
where they are heading.  
ﬁ–people are looking at the overall targets of wher
e people are trying to get to, rather than 
monitoring people on a daily or weekly basis. So we
're looking for overall trends more than 
very small time-based ones.ﬂ  
The project maps and schedules, change forms, and q
uarterly reports are tools designed to achieve 
various paradoxical goals; to display rationalised 
order, to acquire legitimacy, to cope with changes 
and to support or legitimise spontaneity. They also
 provide impetus to carry the project forward, even
 
if the plan is tentative and has to be made real th
rough day-to-day sense-making and actions. This 
proactive mode of management is combined with a rea
ctive mode of daily trouble-shooting: 
ﬁWe do everything we can in terms of advanced plann
ing, so we have a staggered 
programme of sites in migrating, things like this. 
But ultimately what dominates is when we 
have done something that has gone wrong, or somethi
ng has broken, or something doesn™t 
work in experiments, or something like this, and we
 have to try and solve that.ﬂ 
In other words, there is a plan to improvise, routi
nised processes to stimulate improvisation and 
observation of their own improvisational activities
 (Miner et al., 2001). As one of the technical 
coordinators described, with an extended metaphor, 
ﬁYou need your head in the clouds to see the big pi
cture, but you very much need your feet on 
the ground because you have to put one foot in fron
t of the other, and day to day we keep 
putting one foot in front of the other–.ﬂ  
Structured chaos
 (Tables 1 & 7)
 means providing a minimal structure to support impr
ovisation. 
GridPP is a collaboration of institutes who work to
gether under a Memorandum of Understanding. 
Management in GridPP does not rely on vertical line
s of command, and while there is an extensive 
structure of management boards, committees, and tec
hnical groups, they serve more as communication 
channels than hierarchies of authority. Managerial 
roles in the collaboration serve most of the time a
s 
representatives, spokesperson, or coordinating faci
litators, and when decisions (e.g. financial 
planning) have to be made centrally at the PMB, suc
h decisions are open to scrutiny by the full 
collaboration. Most importantly, there is enormous 
respect to the technical knowledge at the grass-roo
t 
level. As one previous group leader stated:  
ﬁThere™s no strict hierarchy [–] the group leader d
oesn™t get to say what to do.– We 
   17
 recognise it™s the younger people that are much sma
rter and they™re going to be making the 
papers – So it™s kind of a federation, club– of sma
rt academics who all want to do it and 
everyone trusts each other to be doing the best the
y can for the experiment. And that 
fundamental trust drives our particle physics group
.ﬂ  
Different solutions often compete with each other w
ithin the collaboration for a while until one of 
them wins by forming more alliances or others die i
n a natural course e.g. due to technical failures, 
low up-take, lack of funding or other circumstances
. The technical systems then emerge from 
ﬁcontests of unfoldingﬂ (Knorr-Cetina, 1999): 
ﬁThe cream comes to the top. Things that work win o
ut and that™s how we worked it. (–) 
Nobody knew what the right approach was so you try 
several approaches and some win, some 
lose.ﬂ   
The ﬁnatural selectionﬂ of technical solutions, as 
described by members of GridPP, allows elements of 
the Grid to emerge from dispersed and localised pra
ctices without an arbitrary or centrally imposed 
decision-making process. Although the middleware is
 developed by a European Grid development 
project (EGEE) centrally coordinated at CERN, it is
 modularised and each of the components is 
prototyped, released, deployed, tested, and improve
d in an evolutionary manner. Beyond this core 
software there are often parallel technical solutio
ns found in the project, such as some components of
 
the middleware, or other software packages develope
d locally to help deploy, monitor, or manage 
aspects of the Grid. The Grid environment thus cons
ists of a mixture of ﬁecosystemsﬂ, in which 
multiple technical solutions co-exist and even comp
ete. Political influence and vested interests are 
reflected in such competition, but do not dictate o
utcomes. This is not to say that politics does not 
exist, but it is dispersed and mediated, and the in
fluence of powerful actors is often dissipated, or 
contingent on sound technical judgment. As an inter
viewee commented  
ﬁNobody, no matter, even if they were the most poli
tically powerful person in EGEE, can 
force a broken piece of software to be deployed, be
cause they will lose their political influence 
if they do that.ﬂ 
5.3 Learning to perform 

Learned improvisation
 (Tables 1 & 8) refers to drawing upon past experie
nce to cope with 
uncertainties and complexity of the present. The ne
ed to improvise in LCG stems from the innovative 
and exploratory nature of the task: the process has
 to be trial-and-error since nobody knows what 
exactly the end product will look like or what issu
es will emerge along the way. Moreover, the 
complexity, scale and distribution of the project m
eans no one person can have a clear idea of the 
whole system (Hutchins, 1991); requirements cannot 
be pre-specified in detail; architectures are 
conjectures, and even the one centrally designed pi
ece of technology, the middleware, has to be 
modularised and released gradually rather than in a
 big-bang manner.  
Reliance on externally produced hardware and softwa
re also creates challenges by, exposing external 
technological perturbations. Relying on the EGEE to
 provide the middleware, GridPP face an ongoing 
process of learning and adapting to immature softwa
re, and making it work at each individual site. For
 
   18
 example an undocumented change in the firmware of a
 set of hard-disks included an error that had 
significant repercussions for GridPP as they strugg
led to isolate this irregular error among terabytes
 of 
distributed storage. Similarly the release of a new
 version of the Scientific Linux operating system (
on 
which LCG runs) created demands from some computer 
centres to upgrade GridPP to this new version 
particularly where computing resources were shared 
with other disciplines. Yet EGEE™s software only 
ran on an even earlier version. Further issues occu
rred when some centres purchased 64bit rather than 
32bit systems, requiring two different distribution
s of the software.  
The response to this of those involved is not to co
ntrol, predict or formalise, but rather to respond 
pragmatically and creatively at the time, drawing o
n the down-to-earth and creative approaches 
embedded in particle physics tradition (Lewis, 2000
). As Dahlbom and Mathiassen (1993) describe, 
developers ﬁhave to interact with the environment, 
accept the openness of the problem and the system 
to be developed, take into account the preferences 
and beliefs of problem owners and users, deal with 
the economical and political climate of the project
, and keep in step with the changes in the kind of 
technologies on which the project is dependentﬂ. De
velopers should be ﬁscientific investigatorsﬂ rathe
r 
than ﬁeconomic agentsﬂ (ibid.). Indeed, particle ph
ysicists clearly bring their identity as ﬁscientifi
c 
investigatorsﬂ into computing.  
ﬁI think the people who come from a physics backgro
und are ultimately more pragmatic in 
computing. They see the computing as a tool to get 
a job done. And if it requires you to wrap 
sellotape around it to get it to work, then they wi
ll wrap sellotape around it– the physicists 
are happier with an ad hoc solution just to get the
 job done and push them through.ﬂ  
One of the resources that GridPP draws upon is thei
r identity as physicists, and as noted the 
collaboration is designed as a physics experiment. 
The tradition of large scale globally distributed 
collaborations (the ATLAS experiment, one of four a
t the LHC, has over two thousand members) and 
working on a distributed basis is well established 
and provides a solid basis for improvisation in the
 
Grid development project. Such collaborations inclu
de students, technicians, engineers and physicists.
 
Yet they have learnt at project management level ho
w to organise collaborations to be pragmatic and 
drive towards solutions. In other words, the abilit
y to improvise is the result of years of experience
 and 
learning. Such improvisation itself constitutes a f
urther process of exploration and reflection which 
feeds into the organisational capability to improvi
se.  
Reflexive spontaneity
 (Tables 1 & 8) indicates recovering meaning from i
mprovisation retrospectively. 
The seemingly spontaneous practices at the low leve
l are balanced by a level of reflexivity maintained
 
by continuous and extensive communication flows. Pa
rticle physics collaborations are managed by 
what Knorr-Cetina (1999) refers to as ﬁa fine grid 
of discourseﬂ, channelling individual knowledge 
into the collaboration and providing it with a sort
 of ﬁdistributed cognitionﬂ. This web of 
communication includes a complex structure of board
s, committees, and working groups which 
regularly hold meetings including online virtual me
eting. For example, the PMB meeting takes place 
   19
 online every Monday where they discuss the status o
f the project and make action plans. The 
Deployment Team meets online on Tuesdays where they
 discuss technical issues. There are many 
other meetings taking place virtually or face-to-fa
ce during the week. Wikis, web pages and blogs are 
consultation points during the meetings. More impor
tantly, members of GridPP subscribe to various 
mailing lists that carry constant exchanges of up-t
o-date information on problems and emerging 
solutions.  

Such extensive communications embody both mutual mo
nitoring and proactive sensemaking. It lies 
within the monitoring, accounting, and making sense
 of the behaviour and performance of the system. 
Targets of service levels and regular data transfer
 exercises test the reliability and robustness of t
he 
systems hardware and software. Much GridPP discussi
ons in meetings revolve around the results of 
such tests and monitoring statistics. Interpreting 
the statistics is not straightforward or free of 
controversy. One often hears remarks like ﬁwe have 
to understand what is causing this phenomenonﬂ 
or ﬁfind out what is behind the dataﬂ. In other wor
ds, retrospective sensemaking is an inherent and 
natural component in their process of system develo
pment. There is a ﬁhummingﬂ of the collaboration, 
talking ﬁwith itself, about itselfﬂ (Knorr-Cetina, 
1999), which maintains a constant collective 
reflexivity, as ﬁthe monitored character of the ong
oing flow of social lifeﬂ (Giddens, 1984).  
6. Discussions and Implications 
We examine above the characteristics of the collabo
rative performance of GridPP that enable them to 
achieve distributed and scaled agility. Improvisati
on-paradoxes have been used to make sense of the 
way that the Grid is developed. In this section we 
reflect on the case material, draw implications for
 
the wider discourse of agile systems development an
d provide some suggestions for those engaged in 
other distributed systems developments. 

With multiple objectives and system development rat
ionales in the community, the construction of 
Grid technology is a constant engagement and negoti
ation between a structured process and 
amethodical practices (Truex et al., 2000). Long te
rm goals, shared aims, preset deliverables, regular
 
monitoring and proactive political legitimisation a
re entangled with an ﬁunfolding ontologyﬂ (Knorr-
Cetina, 1999), elements of which include: pragmatic
 outlook, fragmented and 
ad hoc
 practices, 
bricolage and improvised solutions, 
post hoc
 rationalisation, as well as contested interests, i
nternal 
competitions, and democratic decision making - ﬁa d
ialectic of resistance and accommodationﬂ 
(Benson, 1977, Pickering, 1995).  

The particle physicists, while not strictly followi
ng any pre-defined agile methods are aware of the 
challenges they face and have made deliberate and s
ubstantial effort to achieve a suitable development
 
process. In other words, the agility seen here is n
ot just an unintended consequence of loose coupling
, 
a culture of improvisation and bricolage, intellige
nce, trust and pragmatism. Rather it is a performan
ce 
by knowledgeable actors who draw upon and enact cer
tain properties of the distributed collaboration, 
   20
 such as minimal structure, flexible planning, exten
sive communication and social bonding, all serving 
to generate coherence, facilitate mutual understand
ing, promote sensemaking, and to coordinate 
distributed work. The agency and knowledgeability o
f members of the project are central in this 
process. While no one serves as the mastermind of t
he project, the interaction and coordination among 
them give rise to a ﬁcollective mindfulnessﬂ (Carlo
 et al., 2004) with ﬁa rich awareness of 
discriminatory detail and a capacity for actionﬂ (W
eick et al., 1999). It takes real effort to maintai
n this 
collective mindfulness, without which distributed a
gility would not be possible or sustainable. 
Therefore, while agility can be described as an eme
rgent property of the distributed collaboration, su
ch 
emergence is very much enacted, involving degrees o
f deliberation and reflection, and instantiated in 
day-to-day practices.  

What implications should we draw from our analysis 
of this case of ﬁcollective agilityﬂ? What is 
presented may not be an ideal form of distributed a
gile systems development Œ after all it is not in a
 
commercial environment or facing immediate safety c
ritical concerns such as in health care or air 
traffic control. Yet there is a lot we can learn. F
rom the perspective of organisational performance, 
collective agility is about accepting what is unpre
dictable and uncontrollable, while actively enactin
g 
those organisational dimensions that generate capab
ilities to perform under such circumstances. Table 
9 presents examples of organisational practices fro
m the case that could be useful to practitioners wh
o 
share the interest in what it takes to ﬁbe agileﬂ. 
In the sections below, we explore further by asking
 the 
questions of 
when, what, who, where 
and
 how 
is such case-specific collective agility 
performed
. Our 
implications should be taken in the round Œ we see 
each as part of a cumulative recommendation for 
those engaged in similar practices rather than an i
solated concept.  
When is collective agility performed? 

Agility is indicated when faced with environmental 
turbulences, uncertainties, and an innovative or 
exploratory task, as is the case with GridPP. Yet o
rganisational improvisations come with risks and, 
for example, may not be the most efficient or effec
tive way to tackle certain problems, despite being 
preferred by a community drawing on their past succ
ess. The particle physics community™s tradition of 
experimental scientific investigation and pragmatic
 problem-solving means an agile approach is 
ﬁnaturalﬂ rather than contrived, yet this may also 
means it is ﬁassumedﬂ rather than ﬁconsideredﬂ. 
Over-reliance on improvisation can also lead to an 
amplification of unexpected events and crises, self
-generating a negative spiral of uncertainties and c
omplexities (Cunha et al., 1999). Communities 
engaging in large scale and distributed systems dev
elopment are thus faced with the challenge of 
getting the appropriate mixture of improvisation an
d structure. As expressed by the concept of 
learned 
improvisation
, we argue agility can (to degrees) be learnt. Comm
unities accustomed to more formal 
management approaches are not incapable of achievin
g agile performance. On the contrary, our 
research suggests, organisations with established r
outines and strong cultures to draw upon might be 
better equipped to improvise than those without. Bu
t this needs cultivation of the space and motivatio
n 
   21
 to diverge from or reinterpret established routines
. Collective agility is performed when some ﬁtools 
are droppedﬂ (Weick, 1993a), and surprise, risk and
 wonder are accepted in the community. 
What is (the spirit of) collective agility? 

We argue here that collective agility is supported 
by a sustained mood of 
anxious confidence
. Anxiety 
stems from the nature of innovative tasks, and in t
he sense of urgency, pressure and demand for speed 
in problem solving. A successful innovative communi
ty needs a countervailing level of confidence 
which can stem from strong individual skills and ex
perience under demanding conditions, as well as a 
history of technical success as well as appropriate
 social settings. This confidence can arise in part
 
from an appreciation for the ﬁaesthetics of imperfe
ctionﬂ. An atmosphere of experimentation, trust, 
shared goal, and emotional bonds provides individua
ls and groups with confidence to make mistakes, 
in the knowledge that failures are legitimate and c
an contribute to the cause of the community. 
Who undertakes collective agility?  

The competence of the people, the level of determin
ation and motivation, and how well the group gets 
on, were identified by GridPP members as the most p
ositive aspects of the project. Performing 
collective agility poses a high demand on individua
l skills and mental attitudes. Like most profession
al 
domains, recruits are expected to be self-motivated
, good communicators and able to work in a 
collaborative environment. Distinctively though, Gr
idPP prefers people who are familiar with the 
institutional culture of the particle physics commu
nity, and who are thus motivated to step up and do 
the dirty work when necessary without explicit inst
ruction or reward. The level of commitment, 
devotion and voluntarism appear higher than one mig
ht observe in some commercial contexts. While 
individuals certainly have personal career interest
s at stake, many express a sense of pride in workin
g 
for a higher cause, perhaps explaining their willin
gness to undertake unpopular tasks when needed.  
Where does collective agility happen? 

The literature suggests that both improvisation and
 agility are more easily performed in small groups,
 
such as a jazz ensemble or small development teams.
 Our case shows agility is possible in a large and 
distributed group, when the ﬁambienceﬂ is right, al
though achieving this is itself a major challenge 
(see also Ramesh et al., 2006). Community bonds can
 alleviate many difficulties but require effort to 
maintain. Even though GridPP members are accustomed
 to virtual meetings and a large number of 
emails, they still emphasise the importance of face
-to-face communication, and travel extensively to 
meet up. Being reliant on delivery from many remote
 partners without the authority over them is often 
a source of frustration, thus the ability to exert 
gentle pressure, to persuade and to negotiate are 
important elements in coordinating a collective per
formance. Meanwhile, barriers of communication 
or an overload of information can also create ineff
iciencies in a non-hierarchical community. 
   22
 How is collective agility performed? 

As has been repeated throughout the paper, agility 
requires a mental attitude to, in the words of one 
interviewee, ﬁlet go of controlﬂ, yet this does not
 mean anarchy. High level planning and a minimal 
structure are required. For GridPP this consists of
 alignment with goals of doing new physics, a clear
 
orientation towards the LHC objectives, a shared cu
lture among participants, and a carefully crafted 
minimal structure of project management, and commun
ication channels to allow local ﬁclusters of 
expertiseﬂ to interact. Improvisation at the local 
level is complimented by structuring at the distrib
uted 
level to maintain cohesiveness across the project a
nd to create a sense of community among the 
independent-thinking actors. Finally organisational
 improvisation comes with risks. The lack of formal
 
planning and reflexivity may mean that exploitation
 of novel ideas and knowledge is limited despite a 
great deal of exploration, thus creating ﬁopportuni
ty trapsﬂ. 
7. Conclusions 
This paper considers agile system development pract
ice from the perspective of organisational 
performance, reflecting an understanding that syste
ms development processes and activities cannot be 
discussed in a vacuum but must be considered in ter
ms of how, in given contexts, they become 
embodied within a set of roles, attitudes and worki
ng practices adopted by people Œ as a 
performance
. 
From this case study we observe that the LHC-Grid u
nfolds in a constant negotiation and mediation 
between design and bricolage (‚working things out™)
, between planning and improvisation, and 
between enough success and tolerable and instructiv
e failure. Drawing on previous work on paradox 
we use a set of improvisation-paradoxes as a framew
ork to examine system development practices 
within this distributed development context. This f
ramework, and the attention to collective 
performance, enables us to elaborate and explore el
ements often pushed to the background in 
discussions of system development, such as environm
ental conditions, individual skills, professional 
cultures, organisational structures, communication 
patterns, and interpersonal relationships. The case
 
study demonstrates in this community of science kno
wn to be most rationalistic and analytical, 
systems development is actually more like an ﬁartﬂ 
Œ visionary, experiential, passionate, agile and 
emergent.  

This study has limitations and thus suggests some f
uture research directions. First the context of 
GridPP is clearly distinctive. Experimental physics
 offers an environment that in many ways embraces 
an agile approach. Studies in other contexts that e
xplore similar themes would be useful, for example 
in the various projects around the world that are d
eveloping national health care information 
infrastructures (Coiera, 2009), or those developing
 systems for the cloud (Buyya et al, 2009). This 
work might also suggest some comparison with the wa
ys in which the Internet and its core systems 
and services have developed using a ‚community cent
ric™ development model, as well as some aspects 
of the open source model (Tuomi, 2002, 2005). While
 the context and outcomes in such domains are 
rather different, the performative analysis seems t
o have strong resonance. We also acknowledge that 
   23
 the period of this study was one of development and
 testing rather than of operations and the phase 
change may have significant consequence on the appr
oach to system development. Indeed, towards 
the end of the study reported here, there were sign
s that could indicate a greater emphasis on a more 
structured approach within the LCG.  

Despite the limitations discussed above, the contri
butions from this research are, we believe, 
significant.  

First we provide a conceptualisation of agility (co
llective agility) that differs substantially from t
he 
more common concerns with agile methods and behavio
ur, or with an organisation™s agile potential or 
capabilities. In contrast, we adopt a performative 
ontology and develop an understanding of agility 
through the concept of enacted emergence. Agility f
or us is an expression of what people do or 
achieve, rather than what they might do or capabili
ties they hold. We argue that collective agility, a
s 
an organisational performance, emerges from collect
ive enactment of certain qualities and processes in
 
the distributed community.  

Second, we derive six improvisation-paradoxes from 
the literature and use them to give a stronger 
conceptualisation to the work of GridPP members as 
they negotiate the contradictory pressures for 
order and innovation. These paradoxes are used to u
nderline the dynamics of the agile performance; as 
an expression of, and (to a degree) the resolution 
of, fundamental tensions. It is the mutual constitu
tion 
of elements in tension that allow agility to emerge
. 
Third, we offer a contribution to practice by drawi
ng implications from the case, presented as the 
when, what, who, where and how of collective agilit
y, and covering both useful practices identified 
and risks to be aware of. These recommendations hig
hlight the means by which collective agility 
might be achieved and maintained, and offer insight
s for other domains attempting to construct large-
scaled distributed infrastructure in an agile fashi
on. For example, Ramesh et al. (2006) assert that 
distributed agility faces the challenge of communic
ation, lack of control and lack of trust. Our study
 
suggests that these may not be causes but symptoms 
of a broader failing to understand the nature of 
agility within such a context. Thus to managers who
 want to achieve some of the attributes of a 
collective agile performance, we suggest that commu
nication, control and trust cannot be isolated 
from more complex and comprehensive efforts to supp
ort and cultivate an innovative culture within 
the distributed community, and require reflection o
n questions of balance among the various 
paradoxical tensions embedded.  

Finally the ‚enacted emergence™ of collective agili
ty highlights the need for ongoing performances - 
agility is not a ﬁper projectﬂ or even less, ﬁper p
haseﬂ activity and cannot be achieved by a top-down
 
ﬁchange programmeﬂ. Rather it is a performance that
 is reflective of multiple collective organisationa
l 
practices. Hence, achieving it must be a long-term 
aspiration requiring attention and adjustments over
 
time, and like other institutional practices, colle
ctive agility may be fragile and easily broken. For
 
LCG it might be that the future would be different,
 and that contractual relationships and a reliance 
on 
   24
 technical and managerial rationality would prevail 
once the LHC data begins to flow in bulk. What is 
clear is that many domains where large scale distri
buted systems are under development can learn 
from this case and the paradoxical nature of collec
tive agility.  
References
 Abrahamsson, P., K. Conboy et al. "Editorial: ‚Lots
 done, more to do™: the current state of agile 
systems development research." European Journal of 
Information Systems (18), 2009, pp. 281-
284. 
Avgerou, C. and T. Cornford, "A Review of the Metho
dologies Movement", Journal of Information 
Technology(5) 1993
, 
pp. 277-286. 
Bansler, J., and Bodker, K. "A Reappraisal of Struc
tured Analysis: Design in an Organisational 
Context," 
ACM transactions on Information Systems
 (11:2), April 1993, pp 165-193. 
Bansler, J.P., and Havn, E.C. "Improvisation in Inf
ormation Systems Development," Information 
Systems Research: Relevant Theory and Informed Prac
tice (IFIP 8.2), Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Manchester, UK, 2004, pp. 631-646. 
Barrett, F.J. "Coda: Creativity and Improvisation i
n Jazz and Organisations: Implications for 
Organisational Learning," Organisation Science (9:5
), 1998, pp. 605-622. 
Baskerville, R. and Pries-Heje, J. "Short Cycle Tim
e Systems Development" Information Systems 
Journal (14:3), 2004, pp. 237-264. 
Baskerville, R.L. "Artful Planning", European Journ
al of Information Systems (15), 2006, pp.113-115. 
Baskerville, R., Ramesh, B., Pries-Heje, J., and Le
vine, L. "High-speed software development 
practices: What works, what doesn™t.," IEEE IT Prof
essional (8) 2006, pp 29-36. 
Baskerville, R., Travis, J., and Truex, D. "Systems
 without method: the impact of new technologies on 
information systems projects," in: The impact of co
mputer supported technologies on 
information systems development, K.E. Kendall, K. L
yytinen and J.I. DeGross (eds.), North-
Holland,, Amsterdam, 1992, pp. 241-269. 
Beck, K., and Andres, C. 
Extreme Programming Explained
 Addison-Wesley, Upper Sadle River, NJ, 
2005. 
Benson, J.K. "Organisations: A dialectical view," A
dministrative Science Quarterly (22) 1977. 
Berliner, P.F., Thinking In Jazz: The Infinite Art 
of Improvisation, the University of Chicago Press, 
1994. 
Berners-Lee, T., and Fischetti, M. Weaving the Web,
 Harper, San Francisco, CA, 1997. 
Boehm, B. "A spiral model of software development a
nd enhancement," 
Computer
 (21:5), May 1988, 
pp 61-72. 
Britton, D., Clark, P., Coles, J., Colling, D., Doy
le, A., Fisher, S.M., Irving, A.C., Jensen, J., McN
ab, 
A. and Newbold, D. "A Grid for Particle Physics - f
rom Testbed to Production," GridPP, 2004. 
Brooks, F. The Mythical Man-Month, Addison-Wesley, 
New York. DeRemer, Frank; 1979  
Brown, J.S. and Duguid, P. "Organisational Learning
 and Communities-of-Practice: Toward a Unified 
   25
 View of Working, Learning, and Innovation," Organis
ation Science, Special Issue: 
Organisational Learning: Papers in Honor of (and by
) James G., (2: 1), 1991, pp. 40-57. 
Buyya, R., Yeo, C.S., Venugopal, S. Broberg, J. and
 Brandic, I. Cloud computing and emerging IT 
platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for delivering
 computing as the 5th utility, 
Future 
Generation Computer Systems, 
25(6) 2009, pp. 599-616.
 Carlo, J.L., Lyytinen, K. & Boland, R.J., ﬁSystemic
 Risk, IT Artifacts, and High Reliability 
Organisations: A Case of Constructing a Radical Arc
hitectureﬂ. Sprouts: Working Papers on 
Information Environments, Systems and Organisations
, 4(2) 2004.  
Chae, B., and Bloodgood, J.M. "The Paradoxes of Kno
wledge Management: An Eastern Philosophical 
Perspective," Information and Organisation (16) 200
6, pp 1-26. 
Chae, B., and Poole, M.S. "Surface of Emergence in 
Systems Development," European Journal of 
Information Systems (14) 2005, pp 19-36. 
Ciborra, C. "A Theory of Information Systems Based 
on Improvisation," In Rethinking Management 
Information Systems, W. Currie and B. Galliers (eds
.), Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1999, 
pp. 136-155.  
Ciborra, C.U. "In the Mood for Knowledge: A new stu
dy of improvisation," in: Social Study of 
Information Technology Workshop London School of Ec
onomics and Political Science, 
London, 2001. 
Ciborra, C. The Labyrinths of Information, Oxford U
niversity Press, 2002. 
Ciborra, C., Braa, K., Cordella, A., Dahlbom, B., F
ailla, A., Hanseth, O., Hepsø, V., Ljungberg, J., 
Monteiro, E., and Simon, K.A., From Control to Drif
t: The Dynamics of Global Information 
Infrastructures, Oxford University Press, 2000. 
Cohen, M.D., et al. "A Garbage Can Model of Organis
ational Choice," Administrative Science 
Quarterly (17:1), 1972, pp. 1-25. 
Coiera, E, 'Building a National Health IT system fr
om the Middle Out', Journal of American Medical 
Information Association, 16(3), 2009, pp271-273. 
Conboy, K., and Fitzgerald, B. "Toward a Conceptual
 Framework of Agile Methods: A Study of 
Agility in Different Disciplines," Proceedings of t
he WISER'04, Newport Beach, California, 
2004.  
Corbin, J., and Strauss, A. Basics of Qualitative R
esearch, Sage, Los Angeles, 2008. 
Crossan, M.M. "Improvisation in Action," Organisati
on Science (9:5), 1998, pp. 593-599. 
Crossan, M.M., H.W. Lane, R.E. White, L. Klus "The 
Improvising Organization: Where Planning 
Meets Opportunity," Organisation Dynamics (24:4), 1
996, pp. 20-35. 
Cunha, M.P.e., Cunha, J.V.d., and Kamoche, K. "Orga
nisational improvisation: What, when, how and 
why," International Journal of Management Reviews (
1:3) 1999, pp 299-341. 
Curtis, B., H. Krasner, and Iscoe N. "A Field Study
 of the Software Design Process for Large 
Systems." Communications of the ACM (31:11) 1988, p
p1268-1287 
Dahlbom, B., and Mathiassen, L. Computers in Contex
t: The Philosophy and Practice of Systems 
   26
 Design, Malden, USA, 1993. 
DeMarco, T. Structured Analysis and Systems Specifi
cation Yourdon - Prentice-Hall Software, New 
York, 1978. 
DeRemer, Frank and Kron, Hans, "Programming-in-the 
large versus programming-in-the-small". 
Proceedings of the international conference on Reli
able software: 114--121, Los Angeles, 
California: ACM, 1975. 
Dyba, T. "Improvisation in small software organisat
ions," IEEE Software (Sept/Oct) 2000, pp 82-87. 
Flor, N.V. ﬁGlobally distributed software developme
nt and pair programmingﬂ, Communication of 
ACM, 49(10), 2006 pp.57-58.  
Foster, I., et al. "The Anatomy of the Grid: Enabli
ng Scalable Virtual Organisations," The 
International Journal of High Performance Computing
 Applications (15:3), 2001, pp. 200-222. 
Fowler, M., and Highsmith, J. "The Agile Manifesto,
" Software Development (August), 2001.  
Giddens, A. The Constitution of Society: Outline of
 the Theory of Structuration, Polity Press, 
Cambridge, 1984. 
Hatch, M.J. "Exploring the Empty Spaces of Organisi
ng: How Improvisational Jazz Helps Redescribe 
Organisational Structure," Organisation Studies (20
:1), 1999, pp. 75-100. 
Highsmith, J. "Agility in Software Development," In
 Agile Software Development Ecosystems, J. 
Highsmith (ed.) Addison Wesley Professional, 2002. 
Hutchins, E. "Organising Work by Adaptation," Organ
isation Science (2:1), 1991, pp. 14-39. 
Hutchins, E. Cognition in the Wild, the MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 1995. 
Jones, C. "Computing at CERN: The Mainframe Era," C
ERN Courier (44:7), 2004, pp. 32-35. 
Kamoche, K., Cunha, M.P.E., and Vieira da Cunha, J.
 "Towards a Theory of Organisational 
Improvisation: Looking Beyond the Jazz Metaphor," J
ournal of Management Studies (40) 2003, 
pp. 2023-2051. 
Kautz, K., Madsen, S., and Nørbjerg, J. "Persistent
 problems and practices in information systems 
development," Information Systems Journal (17) 2007
, pp 217-239. 
Knorr-Cetina, K. Epistemic Cultures: How the Scienc
es Make Knowledge, Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 1999. 
Lanzara, G.F. "Between Transient Constructs and Per
sistent Structures: Designing Systems in 
Action," Journal of Strategic Information Systems (
8), 1999, pp. 331-349. 
Lee, O.-K., Banerjee, P., Lim, K.H., Kumar, K., Hil
legersberg, J.v., and Wei, K.K. "Aligning IT 
Components to Achieve Agility in Globally Distribut
ed System Development," 
Communications of the ACM (49:10) 2006, pp 49-54. 
Lee, G., DeLone, W. & Espinosa, J.A.ﬁAmbidextrous c
oping strategies in globally distributed 
software development projectsﬂ. Communications of t
he ACM, 49(10), 2006, pp.35-40.  
Lewis, M. "Exploring paradox: Toward a more compreh
ensive guide," Academy of Management 
Review (25:1) 2000, pp. 760-776. 
Mathiassen, L., and Pries-Heje, J. "Business Agilit
y and Diffusion of Information Technology," 
   27
 European Journal of Information Systems (15) 2006, 
pp 116-119. 
Mathiassen, L., and Vainio, A.M. "Dynamic Capabilit
ies in Small Software Firms: A Sense-and-
response Approach," IEEE Transaction of Engineering
 Management (54:3) 2007. 
Miner, A.S., Bassoff, P. Moorman, C,,"Organisationa
l Improvisation and Learning: A Field Study," 
Administrative Science Quarterly (46), 2001, pp. 30
4-337. 
Mintzberg, H. "The structuring of organisations," i
n: The Strategy Process: European Edition, H. 
Mintzberg, J.B. Quinn and S. Ghoshal (eds.), Prenti
ce Hall Europe, Hertfordshire, 1995, pp. 
350-371. 
Mintzberg, H., and McHugh, A. "Strategy Formation i
n an Adhocracy," Administrative Science 
Quarterly (30), 1985, pp. 160-197. 
Mirvis, P.H. "Variations on a Theme: Practice Impro
visation," Organisation Science (9:5), 1998, pp. 
586-592. 
Moorman, C., and Miner, A.S. "The Convergence of Pl
anning and Execution: Improvisation in New 
Product Development," Journal of Marketing (62:3), 
1998, pp. 1-20. 
Nandhakumar, J., and Avison, D.E. "The Fiction of M
ethodological Development: a Field Study of 
Information Systems Development," Information Techn
ology & People (12:2) 1999, pp.176-
191. 
Orlikowski, W. "Improvising Organisational Transfor
mation over Time: A Situated Change 
Perspective," Information Systems Research (7:1), 1
996, pp. 63-92. 
Orlikowski, W.J. "Using Technology and Constituting
 Structures: A Practice Lens for Studying 
Technology in Organisations," Organisation Science 
(11:4), 2000, pp. 404-428. 
Overby, E., Bharadwaj, A., and Sambamurthy, V. "Ent
erprise Agility and the Enabling Role of 
Information Technology," European Journal of Inform
ation Systems (15:2) 2006. 
Parnas, D., and Clements, P. "A Rational Design Pro
cess: How and Why To Fake It," IEEE 
Transaction of software engineering, 1986, pp 346-3
57. 
Pickering, A. The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency 
and Science, University Of Chicago Press,1995  
Poole, M.S., and Van de Ven, A.H. "Using Paradox to
 Build Management and Organisation Theories," 
The Academy of Management Review (14:4), 1989, pp. 
562-578. 
Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Mohan, K. and Xu, P. ﬁCan Dist
ributed Software Development Be Agileﬂ, 
Communications of the ACM, 49(10), 2006, pp.41- 46.
  
Reifer, D.J., Maurer, F. and Erdogmus, H., ﬁScaling
 Agile Methodsﬂ. IEEE Software, July/August 
2003, pp. 12-14. 
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A. and Grover, V. ﬁShap
ing Agility through Digital Options: 
Reconceptualizing the Role of Information Technolog
y in Contemporary Firmsﬂ MIS Quarterly 
(27), 2003, pp.237-263.  
Smith, W.K., and Tushman, M.L. "Managing strategic 
contradictions: A top management model for 
managing innovation streams," Organisation Science 
(16:5) 2005. 
Traweek, S. Beamtimes and Lifetimes: The World of H
igh Energy Physicists, Harvard University 
   28
 Press, London, 1988. 
Truex, D., Baskerville, R. and Travis J. "Amethodic
al Systems Development: The Deferred Meaning 
of Systems Development Methods," Accounting, Manage
ment and Information Technology 
(10), 2000, pp. 53-79. 
Truex, D.P., and Baskerville, R. "Deep Structure or
 Emergence Theory: Contrasting Theoretical 
Foundations for Information Systems Development," I
nformation Systems Journal (8), 1998, pp. 
99-118. 
Tuomi, I "Networks of Innovation", Oxford Universit
y Press, Oxford, 2002. 
Tuomi, I "The Future of Open Source". In Wynants, M
. and Cornelis, J (eds) "How Open is the 
Future?", VUB Brussels University Press, Brussels, 
pp. 429-459, 2005. 
Venters, W., and Cornford, T. "Introducing Pegasus:
 An Ethnographic Research Project Studying the 
Use of Grid Technologies by the UK Particle Physics
 Community," Proceedings of the National 
e-Science Center Conference, Manchester, 2006.  
Wade, M., and Hulland, J. "The Resource Based View 
and Information Systems Research: Review, 
Extension and Suggestions for Future Research". MIS
 Quarterly, (28:1), 2004, pp. 107-138. 
Weick, K.E. "Enactment Processes in Organisations,"
 In Making Sense of the Organisation, K. E. 
Weick (ed.) Blackwell, 1977.  
Weick, K.E. "The Collapse of Sensemaking in Organis
ations: The Mann Gulch Disaster," 
Administrative Science Quarterly (38), 1993a, pp. 6
28-652. 
Weick, K.E. "Organisational Redesign as Improvisati
on," In Organisational Change and Redesign: 
Ideas and Insights for Improving Performance, G. P.
 Huber and W. H. Glick (eds.), Oxford 
University Press, New York, 1993b, pp. 346-379. 
Weick, K.E. "Improvisation as a Mindset for Organis
ational Analysis," Organisation Science (9:5), 
1998, pp. 543-555. 
Weick, K.E. "The Aesthetic of Imperfection in Orche
stras and Organisations," in: Readings in 
Organisation Science, M.P. Cunha and C.A. Marques (
eds.), ISPA., Lisbon, 1999. 
Weick, K.E. "Enactment Processes in Organisations,"
 In Making Sense of the Organization, K. E. 
Weick (ed.) Blackwell, Malden, MA, 2001. 
Weick, K.E., and Roberts, K.H. "Collective Mind in 
Organisations: Heedful Interrelating on Flight 
Decks," Administrative Science Quarterly (38), 1993
, pp. 357-381. 
Weick, K. E. Sutcliffe, K. M. Obstfeld, D. "Organis
ing and the Process of Sensemaking," 
Organisation Science (16:4), 1999, pp. 409-421 
Williams, L., and Cockburn, A. "Agile Software Deve
lopment: It's About Feedback and Change," 
IEEE (June), 2003.  
   29
 Paradoxes of Learning
  Immediate 
Historic 
Learned 
Improvisation
 environmental turbulence (Moorman and Miner, 

1998, Ciborra, 1996) 

task uncertainty (Miner et al., 2001)  

task complexity (Hutchins, 1995, Weick and 

Roberts, 1993) 

 
 organizational memory (Ackerman and 

Halverson, 1998; Moorman and Miner, 1998; 

Weick, 1998) 

Routines (Hutchins, 1995, Weick and Roberts, 

1993) 

Practicing (Moorman and Miner, 1998; Weick, 

1998) 
 Spontaneity 
Reflexivity 
Reflective 
Spontaneity
 convergence of planning and execution 

(Moorman and Miner, 1998)  

drop your tools (Weick, 1993a) 

trial and error, 
bricolage
 (Lanzara, 1999) 
retrospective sense-making (Weick, 1993b) 

ex-post
 interpretation (Lanzara, 1999)  
transient constructs (Lanzara, 1999)  

 Paradoxes of Organizing
  Unfolding 
Planning 
Planned Agility
 ﬁunfolding ontologyﬂ (Knorr-Cetina, 1999) 

ﬁunfolding circumstancesﬂ (Ciborra, 1999) 

ﬁthe spontaneousﬂ (Weick, 1998) 

drifting (Ciborra, et al., 2000), 
 flow (Hatch, 1999) 
visions (Hatch, 1999, Mintzberg and McHugh, 

1985, Hutchins, 1991, Weick, 1993b) 

plan to improvise (Miner et al., 2001) 

artful planning (Baskerville, 2006) 

a sense of urgency (Crossan, 1998, Hutchins, 

1991, Mirvis, 1998) 
  Practices 
Structure 
Structured 
Chaos 
organized anarchy (Cohen et al., 1972) 

knowing in practice (Orlikowski, 2000) 

fractures, discoutinuities, inconsistencies 

(Lanzara, 1999) 

ambiguity (Hatch, 1999) 

 
 minimal structure (Cunha et al., 1999) 

collateral structure (Cunha et al., 1999) 

aesthetic of imperfection (Weick, 1999) 

ﬁexperimental cultureﬂ (Cunha et al., 1999) 

pro-innovation culture (Miner, et al., 2001; 

Mirvis, 1998; Weick, 1998) 
Paradoxes of Belonging
  Individuals Collectivity 
Collective 
Individuality
 individual skills (Brown and Duguid, 1991; 

Mirvis, 1998) 

creativity (Barrett, 1998; Hatch, 1999; Kamoche, 

et al., 2003) 

 group cohesion
 (Hutchins, 1995; Weick and 
Roberts, 1993) 

facilitative leadership (Crossan, 1998)  

trust and kinship (Crossan, 1998, Weick, 

1993a)  

fluid communication (Orlikowski, 1996, Miner 

et al., 2001) 
 Anxiety 
anxiety (Cunha, et al., 1999; Mirvis, 1998) 

moods (Ciborra, 2001) 

emotionality (Hatch, 1999) 

sense of urgency (Crossan, 1998, Hutchins, 1991, 

Mirvis, 1998)
  
Confidence 
individual skills (Brown and Duguid, 1991; 

Mirvis, 1998) 

aesthetic of imperfection (Weick, 1999)
 prideful wariness (LaPorte 1996)
 Anxious 
Confidence
 Table 1. Tensions and Paradoxes in Organizational I
mprovisation 
  
   30
  Research Methods
 Examples
 Data Collection
 Semi-structured interviews 
Members of GridPP, middleware developers, 

members of LCG at CERN, physicist users–
 Audio-recorded, 

transcribed, coded 
Participant 

observations 
 Virtual 

meetings 
weekly GridPP PMB meetings  

weekly deployment team meetings 
Audio-recorded, notes 

taken, not transcribed 
Face-to-face 

meetings 
GridPP collaboration meetings, PMB face-to-face 

meetings, deployment team face-to-face meetings,  
Many audio-recorded, 

notes taken, not 

transcribed 
Site visits 
GridPP site readiness review Notes taken 
Secondary data 
GridPP publications, GridPP documents, GridPP 

website, wiki, blogs, mailing lists 
Frequent consultation 
Table 2. Details of research activities. 
   
Roles of Interviewees
 Number
 Notes
 GridPP PMB members 12 
Including project leaders, representatives of all o
ther major 
boards, and liaisons with other partners. 
GridPP technical experts 15 
e.g. Tier 1 manager, Tier 2 manager, technical coor
dinator, 
deployment, sys-admins, other software developers 
Active physicists 9 Often overlapping with other ro
les 
Middleware developers 5 Based in the UK and CERN 

LCG technical experts 11 
e.g. LCG Grid deployment, experiment integrator, ot
her 
software developers 
Table 3. Details of interviews
. 
  
   31
 Quotations 
Interviewee Codes 
 
I™m trying not to use the word senior to imply ther
e™s a real hierarchy. I 
mean people get promoted to be professor or whateve
r but it really hasn™t 
nothing to do with the way it works, okay? That™s i
nternal to the university. 
So um, those people that you know, formally might s
eem more senior, this is 
relevant, their peers with people like [XXXX] and y
ou know, really rely on 
people like that to make it work technically. So th
ey™re fully trusted to just 
get on with it in the deployment board. Okay? So it
™s a fairly flat structure 
really. There™s no, there™s no company-like structu
re of management board 
sets policy and another group sets something else a
nd then you know, down 
the bottom, people do what they™re told. It™s nothi
ng like that at all.  
 
So I was going to come at it from the physicists' p
oint of view to start with 
because it's very important for the physicists beca
use there's so many things 
that they have to do in order to be able to interpr
et something that's been true 
in the data, that they have to trust what other peo
ple have done. And this is 
even more so when you have such big detectors as th
e LHC ones. 
 
And if you go into these big bang mode where it tak
es you two years to put 
this into production, particularly in a community w
hich is as unstable as this 
is, as uncertain as this is, where changing the bea
m, which is something 
totally out of our control, can have implications e
verywhere, this is not the 
right policy. And you have to be much more agile in
 the trends in software 
engineering and agile in programming, and I am sure
 you know all about 
that. And here you do have to do that. 
 
Member of 

Project 

Management 

Board  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GridPP 

technical 

expert (based 

in the UK) 

 
 
LCG 

technical 

expert (based 

at CERN) 
 
[collaboration] 

[democratic 

meritocracy] 

[flat structure] 

[mutual respect]  

  

 
 
 
 
 
[trust] 

[PP history and 

culture] 

 
 
 
[agility] 

[pragmatism] 
Table 4. Example of quotations and coding 
  
   32
 Short cycle time 

system development  
Compared to system development practices 

in our case 
Organizational Implications 
Causes:  

Vague requirement  

Lack of experience 

Time pressure 

  
Yes. Vague requirements because it involves 

new technology and new experiments. 

Yes 

Yes  

Other causes: 
 Faced with enormous uncertainties and 

environmental turbulence. 

Scale 

Existing culture of the particle physics 

community favours exploration, trial-and-error, 

and bricolage. 
A collective attitude to deal with 

uncertainty and ambiguity; 

Capability of organizational 

learning; 

 
Capability to work under great 

pressure; 

Distributed management 

Drawing upon organizational 

memories 
System development practices:  
 Prototyping Yes. ﬁrapid prototypingﬂ 
Result: documentation can™t catch up with the 

speed of changes.  
Exploration, spontaneity 
Release orientation Yes, ﬁfast developmentﬂ, ﬁnight
ly buildﬂ and 
ﬁmonthly releaseﬂ 
Incremental changes 
Tailored methods Yes, or no explicit use of methodo
logy or 
methods. 
Flexibility 
Coding your way out Yes, ﬁhackingﬂ Pragmatism 

Parallel development Yes 
Coordination, negotiation, 

persuasion 
Fixed architecture No. Driven by user requirements,
 which also 
evolve. 
A common goal and shared vision 
Components based 

development and use 
Yes. Particularly necessary due to the 

distributed model.  
Coordination  
Tool dependence Yes but mostly self-developed.  

Dependence on good 

people 
Yes, very much so. Democratic meritocracy, weak 
authority, high autonomy 
Customer involvement Yes. Power users use and test 
the system from 
very early on. The experiments develop 

applications to run on the Grid, with heavy 

interactions. Developers select power users as 

guinea pigs, and cultivate their user 

communities.  
Learning, community building, 

informal communications 
Maintenance ignored No, but it is problematic.   

Quality is negotiable Yes 
ﬁAesthetics of imperfectionﬂ, 

pragmatism 
 Other practices:
 Parallel solutions competing against each other. 
 
Federated structure 
Table 5 Comparing characteristics of systems develo
pment practices with those of ﬁshort cycle time 
system developmentﬂ presented by Baskerville and Pr
ies-Heje (2004). 
     33
   Individuality 
 Intelligence 
 Autonomous 
 Freedom at work 
 Improvisation 
Collective Individuality
 Community bonds among free-

thinking individuals 
Collectivity 
 Shared goal of physics 
 Emphasis on hanging out 
 Facilitative leadership 
 High level of trust 
 Hanging out 
 Anxiety 
 Uncertainties 
 Unreliable software 
 Pressure from CERN and from 

users 
 Funding shortage 
Anxious Confidence
 Confidence as a 

capability to handle 

anxiety 
Confidence 
 Cleverness 
 ﬁIt will workﬂ 
 History/organizational memory 
 Aesthetic of imperfection 
Table 6 Paradoxes of belonging in GridPP 
 Unfolding 
 Adhocracy 
 Constant changes and adaptation 
 Exploration 
 Flux 
Planned Agility
  
Planning to improvise; 
preparing for changes 
Planning 
 Common goal/shared vision 
 Memorandum of Understanding 
 Deliverables 
 Milestones 
 Project map 
 Quarterly reports 
Practices 
 Bottom-up approach 
 Competition 
 Democratic discussions 
 Natural selection of parallel 

technical solutions  
 Transparency 
Structured Chaos
 Providing minimal 
structure to support 
improvisation 
Structure 
 Charismatic leadership 
 Collateral structure 
 Limited hierarchical command or 

authoritative management 
  Table 7 Paradoxes of organizing in GridPP 
   34
   Environment/Present 
 Complexity of the Grid (multiple 

Grids, multiple groups of users) 
 Technological uncertainties 
 Time constraints (pressure of speed) 
Learned Improvisation
 Drawing upon past experience 
to handle uncertainties & 
complexities of the present 
History/Culture 
 Pragmatic approach 
 Computing expertise/successes in PP  
 Tradition of distributed collaboration 

in experiments 
 Spontaneity 
 Agility 
 Fast, incremental changes 
 Short cycle development 
 Trial and error 
 Reflective Spontaneity
 Recovering meaning from 
actions retrospectively 
Reflexivity/Learning 
 Active informal face-to-face 

communication 
 Mailing lists, blogs, wiki,  
 Frequent multiple meetings, on site and 

virtual 
 Testing and monitoring 
Table 8: Paradoxes of learning in GridPP 

 
 
  Draw upon past experience to handle new tasks; 
 Continuous reflection and learning; 
 Extensive communications within and between differe
nt groups, with an emphasis on face-to-face 
informal communication; 
 Work with power users; cultivate user communities; 
 Project leader articulates clear vision and shared 
goals; 
 Use high level milestones and deliverables to creat
e momentum, but be ready to change them; 
 Share knowledge by mailing lists, wiki, blogs, etc;
  Cultivate community bonding and shared identity; 
 Develop trust, loyalty and mutual support; 
 Motivate and rely on good people; 
 Maintain high level of transparency within the proj
ect; 
 Allow mistakes and unsuccessful explorations; 
 Allow parallel solutions to compete with each other
 when resources permit; it might be a faster and sa
fer 
way of achieving a goal. 
Table 9. Key organisational practices in GridPP
    35
  
 
 Project 
 Management 
 Board
 Oversight 
 Committee 
 Collaboration 
 Board 
(Institutes)
 Deployment 
 Board
 User Board 
(Experiments)
 Provision
 Utilisation
 Review
 Action
 Deployment 
Team
 Tier
-1 Board
 Tier
-2 Board
  Figure 2. Organizational chart of GridPP (Adapted 
graph from the GridPP website) 
Arrows: formal communication 

channels.  

Dotted line arrows: occasional formal 

communications 
Scot 

– 





˘˘ˇ

ˆ
˙˝˙ˇ˙
˛˚
˚
˛˚
ˆ˜
 ˛!
˝"˘
˚
˜
Figure 1. Infrastructure of LCG (Including GridPP) 
˚##
˚˘$
!% &
