 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)ICIS 2002 ProceedingsInternational Conference on Information Systems(ICIS)12-31-2002Balancing Quality and Agility in Internet SpeedSoftware DevelopmentRichard BaskervilleGeorgia State UniversityLinda LevineSoftware Engineering InstituteJan Pries-HejeIT University of DenmarkBalasubramaniam RameshGeorgia State UniversitySandra SlaughterCarnegie Mellon UniversityThis material is brought to you by the International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS) at AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). It has beenaccepted for inclusion in ICIS 2002 Proceedings by an authorized administrator of AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). For more information, pleasecontactelibrary@aisnet.org.Recommended CitationBaskerville, Richard; Levine, Linda; Pries-Heje, Jan; Ramesh, Balasubramaniam; and Slaughter, Sandra, "Balancing Quality andAgility in Internet Speed Software Development" (2002).ICIS 2002 Proceedings.Paper 89.http://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2002/89 2002 Š Twenty-Third International Conference on Information Systems 
859BALANCING QUALITY AND AGILITY IN INTERNETSPEED SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENTRichard BaskervilleGeorgia State UniversityAtlanta, GA  USAbaskerville@acm.org
Linda LevineSoftware Engineering Institute
Pittsburgh, PA  USAll@sei.cmu.edu
Jan Pries-HejeThe IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
jph@itu.dkBalasubramanian Ramesh
Georgia State UniversityAtlanta, GA  USAbramesh@gsu.edu
Sandra SlaughterGraduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie Mellon UniversityPittsburgh, PA  USAsandras@andrew.cmu.edu
AbstractThis research seeks to discover how quality and agility can be achieved in Internet speed software development.
The study is being conducted in multiple phases. During phase 1, detailed case studies of Internet software
development were conducted with 10 companies. In phase 2, a Discovery Colloquium was held to synthesize
knowledge on innovative practices for quality and agility in Internet software development. During phase 3,
the objective is to develop a contingency framework that characterizes choice and effectiveness of the practices
based upon the insights from the prior two phases and through a second round of interviews with the original
companies (still in business) and with selected additional companies from phase 2. This 
paper reports on
findings on the use of agile methodologies that have emerged from 
phase 2, the Discovery Colloquium, as
presented within the larger context of the study.  
1INTRODUCTION
The explosion of electronic commerce on the Internet and the rapid rate at which corporations are reinventing themselves into

e-businesses have created a radically new environment for software development. To be competitive in the digital economy
requires the ability to develop high quality software systems at ﬁInternet speed.ﬂ  However, the widespread diffusion of qualit
ysoftware development practices has met with serious obstacles. Software has been credited with contributing to some of the most
spellbinding advances of the 20
th century, but it also ﬁeasily rates among the most poorly constructed, unreliable, and least
maintainable technological artifacts invented by man.ﬂ (Gross et al. 1999). The problems with software development are
exacerbated in the Internet environment, with the emphasis on reduced cycle times. Existing software development approaches
may not be a match to the needs of this world. Such approaches can be oriented toward a large scale, can make cumbersome
project configuration assumptions, and are based on assumptions that represent a single-goal dimension.
 Baskerville et al./Internet Speed Software Development
8602002 Š Twenty-Third International Conference on Information Systems
Beyond the high visibility Internet software leaders such as Microsoft and Netscape, little is known about how Internet softwar
eproduct development is carried out. How do software developers actually build their fast cycle time software? What is the impac
tof these development practices on the quality of the software?  Anecdotal evidence suggests that quality assurance practices ar
ecandidates for compression in cycle time reduction (Wetherbe and Frolick 2000). However, there is a need to understand how
firms are developing fast cycle time software, what quality processes are used, and how software quality is retained in this
environment. Software development organizations are seeking appropriate methods, tools, and practices that meet the challenges
imposed by Internet speed software development. Current methods for software development and models for process improvement
(e.g., ISO 9000-3, CMM, SPICE, Bootstrap) are effective in large-scale, long-term development efforts that employ stable and
disciplined processes (Harter et al. 2000; Krishnan et al. 2000). However, Internet software development is characterized by ra
pid
changes in requirements and unpredictable product complexity. Approaches that achieve a balance between flexibility and
disciplined methodology are necessary in such environments (Cusumano and Yoffie 1999a, 1999b; Ians
iti and MacCormack 
1997;Thomke and Reinertsen 1998). However, most current methods and tools address the needs of large systems developed by
multiple large teams and are not easily downward scalable to Internet speed software development (Fayad et al. 2000; Laitinen
et al. 2000).
In contrast to 
heavy or 
monumental
 methodologies (Highsmith 1999), there is growing interest in 
light
 methodologies that are
more formal than ﬁhackingﬂ and less formal than the popular rigorous methodologies. These methodologies are claimed to be
ﬁadaptive rather than predictiveﬂ (Beck 2000) and emphasize improvisation (Miner et al. 2001). Spiral models of development
(Boehm 1998; Boehm et al. 1998), Agile Software Process (Aoyama 1998), Scrum (Rising and Janoff 2000), and eXtreme
Programming (XP) (Beck 2000; Beck and Fowler 2001; Jeffries et al. 2001) are among such methodologies. XP, which is the most
popular in this environment, emphasizes planning, analysis and design thro
ughout the software development life cycle (Beck et
al. 1999) and relies on some simple ideas that are put to extreme practice. The agile methodologies are not without critics. Am
ong
the problems associated with light methods are the potential loss of control in project management and the potential for ineffi
cient
and chaotic software design and architecture that require ﬁrefactoringﬂ to be rationalized (Fowler 2000). Further, as the
methodologies themselves are not very stable, predictability and repeatability, hallmarks of a disciplined process, cannot be
guaranteed.
While the current literature recognizes that many challenges and new ideas are emerging, the need for solutions and frameworks
that an Internet software development organization can readily adopt remains unfulfilled. Our research study addresses this voi
d.It is conducted using multiple phases, each of which is designed to accomplish a particular objective. Specifically, this study
 seeks
to:  (phase 1) understand how and why the development of Internet software is different from traditional software development;
(phase 2) discover innovative practices used to achieve both quality and agility in Internet software development; and (phase 3
)discern the contingencies motivating the choice and effectiveness of these practices (Shenhar 2001).  Note that this paper desc
ribesphase 2 of the study.
2METHODOLOGY
The study uses a mixed methods research design (Tashakkori and Teddlie 1998) involving the collection of multiple kinds of data
.During phase 1, in Fall 2000, detailed case studies of Internet software development were conducted with 10 companies in two
major metropolitan areas. The objective of phase 1 was to understand how and why Internet software development differs from
traditional software development. Phase 1 identified practices for Internet speed development (Baskerville et al. 2
001) and
explored the role of quality in this fast cycle environment (Ramesh et al. 2002).
The objectives of phase 2 are to synthesize knowledge on best practices for quality and agility in Internet software developmen
t.To help achieve these objectives, in October 2001, we held a one-day Discovery Colloquium on Innovative Practices for Speed
and Agility in Internet Software Development (Levine et al. 2002).  The colloquium activities were designed to expand
understanding of the interface between business issues and Internet software development through dialogue; explore promising
practices for Internet software development; and engage participants in a vision-based approach to identify emerging models,
strategies, and directions to address challenges in Internet software development. 
The Colloquium represented the second phase of our larger study and was designed to benefit from the findings from phase 1.
Interviewees from the phase 1 companies, as well as selected experts were invited.  Participants included software practitioner
sfrom entrepreneurial small firms as well as large ﬁbrick and mortarﬂ companies, Internet business strategists, and leading soft
ware
development experts. Software development methodological perspectives also ranged from adherents of agile methodologies to
adherents of more traditional software process disciplines, representing a broad spectrum of stakeholders.
 Baskerville et al./Internet Speed Software Development
2002 Š Twenty-Third International Conference on Information Systems 
861The event was designed to capitalize on the rich mix of participants and allow for maximum exchange of ideas. Our
unconventional research process leveraged forward-looking approaches including search approaches to system learning, difference
questioning, and creative abrasion. Grounded in Kurt Lewin™s action research model, search conferences seek to ﬁbring the whole
system in the roomﬂ to exchange views and learn from one another (http://futuresearch.net/). The search conference design utili
zesdifference questioning, in the belief that ﬁwhen members of a group question differences [they] generate new informationﬂ
(Goldstein 1994). This is done thro
ugh creative abrasionŠa term coined by Dorothy Leonard (
1995) to describe a process that
ﬁcreates a collision of ideas within a climate of social cohesion,ﬂ resulting in original and innovative ideas.
The Colloquium opened with an inclusion exercise focusing on the use of metaphors to illustrate participants™ images about the
current Internet software development environment. This exercise was followed with a series of active-listening exercises
conducted in context-based groups, wherein participants discussed their own experiences. The exercises used ﬁfishbowlﬂ
discussions as applied in education and human development, in combination with a model drawn from Zuni tribal council ﬁtalking
circles.ﬂ  A series of small participant groups (or subgroups) were centered in the larger group, discussing issues pertinent t
oquality software development. While each subgroup engaged in dialogue, participants in the rest of the room reflected and liste
ned
to the discussion without comment. The fishbowls created an environment where thoughtful listening is as important as talking
and sharing, and framed core questions for further consideration. The segment concluded with a full group discussion and
selection of core issues for further analysis.
In the next session, participants joined one of several breakout groups, dedicated to exploration of a core issue. The first pa
rt of
this exploration involved 
hypothesis testing
, wherein groups identified observations relating to their core issue, and then developed
hypotheses about the associated factors and dynamics. The purpose of this work was to begin the process of deep, thoughtful
examination of an important trend or issue with Internet software development at the present time. The approach helped ensure
that the groups avoided polarization in their views, but continued to carry on fruitful dialogue, embracing differences as well
 as
convergence.
Difference questioning 
flowed from the hypothesis testing and created a process for groups to develop a set of assumptions that
underlay each of their hypotheses. Once that was complete, the groups scanned their exploratory work to that point to identify
emerging 
principles and practices
 that held potential for further investigation. The purpose of this work was to further build the
community dialogue from generative ideas, and to ensure that that dialogue fairly represented all strongly held viewpoints. A
further purpose was to allow for both divergence and convergence of insights, with maximum cross-fertilization across
differences. Each group was provided worksheets to guide them through the process.
The session concluded with breakout groups reporting to the full gathering the key elements of their analysis. Finally, the ful
lgroup engaged in ﬁproto-scenario developmentﬂ through identification of emerging cond
itions and impacts. Several scenarios were
selected for analysis of factors enabling or constraining their emergence. This exercise highlighted evolving dynamics in Inter
net
software development. 
To illustrate the nature of the outputs of the Colloquium, we present initial findings on one core issue investigated, i.e., 
agile
methodologies.
3INITIAL FINDINGS:  ARE AGILE METHODOLOGIES DIFFERENT?
The participants observed that the effectiveness of agile methods appears to lie in people not in process. The discussion revea
ledthe belief that basic software development principles do not change.  However, we learned that these principles are implemented
through specific practices that evolve and are matched to environmental contingencies. The questions driving discussion include
dthe following:  What agile methodologies are being used in software development? What disti
nguishes agile meth
odologies from
traditional software development methodologies? When are agile methodologies more effective?
Several general observations about agile methodologies emerged:

(1)People claim that agile methods are the best way to develop information systems, and assert that agile methods are a ﬁnew
and radically different methodology.ﬂ
(2)Three key elements of agile methods include:  collaborative work; incremental, evolutionary life cycles within a strategy;
and strong customer communication.
 Baskerville et al./Internet Speed Software Development
8622002 Š Twenty-Third International Conference on Information Systems
(3)Larger questions on agile methodologies can be explored by examining the basic practices of XP and other agile practices.
There was general agreement that XP embodied most of what is seen as good about agile methods.
(4)The effectiveness of agile methods appears to lie in people 
not process.  Agile methods reward heroes.
As part of the research and discovery process, the group generated rival hypotheses and underlying assumptions for these
hypotheses about agile methodologies (Figure 1).
H1Agile methods are more effective (than traditional software development methods)
H2 Agile methods are not fundamentally different from traditional software development methods
H3 Partially implementing key agile practices will lead to project failure
H4 Agile methods require good people to be successful
H5Internet speed development is fundamentally different from traditional development; thus, agile
methods are needed
H6Agile methods are effective when the time horizon is short term, and not as effective over the long
termH7Agile methods aren™t really new per se, but their implementation is extreme
Figure 1.  Hypotheses About Agile Methodologies
A number of key insights emerged. First, the basic principles of software development exist, are known, and are immutable.
Second, there is more than one way to implement a software development principle. While everyone agrees on software
development principles, some practices are controversial. It is important to describe what the principles are and to discern ho
wpractices differ from one methodology to another. Third, for every agile method practice, an analog in traditional software
development methods can be found. For example, consider the following principles: good teamwork is critical; requirements
change; and talking to the customer is good. These hold for agile and traditional methods. Fourth, some combinations of practic
esare superior in specific environments. This means that different environments require different implementations for effectivene
ss.Environments dictate practices, not principles. Fifth, software development is linear and time bounded at an atomic level.
Development approaches are bounded by lifecycle choices. Thus, the choice of software development lifecycle dictates the choice
of practices such as waterfall, spiral, and prototyping. 
Based upon these insights, the group members generated meta-principles underlying software development and methodologies.
The meta-principles are presented in Figure 2.
P1All software processes require good teamwork regardless of methodology
P2Good software development methodologies engage the customer
P3The project environment constrains what software development practices will be effective
P4Practices interact often in unforeseen ways.  The implication is that you can mix and match
methodologies, but sometimes this has unintended consequences
P5Current agile methods are a simple instantiation of a set of practices that seem to work 
Figure 2.  Meta-Principles Underlying Software Development Methodologies
Finally, the group members identified promising practices in agile methodologies, including: short development iterations to
explore unknown problem spaces effectively without wasting time, accountability and discipline in programming, minimal
essential documentation, onsite customer liaison, pair programming, frequent peer and customer reviews, frequent regression
testing, configuration management, and detailed planning for the immediate future (up to six months) with ﬁfuzzierﬂ planning
beyond six months. 
A major finding is that agile methods may appear to be different in implementation, but are not really different in terms of
software development principles.  Additionally, while software development principles don™t change, different implementations
(or practices) may be more effective in different environments. No ﬁone size fits allﬂ approach works for all projects.
 Baskerville et al./Internet Speed Software Development
2002 Š Twenty-Third International Conference on Information Systems 
8634DISCUSSION
We are currently analyzing our findings from the Colloquium. Further, we are synthesizing knowledge on best practices for quali
tyand agility that have emerged from our phase 1 case studies, the Colloquium, and our literature review. Based upon this synthes
is,we are developing an initial framework that characterizes the situational factors motivating the choice of these practices and 
their
effective use. At the conference, we will present key findings from phase 1 and phase 2.  Phase 3 of the study is planned to
validate and refine the framework based upon a second round of interviews with the original companies (still in business) and
with selected additional companies from Phase 2.
5REFERENCES
Aoyama, M.  ﬁWeb-Based Agile Software Development,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, November/December 1998, pp. 56-65.
Baskerville, R., Levine, L., Pries-Heje, J., Ramesh, B., and Slaughter, S.  ﬁHow Internet Software Companies Negotiate Quality,
ﬂIEEE Computer
 (34:5), 2001, pp. 51-57.
Beck, K.  
Extreme Programming Explained:  Embrace Change
.  Reading, MA:  Addison-Wesley, 2000.
Beck, K., and Fowler, M. 
 Planning Extreme Programming
.  Reading, MA:  Addison Wesley, 2001.
Beck, K., Hannula, J., Hendrickson, C., Wells, D., and Mee, R.  ﬁEmbracing Change with Extreme Programming,ﬂ 
IEEEComputer
 (32:10), 1999,  pp. 70-77.
Boehm, B.  ﬁA Spiral Model of Software Development and Enhancement,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer
 (21:5), 1998, pp. 61-72.
Boehm, B., Egyed, A., Kwan, J., Port, D., Shah, A., and Madachy, R.  ﬁUsing the Win-Win Spiral Model:  A Case Study,ﬂ 
IEEEComputer
 (31:7), 1998, pp. 33-44.
Cusumano, M. A., and Yoffie, D. B.  ﬁSoftware Development on Internet Time,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer
 (32:10), 1999a, pp. 60-69.
Cusumano, M. A., and Yoffie, D. B.  ﬁWhat Netscape Learned from Cross-Platform Software Development,ﬂ 
Communications
of the ACM
 (42:10), 1999b, pp. 72-78.
Fayad, M. E., Laitinen, M., and Ward, R. P.  ﬁSoftware Engineering in the Small,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (43:3), 2000,
pp. 115-118.
Fowler, M.  
Refactoring:  Improving the Design of Existing Code
.  Reading, MA:  Addison-Wesley, 2000.
Goldstein, J.  
The Unshackled Organization
.  Portland, OR:  Productivity Press, 1994.
Gross, N., Stepanek, M., Port, O., and Carey, J.  ﬁSoftware Hell,ﬂ 
BusinessWeek Online
, December 6, 1999. 
Harter, D., Krishnan, M., and Slaughter, S.  ﬁEffects of Process Maturity on Quality, Cycle Time, and Effort in Software Produc
tDevelopment,ﬂ 
Management Science
 ( 46:4), 2000, pp. 451-466.
Highsmith, J.  
Adaptive Software Development
.  New York:  Dorest House, 1999.
Iansiti, M., and MacCormack, A.  ﬁDeveloping Products on Internet Time,ﬂ 
Harvard Business Review
, September-October 1997,
pp. 108-117.
Jeffries, R., Anderson, A., and Hendrickson, C.  
Extreme Programming Installed
.  Reading, MA:  Addison-Wesley, 2001.
Krishnan, M., Kekre, S., Kriebel, C., and Mukhopadhyay, T.  ﬁAn Empirical Analysis of Productivity and Quality in Software
Products,ﬂ 
Management Science
 (46), 2000, pp. 745-759.
Laitinen, M., Fayad, M. E., and Ward, R. P.  ﬁThe Problem with Scalability,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (43:9), 2000, pp. 105-
107.Leonard, D.  
Wellsprings of Knowledge:  Building and Sustaining the Sources of Innovation
.  Cambridge, MA:  Harvard Business
School Press, 1995.
Levine, L., Baskerville, R., Loveland Link, J. L., Pries-Heje, J., Ramesh, B., and Slaughter, S.  
Discovery Colloquium:  Quality
Software Development @ Internet Speed
.  SEI Technical Report CMU/SEI-2002-TR-020, ESC-TR-2002-020.  Pittsburgh,
PA:  Software Engineering Institute, 2002 (available online at http://
www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/
02.reports/02tr020.html).
Miner, A. S., Bassoff, P., and Moorman, C.  ﬁOrganizational Improvisation and Learning:  A Field Study,ﬂ 
Administrative Science
Quarterly
 (46:2), Jun 2001, pp. 304-337.
Ramesh, B., Baskerville, R., and Pries-Heje, J.  ﬁInternet Software Engineering:  A Different Class of Processes,ﬂ 
Annals of
Software Engineering
 (14), 2002, pp. 169-195.
Rising, L., and Janoff, N .S.  ﬁThe Scrum Software Development Process for Small Teams,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
 (17:4), 2000, pp. 26-
32.Shenhar, A. J.  ﬁOne Size Does Not Fit All Projects:  Exploring Classical Contingency Domains,ﬂ 
Management Science
 (47:3),
2001, pp. 394-414.
Tashakkori, A., and Teddlie, C.  
Mixed Methodology:  Combining Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches
.  Thousand Oaks,
CA:  Sage Publications, 1998.
 Baskerville et al./Internet Speed Software Development
8642002 Š Twenty-Third International Conference on Information Systems
Thomke, S., and Reinertsen, D.  ﬁAgile Product Development:  Managing Development Flexibility in Uncertain Environments,ﬂ
California Management Review
 (41:1), 1998, pp. 8-30.
Wetherbe, J., and Frolick, M.  ﬁCycle Time Reduction:  Concepts and Case Studies,ﬂ 
Communications of the AIS
 (3:Article 13),
2000, pp. 1-42.
