 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)BEYOND MODES: A NEW TYPOLOGY OFISD CONTROLW. Alec CramQueenÕs UniversityM. Kathryn BrohmanQueenÕs UniversityICIS 2010Proceedings.  Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
1 BEYOND 
MODES
: A NEW 
TYPOLOGY OF 
ISD
 CONTROL
 Completed Research Paper 
W. Alec Cram 
Queen™s University 
Kingston, Ontario, Canada 
wcram@business.queensu.ca 
M. Kathryn Brohman 
Queen™s University 
Kingston, Ontario, Canada 
kbrohman@business.queensu.ca 
   Abstract 
This study focuses on the role of information syste
ms development (ISD) control as a means to 
better understand the underlying elements of ISD me
thodologies. Based on Ackoff™s general 
systems theory, we propose a new typology of ISD co
ntrol that moves beyond the de facto 
standard in ISD research: control modes. Through tw
enty-six interviews at four organizations, we 
find that our typology aids in distinguishing betwe
en control dimensions within structured and 
flexible development to a greater extent than contr
ol modes would allow. Our paper also discusses 
possible reasons why the benefits of agile developm
ent may become diluted in organizations 
where both flexible and structured methods are empl
oyed. This work contributes to the 
advancement of ISD control theory and provides usef
ul insights for practitioners responsible for 
the governance of ISD projects. 

Keywords:  
IS control, Agile software development, Systems ana
lysis and design 
 Systems Development and Alternative Methodologies 

2 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Introduction 

Information systems researchers and practitioners c
laim that IT departments are diluting the benefits 
of agile 
software development methods by infusing them with 
traditional, structured techniques in order to over
come 
organizational constraints and executive resistance
 to change (Karlstroem & Runeson 2005; Manhart & Sc
hneider 
2004).  Such approaches are becoming more widesprea
d in practice as development teams ﬁare puzzling ou
t the mix 
of methodologies and combining them to fit within t
heir organizational realities, blending agile and n
on-agile 
techniques and practices to create a hybrid methodo
logy that fits larger organizationsﬂ (West et al. 2
010). For 
example, Daimler-Chrysler did not adopt a full agil
e approach but added specific agile practices in an
 attempt to 
‚break the ice™ and foster organizational acceptanc
e of agile elements (Manhart & Schneider 2004). Des
pite 
management resistance to agile methods in tradition
al, stage-gate project management organizations, cu
stomized 
agile methods are increasingly being employed in su
ch environments (Karlstroem & Runeson 2005). As dev
elopers 
and IT professionals rapidly move to adopt agile in
formation systems development (ISD) approaches - 45
% of 
13,000 organizations recently surveyed said they us
e agile methods (Taft 2010) Œ we expect that more I
T 
organizations will face constraints, resistance, an
d pressure to follow the trend of hybrid systems de
velopment 
methodologies. To date, little research has been do
ne to determine the causes or the effects of hybrid
 development, 
particularly in relation to the dilution of agile p
ractices.   
One plausible explanation for why agile practices a
re being diluted is a misalignment between ISD proj
ect and 
organizational controls (Taft 2010). A common mecha
nism used for ISD project control is through the us
e of ISD 
approaches, which refer to a set of related goals, 
guiding principles, and fundamental concepts that d
rive 
interpretations and actions in systems development 
processes (Iivari et al. 2000/2001).  Organizationa
l control 
consists of the set of structures, processes, polic
ies, and relationships that affect the way people d
irect and 
administer a corporation; these mechanisms include 
organizational structure, standardized processes, a
nd 
performance management tools (e.g. balanced scoreca
rd).  Information systems literature has studied th
e 
relationship between performance and alignment of b
usiness to IT from a governance and control perspec
tive 
(Broadbent & Weill 1993; Weill & Ross 2004). Consis
tent with this research, we have designed a researc
h program 
to study how organizations effectively control syst
ems development projects when project and organizat
ional 
controls are misaligned, as well as how contradicto
ry control elements in hybrid development projects 
lead to 
performance impacts. 

As a preliminary step in our research program, the 
purpose of this paper is to develop a theoretically
 grounded 
typology of ISD project control by clearly differen
tiating the mechanisms used to control information 
systems 
development. Effective control over ISD is widely v
iewed as an important contributor to achieving proj
ect and 
organizational objectives (Dibbern et al. 2008; Hen
derson & Lee 1992; Sia & Neo 1997). Past ISD resear
ch on 
control predominantly focuses on how types of contr
ol are determined by organizational and behavioral 
circumstances (Choudhury & Sabherwal 2003; Kirsch 1
996). Standardization and use of control mechanisms
 have 
been examined in prior research (Kirsch 1997; Nidum
olu & Subramani 2003); however, there is a general 
lack of 
theory pertaining to the role of control in end-to-
end systems development methodologies (Harris et al
. 2009). 
Though a need exists for advancement in control con
ceptualizations in order to extend knowledge in the
 field 
(Kirsch 2004), the role of control in ISD remains d
ominated by Kirsch™s (1996, 1997) portfolio of cont
rol modes 
(see Table 1). 

A key mechanism of control in ISD projects is the d
evelopment methodology, which represents ﬁa corners
tone of 
disciplinary practice, a means of controlling proce
sses and resultsﬂ (Orlikowski 1991, p. 16). Traditi
onal software 
development methodologies (e.g. waterfall) are very
 structured and sequential in nature; the early dom
inance of 
these methods in practice is attributed to advocate
s that argued for development to be completed via d
iscrete phases, 
whereby requirements analysis, design, testing, and
 implementation are individually completed in a pre
-defined 
sequence (Boehm 1976; Royce 1970). Using these plan
-driven, structured methods, customers are primaril
y 
involved in the requirements gathering, but have mi
nimal participation in subsequent phases. A more re
cent 
movement to encourage more flexibility to respond t
o changing customer needs in software projects has 
resulted in a 
number of more agile development methodologies incl
uding XP (eXtreme Programming), Scrum, DSDM (Dynami
c 
Systems Development Method), and FDD (Feature-Drive
n Development). Agile development is based around t
he 
concept of collaborative, self-organizing teams tha
t iteratively deliver working software (Beck et al.
 2001; Martin 
1991). Agile projects take a minimalist approach to
 design and documentation, relying instead on adapt
ability, 
flexibility, and responsiveness (Fitzgerald et al. 
2006; Lee & Xia 2010; Nerur & Balijepally 2007). Pr
oject team 
  Cram & Brohman / Beyond Modes: A New Typology of IS
D Control 
   Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
3 members tend to have only loosely defined responsib
ilities and customers are encouraged to be actively
 involved in 
the development process (Nerur et al. 2005). Agile 
development methods allow software teams to increas
e 
flexibility by allowing them to embrace and respond
 to changing environments (Beck & Andres 2004; Coad
 et al. 
1999). 

The trade-off between control and flexibility as a 
central dynamic in today™s software development app
roaches is 
particularly pertinent to the definition of ISD con
trol. To date, there is no accepted view about the 
relationship 
between control and flexibility in agile literature
. Some argue that the fundamental agile design view
s contradict 
control (Augustine et al. 2005) and others find tha
t less formal control approaches are not a signific
ant predictor of 
agile development success (Misra et al. 2009).  Two
 articles recently published in the Information Sys
tems Research 
(ISR) special issue on agile methods apply more the
oretical and rigorous methods to examine control of
 flexible 
software development practices. Both papers define 
control according to Kirsch™s (1996) portfolio of c
ontrol modes; 
however, their results are contradictory, as each d
efines a different control mode to be appropriate f
or agile 
environments. Maruping et al. (2009) conclude that 
the relationship between agile methodology use and 
software 
project quality is moderated by outcome control (se
e Table 1), while Harris et al. (2009) argue both f
ormal control 
modes (output and behavioral) are insufficient and 
introduce a new form of control (emergent outcome c
ontrol) to 
explain agile environments. One plausible explanati
on for such conflicting results in the literature i
s that control 
modes do not sufficiently differentiate structured 
and flexible methods of systems development. As suc
h, this paper 
uses Ackoff™s general systems theory (1974, 1981) t
o develop a new typology of ISD control and validat
es the 
typology using 26 interviews with experienced syste
ms developers in four organizations. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follow
s. The next section will outline the management con
trol literature 
and its relationship to ISD. This will be followed 
by a proposed new typology of ISD control, based on
 Ackoff™s 
systems theory. Next, the research design, data col
lection, and analysis methods will be outlined, fol
lowed by a 
presentation of the results and a discussion of the
 findings. Finally, the paper will conclude with de
tails of the 
study™s limitations and implications for research a
nd practice. 
Controlling Systems Development 

Control broadly refers to a process in which a pers
on or group intentionally affects the behavior of a
nother person or 
group, often with the objective of achieving goals 
(Davis 1940; Flamholtz et al. 1985; Tannenbaum 1962
). 
Researchers from computer science, software enginee
ring, and management information systems (MIS) have
 
examined the relationship between control in ISD at
 varying degrees; in fact, the entire ISD methodolo
gy movement 
in the 1970s and 1980s was predicated on the import
ance of structure to encourage the use of different
 
methodologies to guide development (Boehm 1976). Ma
rkus and Bjorn-Anderson (1987) examine the role of 
IS 
professionals exercising technical, structural, con
ceptual, and symbolic power. They argue that develo
pment 
methods may aid in the exercise of power by guiding
 the questions that developers ask and thus influen
cing the 
design features.  

In MIS, ISD methodologies represent an organized gr
ouping of a development approach, model, method(s),
 and 
techniques that are supported by material resources
 (Hirschheim, Klein & Lyytinen 1995; Huisman & Iiva
ri 2006). 
The use of ISD methodologies and these underlying c
omponents are believed to comprise inherent control
 
mechanisms that are used to enable consistency and 
quality (e.g. minimized software defects) in system
s 
development.  

For example, Westrup (1993) argues that management 
control can be exerted via development methodology 
use by 
demanding specified outcomes at particular project 
stages through development tools such as CASE and e
xtensive 
staff training.  Orlikowski (1991) argues that meth
odologies are a form of cultural control over devel
opers as they 
force an ﬁinternalization of...assumptions, values,
 and interestsﬂ (p. 17). Later, Kirsch (1997) indic
ates that 
organizations operating in dynamic, changing enviro
nments may actually change control approaches throu
ghout the 
lifecycle of an IS project as priorities change; th
e result is a portfolio of control modes for inform
ation systems 
projects. Developed from managerial control literat
ure (Ouchi 1978, 1979), she defined four control mo
dels in ISD 
(Kirsch 1996, 1997; Kirsch et al. 2002). This portf
olio of modes, defined in Table 1, is the common le
ns used by IS 
researchers to study ISD control to date. Although 
Kirsch references procedures such as development st
andards and 
performance goals that would commonly be part of a 
development methodology, ISD methodologies are not 
specifically addressed. 
 Systems Development and Alternative Methodologies 

4 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Several other researchers have extended the use of 
control theory into software development environmen
ts 
(Choudhury & Sabherwal 2003; Henderson & Lee 1992; 
Nidumolu & Subramani 2003) and more recently 
researchers have examined the control of flexible s
oftware development (Harris et al. 2009; Maruping e
t al. 2009; 
McHugh et al. 2008). The importance of flexibility 
in software development processes is supported by a
 substantial 
body of research (e.g. Byrd & Turner 2000; Duncan 1
995; Gefen & Keil 1998) and reports a significant r
elationship 
between flexibility and software development perfor
mance (Lee & Xia 2005; MacCormack et al. 2001); how
ever, 
the relationship between control and flexibility re
mains uncertain. 
Table 1. Modes of Control 
Behavioral control Exhibited when a supervisor ‚che
cks™ on a subordinate. It is subtle, flexible, capt
ures 
a range of activities, though assessments are subje
ctive and difficult to communicate 
through organizational levels (Ouchi 1978) 
Formal 
Outcome control Exhibited by monitoring an employee
™s level of output. It is quantifiable, 
comparable across levels and functions, and capture
s performance levels specific 
activities (Ouchi 1978) 
Clan control Uses selection processes and social me
chanisms to control the behavior of 
individuals (Ouchi 1979). For example, if employee 
mistakes on a project are 
publicly criticized by other team members, individu
als may become more vigilant in 
their activities so as not to attract negative atte
ntion from their peers. 
Informal 
Self control Individuals control their own actions,
 outside the direction of management (Kirsch 
1996). For example, if an employee takes initiative
 to resolve an issue without being 
asked to do so by their supervisor. 
The fundamental challenge in using modes to examine
 control in flexible environments is that the scope
 is too 
general; in fact, both Maruping et al. (2009) and H
arris et al. (2009) incorporate additional theory t
o examine control 
in agile environments. Maruping et al. (2009) base 
their theoretical argument on the importance of tea
m member 
autonomy, specifically that decentralized decision-
making authority is important when requirements are
 volatile 
(Nidumolu & Subramani 2003) and outcome control cre
ates an environment for autonomy (Henderson & Lee 1
992). 
They find that outcome control is more appropriate 
in agile environments as autonomous team members wi
ll have a 
heightened need to respond in changing environments
. Harris et al. (2009) conceptualize the role of co
ntrol in agile 
development from a product development lens and bas
e their theoretical argument on the theory of dynam
ic 
capabilities; high change environments require the 
ability to reconfigure on-the-fly because change ca
nnot be 
predicted (Eisenhardt & Martin 2000; Teece et al. 1
997). They argue output control is not appropriate 
in agile 
environments as outcomes in agile methods are not e
xplicit; rather, they are developed from an iterati
ve 
development process. Based on these results, we con
clude that a typology of ISD control needs to go be
yond control 
modes to effectively define control mechanisms that
 govern both traditional and flexible development e
nvironments.  
ISD Control: A New Typology 

Doty and Glick (1994) define typologies as a concep
tually derived, interrelated set of ideal types, wh
ich represent 
configurations of multiple constructs. Our ISD cont
rol typology differentiates control on two theoreti
cal dimensions: 
1) the inherent problem solving method of the ISD a
pproach, and 2) the dimensions of control in a prob
lem solving 
environment. On this basis, we develop and evaluate
 three research propositions, which are described b
elow. 
Inherent Problem Solving Method 

Consistent with Ackoff™s general systems theory (19
74, 1981), our typology posits that variation in IS
D control can 
be explained by the inherent problem solving method
 of the development approach. The motivation to ado
pt this 
theoretical dimension was inspired by a similar mov
ement from structured to flexible methods in projec
t 
management; flexible methods are defined as integra
tive project management practices. Shenhar and Dvir
 (2007) 
argue that the discipline of project management nee
ds to undergo a fundamental shift in practice and p
hilosophy in 
order to move away from reductionist project manage
ment approaches. Information systems researchers al
so claim 
that fundamental design views of integrative projec
t management are contradictory to traditional metho
ds, which are 
defined by controlling and directive practices appr
opriate for stable environments, whereas agile meth
ods are 
  Cram & Brohman / Beyond Modes: A New Typology of IS
D Control 
   Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
5 grounded in collaborative and communicative practic
es appropriate for turbulent environments (Nerur & 
Balijepally 
2007).  In software engineering, Adaptive Software 
Development, Crystal, Dynamic Systems Development M
ethod, 
Feature-Driven Development, Internet-Speed Developm
ent, and Scrum support integrated project managemen
t 
principles (Augustine et al. 2005).  

We deem this approach appropriate as ISD methodolog
ies are essentially a set of guidelines, activities
, and tools that 
vary according to some ﬁsystematic way of conductin
g  at least one phase of the systems development li
fecycleﬂ 
(Huisman & Iivari 2006, p. 32). To clarify, conside
r the systematic ways that a project team may choos
e to define 
the requirements of a new system. One approach woul
d be to define the high level scope and objectives 
of the 
system and break down the work to create a requirem
ents document used to guide development. Ackoff (19
74) 
defines this structured problem solving approach as
 a reductionistic method of analysis. In ISD, struc
tured 
approaches see the organization (or the customer) a
s a ‚tool™ and attempt to understand their problems
 (or needs) by 
breaking them into parts and following a step-by-st
ep process to create a detailed analysis and design
 of the software 
to be developed (e.g. waterfall). Early research in
 computer science and software engineering literatu
re argues that 
managers break down programming initiatives into ta
sks as a means to more easily control developers. B
y utilizing 
the organizational hierarchy, Kraft (1977) suggests
 that the fragmentation of programming tasks may le
ad to 
increased efficiency and productivity, but also ena
bles managers to remain in charge of development in
itiatives and 
staff advancement. 

An alternative, systematic approach for a project t
eam to establish systems requirements is by definin
g a general 
direction for the project and continuously communic
ating with users to capture requirements and priori
ties on an 
ongoing basis, while concurrently developing the so
ftware in short, iterative cycles. This agile appro
ach follows 
expansionistic methods of analysis where the organi
zation (and other stakeholders) work to develop a h
olistic view 
of the problem and use continuous planning approach
es to encourage learning in rapidly changing enviro
nments 
(Ackoff 1974). In ISD, these methods have been defi
ned as agile as well as interactionist, speech act-
based, and soft 
systems (Iivari et al. 2000/2001).   

Categories and Dimensions of Control 

In contrast with ISD control research, the concept 
of control within the management discipline has a l
ong and varied 
history (Giglioni & Bedeian 1974). Beginning in the
 early 1900s and continuing through the present day
, 
publications have varied in their interpretations o
f the concept of control. After a thorough review o
f managerial 
control literature, including both conceptual and e
mpirical work, we identified fourteen distinct dime
nsions of 
control (see Table 2). 
Table 2. Emergent Categories and Dimensions of Cont
rol 
Control Objectives Control Practices Control Effect
s 
Control 

Categories 
Speed 
Budget 
Functionality 
Regulatory 
Compliance 
Product Quality 
Risk Reduction 
Active 
Monitoring 
Enforcement 
Standardization 
& Measurement 
Information & 
Interaction 
Remediation & 
Correction 
Authority 
Dependence 
Satisfaction 
Objectives 
8 
8 
5 
8 
9 
8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Practices 
0 1 0 0 0 1 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 0 1 0 
Effects 
1 0 4 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
9 
8 
9 
In an effort to categorize these dimensions into hi
gher level categories, we used Gregory™s (2007) wor
k on control 
systems and performance management. Although this r
esearch was completed from an operations management
 
perspective, it defines control categories from a g
eneral problem solving context using Ackoff™s gener
al systems 
theory (1974, 1981), so the categories of control w
ere deemed appropriate in a systems development con
text. We 
asked 9 IS professionals (5 academics and 4 practit
ioners) with extensive systems development experien
ce to sort 
the dimensions into three control categories: objec
tives, practices, and effects; Moore and Benbasat™s
 (1991) 
 Systems Development and Alternative Methodologies 

6 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 guidelines for confirmatory card sorting were used 
to structure this exercise. Table 2 shows the resul
ts of the 
confirmatory card sort. All items but one clearly c
onverged on a single category of control (the produ
ct functionality 
control item was removed from the study). The follo
wing sections outline the three emergent categories
 and their 
underlying dimensions. 

Control Objectives 

Control objectives are described by five items, whi
ch each indicate a specific end result defined by I
SD project 
stakeholders. This type of control is deemed approp
riate when desired outcomes can be established a pr
iori and 
actual accomplishments can be measured against the 
targets. By applying general systems theory, contro
l objectives 
are separated into two ideal types: targets and tol
erances. Targets represent a reductionistic approac
h, whereby 
control is used as a means of achieving targets rel
ated to time deadlines, budget limitations, and com
pliance 
regulations (Davis 1951; Koontz 1958; Koontz 1959).
 Tolerances represent an expansionistic approach, w
hereby 
control is used to reach an objective that exists w
ithin a desired range of acceptability. 
The disadvantage of achieving control objectives th
rough target setting is that managers tend to negle
ct important 
emergent aspects of the systems behavior (Caulkin 2
002). For example, if an ISD project is defined by 
a specific 
budget objective, efforts to control behavior towar
d this objective may inhibit team member ability to
 see emergent 
aspects related to the required functionality of th
e system. General systems theory supports the claim
 that target-
based control objectives are less problematic in si
mple projects, but claims that more expansionistic 
approaches 
(defined as tolerances in our typology) are require
d to effectively control complex systems (Ackoff 19
74). As 
flexible development methods claim to be more appro
priate for managing changing requirements, budgets,
 and 
schedules (Harris et al. 2009), we propose that tol
erance-based control objectives will be more promin
ent in flexible, 
or agile, development environments. We define toler
ance-based objectives as quality control and risk r
eduction. 
These concepts have a long tradition in the managem
ent literature as an objective of control. For exam
ple, Cross 
(1928) cites the avoidance of fraudulent practices 
as an objective of control and Fayol (1949) suggest
s that ﬁa good 
system of control provides against undesirable surp
rises, capable of degenerating into catastrophesﬂ (
p. 109).   
Proposition 1
: ISD control objectives will vary between structur
ed and flexible ISD approaches: target-
based control objectives will be more prominent in 
structured ISD approaches and tolerance-based contr
ol 
objectives will be more prominent in flexible ISD a
pproaches.
  Control Practices 

Control practices represent specific techniques use
d to enable the ISD process to achieve a control ob
jective.  The 
distinction between structured and facilitative con
trol practices in our typology is consistent with M
iller and 
Skidmore™s (2004) distinction between hyper-organiz
ation and disorganization. They define hyper-organi
zation as 
‚the restless pursuit of greater efficiency and the
 most rational way to pursue objectives™, whereas d
isorganization 
‚reflects workers™ desire to associate themselves w
ith organizations which give them more autonomy and
 the facility 
to develop their own skills and ideas™ (p. 16).  In
 hyper-organizations, reductionistic practices are 
defined by 
activities focusing on measurement and evaluation (
Eisenhardt 1985). Structured practices of control h
ave a long 
history in management control literature (Cross 192
8; Diemer 1915; Emerson 1919; Weber 1947) and remai
n 
common today as Project Management Offices (PMOs) a
ttempt to define standard project management tools 
and 
techniques to guide project teams toward these set 
guidelines and regulations. In structured ISD appro
aches, project 
team members are assigned defined job roles and res
ponsibilities (e.g. programmer, tester) and an impo
rtance is 
placed on the creation and maintenance of documents
 such as project plans, technical documents, and re
quirements 
specifications (Nerur et al. 2005). Fixed deadlines
 and budgets are established early in waterfall dev
elopment and 
are closely scrutinized through detailed project bu
dgeting, tracking, and reporting. We identified two
 structured 
control practices in the managerial literature: sta
ndardizing expectations and measuring actual result
s (Koontz 1959) 
and enforcing newly implemented rules or procedures
 (Davis 1940; Urwick 1944; Weber 1947).  
In contrast, expansionistic practices of control en
able the ISD process to work toward control objecti
ves by 
effectively facilitating the dissemination of infor
mation and interaction between individuals and grou
ps in an 
optimal manner (Eisenhardt 1985; Ouchi 1978; Urwick
 1944), regularly remediating and correcting defici
encies 
(Brech 1965; Diemer 1915; Reeves & Woodward 1970), 
and actively monitoring of information, rules, acti
vities, 
and people through ongoing, iterative processes (Ch
ild 1973; Ouchi 1978; Weber 1947). We define these 
as 
facilitative practices of control and propose that 
they are more common when attempting to achieve con
trol in 
complex, changing environments: 
  Cram & Brohman / Beyond Modes: A New Typology of IS
D Control 
   Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
7 Proposition 2: 
ISD control practices will vary between structured 
and flexible ISD approaches: structured 
practices will be more prominent for structured ISD
 approaches and facilitative control practices will
 be 
more prominent in flexible ISD approaches.
  Control Effects 

Effects of control are the consequences that occur 
as a result of control objectives and practices. We
 uncovered three 
control effect dimensions in the managerial control
 literature and categorized each as either reductio
nistic or 
expansionistic. First, Weber (1947) and Tannenbaum 
(1962) perceive control as a mechanism that can lim
it 
discretion, restrict rights, and establish dominanc
e over others. The effect of control is also define
d by increased 
bureaucracy and dependence on static processes (Chi
ld 1973) and the enforcement of newly implemented r
ules or 
procedures (Davis, 1940; Urwick, 1944; Weber 1947).
 These effects all relate to the minimization of co
ntrolee 
dissent and the creation of dependence on strict or
ders, processes, and authority. 
Expansionistic control objectives and practices enc
ourage timely, accurate, and relevant information f
lows and 
remediation to encourage performance toward quality
 expectations and risk reduction. We argue that the
se practices 
give software development teams the autonomy to det
ermine the best way to deploy resources in an effor
t to meet 
project goals. According to the managerial control 
literature, enabling individuals to gain insight in
to past, current, 
and future activities can result in a greater feeli
ng of fulfillment and achievement (Ouchi 1978; Reev
es & 
Woodward 1970). Control literature also claims that
 empowering employees to accept greater responsibil
ity and 
exercise self-control and self-direction presents a
n opportunity for greater productivity and satisfac
tion (Kirsch 
1996; McGregor 1960. Grounded in previous research 
that autonomy becomes even more consequential when 
software development teams need to respond to requi
rements changes (Gerwin & Moffat 1997; Henderson & 
Lee 
1992; Maruping et al. 2009), we propose the followi
ng:  
Proposition 3: 
ISD control effects will vary between structured an
d flexible ISD approaches: dependency 
control effects will be more prominent for structur
ed ISD approaches and autonomy control effects will
 be 
more prominent in flexible ISD approaches.
  
Based on the problem solving methods, control categ
ories, and control dimensions discussed above, the 
proposed 
typology of ISD control is outlined in Figure 1. 
 Figure 1. Typology of ISD Control 
Research Methodology 

In order to provide useful insights into control ph
enomena, researchers have called for an increased f
ocus on 
fieldwork and observation of organizational practic
es (Merchant 1988). In response, a positivist case 
study approach 
is employed in this study, with the purpose of buil
ding theory pertaining to ISD control.  
Two development methodologies, agile and waterfall,
 are examined at four organizations. These methodol
ogies 
were chosen as proxies for the plan-driven, structu
red methodologies and flexible, adaptive methodolog
ies outlined 
in the propositions. Both waterfall and agile are w
idely used in practice (Conboy 2009; Nerur et al. 2
005) and are 
perceived to be conflicting in their core strategy 
and philosophy, particularly in their approach to c
ontrol. Whereas 
waterfall development is seen to integrate a high l
evel of control through the use of structured proce
sses and 
procedures, agile development is commonly perceived
 to be less controlled through the use of more flex
ible, 
adaptive activities (Dyba & Dingsoyr 2008). 
 Systems Development and Alternative Methodologies 

8 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Study Design 

As organizations advocate a range of development pr
ocesses and developers may have experience with dif
ferent 
methodologies, a multiple case study design was con
sidered the most effective research design in order
 to compare 
control phenomena across different systems developm
ent methodologies. A multiple-case study approach a
llows for 
cross-case analysis and the extension of theory (Be
nbasat et al. 1987), as well as providing a foundat
ion for 
generalization (Yin 2009). 

The unit of analysis for this study is at the syste
ms development methodology level. Because control p
henomena 
exist at the organizational, project, and individua
l level (Davis 1951; Flamholtz et al. 1985; Ouchi 1
978), focusing 
exclusively on one level may exclude areas of poten
tially rich insights at other levels. Due to the ex
ploratory nature 
of this research, a more encompassing view is desir
ed; therefore, analysis is focused on development m
ethodologies 
and their relationship with control across multiple
 levels. 
Four organizations were selected to participate in 
this research. The first organization, referred to 
as UniCan, was 
selected as a pilot study, primarily on the basis o
f access and geographical proximity. Pilot studies 
are only 
occasionally used in case study research (Dube & Pa
re 2003); however, their use can contribute to a re
fined data 
collection process, contextual clarification, and f
ield inquiry logistics streamlining (Yin 2009). The
 data collected 
from UniCan was used for these purposes, but the da
ta itself was excluded from the data analysis proce
ss. UniCan is 
a mid-sized Canadian University with approximately 
18,000 enrolled undergraduate and graduate students
. 
Interviewees were involved in the systems developme
nt activities at the University, working on a varie
ty of web and 
application development activities related to areas
 such as student registration and awards. UniCan ut
ilizes a hybrid 
systems development methodology, including techniqu
es characterizing both agile and waterfall methodol
ogies.   
The three remaining organizations each utilize diff
erent systems development methodologies. LargeMan i
s a 
multinational manufacturing conglomerate based in t
he United States. The company has offices in 32 cou
ntries 
around the world and over 75,000 employees. The loc
ation used for this study is in Ontario, where the 
local 
development team is responsible for the development
 of an inventory tracking application for the organ
ization™s 
products. LargeMan uses a waterfall systems develop
ment methodology, characterized by structured, sequ
ential 
development cycles, detailed project budgeting and 
tracking, and formal approval of phase deliverables
.  
InfoOrg is a large information and technology compa
ny with approximately 50,000 employees. The locatio
n used 
for this study is in British Columbia, where a cust
omer-facing finance application is developed and su
pported by a 
local project team. Although the core application u
tilizes a primarily waterfall methodology, smaller 
supplementary 
development projects have adopted an agile methodol
ogy, integrating daily ‚stand-up™ meetings, frequen
t delivery of 
working code, and short, iterative development cycl
es. 
The final case study organization is a software dev
elopment firm referred to as OntCode that develops 
software for 
financial services, retail, and manufacturing custo
mers. OntCode uses an agile development methodology
, 
characterized by iterative development cycles, coll
ective code ownership, and pair programming.
 Data Collection 

The data were collected during June and July 2009 v
ia 26 semi-structured interviews. Four interviews w
ere 
conducted during the pilot study at UniCan, followe
d by eight interviews at InfoOrg, seven at LargeMan
, and seven 
at OntCode.  The interviews were conducted with par
ticipants in a range of systems development roles, 
including 
developers, systems analysts, quality assurance ana
lysts, and development managers. By selecting parti
cipants from 
a range of roles within the development process, pe
rspectives from both controllers and controlees wer
e obtained. 
The nature of the interview data collection was bot
h a retrospective account of participant experience
s, as well as 
perspectives related to on-going projects. A formal
 interview protocol was utilized, but the interview
er remained 
open to probing into participant responses when the
y initiated a new area of inquiry. Subsequent to th
e pilot study, 
all interviews were digitally recorded and transcri
bed. In total, 189 pages of transcribed notes were 
produced from 
the interviews. 

Prior to each interview, a questionnaire was comple
ted by participants who indicated their level of ex
perience using 
ten systems development techniques associated with 
waterfall development methodologies (e.g. specializ
ed staff 
roles, working software at the end of a project, im
portance of technical documentation) and ten techni
ques 
associated with agile development methodologies (e.
g. pair programming, story cards, collective code o
wnership). 
The techniques were not labeled by methodology and 
were randomly ordered in the questionnaire. A six p
oint scale 
  Cram & Brohman / Beyond Modes: A New Typology of IS
D Control 
   Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
9 was used, from 0 (No Experience) to 6 (Extensive Ex
perience). A similar number of interviewees were se
lected 
from organizations representing a range of developm
ent methodologies: seven from a waterfall organizat
ion 
(LargeMan), seven from an agile organization (OntCo
de), and eight from a hybrid organization (InfoOrg)
. An 
additional four participants were interviewed from 
a hybrid organization (UniCan) for the pilot study.
 Experience 
scores ranged from 20 to 58 in agile experience, wi
th an average of 37.5. For waterfall experience, sc
ores ranged 
from 10 to 60, with an average of 38.7. Based on th
ese results, the consolidated interviewee sample is
 concluded to 
have an approximately equal level of experience wit
h both agile and waterfall methodologies. 
In order to increase the reliability of data collec
tion, the use of a case study protocol and a case s
tudy database were 
utilized during the study. Yin (2009) defines a cas
e study protocol as the instrument, procedures and 
general rules 
used to guide the data collection process. The prot
ocol was created prior to data collection and in li
ne with Yin™s 
(2009) suggestions, included sections on data colle
ction procedures, an outline of the case study repo
rt, the case 
study questions, and evaluation guidelines. A case 
study database facilitates the separation of the co
llected data and 
the investigator™s report, potentially allowing oth
er investigators to independently review the collec
ted evidence 
(Yin 2009). The use of QSR NVivo version 8.0 was us
ed as a case study database in order to store inves
tigator case 
study field notes, observations, interview transcri
pts, case study documents, and narratives.  
Data Analysis 

Defining an analysis strategy is an important step 
in identifying what data to analyze and why it shou
ld be analyzed 
in order to develop theory (Dube & Pare 2003; Yin 2
009). First, the interviews were reviewed and coded
 by the first 
author; the 14 items of control (listed in Table 2)
 were used as coding categories (Miles & Huberman 1
994). Seven 
interviews were reviewed in detail by the second au
thor in order to validate the reliability of coding
. All issues were 
discussed and coding revisions were made, where nec
essary. Similar techniques have been used in other 
studies 
such as Romm and Pilskin (1999) and Silva and Hirsc
hheim (2007) as a means of facilitating researcher 
collaboration to increase data analysis reliability
. Because the data collection and analysis stages o
verlapped, it 
allowed the investigators increased flexibility in 
data collection activities (Eisenhardt 1989). As a 
result, two new 
dimensions were added to the coding scheme: priorit
ization and eustress. Miles and Huberman (1994) sug
gest that 
this process of revision acts as a refinement of th
e original conceptual structure of the study and in
tegrates 
empirically grounded insights generated from the fi
eld site. Participants identified prioritization as
 a control practice 
that enabled the ISD process to work toward control
 objectives. The use of prioritization was most com
mon amongst 
agile developers as it applied to the activities of
 each iteration (called a sprint). The prioritizati
on of tasks and 
decisions toward product objectives is evident in e
arly control literature (Koontz 1958), but the role
 of prioritization 
as an ISD control practice has not been studied to 
date. The second item introduced by participants is
 eustress: 
positive stress resulting from an individual faced 
with a challenge (Selye 1964). Again, common amongs
t agile 
developers, eustress was mentioned as a consequence
 of flexible control objectives and practices by ef
fectively 
motivating participants to achieve a high level of 
performance. 
The final data analysis step was the in-depth exami
nation of the coded data. Cross-case patterns are b
e used to 
identify within-group similarities and intergroup d
ifferences (Dube & Pare 2003). To achieve this obje
ctive, NVivo 
matrix queries were used to identify instances with
in the interview transcripts where both a systems d
evelopment 
technique and a control category coding overlapped 
within a particular quote.  By examining the matrix
 reports 
specific to individuals with experience using a par
ticular methodology and development technique, insi
ghts were 
developed into the nature of control variance. 

Results 

Using the three categories of control in the propos
ed typology, we highlight the number of interviewee
 quotes 
referring to each of the sixteen control dimensions
. Figure 2 illustrates the extent to which the data
 supports the 
research propositions. For comparative purposes, qu
otes referring to aspects of control modes are also
 presented. 
The frequency of individual quotes attributed to co
ding categories ranged from 3 (achievement of budge
t objective) 
to 30 (information and interaction). A total of 338
 quotes were coded in the transcripts, averaging 17
 quotes per 
control dimension and 13 quotes per interviewee. In
 the remainder of this section, a selection of inte
rview quotes is 
used to illustrate the extent of the support for th
e three research propositions. 
 Systems Development and Alternative Methodologies 

10 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
  Figure 2. Control References 
Control Objectives 

Little evidence was found to support Proposition 1.
 Both budget and compliance were more prominent in 
waterfall 
but there was insufficient data to make strong conc
lusions for either control objective. Analysis of t
he content and 
frequency of quotations provided evidence that stru
ctured approaches established desired outcomes a pr
iori, 
ﬁGenerally most of [my experience is] a very strict 
waterfall type development cycle, in particular [at
 a former 
company] because I had to meet ISO standards and ce
rtifications so they had a very set processﬂ
 (Developer, 
OntCode) and actual accomplishments are measured ag
ainst the a priori targets, ﬁ
So, if [we] are now accountable 
for–the release, [we] have got to figure out how to
 do it.  Which can be, depending on your personalit
y, really 
good, because then you can show off and say, ™I did
 this great work, and I hit the deadlines and the b
udget and all 
that stuff™ﬂ
 (Developer, LargeMan). 
The target-based objective with the largest varianc
e was speed; however, results were opposite to the 
relationship 
hypothesized. After careful examination of quotatio
ns, we concluded that speed references by agile dev
elopers 
related more to speed generating the need for auton
omy as opposed to speed as a target. 
ﬁWith agile, it™s quick, you 
are always on top of everything that™s happening, y
ou can reprioritize quickly; you can change the sco
pe because 
you gained more understanding and you share it and 
then your tester is right with you..they get bits a
nd pieces at a 
  Cram & Brohman / Beyond Modes: A New Typology of IS
D Control 
   Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
11
 timeﬂ
 (Project Manager, InfoOrg). This interpretation su
ggests speed may also be a consequence of control Œ
 a 
control effect. One IS professional identified spee
d as a control effect in the card sort exercise. A 
follow-up 
conversation with this professional confirmed our i
nterpretation that the speed of agile practices enc
ourages 
autonomy that can present opportunities for greater
 productivity and satisfaction for developers.   
Both quality and risk reduction were conceptualized
 as tolerances that correspond to an expansionist a
pproach to 
control. Results show quality and risk were noted m
ore frequently by agile participants than waterfall
 participants; 
however, the variance between the two groups was in
sufficient to conclude that tolerances are more com
mon in 
flexible development environments. 

Control Practices 

Results provided stronger support for Proposition 2
; four of the six control dimensions align with the
 proposed ISD 
typology categories (structured or facilitative), a
s predicted. The remaining two categories, prioriti
zation and 
standardization/measurement were not found to vary 
significantly. 
Enforcement of policies and procedures was clearly 
more prominent in the waterfall approach.  Policies
 and 
procedures tended to the focus on the early definit
ion of scope, requirements and deadlines, as well a
s the structured, 
sequential development phases and milestones. ﬁ
We know when we have to do the installation and the
n from there 
we will build a time line around that; around requi
rements gathering, around scoping, requirement gath
ering, 
development and a testing phaseﬂ 
(Business Analyst, LargeMan). 
Active monitoring, remediation and correction, and 
information and interaction were all more prominent
 in the agile 
approach. These practices were used in a holistic, 
expansionistic sense as the means used to ensure th
at project 
objectives were being met. Information and interact
ion was the most talked about control mechanism in 
our study,  
ﬁThings get done faster because we have a lot of fac
e- to-face communication.  We™re in the same 
room; we don™t send emails back and forth where the
y end up in some folder.  I™m going to get up 
and I™m going to walk over to you...and ask: so wha
t™s going on with this, I™m running into this 
problem, can you come over here and give me a hand?
ﬂ (Developer, OntCode).  
ﬁYou have to be able to work in the project room and
 because things change so quickly, if we can™t 
communicate, even under stress, then it becomes an 
instant problem for the teamﬂ 
(Developer, 
OntCode).  
There were 30 information and interaction quotation
s made by agile developers compared to two by water
fall 
developers. Support for active monitoring in agile 
practices was also very strong, ﬁ
You can™t necessarily corral 
human nature.  But at least, in an agile project ma
nagement world, you actually get, at least daily, a
n update from 
them...™what have you done, what are you doing toda
y, what issues are you facing?™  And hopefully you 
learn sooner 
when they™re on these - I call them voyages of disc
overy - so that you can help them and get them to m
ove forwardﬂ 
(Developer, InfoOrg). Variance in remediation and c
orrection was less evident, but comments by agile d
evelopers 
focused more on the real-time nature of this contro
l practice, ﬁ
So, right away if you start something and the clien
t 
says, ™oh wait a minute, I want to do that instead™
 or ™I don™t really like the way it looks™, right a
way you can fix itﬂ
 (Developer, OntCode). Remediation and correction in
 waterfall was more scheduled and structured in wat
erfall 
approaches: ﬁ
[Management] can look at a project and make the dec
ision if they™re going throw good money after 
bad.  If there™s something that is floundering, the
y™ve built these structures in that can look at it 
and say ‚you need 
more work on this™ or ‚no, you can™t even go any fu
rther™ﬂ
 (Developer, LargeMan). 
Control Effects 

Control effects clearly varied between structured a
nd flexible ISD approaches; results show strong evi
dence in 
support of Proposition 3. Waterfall developers talk
ed about the effects of detailed project budgeting 
and tracking, 
intense documentation, and the structured, sequenti
al nature of the development process. Authority was
 evident as 
developers described the consequence of structured 
practices, ﬁ
So these guys were handed documents with 
everything laid out in them.  So there, it is, real
ly they were treated almost like code monkeys.  You
 could have 
handed this to– a group here or a group in India or
 a group in China; it didn™t matterﬂ
 (Business Analyst, 
LargeMan). Structured approaches also prevented aut
onomy as developers are very dependent on static pr
ocesses 
and are often forced to document and share informat
ion. Two developers at LargeMan described this best
: 
 Systems Development and Alternative Methodologies 

12 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
  ﬁI think a lot of my problems with the [developmen
t process are that] the analysts work as 
secretaries rather than actually using analytical t
hought.  And it becomes a sort of customer-
driven design where a customer comes up with a scre
en and then hands it to me through the 
analyst, which is why we end up re-architecting a l
ot of the designs because they are just really 
amateurish, they™re not done by people who actually
 understand technology in any wayﬂ
 (Developer, LargeMan). 
Both satisfaction and eustress align with the auton
omous control type and were talked about as consequ
ences of key 
principles behind the agile manifesto (Beck et al. 
2001). Satisfaction was most commonly talked about 
in relation to 
frequently delivering working code and the use of s
hort, iterative development cycles (i.e. sprints). 
 ﬁYou actually feel like you™re delivering something
, you™re actually incrementally improving your 
software, you can actually see that.  And that™s go
od because I think that gives people gives 
satisfaction in what they do–there™s actually, ther
e™s progress, there™s a feeling of achievement 
and I think people value thatﬂ (
Developer, InfoOrg).  
ﬁClients like seeing new things like, ‚wow, I™m gett
ing a lot of stuff, you know weren™t they just 
here last week showing me something new, and they™r
e back again?  Wow, these guys are really 
doing something for meﬂ
 (Developer, OntCode).  
Eustress was also an effect of frequently delivery 
working code, ﬁ
I think it™s good to have that tension that exists 
sometimes, you don™t want it to be too large but pr
imary focus for software development is getting som
ething to your 
clients, right?... So, having that little bit of te
nsion there I think is actually good because it giv
es people some focusﬂ
 (Developer, OntCode), as well as the need to mainta
in a constant pace to promote sustainable developme
nt: 
ﬁI would say it probably creates a higher level of s
tress but I don™t think it necessarily means its 
stress in terms of physiological discomfort but I t
hink it sharpens the mind.   Because, you know 
you can™t procrastinate as it will be really obviou
s when you don™t complete something.  I think 
it™s a good thingﬂ
 (Developer, InfoOrg).  
ﬁThe (agile methodology) originators came up with th
is idea of work is taking responsibility for 
the thing that they create.  So, in some sense, fee
ling ashamed that others might look at my code 
and it is atrocious because I was in a rush and had
 to leave earlyﬂ
 (Developer, OntCode). 
Discussion 

Based on the findings noted above, we argue that th
e proposed typology of ISD control provides valuabl
e new 
insights into how systems development projects are 
controlled. The following discussion outlines why t
he typology 
is important for supplementing past work using cont
rol modes, as well as how our findings provide insi
ghts on the 
causes and effects of development methodology dilut
ion. 
Moving Beyond Modes 

First, to evaluate whether our proposed ISD control
 typology supplements previous work on control mode
s, we 
coded our interviews by control modes (results are 
summarized in Table 2). Our results suggest that ag
ile 
approaches align with behavioral and clan control. 
Behavioral control was evident in the description o
f the subtle, 
flexible approach to assessment in daily stand-up m
eetings, ﬁ
I run the daily stand-up meetings.  They are very s
hort; 
they always focus on what was done yesterday, what™
s going to be done todayﬂ 
(Project Manager, InfoOrg)
.  
Clan 
control was also evident in agile practices, ﬁ
It™s self organizing teams, so the teams control th
emselves, they steer 
their destiny.  They work, so arguably I guess ther
e is control; it™s just different.  They work colla
boratively with the 
team or with the client; the team works collaborati
vely with the client to deliver basically what the 
client, at any 
given time, thinks is highest priorityﬂ
 (Developer, OntCode).  
If only modes were considered in our research, our 
results would seem to support the work by Harris et
 al. (2009) 
and refute the work by Maruping et al. (2009), as t
hey deemed outcome control inappropriate in agile e
nvironments. 
However, we argue that our typology can help to cla
rify conflicting results in previous research. Firs
t, if we map 
Maruping et al.™s (2009) theoretical argument that 
decentralized decision-making (i.e. autonomy) is im
portant when 
requirements are volatile to our typology, we would
 categorize their theoretical argument as facilitat
ive practices 
with autonomy outcomes. More specifically, their ar
gument that autonomous team members will have a hei
ghtened 
  Cram & Brohman / Beyond Modes: A New Typology of IS
D Control 
   Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
13
 need to respond in a changing environment is consis
tent with our position that facilitative practices 
reflect the 
workers™ desire to associate themselves with organi
zations that give them more autonomy. Hence, if Mar
uping et al. 
(2009) developed their conceptual argument on our p
roposed typology, their results would likely suppor
t facilitative 
control practices and autonomous effects. Similarly
, Harris et al. (2009) argue high change environmen
ts require the 
ability to reconfigure on-the-fly and outcomes in a
gile methods are not explicit; rather, they are dev
eloped from an 
iterative development process. Using our typology a
s a theoretical lens, they may have argued high cha
nge 
environments require tolerance-based control object
ives and facilitative control practices. Tolerance-
based control 
objectives incorporate changing requirements, budge
ts, and budgets which is consistent with Harris et 
al™s (2009) 
concept of emergent outcomes. The iterative develop
ment process they describe is consistent with facil
itative 
control practices. Hence, we conclude that had prev
ious research adopted our proposed typology of ISD 
control, 
results related to control in flexible environments
 would be consistent and lend support to our conten
tion that control 
modes alone are inadequate to examine control in in
formation systems development. 
Causes and Effects of Diluted Development Practices 

We recognize that there are multiple explanations f
or why Proposition 3 was strongly supported by our 
research 
results, while Propositions 1 and 2 were not strong
ly supported; some of these alternative explanation
s are noted in 
the limitations section of this paper. However, one
 plausible explanation is that hybrid development m
ethodologies 
dilute the unique benefits of waterfall and agile p
ractices by confounding control dimensions that dra
w on both 
reductionistic and expansionistic perspectives. To 
investigate this concept further, we re-examined th
e interview 
data for each case study to determine if individual
 organizations are pursuing particular control dime
nsions using 
both
 agile and waterfall techniques. We find that in ea
ch case where a non-variant or unsupported result w
as noted 
in our data analysis, at least one of the three cas
e study organizations employed diluted development 
methods. That 
is, the development team utilized both agile and wa
terfall techniques in relation to a single control 
objective or 
practice. Though this is unsurprising for InfoOrg, 
where a hybrid development approach is used, it is 
surprising at 
LargeMan and OntCode where increasingly extreme or 
‚pure™ instantiations of their respective developme
nt 
methodologies are purported to be in place. For the
 control objectives category, both agile and waterf
all techniques 
were used by: InfoOrg (speed objective); LargeMan a
nd InfoOrg (quality objective); InfoOrg and OntCode
 (risk 
objective). In employing control practices, both ag
ile and waterfall techniques were used by: LargeMan
 and InfoOrg 
(standardization & measurement practice); and InfoO
rg (prioritization practice). Illustrative examples
 are outlined 
below. 

First, we argue that the focus on quality by waterf
all developers presents a threat of dilution of str
uctured approaches 
in systems development. In practice, integrated per
formance management initiatives such as earned valu
e analysis 
attempt to monitor system quality. Earned value ana
lysis (EVA) combines measurements of scope, schedul
e, and 
cost in a single integrated system (Fleming & Koppe
lman 2006). Although the integration of targets may
 capture a 
more complete view of the system, our typology supp
orts the argument that integrated performance initi
atives are 
still target-based control objectives. As practical
 ISD literature presents these more advanced target
-based initiatives 
as quality management practices (Fleming & Koppelma
n, 2006), it not surprising that the developers usi
ng waterfall 
methodologies indicate quality as a control objecti
ve. Using our typology as a theoretical framework, 
we argue that 
the adoption of facilitative quality control practi
ces (e.g. continuous improvement, quality circles) 
will present a 
threat to structured development teams as they will
 encourage tolerance-based objectives that do not a
lign to the 
target-based needs of structured software developme
nt approaches. Similarly, we argue that adoption of
 target-based 
performance management initiatives (such as EVA) wi
ll dilute agile practices; researchers have recogni
zed the 
restrictions of these techniques in agile environme
nts and are attempting to modify them to support mo
re flexible 
approaches (Sulaiman et al. 2007).  

We adopt a similar logic to explain the reference t
o standardization and measurement practices in agil
e 
environments. We expect that the popularity of stru
ctured performance management techniques (e.g. bala
nced 
scorecard) have influenced the adoption of standard
ization and measurement practices in agile environm
ents. 
Consistent with our typology, we argue that these s
tructured methods conflict with the dominant expans
ionistic 
problem solving approach in agile environments. In 
fact, it is possible that organizations that have m
ade a 
commitment to balanced scorecard-type performance m
anagement practices may be attempting to infuse the
m into 
their systems development environments and these pr
actices are one of those being adopted by agile env
ironments 
in an attempt to overcome organizational constraint
s and executive resistance to change (Karlstroem & 
Runeson 
2005; Manhart & Schneider 2004).  Results from our 
research only show that standardization and measure
ment 
 Systems Development and Alternative Methodologies 

14 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 practices have been infused into agile environments
. Future research is needed to determine whether or
 not these 
practices are diluting the benefits of flexible sys
tems development approaches.  
Finally, our results show that risk management and 
prioritization are common in both structured and fl
exible 
environments. We propose the key to differentiation
 is how uncertainty is perceived. Structured risk m
anagement 
methods perceive uncertainty as foreseeable and pri
oritization practices take a preemptive planning ap
proach where 
risks are identified and prioritized to avoid or mi
tigate possible negative effects (Kliem & Ludin 199
5). In structured 
risk management environments, efforts are made to p
revent change. In rapidly changing environments, ri
sk 
objectives need to welcome change and recognize tha
t uncertainty is unforeseen. Risk management expert
s suggest 
risk management approaches need to focus less on pl
anning and more on flexibility and learning (De Mey
er et al. 
2002).  Based on this reflection, we suggest that r
isk objectives can be target-based or tolerance-bas
ed. We also 
argue that prioritization practices can be structur
ed using risk planning and identification practices
 and facilitative 
using more frequent iterative prioritization method
s that are enabled by constant interaction with the
 customer. Re-
evaluation of interview data showed some support fo
r the different risk objectives and practices; howe
ver, as the 
interview protocol did not specifically address dif
ferent approaches to risk, results are not conclusi
ve. For the risk 
reduction objective, developers in structured envir
onments sought to limit and clearly define change a
s a means to 
limit risk: 
ﬁIt reduces risk, and it sets expectations so that 
the businesses and the users have an expectation of
 what they 
are going to get, and when they are going to be abl
e to get it.  So, you are really setting expectatio
ns there and I 
think that it is reducing risk...We know we™ve got 
that goal; we have an idea of what has to be done i
n there.  
And we just have to figure out how to do it– And so
 scheduling and managing all of that with a team of
 
developers is what we have to do within this window
 of time.  And having that laid out, does tend to r
educe the 
risk because it gives you a structure to work withi
nﬂ 
(Developer, LargeMan). 
As well, prioritization practices were more structu
red in waterfall environments: 
ﬁWe have a release cycle, about three releases a ye
ar, and all the change requests will be prioritized
–the ones 
with the most priority will probably get done... Th
e prioritization is done by the business analyst an
d the 
country representative.  So, each country has a [he
ad office] representative and then they would have 
a 
meeting, I think once a month or sometimes more fre
quently, depending on when the release cycle is.  A
nd they 
would decide on what they want on the next release 
and how much benefit it™s going to give to their bu
siness 
and from that they can decide which one is the high
est priority for them.
 (Developer, LargeMan) 
We laid out for a release, if we have a release com
ing up we may have thirty five or forty tasks.  Whe
ther they 
are technical or business requirements they will be
 laid out and need to be done.  All we do in that i
s we go, 
‚okay here is when our coding needs to be done, so 
we have to be ready for testing by that time, here 
is our 
release date™.  So everybody knows those two dates.
  How you get to that date, we don™t careﬂ 
(Developer, 
LargeMan).
In agile environments, developers embraced change a
nd prioritization methods are more iterative and cu
stomer-
focused: 
ﬁThe change in requirements are good because the cu
stomer often changes their mind or one or more peop
le 
came up with the idea that by the time you needed m
ore detail, we realized that the benefits here were
 different 
from what was originally thought.  So, to be honest
 if I deal with the customer ongoing and if you hav
e to 
change requirements I think is critical to end up w
ith something that is usefulﬂ  
(Developer, OntCode).
 ﬁIt™s more of an observation and iterative modifica
tion so, you do a bit, you observe, you change your
 plan, you 
do a bit more, you observe, you change your plan an
d that™s basically the ideal control process in an 
agile 
projectﬂ 
(Developer, OntCode).
  ﬁ
And I keep the backlog of the issues and tasks up t
o date, so I daily report on how much time we spent
, what™s 
left - remaining hours or remaining time as well as
 how it compares to the estimate from the initial o
f the 
projectﬂ
 (Project Manager, InfoOrg). 
In general, this line of reasoning suggests that wh
en organizations adopt hybrid methodologies, they m
ay dilute the 
core benefits of each individual methodology (e.g. 
agile and waterfall) by introducing contradictory f
orms of 
systems development control. Past research suggests
 that when inconsistent organizational control and 
values are 
present within a development team, it can result in
 project challenges that are difficult to overcome 
(Ngwenyama & 
  Cram & Brohman / Beyond Modes: A New Typology of IS
D Control 
   Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
15
 Nielsen 2003). As well, due to the varied methods, 
philosophies, and principles on how systems are dev
eloped, ﬁ–it 
could prove very challenging and confusing for ISD 
teams who wish to be agile when they are given comp
letely 
conflicting, polar opposite adviceﬂ (Conboy 2009, p
. 330). This confusion and uncertainty relates clos
ely to the 
concept of control effects. Our results suggest tha
t when the control values and perspectives of a dev
elopment team 
are markedly different from those of management or 
the broader organization, negative implications of 
oppression 
and dependency may result. This observation is cons
istent with prior research. Hirschheim & Klein (199
4) find that 
when methodologies fail to adequately consider the 
developer™s inherent needs for communication, coope
ration, and 
self-control, the process constrains and oppresses 
the developer. Other research suggests that the lev
el of 
dependence between activities is significantly rela
ted to the extent of the organizational hierarchy (
Ouchi & Maguire 
1975). In contrast, where governance and control va
lues are aligned across an organization, effects re
lating to 
satisfaction and positive stress will be more preva
lent. This implies that control objectives and prac
tices that relate to 
positive control effects may lead to ﬁmeaningful bu
siness outcomes at a magnitude that is important to
 many 
organizations and that these correlations generaliz
e across companiesﬂ (Harter et al. 2002, p. 276). T
his finding 
provides preliminary evidence that the dilution of 
agile techniques may negatively influence the perfo
rmance of 
systems development projects. 

Implications, Limitations, and Future Research 

The objective of this paper was to conduct an in-de
pth exploration of the dimensions of systems develo
pment 
control as a means to derive theory related to how 
structured and flexible development methodologies a
pply control 
differently. Specifically, we were interested in un
derstanding how hybrid methodologies that integrate
 aspects of 
both structured and flexible methods may dilute the
 performance benefits perceived to exist in a ‚pure
™ form of 
either method.  

Two important contributions stem from this research
. First, our findings suggest that when control is 
viewed using 
the categories and dimensions proposed in this stud
y, unique insights can be generated regarding the s
ystems 
development process that go beyond the standard con
trol modes approach. By drawing on Ackoff™s general
 systems 
theory (1974, 1981), we find support in our asserti
ons that a new typology consisting of control objec
tives, practices, 
and effects can help to reconcile past contradictor
y findings related to systems development control. 
Previous 
research examining the relationship between develop
ment methodology elements such as Iivari et al. (20
00/2001), 
has been characterized as taxonomic theory (Gregor 
2006); however, this study builds on these classifi
cations by 
incorporating the construct of control. By empirica
lly establishing a typology of ISD control, the fin
dings from this 
study represent a novel contribution to control the
ory in systems development. 
Second, we provide evidence that ISD methods can be
 differentiated by reductionist and expansionistic 
elements 
and organizations are blending these elements in pr
actice. Future research could examine whether or no
t these 
hybrid approaches dilute the benefits inherent in a
 more pure methodological form because of the contr
adictory 
control perspectives. This practical contribution c
an provide important insights to boards, managers, 
and 
development teams by articulating a new perspective
 on how development projects are controlled. By foc
using 
specifically on the control aspects inherent in agi
le and waterfall methodologies, practitioners can m
ore clearly 
determine the development approach that aligns with
 their intended objectives. The findings highlight 
areas where 
caution may be required from practitioners regardin
g the implications of mixing agile and waterfall de
velopment 
practices. We suggest that such approaches may conf
use developers and erode the strength of management
 control, 
potentially leading to suboptimal project performan
ce. 
There are several limitations of this study to cons
ider. First, because the agile and waterfall develo
pment 
methodologies are used as a proxy for flexible and 
plan-driven approaches, respectively, interpreting 
the findings in 
relation to other methodologies or approaches shoul
d be approached with caution. Although the typology
 
components were supported across a range of the con
trol dimensions for the methodologies studied, it s
hould not be 
inferred that similar findings will necessarily be 
replicated at other organizations or with other met
hodologies. 
Second, all of the organizations and case study sit
es visited for the study were based in North Americ
a, which could 
limit the applicability of the findings to non-Nort
h American cultures. Prior research has noted that 
culture may 
affect the nature of control systems (Birnberg & Sn
odgrass 1988), as well as the manner in which syste
ms are 
developed (Iivari & Huisman 2007; Leidner & Kaywort
h 2006); therefore, the findings of this study may 
be 
influenced by the cultural norms, values, and proce
dures that apply to a North American environment. 
Future research can build on the findings noted in 
this study in three areas. First, additional resear
ch is required to 
continue to develop an understanding of the organiz
ational circumstances that lead to diluted agile pr
actices, as well 
 Systems Development and Alternative Methodologies 

16 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 as to determine the specific project performance im
plications of such practices. Our findings suggest 
a relationship 
between control and diluted practices, but subseque
nt studies could consider other alternative causes 
such as the 
extent of cultural values alignment between organiz
ations and project teams. Second, future research c
ould further 
validate and expand on the typology of ISD control 
proposed in this study. Our model contributes to bu
ilding a 
better understanding the interrelationship between 
control and the systems development process; howeve
r, other 
control categories and dimensions may exist that ca
n provide further insights. Finally, we address the
 governance of 
ISD projects from the perspective of management con
trol, but do not directly examine the complex role 
of power, 
politics, and authority that can influence how and 
why systems are developed within organizations. Fut
ure studies 
could consider the role of ISD governance and contr
ol as it applies from the board room to the server 
room as a 
means to better understand the complexities that ca
n influence the process of systems development. 
Acknowledgements  

The authors would like to acknowledge The Monieson 
Centre at Queen™s University for their financial su
pport of 
this research, as well as the four organizations wh
o graciously participated in the study. 
References 

Ackoff, R.L.  1974. 
Redesigning the Future: A Systems Approach to Socie
tal Problems,
 New York, NY: Wiley-
Interscience. 
Ackoff, R.L.  1981. 
Creating the Corporate Future
. New York, NY: Wiley. 
Augustine, S., Payne, B., Sencindiver, F., and S. W
oodcock.  2005. "Agile Project Management: Steering
 From the 
Edges," 
Communications of the ACM
 (48:12), pp. 85-89. 
Beck, K.  2004. 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change
, Boston: Addison-Wesley. 
Beck, K., Beedle, M., Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., C
unningham, W., Fowler, M., Grenning, J., Highsmith,
 J., 
Hunt, A., Jeffries, R., Kern, J., and Marick, B.  2
009. 
Manifesto for Agile Software Development.
 Retrieved 
June 2009, http://agilemanifesto.org . 
Benbasat, I., Goldstein, D. K., and Mead, M.  1987.
 "The Case Research Strategy in Studies of Informat
ion 
Systems," 
MIS Quarterly
 (11:3), pp. 369-386. 
Birnberg, J. G., and Snodgrass, C.  1998.  "Culture
 and Control: A Field Study," 
Accounting, Organizations and 
Society
 (13:5),  pp. 447-464. 
Boehm, B. W.  1976. "Software Engineering," 
IEEE Transactions on Computers
 (25:12), pp. 1226-1241. 
Brech, E. F. L.  1965. 
Organisation, 
London, England: Longmans, Green and Co. 
Broadbent, M. and Weill, P.  1993. ﬁImproving Busin
ess and Information Strategy Alignment: Learning fr
om the 
Banking Industry,ﬂ 
IBM Systems Journal
 (32:1), pp. 162-179. 
Byrd, T. A. and Turner, D. E.  2000. "Measuring the
 Flexibility of Information Technology Infrastructu
re: 
Exploratory Analysis of a Construct," 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (17:1), pp.167-208.  
Caulkin, S.  2002. ﬁThinking outside the boxﬂ, 
The Observer
, (May 20). 
Child, J.  1973. "Strategies of Control and Organiz
ational Behavior," 
Administrative Science Quarterly 
(18:1), pp. 1-
17. 
Choudhury, V. and Sabherwal, R.  2003. "Portfolios 
of Control in Outsourced Software Development Proje
cts," 
Information Systems Research
 (14:3), pp. 291-314. 
Coad, P., De Luca, J. and Lefebre, E.  1999. 
Java Modeling in Color
. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Conboy, K.  2009. ﬁAgility from First Principles: R
econstructing the Concept of Agility in Information
 Systems 
Development,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research 
(20:3), pp. 329-354. 
Cross, M. C.  1928. 
Types of Business Enterprise: Structure and Control
, 
New York, NY: Prentice-Hall. 
Davis, R. C.  1940. 
Industrial Organization and Management,
 New York, NY: Harper. 
Davis, R. C. 1951. 
The Fundamentals of Top Management, 
New York, NY: Harper. 
De Meyer, A., Loch, C. H., and Pich, M. T.  2002. ﬁ
Managing Project Uncertainty: From Variation to Cha
os,ﬂ 
MIT 
Sloan Management Review
 (43:2), pp. 60-67. 
  Cram & Brohman / Beyond Modes: A New Typology of IS
D Control 
   Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
17
 Dibbern, J., Winkler, J., and Heinzl, A.  2008. "Ex
plaining Variations in Client Extra Costs Between S
oftware 
Projects Offshored to India," 
MIS Quarterly
 (32:2), pp. 333-366. 
Diemer, H.  1915. 
Industrial Organization and Management,
 Chicago, IL: La Salle. 
Doty, D. H. and Glick, W. H.  1994. "Typologies as 
a Unique Form of Theory Building: Toward Improved 
Understanding and Modeling," 
Academy of Management Review
 (19:2), pp. 230-251. 
Dube, L. and Pare, G.  2003. "Rigor in Information 
Systems Positivist Case Research: Current Practices
, Trends, and 
Recommendations," 
MIS Quarterly
 (27:4), pp. 597-635. 
Duncan, N. B.  1995. "Capturing Flexibility of Info
rmation Technology Infrastructure: A Study of Resou
rce 
Characteristics and their Measure," 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (12:2), pp.37-57.  
Dyba, T. and Dingsoyr, T.  2008. "Empirical studies
 of agile software development: A systematic review
," 
Information and Software Technology 
(50), pp. 833-859. 
Eisenhardt, K. M.  1985. "Control: Organizational a
nd Economic Approaches," 
Management Science
 (31:2), pp. 
134-149. 
Eisenhardt, K. M.  1989. "Building Theories from Ca
se Study Research," 
The Academy of Management Review
 (14:4), pp. 532-550. 
Eisenhardt, K. M. and Martin, J. A.  2000. ﬁDynamic
 Capabilities: What are they?,ﬂ 
Strategic Management Journal
 (21:10/11), pp. 1105-1121. 
Emerson, H.  1919. 
The Twelve Principles of Efficiency, 
5th Edition, New York, NY: The Engineering Magazine
 
Co. 
Fayol, H.  1949. 
General and Industrial Management,
 London, England: Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons. 
Flamholtz, E. G., Das, T. K., and Tsui, A. S.  1985
. "Toward an Integrative Framework of Organizationa
l Control," 
Accounting, Organizations and Society
 (10:1), pp. 35-50. 
Fleming, Q. W. and Koppelman, J. M.  2006. 
Earned Value Project Management
, 3
rd
 Edition, Newton Square, PA: 
Project Management Institute. 
Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G., and Conboy, K.  2006.
 ﬁCustomising agile methods to software practices a
t Intel 
Shannon,ﬂ 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (15:2), pp. 200-213. 
Gefen, D. and Keil, M.  1998. ﬁThe Impact of Develo
per Responsiveness on Perceptions of Usefulness and
 Ease of 
Use: An Extension of the Technology Acceptance Mode
l,ﬂ 
Database for Advances in Information Systems
 (29:2), pp. 35-50.   
Gerwin, D. and Moffat, L.  1997. ﬁWithdrawl of team
 autonomy during concurrent engineering,ﬂ 
Management 
Science
 (43:9), pp. 1275-1288.  
Giglioni, G. B., and Bedeian, A. G.  1974. "A Consp
ectus of Management Control Theory: 1900-1972," 
Academy of 
Management Journal
 (17:2), pp. 292-305. 
Gregor, S.  2006. "The Nature of Theory in Informat
ion Systems," 
MIS Quarterly
 (30:3), pp. 611-642. 
Gregory, A. J.  2007. ﬁTarget setting, lean systems
 and viable systems,ﬂ 
Journal of Operational Research Society 
 (58), pp. 1503-1517. 
Harris, M. L., Collins, R. W., and Hevner, A. R.  2
009. ﬁControl of Flexible Software Development Unde
r 
Uncertainty,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
 (20:3), pp. 400-419. 
Harter, J. K., Schmidt, F. L., and Hayes, T. L.  20
02. ﬁBusiness-Unit Level Relationship Between Emplo
yee 
Satisfaction, Employee Engagement, and Business Out
comes: A Meta-Analysis,ﬂ 
Journal of Applied 
Psychology
 (87:2), pp. 268-279. 
Henderson, J. C. and Lee, S.  1992. "Managing I/S D
esign Teams: A Control Theories Perspective," 
Management 
Science
 (38:6), pp. 757-777. 
Hirschheim, R. and Klein, H. K.  1994. ﬁRealizing e
mancipatory principles in information systems devel
opment: 
The case for ETHICS,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly
 (18:1), pp. 83-109. 
Hirschheim, R., Klein, H. K., and Lyytinen, K.  199
5. 
Information Systems Development and Data Modeling: 
Conceptual and Philosophical Foundations.
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Huisman, M. and Iivari, J.  2006. "Deployment of Sy
stems Development Methodologies: Perceptual Congrue
nce 
Between IS Managers and Systems Developers," 
Information & Management
 (43), pp. 29-49. 
 Systems Development and Alternative Methodologies 

18 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Iivari, J. and Huisman, M.  2007. "The Relationship
 Between Organizational Culture and the Deployment 
of 
Systems Development Methodologies," 
MIS Quarterly
 (31:1), pp. 35-58. 
Iivari, J., Hirschheim, R., and Klein, H. K.  2000/
2001. "A Dynamic Framework for Classifying Informat
ion 
Systems Development Methodologies and Approaches," 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (17:3), 
pp. 179-218. 
Karlstroem, D. and Runeson, P.  2005. ﬁCombining ag
ile methods with stage-gate project management,ﬂ 
IEEE 
Software
 (22:3), pp. 43-49. 
Kirsch, L. J.  2004. "Deploying Common Systems Glob
ally: The Dynamics of Control," 
Information Systems 
Research
 (15:4), pp. 374-395. 
Kirsch, L. J.  1997. "Portfolios of Control Modes a
nd IS Project Management," 
Information Systems Research
 (8:3), 
pp. 215-239. 
Kirsch, L. J.  1996. "The Management of Complex Tas
ks in Organizations: Controlling the Systems Develo
pment 
Process," 
Organization Science
 (7:1), pp. 1-21. 
Kirsch, L. J., Sambamurthy, V., Ko, D.-G., and Purv
is, R. L.  2002. "Controlling Information Systems D
evelopment 
Projects: The View from the Client," 
Management Science
 (48:4), pp. 484-498. 
Kliem, R. L. and Ludin, I.  1995. ﬁAnd just-in-time
–,ﬂ 
Journal of Systems Management
 (46:6), pp. 24-26.  
Koontz, H.  1958. "A Preliminary Statement of Princ
iples of Planning and Control," 
Journal of the Academy of 
Management
 (1:1), pp. 45-61. 
Koontz, H.  1959. "Management Control: A Suggested 
Formulation of Principles," 
California Management Review
, 
pp. 47-55. 
Kraft, P.  1977. 
Programmers and Managers: The Routinization of Comp
uter Programming in the United States, 
New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. 
Lee, G. and Xia, W.  2010. ﬁToward Agile: An Integr
ated Analysis of Quantitative and Qualitative Field
 Data on 
Software Development Agility,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly 
(34:1), pp. 87-114. 
Leidner, D. E. and Kayworth, T.  2006. ﬁA Review of
 Culture in Information Systems Research: Toward a 
Theory 
of Information Technology Culture Conflict,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly
 (30:2), pp.357-399. 
MacCormack, A., Verganti, R., and Iansiti, M.  2001
. ﬁDeveloping Products on ‚Internet Time™: The Anat
omy of a 
Flexible Development Process,ﬂ 
Management Science
 (47:1), pp. 133-150.  
Manhart, P. and Schneider, K.  2004. ﬁBreaking the 
Ice for Agile Development of Embedded Software: An 
Industry 
Experience Report,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 26
th
 International Conference on Software Engineering
. 
Markus, M. L. and Bjorn-Andersen, N.  1987. "Power 
Over Users: ITs Exercise by System Professionals," 
Communications of the ACM
 (30:6), pp. 498-504. 
Maruping, L. M., Venkatesh, V., and Agarwal, R.  20
09. ﬁA Control Theory Perspective on Agile Methodol
ogyUse 
and Changing Requirements,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
 (20:3), pp. 377-399. 
Martin, J.  1991. 
Rapid Application Development
, New York, NY: Macmillan. 
McGregor, D.  1960. 
The Human Side of the Enterprise, 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
McHugh, O., Conboy, K., and Lang, M.  2008. ﬁA Stud
y of the Use and Effectiveness of Controls in Agile
 
Information Systems Development Projects,ﬂ 
eProceedings of the 3
rd
 International Research Workshop on 
Information Technology Project Management
, Paris, France.  
Merchant, K. A.  1988. "Progressing Toward a Theory
 of Marketing Control: A Comment," 
The Journal of 
Marketing
 (52:3), pp. 40-44. 
Miles, M. B. and Huberman, A. M. 1994. 
Qualitative Data Analysis,
 Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Miller, P. and Skidmore, P.  2004. 
Disorganization: Why Future Organizations must ‚Loo
sen Up™
, London: 
DEMOS. 
Misra, S.C., Kumar, V., and Kumar, U.  2009. ﬁIdent
ifying some important success factors in adopting a
gile 
software development practices,ﬂ 
Journal of Systems and Software
 (82:11), pp. 1869-1890. 
Moore, G.C. and Benbasat, I. 1991. ﬁDevelopment of 
an instrument to measure the perceptions of adoptin
g an 
information technology innovation,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
 (2:3), pp. 192-222. 
Nerur, S. and Balijepally, V.  2007. ﬁTheoretical R
eflections on Agile Development Methodologies,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (50:3), pp. 79-83. 
  Cram & Brohman / Beyond Modes: A New Typology of IS
D Control 
   Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
19
 Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R., and Mangalaraj, G.  2005.
 "Challenges of Migrating to Agile Methodologies," 
Communications of the ACM
 (48:5), pp. 73-78. 
Ngwenyama, O. and Nielsen, P. A.  2003. ﬁCompeting 
Values in Software Process Improvement: An Assumpti
on 
Analysis of CMM from an Organizational Culture Pers
pective,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management 
(50:1), pp. 100-112. 
Nidumolu, S. R. and Subramani, M. R.  2003. "The Ma
trix of Control: Combining Process and Structure 
Approaches to Managing Software Development," 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (20:3), pp. 
159-196. 
Orlikowski, W. J.  1991. "Integrated Information En
vironment or Matrix of Control? The Contradictory I
mplications 
of Information Technology," 
Accounting, Management & Information Technology
 (1:1), pp. 9-42. 
Ouchi, W. G.  1979. "A Conceptual Framework for the
 Design of Organizational Control Mechanisms," 
Management Science
 (25:9), pp. 833-848. 
Ouchi, W. G.  1978. "The Transmission of Control Th
rough Organizational Hierarchy," 
Academy of Management 
Journal
 (21:2), pp. 173-192. 
Ouchi, W. G. and Maguire, M. A.  1975. ﬁOrganizatio
nal control: Two functions,ﬂ 
Administrative Science Quarterly
 (20:4), pp. 559-569. 
Reeves, T. K.. and Woodward, J.  1970. "The Study o
f Managerial Control," in 
Industrial Organizations: Behaviour 
and Control,
 Woodward, J. (Ed.), London, England: Oxford Univer
sity Press. 
Romm, C. T. and Pilskin, N.  1999. "The office tyra
nt - social control through e-mail," 
Information Technology & 
People
 (12:1), pp. 27-43. 
Royce, W. W.  1970. "Managing the Development of La
rge Software Systems," 
Proceedings, IEEE WESCON,
 pp. 
1-9. 
Selye, H.  1964. 
From Dream to Discovery, 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Shenhar, A. J. and Dvir, D.  2007. 
Reinventing Project Management: The Diamond Approac
h to Successful Growth 
and Innovation
, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing. 
Sia, S. K. and  Neo, B. S.  1997. "Reengineering Ef
fectiveness and the Redesign of Organizational Cont
rol: A Case 
Study of the Inland Revenue Authority of Singapore,
" 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (14:1), pp. 
69-92. 
Silva, L. and Hirschheim, R.  2007. "Fighting Again
st Windmills: Strategic Information Systems and Org
anizational 
Deep Structures," 
MIS Quarterly
 (31:2), pp. 327-354. 
Sulaiman, T., Barton, B., and Blackburn, T.  2006. 
ﬁAgile EVM Œ Earned Value Management in Scrum Proje
cts,ﬂ 
Proceedings, Agile Conference
.  
Taft, D. K.  2010. ﬁAgile development is hitting th
e mainstream, report says,ﬂ www.eweek.com, (January
 22). 
Teece, D., Pasano, G., and Shuen, A.  1997. ﬁDynami
c Capabilities and Strategic Management,ﬂ 
Strategic 
Management Journal
 (18:7), pp. 509-533. 
Tannenbaum, A. S.  1962. "Control in Organizations:
 Individual Adjustment and Organizational Performan
ce," 
Administrative Science Quarterly
 (7:2), pp. 236-257. 
Urwick, L.  1944. 
The Elements of Administration, 
New York, NY: Harper. 
Weber, M.  1947. 
The Theory of Social and Economic Organization, 
New York, NY: The Free Press. 
Weill, P. and Ross, J. W.  2004. 
IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decisio
n Rights for Superior 
Results
, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 
West, D., Grant, T., Gerush, M., and D™Silva, D.  2
010. ﬁAgile Deelopment: Mainsteam Adoption has Chan
ged 
Agility: Trends in Real-World Adoption of Agile Met
hods,ﬂ 
Forrester Research
, (January 20). 
Westrup, C.  1993. "Information Systems Methodologi
es In Use," 
Journal of Information Technology
 (8), pp. 267-
275. 
Yin, R. K.  2009. 
Case Study Research: Design and Methods,
 Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. 
