 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Transforming Organizational Capabilities intoAgile IT Adoption: A Case Study of BeijingInternational AirportJenson Chong-Leng GohNational University of SingaporeMei Yun ZuoRenmin University of ChinaShan L. PanNational University of SingaporeICIS 2010 Proceedings.  Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
1 Transforming Organizational Capabilities into Agile
 
IT Adoption: A Case Study of Beijing International 
Airport  
Completed Research Paper 
Jenson Chong-Leng Goh 
National University of Singapore 
3 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117543 
jensongoh@nus.edu.sg  
Mei Yun Zuo 
Renmin University of China 
No. 59, Zhongguancun Street, Haidian 
District, Beijing, China, 100872 
zuomy@ruc.edu.cn 
 Shan L Pan 
National University of Singapore 
3 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117543 
pansl@comp.nus.edu.sg 
Abstract 
In this increasingly hypercompetitive environment, 
agile IT adoption practices constitute the 
foundation that drives the speed and extent of the 
adoption of appropriate IT systems especially in 
times of urgency. These practices are a priori cond
itions that enable enterprise agility that is 
becoming an imperative competitive requirement for 
firm™s survival. The main contribution of this 
study is it provides an explanation of how agile IT
 adoption practices can be developed within an 
organization. It also highlights the various types 
of agile IT adoption practices that can be 
developed within an organization. It achieves this 
by using a single embedded case study design 
that investigates into four large IT system impleme
ntations during the construction of Beijing™s 
International Terminal 3 Airport for the 2008 Olymp
ics Games. Looking through the theoretical 
lens of the coevolutionary of organizational contro
l and trust upon the collected data, several 
inductively derived models which detail the develop
ment of the four agile IT adoption practices 
consisting of 2 sensing practices: preemptive-based
 and precision-based; and 2 responding 
practices: adeptness-based and improvement-based, a
re presented. This paper concludes with a 
discussion of the implications and potential theore
tical and practical contributions of these 
models. 

Keywords:  
Case study/studies, Enterprise agility, Information
 technology adoption, IS control, 
IT capabilities, Trust, Information systems project
 management 
 IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

2 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Introduction 

Businesses in today™s economic landscape are confro
nted with rapid technological advancements, globali
zation, 
dramatic regulatory uncertainties and acute time-to
-market pressures. Consequently, the business compe
titive 
environment has become hypercompetitive, especially
 in the fast moving and high-tech industries (McAfe
e et al. 
2008; Thomas Iii 1996). How can an organization str
ive in this turbulence? One answer to this question
 is for the 
organization to develop enterprise agility to sense
 and respond readily to environmental changes (Samb
amurthy et 
al. 2003).  

As a result, enterprise agility is regarded by many
 scholars as one of the key determinants of firm™s 
success and 
profitability in today™s hypercompetitive business 
environment (e.g. Mathiassen et al. 2006; Overby et
 al. 2006; 
Sambamurthy et al. 2003). Then we begin to ask what
 enables the development of enterprise agility in a
n 
organization? Many researchers advocate that IT pla
ys that critical enabling role (e.g. Baskerville et
 al. 2005; 
Gallagher et al. 2008; Overby et al. 2006). IT enha
nces enterprise agility by providing the digital op
tion that an 
organization leverages to improve richness and reac
h of its knowledge and processes (Sambamurthy et al
. 2003).  IT 
can bridge the ‚agility gap™ between an organizatio
n™s current enterprise agility and what it needs to
 ensure its 
survival (van Oosterhout et al. 2006, pp. 135, Figu
re 1).  IT can also be deployed to enhance the core
 competencies 
(Seo et al. 2008) and enable capabilities (McAfee e
t al. 2008; Overby et al. 2006) of an organization 
that is closely 
linked to the development of enterprise agility.  

Given the multiple roles that IT can play, the adop
tion of IT is seemingly highly desirable to any org
anization 
(Baskerville et al. 2005). However, the adoption of
 IT alone is insufficient to ensure long-term survi
val of an 
organization in a hypercompetitive environment. We 
posit that the key determinant of the long-term sur
vival and 
profitability of an organization is going to be dep
endent upon both the adoption of an 
appropriate IT system
 and the 
speed
 of which it is adopted, i.e. agile IT adoption. Wi
th the environment being increasingly hypercompetit
ive, the 
consequence of not achieving agile IT adoption is g
oing to make the effort to sustain an organization™
s survival 
demanding. Accordingly, this will amplify the urgen
cy and needs for the organization to look into ways
 to enable 
agile IT adoption. Yet, after more than a decade of
 study into organizational IT adoption, very few re
searches have 
investigated IT adoption factors like urgency to ad
opt, speed of IT adoption, extend of IT adoption an
d 
appropriateness of IT adoption (i.e. agile IT adopt
ion) together in their research models. In describi
ng the dominant 
IT adoption research, Fichman (2004) propounds to t
he effect that most of these researches place their
 focus on 
identifying the quantity of the ‚Right Stuff™ (inde
pendent variables) such as size & structure, knowle
dge & 
resources, management support, compatibility and co
mpetitive environment that will influence the quant
ity of an IT 
innovation (dependent variables) such as earliness 
of adoption; frequency of adoption; and extent of i
mplementation, 
while unwittingly leaving out the urgency and speed
 of IT adoption in these researches. This study res
ponds to the 
call by Fichman (2004) by  attempting to identify t
he specific agile IT adoption practices that enable
s an 
organization to quickly sense the appropriate IT sy
stem to adopt and the respective IT adoptions™ enab
lers/inhibitors, 
and to respond readily to enhance the speed and ext
ent of that IT system adoption within the organizat
ion. In doing 
so, this study goes beyond treating organizational 
IT adoption as a single activity or ‚black box™.  R
ather, we treat 
organizational IT adoption as a set of controlled ‚
sensing™ and ‚responding™ activities that enable an
 organization to 
achieve both scale and speed in IT adoption especia
lly in times of urgency.  
The literature of coevolution of organizational con
trol and trust is an appropriate theoretical lens f
or this study 
because practices are created and sustained through
 the exercise of organizational control over its re
sources and 
processes. Invariably, organizational control is al
ways intertwined with trust. This is evident in man
y studies from 
the literature of control (e.g. Das et al. 1998; In
kpen et al. 2004; Rustagi et al. 2008). Hence, the 
coevolution of 
organizational control and trust forms good foundat
ion on which agile IT adoption practices within an 
organization 
could be built. This study presents a case study of
 multiple simultaneous IT implementations during th
e construction 
of Beijing™s international T3 terminal in its attem
pt to answer the following research questions: (1) 
How are agile IT 
adoption practices developed within an organization
? and (2) What types of agile IT adoption practice 
can be 
developed in an organization?  

Theoretical Background 

Enterprise agility is defined as a set of organizat
ional capabilities that permits an organization to 
sense change in the 
internal and external environments and to respond e
ffectively and efficiently to the change in a timel
y and cost 
  Goh et al. / Transforming Organization Capabilities
 into Agile IT Adoption  
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
3 effective manner (Overby et al. 2006; Sambamurthy e
t al. 2003; Seo et al. 2008). In a hypercompetitive
 business 
environment, these changes create a ﬁfog of the fut
ureﬂ that obscure the ﬁvisionﬂ of an organization c
ausing it to lose 
sight of ﬁsudden death threatﬂ and/or ﬁgolden oppor
tunityﬂ (Sull 2005). Consequently, it is no surpris
e that 
enterprise agility is fast becoming imperative for 
any organization which needs it not just to achieve
 and/or sustain 
competitive advantage (Sharifi et al. 2001) but als
o its survival (Baskerville et al. 2005) .  
The enabling roles of IT towards the derivation and
 maintenance of enterprise agility within an organi
zation is well-
established among enterprise agility researchers in
 IS. Some of these concepts include: (1) Sambamurth
y et al. 
(2003)™s real option theory which explains the way 
in which the adoption of IT can digitalize the proc
ess and 
knowledge flow within an organization that subseque
ntly leads to the derivation of enterprise agility;
 (2) Van 
Oosterhout et al. (2006)™s research model, that ana
lyzes the change factors requiring enterprise agili
ty, has 
specifically identified IT system within an organiz
ation as one of the key enablers of enterprise agil
ity; (3) Weill et 
al. (2002) demonstrate the way in which appropriate
 development of IT infrastructure can lead to strat
egic agility; 
and (4) Zain et al. (2005) have illustrated in thei
r research model the mechanisms through which the a
doption of an 
IT system can enhance an organization™s agility. Th
ese concepts converge in their ideas about the enab
ling roles of 
IT towards enterprise agility in an organization. I
ntuitively, before IT can help to achieve enterpris
e agility, ﬁagile IT 
adoptionﬂ is a highly desirable process for any org
anization (Mathiassen et al. 2006). Unfortunately, 
despite the 
growing numbers of research on enterprise agility, 
there are very few researches that investigate agil
e IT adoption. 
As far as we are aware of, there are only two of su
ch researches in the literature namely, Bruque-Cáma
ra et al. 
(2004) and Hovorka et al. (2006). The lack of empir
ical study on an important subject such as agile IT
 adoption 
limits, to a large extent, the applicability and pr
edictability of the various enterprise agility conc
eptualizations into 
the practitioner™s world. This study attempts to fi
ll this identified knowledge gap in enterprise agil
ity literature. To 
meticulously achieve that, the literature review se
ction will visit the IT adoption literature to see 
if existing 
researches on IT adoption can be referenced to info
rm on the agile IT adoption phenomenon. 
The literature on organizational IT adoption has we
ll been studied for over two decades. In the domain
 of 
organizational IT adoption, studies have predominat
ely focused on identifying factors/antecedents that
 influence the 
adoption decision at organizational level (e.g. Coo
l et al. 1997; Cooper et al. 1990; DiMaggio et al. 
1983; Kim et al. 
2006; MacKay et al. 2004; Teo et al. 2003a).
  As the business environment turns hypercompetitive
, IT adoption 
research has increasingly leaned toward the explora
tion on the environmental or organizational factors
 that help a 
firm to adopt IT more intensely (e.g. Teo et al. 20
03b) and more quickly (e.g. Bruque-Cámara et al. 20
04). 
Nonetheless, a number of gaps in the literature can
 be identified. First, as traditional dominant inno
vation adoption 
models are designed specifically to be applied to a
 particular range of adoption scenarios, when this 
assumption is 
violated and these models are forcefully applied in
to every situation, they tend to produce weak and u
nstable 
conclusion (Benbasat et al. 2007). Some of these co
nclusions include: (1) a situation whereby adoption
 of IT is 
subjected to heavy coordination requirement across 
multiple adopters (Frambach et al. 2002); (2) a sit
uation 
whereby adoption requires extensive training effort
 to overcome the high barrier of knowledge due to t
he 
complexity of the IT system (Gallivan 2001); and (3
) a situation whereby IT adoption happens in a cons
tantly 
changing IT environment (Benbasat et al. 2007). Sec
ond, in summarizing the current stage of IT adoptio
n research, 
Fichman (2004) ascribes the extant literature on IT
 adoption to a ‚dominant paradigm™ that focuses on 
identifying 
the quantity of the ‚Right Stuff™ (independent vari
ables) such as size & structure, knowledge & resour
ces, 
management support, compatibility and competitive e
nvironment that will influence the quantity of an I
T innovation 
(dependent variables) such as earliness of adoption
; frequency of adoption; and extent of implementati
on. Each of 
these identified antecedents is assumed to have an 
independent effect that contributes to the variance
 explained in 
the dependent variables (Fichman 2004). Hence, the 
dominant paradigm does not allow for complex intera
ction 
among factors that go beyond simple linear additive
 (or multiplicative effect) especially in theoretic
al context that 
warrants the holistic configuration of factors to e
xplain organization IT adoption (Fichman 2004).  Of
ten, 
organizational IT adoption is treated as a ‚black b
ox™ in these researches. Third, none of the existin
g IT adoption 
researches have included independent factors like t
he urgency, appropriateness, extent and speed of ad
option of an 
IT system together in their research models. Urgenc
y of an IT system™s adoption drives the motivation 
for the extent 
and speed of adoption of an appropriate IT system. 
We advocate that the need to consider all these fac
tors together 
when conducting IT adoption research is increasingl
y imperative largely due to the hypercompetitive en
vironment.  
The literature review on IT adoption and enterprise
 agility revealed an inadequate understanding on th
e development 
process of agile IT adoption practices within an or
ganization. Agile IT adoption practice is defined a
s practice that 
allows an organization to detect opportunity for ap
priopriate introduction of IT innovation into an or
ganization and 
to respond to it through assembling of assets, know
ledge, capabilities and relationships that are requ
ired for the 
 IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

4 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 speedy adoption of that IT innovation (Hovorka et a
l. 2006).  To address this knowledge gap, this stud
y goes beyond 
treating organizational IT adoption as a single act
ivity or ‚black box™, but rather to treat it as con
sisting of a set of 
controlled ‚sensing™ and ‚responding™ activities to
 explore the inside of the ‚black box™. This study 
achieves this by 
looking into the literature on coevolution of organ
izational control and trust, which is an appropriat
e starting point 
because practices within an organization inherently
 involve some forms of control mechanism to direct 
resources 
towards the achievement of organizational goals whi
ch in turn, is contingent upon the trust an organiz
ation placed 
on its stakeholders. 

Extant literature about organizational control has 
generally converged in defining organizational cont
rol as 
‚encompassing all attempts to ensure that individual
s in an organization act in a manner that is consis
tent with 
meeting the organization™s goals and objectives
™ (Eisenhardt 1985; Kirsch 1997; Ouchi 1980). Liter
ature on 
organizational control proposes and elaborates many
 of these mechanisms and modes, which can address v
arying 
control issues within an organization (e.g. Choudhu
ry et al. 2003; Nidumolu et al. 2003-4). In synthes
izing the 
literature of organization control to be applied to
 the context of system development process, Kirsch 
(1997) 
organizes organizational control in the literature 
into two modes: (1) formal control mode; and (2) in
formal control 
mode. Under the formal control mode, behavior and o
utcome controls are derived from Ouchi (1980) and E
isenhardt 
(1985). According to Kirsch (1997), behavior contro
l is defined as the act of setting a set of specifi
c rules and 
procedures that aligns the behavior of the controll
ee (i.e. people that are being ‚controlled™) to wha
tever is deemed 
desirable in meeting the organization™s objective. 
In contrast to that, outcome control is the act of 
setting goal that is 
desirable in meeting the organization™s objective a
nd a reward is given to the controllee who meets it
. Under the 
informal mode of control, clan and self controls ar
e identified. Clan control looks at the disseminati
on of desired 
value, belief and philosophy of the organization by
 socializing the individuals to a common set of nor
ms and values 
within a clan (e.g. Birnberg et al. 1988; Kohli et 
al. 2004). Appropriate behaviors that are in line w
ith the norms and 
values are rewarded and those that are not are puni
shed (Ouchi 1979). Finally, self control focuses on
 individual and 
looks for mechanism that identifies and provides th
e conducive environment that rewards and encourages
 highly 
motivated individual to exercise self-control in th
e best interest of meeting the organization™s objec
tive (Kirsch 
1997).  

The need to undertake control measure by the contro
ller on the controllee inherently implies a percept
ion of risk (i.e. 
there is a possibility that the controllee may devi
ate from the organization™s objective during execut
ion) in the 
operating context. This perception of risk is moder
ated by the amount of trust that exists between the
 controller and 
controllee (Inkpen et al. 2004). It is important to
 note that the concept of controller and controllee
 is not necessarily 
applicable to just individual but can be extended t
o joint venture between companies and IT outsourcin
g projects for 
instance (e.g. Choudhury et al. 2003; Inkpen et al.
 2004; Rustagi et al. 2008).  The exploration on jo
int venture 
control and trust configuration, when examining agi
le IT adoption practices, falls in line with the de
finition of 
enterprise agility because enterprise agility is co
ncerned with the economic of scope (Dove 2001) whic
h mandated 
response to be not just effective towards the chang
ing environment but also to stay productive at the 
same time 
(Mathiassen et al. 2006). Outsourcing and joint ven
ture are two examples of viable and effective mecha
nisms which 
help to achieve ‚economic of scope™ in enterprise a
gility. In the context of joint venture between com
panies, Inkpen 
& Currall (2004) define joint venture trust as a de
cision of one party to have faith in the other part
y, despite the risk 
of experiencing negative outcome if one party is un
trustworthy. When a perceived risk by one party exc
eeds the 
amount of trust it has with the other party, this d
iscrepancy will be bridged via the implementation o
f control 
mechanism which will help to lower the perceived ri
sk to an extent where trust can take over (Schoorma
n et al. 
2007). Collectively, the coevolution of organizatio
n control and trust suggests that it is most likely
 the fundamental 
ingredient on which agile adoption practices can be
 derived. This is because successful IT adoption wi
thin an 
organization is frequently made possible by the com
bination of IT and IT complementary organization ca
pability to 
form routine and practice (Overby et al. 2006; Samb
amurthy et al. 2003). In summary, we believe the id
entified 
gaps in the extant enterprise agility and IT adopti
on literature on agile IT adoption practices can be
st be filled 
through the application of our proposed theoretical
 lens (i.e. coevolution of organizational control a
nd trust). 
Research Methodology 

This study adopts the case research methodology to 
investigate the identified research questions prese
nted earlier for 
of a number of reasons. First, the main research qu
estion concerns with ﬁhowﬂ agile IT adoption practi
ces are 
developed within an organization (Walsham 1995). Se
cond, we are interested to uncover the complex and 
multi-
faceted relationships and interplay of an organizat
ion™s resources, capabilities, controls and trust t
o create agile IT 
  Goh et al. / Transforming Organization Capabilities
 into Agile IT Adoption  
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
5 adoption practices within an organizational context
 (Pentland 1999). The case study on the IT implemen
tations in 
Terminal 3 of Beijing Capital International Airport
 (BCIA) was chosen for the following number of reas
ons. First, 
the scale of the Terminal 3™s IT projects is way bi
gger than what the Airport IT Management Department
 has 
previously encountered. Second, the project has to 
be ready for the 2008 Olympic Games Œ an ambitious 
deadline of 
around 2 years to completion. Third, it was a succe
ssful agile adoption of the IT systems in Terminal 
3 by all 
stakeholders (e.g. airlines, custom, airport shops 
etc.).  
Access to case site was first negotiated and gained
 in June 2009. Subsequently, the study adopts a sin
gle embedded 
case design where six major systems and two termina
l command centres that are crucial to the success o
f the entire 
Terminal 3 project were identified. Our single embe
dded case design is best illustrated in Yin (2009),
 pp. 46, Figure 
2.4. This study focuses on a single case study to u
nderstand how agile IT adoption practices are devel
oped in Beijing 
Capital International Airport Company Limited. Henc
e, the unit of analysis of the case study is at the
 organization 
level. Each IT system implementation chosen for the
 study is regarded as an embedded case within this 
single case 
study. The focus of each embedded case is to look a
t how agile IT adoption practices are developed wit
hin that IT 
implementation. Therefore, the unit of analysis of 
each embedded case is at project level. Data obtain
ed from all 
embedded cases are combined to provide empirical ev
idence to demonstrate how agile IT adoption practic
es are 
developed at organization level. In total, a series
 of 9 face-to-face group interviews (which include 
2 to 6 key project 
team members) plus 1 individual off-site preliminar
y interview were conducted for the duration of 120-
180 minutes 
on average for each interview (See Appendix A). All
 interviewees are carefully selected based on the c
ritical role 
that they played in ensuring the successful impleme
ntation of the Terminal 3 IT systems. The content o
f the 
interviews were digitally recorded and transcribed 
for subsequent data analysis. The error of recall o
f interviewee 
may give rise to data validity and reliability issu
es (Glick et al. 1990). To mitigate this risk, the 
questions asked 
during the interview were open-ended and tailored s
pecifically to the role of the person to be intervi
ewed (Tan et al. 
2009). To avoid losing our research focus where the
 intended unit of analysis is at organization level
 (Yin 2009, pp. 
52), break-out sessions participated only by the re
search team were conducted between interviews to en
sure the data 
collected conforms to our intended unit of analysis
.  
The theory-building process, as prescribed by Eisen
hardt (1989), is consulted to guide the development
 of this study 
and the process is described as follow. Before the 
start of the study, certain relationships between o
ur phenomena 
(i.e. agile IT adoption) and theoretical lens (i.e.
 coevolution of organizational control and trust) w
ere predicted. 
These have contributed to a set of initial themes w
hich forms our theoretical lens that serves as a ﬁs
ensitizing device™ 
(Klein et al. 1999) to guide the data collection. D
ata collected are coded and arranged into the ident
ified set of 
themes and a preliminary theoretical model is propo
sed. Data analysis was performed at the same time a
s data 
collection activities were being conducted to take 
full advantage of the flexibility of adopting the c
ase methodology 
(Eisenhardt 1989). The data analysis work followed 
an iterative process of moving back and forth betwe
en empirical 
data, the theoretical lens, relevant literature, an
d the proposed model until ‚theoretical saturation™
 is reached 
(Eisenhardt 1989).  With every completed group inte
rview, the collected data was used to validate and 
refine the 
initial predicted model repeatedly. This process he
lps to enhance the construct validity of our study.
 In addition, due 
to the single embedded case design, each completed 
group interview also helps to further strengthen th
e external 
validity of our study especially when the collected
 empirical evidences support our emerging theoretic
al model. This 
achieves the effect of ‚analytic generalization™ as
 advocated by Yin (2009). To manage the extensive a
mount of data 
collected during the interviews, a combination of a
 narrative strategy and a visual mapping strategy i
s adopted 
(Langley 1999). A series of diagrams capturing the 
essence of our theoretical ideas are derived throug
h this process.  
These were presented to the respective stakeholders
 at Beijing Capital International Airport (BCIA) IT
 department 
for validation of our interpretation of the data an
d the emerging data model. 
To ensure high reliability of our empirical data, d
ata that had been uncovered from one system impleme
ntation 
group were validated against another system impleme
ntation group in another interview to allow for dat
a 
triangulation (Dube et al. 2003; Yin 2009). In addi
tion, all interviews are conducted by multiple case
 researchers. 
Triangulation of observations of the data obtained 
on-site has been achieved through iterative data va
lidation and 
consolidation from multiple observers until a congr
uent and coherent theme that can explain the data e
merges. This 
process of triangulation of observation is attuned 
to the best case study practice advocated in positi
vism (e.g. Dube 
et al. 2003); soft positivism (e.g. Madill et al. 2
000); and interpretivism  (e.g. Klein et al. 1999) 
philosophy. Data 
collected from the interviews were also corroborate
d with the business documents, published articles a
nd books, 
information from the corporate website, and notes f
rom direct observation. All these measurements were
 
implemented to ensure that every data collected cou
ld be supported by at least two data sources. In to
tal, four out of 
 IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

6 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 the six IT system projects and two command centres 
were identified as being representative of the enti
re Terminal 3 
IT implementation project. 

Case Description 

Airport terminal™s main revenue streams can be broa
dly classified into aeronautical (from airlines) an
d non-
aeronautical (from passengers) streams. In recent y
ears, the industry has become highly competitive wi
th every 
airport terminal company looking into ways to impro
ve its services and its terminal™s capacity. The ai
m is to become 
the ‚travel™ hub for airlines and passengers in its
 region. This is also the company™s vision of the s
tate-owned Beijing 
Capital International Airport (BCIA) Company Limite
d that manages the main airport of Beijing, China. 
The main 
airport of Beijing owned by BCIA consists of three 
terminals namely, Terminal 1, 2 and 3. Terminal 1 w
as built in 
1990 occupying around 90,000 m
2. Terminal 2 is 3.7 times larger (336,000 m
2) than Terminal 1 and was completed 
in 1999 to take over Terminal 1 while it was closed
 for refurbishment. Terminal 1 reopened in 2004 at 
about the 
same time where the construction of Terminal 3 bega
n. Constructed specially for the 2008 Olympics Game
s, 
Terminal 3 occupies a colossal space of 986,000 m
2. When completed in March 2008, Terminal 3 was the 
largest 
airport terminal in the world. 

ﬁCapital airport is China™s first gate to the world
. During the period of the Olympics, it takes on th
e responsibility 
and honor of being the first customer contact point
 for athletes and VIPs from all over the world – th
e impression 
that the airport leaves on the visitors represents 
the hospitality and congeniality of the country –ﬂ 
Mr. Hu Jintao, 
Chinese President (Translated from the book ﬁThe 52
nd Gold Medalﬂ). 
To achieve the goal of seamless customer touch poin
ts across all facets of airport operation in Termin
al 3 laid down 
by President Hu, IT became the imperative enabling 
tool. The IT department of BCIA has been the key dr
iving force 
behind the planning and management of all IT projec
ts, day-to-day terminal operations and IT personnel
 (in-house 
and outsource staff) in the existing terminal 1 and
 2. Hence, it is not surprising that the department
 is given the 
important responsibility to manage the entire Termi
nal 3 IT projects implementation. Table 1 provides 
a brief 
description of the four representative systems anal
yzed in this paper. In Appendix A, details of inter
viewees of each 
project, including those projects that are not sele
cted for this study, are presented. 
Table 1: Brief Background of Systems in this Study 
System Name 
Brief System Background 
Airport Operation 

Database (AODB) 
The ‚core hub™ that allows information captured wit
hin other systems in the airport to be 
seamlessly stored, analyzed and shared to ensure th
e smooth running of all aspects of its 
operations (a.k.a the ‚heart™ of the airport operat
ions). 
Airport Departure  System that manages the entire p
rocess of checking in and boarding the passengers a
nd their 
luggage which all airlines in Terminal 3 are requir
ed to use.  
Airport Security  System that handles all forms of 
security-related processing within Terminal 3. Secu
rity 
system of the airport can be classified into 5 leve
ls of security checks (Airport-int 2009). 
Due to the huge number of country leaders and forei
gn visitors involved during the Olympic 
Games in 2008, the highest level of security 5 was 
mandated in Terminal 3. 
Airport Data 

Centre  
System that facilitates the billing for services re
ndered in Terminal 3 by the BCIA. From 
BCIA™s perspective, this system demands one of the 
highest priorities because it deals with 
the company™s revenue generating activity. 
Airport Operation Database (AODB) 

Right in the beginning of 1999 when the first AODB 
(developed by Motorola) was put into use in Termina
l 2, the IT 
department already faced significant challenge in l
earning the right way to maintain and use it. Over 
the years, they 
continued to acquire valuable knowledge about AODB 
through the constant interaction with vendors like 
Motorola 
and through usage and experimentation during operat
ion. As a result, the IT department developed its o
wn set of 
standard operating procedures that laid the foundat
ion for the future administration and maintenance o
f AODB in all 
its airport terminals.  
  Goh et al. / Transforming Organization Capabilities
 into Agile IT Adoption  
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
7 ﬁFrom 2000 to 2002, we came up with a maintenance s
tandard operation procedure handbook. Till today, o
ur 
maintenance strategy is dependent on this handbook.
ﬂ ŒDeputy Manager, IT Department 
 
In 2004, frequent hardware failures occurred that b
rought down the AODB in Terminal 1 and 2. The downt
ime 
highlighted the dependency of terminal operations a
nd AODB and the need to closely monitor both. Two c
ommand 
centres, namely Terminal Operational Command Centre
 (TOCC); and System Operational Command Centre 
(SOCC) were established in late 2007 and all the ex
isting AODB system and terminal operations especial
ly in 
Terminal 3 were being subsumed under these two comm
and centres.  
The implementation of a new AODB system in Terminal
 3 started in 2006 and was delivered in early 2008.
 Several 
key challenges were presented: (1) the new AODB was
 an off-the-shelf system that differed significantl
y from the 
customized AODB built for Terminal 1 and 2; and (2)
 the information systems in the Airport Transport C
ontrol 
(ATC) which AODB draws its information from were al
so undergoing upgrade which led to many uncertainti
es on 
how the two systems should interface.  The heavy in
vestment in IT staff training by IT department paid
 off. Some of 
the key initiatives that are still in place today a
re: (1) the encouragement of the leaders for the IT
 staff to build up 
their knowledge on AODB since 1999; and (2) the cul
tivation of a strong learning and sharing environme
nt that 
facilitates the exchange of knowledge across genera
tions of AODB administrator (currently at its fourt
h generation).  
ﬁ– our IT department had a very strong learning cul
ture – In 2000, I took the lead with a few other co
lleagues to 
look into system backup and business continuity in-
depth study (for the AODB) – during that time, we d
idn™t 
leverage upon outside help and we did all the resea
rch on our own – we invented many system maintenanc
e 
strategies.ﬂ ŒDeputy Manager, IT Department 

 
This strong learning and sharing environment encour
ages desirable behaviors such as selfless sharing o
f valuable 
knowledge and proactive problem solving with ‚no-bl
ame™ culture. The selfless sharing of knowledge is 
exemplified 
through the informal mentor-apprentice relationship
s in the IT department, whereby the past AODB admin
istrator 
serves as mentor to the new AODB administrator.  

ﬁWe have an unofficial master-apprenticeship mechan
ism and a backup mechanism – if the apprentice is g
ood at 
work, the master will have opportunity to do other 
things and can also be promoted. This serves as a b
ig motivation 
for the master (to coach the apprentice).ﬂ Œ Chief 
Engineer (1
st
 Generation AODB Administrator), IT Department 
 
Leaders of the IT department place great trust into
 the hands of the highly experienced AODB administr
ators to 
drive the Terminal 3 project. In comparison, while 
the vendor was not expected to perform as well as t
he IT 
department staff, they were highly trusted in their
 ability to deliver quality IT solution largely due
 to the close 
working relationships that had been established dur
ing the AODB implementations for Terminal 1 and 2. 
ﬁBecause of our in-depth knowledge of T2™s (Termina
l 2) business operation, we can easily make a compa
rison 
between T2 and T3 (Terminal 3) and highlight the we
akness and strength of T2™s system (AODB system), t
hen we 
can use this knowledge to inform the vendors to imp
rove their system by absorbing T2™s strength and el
iminating its 
weakness. In this way, our T3 design (of AODB) can 
be more aligned with our most ideal maintenance pro
cess 
which was not possible in the past (in T2 AODB).ﬂ Œ
 Business Process Lead, AODB System Project 
Airport Departure System 

The development work of the airport departure syste
m of Terminal 3 started in 2006 and was completed i
n early 
2008. To achieve wide spread IT adoption by partner
s of BCIA (i.e. all the airlines), the IT departmen
t adopted a 
number of key strategies: (1) Inclusion of the high
ly experienced staff of all the airlines to ensure 
accurate depiction 
of each airline™s requirement in the tender specifi
cation;  (2) Assignment of several senior experts (
all having over 
10 years of experience, including those who were in
volved in the development of Terminal 1 and 2™s dep
arture 
systems) from the IT department to the project; and
 (3) Collaboration with a vendor that had more than
 50 years of 
airport departure system implementation experience.
 As a result, the IT department was able to reap a 
number of key 
benefits: (1) Ability to draft out very accurate an
d detailed business requirements needed for the sys
tem 
implementation, which in turns kept any subsequent 
changes at bay; (2) Alignment of shared goals to se
rve 
passengers between the airlines and IT staff that e
ncouraged selfless contribution to this common end;
 and (3) 
Development of strong trusting relationships among 
IT and airlines staff.  However, the same level of 
trust appeared 
to be lacking between the IT department and the ven
dor, largely because customized development work wa
s done 
 IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

8 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 overseas, the software used was proprietary and onl
y local members, who were less experienced, of the 
vendor were 
available onsite for installation and configuration
. 
ﬁIf you have a chance to read the requirement submi
tted (for the departure system) by each airline, yo
u will be 
surprised to realize how deep into the future they 
have predicted for the airline industry to go into 
development and 
the needs of their passengers ... Because our custo
mers are airlines, the requirement gathered from th
em are all 
very accurate in predicting the eventual useﬂ ŒTech
nical Lead, Departure System Project 
 
 ﬁThey (vendor) guard their technical knowledge str
ictly – and because their technology is proprietary
 and not 
open-sourced – we honestly feel that this is not a 
healthy development into our future relationshipﬂ Œ
 Technical 
Lead, Departure System Project  

 
A series of training was conducted by the IT depart
ment to impart important information pertaining to 
BCIA™s 
culture, practices, work attitudes and standards to
 the vendor before implementation commenced. This w
as to ensure 
that the vendor got a clear interpretation of the t
ender™s expectation and was able to assimilate seam
lessly into the 
BCIA™s culture and working norms.  

ﬁWe provide training to their (vendor) project mana
gement team to impart knowledge about our company™s
 
management philosophy, procedure and specific thing
 to take note of when it comes to system requiremen
t. The 
objective is to ensure that they can reach up to th
e same standard as our internal IT staff and to ali
gn their way of 
thinking with ours.ﬂ Œ Technical Lead, Departure Sy
stem Project 
 
To mitigate the risk of low trust level of vendor, 
the ‚Backward Planning™ (interpreted as setting har
d deadline for 
project and planning backward to set milestones) me
thodology was adopted to communicate expected deliv
erables 
and their deadlines. A weekly meeting was held to t
rack the development progress with major stakeholde
rs and 
vendors. On a daily basis, a more rigorous schedule
 of workload was drafted and the local members of t
he vendor 
were expected to follow and complete them according
ly. Some members of the IT department staff were st
ationed 
beside the vendors to ensure conformance of the dai
ly schedule and to ensure the quality of the task c
ompleted.  
Airport Security System 

The tender for the implementation of this system wa
s awarded in October 2005 and the system went live 
on March 
2008. The requirement to achieve maximum security a
t level 5 (see Airport-int 2009) posed significant 
risk to the 
system implementation process mainly because the sc
ale of the implementation was unprecedented then in
 the world 
in 2008. Many unknowns existed and a large number o
f stakeholders were involved in this project (such 
as custom 
department, airlines, ground staff etc.). To mitiga
te this risk, significant amount of time was spent 
before October 
2005 visiting many vendors around the world to acqu
ire their knowledge in the implementation of securi
ty system.  
ﬁAs far as security is concerned, this system is fi
rst of its kind in China – In April 2005 before the
 beginning of the 
tender, we did a number of visit and research on a 
number of airports – we involved the design unit in
 T2 
(Terminal 2) to consolidate our findings into the t
ender specification for the security system in T3 (
Terminal 3).ﬂ Œ 
Project Manager, Security System Project 

 
While the system implementation posed huge potentia
l risk, it did not faze the members of the staff in
volved 
because: (1) they were happy to be associated with 
the ‚novel™ of the level 5 security system in the w
orld; and (2) 
they relish in their national pride of having been 
proven to achieve something seemingly impossible, a
t all cost no 
less, through the collective determination of multi
ple stakeholders.  
ﬁThe success of this project relies on our common w
orking attitude. This doesn™t just apply to us (IT 
Department) 
but the vendor as well. One of our vendor member™s 
wife was giving birth during that time, he chose to
 stay onsite.ﬂ 
Œ Project Manager, Security System Project 

 
The overall lack of experiences in implementing a s
ystem at this level of security raises questions ab
out the skill set 
of everyone involved. This resulted in a low trust 
environment where tight control measures have to be
 put in place. 
To ensure proper conformance of the system requirem
ent, a separate audit team was formed to inspect al
l the project 
deliverables. The implementation of the system can 
only proceed after the approval of the audit team. 
In addition, 
the IT department also mandated the staff involved 
to stay onsite during the entire system development
 period. 
  Goh et al. / Transforming Organization Capabilities
 into Agile IT Adoption  
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
9 Frequent site inspection and weekly meeting were co
nducted to instill the sense of urgency and to get 
things done 
right the first time. To ensure no opportunism beha
vior of the vendors and staff, a joint responsibili
ty deposit was 
imposed on them, which mandated the timely completi
on of task or risk losing portion or all of the dep
osit. In 
addition, payments to the vendors were done in a ‚m
ilestone™ fashion, i.e. they only got paid when the
 audit team 
certified that they have met all the requirements o
f that milestone.   
ﬁOur company adopts an outcome driven control, that
 is to say if you achieve your target, you will be 
given 
monetary reward, if you don™t, money is deducted– o
nce we established the target, everyone will come u
p with the 
‚responsibility™ deposit, you don™t hit it (target)
 we deduct money from the deposit. You complete it,
 we give you 
reward.ﬂ Œ Project Manager, Security System Project
  
The leaders in the IT department have led by exampl
e. They held progress meeting on Saturday and condu
cted 
inspection at night to instill the discipline of wo
rking round the clock. In addition, the Chinese bel
ieved in 
encouragement slogan. Many were placed around the p
remises to motivate all the stakeholders to answer 
to the 
higher calling of their work. For example, one of t
he slogans in Chinese posted at the canteen transla
ting to the 
effect of:  ﬁ
If you are afraid of death, don™t become a communis
t. If you are afraid of hard work, don™t take up 
system development work of T3!
ﬂ 
Data Centre System 

The implementation of the data centre system starte
d at late 2007 and was delivered within six months 
in March 
2008. As the main purpose of this system was to pro
vide a single authoritative source of bill calculat
ion for all the 
internal stakeholders of BCIA, it must be precise a
nd error-free. This was not easily achievable. The 
IT department 
was aware of the difficulty involved in getting buy
-ins from internal stakeholders, so one of its most
 well-respected 
IT staff within the airport was assigned as the pro
ject manager. Through close coordination and many i
ntense 
negotiations with all the stakeholders, the BCIA pr
oject manager was able to keep the implementation e
ffort 
moving. To further accelerate the development of th
e system, the BCIA project manager leveraged upon h
is close 
working relationship with the local partners at the
 Company CX (A large multi-national company) to sta
rt work on 
the project before the signing of the tender docume
nt was finalized. To ensure a tight control on chan
ges, a rigorous 
change management process was implemented. Despite 
all these preventative measures imposed to get the 
project 
completed on time, the project manager still faced 
a number of difficult challenges including: (1) cop
ing with the 
withdrawal of CX from the tender before the actual 
signing of the tender document. This was a crisis e
specially 
since the local vendor of CX had already committed 
their resources into this project. The quick thinki
ng project 
manager managed to resolve the situation by convinc
ing the local vendor to absorb the staff deployed o
nsite by CX, 
so as to minimize disruption; (2) coping with three
 unforeseen change requests during the development 
of the 
system. If they were mandated to complete before th
e Olympics, these changes would cause the system sc
hedule to 
overrun. The project manager mitigated the situatio
n by convincing the stakeholders to defer the chang
es after the 
2008 Olympics after some intense negotiations; and 
(3) coping with the request to subsume the two func
tionalities 
embedded within the Terminal Operation Database sys
tem and the Company™s ERP System into the new syste
m. 
This would disrupt the established information flow
 and power structure within an organization derived
 from these 
two systems. Leveraging upon his respectable status
 and given complete authority by the management, th
e project 
manager managed to navigate an extremely delicate c
hange process which enabled the smooth transition o
f the 
multiple stakeholders from their familiar interface
s to this new system. 
ﬁDuring the system development process, we have bee
n given a lot of authority to control many decision
s 
concerning payment and operational data which inclu
de daily operation report – from our angle, this ma
kes a lot 
of our work easier to implementﬂ Œ Project Manager,
 Data Centre System Project 
 
The project manager was able to overcome these chal
lenges because of the following measures: (1) Const
ant and 
persistent communication about the accounting regul
atory requirements that BCIA needs to conform to an
d the key 
advantages and improvements which the new system co
uld provide; (2) Weekly meeting to trace the progre
ss and 
report it back to the stakeholders; and (3) Verifie
d payment to the vendor only when a milestone was c
ompleted and 
signed off by him. Furthermore, due to the project 
manager™s willingness to engage the local vendor de
spite the 
withdrawal of the main potential contractor (CX), t
he vendor™s project manager was willing to give som
ething in 
return to the project manager™s trust. For example,
 he was very proactive in reporting the status of t
he project and 
 IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

10 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 was flexible to take up ad hoc work of a smaller sc
ale not specified within the initial terms of contr
act. He did these 
jobs at no extra cost to BCIA.  

ﬁ– The core team (vendor team) comprises of team me
mbers that possess in-depth business domain knowled
ge and 
strong technical skills and experiences in this are
a (development of Data Centre) – you don™t need to 
explain things 
in detail to them (vendor) – if we have another ven
dor, the pressure on us would be really great and w
e will 
probably have to do OT everydayﬂ Œ Project Manager,
 Data Centre System Project 
 
Comparatively, the internal partners (such as airli
nes and shop owners) were much less ‚cooperative™ w
ith the IT 
department™s project manager than the vendor. Conse
quently, the trust level of these partners is low. 
 ﬁIf you don™t have professionals to control the pro
cess of this project, the project risk would be hig
h. If you let the 
users (partners) control the process, you will face
 the challenge of frequently changing requirements 
– because 
they (partners) represent their own interest.ﬂ Œ Pr
oject Manager, Data Centre System Project 
Discussion 

Within Case Analysis 

Every system that is being analyzed in this study e
xhibits two common elements. First, all these syste
ms in 
accordance to BCIA™s Terminal 3 project plan must b
e delivered in full within a timeline of around 2 y
ears to be on 
time for the 2008 Olympics Games. This sets the sta
ge for the urgency of the IT department to ensure a
gile IT 
adoption across its organization. Second, all the s
ystems require close coordination across multiple s
takeholders and 
are large scale in implementation. As a result, its
 implementation details are highly complicated. The
se two elements 
conspire to create an environment where the perceiv
ed impact of failure (i.e. losing reputation as a c
ountry) is 
extremely high if agile IT adoption is not achieved
.  
The data analysis of the four systems also reveals 
several common patterns in the development process 
of agile IT 
adoption practices within each IT system implementa
tion. First, two dominant organization capabilities
 are 
identified to be highly salient in the data for eac
h system implementation. To ensure close corroborat
ion of 
inductively derived data with the literature, these
 organization capabilities are being grouped togeth
er and the 
literature scans for construct that can best captur
e their essences. Second, two dominant control mech
anisms 
contingent upon the trust relationships among staff
, partners and/or vendors are also highly salient i
n each system 
implementation. The same process of corroborating t
he findings with literature follows and a ‚control™
 construct is 
derived for each pair of identified control mechani
sms. In cases where no literature support is found,
 the data 
analysis process allows a new theme to be created w
hich is akin to the process of theory development a
s advocated 
by Eisenhardt (1989). Table 2 shows the organizatio
n capabilities of AODB System and Figure 1 shows th
e 
inductively derived model for the AODB System. 
Table 2: Identified Organization Capabilities in AO
DB System Implementation 
Capability Reconfiguration Capability (Lavie 2006) 
Capability by which an organization taps on in orde
r to modify their existing capabilities
 Capability substitution An organization acquires ne
w capabilities that supersede its existing capabili
ties. 
Capability evolution An organization evolves its ex
isting capabilities over time through an ongoing pr
ocess 
of knowledge absorption & assimilation. 
Capability 

transformation 
An organization leverages upon the capability of le
arning from a combination of 
knowledge from both the internal and external sourc
es to modify its existing capability. 
Absorptive Capacity Capability (Lichtenthaler 2009)
 Capability of an organization to learn via 3 types 
of learning processes
 Exploratory learning Knowledge acquisition process 
that consists of two process stages of recognizing 
external knowledge and assimilating this knowledge.
 Exploitative learning Associates with matching know
ledge and market that consist of two process stages
 of 
transmuting the assimilated knowledge and applying 
it. 
  Goh et al. / Transforming Organization Capabilities
 into Agile IT Adoption  
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
11
 Transformative 

learning 
Associates with processes to protect and keep the a
ssimilated knowledge ‚alive™ (See 
description on the identified control mechanisms). 
Resource Fluidity Capability (Doz et al. 2008)
 We posit that the above two capabilities combined t
o give rise to resource fluidity capability which i
s defined as 
an organization™s ﬁ
internal capability to reconfigure business systems
 and redeploy resources rapidly (
capability 
reconfiguration
), based on business processes for operations and r
esource allocation, people management 
approaches, and mechanisms and incentives for colla
boration that make business models and activity sys
tem 
transformation faster and easier 
(enabled through the learning processes of absorptiv
e capacity
)ﬂ 
 Figure 1: AODB System - Preemptive-based Agile Adop
tion Practices 
Two forms of control mechanisms, namely informal cl
an control; and informal self control from Kirsch (
1997) 
contingent upon the high trust on its staff and ven
dor were clearly administered during the system imp
lementation. 
Together, these control mechanisms can be deemed as
 transformative learning controls (refers to the de
finition of 
transformative control above). When the trust level
 of stakeholders is very high within a system imple
mentation 
project, informal control mechanisms are commonly p
referred over formal control mechanisms (Rustagi et
 al. 2008). 
It is noted in the case data that IT staff frequent
ly exercised their initiatives to proactively preem
pt problems during 
system implementation, largely attributed to this h
igh level of trust and the appropriate use of infor
mal control 
mechanisms. We, therefore, posit that the IT depart
ment used these two control mechanisms to transform
 two of its 
existing capabilities into a ‚preemptive-based™ pra
ctice that led to the agile adoption of AODB system
 across BCIA. 
Table 3 shows the organization capabilities of Airp
ort Departure System and Figure 2 shows the inducti
vely derived 
model for the Airport Departure System. 
Table 3: Identified Organization Capabilities in Ai
rport Departure System Implementation 
IS Planning Capability (Wade et al. 2004) 
The ability to anticipate future changes & growth, 
to choose IT platforms that can accommodate this ch
ange 
(Feeny et al. 1998), & to effectively manage the re
sulting technology change and growth (Mata et al. 1
995).
  IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

12 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Behavioral Conditioning Capability 
Capability of an organization to influence its stak
eholders to exercise the appropriate behaviors duri
ng task 
execution.
 Acculturation™s assimilating 

processes 
The ability to make vendors willingly give up their
 own organization™s culture so 
as to adopt the culture and norms of BCIA (Adapted 
from Nahavandi et al. 1988). 
IT-based co-creation of 

value 
The ability to co-create business value with multip
le parties through the 
appropriate use of IT (Adapted from Kohli et al. 20
08)  
System Capabilities (Van Den Bosch et al. 1999)
 We posit that the above two capabilities allow a hi
gh degree of behavior to be programmed (
enabled through 
Behavioral Conditioning Capability
) or documented down in written format in advance o
f their execution 
(enabled through IS Planning capability
) which is analogous with the definition of ‚system
 capabilities™. 
 Figure 2: Airport Departure System - Precision-base
d Agile IT Adoption Practices 
The development of the Airport Departure System was
 perceived as involving high risk by the IT departm
ent 
(because they don™t trust the vendor) especially wh
en the development work was done oversea (which the
 IT 
department had no control over). To mitigate these 
risks, the IT department exercised two strong forma
l control 
mechanisms on the local members of the overseas ven
dor, i.e. formal outcome control and formal behavio
r control 
mentioned in Kirsch (1997). These two control mecha
nisms fit into the ex-post deterrents control defin
ition: control 
which aims to minimize the opportunism tendency, th
rough structural safeguard during the management of
 alliance 
in the literature of joint venture (Das et al. 1998
). With high trust in the ability of partners (such
 as airlines) to work 
with the IT staff in an ‚IT-enabled co-creation of 
value™ way, strong IS planning capabilities to deri
ve precise system 
requirements and ex-post deterrent formal controls 
over the vendors to ensure absolute conformance dur
ing 
implementation, the IT department was able to deriv
e precision-based agile IT adoption practices. Thes
e practices 
allow the BCIA™s IT department to ‚sense™ the requi
rements before implementation in absolute precision
 with 
almost no alteration to specifications during imple
mentation. Table 4 shows the organization capabilit
ies of Airport 
Security System and Figure 3 shows the inductively 
derived model for the Airport Security System. 
  Goh et al. / Transforming Organization Capabilities
 into Agile IT Adoption  
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
13
 Table 4: Identified Organization Capabilities in Ai
rport Security System Implementation 
Shared Ideology Resource 
Attractive identity The motivation of being associa
ted with working on a cause that adds significant 
value to one™s worth as perceived by others. 
Collective reality 

interpretations 
An interpretation made through group consensus (oft
en unspoken) of what the 
reality is like. 
Knowledge Integration Capability 
 The ability to fuse knowledge across the organizati
on or outside of the organization together and use 
it 
effectively
 Socialization Capabilities (Van Den Bosch et al. 19
99)
 We posit that the shared ideology and knowledge int
egration capability fit the definition of ‚socializ
ation 
capabilities™ which is defined as the ability of a 
firm to produce a 
shared ideology
 that offers members an 
attractive identity as well as collective interpret
ation of reality which give rises to social and 
knowledge 
integration.
  
 Figure 3: Airport Security System - Adeptness-based
 Agile IT Adoption Practices 
In the context of trust of partners and vendor, our
 findings reveal that there is very little trust of
 both of their ability 
to come up with an appropriate solution that can en
sure the risk can be effectively mitigated. As a re
sult, the IT 
department adopts a combination of control mechanis
ms namely, formal behavior control and informal cla
n control, 
to transform the socialization capabilities into ‚a
deptness-based™ agile IT adoption practices. These 
practices allow 
the IT department to become highly proficient and e
fficient in responding to uncertainties in both sys
tem 
requirements and its manpower resource allocation c
apabilities that lead to the eventual agile adoptio
n of the 
security system across BCIA. The two control mechan
isms can be deemed as a form of ‚ownership control™
 which is 
defined as control that allows the creation of equi
ty ownership in a joint venture so that vendor, par
tners and IT 
department are bind together closely for a common g
oal and value (Inkpen et al. 2004). Table 5 shows t
he 
 IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

14 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 organization capabilities of Data Centre System and
 Figure 4 shows the inductively derived model for t
he Data 
Centre System. 
Table 5: Identified Organization Capabilities in Da
ta Centre System Implementation 
Stakeholder Management 
External relation 

management  (Wade et al. 

2004) 
The firm™s ability to manage linkages between IS fu
nction and stakeholders 
outside the firm (Wade et al. 2004). 
IS-business partnerships 

(Wade et al. 2004) 
‚This capability represents processes of integratio
n and alignment between the IS 
function and other functional areas or department o
f the firms™ 
(Wade et al. 
2004). 
IT change management Capability (Bharadwaj 2000) 
The ability of IS managers to understand how techno
logies can and should be used, as well as how to mo
tivate 
and manage IS personnel through the change process.
 Coordination Capabilities (Van Den Bosch et al. 199
9)
  
We posit that the above two capabilities combined t
o form ‚coordination capabilities™ which are define
d as 
capabilities of which an organization leverages upo
n the relations between members of a group (
enabled 
through stakeholder management
) for knowledge absorption through lateral way of c
oordination (
enabled 
through IS change management capability
). 
 Figure 4: Data Centre System - Improvement-based Ag
ile IT Adoption Practices 
It is clear in the analysis of the case data that c
omplete trusting relationships exist between the BC
IA IT department 
and the vendor. The same, however, cannot be said a
bout the stakeholders involved (i.e. airlines, shop
 owners and 
etc.) mainly due to monetary transactions that the 
system must perform. From the perspective of percei
ved risks, the 
  Goh et al. / Transforming Organization Capabilities
 into Agile IT Adoption  
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
15
 timeline (within 6 months) to get this work complet
ed is significantly shorter. These consolidations o
f factors result 
in BCIA IT department adopting two control mechanis
ms namely formal outcome and informal self control.
 These 
implemented control mechanisms (i.e. formal outcome
 control and informal self control) fits the defini
tion of 
concertive control which is defined as control that
 is executed through influential personnel upon a s
elf-managed 
work group and is achieved when the self-managed wo
rk group reaches a consensus on how to shape their 
behaviors 
according to a set of core values (Kohli et al. 200
4). In the case of data centre implementation, ther
e exist two self-
managed work groups: (1) the BCIA IT team and its v
arious stakeholders; and (2) the BCIA IT team and v
endor. 
The locus of control is shifted from the BCIA manag
ement to these two self-managed work groups to impo
se their 
specific control mechanisms to ensure the successfu
l fulfillment of the requirements. The BCIA IT and 
the vendor 
project manager play the role of influential person
nel that translates the necessary core values of BC
IA management 
into the implementation of the project to ensure co
nformance of desired behaviors. We, therefore, grou
ped the two 
control mechanisms used as influential peer concert
ive control. The end result is the development of i
mprovement-
based IT agile adoption practices which are similar
 to agile improvement practices which are defined a
s practices 
that build up an organization agility to response b
y enhancing coordination and alignment with other i
nitiatives 
(Börjesson et al. 2006).  

Cross Case Analysis 

These identified agile IT adoption practices, like 
in the literature of enterprise agility (e.g. Overb
y et al. 2006; 
Sambamurthy et al. 2003), can be distinctly divided
 into two components namely, sensing practices and 
responding 
practices. The overarching inductively derived mode
l is shown in Figure 5 and the definition of these 
practices 
summarized in Table 6.  
 Figure 5: Model for Agile IT Adoption Practices 
Table 6: Sensing and responding agile IT adoption p
ractices 
Sensing agile IT adoption practices 
Responding agile IT adoption practices 
Comprise of preemptive-based and precision-based 

agile IT adoption practices 
Comprise of adeptness-based and improvement-based 

agile IT adoption practices 
 IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

16 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Is responsible in accurately detecting opportunitie
s for 
appropriate introduction of IT innovation into an 

organization which consequently reduces the resista
nce 
that are evident in many large scale cross organiza
tion 
system implementation (Lapointe et al. 2005). 
Enhance an organization™s ability to arrange its as
sets, 
knowledge, capabilities and relationships to mitiga
te all 
the unforeseen circumstances that occurred during 

system implementation to keep the project aligned w
ith 
business objectives of BCIA. 
Conclusion 

Theoretical and Practical Implications 

The models derived inductively in this study seek t
o address the two research questions identified ear
lier in this 
paper namely: (1) How are agile adoption practices 
developed within an organization? (2) What types of
 agile 
adoption practices can be developed in an organizat
ion? In our study, we have presented several models
 detailing 
how agile IT adoption practices can be developed wi
thin an organization. In total, we have identified 
four distinct 
types of agile IT adoption practices that can be de
veloped. By showing the way in which specific organ
ization 
capabilities that can be transformed into agile ado
ption practices through the appropriate use of orga
nizational 
control mechanisms contingent upon trust of its sta
keholders, this study makes several important theor
etical 
contributions.  

First, it demonstrates the specific ‚innovation con
figuration™ (Fichman 2004) that needs to be put in 
place so that 
agile IT adoption can occur. This fills the gaps as
 advocated by many adoption researchers and answer 
to the call to 
look beyond the dominant IT adoption model (e.g. Be
nbasat et al. 2007; Fichman 2004; Frambach et al. 2
002). 
Besides this, the study highlights the increasing i
mportance of the urgency of agile adoption of an IT
 system in a 
hypercompetitive environment. It addresses the know
ledge gap of not considering urgency, speed, extend
 and 
appropriateness of IT adoption in totality in organ
ization IT adoption research. Together, these two c
ontributions 
enhance our understanding on IT adoption and provid
e insights to practitioners on ways in which they c
an enable 
agile IT adoption in an increasingly ‚flat™, global
ized and hypercompetitive world.  
Second, the study addresses the lack of empirically
 validated evidence in extant literature on enterpr
ise agility 
especially in the area of agile IT adoption (Basker
ville et al. 2005). It does this by informing us ho
w we can 
accelerate the process of IT adoption through the d
evelopment of agile IT adoption practices which in 
turns permit 
an organization to become more agile. From a practi
cal perspective, it offers specific roadmap to guid
e practitioners 
in developing enterprise agility within its organiz
ation through agile IT adoption practices. Hovorka 
& Larsen 
(2006)™s study on agile IT adoption practices is fo
cused primarily in a networked organization structu
re while this 
study complements Hovorka & Larsen (2006)™s study t
hrough the investigation of agile IT adoption pract
ices within 
an organization. Together, it provides more holisti
c understanding of what constitutes agile IT adopti
on practices 
and the underlying mechanisms to enable it both wit
hin an organization and in a networked environment.
  
Third, this study contributes to the area of organi
zational control and trust. The extant literature o
n organizational 
control is predominately focused on identifying the
 various factors that will influence the selection 
of specific 
control mechanisms during system development activi
ties. The relationship between trust and control is
 rarely 
examined together (e.g. Cardinal et al. 2004; Choud
hury et al. 2003; Kirsch 1997; Kirsch 2004; Kohli e
t al. 2004; 
Nidumolu et al. 2003-4). As far as we know, the onl
y study that combined the trust and control in the 
control 
literature is done by Rustagi et al. (2008). Yet, w
e know that control mechanisms are often intertwine
d with trust 
especially in a joint venture relationship with eac
h affecting and being affected by each other (Das e
t al. 1998). 
Answering to the call of Inkpen & Currall (2004), t
his study provides empirical evidence to demonstrat
e the effect 
of control mechanisms and trust together in the dev
elopment of agile IT adoption practices. 
Limitations and Future Research 

Like many single case research study, the problem o
f generalizability or external validity is one of t
he key 
limitations as advocated by many researchers (Walsh
am 2006). Yet, it should be noted that a single cas
e 
methodology is actually a ﬁtypical and legitimate e
ndeavorﬂ in qualitative research (Lee et al. 2003, 
p.231). While 
statistical generalization is impossible to achieve
 with our single embedded case study design, the it
eratively 
analysis between literature and data grounded in th
e empirical reality of our case study, has yielded 
significant rich 
insights and achieved theoretical saturation (Strau
ss et al. 1990) of which learning from additional d
ata is minimal 
  Goh et al. / Transforming Organization Capabilities
 into Agile IT Adoption  
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
17
 (Eisenhardt 1989). The second limitation of this st
udy is that it focuses on customization of off-the-
self systems, 
which may also limit its generalizability of its fi
ndings across other context of application. However
, theoretical 
generalizability of our findings is still a viable 
option which is consistent with extant literature u
nder the principle of 
ﬁanalytical generalizationﬂ (Yin 2009) or ﬁgenerali
zing from description to theoryﬂ (Lee et al. 2003, 
p.235). This is 
possible due to the employment of the single embedd
ed case design. The analysis of individual embedded
 case 
provides a rich set of evidences to support the ana
lysis of another embedded case. For example, it is 
evident during 
the first group interview that some forms of contro
l mechanisms are being mashed with existing organiz
ation 
capabilities to form agile IT adoption practices. T
his provides the necessary foundation for the resea
rch team to 
construct the preliminary theoretical model.  This 
model is then being rigorously validated and contin
ually refined as 
the team moved from one group interview to another.
 When empirical data collected in each group interv
iews 
corroborates with our theoretical model, we achieve
 the level of ﬁanalytical generalizationﬂ as advoca
ted by Yin 
(2009) where ﬁ
a previously developed theory is used as a template
 with which to compare the empirical results of 
the case study
ﬂ (Yin 2009, pp. 38). Future research can be focuse
d on validating our propositions made in this study
 
as well as in our models statistically across other
 context of application so that the understanding o
f our proposed 
models can be better refined.  

Appendix A 
Details of Interviews Conducted 
Unless otherwise specified, all interviews conducte
d are group interviews
 Description 
 Job Title of Interviewees (Role in T3 IT project in
 Bracket and Bold) 
Unless otherwise specified, interviewee belongs to 
the IT Dept, BCIA
 No 
Off-site Preliminary 

Individual
 Interviews 
General Manager, Information Dept, Capital Airports
 Holding Company (
BCIA Management
) 1 
Overview Interview  Deputy Manager/Chief Engineer (
Project Manager, Western SOCC Project
) and Chief 
Engineer (
Project Manager, Data Centre System Project
) 
2 
AODB System 

Project  
Deputy Manager/Chief Engineer (
Project Manager, Western SOCC Project - First 
generation AODB administrator
), Business Manager, Production Control (
Business Process 
Lead, AODB System Project
) and Engineer (
Technical Lead, AODB & Data Centre System 
Project - Current AODB administrator
)  
3 
Airport Departure 

System Project 
Departure System Services Engineer (
Technical Lead, Departure System Project
) and 
Business Manager, IT Services Engineer (
Business Process Lead, Luggage System Project
) 
2 
Airport Security 

System Project 
Engineer, Eastern SOCC (
Project Manager, Security System Project
) and Engineer, Eastern 
SOCC (
Technical Lead, Security System Project
) 
2 
Airport Data Centre 

Project 
Deputy Manager/Chief Engineer (
Project Manager, Western SOCC Project
), Chief Engineer 
(Project Manager, Data Centre System Project
) and Engineer (
Technical Lead, AODB & 
Data Centre System Project
) 
3 
Airport Flight 

Display System 

Project 
Business Manager, System Services (
Business Process Lead, Flight Display System Projec
t
) 
and Engineer, Eastern SOCC (
Technical Lead, Flight Display System Project
) 
2 
Airport Luggage 

System Project 
Deputy Manager/Chief Engineer (
Project Manager, Western SOCC Project
), Vice Manager, 
Terminal Building Eastern Management Dept (
Project Manager, Luggage System Project
) 
and Business Manager, IT Services Engineer (
Business Process Lead, Luggage System 
Project
) 
3 
Terminal & System 

Command Centres  
Deputy Manager/Chief Engineer (
Project Manager, Western SOCC Project
), Business 
Manager, Western System Operation Control Center (
Business Process Lead, Western SOCC 
Project
) and Business Manager, Production Control (
Business Lead, AODB System Project
) 
3 
Final Interviews and 

Finding Presentation 
Executive Vice President cum CIO, BCIA (
BCIA Management
), Manager (
BCIA 
Management
), Deputy Manager/Chief Engineer (
Project Manager, Western SOCC Project
), 
Chief Engineer (
Project Manager, Data Centre System Project
), Engineer (
Technical Lead, 
AODB & Data Centre System Project
) and Business Manager, IT Services Engineer 
(Business Process Lead, Luggage System Project
) 
6 
 IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

18 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 References 

Airport-int "Hold Baggage Screening Systems (
http://www.airport-int.com/article/hold-baggage-scr
eening-
systems.html),
" Airport-int International, 2009. 
Baskerville, R.L., Mathiassen, L., and Pries-Heje, 
J. "Agility in fours: IT diffusion, IT infrastructu
re, IT 
development and business," in: 
Business Agility and Information Technology Diffusi
on,
 R.L. Baskerville, 
L. Mathiassen, J. Pries-Heje and J.I. DeGross (eds.
), Springer, New York, NY, 2005. 
Benbasat, I., and Barki, H. "Quo vadis, TAM?," 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems
 (8:4) 2007, pp 
212-218. 
Bharadwaj, A.S. "A Resource-based Perspective on In
formation Technology Capability and Firm Performanc
e: An 
Empirical Investigation," 
MIS Quarterly
 (24:1) 2000, pp 169-196. 
Birnberg, J.G., and Snodgrass, C. "Culture and Cont
rol: A field study," 
Accounting, Organizations and Society
 (13:5) 1988, pp 447-464. 
Börjesson, A., Martinsson, F., and Timmerås, M. "Ag
ile improvement practices in software organizations
," 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (15:2) 2006, p 169. 
Bruque-Cámara, S., Vargas-Sánchez, A., and Hernánde
z-Ortiz, M.J. "Organizational determinants of IT ad
option in 
the pharmaceutical distribution sector," 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (13:2) 2004, p 133. 
Cardinal, L.B., Sitkin, S.B., and Long, C.P. "Balan
cing and Rebalancing in the Creation and Evolution 
of 
Organizational Control," 
Organization Science
 (15:4) 2004, p 411. 
Choudhury, V., and Sabherwal, R. "Portfolios of Con
trol in Outsourced Software Development Projects," 
Information Systems Research
 (14:3) 2003, pp 291-314. 
Cool, K.O., Diericks, I., and Szulanski, G. "Diffus
ion of innovations within organizations: Electronic
 switching in 
the Bell System, 1971-1982," 
Organization Science
 (8:5) 1997, pp 543-559. 
Cooper, R.B., and Zmud, R.W. "Information technolog
y implementation research: A technological diffusio
n 
approach," 
Management Science
 (36:2) 1990, pp 123-139. 
Das, T.K., and Bing-Sheng, T. "Between Trust and Co
ntrol: Developing Confidence in Partner Cooperation
 in 
Alliances," 
Academy of Management Review
 (23:3) 1998, pp 491-512. 
DiMaggio, P.J., and Powell, W.W. "The Iron Case Rev
isited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Ra
tionality 
in Organizational Fields," 
American Sociological Review
 (48:2) 1983, pp 147-160. 
Dove, R. 
Response Agility - The Language, Structure and Cult
ure of Agile Enterprise
 Wiley, New York, USA, 
2001. 
Doz, Y., and Kosonen, M. "The Dynamics of Strategic
 Agility: Nokia's Rollcoaster Experience," 
California 
Management Review
 (50:3) 2008, pp 95-118. 
Dube, L., and Pare, G. "Rigor in Information System
s Positivist Case Research: Current Practices, Tren
ds and 
Recommendations," 
MIS Quarterly
 (27:4) 2003, pp 597-635. 
Eisenhardt, K.M. "Control: Organizational and Econo
mic Approaches," 
Management Science
 (31:2) 1985, pp 134-
149. 
Eisenhardt, K.M. "Building theories from case study
 research," 
Academy of Management Review
 (14:4) 1989, pp 
532-550. 
Feeny, D.F., and Willcocks, L.P. "Core IS Capabilit
ies for Exploiting Information Technology," 
Sloan Management 
Review
 (39:3) 1998, pp 9-21. 
Fichman, R.G. "Going Beyond the Dominant Paradigm f
or Information Technology Innovation Research: Emer
ging 
Concepts and Methods," 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems
 (5:8) 2004, pp 314-355. 
Frambach, R.T., and Schillewaert, N. "Organizationa
l innovation adoption - A multi-level framework of 
determinants and opportunities for future research,
" 
Journal of Business Research
 (55) 2002, pp 163Œ 176. 
Gallagher, K.P., and Worrell, J.L. "Organizing IT t
o promote agility," 
Information Technology and Management
 (9:1) 2008, pp 71-88. 
Gallivan, M.J. "Organizational Adoption and Assimil
ation of Complex Technological Innovations: Develop
ment 
and Application of a New Framework," 
The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems
 (32:3) 2001, 
pp 51-85. 
Glick, W.H., Huber, G.P., Miller, C.C., Doty, D.H.,
 and Sutcliffe, K.M. "Studying changes in organizat
ional design 
and effectiveness: Retrospective event histories an
d periodic assessments " 
Organization Science
 (1:3) 
1990, pp 293-312. 
Hovorka, D.S., and Larsen, K.R. "Enabling agile ado
ption practices through networked organizations," 
European 
Journal of Information Systems
 (15:2) 2006, pp 159-168. 
  Goh et al. / Transforming Organization Capabilities
 into Agile IT Adoption  
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
19
 Inkpen, A.C., and Currall, S.C. "The Coevolution of
 Trust, Control, and Learning in Joint Ventures," 
Organization 
Science
 (15:5) 2004, p 586. 
Kim, H.-W., and Pan, S.L. "Toward a Process Model o
f Information Systems Implementation: The Case of 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM)," 
The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems
 (37:1) 2006, pp 59-76. 
Kirsch, L.J. "Portfolios of Control Modes and IS Pr
oject Management," 
Information Systems Research
 (8:3) 1997, p 
215. 
Kirsch, L.J. "Deploying Common Systems Globally: Th
e Dynamics of Control," 
Information Systems Research
 (15:4) 2004, p 374. 
Klein, H.K., and Myers, M.D. "A set of principles f
or conducting and evaluating interpretive field stu
dies in 
information systems," 
MIS Quarterly
 (23:1) 1999, pp 67-93. 
Kohli, R., and Grover, V. "Business Value of IT: An
 Essay on Expanding Research Directions to Keep up 
with the 
Times," 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems
 (9:1) 2008, pp 23-39. 
Kohli, R., and Kettinger, W.J. "Informating The Cla
n: Controlling Physicians' Costs and Outcomes," 
MIS Quarterly
 (28:3) 2004, pp 363-394. 
Langley, A. "Strategies for theorizing from process
 data," 
Academy of Management Review
 (24:4) 1999, pp 691-
710. 
Lapointe, L., and Rivard, S. "A Multilevel Model of
 Resistance To Information Technology Implementatio
n," 
MIS 
Quarterly
 (29:3) 2005, pp 461-491. 
Lavie, D. "Capability Reconfiguration: An Analysis 
of Incumbent Responses to Technological Change," 
Academy 
of Management Review
 (31:1) 2006, pp 153-174. 
Lee, A.S., and Baskerville, R.L. "Generalizing gene
ralizability in information systems research," 
Information 
Systems Research
 (14:3) 2003, pp 221-243. 
Lichtenthaler, U. "Absorptive Capacity, Environment
al Turbulence, and The Complementarity of Change," 
Academy of Management Review
 (54:4) 2009, pp 822-846. 
MacKay, N., Parent, M., and Gemino, A. "A model of 
electronic commerce adoption by small voluntary 
organizations," 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (13) 2004, pp 147Œ159. 
Madill, A., Jordan, A., and Shirley, C. "Objectivit
y and reliability in qualitative analysis: Realist,
 contextualist and 
radical constructionist epistemologies," 
British Journal of Psychology
 (91:1) 2000, pp 1-20. 
Mata, F.J., Fuerst, W.L., and Barney, J.B. "Informa
tion Technology and Sustained Competitive Advantage
: A 
Resource-Based Analysis," 
MIS Quarterly
 (19:4) 1995, pp 487-505. 
Mathiassen, L., and Pries-Heje, J. "Business agilit
y and diffusion of information technology," 
European Journal of 
Information Systems
 (15:2) 2006, p 116. 
McAfee, A., and Brynjolfsson, E. "Investing in the 
IT That Makes a Competitive Difference," 
Harvard Business 
Review
 (86:7/8) 2008, pp 98-107. 
Nahavandi, A., and Malekzadeh, A.R. "Acculturation 
in Mergers and Acquisitions," 
Academy of Management 
Review
 (32:2) 1988, pp 344-354. 
Nidumolu, S.R., and Subramani, M.R. "The Matrix of 
Control: Combining Process and Structure Approaches
 to 
Managing Software Development," 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (20:3) 2003-4, pp 159-
196. 
Ouchi, G.W. "A Conceptual Framework for the Design 
of Organizational Control Mechanisms," 
Management 
Science
 (25:9) 1979, pp 833-848. 
Ouchi, G.W. "Markets, Bureaucracies and Clans," 
Administrative Science Quarterly
 (25) 1980, pp 129-141. 
Overby, E., Bharadwaj, A., and Sambamurthy, V. "Ent
erprise agility and the enabling role of informatio
n 
technology," 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (15:2) 2006, p 120. 
Pentland, B.T. "Building process theory with narrat
ive: From description to explanation," 
Academy of Management 
Review
 (24:4) 1999, pp 711-724. 
Rustagi, S., King, W.R., and Kirsch, L.J. "Predicto
rs of Formal Control Usage in IT Outsourcing Partne
rships," 
Information Systems Research
 (19:2) 2008, pp 126-143. 
Sambamurthy, V., Anandhi, B., and Varun, G. "Shapin
g agility through digital options: Reconceptualizin
g the role 
of information technology in contemporary Firms1," 
MIS Quarterly
 (27:2) 2003, p 237. 
Schoorman, F.D., Mayer, R.C., and Davis, J.H. "An I
ntegrative Model of Organizational Trust: Past, Pre
sent, and 
Future," 
Academy of Management Review
 (32:2) 2007, pp 344-354. 
Seo, D., and La Paz, A.I. "Exploring the dark side 
of IS in achieving organizational agility," 
Communications of the 
ACM
 (51:11) 2008, pp 136-139. 
 IT Project Management and Outsourcing 

20 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Sharifi, H., and Zhang, Z. "Agile manufacturing in 
practice - Application of a methodology," 
International Journal 
of Operations & Production Management
 (21:5/6) 2001, pp 772-794. 
Strauss, A., and Corbin, J. 
Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Pro
cedures and Techniques
 Sage 
Publications, Newbury Park, CA, 1990. 
Sull, D.N. 
Made in China: What Western Managers Can Learn from
 Trailblazing Chinese Entrepreneurs
 Havard 
Business School Press, Boston, Massachusetts, 2005.
 Tan, B.C.C., Pan, S.L., Lu, X., and Huang, L. "Leve
raging digital business ecosystems for enterprise a
gility: The tri-
logic development strategy of Alibaba.com," Interna
tional Conference on Information Systems, Phoenix, 
USA, 2009. 
Teo, H., Wei, K., and Benbasat, I. "Predicting inte
ntion to adopt interorganizational linkages: an ins
titutional 
perspective," 
MIS Quarterly
 (27:1) 2003a, pp 19-49. 
Teo, T.S., and Pian, Y. "A contingency perspective 
on Internet adoption and competitive advantage," 
European 
Journal of Information Systems
 (12) 2003b, pp 79-92. 
Thomas Iii, L.G. "The Two Faces of Competition: Dyn
amic Resourcefulness and the Hypercompetitive Shift
," 
Organization Science
 (7:3) 1996, pp 221-242. 
Van Den Bosch, F.A.J., Volberda, H.W., and De Boer,
 M. "Coevolution of Firm Absorptive Capacity and 
Knowledge Environment: Organizational Forms and Com
binative Capabilities," 
Organization Science
 (10:5) 1999, pp 551-568. 
van Oosterhout, M., Waarts, E., and van Hillegersbe
rg, J. "Change factors requiring agility and implic
ations for IT," 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (15:2) 2006, pp 132-145. 
Wade, M., and Hulland, J. "Review: The Resource-Bas
ed View and Information Systems Research: Review, 
Extension and Suggestions for Future Research," 
MIS Quarterly
 (28:1) 2004, pp 107-142. 
Walsham, G. "The Emergence of Interpretivism in IS 
Research," 
Information Systems Research
 (6:4) 1995, pp 376-
394. 
Walsham, G. "Doing interpretive research," 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (15:3) 2006, pp 320-330. 
Weill, P., Subramani, M., and Broadbent, M. "Buildi
ng IT infrastructure of strategic agility," 
Sloan Management 
Review
 (44:1) 2002, pp 57-65. 
Yin, R.K. 
Case Study Research: Design and Methods
, (4th ed.) SAGE Publications Inc., 2009. 
Zain, M., Rose, R.C., Abdullah, I., and Masrom, M. 
"The relationship between information technology ac
ceptance 
and organizational agility in Malaysia," 
Information & Management
 (42:6) 2005, pp 829-839. 
 
 