 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)University of Wisconsin, MilwaukeeUniversity of Nevada Las VegasOakland UniversityICIS 2006 Proceedings.  Twenty-Seventh International Conference on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
181 FLEXIBLE SOFTWARE 
COMPONENT 
DESIGN USING 
A PRODUCT 
PLATFORM 
APPROACH* Design Science   Hemant Jain Sheldon B. Lubar School of Business 
University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Milwaukee, WI jain@uwm.edu   Marcus A. Rothenberger Department of MIS 
University of Nevada Las Vegas 
Las Vegas, NV marcus.rothenberger@unlv.edu
  Vijayan Sugumaran 
Department of Decision an
d Information Sciences 
Oakland University Rochester, MI sugumara@oakland.edu    Abstract The concept of reusing software artifacts to impr
ove development efficiency and software quality 
has been around for quite some time, yet it has 
focused mostly on in-house reuse with limited 
success. Recently developments 
in component-based software 
development, Web services, and 
service-oriented architecture are targeting inte
r-organizational reuse by promoting black-box 
reuse facilitated by standard Web service-based interface definitions. This reuse paradigm 
reduces dramatically the cost of component integration and maintenance, as it is no longer 

necessary to understand implementation details. 
However, this requires a very high level of 
standardization and clear functional definitions to facilitate retrieval through search engines. 
Because of this, its application has been limited to
 relatively small infrastructure items, such as 
user interfaces, printing components, and data access modules. Further, the reuse potential of 
such components is high, as infrastructure fu
nctionality is needed ac
ross domains. However, 
without the ability to build the core of an app
lication around reusable 
software components, the 
true value of component-based 
software development that can o
ffer lower cost, high quality, 
agility, and responsiveness cannot be realized. Thus, in order to move this adoption philosophy 
forward, domain-specific 
components must be available. This
 research develops a method that 
promotes flexible component design based on a common product platform with derivative 
products. Following the design research method, the methodology artifact will be evaluated 
through an experimental evaluation and a formal assessment of its value to component-based 
development. 
Keywords:  
Component design, software reuse, component-based development, design science 
                                                          
 * Authors contributed equally.  Author
ship is in alphabetical order. 
 Design Science 182 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
  Introduction From the early years of information technology, software has predominantly been made to order to fit specific 
organizational needs. Custom-developed software is made to
 the requirements of the client organization. This option 
  usually ensures the best fit of the software to the existing organizational processes; thus, a company is not required 
to change the way it does business. On the down side, custom software is characterized by high cost, low quality, 
longer development time, and low agility. 
Reuse of software artifacts has been frequently discussed over the past decade as a means of improving development 
efficiency and software quality, yet su
ch discussion emphasized mostly in-house reuse with the limitation of a 
comparably small repository (Basili et al. 1996; Poulin et 
al. 1993). It is only recently that the development of 
component standards, such as CORBA and JavaBeans, has promoted the emergence of component markets that 
support the notion of inter-organizational reuse. This movement has been further enhanced by wide adoption of Web 
services standards and movement toward service-oriented 
architecture.  As opposed to the traditional reuse notion, 
which requires developers to modify and customize retrieved components to fit the requirements of new software 
projects, component-based software development limits the customization of modules to the selection of appropriate 
parameters. This black-box reuse approach reduces the cost of component integration and maintenance, as it is no 

longer necessary to understand implementation details to reuse a component (Ravichandran and Rothenberger 
2003).  
However, because of the need for high functionality standardization, the availability and use of black-box 
components have mostly been limited to
 infrastructure items, such as user in
terfaces, printing components, and data 
access modules (Taft 2000). The functionali
ty of infrastructure components is hi
ghly standardized and can be clearly 
defined for retrieval through search engines. Further, th
e reuse potential of such components is very high, as 
infrastructure functionality is needed 
across domains. Nevertheless,
 without the ability to 
build the core of an 
application around reusable software components, the tr
ue value of component-based software development cannot 
be obtained. Thus, in order to move this adoption philosophy forward, domain-specific components must be 
available for various domains. 
This research investigates how domain-specific components can be structured to maximize their reuse potential. 
Product platforms have achieved in the physical world what we propose in this research for software components. 
Platform-based components are domain-specific components that are customizable (without code changes) to 
various needs.  Thus, this concept increases the requirements flexibility of component-based development while 

retaining the benefit of black-box component design.  Motivated by the product platform literature, we have 
developed a component design methodology that draws from the areas of domain analysis, domain modeling, 
component-based software development, and software reuse.
 The design approach will be formalized and evaluated 
according to the design science paradigm (H
evner et al. 2004; Peffers et al. 2006). 
Background and Conceptual Development 
Software Reuse 
Although software productivity has steadily increased, the de
mand for software development is still very high.  To 
address these demands, research has been conducted to build
 reusable artifacts such as data objects, design patterns, 
and pseudo code. Reuse of such artifacts has been suggeste
d as the only way to achieve the low-cost, high- quality, 
and low-development time objectives of application development (Krueger 1992; Mili et al. 1995).  Reuse involves 

generating new designs by combining high-level specifications and existing component artifacts  (Setliff et al. 
1993). Tools and techniques are also being developed to provide support for reuse-based software design (Nierstrasz 
and Meijler 1995; Purao and Storey 1997). A number of reusable artifacts have been developed, such as class 
libraries, components (Szyperski 1998), frameworks, and patterns. Research has also been undertaken that attempts 
to realize the benefits of reuse for object-oriented conceptual
 design through the creation of tools to facilitate design 
and construction of new systems with reuse (Purao and Storey 1997; Sugumaran et al. 2000).  Higher-level design 
fragments and models are being developed (Han et al. 1999).  
  Jain et al./Flexible So
ftware Component Design Usi
ng a Product Platform Approach 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
 183 Domain Analysis and Modeling Domain analysis is an activity similar to systems analys
is, performed over an application domain.  It involves 
analyzing existing systems in the appli
cation domain and creating a domain model 
that characterizes 
that application 
domain.  An early definition of domain analysis and modeling provided by Neighbors is: ﬁDomain analysis and 
modeling is an activity in which all systems in an application domain are generalized by means of a domain model 
that transcends specific applications
ﬂ (Neighbors 1984). The primary objectiv
e of the domain modeling approach to 
software construction is to increase reuse, i.e., reuse not only of code modules but also of domain knowledge such as 
domain requirements, specifications, and designs.  From the domain model, target systems can be generated by 
either tailoring the domain model, or by a combination of evolving the domain model and then tailoring it.   
A domain model represents the common characteristics and variations among the existing and future members of a 
family of software systems in a particular application domain.  A computer-based domain model captures both the 
static and dynamic aspects of the application domain.  
The static aspects include ob
ject types of the domain, 
attributes of those object types (Meyer 1988), and relationships among them.  The dynamic properties include the 
operations associated with object types, the state change
s of object types, and the 
messages passed between object 
types.  The domain model may also include integrity constr
aints that govern the behavior of object types in the 
domain.  Thus, it is a key ingredient for the crea
tion of reusable core assets (Kang et al. 2002). 
Recently domain analysis methods such 
as feature-oriented approach (Kang 
et al. 2002), Reuse-Driven Software 
Engineering Business (RSEB) (Jacobson 
et al. 1997), FODAcom (Vici et al. 
1998), FeatuRSEB (Griss et al. 1998), 
and Product Line Analysis (PLA) (Chastek 2002) have 
been used to analyze commonality and variability among 
products within a product line. In particular, the feature-oriented approach has been used extensively in industry and 
academia since the FODA method was in
troduced in 1990 by the Software E
ngineering Institute (Clements et al. 
2005). The feature-oriented approach 
attempts to analyze commonality and variability in terms of features, and thus 
a feature-based model provides a basis for developing, para
meterizing, and configuring reusable assets (Kang et al. 
2002). 
In the feature-oriented approach, during feature modeling, if
 there are no existing products
 or if the existing products 
do not have a specified set of features 
associated with them, then
 features associated with
 each individual product 
must be identified and defined (Bosch 2000). In mature and 
stable domains, the approach identifies the features of a 
given domain by analyzing the domain terminology and pr
ovides feature categories as
 a feature identification 
framework (Kang et al. 1998). Also, pro
duct features identified in MPP (mar
keting and product plan) are organized 
into an initial feature model (Kang et al. 2002). Although
 the approach suggests standardizing domain terminology 
and clarifying domain scope before feat
ure identification, it is difficult to 
accomplish in immature or emergent 
domains because of the lack of availability of domain experts and supporting material.  Further, in a very new or an 

envisioned market like an emerging market (Li 2002), it is practically impossible to identify any reference product 
that would match exactly the envisioned product line. Hence, the informational input such as domain knowledge 
will be very scarce for such domains. In addition, the ap
proach is not appropriate when domain experts are not 
available, and features are not useful for exploring new or
 poorly understood system characteristics (Chastek 2002).  
Both FODAcom (Vici and Argentieri, 1998) and FeatuRSEB (Griss et al. 1998) have used use-case models with 
feature models for C&V analysis. PLA (Chastek 2002) comb
ines traditional object-based analysis with FODA for a 
product line analysis. However, these methods do not pr
ovide a systematic and concrete mechanism for feature 
identification and the rationale for features 
like the feature-oriented approach does. 
Component-Based Software Development 
There is general agreement in the software industry that component-based software development (CBD) technology 
will bring profound changes in systems development and 
delivery. Numerous advantag
es of CBD are touted. An 
information system developed from reusable components is 
argued to be more reliable (Vitharana and Jain 2000), to 
increase developer productivity (Lim 1994), to reduce skills requirement (Kiely 1998), to shorten the development 

life cycle (Due 2000), to reduce time-t
o-market (Lim 1994),to  increase the 
quality of the developed system (Lim 
1994; Sprott 2000), and to cut down the development cost (Due 2000). Beyond these operational benefits, CBSD 
also has been found to provide strategic benefits, such as the opportunity to enter new markets or the flexibility to 

respond to competitive forces and chan
ging market conditions (Favaro et al
. 1998). Component providers have the 
opportunity to enter new markets beca
use of the potential to cross sell com
ponents with associated functionalities. 
 Design Science 184 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
  Similarly, end user organizations have the flexibility to
 quickly replace components w
ith newer ones, containing 
additional features, in order to respond to co
mpetitive forces and changing market conditions. 
Component-based software development is changing the wa
y applications are being developed and delivered to the 
end user.  It is causing a shift in software development paradigms, particularly with the development of several 

component architecture standards such as CORBA, COM, and EJB (Szyperski 1998).  A component is a well-
defined unit of software that has a published interface and 
can be used in conjunction with other components to form 
larger units (Hopkins 2000).  For example, in an auction application domain, one component captures the 

characteristics of a bid and its associated processes.  A
nother component deals with transaction processing. These 
can be combined to form a larger component that would be a reusable artifact. 
Software Product Line 
The software product line approach is
 recognized as a successful method
 for improving reuse in software 
development. The idea behind the product line concept is for organizations to develop a product family from 
reusable core assets rather than from scratch. It is di
fferent from the platform-based component design that we are 
proposing in this research, as it does not address the nature 
of the reusable component itself.  Instead, the software 
product line approach provides a means to select and integrate individual components to build a product line-based 
application. The product line 
approach is receiving increas
ed attention, specifically as software engineers or 
developers are faced with increasing pr
essure to produce software more quick
ly and economically. To identify and 
describe the right functionality to be encapsulated as reusable artifacts is a key challenge within the product line 
approach. In order to address this challenge, the key requirements for developing future products that drive the 

design of a product line need to be identified. Thus, a thorough requirements analysis for the product line, where 
particular common and variant requirements are systematically identified and described, must be performed. 
Furthermore, the requirements and commonality and vari
ability (C&V) identified must satisfy an organization™s 
high-level business goals, and thus, re
quirements analysis and C&V analysis must be carried out to satisfy these 
goals and provide the rationale for them. 
Application Frameworks 
An application framework is a reusable design for implemen
ting a software system that can be expressed as a set of 
abstract classes (Johnson and Foote 199
8). These classes can be specialized 
to produce custom applications. An 
application framework captures the standard structure of an application by bundling large amounts of reusable code. 
Over the years, several frameworks have been developed in
 areas such as user interf
ace design, graphical editors, 
networks, financial applications, etc. (Fayad et al. 1999). Some examples of frameworks are MacApp, Model View 
Controller (MVC), Apac
he Struts, Java Serv
er Faces (JSF), Django, Symfony
, Java Native Interface (JNI), 
Microsoft™s Distributed Common Object Model (DCOM), Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) 
etc.  Although many object-oriented application frameworks have been developed, they have had limited success for a 
number of reasons. One of the main ones is that frameworks have a steep learning curve. Developers have to 
understand the abstract designs of cl
asses and how they interact with each
 other for different
 purposes. Class 
complexity and object collaboration complexity are ofte
n cited as the major obstacles for using application 
frameworks. In addition, large-scale reusable frameworks 
also fail due to lack of integratability, maintainability, 
efficiency, and standards (Fayad and Schmidt 1997). Frameworks are generally tied to a particular language or 
technology, and hence components from multiple frameworks cannot be combined easily (Johnson 1997). Demeyer 

et al. (1997) specify the following design guidelines for 
ﬁtailorableﬂ frameworks: inter
operability, distribution, and 
extensibility. Our product platform-bas
ed approach for component design is
 based on these principles and 
accommodates multiple levels of granul
arity compared to other frameworks.
 Also, our propos
ed approach is 
independent of any application framework and can be used to create a new framework in a particular application 
domain. We also provide a formal specification for the platform design and plug-ins, which promotes 
interoperability and extensibility. Thus, our proposed methodology is flexible and agile. 
  Jain et al./Flexible So
ftware Component Design Usi
ng a Product Platform Approach 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
 185 Domain-Specific Component Reuse 
In order to successfully sell domain-specific components, providers must ensure that the software components allow 
for sufficient flexibility to be integrated in a maximu
m number of applications. The most common approach to 
achieving this is the parameterization of components. This means that components are developed with a set of 
optional functionalities and choices that can be triggered by
 their parameters. The com
ponent user can select the 
options by setting the parameters accordingly (Barnes and Bo
llinger 1991). This method li
mits possible applications 
of the component to what the component developers anticip
ate, as only those applications will be supported with 
appropriate parameters. 
An alternative method may address the 
lack of extensibility. Reusing smaller components (with less functionality 
per component) can allow software developers to more ex
actly choose components based on the requirements (Apte 
et al. 1990). If a component representing 
a particular aspect of the desired f
unctionality is not available, it can be 
developed with little effort and integrated with the remain
ing components that meet the requirements. Nevertheless, 
this approach is problematic: since th
e components each represent a low deve
lopment effort, the leverage of each 
reuse instance is small. Activities such as retrieval and 
parameterization will use a proportionally larger share of 
development time, thus increasing development cost. 
Component flexibility can be increased
 over traditional parameterized compone
nts by building a platform for each 
component that allows the creation of derivative components by using different combinations of available plug-ins 

(plug-ins are lower-level component stubs that extend the 
functionality of a component pl
atform or a higher-level 
plug-in).  Complex application can then be built from platform-based components. This approach is an alternative to 
traditional component design combining the retrievability 
and integration ease of para
meterized components with 
extensibility of very small co
mponents. Figure 1 contrasts 
the benefits of the three co
mponent design approaches. 
 Product Platform
Option A
Small
Components
Parametrized
Components
Product Platform
Components
Option B
Option C
Cost
Flexibility
 Figure 1.  Component Design Methods 
 Product Platforms In the physical world, the modular design of product platforms has been a means to increase product variety to better 
meet varying customer requirements 
(Salvador et al. 2002). For example,
 Hewlett-Packard™s (HP) OfficeJet 
 Design Science 186 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
  platform combined the functions of previously distinct pro
ducts, such as computer printe
r, fax machine, scanner, and 
photo copier, thus meeting customer demand in a flexible manner (Meyer and Lehnerd 1997). The lessons learned 
from the modular development of physical products may also apply to the development of software components; as 
in manufacturing, modularity promotes an increased fit between software and customer specifications by enabling 

the developers to combine and customize elements of the application, thus reducing the need to custom develop 
based on each client™s specifications. In this research, we are developing a platform-based component design method 
as an alternative to existing component design options. 
The Artifact Platform Design through Functional Decomposition 
The major challenge in platform-based component development is to design a component platform that unifies the 

functional requirements of the common component user base. Based on platform-development in manufacturing, the 
design of a platform must be guided by the customer demand (Meyer and Seliger 1998). In terms of component-
platform development, this means that the projected market for the component must drive its design. We are using 

the Unified Modeling Language (UML) notation of the object-oriented design model to illustrate the development of 
a component platform. The proposed methodology consists of two phases: a) platform design and b) post-
implementation modifications. The following subsections describe these phases in more detail. 
Platform Design 
For the design of a platform-based component, individual component models must be created to meet the 
requirements of each applicati
on domain in which the platform component th
at is to be developed will be used. As a 
next step, commonalities between the individual designs must be transferred into the platform and plug-in design 

hierarchy of the platform-based component. Finally, the design hierarchy may be evaluated and fine-tuned if 
necessary.  The overall process diagram depicting this methodology is shown in Figure 2. 
  Figure 2.  Overall Process Diagram for the Methodology 
   Jain et al./Flexible So
ftware Component Design Usi
ng a Product Platform Approach 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
 187 The paper presents a scenario of a 
platform-based reservation component 
that demonstrates the transformation 
process from individual components to a component platform design hierarchy.  Figure 3 is the integrated 
reservation design hierarchy providing the functionality for re
servations in different industries developed from a set 
of individual component designs, covering the domains of train, airlines, show, and sports game reservations.  A 

component platform can be associated with multiple levels of plug-ins; the actual number of levels for a specific 
design is determined by the transformation methodology and the nature of the individual designs it converts. In this 
example, plug-ins are provided on two levels; the first level incorporates industry segment-specific functionality for 

transportation and event reservations, the second level provi
des the lowest level of industry functionality for train, 
airline, show, and sports
 game reservations.   
 Design Science 188 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
  +bookTrip()
Transport Reservation
+MakeReservation()
-EmployeeID
-Name
Agent
1-makes
0..*
-Amount
-Type
Payment
-pays1
0..*
-Last Name
-First Name
-Street
-City
-Zip

-Country
-Phone
-Email
Customer
-makes
0..*
1-Name
Passenger
1..*
-is made for
1..*
+checkInventory()
+checkSeatsAvailable()
-Origin
-Destination

-Departure Time
-Arrival Time
-Booking Class
-Inventory
Route Segment
0..*
-is made on
1..*
+reserve()
-Row
-Seat No
Seat
0..*
-is on
11-holds
0..*
-Date
Scheduled Route
-has
1..*
1-Record Locator
-Price
Reservation
+pay()
-Invoice No
-Total
Invoice
1-bills
1..*
-Airline
-Flight No
Flight
-Train Name
Train
Seat Reservation
1-reserves1..*
Event Reservation
-Row
-Seat
Seat
0..*
-is made for
1..*
-Section Name
-Price
Price Category
+listAvailability()
-Date
-Time
Event
-Name
-Street
-City
-Zip
Venue
-plays in
10..*
1-has
1..*
0..*
-is available in
1-Name
Show
-Team A
-Team B
Sports Game
Reservation Component Platform
Transportation Reservation Plug
-In (Level 1)
Event Reservation Plug
-In (Level 1)
Train Reservation
Plug-In (Level 2)
Airline Reservation Plug-In 
(Level 2)
Show Reservation
Plug-In (Level 2)
Sports Game Reservation
Plug-In (Level 2)
+reserve()
-Row
-Seat No
Seat
**0..*
-is on1
 Figure 3.  Reservation Component 
Platform with Industry Plug-Ins 
  Jain et al./Flexible So
ftware Component Design Usi
ng a Product Platform Approach 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
 189 When adding functionality by incorporating plug-ins into 
the overall platform design, the methodology differentiates 
between distinct functionalities and partially common functionalities: Distinct functionalities have no common 
elements across the derivative component
s; their implementation will result in 
separate classes fo
r each plug-in. 
Thus, the functionality must be excluded from the platform; only the plug-ins will contain the class that relates to the 

desired functionality in each derivative (e.g. Seat class 
in Figure 3). Common functio
nalities also vary across the 
derivative components; however, some aspects are co
mmon to all derivatives. The commonalities manifest 
themselves in the implementation of common attributes or common methods in the platform™s parent class that 

represents the dimension. The plug-ins inherit the class properties from the platform and extend the class to match 
the functionalities required for each deri
vative component (e.g. Transport Reserv
ation class in Figure 3). Plug-ins 
connect to higher levels of the platform
 hierarchy using either inheritance (if th
e distinct class is a specialization of a 
common class) or association (if no commonalities with the distinct class exist). 
The transformation process from the individual component designs to the platform design hierarchy is driven by the 
identification and integration of commonalities that exist 
between the individual designs. The conversion follows a 
formal process that has been refined through multiple iterations of applying the methodology to different scenarios 
and evaluating the outcome. Refi
nements were made after each iteration; Figu
re 4 depicts the form
al specification of the resulting methodology. The development of a component plat
form and its plug-ins is a recursive process that we 
named ﬁ
CreatePlugIn
ﬂ (Figure 4).  For better readability, we also use an English language description to present 
these steps (Figure 5). 
 1. 
DiijijiCSDDCCS|| 2. 
CjjjSCCC|ijDiDCSD::   where
ijDijjjjDCSDCCCC::|   kjPCijDiCjDCSDSC: 3. Repeat until 
SD = {}   a. For 
CjjjSCCC| contained in the most 
DiSD    where 
jjjjCCCC| that is contained in the same 
Di    DDijDiDDSSDCSDSS::   b.  The next Plug-In will be a child of 
Pk   c.  Execute CreatePlugIn(
DS)   where: 
SD Set of Individual Component Designs 
 Di Individual Component Designs 
DiSD  SC Set of Classes 
 Cj Classes 
CjSC  Cji Classes 
ijiDC  Pk Platform-Based Component Plug-In  
   (Highest Level Plug-In is the Component Platform)
 Figure 4.  Formal Specification of 
CreatePlugIn(S
D)  Design Science 190 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
   1. SC is the union of all classes contained in the individual designs S
D  2. For all classes (or possible class generalizations) C
j' that are part of the set of 
classes Sc, where no other class generalization exists in all individual designs that 
incorporates more functionality of the original class than C
j' does, 
add Cj' to the current Plug-In (or Platform if this is the highest level), remove C
j' from the set of classes S
C, and remove C
j' from all individual designs D
i.  3. Repeat until the set of designs S
D is empty 
a. Find the class (or possibl
e class generalizations) C
j' that is part of the set of 
classes SC and that is contained in the largest number of individual designs 
Di where no other class generalization exists in the same set of individual 

designs Di that incorporates more functionality of the original class than C
j' does, 
create a subset of all designs S
D' that includes only the individual designs 
that contain Cj' and remove the designs S
D' from S
D b. The next Plug-In will be a child of the current Plug-In P
k. c. Execute the process recursively with S
D' as the parameter 
Figure 5.  English Language Description of 
CreatePlugIn(S
D)  Post-implementation Modifications 
Future derivatives of a platform can be added along the functional dimensions that were anticipated when the 
platform was designed.  With regards to the Reservation 
platform example (Figure 3), 
that means that the set of 
supported industry can be expanded by adding a new industry plug-in.  If the class that implements a new dimension 
is not part of the existing platform, functionality can also change along this dimension by adding the new class 

entirely to the plug-in that represents the new derivative, thus not changing the platform. Additions are only viable if 
the new derivative component utilizes most of the platform™s
 functionality (in the printer context that means that it 
makes economic sense to add fax capabilities to a printer;
 however, it does not make economic sense to add fax 
capabilities to a dishwasher).  
Further, additions should be relatively small in size compared to the existing platform (e.g. it does not make 
economic sense to add fax capabilities to a speaker). Alth
ough the fax function could utilize a speaker, the relative 
size of the fax functionality compared to the speaker fu
nctionality justifies the development of a separate fax 
platform. In the context of the Reserva
tion platform example, that means that 
different types of booking agents can 
be added as an afterthought if this ad
dition does not affect the 
original component platform. Figure 6 shows this 
addition, which is possible because th
e different types of booking agents 
specialize an existing platform class 
without modifying the original platform component design. 
Evaluation of the Artifact In design research, the utility, quality, 
and efficacy of the artifact must be ev
aluated (Hevner et al. 2004).  Hereby 
the researcher can select from a variety of evaluation methods. It is important to match the evaluation methods 
appropriately with the artifact that is to be evaluated (Hevne
r et al. 2004). The design artif
act in this research is the 
methodology facilitating a compone
nt design that we claim results in a 
higher component flex
ibility and therefore 
agility. 
   Jain et al./Flexible So
ftware Component Design Usi
ng a Product Platform Approach 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
 191  -employer
0..*
1-IATA License
Travel Agent
-Name
-Address
Travel Agency
-employer
0..*
1-Qualification
Airline Agent
-AirlineCode
-Affiliations
Airline
-employer
0..*
1Ticket Agent
-Name
-Address
-Hours
Ticket Agency
-Name
-Base
Railroad Agent
Travel Agency Plug-In
Airline Plug-In
Ticket Agency Plug-In
Railroad Plug-In
+MakeReservation()
-EmployeeID

-Name
Agent
1-makes
0..*
-Amount
-Type
Payment
-pays1
0..*
-Last Name
-First Name
-Street

-City

-Zip

-Country
-Phone
-Email
Customer
-makes
0..*
1-Record Locator
-Price
Reservation
+pay()
-Invoice No
-Total
Invoice
1-bills
1..*
Reservation Component Platform
 Figure 6: Reservation Component Platform 
with Booking Agent Plug-In Extension 
  A formal analysis of the reservation platform scenario demonstrates the utility of the artifact.  We formally 
evaluated whether the platform/plug-in component hierarchy that resulted by applying the proposed methodology to 
the individual component designs is equi
valent to the individual component de
signs. Only if the resulting platform 
component with all its plug-ins can be successfully d
ecomposed into the original individual designs, the 
methodology can be deemed lossless a
nd correct.  This formal evaluation wa
s conducted as part of the iterative 
process that lead to the final vers
ion of the methodology.  For space c
onsiderations, the decomposition is not 
presented in detail; however, they are 
available from the authors upon request. As this functional equivalency can be 
formally demonstrated, the utility of the methodology is supported. 
The objective of the platform component method was to 
improve the flexibility and ag
ility of components. Since 
one platform component can incorporate a number of different domains (four domains in the scenario presented), we 
demonstrated that the platform component is more flexib
le than each of the individual components. Further, the 
platform component is extensible without requiring the de
veloper to understand the implementation details of large 
parts of the platform.  The study discussed extensions in 
the context of the agent scen
ario (Figure 6) and hereby 
supported the notion of agility. Thus, 
the scenarios presented in the study
 support the efficacy of the design 
approach.   While the utility evaluation is based on a formal assessment th
at is rigorous, the evaluation 
of efficacy is descriptive, 
which is a valid, yet not the strongest, evaluation method (Hevner et al. 2004). Thus, we will evaluate the 
methodology™s efficacy and quality in an
 experiment involving a group of 
experts completing a task with and 
 Design Science 192 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
  without the platform-based approach.  Subsequently, the expe
rts will evaluate their experiences.  By the time of the 
conference, we will have completed the research
 and we will present the completed evaluations. 
Conclusion This study developed an innovative method for component design that promotes the development of more flexible 
and more agile reusable components. This approach may be able to move black-box component reuse forward from 
an infrastructure-centered reuse paradigm to a method for large-scale domain-specific reuse. Thus, through the 

availability of more flexible and more agile components, 
the benefits that software developers can obtain from 
component-based software development may increase. 
References Apte, U.M., Sankar, C.S., Thakur, M., an
d Turner, J.E. "Reusability-Based Strategy for Development of Information 
Systems: Implementation Experience of a Bank," in: 
MIS Quarterly
, 1990, p. 421. 
Barnes, B.H., and Bollinger, T.B.
 "Making Reuse Cost-Effective," 
IEEE Software
 (8:1) 1991, pp 13-24. 
Basili, V.R., Briand, L.C., and Melo, 
W.L. "How reuse influences producti
vity in object-oriented systems," in: 
Communications of the ACM
, 1996, p. 104. 
Bosch, J. "Organizing for software product lines," Soft
ware Architectures for Product Families. International 
Workshop IW-SAPF-3, 2000, pp. 117-134. 
Chastek, G.J. "Software Product Lines," SPLC 2, 2002, p. 399 pp. 

Clements, P.C., Jones, L.G., Northrop, L.M., and McGregor
, J.D. "Project management in a software product line 
organization," 
IEEE Software (22:5), 09 2005 2005, pp 54-62. 
Demeyer, S., Meijler, T.D., Nierstrasz, O., and Steyaer
t, P. "Design Guidelines 
for Tailorable Frameworks," 
Communications of the ACM
 (40:10) 1997, pp 60-64. 
Due, R.T. "The wisdom of patterns," 
Cutter IT Journal
 (13:8), 08 2000 2000, pp 6-9. 
Favaro, J.M., Favaro, K.R., and Favaro, P.F. "Value based software reuse investment," 
Annals of Software 
Engineering
 (5), 1998 1998, pp 5-52. 
Fayad, M., and Schmidt, D. "Object
-Oriented Application Frameworks," 
Communications of the ACM
 (40:10) 1997, 
pp 32-38. 
Fayad, M., Schmidt, D., and R., J. (eds.) 
Building Application Frameworks: Object-Oriented Foundations of 
Framework Design
. John Wiley, New York, 1999. 
Griss, M.L., Favaro, J., and d'Alessandro, M. "Integrating feature modeling with the RSEB," 
Fifth International 
Conference on Software Reuse
), 1998 1998, pp 76-85. 
Han, T., Purao, S., and Storey, V. "A Methodology for Building a Repository of Objected-Oriented Design 
Fragments," 18th International Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER'99), Paris, France, 1999, pp. 203-217. 
Hevner, A.R., March, S.T., Park, J., and Ram, S. "D
esign Science In Information Systems Research," in: 
MIS Quarterly
, 2004, pp. 75-105. 
Hopkins, J. "Component primer," 
Communications of the ACM
 (43:10), 10 2000 2000, pp 27-30. 
Jacobson, I., Griss, M., and Jonsson, P. "Making the reuse business work," 
IEEE Computer
 (30:10), 10 1997 1997, 
pp 36-42. 
Johnson, R.E. "Frameworks = (Components + Patterns)," 
Communications of the ACM
 (40:10) 1997, pp 39-42. 
Johnson, R.E., and Foote, B. 
"Designing Reusable Classes," 
Journal of Object-Oriented Programming
 (1:2) 1998, 
pp 22-35. 
Kang, K.C., Lee, J., and Donohoe, P. "Feature-oriented product line engineering," in: 
IEEE Software
, 2002, pp. 58-
65. 
Kang, K.C., Sajoong, K., Jaejoon, L., Kijoo, K., Euiseob, S., and Moonhang, H. "FORM: a feature-oriented reuse 
method with domain-specific reference architectures," 
Annals of Software Engineering
 (5), 1998 1998, pp 143-
168. 
Kiely, D. "Sharing data between VBA apps," 
Visual Basic Programmer's Journal
 (8:10), 09 1998 1998, pp 94-94-
94-96, 99. 
Krueger, C.W. "Software Reuse," in: 
ACM Computing Surveys
, 1992, pp. 131-184. 
Li, J. "The application of industrial automation technology in material management of the product line," 
Journal of 
Shenzhen Polytechnic
 (1:1), 06 2002 2002, pp 7-13. 
Lim, W.C. "Effects of reuse on quality, productivity, and economics," in: 
IEEE Software, 1994, p. 23. 
  Jain et al./Flexible So
ftware Component Design Usi
ng a Product Platform Approach 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
 193 Meyer, B. 
Object-oriented software construction
 Prentice-Hall, New York, 1988, pp. xviii, 534 p. 
Meyer, M.H., and Lehnerd, A.P. 
The power of product platforms: building value and cost leadership
 Free Press, 
New York, 1997, pp. xiv, 267 p. 
Meyer, M.H., and Seliger, R. "Product Platforms in Software Development," in: 
Sloan Management Review
, 1998, 
pp. 61-74. 
Mili, H., Mili, F., and Mili, A. "Reusing soft
ware: Issues and research directions," in: 
IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering
, 1995, pp. 528-563. 
Neighbors, J.M. "The Draco Approach to Constructing Software from Reusable Components," 
IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering
 (SE10:5) 1984, p 564. 
Nierstrasz, O., and Meijler, T.D. "Researc
h directions in software composition," in: 
ACM Computing Surveys
, 1995, p. 262. 
Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Gengler, C.E., Rossi, M., Hui, W., Virtanen, V., and Bragge, J. "The Design Science 
Research Process: A Model for Producing and Presen
ting Information Systems Research," DESRIST, CGU, 
Claremont, CA, 2006. 
Poulin, J.S., Caruso, J.M., and Hancock, D.R. "The business case for software reuse," in: 
IBM Systems Journal, 1993, p. 567 528 pages. 
Purao, S., and Storey, V.C. "Intelligent Support for Retrie
val and Synthesis of Patterns for Object-Oriented Design," 
ER, 1997, pp. 30-42. 
Ravichandran, T., and Rothenberger, M.A. "Software reuse strategies and component markets," in: 
Communications 
of the ACM
, 2003, pp. 109-114. 
Salvador, F., Forza, C., and Rungtusanatham, M. "Modularity, product variety, production volume, and component 
sourcing: Theorizing beyond generic prescriptions," in: 
Journal of Operations Management
, 2002, pp. 549-575. 
Setliff, D.E., Kant, E., and Cain, T. "Prac
tical Software Synthesis - Introduction," 
IEEE Software
 (10:3) 1993, pp 6-
9. Sprott, D. "Componentizing the enterprise application packages," in: 
Communications of the ACM
, 2000, pp. 63-69. 
Sugumaran, V., Tanniru, M., and Storey, V.C.
 "Supporting reuse in systems analysis," 
Communications of the ACM
 (43:11) 2000. 
Szyperski, C.A. "Emerging component software technologies - a strategic comparison," 
Software - Concepts and 
Tools (19:1) 1998, pp 2-10. 
Taft, D.K. "Flashline.com Profits From Software Component Market," in: 
Computer Reseller News
, 2000, p. 58. 
Vici, A.D., Argentieri, N., Mansour, A., d'Alessandro, M., and Favaro, J. "FODAcom: an experience with domain 
analysis in the Italian telecom industry," Fifth 
International Conference on Software Reuse (Cat. 
No.98TB100203), 1998, pp. 166-175. 
Vitharana, P., and Jain, H. "Research issu
es in testing business components," in: 
Information & Management
, 2000, 
pp. 297-309. 
  Design Science 194 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006
   