 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)See next page for additional authors Authors 2004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information Systems1011CRISIS IN AMERICAN INFORMATION SYSTEMS EDUCATION:INNOVATIONS TO ADDRESS THE THREAT OFOFFSHORINGChair:Kate M. Kaiser
, Marquette University (kate.kaiser@mu.edu
)Panelists:Erran Carmel
, American University (
carmel@american.edu)Mike Gallivan
, Georgia State University (mgallivan@gsu.edu)Monica Adya, Marquette University (monica.adya@marquette.edu)Arkulgud Ramprasad
, University of Illinois-Chicago (prasad@uic.edu)Amar Gupta, University of Arizona (gupta@eller.arizona.edu
)Key IssuesOur classrooms are nearly empty.  The j
ob prospects for our graduates are bleak.  
Offshoring is reconfiguring the American
information technology industry.  What are we to do?
After years of unprecedented growth, demand, and skill shortages, IT
 faculty find themselves in a new environment.  As a short-
term solution, some faculty are scrambling to develop and re
design courses.  This is not enough and will not sustain the
fundamental shifts needed in a global economy.  How can individual faculty, Information Systems departments, and schools

respond to survive the rapidly changing landscape?The situation calls for innovations in academic delivery.  Academ
ics must serve as examples of agility to students by rethinkin
gand revising curricula.  We have responded when faced with othe
r changes such as DBMS, end-user computing, networking, and
e-commerce when it was in our favor.  Can we do it again?
How do we instill in students how they can become innovators and not merely problem solvers?
What new organizational forms can academic program
s take to help students bridge global teams?
The panel will discuss innovations to address the crisis of low 
enrollments and dated skill sets. 
 The format lists panelists i
n orderof presentation along with their relevant expertise.Panel FormatKate M.  Kaiser will state objectives and facilitate discussion to engage audience participation.The IssuesErran Carmel will present the overall offshoring landscape and then set up 
the framework for addressing needs.  First, he will
review the data on job migration, wage, and employment trends in
 the United States and Europe followed by data on the education
pipeline in math, science, and technology, and IT specifically.  
With this backdrop he will present a framework for the structu
ralchanges taking place due to offshoring that universities need to address.  PanelŠInnovations to Address the Threat of Offshoring10122004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information SystemsProgram ChangeMike Gallivan
 will describe ﬁre-visioningﬂ and innovation underway at
 Georgia State University.  Committee members proposed
a radical redesign of curriculum, driven by declining enrollments
, consideration of Association for Computing Machinery (ACM)
accreditation, and the recognition of offshoring as an important 
societal ﬁmega-trend.ﬂ  Faculty acknowledged these three ﬁtect
onicshiftsﬂ as shaking the roots of the IS discipline.  After debate
 on what to do and how quickly to try to do it, they decided th
atgraduate students were better positioned th
an undergraduates to respond to radical cu
rriculum changes.  Mike will describe
proposed changes and the processes used to evaluate and approve them.
Cultural InteractionMonica Adya
 will discuss using videoconferencing and Internet2 for cr
oss-border undergraduate team teaching as part of a 3M
grant to set up a cross-training program between U.S. and Asian 
students.  She will discuss visions of curriculum challenges an
dsuccesses encountered in the development, im
plementation, and conduct of such programs.
Internships Revised Arkulgud Ramprasad
 will present how to market the IT major to stude
nts and practitioners more attractively by refining the
internship model.  Ram hosted an online discussion of the Chica
go Society for Information Management (SIM) chapter to develop
a deeper understanding of the shifting responsibilities of entry-
level technology talent.  IT leaders discussed how technology 
workis shifting in function, form, and focus, and how we must ch
ange our technical educational and guidance.  He will propose a
redesign of the internship model toward a systematic method similar to medicine.
Lessons LearnedAmar Gupta
 offered one of the first MBA classes on offshoring in 
the spring of 2004 at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The class considered the notion of 24-hour knowledge factorie
s by taking an example involving design and development of a
complicated product using workers at different locations and in di
fferent time zones.  His experience at refining that course w
illoffer insight for those designing similar courses.  Another MIT 
course he will discuss involved a 10-day trip to India where
students visited domestic and multinational companies and met with policy makers.
Participants™ Relevant BiographiesKate M.  Kaiser
 has written an offshoring book chapter, chairs the SI
M e-community on IT outsourcing, and has written a case
study on cosourcing in 
MIS Quarterly Executive
.  She received a 3M Foundation grant to make interdisciplinary curriculum
changes and an Alfred P.  Sloan Foundation grant to travel to 
Russia and India to research offshore career development practice
s.Erran Carmel
 has been studying offshoring for almost a decade.  His book, 
Global Software Teams:  Collaborating Across
Borders and Time Zones
 (Prentice Hall, 1998),  is the seminal work in 
the area and he is presen
tly writing his second book on
offshoring.  He speaks at offshore outsourcing conferences ar
ound the world.  Erran cofounded the program in Management of
Global Information Technology at American University in Washington, DC.
Mike Gallivan 
conducts research on strategies for managing IT human 
resources, in particular the changing skill requirements
for IT professionals.  He also conducts research on managing IT
 outsourcing alliances and recently turned his attention to stud
yingoffshore outsourcing in China.Monica Adya
™s research interests include IT education and human 
resource issues, knowledge management, and decision support
systems.  She has received a grant from the 3M Foundation for 
studying the impact of offshore outsourcing on IT curricula.  
Arkulgud Ramprasad 
is the Director of the Center for Research in Inform
ation Management (CRIM) at the University of Illinois
at Chicago.  He held a forum on Enterprise IT Sourcing St
rategies which has an accompanying white paper and has spoken on
offshoring at SIM events.Amar Gupta 
is Professor of Entrepreneurship and MIS in the Eller Co
llege MIS Department at the University of Arizona.  He
codeveloped and taught MIT™s Outsourcing of Professional Ac
tivities focusing on strategic, organizational, economic, and
technical aspects of outsourcing.