 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)American UniversityAmerican UniversityAmerican UniversityICIS 2010 Proceedings. Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
1 The Main and Interaction Effects of Process Rigor, 
Process Standardization, and Process Agility on 
System Performance in Distributed IS Development: 
An Ambidexterity Perspective 
Completed Research Paper 
Gwanhoo Lee 
Kogod School of Business 
American University 
4400 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
Washington, D.C. 20016 
glee@american.edu 
 William H. DeLone 
Kogod School of Business 
American University 
4400 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
Washington, D.C. 20016 
wdelone@american.edu 
 J. Alberto Espinosa 
Kogod School of Business 
American University 
4400 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
Washington, D.C. 20016 
alberto@american.edu 
Abstract 
Information systems (IS) development is becoming in
creasingly more geographically dispersed. 
Although process rigor, process standardization, an
d process agility are generally believed to 
have a positive impact on software development, it 
has not been well understood how these 
process capabilities affect distributed IS developm
ent. More important, no prior research has 
investigated their interaction effects. Drawing upo
n prior literature on organizational 
ambidexterity, we hypothesize: positive main effect
s of process rigor, process standardization, and 
process agility; a positive interaction effect of p
rocess rigor and process agility; and a positive 
interaction effect of process standardization and p
rocess agility on system performance in 
distributed development. Our data analysis results 
support a positive main effect of the three 
process capabilities. We find a positive interactio
n effect of process rigor and process agility 
suggesting positive process ambidexterity of rigor 
and agility. Surprisingly, we find a negative 
interaction effect of process agility and process s
tandardization suggesting negative process 
ambidexterity of agility and standardization. 

Keywords: 
Process rigor; process agility; process standardization; dis
tributed IS 
development; system performance; interaction effects; process ambi
dexterity 
 Track Title 

2Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010  
Introduction 

Information systems (IS) development is becoming in
creasingly more geographically dispersed in part du
e to 
globalization, outsourcing, and offshoring trends (
Espinosa, Slaughter, Kraut, and Herbsleb 2007). Whi
le taking 
advantage of lower costs and broader talent pools, 
organizations face new challenges associated with d
istributed 
development (Cusumano 2008). Geographic dispersion 
causes higher complexity and dynamism of software 
development which in turn make it difficult for sof
tware teams to coordinate and carry out their work 
(Herbsleb and 
Mockus 2003; Xia and Lee 2005). Therefore, the grow
ing adoption of distributed development may exacerb
ate 
historically-low success rate of IS development (St
andish Group 2009).  
Prior research has consistently supported the impor
tance of process capability in software development
 
(Sambamurthy and Kirsch 2000). Over the last severa
l decades, organizations emphasized a few different
 types of 
process capabilities as critical success factors fo
r software development. In the 1980s and the 1990s,
 organizations 
have focused their efforts mostly on improving proc
ess rigor (Pyster and Thayer 2005). Numerous system
 
development methodologies and approaches such as th
e Waterfall Model and the Capability Maturity Model
 were 
used to improve the rigor of software process both 
at the project level and at the organizational leve
l (Harter, 
Krishnan, and Slaughter 2000; Jalote 2000; Krishnan
, Kriebal, Kekre, and Mukhopadhyay 2000). These str
uctured, 
plan-driven development approaches were widely impl
emented to reduce defects, improve quality and prod
uctivity, 
and increase user satisfaction. However, they often
 led to project failures as they did not allow soft
ware teams to 
change freely from the detailed plan laid out prior
 to the project™s start (Austin and Devin 2003). 
Process standardization has long been recommended a
s the way to improve software development performan
ce 
(Nidumolu 1996). In distributed development, organi
zations may benefit from process standardization ac
ross sites 
because standardization helps overcome differences 
derived from local contexts (Oshri, van Fenema, and
 Kotlarsky 
2008). Distributed development decreases communicat
ions and increases the possibilities for conflict, 
misunderstanding, and breakdowns in communication (
Chudoba, Wynn, Lu, and Watson-Manheim 2005). It is 
very 
challenging for distributed teams to develop shared
 understanding because members of such teams do not
 stand on 
‚common ground™(Cramton 2001). Standardized process
es can facilitate communication and coordination am
ong 
team members distributed geographically who, otherw
ise, might have very different ways of carrying out
 tasks 
(Oshri et al. 2008). Furthermore, standardized proc
esses can reduce the negative impact of personnel t
urnover and 
lead to a cohesive organizational culture (Humphrey
, Snyder, and Willis 1991; Nidumolu 1996).  
In the late 1990s and the early 21st century, recog
nizing the detrimental consequences of the lack of 
process 
adaptability in software development, organizations
 began to adopt agile development approaches such a
s XP 
(Extreme Programming) and Scrum to improve software
 development flexibility in responding to ever-chan
ging 
requirements (Beck and Andres 2005; Cockburn 2007).
 The agile camp emphasizes process agility over pro
cess 
rigor and standardization and implies that overly r
igorous and standardized processes do not pay off. 
Although agile 
processes generally benefit small-scale and colloca
ted development, it is questionable if such process
es are 
applicable and useful for distributed development (
Cusumano 2008). 
Some might argue that process rigor and process agi
lity are conflicting and incompatible and thus unde
rmine 
development performance when they are present simul
taneously. However, others propose that IS developm
ent 
often require both rigor and agility instead of req
uiring one over the other (Applegate, Austin, and M
cFarlan 2007; 
Boehm and Turner 2004; Pyster and Thayer 2005). The
 same argument can be true for process standardizat
ion and 
process agility. Therefore, distributed IS developm
ent appears to face paradoxical requirements for so
ftware process 
(Ramesh, Cao, Mohan, and Xu 2006). On the one hand,
 it requires rigor, formality, and standardization 
in its process 
to overcome communication and coordination difficul
ties resulting from team boundaries of distance, ti
me, culture, 
and organization (Lee, DeLone, and Espinosa 2006). 
On the other hand, it requires agility to cope with
 high 
uncertainty and dynamism exacerbated by geographic 
dispersion (Royce 2005).  
This research aims to fill the gap in prior literat
ure by addressing the following issues. First, alth
ough prior literature 
argues that process rigor, process standardization,
 and process agility generally have positive effect
s on IS 
development, no research has empirically tested the
ir effects in the context of distributed developmen
t. In this 
research, we empirically test if all three process 
capabilities indeed have positive effects on system
 performance in 
distributed development. By doing so, we validate t
he usefulness of the three process capabilities in 
the context of 
distributed development. Second, we examine if and 
how the three process capabilities interact with on
e another to 
affect system performance in distributed developmen
t above and beyond their main effects. Prior resear
ch has not 
  Short Title up to 8 words 
  Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
3 addressed this critical question. Drawing upon the 
organizational ambidexterity literature, we hypothe
size these 
interaction effects and empirically test them with 
cross-sectional survey data. This research signific
antly advances 
the extant literature by uncovering the interaction
 effects of process capabilities on distributed dev
elopment. 
Furthermore, this research can provide IS project m
anagers with a framework for evaluating the effecti
veness of 
various system development methodologies in terms o
f rigor, standardization, and agility. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
 In the next section, we discuss theoretical backgr
ound for this 
research and develop our hypotheses based on prior 
literature on IS development process, distributed s
oftware 
teams, organizational ambidexterity, and IS project
 performance as well as based on field interview da
ta from IS 
projects managers. We then discuss our research met
hods and test the hypotheses using our survey data.
 Finally, we 
present the results and conclude this paper with th
e discussion on the implications of the findings fo
r theory and 
practice.  

Hypotheses Development 

The effectiveness of IS development processes has b
een proposed to be critical for IS project performa
nce 
(Sambamurthy and Kirsch 2000). An IS development pr
ocess is defined as a set of activities performed d
uring the 
development of a system (Curtis, Kellner, and Over 
1992). These activities involve interactions among 
people, 
technology, methods, and procedures (Humphrey 1989)
. Over the last several decades, the software devel
opment 
literature has identified a few important process c
apabilities including process rigor, process standa
rdization, and 
process agility. These process capabilities deem to
 be effective in general. However, no research has 
examined their 
effects on IS development performance in distribute
d environment.  
The recent development of the organizational ambide
xterity perspective can be used as a useful theoret
ical lens to 
theorize the interaction effects of different softw
are process capabilities. Organizational ambidexter
ity is defined as 
an organization™s ability to concurrently demonstra
te alignment and adaptability (Gibson and Birkinsha
w 2004), 
exploitation and exploration (Gupta, Smith, and Sha
lley 2006; Im and Rai 2008), efficiency and flexibi
lity (Adler, 
Goldoftas, and Levine 1999) or incremental change a
nd revolutionary change (Tushman and O'Reilly 1996)
. The 
dichotomy between alignment and adaptability appear
s to be particularly relevant to IS development pro
cess 
capabilities. While some IS development process cap
abilities tap into alignment aspects, other process
 capabilities 
tap into adaptability aspects. The alignment dimens
ion of organizational ambidexterity refers to the c
oherence 
among all the patterns of activities in the busines
s unit, and adaptability refers to the organization
al capacity to tailor 
activities in the business unit quickly to meet cha
nging demands in the task environment (Gibson and B
irkinshaw 
2004). 

Drawing upon the literature on software development
, distributed software teams, and organization ambi
dexterity as 
well as our field interview data, we develop the fo
llowing five hypotheses with respect to the main ef
fects and the 
interaction effects of process rigor, process stand
ardization, and process agility on system performan
ce in distributed 
development. Figure 1 shows our research model. 
 Figure 1.  Research Model 
H1: + 
System  
Performance in 
distributed 
development 
Control variables
 Process 
Agility 
Process 
Rigor 
Process 
Standardization 
H3: + 
H4: + 

H5: + 
H2: + 
 Track Title 

4Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010  
Main Effects of Process Rigor, Process Standardization, and Process Agilit
y on System Performance
 We define process rigor as the strict adherence, co
mpliance, and precision to pre-defined, formal, and
 structured IS 
development process. As such, process rigor is intr
oduced and built through clear, formal, and detaile
d definitions of 
roles, activities, work products, methods, and meas
ures related to software development (Applegate et 
al. 2007; 
Berry, Hungate, and Temple 2003). Process rigor is 
characterized by detailed system requirements docum
entation, 
thorough review of system requirements by key stake
holders, clear definition of responsibilities and g
oals, detailed 
project plans, formal estimation methods, formal de
velopment phases, accurate performance tracking, an
d frequent 
progress review and measurement (Jalote 2000; Lee e
t al. 2006).  
Process rigor is especially emphasized by plan-driv
en, structured approaches to IS development (Boehm 
and Turner 
2004) and is exemplified by the Capability Maturity
 Model Integrated (CMMI) (Ahern, Clouse, and Turner
 2008; 
Krishnan and Kellner 1999; Pyster and Thayer 2005).
 Process rigor is not easily achieved in practice a
s one study 
shows that only 6% of software developers rigorousl
y adhere to methods (Fitzgerald 2000). Process rigo
r helps 
distributed development overcome communication impe
dance (Ramesh et al. 2006). The lack of process rig
or is 
often responsible for IS development failures (Pyst
er and Thayer 2005). We argue that process rigor he
lps 
distributed software teams overcome communication i
mpedance and effectively coordinate development tas
ks 
because well-defined processes reduce task-related 
ambiguity. One global project manager in our field 
interview 
stated, 
ﬁI don™t want to make it too simplistic but, good c
ommunication, strong project management and clearly
 
defined processes are the keys that make projects s
uccessful from my standpoint.ﬂ
 Without rigorous IS development 
processes, distributed teams are more likely to mak
e errors and mistakes, resulting in integration pro
blems and lower 
system performance. Therefore, we posit:
 H1. Process rigor positively affects system perform
ance in distributed development.
 We define process standardization as the uniformity
, commonality, and consistency of IS development pr
ocesses 
across development sites. We argue that standardize
d processes enable team members to understand each 
other™s 
work easily, coordinate their activities efficientl
y, and undertake system integration effectively. St
andardized 
processes save a great deal of time and effort espe
cially in the inception of a distributed developmen
t project 
because distributed teams otherwise would need to s
pend a significant amount of time and effort to set
 up ground 
rules and protocols for task coordination. 

Consistent processes enable team members to better 
understand each others' work, coordinate their acti
vities more 
easily, and thus undertake system integration more 
effectively (Lee et al. 2006; Nidumolu 1996).
 A case study of a 
large offshore IT service provider suggests that th
e standardization of software development methodolo
gies and 
templates across the remote sites facilitates knowl
edge transfer in geographically distributed teams b
y overcoming 
differences in work routines and methodologies deri
ved from the local contexts (Oshri et al. 2008). Pr
ocess 
standardization helps distributed software teams to
 develop a shared mental model of how work is done 
(Klimoski 
and Mohammed 1994; Mathieu, Goodwin, Heffner, Salas
, and Cannon-Bowers 2000). Standardized processes l
ead 
to a cohesive organizational culture through the co
mmon technical language, procedures, and goals (Hum
phrey et al. 
1991).  

One project manager in our field interview stated, 
ﬁOne of the key things we have done right is, we ha
ve internally 
developed project management automation tools that 
we use globally from wherever we are. We also have 
an 
extranet with our offshore partner and they use the
 same hardware and software that we use.ﬂ 
We posit that 
standardized IS development processes across differ
ent locations lead to system performance by reducin
g process 
variance. Reduced process variance in turn reduces 
time-consuming coordination and negotiation to reso
lve 
differences and conflicts across locations. 
H2. Process standardization across locations positi
vely affects system performance in distributed 
development.
 Consistent with prior literature (Lee and Xia 2005;
 Lee and Xia 2010; Lyytinen and Rose 2006; Tiwana, 
Bharadwaj, 
and Sambamurthy 2003), we define process agility as
 the process capability to effectively sense and re
spond to 
changing system requirements. The rapid adoption of
 agile development methods suggests that process ag
ility is 
perceived by organizations to be an important capab
ility for IS development. Process agility enables s
oftware teams 
to strategize their responses to changing system re
quirements and implement necessary changes in a tim
ely and cost-
  Short Title up to 8 words 
  Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
5 effective manner (Beck and Andres 2005; Cockburn 20
01). Process agility lowers the cost of incorporati
ng changes 
(Athey and Schmutzler 1995).
 Due to inherent uncertainty in business and technol
ogy environments, changes in 
system requirements are inevitable (Krishnan and Bh
attacharya 2002). Distributed development environme
nt 
exacerbates the uncertainty of system requirements 
because of difficulties in defining initial require
ments. 
Furthermore, requirements are more volatile due to 
competitive environment changes occurring across mu
ltiple 
team boundaries. Thus, handling these requirement c
hanges imposes a difficult challenge on distributed
 software 
teams.  

System performance would be significantly undermine
d when IS development processes are not designed to
 
effectively manage requirement changes. One project
 manager in our preliminary field interview stresse
d that the 
lack of their vendor™s process agility caused a ten
sion as it had a high impact on project performance
. ﬁ
Every time 
we ask for new deliverables or changes, we™re alway
s getting a lot of pushback from (the vendor) that 
they cannot 
meet our delivery dates.
ﬂ Process agility is needed especially when require
d changes were not anticipated or 
adequately specified at the onset of the project (v
an Oosterhout, Waarts, and van Hillegersberg 2006).
 We posit that 
a streamlined, efficient process that enables the s
oftware team to sense critical requirement changes 
and to strategize 
and implement appropriate responses is critical to 
system performance in geographically distributed de
velopment. 
H3. Process agility positively affects system perfo
rmance in distributed development. 
Interaction Effects of Process Rigor, Process Agility, and Pr
ocess Standardization on System 
Performance 

The organizational ambidexterity literature concept
ualizes ambidexterity to be the simultaneous presen
ce of 
alignment and adaptability. Similarly, we define IS
 development process ambidexterity as the process c
apability that 
simultaneously demonstrates alignment and adaptabil
ity in IS development. In this research, we concept
ualize 
process rigor and process standardization as two di
fferent types of process alignment. While process r
igor focuses 
on clarity, formality, and exactness of IS developm
ent processes, process standardization mainly focus
es on 
uniformity and consistency of IS development proces
ses across development sites. Therefore, they captu
re different 
dimensions of process alignment in the distributed 
development context. On the other hand, we conceptu
alize 
process agility as process adaptability in this res
earch. Process agility refers to the process capabi
lity to efficiently 
and effectively respond to changing user requiremen
ts (Lee and Xia 2010). Therefore, agility requires 
adaptation of 
and departure from planned actions and processes. 

Derived from the organizational ambidexterity liter
ature, we propose that the simultaneous presence of
 process 
alignment and process adaptability positively affec
ts system performance in distributed development. A
lthough 
several researchers maintain that there is an inher
ent trade-off between organizational alignment and 
adaptability 
(Ancona, Goodman, Lawrence, and Tushman 2001; Floyd
 and Lane 2000; Levinthal and March 1993), the 
possibility of achieving both alignment and adaptab
ility has been suggested by recent literature (Gibs
on and 
Birkinshaw 2004; Im and Rai 2008; Tushman and O'Rei
lly 1996). Process rigor and process standardizatio
n are 
geared toward improving routines and ﬁbusiness-as-u
sualﬂ activities. Process agility, on the other han
d, is geared 
toward handling unanticipated changes and dynamic e
vents. If a software team focuses one of these at t
he cost of the 
other, problems will arise. We argue that the most 
successful software teams reconcile the tension bet
ween process 
rigor/process standardization and process agility a
nd, by doing so, enhance their software development
 performance. 
Our field interview data suggest that change proces
ses become more effective when development processe
s 
demonstrate greater rigor and smaller variance. Whe
n processes are well-defined, well-documented, form
alized, 
detailed, and standardized, change processes can be
 well coordinated, reducing the possible negative i
mpact of 
changes on system performance. Therefore, we posit:
 H4. The higher the levels of process rigor and proc
ess agility, the higher the level of system 
performance.
 H5. The higher the levels of process standardizatio
n and process agility, the higher the level of 
system performance. 
 Track Title 

6Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010  
Method 

Data Collection and Research Sample 

Before collecting survey data, we conducted twenty-
two field interviews with project managers of globa
l IS projects 
to help formulate research questions, generate meas
urement items, and theorize relationships among pro
cess 
capabilities. We conducted one hour, semi-structure
d interviews face-to-face and by telephone with sev
eral 
managers from organizations located in various coun
tries including Australia, India, the UK, and the U
SA. These 
organizations represent the automotive, music, comp
uter, financial, and IT service industries. On aver
age, the 
interviewees had 6.6 years of project management ex
perience. 
We then used a Web-based online survey instrument t
o collect our primary data. No one from the field i
nterviews 
participated in the survey. The survey instrument w
as designed to collect data from two participants f
rom each 
project, a project manager and a stakeholder (e.g.,
 a project sponsor, user, or client of the project)
, to avoid common 
method bias. As shown in Appendix, project managers
 responded to questions related to process rigor, p
rocess 
standardization, and process agility of their softw
are development and system performance. On the othe
r hand, 
stakeholders only responded to questions related to
 system performance. 
We solicited survey participation from organization
s that were partners of an IS research center affil
iated with a 
U.S.-based private university. We identified and se
nt an invitation to 171 project managers who had ex
perience 
managing IS development projects involving more tha
n one geographic location. In total, we received 10
3 project 
manager responses. After eliminating invalid, incom
plete, or redundant responses, we retained 85 usabl
e project 
managers™ responses for our data analysis, thus res
ulting in an effective response rate of 49.7%. A la
rge number of 
our data points came from three large U.S. companie
s: an oil company, a manufacturing company, and an 
IT service 
company. Specifically, 72 projects were from these 
three companies and 13 projects were from 12 differ
ent 
organizations in various industries. 

Then, we contacted project stakeholders of the proj
ects in our sample whose name and contact informati
on were 
provided by the project managers. We obtained 69 re
sponses from project stakeholders. We found that ei
ght 
responses were incomplete or redundant and thus eli
minated them. As a result, we retained 61 usable re
sponses. 
Unfortunately, the number of usable stakeholder res
ponses was significantly smaller than the number of
 project 
manager responses and not deemed large enough to de
tect effects. To maximize the statistical power of 
hypothesis 
testing, we decided to use only project manager res
ponses for our data analysis. Stakeholder data were
 used to 
examine potential common method bias problems of pr
oject manager data as well as to provide additional
 insights 
beyond our main results.  

To assess if potential common method bias was a sig
nificant issue (Malhotra, Kim, and Patil 2006), we 
performed 
the following statistical analyses. First, we condu
cted a Harman™s one-factor test (Podsakoff and Orga
n 1986) on the 
latent constructs including process rigor, process 
standardization, process agility, and system perfor
mance. Results 
showed that multiple factors are present and the mo
st covariance explained by one factor is 38.6 perce
nt, indicating 
that common method biases are not likely to be a se
rious concern (Podsakoff and Organ 1986). Second, w
e tested 
the consistency between responses between project m
anagers and project stakeholders on the common ques
tionnaire 
items that both responded to. These items included 
questions about time cost overrun, time overrun, an
d number of 
system defects. We found relatively high correlatio
ns between them, ranging from .44 to .54. 
Table 1 shows the characteristics of the research s
ample. The sample included different types of infor
mation systems 
development projects including new development (26.
3%), off-the-shelf software implementation (28.9%),
 system 
enhancement (30.4%), and others (14.4%). On average
, a project team had 55.9 members, a budget of $7.5
 million, 
duration of 16.6 months. 44.7% of projects used str
uctural waterfall development methodologies while 2
5.0% used 
agile development methods. All the projects in the 
sample involved multiple locations. Project manager
s had about 
11 years of project management experience and nearl
y 20 years of IT-related work experience, indicatin
g that the 
survey includes well-rounded and seasoned managers.
 To examine the possibility of non-response bias, w
e split the 
sample into two half-sized sub-groups based on the 
time when each response was received. We then compa
red the 
early response group with the later response group 
on variables such as team size, project duration, p
roject type, 
organizational size, and project management experie
nce. No significant differences between the two gro
ups on these 
variables were found, indicating that non-response 
bias was not likely to be an issue. 
  Short Title up to 8 words 
  Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
7 Table 1.  Sample Characteristics
 Variable         Percent Variable         Percent V
ariable          Percent 
Project profile 

 
Team size (mean: 55.9) 
Less than 20 members 37.6 

20 Œ 50 members 31.8 

Over 50 members 30.6 
 
Budget (mean: $7.5 million) 
Less than $1 million 32.8 

$1 Œ 5 million   32.8 

Over $5 million 34.4 
 
Duration (mean: 16.6) 
Less than 6 months 11.0 

6-11 months  30.5 

12 Œ 23 months              31.7 

Over 24 months 26.8 
Project manager profile 

 
Project management experience 
(mean 11.2) 
 Less than 10 years 40.0 

 10 Œ 20 years  54.1 

 Over 20 years    5.9 

 
IT work experience (mean 19.9) 

 Less than 10 years 10.6 

 10 Œ 20 years  43.5 

 Over 20 years   46.9 
Organization profile 

 
Industry 

 Manufacturing  14.3 

 Software/IT service 32.1 

 Utility/commodity 40.5 

 Bank/finance    2.4 

 Other     8.7 
  
Employees (mean: 116,620) 
Less than 10,000 11.5 

10,000 Œ 100,000  44.2 
    Over 100,000  44.3 
  Notes
.  n = 85 
Measures 

All measurement items for the three IS development 
process capabilities and system performance used fi
ve-point 
Likert scales. These measures were designed to eval
uate project manager™s perception of project proces
s and 
performance. The items are shown in Appendix. 

Process rigor 

We measured process rigor using four items. We deve
loped these items based on the CMM literature (e.g.
, Jalote 
(2000) and Ahern et al. (Ahern et al. 2008)) and ba
sed on the results of our field interviews. The ite
ms intend to 
measure the extent to which IS development process 
is defined, communicated, documented, formalized, p
lanned, 
and detailed. 

Process standardization
 The items for process standardization intend to mea
sure the extent to which common IS development proc
esses are 
consistently used across project sites. With four i
tems, we measured the consistent use of project man
agement 
practices, planning methods/techniques, communicati
on methods/technologies, and performance review 
methods/processes. These items were selected based 
on comments from our field interviews. 
 Process agility
 Using four items, we measured process agility by as
sessing how effectively IS development process enab
les the 
team to sense the need for requirements changes, pl
an its responses, and incorporate necessary changes
 into the 
system under development. These measurement items w
ere informed by and adapted from Lee and Xia (2005)
. 
System performance
 In this research, system performance is the only de
pendent variable. With three items, we measured the
 extent to 
which the final system delivered by the project had
 defects, met technical requirements and specificat
ions, and were 
perceived by project managers to be a success. 
 Track Title 

8Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010  
Control and dummy variables 

We controlled for variables that may affect system 
performance, such as team size and project duration
. Team size is 
measured by the number of team members and project 
duration is measured in months. Our analysis indica
ted that 
these three control variables were distributed in a
 non-normal fashion. Therefore, we transformed the 
variables using 
a logarithmic transformation to reduce skewness and
 approximate normality. In addition, we controlled 
for dummy 
variables for three organizations in the study samp
le that accounted for a large portion of data point
s. 
Analysis and Results 

Construct Validity and Reliability
 The measurement items of process rigor, process sta
ndardization, process agility, and system performan
ce in this 
research are designed to be reflective measures. Ex
ploratory factor analysis (principal component anal
ysis with 
Varimax rotation) of these measures produced the in
tended four-factor structure. All retained items lo
aded on their 
expected factors with loadings ranging from 0.65 to
 0.88. Table 2 shows correlations of the constructs
 and square 
root values of the average variance extracted (AVE)
 and. Results show that the AVE values for all four
 constructs 
are greater than 0.707 and exceed the correlations 
with other constructs, indicating satisfactory conv
ergent and 
discriminant validities for the constructs. Cronbac
h™s 
 values were 0.79 for process rigor, 0.85 for proce
ss 
standardization, 0.83 for process agility and 0.82 
for system performance, indicating adequate constru
ct reliabilities. 
Table 2.  Correlations and Average Variance Extract
ed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    Notes
. (1) 
* p 
< 0.05;
 ** p 
< 0.01
.  
                               (2) Diagonal element
s are the square root of average variance extracted
 (AVE) by 
latent constructs from their indicators; Off-diagon
al elements are correlations
 Model Specification and Estimation Procedure 

We specify the following linear equation to test ou
r hypotheses. Since this equation includes interact
ion terms, we 
centered all independent variables to avoid possibl
e multicollinearity and scale invariance problems a
nd to provide a 
more accurate interpretation of effects (Aiken and 
West 1992).  
System Performance 

     = 
0 + 
1ln(Team Size) + 
2ln(Project Duration) + 
3Dummy1 + 
4Dummy2 + 
5Dummy3  
     + 
6(Process Rigor) + 
7(Process Standardization) + 
8(Process Agility)  
            + 
9(Process Rigor x Process Agility) + 
10
(Process Standardization x Process Agility) 
            + 
11
(Process Rigor x Process Standardization) + 
                                                
 
We estimated the parameters of the equation using a
 hierarchical OLS (Ordinary Least Squares) regressi
on method. 
We first entered in the regression model the two co
ntrol variables and dummy variables, then the three
 independent 
variables, and then the three interaction terms. Al
though the interaction effect of process rigor and 
process 
standardization is not hypothesized in this researc
h, the product term of the two variables was includ
ed to make a 
complete regression model. 
Variable      1      2      3      4       5      6
 1. 
ln
 Team Size    Œ      
2. 
ln
 Project Duration  0.36**    Œ     
3. Process Rigor -0.11  0.03  0.74    

4. Process Standardization -0.07  0.06  0.42**   0.
77   
5. Process Agility -0.09  0.08  0.37**   0.42**   0
.77  
6. System Performance -0.10  0.15  0.49**   0.43** 
   0.46**   0.79 
  Short Title up to 8 words 
  Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
9 Results of Estimation 

The OLS estimates of the parameters of the equation
 are provided in Table 3. The predicted power of th
e regression 
model increased significantly as we added to the ba
se model the main effects (
F = 13.116, p < 0.01) and interaction 
effects (
F = 2.813, p < 0.05) of our hypotheses. The estimat
es of the parameters shown in Model 3 provide suppo
rt 
for H1 to H4. However, H5 was not supported, demons
trating a negative effect instead of a hypothesized
 positive 
effect. More specifically, the positive main effect
s of process rigor (
6 = 0.225, 
p < 0.05), process standardization 
(7 = 0.217, 
p < 0.05), and process agility (
6 = 0.348, 
p < 0.01) on system performance are statistically si
gnificant. 
The results support the positive interaction effect
 of process rigor and process agility (
9 = 0.298, 
p < 0.05). 
However, the results show a negative interaction ef
fect of process standardization and process agility
 (
12
 = - 0.351, 
p < 0.05) on system performance. 
We checked for the effect of multicollinearity usin
g conditions specified by Belsley et al. (Belsley, 
Kuh, and Welsch 
1980). The variance inflation factors for the indep
endent variables and the interaction terms in Model
s 1 to 3 ranged 
from 1.32 to 2.57. The highest condition index in M
odels 1 to 3 was 13.25. Thus, the results do not in
dicate the 
presence of any serious multicollinearity effects i
n our regression models. We conducted Kolmogorov-Sm
irnov tests 
to check the normality of the residuals and did not
 find any violations (
z = 0.68, 
p = 0.75). We tested for 
heteroscedasticity of the error terms using White™s
 tests and did not find any violations (
2d.
 = 76.6, 
df
 = 77, 
p = 
0.49). 

 Table 3.  Results of Hierarchical Regression Analys
is on System Performance 
Coefficients (unstandardized) 
Variables 
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 
    
Constant (
0)      3.738**         3.560**       3.571**  
ln Team Size (
1)    - 0.080           - 0.033         - 0.023     
 ln Project Duration (
2) 
Dummy 1 (
3) 
Dummy 2 (
4) 
Dummy 3 (
5) 
     0.142     

   - 0.016     

     0.293     

   - 0.117     
        0.153      

        0.136      

        0.103      

      - 0.155      
     0.143      

     0.110      

     0.094      

   - 0.100      
    

Process Rigor (
6)          0.304**       0.225*    
Process Standardization (
7)          0.236*         0.217*    
Process Agility (
8)          0.258*         0.348**  
    

Process Rigor X  

     Process Agility (
9) 
  
     0.298*    
Process Standardization X  

     Process Agility (
10
) 
  
   - 0.351*   
Process Rigor X  

     Process Standardization (
11
) 
  
   - 0.004     
    

F-Statistic      1.671          6.443***         5.
789*** 
F          13.116***         2.813* 
R2      0.096           0.404         0.466 
R2            0.309         0.062 
                    Notes.  * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; **
* p < 0.001.  
  Track Title 

10
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010  
Discussion 

Implications for Theory and Practice 

The regression results generally supported our hypo
theses. However, contrary to our expectation, we fo
und a 
negative interaction effect of process standardizat
ion and process agility on system performance in di
stributed 
development. We discuss the implications of these r
esults, followed by limitations and conclusions. 
All three IS development process capabilities Œ rig
or, standardization, and agility - demonstrated a p
ositive effect on 
system performance. Although the positive effects o
f these process capabilities on IS development have
 been 
proposed by prior literature, no research has provi
ded empirical evidence of these effects in the cont
ext of 
distributed IS development. Thus, our research is o
ne of the first attempts to confirm the value of pr
ocess rigor, 
process standardization, and process agility in dis
tributed IS development. Our research informs IS pr
oject managers 
of the importance of each of the three process capa
bilities in distributed development. Developing the
se process 
capabilities generally increases the likelihood of 
system success in distributed development projects.
 More important, our research examines the interacti
on effects of the process capabilities. To the best
 of our 
knowledge, no prior research has empirically tested
 them. In particular, based on the organizational a
mbidexterity 
perspective, we posited a positive interaction effe
ct of process rigor and process agility and a posit
ive interaction 
effect of process standardization and process agili
ty on system performance in distributed development
. The results 
supported that process rigor and process agility in
deed have a positive interaction effect above and b
eyond their 
respective main effects on system performance. That
 is, the positive effect of process ambidexterity o
f rigor and 
agility was validated for the context of distribute
d IS development. Agile development advocates tende
d to 
understate the value of process rigor relative to t
he value of process agility. Furthermore, process r
igor and process 
agility tended to be viewed as a trade-off. However
, our research suggests that process rigor makes pr
ocess agility 
even more effective and that distributed software t
eams are better off by developing and maintaining b
oth process 
capabilities. Our research shows that, at least in 
distributed development, process rigor and process 
agility 
demonstrate a synergistic effect on development per
formance. This finding significantly advances the b
ody of 
knowledge on distributed software development and w
arrants further research in this area. One of the p
ractical 
implications of this research is that when a projec
t manager evaluates the effectiveness of a new syst
em 
development methodology, he/she needs to understand
 how the new methodology affects not only process r
igor but 
also process standardization and process agility. 

Then, an important question to be addressed in futu
re research is ﬁHow can both process rigor and proc
ess agility be 
simultaneously achieved?ﬂ The practices and methods
 that foster process rigor often undermine process 
agility and 
vice versa. For example, agile software development
 methods value people over processes/tools, working
 software 
over comprehensive documentation, and responding to
 change over following a plan. These agile practice
s are likely 
to increase process agility but may decrease proces
s rigor. On the other hand, the implementation of s
ome of the 
traditional software process improvement methodolog
ies such as CMMI, ISO/IEC 12207, and IEEE/EIA 12207
 
would increase process rigor but may decrease proce
ss agility. Future research needs to address these 
issues to 
inform researchers and practitioners about effectiv
e approaches to building both process rigor and pro
cess agility, 
thus demonstrating process ambidexterity. 

Surprisingly, we found a negative interaction effec
t of process standardization and process agility on
 system 
performance whereas we originally hypothesized a po
sitive interaction effect. The results suggest that
 the 
relationship between process standardization and pr
ocess agility should be characterized by a trade-of
f. Although 
our data cannot provide a definite explanation for 
this unexpected finding, our best speculation is th
at process agility 
may require local adaptations of development proces
ses in certain locations to effectively respond to 
idiosyncratic 
changes, which contradicts the requirement for glob
al process standardization. In other words, process
 
standardization tends to enforce tightly-coupled pr
ocesses where local changes are costly. These contr
adictory 
demands may cause confusion in the mental model, pr
ocess reconfiguration, and thus inefficiency in IS 
development.  

Although both process rigor and process standardiza
tion are conceptualized as process alignment from t
he 
ambidexterity perspective, their interaction effect
s with process agility are found to have opposite d
irections. In fact, 
the negative ambidexterity effect of standardizatio
n and agility found in this research may have signi
ficant 
implications for theory and practice. Contrary to t
he extant organizational ambidexterity literature t
hat proposed 
  Short Title up to 8 words 
  Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
11
 only the positive effect of ambidexterity, this res
earch suggests that the simultaneous presence of al
ignment and 
adaptability can sometimes lead to inferior organiz
ational performance. We argue that the effect of am
bidexterity on 
performance may be more complex and nuanced than it
 has been documented by prior literature. Practitio
ners need 
to be aware of this trade-off relationship between 
process standardization and process agility and see
k the right 
balance that maximizes development performance. Fur
ther research is warranted to better understand and
 theorize 
why some types of process ambidexterity demonstrate
 a positive effect and other types of process ambid
exterity 
demonstrate a negative effect on distributed IS dev
elopment. 
Limitations and Future Research 

This research has some limitations. Although we hav
e taken careful steps to validate our measures and 
to avoid 
problems of common method variance, all the constru
cts were measured based on a single informant, the 
project 
manager. Although we collected data from project st
akeholders as well, the much smaller number of thei
r responses 
forced us to use data solely from project managers.
 Further data analysis is needed to triangulate the
 results, using 
multiple sources of informants. Our study is also l
imited by the cross-sectional nature of our data. I
t would be useful 
to conduct longitudinal studies with multiple waves
 of surveys to reveal the process by which process 
ambidexterity 
is achieved. Longitudinal studies can allow us to e
xamine the relative importance of process rigor, pr
ocess 
standardization, and process agility over different
 phases of the development lifecycle and to underst
and not only the 
short-term effect of but also the long-term effect 
of process ambidexterity on IS development performa
nce. 
Despite these limitations, our research makes signi
ficant contributions to the extant literature and p
ractice. Our study 
is one of the first attempts to conceptualize and v
alidates the notion of IS development process ambid
exterity as an 
important explanatory factor for the performance in
 geographically distributed development. Furthermor
e, our study 
demonstrates not only the positive effect of but al
so the negative effect of process ambidexterity on 
system 
performance in distributed development. As a result
, this research further advances theories of distri
buted IS 
development and of organizational ambidexterity and
 provides useful insights to practitioners about th
e right 
balance among process rigor, process standardizatio
n, and process agility.  
Working on highly interdependent tasks across very 
complex team boundary configurations with rapidly c
hanging 
requirements is a daunting task for software teams.
 Our study shows that ambidexterity of process rigo
r and process 
agility is one possible answer to help distributed 
software teams achieve higher levels of system perf
ormance. While 
our results are useful and stimulating, further res
earch in this area is needed to deeply understand t
he complex effect 
of process ambidexterity.  

Appendix  Measurement Items for the Project Manager Survey 

IS Development Process Capabilities 

Please indicate the extent to which you agree or di
sagree with the following statements  
(1: Strongly disagree, 2: Somewhat disagree, 3: Neu
tral, 4: Somewhat agree, 5: Strongly agree) 
 
Process rigor
 1)
 System requirements were documented in detail (Rigo
r1) 
2)
 Project team responsibilities were clearly defined 
and communicated (Rigor2)  
3)
 Project team created a detailed project plan (Rigor
3) 
4)
 Project team used a formal software development pro
cess (Rigor4) 
 
Process standardization
 1)
 Common project management practices were used consi
stently across sites (Standard1) 
2)
 Common project planning methods/techniques were use
d consistently across sites (Standard2) 
3)
 Common communication methods/technologies were used
 consistently across sites (Standard3) 
4)
 Common project performance review methods/processes
 were used consistently across sites (Standard4) 
 
Process agility
 1)
 Project team was able to sense user requirements ch
anges effectively (Agility1) 
 Track Title 

12
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010  
2)
 Project team was able to strategize its response to
 user requirements changes effectively (Agility2) 
3)
 Project team was able to make effective decisions t
o cope with user requirements changes (Agility3) 
4)
 Project team was able to incorporate user requireme
nts changes into the system effectively (Agility4) 
System Performance 

Please indicate the extent to which you agree or di
sagree with the following statements  
(1: Strongly disagree, 2: Somewhat disagree, 3: Neu
tral, 4: Somewhat agree, 5: Strongly agree) 
 
1)
 The system had many defects (SysPerform1) 
2)
 The system met technical requirements/specification
s (SysPerform2) 
3)
 The system was a success (SysPerform3) 
 
Acknowledgements 

We thank the financial support from Center for IT a
nd the Global Economy (CITGE) in the Kogod School o
f 
Business at American University, Washington, DC. We
 thank Professors Jungpil Hahn, Ghiyoung Im, and Ar
un Rai 
for their helpful comments on the earlier versions 
of this paper. 
 
References
 Adler, P., S., Goldoftas, B., and Levine, D.I. "Fle
xibility versus Efficiency? A Case Study of Model C
hangeovers in 
the Toyota Production System," 
Organization Science
 (10:1) 1999, pp 43-68. 
Ahern, D.M., Clouse, A., and Turner, R. 
CMMI Distilled: A Practical Introduction to Integra
ted Process 
Improvement
, (Third Edition ed.) Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2008. 
Aiken, L., and West, S. 
Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Inter
actions
 Sage, Newbury Park, CA, 1992. 
Ancona, D.G., Goodman, P.S., Lawrence, B.S., and Tu
shman, M.L. "Time: A New Research Lens," 
Academy of 
Management Review
 (26:4) 2001, pp 645-663. 
Applegate, L.M., Austin, R.D., and McFarlan, F.W. 
Corporate Information Strategy and Management
 Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston, MA, 2007. 
Athey, S., and Schmutzler, A. "Product and Process 
Flexibility in An Innovative Environment," 
Rand Journal of 
Economics
 (26:4) 1995, pp 557-574.Austin, R., and Devin, L. 
Artful Making: What Managers Need to 
Know About How Artists Work
 Financial Times Prentice Hall, 2003. 
Beck, K., and Andres, C. 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change
, (2nd ed.) Addison-Wesley, Boston, 
MA, 2005. 
Belsley, D.A., Kuh, E., and Welsch, R.E. 
Regression Diagnostics: Identifying Influential Dat
a and Sources of 
Collinearity
 Wiley, New York, NY, 1980. 
Berry, D., Hungate, C., and Temple, T. "Delivering 
Expected Value to Users and Stakeholders with User 
Engineering," 
IEEE Software
 (42:4) 2003, pp 542-567. 
Boehm, B.W., and Turner, R. 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for the P
erplexed
 Addison-Wesley, 2004. 
Chudoba, K.M., Wynn, E., Lu, M., and Watson-Manheim
, M.B. "How Virtual Are We? Measuring Virtuality an
d 
Understanding its Impact in a Global Organization,"
 
Information Systems Journal
 (15:4) 2005, pp 279-306. 
Cockburn, A. 
Agile Software Development
 Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2001. 
Cockburn, A. 
Agile Software Development: The Cooperative Game
, (The Second Edition ed.) Addison-Wesley, 
2007. 
Cramton, C.D. "The Mutual Knowledge Problem and its
 Consequences for Dispersed Collaboration," 
Organization 
Science
 (12:3) 2001, pp 346-371. 
Curtis, B., Kellner, M., and Over, J. "Process Mode
ling," 
Communications of the ACM
 (35:9) 1992, pp 75-90. 
Cusumano, M.A. "Managing Software Development in Gl
obally Distributed Teams," 
Communications of the ACM
 (51:2) 2008, pp 15-17. 
Espinosa, J.A., Slaughter, S.A., Kraut, R.E., and H
erbsleb, J.D. "Team Knowledge and Coordination in 
Geographically Distributed Software Development," 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (24:1) 
2007, pp 135-169. 
  Short Title up to 8 words 
  Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
13
 Fitzgerald, B. "Systems Development Methodologies: 
The Problem of Tenses," 
Information Technology and People
 (13) 2000, pp 13-22. 
Floyd, S., and Lane, P. "Strategizing Throughout th
e Organization: Managing Role Conflict in Strategic
 Renewal," 
Academy of Management Review
 (25) 2000, pp 154-177. 
Gibson, C.B., and Birkinshaw, J. "The Antecedents, 
Consequences, and Mediating Role of Organizational 
Ambidexterity," 
Academy of Management Journal
 (47:2) 2004, pp 209-226. 
Gupta, A.K., Smith, K.G., and Shalley, C.E. "The In
terplay between Exploration and Exploitation," 
Academy of 
Management Journal
 (49:4), Aug 2006, pp 693-706. 
Harter, D.E., Krishnan, M.S., and Slaughter, S.A. "
Effects of Process Maturity on Quality, Cycle Time,
 and Effort in 
Software Product Development," 
Management Science
 (46:4) 2000, pp 451-466. 
Herbsleb, J.D., and Mockus, A. "An Empirical Study 
of Speed and Communication in Globally-Distributed 
Software Development," 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
 (29:6) 2003, pp 481-494. 
Humphrey, W.S. 
Managing the Software Process
 Addison-Wesley, 1989. 
Humphrey, W.S., Snyder, T.R., and Willis, R.R. "Sof
tware Process Improvement at Hughes Aircraft," 
IEEE 
Software
 (8:4) 1991, pp 11-23. 
Im, G., and Rai, A. "Knowledge Sharing Ambidexterit
y in Long-Term Interorganizational Relationships," 
Management Science
 (54:7) 2008, pp 1281-1296. 
Jalote, P. 
CMM in Practice: Processes for Executing Software P
rojects at Infosys
 Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 
2000. 
Klimoski, R.J., and Mohammed, S. "Team Mental Model
: Construct or Metaphor," 
Journal of Management
 (20:2) 
1994, pp 403-437. 
Krishnan, M.S., and Kellner, M.I. "Measuring Proces
s Consistency: Implications for Reducing Software D
efects," 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
 (25:6) 1999, pp 800-815. 
Krishnan, M.S., Kriebal, C.H., Kekre, S., and Mukho
padhyay, T. "An Empirical Analysis of Productivity 
and 
Quality in Software Products," 
Management Science
 (46:6) 2000, pp 745-759. 
Krishnan, V., and Bhattacharya, S. "Technology sele
ction and commitment in new product development: Th
e role of 
uncertainty and design flexibility," 
Management Science
 (48:3) 2002, pp 313-327. 
Lee, G., DeLone, W.H., and Espinosa, J.A. "Flexibil
ity and Rigor: Ambidextrous Coping Strategies in Gl
obally-
Distributed Software Development Projects," 
Communication of the ACM
 (49:10) 2006, pp 35-40. 
Lee, G., and Xia, W. "The Ability of Information Sy
stems Development Project Teams to Respond to Busin
ess and 
Technology Changes: A Study of Flexibility Measures
," 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (14:1) 
2005, pp 75-92. 
Lee, G., and Xia, W. "Toward Agile: An Integrated A
nalysis of Quantitative and Qualitative Field Data 
on Software 
Development Agility," 
MIS Quarterly
 (34:1) 2010, pp 87-114. 
Levinthal, D.A., and March, J.G. "Thy Myopia of Lea
rning," 
Strategic Management Journal
 (14) 1993, pp 95-112. 
Lyytinen, K., and Rose, G.M. "Information System De
velopment Agility as Organizational Learning," 
European 
Journal of Information Systems
 (15:2) 2006, pp 183-199. 
Malhotra, N.K., Kim, S.S., and Patil, A. "Common Me
thod Variance in IS Research: A Comparison of Alter
native 
Approaches and a Reanalysis of Past Research," 
Management Science
 (52:12) 2006, pp 1865-1883. 
Mathieu, J., Goodwin, G.F., Heffner, T.S., Salas, E
., and Cannon-Bowers, J.A. "The Influence of Shared
 Mental 
Models on Team Process and Performance," 
Journal of Applied Psychology
 (85:2) 2000, pp 273-283. 
Nidumolu, S.R. "Standardization, Requirements Uncer
tainty and Software Project Performance," 
Information & 
Management
 (31) 1996, pp 135-150. 
Oshri, I., van Fenema, P., and Kotlarsky, J. "Knowl
edge Transfer in Globally Distributed Teams: the Ro
le of 
Transactive Memory," 
Information Systems Journal
 (18:6) 2008, pp 593-616. 
Podsakoff, P.M., and Organ, D.W. "Self-Reports in O
rganizational Research: Problems and Prospects," 
Journal of 
Management
 (12:4) 1986, pp 531-544. 
Pyster, A.B., and Thayer, R.H. "Software Engineerin
g Project Management 20 Years Later," 
IEEE 
Software
:September/October) 2005, pp 18-21. 
Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Mohan, K., and Xu, P. "Can Dis
tributed Software Development Be Agile?," 
Communications 
of the ACM
 (49:10) 2006, pp 41-46. 
Royce, W. "Successful Software Management Style: St
eering and Balance," 
IEEE Software
:September/October) 
2005, pp 40-47. 
Sambamurthy, V., and Kirsch, L.J. "An Integrative F
ramework of the Information Systems Development Pro
cess," 
Decision Sciences
 (31:2) 2000, pp 391-411. 
Standish Group "The Chaos Report," The Standish Gro
up. 
 Track Title 

14
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010  
Tiwana, A., Bharadwaj, A., and Sambamurthy, V. "The
 Antecedents of Information Systems Development 
Capability in Firms: A Knowledge Integration Perspe
ctive," International Conference of Information 
Systems, Seattle, WA, 2003, pp. 246-258. 
Tushman, M.L., and O'Reilly, C.A. "Ambidextrous Org
anizations: Managing Evolutionary and Revolutionary
 
Change," 
California Management Review
 (38:4) 1996, pp 8-30. 
van Oosterhout, M., Waarts, E., and van Hillegersbe
rg, J. "Change Factors Requiring Agility and Implic
ations for 
IT," 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (15) 2006, pp 132-145. 
Xia, W., and Lee, G. "Complexity of Information Sys
tems Development Projects: Conceptualization and 
Measurement Development," 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (22:1) 2005, pp 45-83. 
 