 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)City University of Hong KongCity University of Hong KongCity University of Hong KongICIS 2004 Proceedings. 2004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information Systems645THE ROLES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INORGANIZATIONAL CAPABILITY BUILDING:AN IT CAPABILITY PERSPECTIVEOne-Ki Daniel Lee, Kai H. Lim, and Kwok Kee Wei
Department of Information Systems
City University of Hong KongHong Kong SAR, Chinais.daniellee@student.cityu.edu.hkiskl@cityu.edu.hk
isweikk@cityu.edu.hkAbstractThe objective of this study is to examine why and under what situations certain information technology
resources can generate positive organizational outco
mes. To achieve this, we adopt the organizational
capability perspective. Based on this perspective, IT can 
be viewed as a functional capability that forms high-
level dynamic capability in the copresence of other 
functional capabilities and resources.  A process-oriented
view is used to examine how this capability-formati
on process happens inside organizations. For the high-level
dynamic capability, we focus on organizational agility by 
considering the contemporary business environment.We propose a conceptual framework regarding the role
s of IT capabilities in organizational agility building.
In our framework, IT capabilities can create organiza
tional agility through two paths:  (1) capability building
through process improvement or innovation and (2) 
capability creation through i
nnovative adoption of new
IT capabilities. As part of the framework developmen
t, we suggest a method to define organizational IT
capabilities in multiple levels of analysis, which allows us
 to evaluate IT capabilities at the information systems
strategy level as well as the functional technology l
evel. The proposed conceptual framework serves as a
theoretical foundation of further empirical studies.Keywords:  IT capability, organizational agility, dynamic capability, IT impacts, IT payoff, resource-based
view, process-oriented view, capability buildingIntroductionThe organizational impact of information technology has been a 
key issue for both academicians and practitioners. However, ther
ehas been an ongoing controversy regarding IT impacts 
on organizational performance, generally known as the 
productivityparadox (Brynjolfsson 1993). To overcome this issue, some research
ers suggested a multistage approach to examine mediating
impacts before examining organizational outcomes (e.g., performance, productivity, innovation, etc.) when investigating the val
ueof IT resources (Barua et al. 1995; Mukhopadhyay and Cooper 1993).Within the stream of research investigating the mediating 
impacts of IT, some researchers focus on organizational capability
(Sambamurthy et al. 2003; Wade and Hulland 2004) while others 
have highlighted IT impacts on business process (Davenport
and Short 1990; Dedrick et al. 2003). We believe that each of thes
e perspectives has its own merits. The former perspective has
the benefit of clearly illustrating the nomological network of
 influence among organizational resources, capabilities, and outc
omes
(Sambamurthy et al. 2003; Yeoh and Roth 1999). The latter persp
ective can show how certain impacts happen by investigating
the occurring processes (Soh and Markus 1995). Since business pro
cess is a vehicle to build and materialize organizational
capabilities (Helfat and Peteraf 2003; Teece et al. 1997), we believe
 that by combining the two theoretical lenses, one obtains
 the
benefits of both perspectives. However, studies that inves
tigating IT impacts on business process and organizational capability
together are scarce in the literature.  Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
6462004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information SystemsBy considering the two perspectives together, this research ai
ms to develop a new conceptual framework regarding the roles of
IT in organizations, which explains how and why specific IT re
sources generate certain positive outcomes, such as organizationa
lcompetitiveness and innovation. To achieve our research objectiv
es, we define the following three main research questions: 
(1)What are the mediating impacts of IT in contemporary or
ganizations? Specifically, do IT   impacts exist on business
processes and organizational capabilities?(2)How do the impacts occur? Specifically, how do IT factors 
interact with other factors to improve business processes
and organizational capabilities?(3)How can we classify organizational IT
 to investigate the interaction effects?Theoretical BaseThis research draws on the multi-theoretical tenets of the res
ource-based view, complementarity 
theory, process-oriented view,
dynamic capability theories, and organizational agility. They are described in the following sections.
Resource-Based View and Complementarity Theory for Organizational ITUnder the resource-based view (RBV), organizational resources 
and capabilities are seen as the 
potential sources of organizatio
nalcompetences (Barney 1991). According to Wernerfelt (1984), an 
organization™s success is dependent on its ability to capitalize
on its strategic resources. From this point of view, the utili
zation and the integration of existing resources and capabilities
 havebeen considered as critical management issues to maximize 
organizational value (Teece et al. 1997). By applying this view to
the IT value within an organization, many researchers have defi
ned organizational IT assets as important resources or capabilit
ies,which influence the organization™s competitiveness (Bharadw
aj 2000; Davenport and Short 1990; Sambamurthy et al. 2003).
While the early RBV studies tend to focus on the unique value of 
IT as scarce resources, the recent IT payoff studies take into
account the copresence of other non-IT resources when they ev
aluate the positive impacts of IT (e.g., Barua and Mukhopadhyay
2000; Davern and Kauffman 2000; Wade and Hulland 2004). These studies are based on complementarity theory (Hitt and

Brynjolfsson 1997). According to Milgrom and Roberts (1990), tw
o activities (or factors) are complementary if performing one
increases the benefits of performing the other. As the comp
lementarities for IT resources, researchers have suggested many
different organizational factors, such as incentive to us
e new systems (Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000), human capital (Hitt and
Brynjolfsson 1997), process reengineering (D
evaraj and Kohli 2000), and senior leadership (Davern and Kauffman 2000). The
studies under this stream have proposed to investigate the in
teractions between IT and its complementarities (Barua and
Mukhopadhyay 2000).Process-Oriented View for Organizational IT ImpactsWhile the resource-based view highlights the unique value of or
ganizational IT, the process-oriented view (POV) focuses on IT
use and IT impacts on business processes in order to explain 
an organization™s competitiveness. This view has two important
merits in explaining the roles of IT capabilities in organizations
. First, by evaluating intermediate-level effects, the POV ap
proachenables people to see the first-order impacts of IT instead of 
the aggregated impacts (Barua et al. 1995; Mooney et al. 1995; S
ohand Markus 1995). The intermediate-level impacts include transf
ormed business processes, enriched organizational intelligence,
capacity utilization, dynamic organizational structure, new 
product, and improved product quality (e.g., Barua et al. 1995;
Sambamurthy and Zmud 1994; Soh and Markus 1995). The second benef
it is that it can explain how certain IT impacts occur by
focusing on organizational process (e.g., Bharadwaj 2000; Gr
abowski and Lee 1993; Lucas 1993; Mooney et al. 1995). For
example, Mooney et al. (1995) suggested automational, inform
ational, and transformational changes on business processes as
results of the utilization of organizational IT resources. Sim
ilarly, using POV, Davenport and 
Short (1990) illustrated how the
use of IT can improve coordination and information access pro
cess. In addition to process improvement, process innovation or
process redesign has been thought of as another type of IT 
impact on business processes (e.g., Davenport 1993; Keen 1991; Teo
et al. 1997; Venkatraman 1994). 
 Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
2004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information Systems647Besides the benefits, the POV approach has its inherent theoreti
cal weaknesses. Since the POV approach tends to isolate a speci
ficprocess from others to emphasize certain IT
 impacts on the process, it becomes difficult to explain interdependent processes
(Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000). In addition, as Barua and 
Mukhopadhyay pointed out, the linkage between IT impacts on
business processes and organizational performance measur
es may be affected by other external factors. 
Dynamic Capability View for Organizational OutcomesIn the literature, high-level organizati
onal capabilities are believed to enable an organization to renew its competences by
combining and assimilating internal and external resources 
(Teece et al. 1997) or operational-level capabilities (Helfat and Pe
teraf2003). These high-level, combining capabilities are known as or
ganizational dynamic capabilities (Eisenhardt and Martin 2000;
Teece et al. 1997; Wade and Hulland 2004). According to Gran
t (1996) and Pisano (1994), organizational dynamic capabilities
are the antecedents of organizational activities that alter the or
ganizational resource base to ge
nerate new value-creating str
ategies.Moreover, since capability is considered as a intermediate-lev
el effect to produce positive organizational outcomes (Amit and
Schoemaker 1993), this organizational dynamic capability view (DCV
) for IT payoff has the benefit of illustrating the nomologic
alnetwork of influence among orga
nizational resources, capabilities, and outcomes (Sambamurthy et al. 2003; Yeoh and Roth 1999).
However, by focusing on the strategic decision process for IT i
nvestment and IT utilization to build organizational capability 
(e.g.,Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000; Sambamurthy et al. 2003; Teece et al. 1997), the DCV might have a theoretical weakness in

explaining organizational capability building from general business 
processes, such as operational and management process
(Mooney et al. 1995), even though these general processes are the 
actual activities combining IT resources and other resources.
In terms of the resource-combining nature of dynamic capabilitie
s, some high-level 
capabilities can be cons
idered as specific
forms of dynamic capabilities, such as cross-functional capab
ility (Grant 1991, 1996), combinative capability (Kogut and Zander
1992; Yeoh and Roth 1999), organizational learning capability (C
ohen and Levinthal 1990; Tsai 2001), and organizational agility
(Goldman et al. 1995; Sambamur
thy et al. 2003). Among these, we focus on organizational agility when considering the keen
competition of contemporary business environment (Brown and Eisenhardt 1997; Sambamurthy et al. 2003). Since agility is a

dynamic capability to respond to unexpected change to create co
mpetitive market opportunities by assembling requisite assets,
knowledge, and relationships (Goldman et 
al. 1995; Sambamurthy et al. 
2003), it is a very important factor of contemporary
organizations facing high pressure from their business envir
onment (Brown and Eisenhardt 1997; Sambamurthy et al. 2003).
In addition to the importance of agility in the current busin
ess environment, there are two advantages when focusing on
organizational agility for our conceptual framework. First, b
ecause it is an ability combining various resources and capabiliti
es(Goldman et al. 1995; March 1991; Sambamurthy et al. 2003; Teece 
et al. 1997), it is a general capability that can be applied t
odifferent levels and tasks within an organization.  Second, 
it is believed that an organization needs to utilize IT capabilitie
s foragility building (Sambamurthy et al. 2003). 
Conceptual Framework Development
The objective of this research is to develop a comprehensive c
onceptual framework by integrating different theoretical views,
specifically the dynamic capability view and the process-oriented view.
Theoretical Distances between Capability View and Process ViewThree theoretical issues arise when we integrate capability view 
and process-oriented view. First, each perspective may have a
different focus and interest.  Capability studies tend to fo
cus on strategic decision processes (e.g., Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000;Sambamurthy et al. 2003; Teece 
et al. 1997). On th
e other hand, process-oriented studies emphasize the improvement or
innovation of processes that are involved in business operati
ons and management (e.g., Davenport 1993; Mooney et al. 1995).
Second, each view focuses on different levels of analysis for or
ganizational IT. To avoid the aggregation issue of IT impacts, 
POVsuggests a specific application or technology level of investig
ation (e.g., Barua et al. 1995; Grover et al. 1998) while capabi
litystudies focus on integrated form of IT from a strategic res
ource perspective (e.g., Sambamurthy et al. 2003; Wade and Hulland
2004). Third, there are two different perspectives regarding th
e relationship between capability and process:  (1) capability i
s builtthrough process (Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000; Sambamurthy et al
. 2003) and (2) capability characterizes and defines process
(Eisenhardt and Martin 2000; Teece et al. 1997). In spite of the a
bove issues between the two theoretical lenses, we believe th
atthey can be combined in a manner such that each complements the other.
 Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
6482004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information SystemsSupplementing Perspectives for Framework DevelopmentIn our proposed combinative framework, we adopt three theoretical
 perspectives. As will be illustrated below, through combining
these three perspectives, our framework is able to address the 
three issues mentioned above. They
 are the hierarchical perspect
iveof organizational capabilities and resources, the multilevel persp
ective for IT typologies, and the multipath perspective for
organizational agility creation.First, for the hierarchical perspective of organizational 
capabilities and resources, Grant™s (1996) capability hierarchy theor
y wasadopted to identify organizational IT and its impacts. Accordi
ng to this theory, some functional (low-level) capabilities, such
 as
marketing capability and manufacturing capability, are combined to 
form cross-functional (high-level) capabilities, such as new
product development capability. Likewise, specific resources can 
be thought of as lower-level sources of functional capabilitie
sand cross-functional capabilities (Grant 1991, 1996). This theory 
provides a perspective to understand organizational IT as a
functional capability to build organizational dynamic (high-le
vel) capability. Based on this perspective, the building of
organizational dynamic capability can be explained by the inte
ractions between IT capabilities and other functional capabilitie
sand resources (Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000). Since the interactions
 are considered as IT use processes (Devaraj and Kohli
2003; Lucas 1993; Soh and Markus 1995), dynamic capability bu
ilding (capability view) can be investigated through
organizational operations and management processes that usua
lly involve IT in contemporary business (process view). This
perspective, therefore, addresses the first theoretical issue in the previous section.To address the second theoretical issue between the capability vi
ew and the process view, a multilevel perspective is suggested
for the analysis of organizational IT capabilities. The multiple 
levels refer to the functional technology level as low level (
e.g.,Barua et al. 1995) and the IS strategy level as high level (e.g
., Sambamurthy et al. 2003). We provide a mechanism to link the
different levels of analysis for IT cap
abilities. Through this perspective, not only can one analyze the values of specific IT
capabilities at the organizational strategy level, but one can al
so investigate the interactions between IT capabilities and ot
herfactors at the IT component level to explain how
 a specific IT affects a specific business process.Third, we propose a multipath perspective for organizational 
dynamic capability creation. To be more specific, we adopted
Makadok™s (2001) organizational rent creation mechanisms, capability
 building and resource picking. Based on this perspective,
an organization can be thought to build its capability through 
business processes integrating IT capabilities and other functio
nalcapabilities and resources. In addition, the organization can
 create its capability by innovativ
e adoption of 
new IT capabiliti
esregardless of current business process. By taking into account
 these two paths for organizational dynamic capability creation, 
thetwo different perspectives regarding the re
lationship between capability and process in the previous section can be integrated 
inour conceptual framework without conflict.
The Research ConstructsWe define four research constructs for our conceptual fra
mework development. They are IT capabilities, other functional
capabilities and resources, organizational agility, and organizati
onal competitive outcomes. IT capabilities and other function
alcapabilities and resources are parts of the functional capabilities w
ithin an organization™s capability hierarchy that we menti
onedearlier (Grant 1996). Specifically, based on Bharadwaj™s (2000) IT capability and Sambamurthy et al.™s (2003) digital options,
IT capabilities can be defined as 
organizational functional capabilities to support 
organizational activities and work processes
by deploying IT-based resources in combinati
on or copresence with other resources and capabilities
. The scope of IT, here, refers
to organizational supportive technologies (e.g., office systems, C
AD) rather than direct tec
hnologies (e.g., image processing
technology for digital camera) that are embedded in organizationa
l products and services (Schumann et al. 1994). Organizational
agility is considered as an ability to 
respond to unexpected change to create competitive market opportunities by assembling
requisite assets, knowledge, and relations
hips. Organizational competitive outcomes are the organizational-level outcomes of
specific business processes to provide organizations compe
titive advantages (Atuahene-Gima 2003). These specific outcomes
can be defined by the level and scope of research interests. Fi
gure 1 shows our conceptual framework to explain the roles of IT
in organizational agility building and in organizational outcome creation.
Multilevel Approach for Organizational IT Capabilities To understand our conceptual framework in Figure 1, a clear pi
cture of IT capabilities is required as a window to view the
relationships among organizational resources, capabilities, and out
comes.  Since process view and capability view each has its
 Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
1The categorization was done by comparing th
e definitions and purposes of existing typol
ogies with the definitions of two analys
is levels inTable 1.2004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information Systems649Other Functional 
Capabilities/ 
Resources
Organizational
Agility
IT Capabilities
Organizational
Competitive 
Outcomes
P1P3P4P2Other Functional 
Capabilities/ 
Resources
Organizational
Agility
IT Capabilities
Organizational
Competitive 
Outcomes
P1P3P4P2Figure 1.  Conceptual Framework for 
the Role of IT in Organizations own benefits by focusing on a different level of IT, we take in
to account the different levels of IT capability to complete our
combinative framework so as to maximize the explanatory power of 
our model. To achieve this, we first need to clarify what the
different levels of analysis are. We then propos
e a mechanism to combine these different levels. 
Many typologies and classifications have been suggested to 
denote the IT-related capabilities in organizations (e.g., Davenport
and Short 1990; Mulligan 2002; Nambisan 2003; Sambamurthy et
 al. 2003). We reviewed the existing organizational IT
typologies from two different levels of analysis, low and high le
vels. The typologies at the low level of analysis tend to defi
neIT capabilities based on technology or application features. At this 
level, IT capability can be examined in terms of how IT is
 used
in business processes (Barua et al. 1995). We name this level the 
functional technology
 level. On the other hand, the typologies
at the high level of analysis tend to classify IT capabilitie
s based on their specific goals 
of business supports. IT capabilit
ytypologies at this level can be seen as the result of strategi
c investments (Sambamurthy et al. 2003). We label this level the 
ISstrategy level. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics 
of the two levels for IT capability analysis. By investigating the functional technology level (low level), we e
xpect to solve the aggregation issue of IT impacts (Barua et 
al.1995). On the other hand, we need to consider the IS strategy leve
l (high level) analysis in order to evaluate the business val
uesthat can be achieved from specific IT capabilities (Tallon et
 al. 2000). Table 2 shows some examples for each level.
1Table 1.  The Two Levels of Analysis for IT Capability TypologyLevelPurposeProsCons
FunctionalTechnologyLevel (Low-Level)To define the functionalabilities of specific IT
components, based on

their technology featuresŁDistinctive impacts of technology  components
on organizational process  with detail
explanation of their use processesŁNo aggregation issue

ŁGeneralization of specific IT™s influence
Difficult to explainthe value of IT at
business levelIS StrategyLevel (High-Level)To define the combinative
abilities of organizational
IT, supporting specific
business goalsŁInvestigation of the strategic value of IT in
business supportsŁManagerial perspective

ŁContext-based value of specific IT
Difficult to analyzethe process effect
of specific IT Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
6502004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information SystemsTable 2.  The Existing Typologies for Organizational IT CapabilitiesLevelPerspectiveComponents
FunctionalTechnologyLevelIT Capabilities forProcess RedesignTransactional, geographical, automational,
 analytical, informational, sequential,
knowledge management, tracking, disintermediation (Davenport and Short

1990)TechnologicalCapabilityApplication development, communication technology, database and security,
technical support services, Web technology (Born 2002)
IT Infusion in NPDProcess Management, project management, information/knowledge
management, collaboration and communication (Nambisan 2003)
Capability-based ITClassificationIntegration (intra- and interdepartmental)
, scale (transaction flow and storage),technology focus (production, work flow, management and communication),

accessibility (owners, participants and open) (Mulligan 2002)IS StrategyLevelBusiness DesignCompetitive positioning, geogr
aphic positioning, redesigning organization,redeploying human capital (Keen 1991)
IT Business ValueCustomer relations, Supplier re
lations, sales and marketing support, production
and operations, product and service enhancement, process planning and support 
(Tallon et al. 2000)Digital OptionsDigitized Process Capital 
(Process Reach and Richness) and DigitizedKnowledge Capital (Knowledge Reach and Richness) (Sambamurthy et al.

2003)IT for OrganizationalDesignValue innovation, knowledge work leverage, IT-enabled business platform,
operational excellence, value-chain extension, solutions delivery (Sambamurthy
and Zmud 2000)
From the existing typologies, as shown in
 Table 2, we highlight the typology of Davenport and Short (1990) and the typology
of Sambamurthy et al. (2003), for the low level and for the high 
level, respectively. Whereas Davenport and Short classified IT
capabilities in the functional technology level to show specific IT
 impacts on business process redesign, Sambamurthy et al.
classified IT capabilities from the strategic resource perspectiv
e, namely process capital and knowledge capital, to denote the
organization™s strategic IT investments. 
Even though the two typologies have different purposes and scopes of
 consideration, they can be examined at the same time when
evaluating IT impacts on business. By matching the low-leve
l IT capabilities to the high-level IT capabilities based on their
definitions and example applications, a multilevel typology of IT
 capabilities can be defined. For example, Davenport and Short
™sautomational, geographical, disintermediation, and sequentia
l capabilities may correspond to Sambamurthy et al.™s digitized
process reach, because the digitized process 
reach refers to the ability of firm™s deployment of integrated IT-enabled process
across different units. Similarly, Davenport and Short™s trans
actional, analytical, informational and tracking capabilities may
equivalent to Sambamurthy et al.™s digitized process richne
ss, because digitized process richness refers to the quality of
information over process and the transparency of that informati
on to other processes and systems. Therefore, by combining the
IT capabilities at the functional technology and IS strategy levels
, the roles of IT capabilities can be investigated and inter
pretedat the strategic management level with high-level 
typology as well a detailed, operational-process level.Research PropositionsAs a starting point of our combinative view, the RBV provides our
 understanding of organizational IT as a firm-specific strateg
icresource to produce organizational outcomes. To supplement the 
limitation of the early RBV studies, which isolate IT resources
from other organizational resources when investigati
ng IT impacts (Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000), we adopt the
complementarity perspective that provides the insights to consider
 other organizational factors together with IT to show why
certain IT impacts occur (e.g., Davern and Kauffman 2000; Wa
de and Hulland 2004). However, taking other factors into account
may not be sufficient to explain the payoff of certain IT cap
abilities (Devaraj and Kohli 2003). To address this, some research
erssuggested investigating the actual utilizati
ons of specific technologies instead of the aggregated examination of IT and non-IT
 Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
2004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information Systems651factors (Devaraj and Kohli 2003; Grover et al. 1998). Furthermore,
 the appropriate use of IT (Lucas 1993; Soh and Markus 1995)
and the strategic fit between IT and other organizational f
actors (Grabowski and Lee 1993) have been thought as important
necessary conditions of organizational IT payoff. Therefore, an 
IT resource that is not properly utilized in conjunction with o
therfunctional capabilities and resources may not create any real value.
 This is because the integration occurs through the busines
sprocess and IT capabilities are not likely to have uniform effec
tiveness across all business processes (Barua et al. 1995); spe
cificIT capabilities can only be realized when they are applied to 
specific business processes. These arguments are formulated as
proposition 1.P1.The potential capability of a certain IT resource can only
 be transformed into real capability when the specific
IT capability is properly utilized in conjunction with sp
ecific business processes that involve other functional
capabilities/resources.However, the appropriate application of IT may not be sufficien
t to explain what the direct outcomes are and how these outcomes
happen. As POV suggests, some mediating-level impacts need to
 be examined regarding IT payoff (Barua et al. 1995; Soh and
Markus 1995). There are two competing perspectives for the firs
t-order effect of organizational IT capabilities: IT impacts on
business process and organizational high-level capability. The former perspective highlights business process improvement
(Davenport and Short 1990; Dedrick et al. 2003; Mooney et al
. 1995) or process innovation (Davenport 1993; Venkatraman 1994)
as a result of appropriate application of specific IT capabilitie
s to organizational processes.  The latter perspective emphasi
zesorganizational dynamic capabilities, such as organizational agility
, as the outcomes of capability building process (Sambamurth
yet al. 2003). Since organizational capability is built through organizational 
process (Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000; Sambamurthy et al. 2003)
and business process is a vehicle to build and materialize 
organizational capabilities (Helfat and Peteraf 2003; Teece et al. 1
997),business process and organizational capability have a very close re
lationship. From this, we believe that one can both get the
benefits and solve the weaknesses from combining the two theo
retical lenses. The process-oriented view and dynamic capability
view can supplement each other by seeing IT impacts on business pr
ocess as the organizational agility building process. Therefo
re,the role of organizational IT capabilities can be explained in
 terms of organizational capability building through the interact
ionsbetween IT capabilities and other functional capabilities and re
sources, which result in business process improvement or
innovation. From the interacting relationship between IT factors and other 
factors, we can define the moderating roles of IT capabilities i
nbusiness processes because the business processes of companies 
that have proper IT supports are different from companies that
do not (Barua et al. 1995). Proposition 2 is established based on the moderating roles of IT capabilities.
P2.Organizational IT capabilities moderate the relationshi
p between other functional c
apabilities and re
sources and
organizational agility through business process improvement or process innovation.There have been two different perspectives regarding the causa
l relationship between capability and process. Some researchers
highlight the role of process to build organizational cap
ability (Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000; Sambamurthy et al. 2003) while
others highlight the role of organizational capability to char
acterize and define business process (Eisenhardt and Martin 2000;
Teece et al. 1997). Specifically, the second perspective can denot
e another way of organizational capability creation regardles
sof IT impacts on business process. Based on the second perspec
tive, we argue that organizational agility can be created by
strategic adoption of IT capabilities without the preceding process enhancement or innovation. 
Makadok (2001) suggests two mechanisms, namely capability build
ing and resource-picking, through which an organization can
generate additional business values. The capability building mech
anism is the organizational process by which resources are
deployed more effectively than rivals to create organizationa
l economic rent. This mechanism has been explained in the
development of P2. The other mechanism to create organizationa
l rent is by strategically selecting resources that can give
additional value to the organization. We adopt this view 
for the cases where innovative adoption of specific IT capabilities
radically creates organizational agility (e.g., Damanpour 1991). 
For this additional path of organizational agility creation,
proposition 3 is formulated.
P3.Innovative adoptions of new IT capabilities with strate
gic goals can directly enhance organizational agility, even
without process improvement or process innovation. Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
2Sambamurthy et al. (2003) define customer 
agility as orga
nizational ability to leverage the voice of the customer for gaining m
arketintelligence and detecting competitive action opportunities.
6522004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information SystemsOrganizational
Agility
Functional Capability/
Resource B
Functional Capability/
Resource C
Functional Capability/ 
Resource A
IT Capabilities
Digitized
Process
ReachDigitizedProcess
Richness
DigitizedKnowledge
Reach
DigitizedKnowledge
Richness
Significant
Non-significant
Organizational
Agility
Functional Capability/
Resource B
Functional Capability/
Resource C
Functional Capability/ 
Resource A
IT Capabilities
Digitized
Process
ReachDigitizedProcess
Richness
DigitizedKnowledge
Reach
DigitizedKnowledge
Richness
Significant
Non-significant
Figure 2.  Application of High-Level IT Capabilities to Conceptual FrameworkFigure 2 shows the above propositions (1, 2, and 3) in a graphical
 manner based on Sambamurthy et al.™s concept of digital opti
onsfor high level IT capability typology. The figure illustrates that
 some specific IT capabilities have significant moderating ef
fectson specific relationships between other functional capabilities and 
resources and organizational agility (solid lines in Figure
 2)while others do not (dotted lines in Figure 2). In addition, some innovative adoption of specific IT capabilities can have dire
cteffects on organizational agility. Our last proposition is related to organizational outcome produc
tion as a result of IT-enabled organizational capability creati
on.This represents the direct effects of organizational agility 
on certain organizational outcomes. Organizational innovation has 
beenrecognized as the significant result of organizational dyna
mic, combining capability (Gra
nt 1996; Kogut 
and Zander 1992;
Sambamurthy et al. 2003). Similarly, organizational agility, as 
a high-level dynamic capability, is believed to lead to certain
organizational outcomes, such as a firm™s competitive acti
ons (Sambamurthy et al. 2003), new opportunities, and a source of
differentiation in a firm™s performance (Kogut and Zander 
1992), innovation (Hage 1998), new product development (Atuahene-
Gima 2003), etc. Proposition 4 is thus generated.
P4.IT-enabled organizational agility will gene
rate competitive organizational outcomes.Evidence from Existing Studies Our conceptual framework can be illustrated briefly by some ev
idence in the literature. The first potential evidence is Baxter
Healthcare™s ASAP system (Venkatraman 
and Short 1992). As an automatic purchasing system based on tracking customer™s
inventory, this system has automational, geographical, disinter
mediation, analytical, and tracking capabilities. At the IS stra
tegylevel, ASAP can be classified as having 
digitized process reach and digitized proce
ss richness capabilities. This system is bel
ievedto increase organizational competitiveness by enhancing Baxte
r™s dynamic capability to manage customer order, needs, and
inventory, namely customer agility.
2  This capability was enhanced through the improvement and redesign of the ordering and
 Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
3Sambamurthy et al. (2003) define partnering agility as organiza
tional ability to leverage the assets, knowledge, and competenci
es of business
partners, such as suppliers, distributors, etc., through alliances, partnerships, and joint ventures.4According to Sambamurthy et al. (2003), digitized knowledge r
each refers to the quality and 
accessibility of or
ganizational knowledge codified
in the organizational knowledge base and networked systems.
5According to Sambamurthy et al. (2003), digitized knowledge rich
ness refers to the interaction capability of organizational IT 
to enable
organizational members to share and develop their knowledge which cannot be easily codified.
2004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information Systems653procurement process (Teo et al. 1997; Venkatraman and Shor
t 1992). Therefore, the relationship between the company™s
customer-base resource and organizational customer agility can 
be interpreted as reinforced by IT capabilities (moderating effe
ct).
Moreover, by continuing system capability enhancements includi
ng network connection for document management with vendors
(e.g., EDI), ASAP is believed to enhance partnering agility
3 through vendor management process redesign (moderating effect).
At the same time, the IT capabilities of the ASAP system are 
believed to increase the organizational capability regardless of t
heexisting business process (direct effect) by enabling the comp
any to generate new business value from a new business area,
material management consultation (Teo et al. 1997; Venkatraman 1994).
American Airline™s SABRE is another case that provides support to
 the direct and the moderating effects of IT capabilities in o
urmodel. As a ticket reservation system that
 is operated through a network, SABRE can be classified as having digitized process
reach capability at the IS strategy level and having automationa
l, geographical, and disintermediation capabilities at the func
tionaltechnology level. It is believed that this system increased 
organizational dynamic capability to respond to market situations,
namely organizational agility, by redesigning the customer mana
gement process (Hopper 1990; Teo et al. 1997). In this case,
American Airline™s flight service quality can be interpreted 
as moderated by new IT capabilities to build the organizational ag
ility(moderating effect). Moreover, since SABRE created new revenue 
sources by collecting fees from other companies, this system
is believed to enhance organizational agility with financial flexibility (direct effect). As another example, we can find theoretical and empirical s
upport from the product development area. The cross-functional team
has been considered to be an important factor in the pr
oduct development process (Brown and Eisenhardt 1995). According to
Atuahene-Gima (2003), it is thought to be an important anteced
ent for organizational problem solving capability, which leads
successful product deve
lopment. Problem solving capability 
can be thought of as a dynamic capability to exploit existing resour
ces(Cohen and Levinthal 1990). The established relationship between the cross-functional team and organizational problem solving
capability can be enhanced by IT capabilities such as process 
management, schedule management, knowledge management, and
collaboration and communication capability (moderating effect
) (Nambisan 2003). These low-level capabilities are thought of
as parts of digitized knowledge reach,
4 digitized knowledge richness,
5 and digitized process reach capabilities at the IS strategy
level. However, digitized process richness does not seem to 
have an effect on this process (nonuniform effect). Knowledge
creation capability is related to organization™s exploration a
nd exploitation capabilities that form organizational agility (Ma
rch1991; Sambamurthy et al. 2003). Hence apart from the moderating 
effect, digitized knowledge reach (e.g., data mining system)
is believed to also directly increase organizational agility (direct effect) (Alavi and Leidner 2001).Discussion and Conclusion Overall, we have extended the literature in four significant wa
ys.  First, we have proposed a theoretical framework combining
resource view, process view, and capability view to explain the 
role of organizational IT. The existing issues among the differ
entviews (different type of process, different level of IT analysis, and different pe
rspective for the relationship between capabilityand process) have been solved through our supplementing persp
ectives (capability hierarchy pers
pective, multilevel perspective
for IT capability definition, and multipath perspective for agility
 creation). From our combinative view, the nomological netwo
rkamong diverse organizational factors can be
 illustrated clearly to show the roles of IT capabilities in organizational outcome
creation. At the same time, our combinative view can explai
n how these processes happen. Second, we have delineated the
different levels of organizational capabilities to explain the 
roles of IT resources in organizations. Based on the capability
hierarchy perspective, our research framework suggests an add
itional support for the resource-based view and the complementarit
yperspective by not isolating IT capabilities from other functi
onal capabilities and resources. Moreover, the capability hierarc
hyperspective supplements the existing organizational dynamic capability
 theories. Third, we have provided a possibility to combi
nethe different levels of analysis for IT capabilities so that one
 can investigate the value of IT capabilities at the organizati
onal ISstrategy level as well as at the functiona
l technology level to examine their inter
actions with other 
functional capabilities a
ndresources. Fourth, by applying an organizational rent creation m
echanism to our conceptual framework, we have illustrated the
 Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
6542004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information Systemsmultipath to create organizational agility. This multipath persp
ective could provide a theoretical base to understand why the
different causal relationships exist between capabilities and processe
s. We believe that this conceptual framework can be appli
edto a specific business unit or business process in different organizations for further empirical studies.
As a conceptual research in an organizational context, this 
research has some potential theoretical and practical limitations. 
Firstof all, organizations may have the capability to learn capabilitie
s (Winter 2000). However, in order to focus more on the roles
 of
IT regarding organizational capability, our research framework
 does not include the self-learning or feedback loop between
capabilities and outcomes. Another issue is the dynamic nature of
 IT capability. Although we highlighted previous typologies fo
rhigh and low levels, IT typologies need to be extended as orga
nizations have adopted new technologies. In future studies, each
level of organizational IT capabilities need to be defined thr
ough the review of contemporary technologies, and matching betwee
nthe different levels of IT capabilities needs to be provided for 
the empirical application of our conceptual framework to speci
ficorganizational areas.In spite of the limitations of this research, we believe th
at our research can be extended in many ways under different
organizational contexts such as tasks in traditional industrie
s (e.g., product development, production) and some recently emerg
ingbusiness processes (e.g., knowledge management, e-business). As
 Grant (1991) pointed out, for example, product development
capability can be defined as a cross-functional capability i
nvolving many other functional capabilities and resources. Successf
ulnew product development will be an outcome of this high-le
vel dynamic capability (Kimberly 1986). If we apply our conceptual
framework to the product development process, we can expl
ain how an organization increases its agility for new product
development by utilizing IT capabilities. Similarly, by applying our
 conceptual framework to various organizational processes
of different business units, the degrees of specific organiza
tional agilities or dynamic capabilities in the units can be expla
inedas the impacts of organizational IT.
AcknowledgementThe work described in this paper was supported by a Strategic Re
search Grant awarded by City University of Hong Kong (Project
No. 7001165). We thank the Associate Editor and three reviewers for their insightful comments.
ReferencesAlavi, M., and Leidner, D. E.  ﬁ
Review:  Knowledge Management and Knowledge Management Systems:  Conceptual Foun-
dations and Research Issues,ﬂ MIS Quarterly (25:1), 2001, pp. 107-136.Amit, R., and Schoemaker, P. J. H.  ﬁStr
ategic Assets and Organizational Rent,ﬂ 
Strategic Management Journal
 (14:1), 1993,
pp. 33-46.Atuahene-Gima, K.  ﬁThe Effects of Centrifugal and Centri
petal Forces on Product Development Speed and Quality:  How Does
Problem Solving Matter?,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Journal (46:3), 2003, pp. 359-373.Barney, J. B.  ﬁFirm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage,ﬂ 
Journal of Management (17:1), 1991, pp. 99-120.Barua, A., Kriebel, C. H., and Mukhopadhyay,
 T.  ﬁInformation Technologies and Business Value:  An Analytic and Empirical
Investigation,ﬂ Information Systems Research (6:1), 1995, pp. 3-23.Barua, A., and Mukhopadhyay, T.  ﬁInformation Technology and Bu
siness Performance:  Past, Present, and Future,ﬂ in  
Framingthe Domains of IT Management:  Projecting the Future through the Past,
 R. W. Zmud (Ed.), Pinnaflex Press, Cincinnati,
OH, 2000.Bharadwaj, A. S.  ﬁA Resource-Based Perspective on Inform
ation Technology Capability and Firm Performance:  An Empirical
Investigation,ﬂ MIS Quarterly (24:1), 2000, pp. 169-196.Born, A. D.  ﬁA Framework for Assessing The Impact of In
formation Systems Infrastructure on Business Effectiveness,ﬂ in
Proceedings of the 23
rd International Conference on Information Systems
, L. Applegate, R. D. Galliers, and J. I. DeGross
(Eds.),  Barcelona, Spain, 2002, pp. 37-47.Brown, S. L., and Eisenhardt, K. M.  ﬁThe Art of Continuous
 Change:  Linking Complexity Theory and Time-Paced Evolution
in Relentlessly Shifting Organizations,ﬂ Administrative Science Quarterly (42:1), 1997, pp. 1-34.Brown, S. L., and Eisenhardt, K. M.  
ﬁProduct Development:  Past Research, Pr
esent Findings, and Future Directions,ﬂ 
Academyof Management Review (20:2), 1995, pp. 343-378.Brynjolfsson, E.  ﬁThe Productivity
 Paradox of Information Technology,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (36:12), 1993, pp. 66-77.
Cohen, W. M., and Levinthal, D. A.  ﬁAbsorptive 
Capacity:  A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation,ﬂ 
AdministrativeScience Quarterly (35:1), 1990, pp. 128-152. Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
2004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information Systems655Damanpour, F.  ﬁOrganizational Innovation:  A Meta-Analy
sis of Effects of Determinants and Moderators,ﬂ 
Academy of
Management Journal (34:3), 1991, pp. 555-590.Davenport, T. H.  
Process Innovation:  Reengineering Work through Information Technology
, Harvard Business School Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1993.
Davenport, T. H., and Short, J. E.  ﬁT
he New Industrial Engineering:  Informa
tion Technology and Business Process Redesign,ﬂSloan Management Review (31:4), 1990, pp. 11-27.Davern, M. J., and Kauffman, R. J.  ﬁDiscovering Potential and Realizing Value from Information Technology Investments,ﬂ
Journal of Management Information Systems (16:4), 2000, pp. 121-143.Dedrick, J., Gurbaxani, V., and Kraemer, K. L.  ﬁInforma
tion Technology and Economics Performance:  A Critical Review of
the Empirical Evidence,ﬂ 
ACM Computing Surveys (35:1), 2003, pp. 1-28.Devaraj, S., and Kohli, R.  ﬁInformation Technology Payo
ff in the Health-Care Industry:  A Longitudinal Study,ﬂ 
Journal of
Management Information Systems (16:4), 2000, pp. 41-67.Devaraj, S., and Kohli, R.  ﬁPerformance Impacts of In
formation Technology:  Is Actual Usage the Missing Link?,ﬂ 
ManagementScience (49:3), 2003, pp. 273-289.Eisenhardt, K. M., and Martin, J. A.  ﬁDynamic Capabilities:  What Are They?,ﬂ 
Strategic Management Journal
 (21:10/11), 2000,
pp. 1105-1121.Goldman, S. L., Nagel, R. N., and Preiss, K.  
Agile Competitors and Virtual Organizations
, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York,
1995.Grabowski, M., and Lee, S.  ﬁLinking Information System
s Application Portfolios and Organizational Strategy,ﬂ in  
StrategicInformation Technology Management:  Perspectives 
on Organizational Growth and Competitive Advantage,
 R. D. Banker,
R. J. Kauffman, and M. A. Mahmood (Eds.), Id
ea Group Publishing., Harrisburg, PA, 1993, pp. 33-54.Grant, R. M.  ﬁThe Resource-Based Theory of Competitiv
e Advantage:  Implications for Strategy Formulation,ﬂ 
CaliforniaManagement Review (33:3), 1991, pp. 114-135.Grant, R. M.  ﬁProspering in Dynamically-Competitive Environm
ents:  Organizational Capabilitie
s as Knowledge Integration,ﬂ
Organization Science (7:4), 1996, pp. 375-387.Grover, V., Teng, J., Segars, A., and Fiedler, K.  ﬁThe In
fluence of Information Technology Diffusion and Business Process
Change on Perceived Productivity:  The IS Executive™s Perspective,ﬂ 
Information & Management
 (34:3), 1998, pp. 141-159.
Hage, J.  Organizational Innovation, Dartmouth Printing Company, Hanover, NH, 1998.
Helfat, C. E., and Peteraf, M. A.  ﬁThe Dyna
mic Resource-Based View:  Capability Lifecycles,ﬂ 
Strategic Management Journal
(24), 2003, pp. 997-1010.Hitt, L. M., and Brynjolfsson, E.  ﬁInf
ormation Technology and Internal Firm Organization:  An Exploratory Analysis,ﬂ 
Journalof Management Information Systems (14:2), 1997, pp. 81-101.Hopper, M. D.  ﬁRattling SabreŠNew 
Ways to Compete on Information,ﬂ 
Harvard Business Review (68:3), 1990, pp. 118-125.
Keen, P. G. W.  
Shaping the Future:  Business Design through Information Technology
, Harvard Business School Press, Boston,
1991.Kimberly, J. R.  ﬁThe Organizational 
Context of Technological Innovation,ﬂ in 
Managing Technological Innovation, D. D. Davis
(Ed.), Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 1986, pp. 23-43.Kogut, B., and Zander, U.  ﬁKnowledge of the Firm, Comb
inative Capabilities, and The Replication of Technology,ﬂ 
Organization
Science (3:3), 1992, pp. 383-397.Lucas, H. C.  ﬁThe Business Value of Information Technology: 
 A Historical Perspective and Thoughts for Future Research,ﬂ
in  Strategic Information Technology Management:  Perspec
tives on Organizational Growth and Competitive Advantage,R. D. Banker, R. J. Kauffman, and M. A. Mahmood (E
ds.), Idea Group Publishing, Harrisburg, PA, 1993, pp. 359-374.Makadok, R.  ﬁToward a Synthesis of the Resource-Ba
sed and Dynamic-Capability Views of Rent Creation,ﬂ 
StrategicManagement Journal (22:5), 2001, pp. 387-402.March, J. G.  ﬁExploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning,ﬂ Organization Science (2:1), 1991, pp. 71-87.Milgrom, P., and Roberts, J.  ﬁThe Economics of Modern
 Manufacturing:  Technology, Strategy, and Organization,ﬂ 
AmericanEconomic Review (80:3), 1990, pp. 511-528.Mooney, J. G., Gurbaxani, V., and Kraemer, K. L.  ﬁA Pr
ocess Oriented Framework for Assessing the Business Value of
Information Technology,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 16
th International Conference on Information Systems
, J. I. DeGross, G.
Ariav, C. Beath, R. Høyer, and C. Kemerer, Amsterdam, 1995, pp. 17-27.
Mukhopadhyay, T., and Cooper, R. B.  ﬁA Microeconomic 
Production Assessment of The Business Value of Management
Information Systems:  The Case of Inventory Control,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (10:1), 1993, pp. 33-55.
Mulligan, P.  ﬁSpecification of a Capab
ility-Based IT Classification Framework,ﬂ 
Information & Management
 (39), 2002, pp.
647-658.Nambisan, S.  ﬁInformation Systems as a Refe
rence Discipline for New Product Development,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly
 (27:1), 2003, pp.
1-18. Lee et al./IT Capabilities & Organizational Agility
6562004 Š Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information SystemsPisano, G. P.  ﬁKnowledge, Integration, and the Locus of L
earning:  An Empirical Analysis of Process Development,ﬂ 
StrategicManagement Journal (15:Winter Special Issue), 1994, pp. 85-100.
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A., and Grover, V.  ﬁShaping 
Agility through Digital Options:  Reconceptualizing the Role of
Information Technology in Contemporary Firms,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly (27:2), 2003, pp. 237-263.Sambamurthy, V., and Zmud, R. W.  
IT Management Competency Assessment:  A Tool for Creating Business Value Through IT
Financial Executives Research Foundation, Florham Park, NJ, 1994.
Sambamurthy, V., and Zmud, R. W.  ﬁResearch Commentary:  
The Organizing Logic for an Enterprise™s IT Activities in the
Digital EraŠA Prognosis of Practice and a Call for Research,ﬂ Information Systems Research (11:2), 2000, pp. 105-114.Schumann, P. A. J., Prestwood, D. C. L
., Tong, A. H., and Vanston, J. H.  
Innovate!  Straight Path to Quality, Customer Delight,
and Competitive Advantage McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 1994.Short, J. E., and Venkatraman, N.  ﬁBeyond Business Pro
cess Redesign:  Redefining Baxter™s Business Network,ﬂ 
SloanManagement Review (34:1), 1992, pp. 7-21.Soh, C., and Markus, M. L.  ﬁHow IT Creates Bu
siness Value:  A Process Theory Synthesis,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 16
thInternational Conference on Information Systems
, J. I. DeGross, G. Ariav, C. Beath,
 R. Høyer, and C. Kemerer, Amsterdam,
1995, pp. 29-41.Tallon, P. P., Kraemer, K. L., and Gurbaxani, V.  ﬁExecutiv
es™ Perceptions of the Business Value of Information Technology:
A Process-Oriented Approach,ﬂ Journal of Management Information Systems (16:4), 2000, pp. 145-173.Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., and Shuen, A.  ﬁD
ynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management,ﬂ 
Strategic Management Journal
(18:7), 1997, pp. 509-533.Teo, H.-H., Tan, B. C. Y., and Wei, K.-K.  ﬁOrganizationa
l Transformation Using Electronic Data Interchange:  The Case of
TradeNet in Singapore,ﬂ Journal of Management Information Systems (13:4), 1997, pp. 139-165.Tsai, W.  ﬁKnowledge Transfer in Interorganizational Networ
ks:  Effects of Network Position and Absorptive Capacity on
Business Unit Innovation and Performance,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Journal (44:5), 2001, pp. 996-1004.Venkatraman, N.  ﬁIT-Enabled Business Transformation:
  From Automation to Business Scope Redefinition,ﬂ 
Sloan ManagementReview (35:2), 1994, pp. 73-87.Venkatraman, N., and Short, J. E.  ﬁBaxter Healthcare:  Evolu
tion from ASAP to Valuelink in the Hospital Supplies Marketplace,ﬂ
in Proceedings of the 25
th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los
Alamitos, CA, 1992, pp. 666-677.
Wade, M., and Hulland, J.  ﬁ
Review:  The Resource-Based View and Information 
Systems Research:  Review, Extension, and
Suggestions for Future Research,ﬂ MIS Quarterly (28:1), 2004, pp. 107-142.Wernerfelt, B.  ﬁA Resource-Based View of the Firm,ﬂ 
Strategic Management Journal (5:2), 1984, pp. 171-180.Winter, S. G.  ﬁThe Satisficing 
Principle in Capability Learning,ﬂ Strategic Management Journal (21), 2000, pp. 981-996.Yeoh, P.-L., and Roth, K.  ﬁAn Empirical Analysis of Sustained 
Advantage in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry:  Impact of Firm
Resources and Capabilities,ﬂ Strategic Management Journal (20:7), 1999, pp. 637-653.