 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)ICIS 2010 ProceedingsInternational Conference on Information Systems(ICIS)1-1-2010CONCEPTUALIZING INTERPERSONALRELATIONSHIPS IN AGILE ISDEVELOPMENTSabine MadsenRoskilde University, sabinem@ruc.dkSabine MatookThe University of Queensland, s.matook@business.uq.edu.auThis material is brought to you by the International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS) at AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). It has beenaccepted for inclusion in ICIS 2010 Proceedings by an authorized administrator of AIS Electronic Library (AISeL). For more information, pleasecontactelibrary@aisnet.org.Recommended CitationMadsen, Sabine and Matook, Sabine, "CONCEPTUALIZING INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS IN AGILE ISDEVELOPMENT" (2010).ICIS 2010 Proceedings.Paper 102.http://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2010_submissions/102  Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
1 CONCEPTUALIZING 
INTERPERSONAL 
RELATIONSHIPS IN 
AGILE 
IS
 DEVELOPMENT
 Research-in-Progress 
Sabine Madsen 
Roskilde University 
Department of Communication,  
Business & IT  
Universitetsvej 1 
DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark 
sabinem@ruc.dk 
Sabine Matook 
The University of Queensland 
UQ Business School 
Information Systems 
3 Blair Drive 
Brisbane, 4072, QLD, Australia 
s.matook@business.uq.edu.au 
Abstract 
Agile information systems development (ISD) is a pe
ople-centered approach that emphasizes 
frequent interaction and genuine co-operation betwe
en customers and developers. While business 
relationships are the norm in the workplace, agile 
ISD leads to the creation of close interpersonal 
relationships. Drawing on relationship theory and f
riendship literature we propose a theoretical 
framework of three types of workplace relationships
. The framework is used for deriving 
theoretical preconceptions about agile relationship
s and their impact on the agile ISD team™s 
ability to deliver valuable, working software frequ
ently. We also present the interpretive approach 
we will apply. An understanding of the relationship
 specific aspects of agile ISD as well as of the 
importance and impact of certain relationship chara
cteristics can help explain why some agile 
projects succeed, while others fail. Such knowledge
 can also be used to foster friends-like 
behavior for the benefit of the software outcome in
 future projects. 
Keywords:  
Interpersonal relationships, agile IS development, 
friendships, interaction, helping behavior 
  Human Behavior and IT 

2 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Introduction 

Recently, agile information systems development (IS
D) has become widely diffused and used in practice 
(Dyba and 
Dingsoyr 2008). Agile ISD is a particular type of d
evelopment that recommends that developers and cust
omer 
representatives work closely together to deliver va
luable, working software frequently (Fowler and Hig
hsmith 
2001). Agile ISD advocates the team members™ physic
al proximity, frequent interaction, and genuine co-
operation 
towards the shared goal, i.e. software releases (Co
ckburn 2007). Moreover, inherent in all agile value
s is a strong 
focus on skilled individuals and the importance of 
people in software development (Vidgen and Wang 200
9). Agile 
ISD is therefore a people-centered approach. 

The management of relationships between people in s
oftware teams has previously been recognized as key
 to 
facilitate the utilization of critical skills and e
xpertise (Beath and Orlikowski 1994). However, in t
raditional 
waterfall ISD the relationships are rarely explicit
ly studied with regard to their impact on the softw
are outcome 
(Sawyer et al. 2008). The agile paradigm now invite
s this kind of studies because agile ISD provides a
 number of 
techniques that rely on interpersonal relationships
 rather than written documents to produce the softw
are. For 
example, pair programming in eXtreme Programming (X
P) (Beck 1999; Beck and Andres 2005) requires two 
developers to write the software code (McMahon 2003
). The two developers work closely together to comp
lete their 
task, i.e. their story cards.  In general, close re
lationships among team members have been found to c
ontribute to a 
positive working atmosphere. Thus, agile ISD enable
s and requires close interpersonal relationships th
at can be 
conceptualized as workplace friendships to form in 
an agile ISD project.  
The concept of friendships in business settings has
 been studied by examining friendships among collea
gues and 
between customers and service providers (see for ex
ample, Berman et al. 2002; Grayson 2007; Haytko 200
4; Price 
and Arnould 1999). A workplace friendship shows the
 characteristics of a personal friendship but is fo
rmed in a 
business setting. A personal friendship is a close 
relationship among two individuals that is characte
rized by, e.g., 
voluntary interactions among the friends. These int
eractions are motivated by the friends™ communal co
ncern and 
the expectation of an exclusively intrinsic orienta
tion (Grayson 2007). When a workplace friendship em
erges the 
personal friendship and business relationship betwe
en individuals co-occur. At certain times, one rela
tionship type, 
either the friendship or the business relationship 
might even dominate the interaction between the ind
ividuals. 
Nevertheless, workplace friendships are characteriz
ed by high levels of mutual commitment, trust, reci
procal liking, 
and shared values or interests between individuals 
at work (Berman et al. 2002).   
Prior research shows that workplace friendships pro
vide a number of benefits. Workplace friendships in
crease the 
level of communication, task assistance and support
 provided, as well as the emotional support among c
olleagues or 
team members. These benefits in turn help people ge
t the job done, improve the quality of the work, an
d reduce 
stress (Berman et al. 2002). While the friendship l
iterature delineates many relationship characterist
ics, in this 
research, we focus primarily on helping behavior an
d its beneficial impact on the software outcome. A 
workplace 
friendship is particularly rewarding because of the
 relationship partner™s co-operation and helpfulnes
s in meeting 
one™s specific day-to-day needs (Wright 1984). The 
helping behavior exhibited by the relationship part
ners is also 
important for the achievement of the shared goal.  
 The characteristics of agile ISD as a people-center
ed approach contribute to the formation of close in
terpersonal 
relationships, i.e. of workplace friendships among 
the developers and between the customer representat
ives and the 
developers. Therefore, it is important for managers
 involved in an agile ISD project to have knowledge
 about how to 
invoke and benefit from workplace friendships (Gray
son 2007). In an agile context this motivates exami
ning how 
close the interpersonal relationships among the dev
elopers and between the customer representatives an
d the 
developers are likely to become and which friendshi
p aspects could be fostered and leveraged for the b
enefit of the 
software outcome.  In this research-in-progress pap
er, we draw on relationship theory and friendship l
iterature to 
conceptualize different types of workplace relation
ships that vary in closeness. Based on an understan
ding here of 
we derive theoretical preconceptions about interper
sonal relationships in agile ISD and their impact o
n the 
developers™ ability to deliver valuable, working so
ftware frequently.  
Background   

In this section, we first provide more detail about
 the relationships that agile ISD emphasizes as wel
l as how agile 
methods encourage and support the formation and pro
gression of these relationships. Subsequently, we r
eview prior 
research about different types of relationships. On
 this basis we propose a theoretical framework of t
hree types of 
workplace relationships and discuss their implicati
ons for the individual and the work.  
  Madsen & Matook / Conceptualizing Interpersonal Re
lationships in agile IS Development 
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
3 Relationship-specific aspects of agile IS development 

Agile ISD is a development method that encompasses 
a complete range of practices for designing, buildi
ng, 
implementing, and maintaining an information system
 with a focus on the ability to create and respond 
to change 
(Conboy 2009). The agile approach emerged as a resp
onse to the shortcomings of traditional, plan-drive
n ISD 
(Truex et al. 2000) and is a type of development th
at is interaction rather than document driven. It e
mphasizes the 
developers™ and the customers™ co-creation of valua
ble, working software in accordance with verbally 
communicated, emerging, and changing requirements. 
As such, interpersonal relationships are the main c
arriers of 
the communication, coordination, and collaboration 
in agile ISD, thereby also enabling or inhibiting t
he swift 
reactions to change depending on the quality of the
 relationships. Even though various relationships a
mong different 
stakeholders can emerge in ISD projects, agile ISD 
is primarily concerned with two types of interperso
nal 
relationships, namely the relationships (a) among t
he developers, and (b) between the customer represe
ntatives and 
the developers. The first type refers to relationsh
ips among colleagues in the workplace, and the seco
nd type refers 
to relationships between people in a client-service
 provider relationship in which monetary interests 
often are 
involved. Agile methods support the interaction and
 collaboration between these two types of project p
articipants in 
various ways.  Below we use examples from XP (Beck 
and Andres 2005) and Scrum (Schwaber and Beedle 200
5) 
because they are the two best known and most widely
 used agile methods (Conboy 2009; Dyba and Dingsoyr
 2008).   
XP™s pair programming and Scrum™s daily stand-up me
etings are examples of practices that support the i
nteraction 
among developers. In XP™s pair programming intensiv
e collaboration among the developers is achieved by
 putting 
two developers together to write code for one task 
on one workstation (Beck and Andres 2005). The aim 
is to 
simultaneously produce code and conduct quality che
cks. It is recommended that the developers mix as m
uch as 
possible and empirical findings show that programmi
ng partners might be changed as frequently as every
 half hour 
(Vidgen and Wang 2009). However, the small team siz
e means that the same pairs form often and that the
 
developers therefore have a good understanding and 
overview of what each other are working on. Scrum™s
 daily 
stand-up meetings also support interaction among th
e developers. These meetings are short meetings hel
d each day 
at the same time and location. In these meetings ea
ch developer in the Scrum team answers three questi
ons, namely 
what was done yesterday, what is planed today, and 
if there are any problems that bloc the accomplishm
ent of the 
day™s task (Schwaber and Beedle 2005).  

XP™s planning game, onsite customer practice as wel
l as Scrum™s sprint planning and review meetings fa
cilitate 
collaboration between the developers and the custom
er representatives. In XP, both developers and cust
omer 
representatives participate in the planning game, a
 meeting that occurs once per iteration (Martin 200
3; Poole and 
Huisman 2001). The aim is to collaboratively determ
ine which system requirements that should be includ
ed in the 
current and near-future releases. The requirements 
are written down on user story cards. Later the end
 result in the 
form of released, working software is matched with 
the original user stories as well as acceptance tes
ted by the 
customer.  Thus, the XP developers and customer rep
resentatives collaborate at the beginning and end o
f an iteration 
to identify and test high-priority functionality (W
illiams and Kessler 2002). Moreover, XP stresses th
at the 
developers should have easy and continuous access t
o information and feedback from the customer throug
hout the 
duration of each iteration. It is therefore recomme
nded that the developers and one or more customer r
epresentatives 
should be collocated as this allows for informal fa
ce-to-face conversations and collaboration when the
 need arises 
(Beck and Andres 2005; Fruhling and De Vreede 2006)
. In line with XP™s planning game, Scrum prescribes
 that 
each iteration (i.e., each sprint) starts with a jo
int meeting between the developers and the product 
owner (i.e. the 
customer representative). In the sprint planning me
eting the customer representative shares the argume
nts for the 
priority of functionality with the developers, and 
the functionality to be included in the current spr
int is chosen 
(Rising and Janoff 2000). At the end of the sprint,
 a sprint review meeting is held where the develope
rs show the 
working software to obtain feedback about the produ
ct owner™s perceptions and satisfaction with the re
leased 
product. Even though Scrum does not provide a pract
ice that aims to ensure developer-customer collabor
ation 
during the sprint, empirical findings suggest that 
frequent, informal communication between all develo
pers and the 
product owner is the norm in agile ISD (Baskerville
 et al. 2010).  
In sum, agile ISD emphasizes and provides practices
 that support frequent interactions among developer
s (i.e. 
among colleagues), and close collaboration between 
customer representatives and developers (i.e. betwe
en people in 
a client-service provider relationship). Relationsh
ip research shows that sheer frequency of interacti
on, the need to 
cooperate to produce the result, and shared high-pr
essure experiences promote the formation of close i
nterpersonal 
relationships at work (Price and Arnould 1999). The
refore, we turn to relationship theory and the lite
rature about 
workplace friendship to achieve a conceptual unders
tanding of the relationships that are likely to for
m in agile ISD.  
 Human Behavior and IT 

4 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Characteristics and types of interpersonal relationships 

Different types of relationships between individual
s can be formed. Each type of relationship is gover
ned by implicit 
relationship norms and expectations with regard to 
exchange, equity, intimacy, commitment, trust, coor
dination, and 
communication (Morgan and Hunt 1994; Reis et al. 20
00; Sirdeshmukh et al. 2002). The relationship norm
s enable 
smooth interaction because much can be taken for gr
anted while expectations provide guidelines that mo
derate 
individual behavior during an interaction so as to 
achieve the most favorable outcomes (Reis et al. 20
02). One of the 
reasons that relationships might fail is due to the
 ignorance of, or disregard for the norms and expec
tations 
associated with the particular type of interpersona
l relationship (Clark and Mills 1979). Social excha
nge theory 
(Emerson 1976; Thibaut and Kelley 1959) argues that
 individuals only pursue relationships for as long 
as the 
relationship is satisfactory in terms of the reward
s and cost (Clark and Mils 1993). What an individua
l perceives to 
be a relationship reward and a relationship cost de
pends on the type of relationship. Relationships ca
n be 
characterized as either communal or exchange orient
ed. These two relationship types define different n
orms and 
expectations between the relationship partners (Cla
rk et al. 1986; Clark and Mils 1993).  
Exchange relationships are transactional and utilit
y-oriented in nature. Benefits are given with the e
xpectation of 
receiving a comparable benefit in return. Exchange 
relationships are initiated because both relationsh
ips partners 
believe the relationship is of value for them; a me
ans to an end. The interaction between partners is 
similar to the 
behavior between polite strangers (Tomiuk and Pinso
nneault 2008). Each partner keeps score of what he 
has 
invested and neither of them wants to contribute mo
re than the other (Clark et al. 1986). It is common
ly assumed in 
the literature that workplace and business relation
ships are prototypical examples of an exchange rela
tionship 
(Tomiuk and Pinsonneault 2008). In contrast, in com
munal relationships the norm is to give benefits in
 response to 
needs (offer help, gifts, and give emotional suppor
t) and to express a general concern for the other p
erson.  
Interactions among partners are cooperative and joi
nt efforts are made to achieve a common goal. In co
mmunal 
relationships, no immediate repay of a benefit is e
xpected and the partners do not feel an obligation 
to return a 
benefit received, as in an exchange relationships. 
Relationships between friends and family members ar
e examples 
of communal relationships (Clark and Mils 1993).  

Despite the common assumption that all workplace an
d business relationships are exchange relationships
 some 
researchers draw on both the communal and exchange 
orientations to understand social interaction in wo
rk settings. 
For example, two types of business relationships ha
ve been identified (Heide and Wathne 2006), namely 
those of (1) 
a 
friend 
who follows the norm of ﬁco-operation in principleﬂ
, and (2) a 
business person
 who makes decisions based 
on utility-maximization considerations and who will
 either co-operate or not depending on which action
 that will be 
most profitable for him as an individual. Similarly
, based on a qualitative study of firm-to-firm rela
tionships, the 
three types of 
strictly business
, 
business friend,
 and 
personal friend
 relations are identified (Haytko 2004). The study 
demonstrates that account managers are willing to g
o out of their way to help relationship partners th
ey like and feel 
comfortable with. The definition of the three types
 focuses on the amount of information disclosed bet
ween the 
partners, the resulting level of intimacy, and ulti
mately the trusting behavior between them.   
In exchange relationships the amount and depth of d
isclosed information between the partners is low.  
Consequently, they know very little about each othe
r (Hays 1984). The limited personal disclosure in e
xchange 
relationships impairs the creation of trust between
 the partners (Wheeless and Grotz 1976). These low 
levels of 
relationship intimacy and trust mean that customers
 feel a higher need for performance monitoring of s
ervice 
providers. Moreover, in exchange relationships it i
s uncommon to respond to and express social needs (
e.g., 
emotional stress and feelings of self-worthiness) a
nd to engage in helping behavior. Therefore, it is 
also not possible 
to ask a relationship partner who is strictly busin
ess for a favor or for the answer to a question tha
t could be 
interpreted as ﬁgoofyﬂ, or incompetent by others (H
aytko 2004). Yet, relationships can evolve from non
-intimate to 
intimate areas of communication (Cozby 1973). The m
ore personal a relationship becomes the more people
 feel 
comfortable around each other. As a result, they al
so feel more able to ask for favors and to bring ﬁt
hornyﬂ issues up 
(Wright 1984). Thus, communal relationships are cha
racterized by much helping behavior among the partn
ers. The 
willingness to express and respond to social needs 
is also high in personal friend relationships.   
Building on the dichotomy of communal and exchange 
relationships, the concept of communality has been 
suggested as a continuum that reflects the extent t
o which a workplace relationship resembles a friend
ship (Goodwin 
and Gremler 1996). Nonessential conversation (e.g.,
 about the weather and broader work-related topics,
 such as the 
appointment of a new CEO, the firm™s internationali
zation strategy, etc.) and self-disclosure (e.g., a
bout family, 
hobbies, and sicknesses) that are not directly link
ed to the delivery of the core service are indicato
rs of the degree of 
communality in a relationship (Goodwin and Gremler 
1996). The amount of nonessential information and d
epth of 
  Madsen & Matook / Conceptualizing Interpersonal Re
lationships in agile IS Development 
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
5 disclosed information increases with higher levels 
of communality (Wheeless and Grotz 1976). It has be
en found 
that customers who express communal feelings such a
s ﬁhe™s more like a friendﬂ also report a desire to
 work to 
maintain the relationship, and overcome misundersta
ndings and failures and that similar commitment was
 expressed 
by service providers who identified their regular c
ustomers as friends (Goodwin and Gremler 1996). Thu
s, the 
degree of communality determines future interaction
s between the relationship partners and influences 
the partner™s 
perception of the other™s actions as either genuine
ly communal or instrumental (Clark and Mils 1993). 
 Drawing on several references (see e.g. Clark and M
ils 1993; Hays 1984; Haytko 2004) Table 1 summarize
s the 
abovementioned key characteristics of the three typ
es of workplace relationships, i.e. business associ
ate, business 
friend, and personal friend. The eight relationship
 characteristics are based on general friendship th
eory and 
literature about workplace friendship and as such t
hey are all important. However, helping behavior is
 particularly 
crucial in business settings in which a shared goal
 is pursued and tangible outcomes are sought becaus
e giving and 
receiving help speeds up problem solving processes 
and improves the quality of the work, thereby also 
ensuring that 
the job gets done (Berman et al. 2002). The other r
elationship characteristics can be seen as prerequi
sites for helping 
behavior to occur (e.g., some level of trust is req
uired) or as means that facilitate helping behavior
 depending on the 
type of relationship. For example, work-related but
 even more so nonessential conversations about hobb
ies and 
family lead to intimate self-disclosure which means
 that the individuals get to know each other. While
 it is 
rewarding to know personal things about your collea
gues in itself it also creates an understanding of 
each others™ 
situations that makes it more likely that help will
 be asked for and provided as needed.   
 
Communal relationships, such of those of personal f
riends and even business friends, offer various ben
efits for the 
projects and organizations that constitute the cont
exts in which the relationships are initially estab
lished and 
developed.  Prior research on project team success 
has identified group process issues and technical i
ssues as 
important to task team success (White and Leifer 19
86).  The following preconceptions will introduce t
he aspect of 
friendship relationships as an antecedent of the ag
ile ISD outcome. 
Table 1. Different Types of Relationships in the Wor
kplace
 Relationship 

Characteristics 
Business Associate Business Friend Personal Friend 
Relationship 

Norms 
Individual behavior guided 

by exchange norms  
Individual behavior guided 

by co-operative and 

exchange norms 
Individual behavior guided 

by co-operative norms 
Degree of 

Communality 
Low Medium High 
Helping Behavior No helping behavior Medium helping
 behavior Much helping behavior 
Conversation 
No nonessential 

conversation 
Medium level of 

nonessential conversation  
Much nonessential 

conversation 
Amount and Depth 

of Self-Disclosure 
No self-disclosure Medium self-disclosure 
Highly intimate self-

disclosure 
Trust 
Low levels of trust that 

require substantial 

performance monitoring 
Medium levels of trust with 

occasional performance 

monitoring  
High levels of trust resulting 

in low performance 

monitoring 
Intimacy  
No personal knowledge 

about each other 
Medium personal 

knowledge about each other  
Much personal knowledge 

about each other  
Need responses 
No attention to social 

needs  
Supportive responds to 

social needs  
Supportive responds to social 

needs and emotional stress 
Obligation  
High level of obligation to 

return comparable benefit 

immediately  
Some level of obligation 
Low level of obligation for 

equal, immediate repayment 
 Human Behavior and IT 

6 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Development of theoretical preconceptions 

In this section we draw on the three types of workp
lace relationships and their characteristics to dev
elop an 
understanding of interpersonal relationships in agi
le ISD teams and their impact on the team™s ability
 to deliver 
valuable, working software on a regular basis. The 
section is structured in two parts where we first a
ddress the 
relationships among developers and subsequently loo
k at the relationships between customer representat
ives and 
developers. In each part we summarize our understan
dings as theoretical preconceptions, i.e. as concis
e statements.  
Relationships among developers 

Agile ISD prescribes and provides methodical suppor
t for frequent interaction and collaboration among 
developers. 
This is exemplified by various practices, such as X
P™s pair programming, Scrum™s daily stand-up meetin
gs, and the 
self-organizing nature of agile teams. Scrum is a p
articularly good example of the heightened norms of
 informality, 
and self-organization that agile ISD advocates. In 
Scum there is no project manager. Instead the Scrum
 master™s task 
is to make sure that the developers have everything
 they need (information, software tools, etc.) to g
et the job done. 
As such, there is, at least in principle, no formal
 hierarchy in agile ISD teams; rather the developer
s and the Scrum 
master collaborate towards the shared goal of deliv
ering the functionality that is a part of the parti
cular sprint. Due 
to the frequent face-to-face interactions, and genu
ine co-operation between equal peers prescribed by 
agile ISD it 
seems likely that personal friends relationships am
ong the developers will form and that their actions
 and 
interactions therefore will be guided by the norm o
f co-operation as a matter of principle. Thus, our 
first theoretical 
preconception is: 
TP 1: In agile ISD, the frequency of opportunities 
for interaction and co-operation among the 
developers support the formation of personal friend
 relationships.  
The literature describes personal friend relationsh
ips as characterized by a high level of communality
. This more 
specifically means that relationship partners engag
e in much nonessential and self-disclosing conversa
tions, thereby 
increasing the knowledge they have about each other
 as a person. This in turn leads to enhanced trust 
and a low level 
of performance monitoring.  In practice, the intima
cy of the self-disclosure and the extent to which p
eople actually 
like each other, share similar values and interests
, and engage in voluntary interactions outside the 
office depend on 
many aspects including company culture and personal
ity. However, in an agile ISD context, getting to k
now each 
other and creating trust-based relationships are im
portant aspects as these aspects makes it possible 
for the team 
members to voice concerns and ask for help. It also
 makes people more willing to help. In this way, kn
owing and 
trusting each other are prerequisites for the team 
to fully benefit from the key agile practices for e
xample of pair 
programming and daily standup meetings.  In particu
lar, the daily standup meeting, and especially ques
tion three, 
explicitly invites the team members to voice concer
ns and to ask for and provide help as needed. There
fore, it seems 
reasonable to assume that the amount of helping beh
avior that the team members show towards each other
 is high.  
Indeed, high levels of helping behavior correspond 
with the assumption that the developers have friend
ship bonds.  
Thus, our second theoretical preconception is:   
TP 2: The personal friend relationships among the d
evelopers are in particular characterized by a high
 
level of helping behavior. 
Prior research shows that interacting in person mak
es people work harder to connect and empathize, sol
ves problems 
faster and arouses performance instincts (Sapsed an
d Salter 2004). In line with this, we assume that t
he cumulative 
and collaborative efforts of the developers to get 
the day™s tasks done, i.e. to produce integrated, t
ested code each 
day, and to help each other do so increase the like
lihood that the agile ISD team is able to deliver w
orking software 
to the customer at regular, short intervals. Thus, 
our third theoretical preconception is: 
TP 3: The personal friends relationships and in par
ticular the high level of helping behavior impact 
positively the developers™ ability to deliver worki
ng software to the customer frequently. 
Relationships between developers and customer representatives 

At the general level, the relationship between the 
developers and the customer representatives is that
 of a client Œ 
service provider relationship, which means that the
 partners are in an instrumental (and often monetar
y) relationship 
towards each other. Yet, at the interpersonal level
, agile ISD recommends that the developers and the 
customer 
representatives work together often and in a collab
orative way to produce the result. Moreover, if the
 developers and 
  Madsen & Matook / Conceptualizing Interpersonal Re
lationships in agile IS Development 
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
7 customer representatives are collocated the two typ
es of project partners might think of themselves an
d be seen by 
others as a team (Cohen & Bailey, 1997). However, i
n practice the actual level of informal interaction
 and co-
operation between the developers and customer repre
sentative can vary despite the use of agile practic
es (Conboy 
2009). The balance between exchange and co-operativ
e norms might therefore also vary from project to p
roject, 
thereby making the relationship more or less commun
al in nature depending on the actual display of nor
ms. It also 
seems reasonable to assume that certain situations 
might call more naturally for co-operative norms (e
.g., the 
planning game and sprint planning meetings), while 
other situations might cause exchange norms to come
 into play 
(e.g., the review meetings and acceptance test). Th
us, although agile ISD values and practices strongl
y encourage 
and support frequent interaction and co-operation, 
the exchange orientation is inherent to the develop
er-customer 
relationship. It therefore also seems likely that t
he interpersonal relationships between the develope
rs and the 
customer representatives will be that of business f
riends and that their actions and interactions will
 be guided by 
both co-operative and exchange norms. Hence, our fo
urth theoretical preconception is: 
TP 4: In agile ISD, the frequency of opportunities 
for interaction and co-operation between developers
 
and customer representatives support the formation 
of business friend relationships. 
The literature describes business friend relationsh
ips as of medium level of nonessential conversation
, self-
disclosure, and intimacy. Consequently, the partner
s have some personal knowledge about each other and
 trust is at 
a medium level and therefore occasional performance
 monitoring is conducted. In agile ISD the customer
 
representative serves as an onsite or easily availa
ble contact for the developers because of their dom
ain knowledge. 
Professional and behavioral differences contribute 
to increased need for and occurrence of nonessentia
l 
conversations and self-disclosure. This leads to re
ciprocal knowledge gains about each other and each 
others™ 
broader work situation (e.g., the customer represen
tatives™ needs with regard to internal politics, an
d the developers™ 
needs for information relevant to estimation and su
bsequent development of user stories).  In this way
, the 
developers get a better understanding of the custom
er™s organization and the context in which the IS w
ill be used, 
and at the same time, they might benefit from the c
ustomer representative™s increased willingness to e
ngage in 
helping behavior.  Moreover, the opportunities that
 agile ISD creates for both essential and nonessent
ial 
communications to take place between customers and 
developers can help ensure that the customer repres
entative 
feels needed and as a part of the team.  However, d
espite that mutual knowledge is achieved and helpin
g behavior 
exercised the developerŒcustomer relationships are 
also characterized by the customer™s occasional per
formance 
monitoring. The performance monitoring typically ta
kes place during joint review meetings and when the
 software 
is released to the customer for user acceptance tes
ting. Thus, our fifth theoretical preconception is:
 TP 5: The business friend relationships between dev
elopers and customer representatives are in 
particular characterized by a medium level of helpi
ng behavior and occasional performance 
monitoring.  
Certain agile practices such as, e.g., XP™s plannin
g game and Scrum™s sprint meetings create the setti
ng and 
methodical structure for the customer representativ
e to explain requirements and their priorities and 
to provide 
answers to the developers™ questions in the beginni
ng of an iteration. According to the agile principl
es the customer 
representative should also be available to provide 
help as needed during the iteration. Moreover, the 
performance 
monitoring that takes place at the end of each iter
ation (e.g., in the review meetings) helps ensure t
hat the developers 
receive feedback on whether the produced software m
eets the requirements. The performance monitoring a
lso 
ensures that the developers stay aware of the excha
nge oriented nature of the relationship they have w
ith the 
customer, and therefore the obligation they have to
 deliver value; even when the relationship with the
 customer 
representative is otherwise close. Both the help th
at the developers receive from the customer represe
ntative in order 
to come to understanding of the requirements and th
eir priorities as well as the customer™s occasional
 performance 
monitoring impact positively the developers™ abilit
y to deliver valuable software frequently. Thus, ou
r sixth 
theoretical preconception is:  
TP 6:  The business friend relationships between th
e developers and customer representatives and in 
particular the combination of medium level of helpi
ng behavior with occasional performance 
monitoring impact positively the developers™ abilit
y to deliver valuable software to the customer 
frequently.  
 Human Behavior and IT 

8 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Method 

The theoretical preconceptions presented above cons
titute our current conceptualization of how differe
nt 
interpersonal relationships impact the agile ISD te
am™s ability to release valuable, working software 
frequently. 
Together the theoretical framework and derived prec
onceptions (Klein and Myers 1999) form our starting
 point for 
conducting interpretive case study research (Creswe
ll 2003; Walsham 1995). Interviews with developers 
and 
customer representatives will be the main data coll
ection method and are planned to take place in July
 2010. A semi-
structured interview guide that contains questions 
about relationship type, characteristics, expectati
ons, norms, 
implications, and impact will be developed. We will
 in particular ask questions that help establish an
d explain the 
link between different types of relationships and t
heir characteristics and the success criteria of ag
ile ISD.  
According to the agile manifesto, the objective and
 success criteria of agile ISD is to deliver valuab
le, working 
software to the customer frequently. ‚Frequently™ m
eans that software should be released every few wee
ks rather 
than months. The concept of ‚working software™ is t
he principal measure of progress from a development
 point of 
view and refers to tested and executable code that 
can produce an output. We will use iteration veloci
ty and burn-
down charts as measures for expected and actual pro
duction of working software per iteration. ‚Valuabl
e software™ 
summarizes the agile principle that states that cus
tomer satisfaction should be achieved by delivery o
f software that 
the customer considers useful. We will measure the 
satisfaction by building on discrepancy theory to c
ompare the 
expected and perceived performance of story cards p
er iteration.   
The theoretical framework and preconceptions will a
lso be used during data analysis, as a means for co
ding the data, 
identifying categories, and for structuring the pre
sentation of the case study account. At the same ti
me, we will strive 
to stay open to emerging codes, and categories. By 
the time of the conference, we will have completed 
the data 
analysis and shared our empirical findings with col
leagues to obtain external validation. The objectiv
e of the 
interpretive study is to arrive at a nuanced unders
tanding of different types of relationships in agil
e ISD as well as of 
the importance and impact of certain friendship cha
racteristics, and in particular of helping behavior
, on the software 
outcome. Also, the objective is to create an empiri
cal foundation that can help further advance the th
eoretical ideas.  
In a subsequent research project, we will use this 
nuanced understanding to develop hypothesis and rel
ated 
constructs to capture the topic of interpersonal re
lationships in agile ISD with a positivist research
 approach. 
Conclusion 

In this paper we address the people-centered aspect
s of agile ISD. The aim is to understand how the cl
oseness of the 
interpersonal relationships between key project par
ticipants impacts the agile ISD team™s ability to d
eliver valuable, 
working software frequently. Agile ISD provides var
ious practices that encourage frequent interaction 
and 
collaboration among developers and between customer
 representatives and developers, thereby also suppo
rting the 
formation of close working relationships among thes
e project participants. Drawing on relationship the
ory and 
friendship literature a theoretical framework about
 different types of workplace relationships was dev
eloped and 
used for deriving theoretical preconceptions about 
agile relationships and their impact. An understand
ing of the 
relationship specific aspects of agile ISD as well 
as of different types of workplace relationships ca
n be used by 
researchers to help explain why some agile projects
 succeed, while others fail. Moreover, knowledge ab
out the 
importance and impact of certain relationship chara
cteristics can be used by agile project managers, S
crum masters, 
and others (e.g. the customer representative) to ta
ke action that helps foster friends-like behavior t
hat influences the 
software outcome positively. 
  Madsen & Matook / Conceptualizing Interpersonal Re
lationships in agile IS Development 
 Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
9  
References 

Baskerville, R., Pries-Heje, J., and Madsen, S. "Fr
om exotic to mainstream: A 10-year odyssey from int
ernet speed 
to boundary spanning with Scrum," in: 
agile software development: current research and fu
ture directions
, 
(eds.) Dybå T., Dingsøyr T., Moe, N.B., Springer, 2
010, Chapter 5.   
Beath, C., and Orlikowski, W. "The contradictory st
ructure of systems development methodologies: Decon
structing 
the IS-user relationship in information engineering
," 
Information Systems Research
 (5:4) 1994, pp. 350-
377. 
Beck, K. "Embracing change with extreme programming
," 
Computer
 (32:10) 1999, pp. 70-77. 
Beck, K., and Andres, C. 
Extreme programming explained: Embrace change
, (2 ed.) Addison-Wesley Boston, MA, 
2005. 
Berman, E., West, J., and Richter Jr, M. "Workplace
 relations: Friendship patterns and consequences (A
ccording to 
managers)," 
Public Administration Review
 (62:2) 2002, pp. 217-230. 
Clark, M., and Mills, J. "Interpersonal attraction 
in exchange and communal relationships," 
Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology
 (37:1) 1979, pp. 12-24. 
Clark, M., Mills, J., and Powell, M. "Keeping track
 of needs in communal and exchange relationships," 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology
 (51:2) 1986, pp. 333-338. 
Clark, M., and Mils, J. "The difference between com
munal and exchange relationships: What it is and is
 not," 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
 (19:6) 1993, p 684. 
Cockburn, A. 
Agile software development: the cooperative game
 Addison-Wesley, 2007. 
Cohen, S.G., and Bailey, D.E. "What makes teams wor
k: Group effectiveness research from the shop floor
 to the 
executive suite," 
Journal of Management
, (23:3) 1997, 239-290.  
Conboy, K. "Agility from first principles: Reconstr
ucting the concept of agility in information system
s 
development," 
Information Systems Research
 (20:3) 2009, pp. 329-354. 
Cozby, P. "Self-disclosure: A literature review," 
Psychological Bulletin
 (79:3) 1973, pp. 73-91. 
Creswell, J. 
Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mix
ed Methods Approaches
 Sage, Thousand Oaks, 
CA, 2003. 
Dyba, T., and Dingsoyr, T. "Empirical studies of ag
ile software development: A systematic review " 
Information 
and Software Technology
 (50:9-10) 2008, pp. 833-859. 
Emerson, R. "Social exchange theory," 
Annual review of sociology
 (2:1) 1976, pp. 335-362. 
Fowler, M., and Highsmith, J. "The Agile Manifesto,
" 
Software Development
 (9:8) 2001, pp. 28-35. 
Fruhling, A., and De Vreede, G.-J. "Field experienc
es with eXtreme programming: developing an emergenc
y 
response system," 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (22:4) 2006, pp. 39-68. 
Goodwin, C., and Gremler, D.D. (eds.) 
Friendship over the counter: How social aspects of 
service encounters 
influence consumer service loyalty
. JAI, Greenwich, 1996. 
Grayson, K. "Friendship versus business in marketin
g relationships," 
Journal of Marketing
 (71:4) 2007, pp. 121 - 
139. 
Hays, R.B. "The development and maintenance of frie
ndship," 
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships
 (1:1) 
1984, pp. 75-98. 
Haytko, D. "Firm-to-firm and interpersonal relation
ships: Perspectives from advertising agency account
 managers," 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science
 (32:3) 2004, pp. 312-328. 
Heide, J.B., and Wathne, K.H. "Friends, businesspeo
ple, and relationship roles: A conceptual framework
 and a 
research agenda," 
Journal of Marketing
 (70:3) 2006, pp. 90-103. 
Hinds, P., and Bailey, D. "Out of sight, out of syn
c: Understanding conflict in distributed teams," 
Organization 
Science
 (14:6) 2003, pp. 615-632. 
Hinds, P., and Mortensen, M. "Understanding conflic
t in geographically distributed teams: The moderati
ng effects 
of shared identity, shared context, and spontaneous
 communication," 
Organization Science
 (16:3) 2005, pp. 
290-307. 
Hirschheim, R., and Klein, H. "Four paradigms of in
formation systems development," 
Communications of the ACM
 (32:10) 1989, pp. 1199-1216. 
Janis, I. 
Victims of groupthink: A psychological study of for
eign-policy decisions and fiascoes
 Houghton Mifflin 
Boston, 1972. 
 Human Behavior and IT 

10 
Thirty First International Conference on Informatio
n Systems, St. Louis 2010 
 Klein, H., and Myers, M. "A set of principles for c
onducting and evaluating interpretive field studies
 in information 
systems," 
MIS Quarterly
 (23:1) 1999, pp. 67-93. 
Martin, R. 
Agile software development: principles, patterns, a
nd practices
 Prentice Hall PTR Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, USA, 2003. 
McAvoy, J., and Butler, T. "The role of project man
agement in ineffective decision making within Agile
 software 
development projects," 
European Journal of Information Systems
 (18:4) 2009, pp. 372-383. 
McMahon, J. "Five lessons, from transitioning to eX
treme programming: Using two person teams to write 
software 
code is one aspect of eXtreme Programming (XP). Her
e's what Citect learned when it implemented the XP 
method," 
Control Engineering
 (50:3) 2003, pp. 59-60. 
Morgan, R.M., and Hunt, S.D. "The commitment-trust 
theory of relationship marketing," 
The Journal of Marketing
 (58:3) 1994, pp. 20-38. 
Poole, C., and Huisman, J. "Using extreme programmi
ng in a maintenance environment," 
IEEE Software
 (18:6) 
2001, pp. 42-50. 
Price, L.L., and Arnould, E.J. "Commercial friendsh
ips: Service provider-client relationships in conte
xt " 
Journal of 
Marketing
 (63:4) 1999, pp. 38-56. 
Reis, H.T., Capobianco, A., and Tsai, F.-F. "Findin
g the person in personal relationships," 
Journal Of Personality
 (70:6) 2002, pp. 813-850. 
Reis, H.T., Collins, W.A., and Berscheid, E. "The r
elationship context of human behavior and developme
nt," 
Psychological Bulletin
 (126:6) 2000, pp. 844-872. 
Rising, L., and Janoff, N. "The Scrum software deve
lopment process for small teams," 
IEEE Software
 (17:4) 2000, 
pp. 26-32. 
Sapsed, J., and Salter, A. "Postcards from the edge
: Local communities, global programs, and boundary 
objects," 
Organization Studies
 (25:9) 2004, pp. 1515-1534. 
Sawyer, S., Guinan, P., and Cooprider, J. "Social i
nteractions of information systems development team
s: a 
performance perspective," 
Information Systems Journal
 (20:1) 2008, pp. 81-107. 
Schwaber, K., and Beedle, M. 
Agile software development with Scrum
 Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2005. 
Sirdeshmukh, D., Singh, J., and Sabol, B. "Consumer
 trust, value, and loyalty in relational exchanges 
" 
The Journal 
of Marketing
 (66:1) 2002, pp. 15-37. 
Thibaut, J., and Kelley, H.H. 
The social psychology of groups
 Wiley, New York, 1959. 
Tomiuk, D., and Pinsonneault, A. "Applying relation
ship theories to web site design: development and v
alidation of 
a site-communality scale," 
Information Systems Journal
 (19:4) 2008, pp. 413-435. 
Truex, D., Baskerville, R., and Travis, J. "Amethod
ical systems development: The deferred meaning of s
ystems 
development methods," 
Accounting, Management and Information Technologies
 (10:1) 2000, pp. 53-79. 
Vidgen, R., and Wang, X. "Coevolving systems and th
e organization of agile software development," 
Information 
Systems Research
 (20:3) 2009, pp. 355-376. 
Walsham, G. "Interpretive case studies in IS resear
ch: Nature and method," 
European Journal of Information 
Systems
 (4:2) 1995, pp. 74-81. 
Wheeless, L.R., and Grotz, J. "Conceptualization an
d measurement of reported self-disclosure," 
Human 
Communication Research
 (2:4) 1976, pp. 338-346. 
White, K.B., and Leifer, R. "Information systems de
velopment success: Perspectives from project team 
participants," 
MIS Quarterly
 (10:3) 1986, pp. 215-223. 
Williams, L., and Kessler, R. 
Pair programming illuminated
 Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc. 
Boston, MA, USA, 2002. 
Wing, M. "In Praise of SE Geeks," 
ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes
 (30:4) 2005, pp. 8-9. 
Wright, P.H. "Self-referent motivation and the intr
insic quality of friendship," 
Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships
 (1:1) 1984, pp. 115-130. 
 
 
 
 