 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Georgia State UniversityGeorgia State UniversityUniversity of PretoriaICIS 2006 Proceedings.  Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
835 NEGOTIATING 
RESPONSE-ABILITY AND 
REPEAT
-ABILITY IN 
REQUIREMENTS ENGINEERING Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development  
Nannette P. Napier Computer Information Systems  Georgia State University nnapier1@gsu.edu
  Lars Mathiassen Center for Process Innovation Georgia State University lmathiassen@gsu.edu
   Roy D. Johnson 
University of Pretoria Department of Informatics Roy@UP.ac.az  Abstract Requirements engineering (RE) practices are 
critical to success during the development of 
business software. As managers assess RE practices, they apply specific perspectives that 
determine problems identified and recommendatio
ns for improvement. Two perspectives have 
recently dominated managerial thin
king within the so
ftware industry, one rooted in software 
process improvement and the ot
her rooted in agile software 
development. Underpinning these 
perspectives are two theories about what constitu
tes good software practice. In this paper, we 
explicate these theories in relation to RE and show how they differ in basic assumptions about the 
nature of requirements, requirements capture, requirements usage, change management, and 
approach to improvement. The repeat-ability theo
ry holds that good requirements practices are 
plan-driven and follow generic best practices to arrive at an agreed-upon baseline of software 
requirements. Response-ability holds that good 
requirements practices are adaptive and involve 
close interaction between customers and developers
 to arrive at satisfactory software solutions. 
We use case study data from a software firm, TelSoft, to show how the theories lead to different 
interpretations about why current practices are problematic and how problems are resolved. 
Relating to the improvement strategy adopted at TelSoft, we demonstrate the superiority, for 
managers, of negotiating response-ability and repeat-ability concerns when improving RE 
practices. The paper concludes with a discussion of implications for research and practice. 
Keywords: 
Requirements management, agile methods, software process improvement, CMM, 
case study  Introduction Requirements Engineering (RE) involves eliciting, do
cumenting, and maintaining software requirements 
throughout the software development lifecycle (Kotonya
 and Sommerville, 1998). 
Ineffective RE practices 
can have long-term consequences for software projects. For example, discovering requirements errors 
during the production phase is estimated to be 100 times more expensive to fix than if that same error is 
found during the analysis phase (Boehm, 1983). Acknowledging the significance of RE, software project 
managers have identified misunderstood requirements as the second most important risk to be managed 

(Schmidt et al. ,2001). Despite RE-s
pecific process descriptions and be
st practices (Beecham et al.,, 2005b; 
CMMI Product Team, 2002; Sommerville and Sawyer, 
1997), RE remains one of the most challenging 
aspects of business software development (Beecham et 
al., 2005a). This is due in part to competitive 
 Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
836 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
business environments characterized by frequent requirements changes, rapid technological advances, and 
time-to-market pressures (Ramesh et al., 2002). 
Software development managers looking to improve RE practices must first be able to identify problems 
with current RE practices and then determine the most
 appropriate tactics for resolving those problems. The 
perspective applied to the situation determines the problems identified and the resulting recommendations 
for improvement. Two perspectives that have strongly influenced software development are plan-driven 
versus agile development approaches (Boehm, 2002). 
Plan-driven approaches st
ress repeat-ability whereas 
agile approaches emphasize response-ability.  
Plan-driven approaches, such as the Software Ca
pability Maturity Model (SW-CMM), Bootstrap (Kuvaja 
and Bicego, 1994), or SPICE (Rout, 1995), emphasize documentation of project milestones, requirements, 

and designs; this approach
 is appropriate when the requirements ar
e stable and known in advance (Boehm, 
2002). The plan-driven approach assumes that improvement occurs by increasing organizational maturity 
through documented and repeatable processes (Humphrey, 1989). While some companies have benefited 
from implementing SW-CMM, there are also limitations with this approach to software process 
improvement: the scope of the assessment is limited by the model; it can be expensive to put into practice; 

and best practices may not fit closely the wants and ne
eds of the organization (Iversen et al.,, 2002). In the 
context of RE, one study found that SW-CMM-based 
approaches were able to
 improve technical RE 
problems, but not necessarily organizati
onal RE problems (Beecham et al., 2005b). 
Agile approaches, such as extreme programming (B
eck, 1999), Crystal Met
hods (Cockburn, 2000), or 
Adaptive Software Development (Highsmith, 2000), em
phasize people and prototyp
es over processes and 
documentation (Agile Alliance, 2001; Highsmith and Co
ckburn, 2001). Agile RE practices are less formal 
than plan-driven RE practices, but they still focus on understanding the customer™s business requirements 
(Orr, 2004). Because requirem
ents are expected to change, agile de
velopment occurs in short, iterative 
development cycles, and there is little attempt to pred
ict future requirements. Agile methods also prescribe 
close collaboration between customers and the development organization to continually refine and 
prioritize requirements.  
Although there are strong advocates 
of both the plan-driven and agile ap
proaches, there have also been 
recent attempts to explore comb
ining the two approaches. Boehm 
(2002) suggests that project 
characteristics such as developer skill set, customer
 availability, and requirements predictability be 
evaluated and used to pick the approach that best f
its the situation. Furthermore, he suggests combining 
plan-driven and agile approaches for projects that have mixed characteristics. Some studies have examined 
how agile approaches can comply with the guidelines 
of the SW-CMM (Paulk, 2001) and its latest version 
the Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI
) (Anderson, 2005; CMMI Product Team, 2002). 
Empirical case studies have also begun to appear that
 show how this combinati
on can occur (Baker, 2005; 
Salo and Abrahamsson, 2005). However, the mixed messages about what approach to adopt can be a source 

of confusion for software managers. There is therefore a need to explicate the theoretical underpinning of 
the two approaches and to understan
d how they apply to RE practices. 
Hence, we explore the repeat-ability and response-ability theories that underpin plan-driven and agile 
approaches, and we apply them to RE practices in a software firm, 
TelSoft
 (a pseudonym). We emphasize 
the two theories for RE from the viewpoint of their implications for action. The objective is to clarify the 
underlying assumptions of plan-driven and agile approaches in relation to RE and to explore what types of 

problems and recommendations each perspective reveals. To achieve this, we conducted a systematic 
assessment of RE practices in 
TelSoft and used the data to address the following research questions: 
1. What assumptions distinguish repeat-ability
 from response-ability theories of RE? 
2. How do repeat-ability and response-ability th
eories differ in assessing RE practice? 
3. How do repeat-ability and response-ability th
eories apply to improving RE practice? 
 The argument is organized as follows: First, the re
peat-ability and response-ability theories on RE are 
presented and contrasted in terms of their underlying assumptions. Next, background information is 
provided about 
TelSoft and the adopted research approach. Then, we evaluate the theories based on data 
from 
TelSoft
. The paper concludes with recommendations for 
software managers and future research.  
  Napier et al./ Negotiating Response-ability and
 Repeat-ability in Requirements Engineering 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
837 RE Theories A manager trying to decide how to improve RE practices may hold one of two divergent theories about 
why current practices are problematic and how proble
ms are resolved: repeat-ability and response-ability. 
Repeat-ability holds that good requirements practices
 are plan-driven and follow a set of generic best 
practices for how to arrive at an agreed-upon base
line of software requirements. Repeat-ability is an 
important principle within the SW-CMM (Paulk, Curtis, Ch
rissis and Weber, 1993). In fact, the first step in 
increasing organizational maturity involves moving from 
an initial level to a repeatable level by reducing 
variations in practices (Humphrey, 1989). In contrast, response-ability holds that good requirements 
practices are adaptive and involve close collaboration and interaction between customers and developers to 

help develop satisfactory software solutions. Respon
se-ability is an important principle within agile 
development approaches (Beck, 1999; 
Boehm and Turner, 2004; Turk et al.,, 
2005). In fact, one of the four 
basic principles of the Agile Manifesto is ﬁResponding to change over following a planﬂ (Agile Alliance, 

2001). Table 1 describes these two idealized persp
ectives in detail and explicates their underlying 
assumptions in the context of requirements engineering. 
 Table 1: Theories of RE Œ Underlying Assumptions 
Assumption Repeat-ability Response-ability 
1. Nature of requirements 
 Requirements represent software 
capabilities 
 Requirements are explicated as 
texts in documents 
 Requirements are perceptions of 
software capabilities 
 Requirements are tacitly 
embedded in social relationships 
2. Requirements capture 
 Requirements are derived through 
specification  Interaction is formal 
 Requirements are discovered 
through negotiation 
 Interaction is informal 
3. Requirements usage 
 Requirements are baselined and 
predate development 
 Requirements are stored with 
traceability to source code 
 Requirements emerge through 
development 
 Requirements are expressed 
through software solutions 
4. Change management 
 Requirements changes are 
exceptions and must be managed 
 Requirements changes are 
expected and must be embraced 
5. Improvement approach 
 The goal is to reduce process 
variance through best practices 
 The goal is to increase customer 
satisfaction through collaboration 
 In the repeat-ability theory, requirements are textual 
representations of the desired software capabilities. 
Requirements knowledge is explicated as objects th
at are passed between requirements providers and 
requirements receivers. Requirements capture is a form
al process that occurs 
before development work 
begins; it includes document review, discussion, and sign-off to indicate approval. Once sign-off has been 
obtained, a requirements baseline is established. Any changes to the requirements baseline must be 

documented and communicated to relevant stakeholders (Paulk et al., 1993). The role of quality assurance 
is to verify that the completed software matches 
the requirements specificatio
n. If RE practices are 
problematic, this approach looks for missing or ineffi
cient processes. The overa
ll improvement approach in 
the repeat-ability paradigm is to institute best pr
actices and reduce process variance (Humphrey, 1989). 
In the response-ability theory, requirements exist 
as shared understandings between stakeholders. 
Requirements knowledge is tacit, and the role of do
cumentation is minimized. 
Customers play a critical 
role during software development as expressed in 
the principle ﬁCustomer collaboration over contract 
negotiationﬂ (Agile Alliance, 2001).
 Customers provide immediate feedback on interim versions of the 
 Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
838 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
software and set priorities for the next iteration. Requirements capture happens informally as part of 
ongoing conversations with customer
s. This incremental approach allows requirements changes to be 
incorporated into the next version of the software. If
 RE practices are problematic, this approach looks for 
breakdowns in communication with customers or between developers. The overall improvement approach 

is to increase customer satisfaction by enhancing co
llaboration to quickly adapt to customer requests. 
Research Methodology 
A partnership between 
TelSoft and three researchers from a Univer
sity Innovation Center (UIC) provided 
the basis for data collection. Overall, we adopted an
 action research approach (Baskerville, 1998; Rapoport, 
1970; Susman and Evered, 1978) to diagnose RE
 practices, provide specific recommendations, and 
implement improvements. In this section, we provide background information about the research site and 
describe the research approach of this study in detail. 
TelSoft  TelSoft
 was founded in 1971 with the mission to be the premier technical services firm in the 
telecommunications and utility industries. Approximately 50 people within 
TelSoft
™s software development 
division work together to build and customize geographic information systems (GIS) software. 
TelSoft™s biggest strength is its people: experienced software engineers with deep knowledge of the GIS application, 

systems analysts with strong customer relationships, 
and managers willing to adapt quickly to customer 
requests. However, the company acknow
ledges recent issues with its RE
 practices. For example, internal 
stakeholders complain that insufficient information is collected during requirements elicitation, thereby 

delaying design and development activities. Increasingl
y, customers identify missing functionality during 
acceptance testing of the delivered softwa
re. Also, financial pressures require 
TelSoft to downsize its 
workforce, causing it to lose valuable
 customer and application expertise. 
TelSoft
™s prior attempt at improvement was initiated in July 2000 guided by SW-CMM (Paulk et al., 1993). 
Despite high productivity rates and perceptions 
of progress, support for the SW-CMM initiative was 
withdrawn in August 2001 due pr
imarily to financial pressures. 
TelSoft
 decided to commit resource to 
imminent development rather than to process improvement. The most visible remains of the improvement 
effort were unused and out-dated process documentation combined with mistrust for rigorously following 
SW-CMM to improve RE practices. 
Industry-Research Collaboration To address this problematic situation, a collaborativ
e practice research (Mathiassen, 2002) project was 
initiated between 
TelSoft and the authors in October 2004. Collabo
rative practice research is a form of 
action research characterized by strong collaboration 
between practitioners and re
searcher. Galliers (1991) 
defines action research as an attempt to obtain practi
cal results valued by the involved groups while adding 
to the body of knowledge in the discipline. Consiste
nt with the dual problem solving cycle and research 
cycle (McKay and Marshall, 2001), the collaboration had two objectives: 1) improving the quality and 

productivity of software services at 
TelSoft through enhanced RE practices and 2) contributing to research 
in software requirements management. A memorandum of understanding detailing the project plan, initial 
tasks, and collaboration structure 
documented the agreement between 
TelSoft 
and UIC. The collaboration 
was designed to address the following tasks: 
1. Model and assess 
TelSoft™s 
existing practices and tools as they ar
e applied to requirements elicitation, 
analysis, documentation, and management. 
2. Describe key sources of requirements, the interests of the involved stakeholders, and the different ways 
in which new requirements are negotiated and used as the basis to define the scope of development 

projects. 3. Describe existing practices and tools used to continuously manage the scope of projects by tracing 
project activities and product functionality to the requirements of the project. 
  Napier et al./ Negotiating Response-ability and
 Repeat-ability in Requirements Engineering 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
839 4. Identify strengths and weaknesses in current RE pr
actices as well as opportunities for improvement. 
Generate new or changed process documentation to assist 
TelSoft 
future requirements management 
efforts. 5. Implement and assess selected im
provements in RE practices. 
 The IDEAL model was adopted from McFeeley (1996) to improve RE practices. This particular research 
article focus on information gathered during the ﬁDﬂ phase or ﬁDiagnosingﬂ (see Figure 1). 
 Stimulus forimprovementSet context &EstablishsponsorshipEstablishinfra-structureAppraise &Characterizecurrent processDevelop recommendations& Document resultsSet strategy &PrioritiesEstablishprocess actionteams & ActionplansDefine processes & measuresPlan & Execute pilotsPlan. Execute, & Track installationDocument &Analyze lessonsReviseorganizationalapproachINITIATINGDIAGNO-SINGESTABLISH-MENTACTINGLEARNING Figure 1: IDEAL Mode
l (McFeeley 1996) 
 The collaboration was managed by a Steering Committee (SC) composed of senior management from 
TelSoft
 and the three university research
ers (see Figure 2). The SC meets 2-
3 times per year as needed to 
oversee the project. More hands-on activities are completed by the Problem-Solving Team (PST) consisting 

of middle-level managers at 
TelSoft
 and the three researchers. The PS
T meets as needed to guide the 
collaboration and make decisions such as selecting participants for interviews and workshops.  
 Figure 2: Managing Collaborative Pr
actice Research (Mathiassen 2002) 
TelSoft:
 VP of Software Development,  
 3 Managers  
UIC:  Three authors 
TelSoft: 
CEO, VP of Software Development, 
 Division President 
UIC:  Three authors 
Steering Committee 
(SC) Problem Solving Team (PST)  Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
840 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
Data Collection Data collection and documentation are essential for su
ccessful action research and qualitative research in 
general (Avison et al., 1999; Mason,
 2002; Miles and Huberman, 1994).
 Because one of the authors had 
previously worked at 
TelSoft, the research team quickly earned 
acceptance by and confidence of the 
TelSoft
 employees. In December 2004, the re
search team initiated a diagnosis 
of RE practices by examining 
TelSoft™s
 existing documentation of software development processes, procedures, and policies. This was 
followed by semi-structured interviews with 22 re
presentatives from three major stakeholder groups: 
software development, internal customers, and exte
rnal customers (see Table 2: Summary of Interview 
Sources). In most cases, the interviews were record
ed and conducted face-to-face with at least two 
researchers present; however, there we
re some interviews that were conducted via conference calls or with 
just the first author present. In all cases, the interv
iewers took extensive notes during the interview which 
were later reviewed, discussed, and 
analyzed. An interview guide was presented to participants to structure 
the interview process and ensure that we collected
 the desired information about RE practices. These 
interview guides were tailored to suit stakeholders internal and external to 
TelSoft (see Table 3: Interview 
Guide for Internal Stakeholders). Interviews were sche
duled for one hour. While the interviews served as a 
primary data source, we used multiple sources of ev
idence to corroborate our fi
ndings (Mason, 2002; Miles 
et al., 1994). These sources includ
ed: field observation, field notes, minutes from PST meetings, the 
diagnostic report of RE practices at 
TelSoft, and unlimited access to all 
TelSoft
™s process documentation. 
 Table 2: Summary of Interview Sources 
Group Affiliation Count Role 
Internal Customers  
(Map Services, Sales) 
6 1 Liaison to Software Group 
3 Project Managers 

2 Sales Representatives 
Software Development Group 9 2 Development Managers 
2 Project Managers 
2 Software Engineers 
2 Systems Analysts 

1 Quality Assurance Analyst 
External Customers 

(Far Telco, Local Telco, other) 
7 3 Managers, Far Telco 
3 Managers, Local Telco 
1 Engineer, other customer 
  Table 3: Interview Guide for Internal Stakeholders 
Requirements Documents Requirements Activities 
 Which? 
 Inputs from whom? 
 Contributions? 
 Output to whom? 
 Which? 
 Interactions? 
 Collaboration? 
 Resources? 
Strengths, Weaknesses, and Opportunities 
Strengths, Weaknesses, and Opportunities 
   Napier et al./ Negotiating Response-ability and
 Repeat-ability in Requirements Engineering 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
841 Data Analysis As suggested by Miles and Huberman (1994, p. 56), data analysis was an ongoing process. After groups of 
interviews were conducted, the research team met to reflect upon what was learned and detect patterns 

emerging from the data. These ideas were discusse
d with the PST for feedback and verification and 
documented in field notes. Additiona
lly, we created interim reports afte
r completing interviews with each 
of the three stakeholder groups. We also conducted workshops with participants from the software 

development and internal customers groups to pr
esent the problems detect
ed and to validate our 
assessment. In these 2-3 hour workshops, participants prioritized the identified problems in terms of 
criticality, feasibility, and priority. Feedback from th
ese workshops and all interviews were accumulated 
into the comprehensive diagnostic report which was approved by both the PST and SC. 
To answer our research questions, an additional level 
of analysis was conducted. We used an alternative 
templates strategy for analyzing the data (Langley, 1999); in this approach, different theories are 

independently applied to the same data to evaluate 
the explanatory power of the theories. This technique 
was previously used by Markus (1983) to compare 
three theories of resist
ance when studying systems 
implementation. Similarly, at 
TelSoft, we approached a complex managerial issue through alternative 
theoretical lenses of repeat-ability and response-ab
ility. We applied each theory to the case data and 
assessed the useful of the theories for managerial practice.  
The analytical process was guided by the fundamental
 principle of the hermeneutic circle (Klein and 
Myers, 1999); we alternated between focusing on eac
h theory as a whole and 
on examining closely the 
underlying assumptions composing each theory as outlin
ed in Table 1. During 
the holistic analysis, the 
three researchers first adopted the repeat-ability lens. 
After reviewing selected data sources and reflecting 
upon their experiences at 
TelSoft
, they identified key problems and recommendations that would occur 
within the repeat-ability paradigm. Once agreement had 
been reached, the three re
searchers then repeated 
their interpretation of the key problems and recommendations based upon the response-ability lens. This 
activity resulted in a rough, first versio
n of what is presented in Table 4.  
During the detailed analysis, evidence 
for each theoretical assumption was 
systematically gathered from the 
data. Several codes were developed for each of the five
 assumptions of repeat-ability and response-ability. 
For example, within the repeat-ability theory, two codes 
were created relating to the nature of requirements: 
(1) indicating that requirements are another representa
tion of the software and (2) indicating requirements 
should be documented in textual format. Using Atlas.ti qualitative software, the first author then read 
through the entire set of data sources and applied the repeat-ability codes to all mentioning of problems 
related to requirements, their capture, their usage, 
change management, and approaches to improvement. 
The process was then done again using the codes from the response-ability theory.  
Finally, all three researchers reconsidered the result of 
the holistic analysis in the light of the systematic 
coding of the data. This led to changes in and refinements of Table 4 and also to revision and improvement 

of the coding. These analysis activities were iterated 
until all three authors agr
eed that each of the two 
theories had contributed with a coherent and satisfactory explanation of the data from 
TelSoft 
(Langley, 
1999) . 
Requirements Practices TelSoft
 has two primary software products: Map Displayer and Engineering Support Tool (pseudonyms). 
The Map Displayer is relatively low-cost software that displays digitized maps, has global positioning 
capabilities, and supports limited drawing capabilities. 
Companies use Map Displayer to save on plotting 
and printing costs and to allow field wo
rkers access to up-to-date, accurate maps. 
The Engineering Support Tool serves
 as an accounting system for utilities
 (e.g. location of poles, right of 
ways, cables, etc.). There is a great 
deal of configuration involved in setting up this particular software; 
therefore, it is expensive 
to license and to use. 
TelSoft has, as a consequence, only a handful of clients that 
use the Engineering Support Tool, and this client base is dominated by two long-standing, large customers 
whose requests largely dictate the product™s innovation and growth. 
 Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
842 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
There are two major groups within 
TelSoft: Software Development and the Map Services group. Software 
Development includes systems analysts, project managers, software engineers, quality assurance analysts, 
and their managers. Their job is to create new functionality requested by clients and maintain the existing 
software products. Map Services uses the Engineering Support Tool software to convert paper maps into 

digital format and to translate electronic maps from one format to another. Both of these groups 
communicate with 
TelSoft™s Sales group to learn about end user needs for either updated versions of the 
software or new formats for digitized maps. 
In this next section, we describe RE practices at 
TelSoft
. The data suggest that 
TelSoft
 practices vary greatly 
based upon the customer being served; therefore, this section is divided by customer type. First, we 
describe how Software Development and Map Services
 interact to generate requirements. Then, we 
describe the RE practices with two of 
TelSoft™s most established external customers. For each of these 
customers, we describe how requirements are captured, documented, stored, and changed. 
Requirements Initiated by Internal Customers 
The Map Services group is the primar
y internal customer of Software De
velopment. Because this group is 
seen as part of the 
TelSoft family, the typical rules that apply to external customers regarding documenting 
and negotiating requirements are relaxed.  
Requirements come from a variety of sources: end users looking for an easier way to do their jobs, Map 
Service™s clients changing how digitizing should occur, or unanticipated data conditions found that the 
software now needs to handle. Requests for new softwa
re functionality are typically shared with Software 
Development via email messages or informal face-to
-face conversations. Later, the resulting requirements 
are documented in bulleted format and logged in the 
defect tracking database. Because Map Services relies 
upon the software as a production tool, the chief concern of production managers is getting software that 
meets their requirements as quickly as
 possible with minimal documentation.  
The relationship between the groups is strained in part because requirements are not fully understood and 
agreed upon before development work begins. Software Development gets frustrated and feels that Map 

Services does not do a good job of explicating thei
r requirements up front. Inst
ead, they communicate what 
they think they want at a very high level and then, when software development implements it, they want 
something different. This leads to re-work and blown schedules.  
From Map Services™ perspective, Software Development does not deliver a quality product to them in a 
timely fashion which halts their ability to digitize maps
 and dramatically affects their bottom-line. Software 
Development prioritizes requests from external cust
omers over the ones from internal customers. Not 
trusting that the stringent quality assurance guidelin
es were being followed, the Map Services manager 
dedicated a person on his staff just to test the quality of the work being done by Software Development. 
Because Software Development does not incur any co
sts for giving poor service or product to Map 
Services, there is little incentive for them to prior
itize Map Services™ needs over
 the needs of external 
customers.  
Both Software Development and Map 
Services realize that there are missed opportunities for productivity 
and quality enhancement because the internal end us
ers are not always aware of the capabilities of the 
Engineering Support Tool and Software Development is not knowledgeable about how the software is 
being used. This occurs even though there are a large number of end users from Map Services collocated 

with Software Development.  
Requirements Initiated by External Customers 
Software Development focuses primarily on two exte
rnal customers that hold the largest number of 
licenses for its Map Displayer product and that have invested in enhancing the Engineering Support Tool. 

These companies drive changes to the software by specifying which functional and non-functional 
requirements they are willing to pay fo
r and what the user-interface should 
look like. In an 
effort to keep 
these customers happy, 
TelSoft frequently responds with a ﬁyesﬂ wh
en asked to make changes to their 
processes and products. Software Development has assigned a project manager to serve as the main 
customer liaison for each of these cust
omers, Far Telco and Local Telco.  
  Napier et al./ Negotiating Response-ability and
 Repeat-ability in Requirements Engineering 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
843 The project manager for Far Telco communicates w
ith the customer primarily via email messages and 
internet-supported conf
erence calls. Far Telco shares its high level needs and strategic direction with 
TelSoft
 at a yearly face-to-face planning session. More 
specific and detailed planni
ng occurs for software 
releases which are scheduled a
pproximately every 6-8 months. The client documents the business 
requirements for new functionality; then, communicates with the project manager to generate system level 
and functional requirements. These are documented form
ally in a functional specification that is written by 
TelSoft
 and must be approved before development work 
begins. The functional specification serves as the 
main communication means used by quality assurance analysts for testing and by software engineers for 
understanding what they should code. Once the code has been developed and integration tested, quality 
assurance analysts perform certification testing and document any deviations between the functional 

specification and the software product. If there are an
y changes to the requirements after the functional 
specification has been approved, a change control 
document is written to describe required change, 
perceived benefits, schedule impacts, and approval. 
The project manager for Local Telco communicates with the client using a variety of means Œ email, phone, 
and face-to-face meetings Œ to understand requirements for new functionality. Local Telco takes a much 

more hands-off approach to requirements elicita
tion. It emails high level requirements to 
TelSoft
 that 
includes bulleted lists or a few sentences; then, 
TelSoft
 interprets those into more detailed system level 
requirements and provides these through presentations or in documents for Local Telco™s approval. 

Although 
TelSoft
 employees like having control over the ch
anges that occur in the software, problems 
sometimes occur because Local Telco does not thoroughly review 
TelSoft™s specification of requirements. 
As a result, Local Telco is not always pleased with the delivered software. 
Theoretical Interpretations Given this background about the relationship between 
TelSoft
 and three of its primary customers, we now 
apply the repeat-ability and response-ability theories 
and compare and contrast the types of problems and 
recommendations each perspective brings
 to the data. For each theory, we 
revisit the data collected during 
assessment of RE practices at 
TelSoft, we interpret these data through the lens of each theory, and we 
present the result according 
to the five assumptions: nature of 
requirements, requ
irements capture, 
requirements usage, change mana
gement, and improvement approach. 
Repeat-ability Perspective  Nature of Requirements 
The repeat-ability theory assumes that requirements be explicated as texts in documents. At 
TelSoft, the 
existing requirements documents did not meet stakeholder needs. The software engineers commented that 
some sections of their technical requirements documents were no longer applicable. They also desired more 
detailed requirements documentation when working with Local Telco rather than relying on high-level 

documentation. They found the templates for the functional specification used for Far Telco to be 
sufficient, but there was great variation in the 
quality of this document depending on author:  
ﬁ[Sometimes] we have somebody who™s writing the functional spec who doesn™t know 
the product and doesn™t know what kind of limitations we have because it is an existing 
product. When that knowledge isn™t there, it can make a product or a project more 
expensive, more complicated. There is a point also where they want to be able to do 

things that aren™t possible within the structure.ﬂ (
TelSoft software engineer) 
The Systems Analysts that write requirements documenta
tion were also concerned that they had sufficient 
application knowledge:  
ﬁI have no access to the software for which I am writing requirements. Some I have never 
seen run. – A major need is to have machine(s) set up and maintained – so I can 
confirm current data structures and GUI. This should be dual use: for trouble report 

resolution, testing, documentation use; as well as for requirements. It should connect to 
 Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
844 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
realistic, preferably client provided, data se
ts which truly show their current models.ﬂ 
(TelSoft systems analyst) 
Requirements Capture 
The repeat-ability theory suggests formal inter
actions when capturing and approving requirements. 
Unfortunately, 
TelSoft
™s Sales and Marketing representatives often capture client requirements in 
unsystematic, non-documented ways as the basis for la
ter interaction with Software Development and Map 
Services. This leads to many interp
retations and translations of cust
omer requirements
, each introducing 
potential new sources of error. 
Requirements inspections can be a useful mechanis
m for clarifying ambiguou
s statements, documenting 
questions, and resolving issues. At 
TelSoft, review of requirements is often performed in ad-hoc fashion 
where reviewers are unprepared and the critique is not
 systematically fed back into the requirements 
process. The project manager for Local Telco expressed pressure to rush the requirements review and ﬁhit 
the milestone dates regardlessﬂ because even a slip of 
a few days can upset the client. Several stakeholders 
noted that review meetings were ineffective when key experts had not read the proposed requirements 
documentation before the meeting. This can occur because of insufficient review time and overloaded 
human resources: 
ﬁIf you have somebody who is working on three projects and has a deadline at the end of 
the week and somebody says ‚I need you to review this functional spec in the next 48 
hours™, it doesn™t happen. It just kind of falls through the cracks.ﬂ (
TelSoft
 software 
engineer) 
For some enhancements, requirements documentation is electronically distributed rather than discussed 
through face-to-face meetings. 
The quality of the comments received 
varies considerably indicating that 
this is not the most effective method for surfacing issues and building common understanding about 
requirements. 
Requirements Usage 
The repeat-ability theory stresses the value of esta
blishing a requirements baseline before beginning 
development activities. Once approved by the customer
, this requirements baseline serves as a contract 
between the customer and 
TelSoft
 regarding the capabilities of the delivered software: 
ﬁIf the software is delivered and we missed 
a requirement the client can say ‚Excuse me™ 
(raps desk as if to point to a specific missed requirement). On the flip side, if client says 
‚Oh, but it doesn™t do this.™ We can say, ‚Where does it say that?™ ﬂ (
TelSoft
 development 
manager) 
Despite knowing the importance of an approved baseline, requirements sign-off at 
TelSoft
 happens 
inconsistently across customers and informally via 
email and phone conversations. In the interaction 
between Map Services and Software Development, obtaining of sign-off is not enforced. This causes 
problems when there are disagreements about delivered functionality. 
The repeat-ability theory states that requirements sh
ould be stored with tr
aceability to the source code. 
TelSoft
 experienced problems with both the repository 
chosen to store requirements and the ease of 
traceability. One software engineer expressed frustra
tion with the current database used for storing 
requirements documentation: 
ﬁThe problem with these technical documents is that once the project is done, nobody 
sees them again. They get lost in this huge Notes database so that all that time you spent 
on it – is wasted. The document has no value anymore. If a bug gets called up on 

something, nobody knows where to go look for that documentation. If you do, it can take 
an inordinate amount of time to find it.ﬂ (
TelSoft
 software engineer) 
Because the documents are difficult to find and not alwa
ys kept up-to-date, software engineers rely on the 
code as the most credible source 
of requirements. The source code 
and requirements documentation can 
  Napier et al./ Negotiating Response-ability and
 Repeat-ability in Requirements Engineering 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
845 also get out of sync during the design process. 
TelSoft
™s certification testing frequently detects 
discrepancies between the software and the requireme
nts documentation. These discrepancies reflect design 
decisions that were discussed with the customer but not appropriately documented.  
Change Management In the repeat-ability theory, requirements changes are 
exceptions to the basic course of development and 
must be actively managed. Each requirements ch
ange must be documented with reference to the 
requirements baseline and communicated
 to all relevant stakeholders. 
TelSoft
 experienced problems in each 
of these areas. 
Customer-initiated requirements changes are inconsistently documented. The project managers for external 
customers document changes on form
s specified by the customer. These 
forms contain sufficient detail for 
TelSoft
 employees. With Map Se
rvices, change requests
 are usually described 
via phone call, face-to-face 
visit, or brief email. These discussions 
are then documented using a defect report. 
Changes are not systematical
ly communicated to key stakeholders, es
pecially the quality assurance group. 
Rather than being told when changes occur, quality assurance analysts have to proactively check the 
requirements database for updates. This causes a de
lay in the quality assurance analysts™ re-work of the 
associated test cases.  
Improvement Approach 
Within the repeat-ability paradigm, improvement focuse
s on reducing process variance by following best 
practices. Accordingly, processes should be defined; 
deviations from defined process should be minimized; 
and a mechanism for refining defined processes should be established.  
TelSoft
™s current processes and templates do not explic
itly support the management of requirements 
change. Also, the documented legacy processes are qu
ite different from actual RE practices. Instead of 
repeating the same process over and over, 
TelSoft
™s practices for documenting and changing requirements 
vary across customers. A common theme is that 
TelSoft
 allows external customers 
to dictate their internal 
processes. 
TelSoft
 resorts to ad-hoc practices when internal customers do not make those demands.  
Finally, 
TelSoft
™s RE practices are not assessed and continuously improved. For instance, there is no 
systematic process for tracking errors in requirem
ents and software relate
d to Map Services. While 
software deficiencies are known, 
they are not tracked, root causes ar
e not determined, and appropriate 
interventions are not enacted. There is also no mech
anism for ongoing process management; therefore, 
documented RE processes are not evalua
ted with an eye toward innovation. 
Response-ability Perspective 
Nature of Requirements 
In the response-ability theory, requirements exist as sh
ared understandings between customers and software 
development. Since requirements are embedded in social relationships, tacit knowledge is lost when people 

with customer related capabilities and knowledge leave. At 
TelSoft, high employee turnover began to 
impact RE practices as senior-level employees voluntarily quit to pursue other opportunities. In fact, in the 
year since we completed our diagnosis, 7 of the 15 
TelSoft employees interviewed are no longer with the 
company. 
Requirements Capture 
In the response-ability theory, requirements capture 
occurs informally and is seen as an ongoing 
communication with customers. Because requirements are discovered through negotiation, close, informal 
interactions with customers are essential during requ
irements capture. Here, we focus on specific problems 
with interactions during requirements discovery.  
 Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
846 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
In the relationship between 
TelSoft
 and Far Telco, there are insufficient information technology tools in 
place to support requir
ements negotiation. For ex
ample, although the comp
anies communicate frequently 
via conference calls, 
TelSoft does not have access to software that 
would support file sharing during these 
calls. Therefore, TelSoft
 is unable to see files created during the meeting that other participants were 
discussing. Also, Far Telco maintains its own database for storing high-level business requirements; 
however, 
TelSoft is not provided access to the 
most-up-to-date version of this
 database. Instead, Far Telco 
must manually push the requirements to 
TelSoft
. These problems provide obstacl
es to requirements being 
effectively shared between 
TelSoft
 and Far Telco. 
In the relationship between Local Telco and 
TelSoft, other communications obstacles are more salient. 
Local Telco does not trust 
TelSoft
 to deal with them fairly. Local Telco described 
TelSoft as ﬁthrowing code 
over the wallﬂ without performing adequate testing. Because Local Telco doubted 
TelSoft
™s integrity during 
requirements capture, one manager requested that 
TelSoft ﬁroll back the coversﬂ on processes, procedures, 
and tools. TelSoft
™s weakest relationship is with the users who actually
 work with their software products daily Œ even 
those that literally work around the corner from Software Development. 
TelSoft
 does not become involved 
with end users to identify and anticipate changes and 
to support training. This distant relationship means 
that 
TelSoft
 misses opportunities to understand customer needs for their products. For example, a manager 
at Far Telco described trying to manage and prioritize a list of 60 enhancement requests from the end user. 

She would appreciate more assistance from 
TelSoft
 in screening and prioritizing these potential 
requirements.  
Requirements Usage 
In the response-ability theory, requirements development is not done upfront and documented in 
requirements specifications. Requirements emerge throughout the development process. In this theory, 
spending too much time documenting requirements can be problematic: 
ﬁIt™s always struck me that as much time
 as we spend writing these extremely detailed 
technical specifications, nailing down exactly how we™re going to do every single step of 
the implementation, that we™re basically stealing time from ourselves of actually getting 
the job done right in terms of testing it Œ integration testing and so on and so forth.ﬂ 

(TelSoft software engineer) 
Key stakeholders also disagree about the value of other requirements documents. The Sales and Map 
Services groups use a specialized requirements template called the Source-to-Target Matrix for capturing 
requirements. The intention is to create this document during the bid process to price the project.
 However, 
most clients spent little time specifying requirements upfront, and they tend to primarily present their best 

case scenario and clean data sets. This leads to in
accurate estimates and prici
ng when the exceptions are 
encountered and dirty data sets are provided. 
Change Management In the response-ability theory, requirements changes 
are expected as a result of organizational dynamics 
and close collaboration and interaction between cust
omers and developers. Requirements changes are 
therefore embraced as an importan
t contribution to help develop 
satisfactory software solutions. 
There is, however, a lot of formality built into the requir
ements change process, in particular in relation to 
Far Telco Œ in large part because Far Telco is a huge 
company having to integrate 
applications from several 
vendors. This level of formality causes problems for some Far Telco managers that would prefer to get 
changes quickly done without having to do the associated paperwork. 
Improvement Approach 
Within the response-ability paradigm, improvement fo
cuses on increasing custom
er satisfaction through 
collaboration. 
TelSoft
™s external customers feel that there 
is room for improving the amount of 
  Napier et al./ Negotiating Response-ability and
 Repeat-ability in Requirements Engineering 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
847 collaboration and the strength of the overall relatio
nship. Local Telco representatives are the most 
dissatisfied with this relationship:  
ﬁWe don™t have a partner relationship. A lot of times we kind of feel like there™s 
animosity from them toward us. I don™t know ho
w big of a customer we are in their eyes, 
but I don™t feel treated like a valued
 customer.ﬂ(Local Telco manager) 
 Both customers desire mo
re face-to-face 
time with 
TelSoft
. Far Telco compares 
TelSoft
 with other vendors 
and notes that 
TelSoft
 lacks an onsite presence. They do not vis
it monthly, talk about future plans for the 
software, or provide ongoing training. This leaves 
TelSoft
 at a disadvantage when competitors use flashy 
sales presentations to impress upper management. There are even indications that Far Telco would be 

willing to fund some reasonable amount
 of travel to the site to have
 face-to-face interaction during RE. 
 Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
848 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
 Table 4: Problems and Recommendations 
(#™s refer to assumptions in Table 1) 
 Repeat-ability Response-ability 
Problems 
 Unsystematic early capture of 
requirements (1, 2) 
 Requirements documentation does not 
meet stakeholder needs (1, 3) 
 Requirements baselines not established 
and managed (2,3,4) 
 Requirements not systematically 
reviewed (3) 
 Requirements documentation not 
systematically updated (3, 4) 
 RE practices vary across customers (5) 
 RE process incompletely defined and 
different from practices (5)
  RE practices not assessed and 
continuously improved (5)
  High dependency on people with customer 
related capabilities and knowledge (1, 2) 
 Customer sites are visited infrequently (1, 
2)  Requirements and changes not effectively 
shared amongst stakeholders (1, 2, 3, 4) 
 Requirements documentation hinders 
interaction during development (2, 3, 4) 
 Lack of feedback from customers and 
quality assurance on software solutions (3, 
5)  Lack of customer invo
lvement in test (3, 
5)  No systematic change management (4) 
 Lack of customer relationship 
management (5) 
Recommendations 
 Expand RE process to include 
systematic early capture of 
requirements 
 Revise requirements documentation 
standards so they meet the needs of all 

relevant stakeholders 
 Adopt two-phase funding to enforce 
establishment of requirements baseline 
 Develop systematic process for change 
management with traceability between 
requirements and source code 
 Enhance discipline of the requirements 
review process 
 Standardize, document, and enforce the 
RE process 
 Adopt continuous improvement 
mindset and establish systematic 

process management disciplines  
 Increase availability and competence of 
people with customer related capabilities 
and knowledge 
 Establish activities to increase presence at 
customer sites 
 Establish ongoing communication of 
requirements amongst relevant 

stakeholders and make up-to-date 
documentation readily available 
 Document high-level requirements and 
establish systematic change management 
 Express detailed requirements directly as 
software solutions 
 Ensure systematic feedback from 
customers and quality assurance on 

interim software solutions 
 Improve test to reflect customer 
environments 
 Establish a customer relationship 
management program 
   Napier et al./ Negotiating Response-ability and
 Repeat-ability in Requirements Engineering 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
849 Recommendations for Action 
The results of interpreting RE practices at 
TelSoft
 based on the two theories ar
e summarized in Table 4. The 
table shows that both theories led to relevant, but quite different inventories of problems. The suggested 
recommendations for action are also quite different, though both inventories offer recommendations that 
potentially could improve RE practices. Because the th
eories provide potentially 
relevant, but different 
insights into RE at 
TelSoft
, the question remains how to apply these recommendations to managerial 
decisions for improving RE practices at 
TelSoft
. To explore this question, 
we consider how the actual 
assessment at 
TelSoft
 informed managerial decision-m
aking on improving RE practices. 
The comprehensive assessment report was created by 
the PST and presented to the SC for approval. The 
problem areas from the RE assessment were categoriz
ed into seven improvement areas: software vision 
management, project portfolio management, software
 configuration management, customer relations 
management, requirements management, software quality assurance, and end-user interaction. The PST 
found that 
TelSoft
 needed to better sense customer needs as well as technological and market opportunities. 
TelSoft
 also needed to be more proactive in its interac
tions with customers: sharing information about its 
software development procedures to increase clie
nt confidence in the software product. Finally, 
TelSoft
 needed to adopt a more disciplined approach to core activities related to RE. The PST hence recommended 
to the SC that 
TelSoft 
adopt an overall improvement strategy to
 become a more adaptive enterprise by 
increasing its sense-and-respond cap
ability (Haeckel, 1995; Haeckel, 1999). The improvement strategy 
should be implemented through a number of focused 
and dedicated projects with 
assigned resources, clear 
success criteria, and specified deliverables. The projects should be established, monitored, and coordinated 

through the PST. The SC approved the proposed improvement strategy, and a kick-off seminar was 
organized in which the RE assessment results and plans for improvement were presented to all employees 
in Software Development. 
Management at 
TelSoft 
hence decided to adopt an improvement strategy that draws upon both theories. 
First, the strategy has a clear focus on enhanced interaction and collaboration between Software 

Development and internal and external
 customers; this is indicated by 
several improvement areas: customer 
relations management, requirements management, soft
ware quality assurance, and end-user interaction.
 TelSoft
 appreciated the importance of enhancing the relationships between software developers and internal 
and external customers, and on involving customers 
more actively in collaborative activities throughout the 
development process. Second, the improvement strategy
 has a clear emphasis on increasing discipline in 
key parts of the development process: software conf
iguration management, requirements management, and 
quality assurance. In each of these areas, management at 
TelSoft
 saw a need to adopt more consistent 
processes and related tools. Finally, the strategy also focused on improving RE practices beyond the project 
level. All projects a 
TelSoft
 addressed issues related to the two primary software products: Map Displayer 
and Engineering Support Tool. Therefore, management found it important to improve coordination and 
consistency across projects. 
In summary, the response-ability and the repeat-ability theory both provide important insights into 
problems and possible improvements of RE practices at 
TelSoft
, and management™s decision on a strategy 
for improvement draws upon both theories. The strategy is, however, not a simple merger of the two 
theories, but rather a negotiated compromise of the two theories for improvement. While 
TelSoft
 decided to 
improve the discipline in key RE activities, they had no desire to adopt statistical control and elaborate 
software metrics programs to help reduce 
variation across practices. Similarly, while 
TelSoft
 decided to 
improve the social relationships between developers and 
internal and external custom
ers, they also insisted 
that it was important to have clear contractual arrang
ements with customers, to baseline requirements, and 
to systematically manage change request and the dynamics of their software configurations. Haeckel™s 

approach to the ad
aptive enterprise (1995; 1999) 
was seen as an overall organizational approach that could 
help negotiate in detail such a compromise between the two theories.  
 Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
850 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
 Discussion This research contributes to our knowledge of plan-dri
ven versus agile approaches
 to software development 
in general and RE in particular by explicating the 
repeat-ability and response-ability theories and applying 
them to practices at 
TelSoft
. Based on insights from the case, we
 argue that a negotiated compromise 
between the two theories provides the most useful approach to manage RE improvements. In this section, 

we elaborate on this contribution by relating the findings from 
TelSoft
 to the research questions and by 
discussing implications fo
r research and practice. 
Review of Research Questions 
Our first research question focused on theory and asked about the key assumptions distinguishing repeat-
ability and response-ability theories of RE. Drawing 
upon the literature on software process improvement 
and the literature on agile software development, we 
suggest that these theories differ based upon their 
assumptions about: nature of requirements, requiremen
ts capture, requirements usage, change management, 
and improvement approach. These findi
ngs are summarized in Table 1. Th
ere is an ongoing debate (e.g. 
Boehm, 2002; Boehm et al., 2004; Paulk, 2001) over the relationship between the two most influential 
contemporary paradigms for how to improve software 
practices, i.e. software process improvement and 
agile software development, and most issues remain
s unresolved. This is confusing and frustrating for 
managers who want to improve practices. The explicati
on of the repeat-ability and response-ability theories 
provides clarification on main diff
erences between the two paradigms, an
d it shows in particular how they 
apply to the key discipline of RE.  
Our second research question focused on assessment a
nd asked about differences in problem identification 
and resulting recommendation when diagnosing RE practices based on the two theories. Table 4 

summarizes the findings from the two interpretations of RE practices at 
TelSoft
. The two theories led to 
quite different inventories of problems and, as a consequence, also to quite different recommendations for 
improvement. In fact, there is little overlap between
 the two sets of findings. At the same time, both 
inventories of problems made sense to managers at 
TelSoft
, and they were found to represent relevant and 
important issues related to RE practices. This application of the two theories suggests that they represent 
different and relevant perspectives on RE practices. 
Our final research question focused on improvement and compared the resulting recommendations from 
applying the response-ability versus repeat-ability theories with the decisions made by management at 
TelSoft
. Interestingly, management™s chosen improvement strategy drew on insights from both theoretical 
perspectives and was tailored to the particular needs of 
TelSoft
. When looking from Software Development 
towards internal and external customers, it was considered essential for the firm to maintain a highly 

responsive and flexible approach to deal proactively with both planned and emergent needs. The customers 
appreciated these practices, they saw 
them as expressions of a real interest in providing a high level of 
customer service, and they would like to enhance, rather than reduce these highly adaptive behaviors. 

Similarly, when looking at how developers, managers, and analysts worked within Software Development, 
it was quite clear, that practices were largely ad-hoc, 
established processes were not followed, and priorities 
were made and adjusted in-flight as a result of 
reactive responses to emergi
ng demands. While there had 
been prior attempts to systematically follow SW-CMM (Paulk et al., 1993) to improve practices at 
TelSoft
, these initiatives had failed. Also, while one project had experimented with agile software development, 
there were no systematic attempts or plans to adop
t agile approaches. Instead, management decided to 
implement an improvement strategy which represen
ted a negotiated compromise between the response-
ability and repeat-ability theories, drawing upon th
e strengths of each without committing to extreme 
interpretations of either theory. This comparison 
between recommendations based on the two theories to 
the actual improvement strategy adopted at 
TelSoft
 suggests that the two theori
es represent complementary, 
rather than alternative pers
pectives on RE practices. 
These responses to the three research questions are 
based on a particular approach to investigate RE 
practices at 
TelSoft 
with both strengths and limitations. Concerning reliability (Miles et al., 1994), we 
  Napier et al./ Negotiating Response-ability and
 Repeat-ability in Requirements Engineering 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
851 structured the investigation arou
nd three specific research questions
, explicated our roles within 
TelSoft,
 explicated our theoretical constructs, used multiple so
urces of evidence, and used the fundamental principle 
of the hermeneutic circle (Klein et al., 1999) to converge towards a satisfactory interpretation. The 
reliability could, however, have been improved by in
stituting further checks of the coding scheme and its 
application. Concerning internal validity (Miles et al., 1994), we provided thick descriptions of the case and 
data, we linked data directly to the two presented theo
ries and to each of the a
ssumptions that characterize 
them, and we adopted systematic coding to relate the two theories to our data. The internal validity could 

be further improved by having key actors at 
TelSoft 
confirm the presentation and by considering rival 
explanations for how plan-driven and agile mindsets apply to the data from 
TelSoft.
 Finally, concerning 
action orientation (Miles et al., 1994), we presen
t findings that are accessi
ble to practitioners and 
researchers, the findings have proven useful to actors at 
TelSoft,
 and we have made the findings more 
useful for actors outside 
TelSoft 
by aggregating key viewpoints into two complementary theories of RE. 
The action orientation could be further improved by developing specific knowledge on how managers can 
negotiate an appropriate balance 
between repeat-ability and response
-ability in other organizations. 
Implications for Practice and Research 
We began by considering a manager faced with proble
matic RE practices: what pe
rspectives should this 
manager apply to assess current practices and ma
ke recommendations for improvement? Our research 
shows that applying either a repeat-ability or respon
se-ability theory limits what a manager can know about 
RE practices. The two theories speak, to some extent, 
to different goals. For ex
ample, the response-ability 
theory emphasizes customer satisfaction whereas the re
peat-ability focuses on reducing process variance. In 
most practical situations, neither of these goals can be ignored, and insights derived from the theories will 
therefore likely clash (e.g. role of 
documentation in RE practices) when managers prioritize how to actually 
improve RE practices. To get a more comprehensive understanding of RE situations in software firms, 
managers are therefore advised to apply both theories 
and negotiate how to best combine them to suit the 
particular context in which they operate.
  Our research lends further support to efforts that seek
 to combine plan-driven and agile approaches (Boehm 
et al., 2004; Salo et al., 2005). 
The two theories explicate a common 
ground on which specific approaches 
can be evaluated, compared, and po
ssibly combined with other approaches. Most attempts to compare and 
contrast the two paradigms do not apply theory as a basis for comparison or engage in theory-development 
to help us understand fundamental differences and iden
tify new opportunities. While the literature on plan-
driven development and process-focused improvement is clearly rooted in broader areas like Total Quality 

Management and statistical control, it is interesting to note that the agile software development literature 
does not explicitly draw upon theoretical insights on agility. The Agile Manifesto and related methods are 
largely an expression of a software-specific grassroo
ts movement that resists traditional approaches to 
software development and emphasizes alternative va
lues like: 1) individuals and interactions over 
processes and tools; 2) working software over comprehensive documentation; 3) customer collaboration 
over contract negotiation; and 4) responding to chan
ge over following a plan (Agile Alliance, 2001). 
Hence, we suggest that future research on combining plan-driven and agile mindsets should apply 
theoretical lenses like repeat-ability 
and response-ability to investigate alternative approaches to business 
software development. 
Such future research should build on the extensive literature on 
organizational agility
 (e.g. Dove, 2001; 
Gunneson, 1997; Haeckel, 1995; Haeckel, 1999) which is currently ignored by the software development 
discipline. Organizational agility requires ﬁthe ability to
 manage and apply knowledge effectively, so that 
an organization has the potential to thrive in a continuously changing and unpredictable business 
environmentﬂ (Dove, 2001, p. 9). Gunneson (1997) 
argues that agility is concerned with economies of 
scope, rather than economies of scale. The idea is
 to serve ever-smaller ni
che markets and individual 
customers without the high cost traditi
onally associated with customizati
on. While the ability to respond to 
events in the environment in this way is the essential and distinguishing feature of the agile organization it 

is important to note that issues related to effective planning and appropriate process design are also 
emphasized (Dove, 2001; H
aeckel, 1995; Haeckel, 1999); lean organi
zations are usually associated with 
the efficient use of resources, whereas agile organi
zations are related to effectively responding to a 
 Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
852 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
changing environment (e.g. through implementation of 
a response-ability theory) while at the same time 
being productive (e.g. through implementation of a repeat-ability theory).  
 As a case in point, the improvement of RE at 
TelSoft 
builds upon the principles
 of Haeckel™s adaptive 
enterprise design (1995; 1999). The intention is that
 such an approach will help create macro-level 
improvements within the organization as well as micro-
level improvements within individual projects that 
can help 
TelSoft become more productive and respond more 
effectively to customers. Whether these 
attempts to improve RE practices 
will succeed remains to be seen. But 
they do set the stage for future 
research efforts that can help us develop alternativ
e approaches to business software development. When 
market and technology conditions are relatively stable
, one would expect an incr
eased emphasis on repeat-
ability on the macro-level and as these conditions change, one would expect increased emphasis on 
response-ability. Similarly, on the micro-level one 
would expect that the pr
eference between the two 
theories would depend on the complexity and uncertainty of the development task at hand. The findings 
from this study could in this way guide future res
earch efforts to investigat
e under which macro- and 
micro-level conditions different combinations of re
peat-ability and response-ability would apply to 
development of business software. 
Acknowledgements 
This research was funded in part by 
TelSoft, Research Alliance, and a 
GAANN grant from the U.S. 
Department of Education. We thank the participants at 
TelSoft
 for their enthusiasm and openness during 
this ongoing industry-academia collaboration. 
References Agile Alliance "Manifesto for Agile Software Development", 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org/
, 2001. 
Anderson, D. "Stretching Agile to Fit CMMI Level 3 - the Story of Creating MSF for CMMI/Spl 
Reg/Process Improvement at Microsoft Corporation", in 
Agile Conference
, July 24-29, 2005, pp. 193-
201. 
Avison, D., Lau, F., Myers, M., and 
Nielsen, P.A. "Action Research", 
Communications of the ACM
, (42: 1), January 1999, pp. 94-97. 
Baker, S. "Formalizing Agility: An Agile Organiza
tion's Journey toward CMMI Accreditation", in 
Agile 
Conference
, July 24-29, 2005, pp. 185-192. 
Baskerville, R. "Diversity in Informa
tion Systems Action Research Methods", 
European Journal of 
Information Systems
, (7: 2), June 1998, pp. 90-107. 
Beck, K. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change
, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1999. 
Beecham, S., Hall, T., Britton, C., 
Cottee, M., and Rainer, A. "Using an Expert Panel to Validate a 
Requirement Process Improvement Model", 
The Journal of Systems and Software
, (76: 3), June 2005a, 
pp. 251. 
Beecham, S., Hall, T., and Rainer, A. "Definin
g a Requirements Process Improvement Model", 
Software 
Quality Journal
, (13: 3), September 2005b, pp. 247-279. 
Boehm, B.W. "The Economics of Software Maintenance", in 
Proceedings of the Software Maintenance 
Workshop
, Washington, DC, 1983, pp. 9-37. 
Boehm, B.W. "Get Ready for 
Agile Methods, with Care", 
Computer
, (35: 1), January 2002, pp. 64-69. 
Boehm, B.W., and Turner, R. 
Balancing Agility and Disciplin
e: A Guide for the Perplexed
, Addison-
Wesley, Boston, 2004. 
CMMI Product Team "CMMI for Systems Engineering/Software Engineering/Integrated Product and 
Process Development/Supplier Sourcing", CMU/SE
I-2002-TR-011, Software Engineering Institute, 
2002. 
Cockburn, A. 
Writing Effective Use Cases
, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 2000. 
Dove, R. 
Response Ability: The Language, Structure, and Culture of the Agile Enterprise
, Wiley, New 
York, 2001. Galliers, R. "Choosing Appropriate Information Systems Research Approaches: A Revised Taxonomy", in 
Information Systems Research: Contemporary Approaches & Emergent Traditions
, H. Nissen, H. 
Klein and R. Hirschheim (Eds.),
 Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1991. 
  Napier et al./ Negotiating Response-ability and
 Repeat-ability in Requirements Engineering 
 Twenty-Seventh International Conference
 on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 
853 Gunneson, A.O. 
Transitioning to Agility -- Creating the 21
st Century Enterprise
, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1997. 
Haeckel, S. "Adaptive Enterprise De
sign: The Sense-and-Respond Model", 
Planning Review
, (23: 3)1995, 
pp. 6-13, 42. 
Haeckel, S. Adaptive Enterprise: Creating and Leading Sense-and-Respond Organizations
, Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston, MA, 1999. 
Highsmith, J. 
Adaptive Software Development: 
A Collaborative Approach to
 Managing Complex Systems
, Dorset House Publishing, New York, NY, 2000. 
Highsmith, J., and Cockburn, A. "Agile Software Development: The Business of Innovation", 
Computer
, (34: 9), September 2001, pp. 120-127. 
Humphrey, W.S. 
Managing the Software Process
, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 1989. 
Iversen, J., Nielsen, P.A., and Norbjerg, J. "Problem Diagnosis in SPI", in 
Improving Software 
Organizations: From Principles to Practice
, L. Mathiassen, J. Pries-He
je and O. Ngwenyama (Eds.),
 Addison-Wesley, New York, 2002. 
Klein, H., and Myers, M. "A Set of Principles for Conducting and Evaluating Interpretive Field Studies in 
Information Systems", 
MIS Quarterly
, (23: 1), March 1999, pp. 67-94. 
Kotonya, G., and Sommerville, I. 
Requirements Engineering Processes and Techniques
, John Wiley & 
Sons, 1998. 
Kuvaja, P., and Bicego, A. "Bootstrap - a European Assessment Methodology", 
Software Quality Journal
, (3: 3), September 1994, pp. 117-127. 
Langley, A. "Strategies for Theorizing from Process Data", 
Academy of Management Review
, (24: 4), 
October 1999, pp. 691-710. 
Markus, M.L. "Power, Politics, and MIS Implementation", 
Communications of the ACM
, (26: 6), June 
1983, pp. 430-444. 
Mason, J. Qualitative Researching
, (2nd edition ed.), Sage, London, 2002. 
Mathiassen, L. "Collaborative Practice Research", 
Information Technology & People
, (15: 4)2002, pp. 321-
345. 
McFeeley, B. "Ideal: A User's Guide for Software 
Process Improvement", CMU/SEI-96-HB-001, Software 
Engineering Institute, 
Pittsburgh, PA, 1996. 
McKay, J., and Marshall, P. "The Dual Imperatives of Action Research", 
Information Technology & 
People, (14: 1)2001, pp. 46-59. 
Miles, M.B., and Huberman, A.M. 
Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook
, Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, 1994. 
Orr, K. "Agile Requirements: Opportunity or Oxymoron?" 
IEEE Software, (21: 3), May-June 2004, pp. 71-
73. 
Paulk, M. "Extreme Programming from a CMM Perspective", 
IEEE Software
, (18: 6), November-
December 2001, pp. 19-26. 
Paulk, M., Curtis, B., Chrissis, M.B., and Weber, C.
V. "Capability Maturity Model for Software, Version 
1.1", CMU/SEI-93-TR-24, Software Engineering Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 1993. 
Ramesh, B., Pries-Heje, J., and Baskerville, R. "Internet Software Engineering: A Different Class of 
Processes", in Annals of Software Engineering
, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002, pp. 169-195. 
Rapoport, R. "Three Dilemmas in Action Research", 
Human Relations
, (23: 6)1970, pp. 499-513. 
Rout, T.P. "Spice: A 
Framework for Software Process Assessment", 
Software Process: Improvement and 
Practice
, (1: 1), August 1995, pp. 57-66. 
Salo, O., and Abrahamsson, P. "Integrating Agile Software Development and Software Process 
Improvement: A Longitudinal Case Study", in 
International Symposium on Empirical Software 
Engineering
, November 17, 2005, pp. 187-196. 
Schmidt, R., Lyytinen, K., Keil, M., and Cule, P. "I
dentifying Software Project Risks: An International 
Delphi Study", 
Journal of Management Information Systems
, (17: 4)2001, pp. 5-36. 
Sommerville, I., and Sawyer, P. 
Requirements Engineering: A Good Practice Guide
, John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1997. 
Susman, G., and Evered, R. "An Assessment of 
the Scientific Merits of Action Research", 
Administrative 
Science Quarterly
, (23: 4)1978, pp. 582-603. 
Turk, D., France, R., and Rumpe, B. "Assumptions Underlying Agile Software-Development Processes", 
Journal of Database Management
, (16: 4), October-December 2005, pp. 62-87. 
  Alternative Approaches to Info
rmation Systems Development 
854 Twenty-Seventh International Conference 
on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006  
 