  Thirty Fift
h International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
 1 The Role of Project Modularity in 
Information Systems Development
 Completed Research Paper
  Yi Nah Yeo
 National University of Singapore
 Singapore 117417
 yinah.yeo@nus.edu.sg
  Jungpil Hahn
 National University of S
ingapore
 Singapore 117417
 jungpil@nus.edu.sg
    Abstract
 Recent surveys have shown that ISD project success rates are particularly low. 
Organizations are applying a wide array of 
information 
systems 
development 
methodologies (
ISDMs
) Ð both plan
-based and agile, such as waterfall, scrum and XP 
Ð to improve 
information systems development (
ISD
) performance. However, as ISD 
projects often have different characteristics such as size, scope and complexity, prior 
studies
 have been focused on helping organizations better choose an ISDM for projects. 
Nevertheless, prior research has not taken into consideration the notion of problem 
modularity of ISD projects. In this study, we utilize the 
NK 
fitness landscapes model to 
com
putationally
 examine 
via computer simulations 
the effects of problem modularity 
alongside various project environmental factors, and aim to answer the question: under 
various environmental factors, which ISDM should an ISD team adopt under various 
degree o
f problem modularity? 
 Keywords:  
Information system development
 (ISD)
, information systems development 
methodologies (ISDM), ISD project 
complexity, 
problem m
odularity, 
computer 
simulation, 
agile 
development, 
waterfall 
development
  Project Management and IS Development
 2 Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
  Introduction
 Modern org
anizations depend on information systems largely for enhancing efficiency and competitive 
advantage. This phenomenon is coupled with the prevalence of information systems development (ISD) 
efforts within organizations (Xia and Lee 2005). A fundamental goal
 of ISD projects is the delivery of 
high
-quality systems that fits the needs and requirements of stakeholders. Studies have shown that one of 
the major challenges in ISD is the determination and delivery of system requirements, and this has led to 
the diff
iculty in reaching project success. For example, 
a recent 
report of the Standish Group 
(2009
) on 
projects success rates shows that as much as 24% of all projects were complete failures (i.e., cancelled 
prior to completion or delivered but never used), 44% 
were challenged (i.e., delivered late, over budget, 
and/or with less than the required features and functions) and only 32% were considered successful (i.e., 
delivered on time, on budget, with required features and functions). 
 Since the 1980s, studies hav
e shown that to ensure the smooth delivery of systems projects while 
containing risks and challenges, formal information systems development methodologies (ISDM) have to 
be in place as a form of structured development process (Brooks 1975). Hence, it is im
portant to choose an 
appropriate ISDM that increases a projectÕs success rate, as the use of an adequate methodology plays an 
important role in developing software, to assure that it is delivered within schedule, within cost, and 
meets stakeholder requirem
ents and needs (Geambasu et al. 2011). Furthermore, choosing an inadequate 
ISDM, or an ISDM that does not suit the characteristics of a project (in terms of processes, resources 
allocated, complexity, scope and size) can hinder the success of the developme
nt project. However, the 
existing literature has only broadly investigated the factors (e.g., project size, complexity, and 
organizational structure) that affect the selection of ISDM, most of which are largely project managerial in 
nature
 (Modha et al. 19
90)
. Referring to the field of product engineering and development, while it is 
important to look at the managerial aspects to choose an appropriate development framework, a productÕs 
architecture and design is also central to the selection of an appropria
te development methodology to 
maximize development configuration effectiveness (Yan et al. 2007). Thus considering the area of ISD 
projects, it will be beneficial to look at the more structural aspect of ISD projects
. In this study, we focus 
on one such st
ructural property of ISD project, namely, the degree of requirements modularity. Studies 
into modularity have shown that by implementing formal methodologies that suits the modular nature of 
a project, further benefits can be made in terms of project quali
ty and performance, and will be discussed 
further (Yan et al. 2007). Thus, examining project problem modularity can potentially provide us with 
insights to which ISDM might be more suitable for projects of various modularity levels.
 Although the sequential
 waterfall methodology is still widely adopted by many organizations, practice has 
seen an evolution towards the agile/iterative methodologies, comprising of models such as Xtreme 
Programming, Crystal and Scrum. It is noted that the traditional sequential 
waterfall methodology can be 
used with success largely for developing systems for which the requirements are clearly defined from the 
beginning of the project (Geambasu et al. 2011), whereas agile methodologies develop software in an 
incremental manner in 
numerous iterations while adapting to requirements changes
 (Dyb
„ and 
Dings¿yr
 2008)
. Proponents of the traditional waterfall methodologies have argued that planning and designing is 
more straightforward as developers and users agree on system requirements 
early in the project, and 
makes progress more easily measured. It is also argued that systems can be designed completely and more 
carefully, based upon a more complete understanding of all system deliverables, reducing the likelihood of 
the 
Òpiecemeal effe
ct.Ó1 Proponents have also criticized that the iterative nature of agile development may 
lead to an overall reduction in system quality as there is less emphasis on understanding the system as a 
whole early in the project, and this becomes more pronounced 
in larger
-scale implementations or 
complex systems that include high levels of integration. In contrast, proponents of the agile 
methodologies argue that agile developments are more user
-focused, with high quality software with 
better customer value due to
 the frequent requirements adaptations throughout the development process. 
Thus, proponents criticized the effectiveness of requirements and the possibility of delivering a 
dissatisfactory system due to the inflexibility to changes of the waterfall methodo
logy. While there have 
                                                             1 The Òpiecemeal effectÓ is a development phenom
enon that can occur as pieces of code are defined and 
subsequently added to an application where they may or may not fit well.
   Yeo an
d Hahn / 
Problem Modularity 
in Information Systems Development
    Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
 3 been some discussions about which methodology is better for which projects under conditions such as 
project size and complexity, level of system integration, problem modularity, and the extent of 
requirements changes (Mishra and Mish
ra 2011, 
Geambasu et al.
 2011
, Nejad and Irani 2012
), there is a 
generally a lack of concrete and rigorous comparisons across methodologies. The arguments from 
proponents of both methodologies from practice present arguments without much principled 
justifi
cations, thus it is difficult to determine which ISDM is superior under the various project conditions 
and the reasons behind the superiority. Similarly, academic research has also focused broadly on the 
selection of appropriate ISDM for projects based on 
various aspects of a project such as size, project 
complexity, development team and organizational structure (
Vavpoti
! and
 Vasilecas
 2012). However, 
despite 30 years of research on how to better choose an appropriate ISDM for projects, the same question 
still surfaces within the academic communities. As ISD projects are complex in nature, choosing an 
adequate and appropriate ISDM that will deliver the best value amongst the wide array of options is a 
difficult decision. 
 An important project characteristic
 that has yet to be examined by past research is 
problem modularity 
of 
ISD projects. As problem modularity contributes largely to project architecture, examining this particular 
aspect of a project may provide us with valuable insights into the problems of
 ISDM choice. Project 
modularity brings about vast advantages such as increased flexibility and rapid innovation, better ability 
to deal with complexity and the accommodation of future uncertainty. Modern organizations have since 
been embracing this Òpower
 of modularityÓ in product development projects (Baldwin and Clark 2004, 
Ulrich and Eppinger 1999). Furthermore, proponents of modularity have also described the use of 
modularity as a problem
-solving strategy by making complexity manageable by enabling de
velopment at 
the level of modules, rather than the entire system, and in parallel (Baldwin and Clark 2001, Brusoni et.al. 
2007). Similarly, the ISD process represents a problem
-solving process of searching for configurations 
that add value to the project p
erformance (Hahn and Lee 2010). Since both concepts are fundamentally 
conceptualized as problem
-solving strategies, examining the problem modularity feature of ISD projects 
further may yield potential insights to choosing an appropriate ISDM for ISD projec
ts for the 
enhancement of project success rates.
 The notion of modularity is central in the design and production of software artifacts, especially for large 
and complex projects.
2 Modularity is a general set of design principles that involves breaking up 
the 
system into discrete chunks that communicate with each other through standardized interfaces or rules 
(Langlois 2002). Conceiving the design of a complex software artifact as a modular system means to apply 
the basic principle of Òinformation hidingÓ t
hat prescribes treating software modules as opaque entities. 
In essence, modularity aids in managing uncertainty and complexity (K−ssi et al. 2008). In recent years, 
the widespread adoption of object oriented languages and the diffusion of component based 
development 
as well other popular trends in software engineering have affirmed at large this information hiding 
principle and the paradigm of modularity as common software and system development practices, aimed 
at speeding up the development process, incr
easing innovation and increasing the success rates and 
quality of ISD projects (Narduzzo and Rossi 2003
, Boudreau et al. 2007
). Theoretically, software modularity affects software development and software quality, as the modular 
approach facilitates task d
ecomposition, which is a strategy for efficiently organizing the work necessary 
to create deliverables. Thus, in theory, the degree of software modularity is expected to be positively 
related to software quality and thus, ISD project performance (Simon 199
6, Conley and Sproull 2009). 
However, to reap the potential enhancement in ISD project performance brought about by modularity, it 
is essential to implement an appropriate formal development methodology that fits the modular nature of 
the ISD project. Stud
ies into modularity have shown that by implementing formal methodologies that 
suits the modular nature of a project, further benefits can be made in terms of time, cost, quality and 
ultimately, performance. Thus, there is an explicit practical need to deve
lop and implement appropriate 
methodologies that are able to guide the direction of the whole design and development process using 
modular concepts in a systematic manner (Yan et al. 2007, Duffy et al. 1998). For example, in the 
electronics industry, a stu
dy has shown that a difference in product quality and cost of up to 64 times is 
                                                             2 Modularity has been receiving an increasing amount of attention in a variety of fields. In recent years, 
modular approaches hav
e been widely adopted by software engineering projects, and has been extensively 
discussed in 
a variety of
 literatures (Baldwin 
and 
Clark
 2000
, Brooks
 1975
, Narduzzo 
and 
Rossi
 2003).
  Project Management and IS Development
 4 Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
  present when a development methodology that suits the modular practices of the project is implemented, 
as compared to the reliance on designersÕ natural inclinations (Yan et al
. 2007, Duffy and Ferns 1998). We 
expect that the under
-researched concept of modularity should also have a differential impact for 
different ISDM implemented for ISD projects.
 To improve the success rates of ISD projects, it is thus beneficial to investig
ate the link between the two 
concepts, how different types of ISDM and various degrees of modularity can affect the effectiveness and 
success of an ISD project. This study aims to explore this linkage and its associated dynamic performance 
relationship. Th
e main research focus of this paper is to investigate which form of ISDM (waterfall vs. 
agile) leads to better ISD project performance under various degrees of problem modularity. While it is 
important to select an adequate ISDM for the ISD project, is it 
also important to grasp the optimal degree 
and extent of modularity for the best project quality and performance, to aim for better ISD project 
success rates
. However, it is also important to note that ISD projects exist in different forms 
Ð projects 
have 
variations in terms of size, scope, complexity and resources allocated to them. Since these project 
characteristics may affect the system development process, this study will take into consideration the 
impact of these project elements while examining the 
dual linkage between ISDM and modularity to 
enhance the robustness of the research.
 Research Approach
 This study adopts the computational modeling and simulation approach to a 
computational
 analysis of 
the research problem. Field studies such as surveys an
d case studies enjoy the luxury of realism. However, 
field studies may be limited in generalizability and in what can be observed and measured since it is 
difficult to manipulate all variables of interest in a field setting. Conversely, mathematical/analyt
ical 
models allow formal analysis with rigor but must frequently rely on drastically simplified representations 
of organizations for analytical tractability and, as a result, cannot faithfully represent the richness of 
actual organizations. 
The simulation 
methodology frees manipulation of the project elements of interest 
in a formal model that incorporates a greater number of interdependent elements than is possible with a 
closed
-form analytical approach, which helps acquire theoretical insights through var
ious combinations of 
experimental conditions for greater generalizability (Amaral and Uzzi 2007, Davis et al. 2007). 
 Among the various simulation approaches, we employ the 
NK 
fitness landscapes model (Kauffman 1993, 
Kauffman and Weinberger 1989
, Levinthal
 1997
) and extend it to ISD processes while considering the 
characteristics of modularity inherent in projects. 
The 
NK 
fitness landscapes model is an analytical 
framework for studying adaptive behaviors (Kauffman 1993). Its primary application is to statis
tically 
uncover the performance implications of the behavioral processes of goal
-directed adaptive agents when 
faced with a variety of problem environments. As such, the researcher must specify two primary modeling 
constructs 
Ð 1) the problem space, and 2)
 the agentÕs behavioral rules for adaptation. The problem 
environment is abstracted and summarized into a fitness landscape (or performance landscape), whereas 
the agentÕs behavioral rules direct the agentÕs adaptation within the fitness landscape. The mod
eling 
framework provides researcher a means to systematically create stochastic fitness landscapes that 
encapsulate key environmental conditions (e.g., 
project size/scope, 
complexity, 
extent of problem 
modularity, 
etc.)
. Computational agents programmed wit
h behavioral rules for adaptation 
(i.e., waterfall 
vs. agile ISDMs) 
are seeded onto these fitness landscapes and their adaptation behaviors are then 
observed and tracked. By simulating many different agentsÕ behaviors within many different fitness 
landscap
es, the researcher can uncover the statistical properties of the adaptati
on (e.g., average fitness 
level/
performance at equilibrium, average time to reach equilibrium performance, etc.) in different 
problem contexts.
3  In this research, we aim to understan
d the ISD process of projects with different modularity, thus we 
adopt a process
-oriented view. ISD is conceptualized as a systemic work activity involving the process of 
system analysis, design and development (Korpela et al. 2002). This process can be co
nceptualized as a 
problem solving process where the agent (i.e., the ISD team) performs adaptive search strategies for an 
ISD project configuration that delivers value to the ISD project
 (Hahn et al. 2013)
. Specifically, the ISD 
team identifies a performan
ce gap between the existing and desired states of the project configuration, 
                                                             3 Technical details of the basic 
NK 
fitness landscapes model are provided
 Kauffman (1993)
.   Yeo an
d Hahn / 
Problem Modularity 
in Information Systems Development
    Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
 5 and carry out activities such as detailed user requirements gathering, generating alternative designs and 
solutions in the attempt to reduce the performance gap and achieve higher
 levels of ISD project 
performance. This process of search is adaptive and experiential. The ISD team is assumed not to have 
perfect knowledge of the true structure of the complexity of the problem space (for example, the 
interdependencies among decision v
ariables), but the team is able to infer the value of different system 
designs when the specific configurations are considered (Cerveny et al. 1990). 
 A Model of ISD as Design Problem Solving 
 The model setup requires the specification of four features: (1
) the representation of a projectÕs 
performance (fitness) landscape; (2) the various modular design choices; (3) the process of the ISDM 
applications; and (4) the process of adaptation on the landscape.
 Modeling the ProjectÕs Performance Landscape
 A projec
t p, is represented by a set of 
N decision variables, 
p={d1, d2, É , 
dN}, where each decision 
di can 
take on either one of the two possible values (0, 1). For example, in the case of the development of a sales 
and marketing system, 
d1 can be the decision t
o enable customer order tracking (
d1=1) or not (
d1=0), 
d2 can be the decision to enable the sending of push notifications (
d2=1) or not (
d2=0), so on and so forth. 
Each decision contributes to overall value of the project and the value contribution of each
 decision 
depends not only on the choice made concerning that decision (i.e., 
di=0 or 1) but also on choices 
regarding 
K other decisions. In other words, each decision variable may be tightly linked to other decision 
variables. Thus, the performance of the
 project depends on the performance contributions of all decision 
variables based on the interdependencies among them.
 In the most extreme cases, where there are no 
interdependencies
 among
 the decision variables, and all 
decision variables are independent 
(i.e., the choice of altering one decision will not affect the performance 
contribution of other decisions), each decision then contributes independently to the project performance. 
For example, the decision to enable customer order tracking or not does no
t depend on the decision of 
whether to enable the sending of push notifications. This results in a performance landscape that is 
smooth with a single peak. On the other hand, where there are strong linkages amongst decision variables, 
then the project perf
ormance contributions of all decisions become interdependent 
Ð choice of altering 
one decision will affect the performance of other related decisions. This results in a performance 
landscape that is rugged and with multiple peaks. For example, the decision
 to enable customer order 
tracking will depend on the decision to enable the access of customer accounts by the customer himself. 
The extent of interdependencies ranges from 
K=0 (i.e., most smooth) to 
K=NÐ1 (i.e., most rugged), with 
intermediate values of 
K representing increasing levels of project complexity. The 
patterns of 
interdependencies among design variables can be defined and represented in an 
N!N influence matrix 
(INF
), where 
INF
ij = 1 if 
(column) decision variable 
j influences the value contribut
ion of (row) decision 
variable 
i, or 0 otherwise. 
The influence matrix allows the modeler to specify the complex nature and 
modular structure of the ISD project requirements
.  More formally, the performance contribution (
ci) of each decision variable (
di) is dependent on its own 
value as well as the setting of 
K other interdependent decision variables, where 
ci = ci(di|K other 
djÕs). 
Without loss of generality, we assume that all decisions carry equal weights of contributing to the overall 
performance of th
e project, thus the average of all contributions of decision variables is used as a measure 
of overall project performance outcome. 
 Modeling the Design Structures
 To model modularity, we arrange the interdependencies of the decision variables into cluster
s. Each 
cluster in the landscape represents a module. To examine the effects of various ISDM with respect to 
project modularity, we consider three design structures of varying degrees of problem modularity 
Ð perfectly modular, imperfectly modular, and non
-modular/random (Ethiraj et al. 2008). Each design 
structure comprises of the total number of decision variables 
N, the number of modules 
M, and the total 
number of interdependencies 
R (i.e., 
R = NK). All 3 design structures will have the same value of 
R (i.e., 
the same number of interdependencies spread across the various decision variables). However, the 
distributions of the interdependencies are different for each design structure, which determines the 
 Project Management and IS Development
 6 Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
  degree of modularity. For each cell 
INF
ij, a value of
 1 represents the dependency between the decision 
variables 
di and 
dj (i.e., the performance contribution of 
di depends on the value of 
dj). In the perfectly 
modular problem structure, all interdependencies are within module (see Figure 1a)
. In the imperfe
ctly 
modular structure, most interdependencies are within modules whereas there exists some 
interdependencies across modules (see Figure 1b)
. In the non
-modular/random structure, there is an 
equal probability of having interdependencies within and across m
odules (see Figure 1c)
.  Figure 1. Varying Degrees of Problem Modularity (
N=12, 
M=3, 
K=4)
  a) perfectly modular
 b) imperfectly modular
 c) non
-modular/random
  1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1! 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0!1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1!0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1! 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0!0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0!1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0!0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1!1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0!0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0!0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1!1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0!1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1!1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1! Notes: 
N=12, 
K=4 and 
M=3. The modules are highlighted with the dashed boxes
.  Modeling the I
SD Process
 The agentsÕ (ISD teamsÕ) adaptive behaviors are modeled as incremental experiential search
. For the agile 
development process, the scope of search is within the module currently being attended to, whereas for 
the waterfall development process, t
he scope of search is the entire system. The agents perform local 
search at the module
-level, attempting to enhance the performance at module
-level. In each simulated 
time period, the agents select a neighboring decision configuration at random (out of the
 decision 
variables that are within scope), and evaluate the performance implications of the new configuration. If 
the new configuration results in a performance increase, the configuration is adopted and implemented; 
else, it will be discarded.
 More speci
fically, the 
agile 
development process proceeds through 
I iterations (equal to the number of 
modules, 
M>1) where each module becomes the scope of search within iteration. For example, the ISD 
team will consider decision variables 
d1 through 
d4 during the f
irst iteration (see Figure 1)
. Each iteration 
ends when the agent can no longer find higher performing design configurations within the focal scope
. Upon completion of an iteration, the agent may consider changes to modules previously completed during 
prio
r iterations
. This return to prior modules represent the notion of refactoring in agile development
. The waterfall development process is thus a special case of the agile development process where there is 1 
module (
M=1) comprising of all decisions (
i=1,É,
N) and 1 iteration  (
I=1)
.  Modeling the True Underlying Design Structure
 Considering the modular design structures (i.e., the perfectly and imperfectly modular structures), by 
varying the value of the number of modules 
M, we can examine the effects of ove
r-modularity and under
-modularity. This notion is based on the basis that agents do not have a
-priori knowledge of the true design 
structure of the problem (i.e., they do not have the knowledge of the optimal number of modules to have 
within a project). Th
us, their iteration plan can be classified as over
-modularized, under
-modularized, of 
adequately modularized if the plan fits the true underlying design structure. Letting the true design 
structure be 
M1, a design structure is considered to be over
-modular
ized when 
M1>M, and under
-modularized when 
M1<M. Figure 2b shows the case of adequate modularization which fits the true 
underlying modular structure of the project (
M1=M=3), Figure 2a shows the under
-modularized structure 
(M1<M=4) and Figure 2c shows the 
over
-modularized structure (
M1>M=2).
   Yeo an
d Hahn / 
Problem Modularity 
in Information Systems Development
    Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
 7 Figure 2. Over
-, Under
- and Adequate Modularization
  a) under-modularized (
M=4)
 b) 
adequately 
modular
ized (
M=3)
 c) 
over
-modularized (
M=2)
  1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0!1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1!0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1! 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0!1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1!0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1! 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0!1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0!1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0!0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1!0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0!0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1! Notes: 
N=12, 
K=4 and 
M1=3. The modules are highlighted with the dashed box
es.  Validation of the 
Computational Simulation 
Model
 An important step in the simulation
-based theory development process is the validation of the 
computational model (Davis et al. 2007).  However, the notion of validity for computational models is 
judged
 with a different set of criteria as for empirical models in field studies due to the high level of 
abstraction of computational models.
4 Of particular relevance is the assessment of content and construct 
validity. 
First, the assessment of content validity
 should answer the question of Òdoes the model make 
sense to a group of ex
pertsÓ. 
In other words, the development of the computational model must
 persuasively argue to a relevant group of colleagues that the model captures some important aspect of the 
phen
omenon, and as a result provoke an expectation to learn something about t
he phenomenon from the 
model. 
We believe that our model construction efforts and resulting discussion of the model is 
convincingly portraying the 
ISD 
process as 
design 
problem solving
 and that the modeling framework of 
NK 
landscape models is appropriate insofar as it enables us to capture the important and salient aspects 
of the phenomenon we are investigating (i.e., task partitioning, design choice inter
dependencies, 
complexity etc.).
 Second, the assessment of construct validity must ensure that the model and the 
computation contain parameters, variables and relations which yield outcomes with correspondence to 
the real world.  To this end, we validated our 
NK 
model by verifying that o
ur (basic) results are consistent 
with findings from pr
ior research or our intuition. 
For example, the results show that (1) as ISD 
complexity increases, ISD performance decreases and (2) 
the fit between the true underlying structure of 
the problem and the
 problem modularization produces the best performance, 
which are consisten
t with 
prior research findings.
  Results
 In order to examine the effects of degrees of modularity across the two different kinds of development 
methodologies on ISD project performan
ce, we conduct two levels of simulation experiments. The first 
level (i.e., baseline) examines the basic relationship between the types of methodologies and degrees of 
modularity. The second level manipulates one parameter at a time 
Ð i.e., the number of m
odules (
M), the 
problem complexity (
K), size and scope, as well as resource availability for the ISD project. 
 Monte Carlo techniques are used to minimize any spurious effects due to initial settings. 
All results are 
based on 50 independently generated fit
ness landscapes for each influence matrix (representing the 
                                                             4 Burton and Obel (1995) provide an excellent discussion of validity of computa
tional models, where they 
note that Ò
[A] valid computational model is one that is effectively appropriate to the end goal
Ó (p. 58).  In 
other words, relevancy 
for the intended purpose must be the focus of validation.  
Our 
NK 
model 
of ISD 
is 
an 
illustrative / intellective study of quasi
-realistic organizations
, where the purpose is ÒÉ 
to explore the 
implications of reasonable assumptions about organizational beha
vior, in order to determine what the 
world is like 
when these assumptions are true É
Ó (Cohen and Cyert 1965)
, that is
, to illustrate in a 
quantitative form general hypotheses about some phenomenon and derive implications.  
  Project Management and IS Development
 8 Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
  different design structures), with 20 ISD projects randomly seeded onto each fitness landscape. The 
average performances across agents are computed. The performance of the ISD project is measured 
as a 
portion of the highest performance attainable on each landscape.
5 Baseline Performance Relationship Between ISDM and Modularity
 The first experiment examines the basic performance relationship solely between the software 
development methodologies and 
the degrees of modularity (while holding other factors constant). We 
initially set 
N=16, 
K=6 and 
M=4.
6 The analyses of the basic performance relationship between the 
software development methodologies and the degrees of modularity are based on 14 experimen
tal 
configurations of the ISD project 
Ð (1 perfectly modular structure + 3 imperfectly modular structures + 3 
non
-modular/random structures) 
! 2 ISDM applications = 14 experimental conditions.
 Figures 3a and 3b shows the performances over time for the agil
e and waterfall ISDMs on projects with 3 
degrees of problem modularity. The results suggest that when the agile methodology is adopted, in terms 
of speed, perfectly modular is the first to plateau, followed by the imperfect and non
-modular structures. 
In a
ddition, the imperfect modular structure performs best in terms of peak performance. However, the 
peak performance for perfectly modular structure is significantly lower than both the imperfect modular 
and non
-modular design structures when agile methodolo
gy is applied. Thus, although the perfectly 
modular structure has a faster initial performance improvement, the end performance attained is less 
satisfactory than the other designs. Conversely, when the waterfall methodology is adopted, performance 
is rela
tively consistent for across imperfectly modular and non
-modular structures. In contrast, the peak 
performance for perfectly modular structure is relatively lower than the other two structures. The 
performances of all three design structures take similar t
ime to plateau. Figure 4 shows that the agile 
methodology performs better than waterfall methodology in terms of peak performance attainable for 
both the imperfect and non
-modular structures. However, peak performance attainable for perfectly 
modular struc
ture is consistent for both the agile and waterfall methodologies. 
 When a project is modularized, the adaptive and iterative nature of the agile methodology aids in 
producing projects of higher quality performance, which outperforms that of waterfall. How
ever, when 
interdependencies between modules are absent, a modularized project structure seems to impede the 
performance of the project, regardless of the ISDM used. As an adaptive development approach, agile 
operates in modules, allowing for change in req
uirements and adaptations of decisions. Perhaps due to 
the adaptive nature of agile, its benefits are not largely realized in the perfectly modular structure, as the 
landscape is smooth and there are zero interdependencies between modules. Thus, a certain 
extent of 
interdependencies between modules in a project has to be present for agile to realize its benefits.
                                                                  5 In the 
NK landscapes simulatio
ns, the parameter 
K (representing the overall complexity of the 
landscape) determines the maximum fitness value within the landscape. Smooth landscapes (small 
K) generally have smaller maximum fitness value that are easier to attain, as compared to rugged 
landscapes 
(large 
K) which have larger maximum fitness values that are tougher to reach. Thus, when comparing 
performance across complexity levels (i.e., across 
K), it is appropriate to compare fitness values that are 
normalized to the maximum attainable p
erformance levels rather than the raw fitness measures (Hahn 
and
 Lee
 201
0). 6 When 
N = 16, there are 2
16 = 65,536 possible configurations of ISD projects, which represents a 
sufficient level for project size as an exhaustive search through all 2
16 IS configurations is impractical. 
Later, we relax this assumption and test the
 robustness of our results by running the simulation 
experiments with 
N = 20 (or 1,048,576 possible configurations). 
   Yeo an
d Hahn / 
Problem Modularity 
in Information Systems Development
    Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
 9 Figure 3. Performance over Time 
- ISDM 
! Degrees of Modularity 
  a) agile development
 b) waterfall development
    time
 time
 Figure 4. Final
 Performance 
- ISDM 
! Degrees of Modularity
   Modularity Structure of ISD Project
 Effects of Under
- and Over
-Modularization
 Simulation experiments were conducted on the imperfectly modular and non
-modular design structures 
to examine the effects of under
- and over
-modularization. Here, we maintain the project size and 
complexity at 
N=16, 
K=6, set the true underlying structure to be 
M1=4, and vary the number of modules 
M planned for the agile development. We set 
M=2 and 8 for under
- and over
-modularization,
 respectively
. Here, since modularization is only relevant for agile development (i.e., for waterfall 
development, the number of modules is always one; 
M=1)
 The results, summarized in Figures 5a, suggest that when the project structure is imperfectly modul
ar, 
performance for the true underlying structure (i.e., 
M=4) reaches the highest level of performance as 
compared to the under
- and over
- modularized structures, highlighting the importance of iteration 
planning. In particular, the under
-modularized proje
ct yields a lower peak performance, and the over
-modularized project takes a significantly longer time to peak, suggesting that when an ISD project is 
planned in an over
-modularized manner, there are too few decision variables to be considered in each 
iter
ation, and as a result performance improvements slow down and the benefits of adaptability are 
diminished. When the project structure is non
-modular, performance peaks are comparable across all 
levels of modularization (
M=2, 4 and 8). However, performance 
plateaus fastest when project structure is 
under
-modularized and slowest when over
-modularized. These results suggest that iteration planning is 
important when there exists some inherent level of problem modularity in the project (i.e., imperfectly 
modular
 structure). However, when such underlying structures are not present (i.e., non
-modular/ 
random structure), iteration planning is no longer critical. 
      Project Management and IS Development
 10 Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
  Figure 5. Performance over Time 
Ð Modularization 
  a) 
imperfectly modular structure
 b) 
non
-modular/r
andom structure
   time
 time
 Effects of Project Complexity
 We conducted
 additional experiments to take
 into account project complexity while examining the 
performance relationship between the development methodologies and degrees of modularity. While we 
vary the design complexity by altering the distribution of the interdependencies, we vary the cognitive 
complexity by altering the environmental complexity of the landscape within the parameter 
K of the 
NK 
model. Hence, in this experiment, we again set 
N=16
 and 
M=4 as before, but vary the cognitive 
complexity with 
K={3, 6, 8 and 10}.
 Figures 6a and 6b summarize the results. The results show as complexity increases, peak performances 
decrease (as can be expected) for both the imperfect modular and non
-modular
 design structures, in both 
cases where the agile and waterfall methodologies are applied respectively. Further, when agile 
development is applied, projects with an imperfect
-modular design structure outperform that of a non
-modular structure. In contrast,
 when waterfall is used, the performance gaps between imperfect
-modular 
and non
-modular close in as complexity reaches higher values (i.e., 
K=8 and 10).
 Figure 6. Final Performance 
Ð ISDM 
! Degrees of Modularity 
! Project Complexity 
  a) agile development
 b) waterfall development
    Final Performance
 Final Performance
 Effects of Project Size
 To examine the impact of project size, we conducted a series of experiments that varies project size (via 
parameter 
N of the 
NK 
model) and scope while examining the r
elationship between ISDM and problem 
modularity. Here, we varied the number of decision variables 
N={12, 16, 20} and adjust the overall 
complexity 
K and the 
number
 of modules 
M accordingly (i.e., 
K={8, 10, 14} and 
M={3, 4, 5} when 
N={12, 
16. 20}, respectiv
ely). 
 Figures 7a through 7d summarize the results
. We observe that when the agile methodology is applied in 
the imperfectly modular design structures (see Figures 7a and 7b), a project of smaller size (i.e., 
N=12) 
results in a much lower performance than 
projects of larger size and scope (i.e., 
N=16 or 20). In contrast, 
when the waterfall methodology is applied, peak performance decreases as project size and scope 
increases, uniformly. In addition, the results suggest that the agile methodology outperforms
 waterfall 
with smaller projects (i.e., 
N=12 or 16), but yields similar performance levels as waterfall with large 
projects (i.e., 
N=20).
   Yeo an
d Hahn / 
Problem Modularity 
in Information Systems Development
    Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
 11 It seems that while agile methodology works better with modularity than waterfall, these benefits are 
realized only wh
en the project has a decent size and scope. When the size and scope of a project falls 
below a threshold, the benefits of agile are diminished. However, when the project size and scope becomes 
exceedingly large, the comparative benefits of agile over water
fall is diminished. Predictability of a project 
increases when a project has a smaller size and scope, and decreases when project size and scope is large. 
As a predictive methodology, waterfall development falls in performance when project size increases. 
 With non
-modular design problems (see Figures 7c and 7d), as project size increases, the resulting 
performance decreases, consistently for both agile and waterfall development. Again, this suggests that 
the adaptive benefits of agile development are only 
realized when there exists some structural modularity 
in the ISD projects
.  Figure 7. Performance over Time 
Ð Project Size 
  a) agile development
 / imperfectly modular
 structure
 b) waterfall development
 / imperfectly modular
 structure
   time
 time
  c) agi
le development
 / non
-modular structure
 d) waterfall development
 / non
-modular structure
   time
 time
 Effects of Resource Availability
 This set of simulation experiment considers the effect of the project resource availability while examining 
the relations
hip between ISDM and modularity. With limited resources (cost, time and effort), the extent 
of the search of improvement of the project may be impacted. We create resource constraints by limiting 
the number of neighboring decision variables to be considere
d (search scope=50%, 75% and 100% of all 
possible neighboring configuration) for local incremental improvement. In other words, due to cost, time 
and/or HR constraints, the ISD team cannot perform exhaustive search of alternative configurations but 
resorts
 to investigating a subset of them. All other factors (size, complexity and number of modules for 
agile development) are held constant at 
N=16, 
K=6 and 
M=4.  Figures 8a and 8b summarize the results. It can be noted that with resource constraints, the peak 
performance of waterfall falls heavily below that of agile development in both the imperfectly modular 
and non
-modular design structures. When the agile methodology is applied, peak performance decreases 
slightly as resources availability are constrained
. With waterfall development, however, ISD performance 
is heavily dependent on the resources that can be deployed 
Ð even small constraints (e.g., reducing the 
scope of search by 25% leads to significant decreases in performance). Another interesting observat
ion 
here is that the results are similar across imperfectly modular and non
-modular design structures, 
suggesting that the detrimental impacts of resource constraints apply for all types of ISD projects 
regardless of their structural properties
.   Project Management and IS Development
 12 Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
  When ther
e are resource constraints, cost, time and effort budget are cut. In the case of waterfall 
methodology, when there are changes that need to be made later in the project, these changes may not be 
able to be realized due to resources constraints, as such cha
nges in a waterfall environment are often 
costly and time
-consuming. In contrast, agile promotes flexibility and adaptability throughout the course 
of the entire project due to modularization. As such, changes are often not as costly as that of waterfall, 
in 
terms of cost, time and effort. As such, when resource constraints are high, the impact on the performance 
of the waterfall methodology is much heavier than that of agile. 
 Figure 8. Final Performance 
Ð ISDM 
! Degrees of Modularity 
! Resource Constraint
s  a) 
imperfectly modular
 structure
 b) 
non
-modular
 structure
   Final Performance
 Final Performance
 Effects of Project 
Uncertainty
 In this experiment, we introduce the notion of requirements uncertainty into the model. Uncertainty can 
be conceptualized an
d modeled as the 
imperfect assessment of the implications of making design choices 
Ð the higher the uncertainty, the higher possibility of inaccurate 
assessment 
of 
the 
performance 
implications of 
selecting an alternative project configuration (Hahn et al. 
2013). That said, the extent 
uncertainty will decrease overtime throughout the course of the ISD project as more feedback is obtained 
from the 
users at the end of each iteration
. As the project nears completion, uncertainty will approach 
zero.
 The results 
for the imperfect
-modular case (see Figure 9a) suggest that when agile development is 
applied, as complexity and uncertainty increases by a small amount, performances for all cases are not 
impacted significantly. However, performance is adversely impacted 
as complexity increases beyond a 
certain threshold (i.e., 
K>4). We also note that project uncertainty does not impact agile performance 
significantly. For agile development, project complexity is much more influential to performance than 
project uncertaint
y. Conversely, when waterfall development is applied (see Figure 9b), performance 
drops in a steep manner when either project complexity and/or complex uncertainty increases. In 
essence, the agile methodology suffers when complexity is high, but is resilie
nt to uncertainty, whereas the 
waterfall methodology is negatively impacted by both parameters. We experimented with the non
-modular case as well (results not shown here due to space limitations). The results show that 
quantitatively, the performance of al
l non
-modular settings were lower than that of the imperfect
-modular cases. Similar qualitative results to the imperfect
-modular design structures were obtained with 
non
-modular design structures. 
 When project complexity and uncertainty are high, the requ
irements and technologies involved are 
complex, thus predictability inevitably is low. Due to the predictive nature of waterfall methodology, and 
also the inability to refactor and make significant changes to the earlier parts of the project, the waterfall
 methodology yields a much lower performance when project complexity and uncertainty increase. In 
contrast, the adaptive nature of agile methodology allows it to adapt to changing requirements and other 
project elements through adaptation and refactoring i
n each iteration throughout the project 
development. Thus, when complexity and uncertainty are high, agile performs better than waterfall, 
despite the possibility of taking a longer time to reach its peak performance.
   Yeo an
d Hahn / 
Problem Modularity 
in Information Systems Development
    Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
 13 Figure 9. Final Performance 
Ð ISDM 
! Project Complexity 
! Project Uncertainty 
  a) agile development
 b) 
waterfall development
   Discussion and Conclusions
 Extant research on the selection of ISDM for projects have largely revolved around project characteristics 
such as project size, complexi
ty and organizational structure. Minimal emphasis has been given to the 
problem modularity of projects. Using the 
NK 
fitness landscape model as an analytical framework, we 
computationally explore the impact of various levels of modularity on the applicatio
n of agile and 
waterfall methodologies. We also examined the impact of project elements such as complexity, 
uncertainty, size and scope, as well as resource availability on the project performance with various 
degrees of modularity. We aimed to provide som
e insights into the question: Under various 
environmental factors, which ISDM should an ISD team adopt under which degree of problem 
modularity? 
 Our simulation experiments yielded several important insights
. When the agile methodology is used, the 
imperfe
ct modular structure performs better than that of the non
-modular structure in all cases. 
However, the perfectly modular structure underperforms significantly. When the waterfall methodology is 
used, the performances of the imperfect and non
-modular struct
ures are relatively consistent, with the 
perfectly modular structure underperforming. Further, the effects of under and over modularization are 
only apparent in the projects adopting the agile methodology, where both under and over modularization 
are seen 
to deal negative effects on performance. The effect of increasing complexity as well as uncertainty 
decreases performances of projects adopting both the agile and waterfall methodology, with greater 
impact on waterfall projects. On the other hand, the effe
ct of increasing project size decreases waterfall 
project performance consistently, whereas agile projects of relatively small and relatively large sizes 
underperform. When resource availability is limited, the impact on the performances of waterfall proje
cts 
is significantly greater than that of agile projects. In all cases, the imperfectly modular projects are more 
resilient than non
-modular projects when the agile methodology is used.
 Implications of Results
 To answer the question that we posed, when a p
roject problem is adequately modular, of a decent size and 
scope, the project team can attain the highest possible performance using the agile methodology. 
However, as discussed above, a fully (i.e., perfectly) modular problem structure and a small project
 scope 
will instead diminish the benefits of agile. This observation may seem counterintuitive 
Ð some studies 
have arrived at notions where agile methodologies are better suited for smaller projects due to the 
adaptive and flexible nature 
(Awad
 2005)
. Agil
e methodologies promote the ideas of collaboration, 
 Project Management and IS Development
 14 Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
  communication and iterations, which aim to encourage creativity and innovation. However, when an ISD 
project is of a very small scope and size, the problem becomes much simpler. Intuitively, the ISD team 
need not consist of a large pool of human capital as well. In this case, it becomes tougher to harvest the 
benefits of agile. In contrast, a certain extent of problem modularity 
Ð a level between being perfectly 
modular and non
-modular 
Ð brings about major
 benefits of the agile methodology, for supporting 
adaptability and flexibility. Improvements can be made to modules developed before, to achieve an overall 
higher quality. 
 In addition, project teams must also be cautious as to whether or not the ISD proj
ect plan is under or over 
modularized. When a project is under
-modularized, the number of decision variables to consider at each 
iteration increases, and decreases when the project is over
-modularized. Myopically, as the number of 
decision variable to be c
onsidered in each iteration increases, the room of performance improvement 
increases, thus there is a higher possibility of attaining a greater peak performance. However, as the 
number of decision variables to be considered in each iteration increases, the
 number of local peaks 
increases, and it places more effort on the ISD team to discover the next performance peak. However, as 
previously discussed earlier, to fully realize the benefits that agile methodology brings, the ISD project 
needs to be of suffici
ent size. The adaptable and flexible benefits of the agile methodology are not realized 
by projects of very small size and scope. In contrast, when projects are of small size and scope, the 
predictability and uncertainty of the problem lessens. Thus, the p
redictable nature of the waterfall 
methodology suits such project cases better than the agile methodology.
 We also find that the agile methodology is significantly more resilient to environmental factors 
Ð project 
uncertainty, complexity and resource const
raints 
Ð as compared to the waterfall methodology. However, 
when environmental factors are strong 
Ð which causes the project landscape to be more rugged 
Ð the 
performance difference between the imperfect and non
-modular structures shrinks. For projects of 
both 
imperfect and non
-modular designs, the agile methodology is significantly more resilient to higher project 
uncertainty, complexity as well as higher resource constraints than the waterfall methodology. When 
environmental factors are strong, the projec
t uncertainty is higher, as well as complexity. The predictable 
nature of the waterfall methodology works by considering all decision variables in each iteration, thereby 
requiring significantly more effort to achieve or maintain performance as compared to
 agile. In addition, 
as environmental factors become stronger, the predictability of the problems decreases significantly, 
defying the nature of the waterfall methodology. Consequently, as the environmental factors become 
stronger, the waterfall projects a
chieve a much lower performance yield. In contrast, the agile 
methodology simulates a Òdivide
-and
-conquerÓ strategy when developing ISD projects, by breaking down 
a large and complex problem into smaller chunks 
Ð in this case, modules 
Ð and completing the 
work on 
one module before moving on to the next
 (Elshamy and 
Elssamadisy
 2006)
. Agile methodology also 
promotes adaptability, where changes can be made to modules that are completed to adapt improve 
performance. This strategy reduces the effort needed to m
aintain the project, facilitates changes and 
improves the overall project quality as compared to the waterfall methodology. 
 The implications discussed above can be summarized into a contingency matrix (see Figure 10). When a 
project team faces strong envi
ronmental factors (large scope, high uncertainty, high complexity), the 
resilience of agile makes it a more favorable ISDM to adopt, regardless of the modularity of the project 
design as the performance difference between imperfect and non
-modular designs 
shrinks with strong 
environmental factors. However, when the team faces weak environmental factors (small scope, low 
uncertainty, low complexity), the project is rather predictable, and the waterfall methodology works well 
when the project structure is non
-modular. In the case where the project structure is relatively modular 
with weak environmental factors, the performance gain from using agile is not significantly more than 
that of the use of the waterfall methodology. Thus in this case, both the agile an
d waterfall ISDMs are 
adequate.
   Yeo an
d Hahn / 
Problem Modularity 
in Information Systems Development
    Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
 15 Figure 10. ISDM Choice by Degree of Problem Modularity and Environmental Factors
  In managerial terms, to attain the highest performance possible by using the agile methodology, it is 
crucial for ISD teams to ensure that th
ey achieve an adequately modular and sized project at the initial 
starting point of planning. In reality, this accuracy will not be achieved in one project. The ISD team will 
have to go through several 
iterations 
of project planning and development to obta
in the experience 
needed to determine how the project elements should be structured best for the use of agile. Planning is 
always imperative for project management. This planning phase should be structured such that the ISD 
team explore the various require
ments of the ISD project and structure them accordingly in modules, and 
benchmark the results accordingly with past experiences on whether the planned modularity and size of 
the project is adequate for agile to be used. 
 This paper is not without limitatio
ns. 
Despite the advantages of simulation methods in their ability to 
incorporate complex dynamics without worrying about analytical tractability and their ability to study 
constructs of interest that may be difficult if not impossible to manipulate in fiel
d studies, simulation 
models are stylized theoretical models of reality that require rigorous validation through empirical testing. 
Also, the industry today adopts hybrid forms of both plan
-based and agile ISDMs for various real
-world 
ISD projects 
(Parsons
 and
 Lal
 2006)
. However, we have only investigated 
pure 
forms of plan
-based and 
agile ISDMs in this research. Extensions to this research involving hybrid forms of ISDMs will be expected 
to yield valuable insights. Nonetheless, the analysis of the pure for
ms of the ISDMs still provides us with a 
strong foundation to understanding the effects of modularity on the performance of ISDMs. 
That said, we 
believe that our 
NK 
landscapes model of ISD
Ms has allowed us to provide valuable theoretical insights 
that can 
guide further theoretical and empirical research.
 Acknowledgements
 This study was supported by the National University of Singapore 
Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier 1
 Start
 Up Research Grant.
 References
 Amaral, L.A., and Uzzi, B. 2007. ÒComplex Systems: 
A New Paradigm for the Integrative Study of 
Management, Physical, and Technological Systems,Ó 
Journal of Management Science
 (53:7), pp. 
1033
-1035.
 Awad, M. A. 2005
. ÒA Comparison between Agile and Traditional Software 
Development Methodologies,Ó 
School of 
Computer Science and Software Engineering,
Ó The University of Western Australia
, Australia
. Baldwin, C.Y., and Clark, K.B. 2000. 
Design Rules
: The Power of Modularity
, Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press
. Baldwin, C.Y., and Clark, K.B. 2001. ÒThe Value and Costs 
of Modularity,Ó Working Paper, Harvard 
Business School, Boston, MA.
  Project Management and IS Development
 16 Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
  Baldwin, C.Y., and Clark, K.B. 2004. ÒModularity in the Design of Complex Engineering Systems,Ó 
Working Paper, Harvard Business School, Boston, MA.
 Boudreau, T.
, Tulach, J., and Wielenga, 
G. 2007
. ÒThe Benefits of Modular Programming,Ó in 
Rich Client 
Programming
, Upper Saddle River, NJ
: Prentice Hall
, pp. 9
-19. 
 Brooks, F. 1975. 
The Mythical Man
-Month: Essays on Software Engineering
. Boston, MA: Addison
-Wesley
. Burton, R.M., and Obel, B. 19
95. ÒThe Validity of Computational Models in Organization Science: From 
Model Realism to Purpose of the Model,Ó 
Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory
 (1:1), pp. 57
-71.  
 Brusoni, S., Marengo, L., Prencipe, A., and Valente, M. 2007. ÒThe Value 
and Costs of Modularity: A 
Problem
-Solving Perspective,Ó 
European Management Review
 (4:2), pp. 121
-132.
 Cerveny, R.P., Garrity, E.J., and Sanders, G.L. 1990. ÒA Problem
-Solving Perspective on Systems 
Development,Ó 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (6:4), pp. 103
-122.
 Cohen, K.J., and Cyert, R.M. 1965. ÒSimulation of Organizational Behavior,Ó In 
Handbook of 
Organizations
, J.G. March (ed.), Chicago, IL: Rand McNally, pp. 305
-334. Conley, C.A., and Sproull, L. 2009. ÒEasier Said than Done: An Empirical
 Investigation of Software Design 
and Quality in Open Source Software Development,Ó in 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences
. January 6
-9, Waikoloa Village, HI.
 Davis, J., Bringham, C., and Eisenhardt, K. 2007. ÒDevelop
ing Theory Through Simulation Methods,Ó 
Academy of Management Review
 (32:2), pp. 480
-499. Duffy, A., and Ferns, A.F. 1998. ÒAn Analysis of Design Reuse Benefits,Ó in 
Proceedings of the 12th 
International Conference on Engineering Design
. August 24
-26, Muni
ch, Germany.
 Duffy, A., Smith, J.S., and Duffy, S.M. 1998. ÒDesign Reuse Research: A Computational Perspective,Ó in 
Proceedings of Engineering Design Conference on Design Reuse
. June 23
-25, London, UK.
 Dyb
„, T., and Dings¿yr, T. 2008. ÒEmpirical Studies of
 Agile Software Development: A Systematic 
Review,Ó 
Information and Software Technology
 (50:9
-10), pp. 833
-859.
 Elshamy, A., and Elssamadisy, A. 2006. ÒDivide After You Conquer: An Agile Software Development 
Practice for Large Projects,Ó in 
Proceedings of t
he 7th International Conference on Extreme 
Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering
, June 17
-22, Oulu, Finland, pp. 164
-168.
  Ethiraj, S.K., Levinthal, D., and Roy, R.R. 2008. ÒThe Dual Role of Modularity: Innovation and Imitation,Ó 
Manageme
nt Science
 (54:5), pp. 939
-955. Geambasu, C.V., Jianu, I., Jianu, I., and Gavrila, A. 2011. ÒInfluence Factors for the Choice of a Software 
Development Methodology,Ó 
Accounting and Management Information Systems
 (10:4), pp. 479
-494. Hahn, J.
, and Lee, G. 2
010.
 ÒThe Effect of Knowledge Overlap, Task Interdependence, and Trust on IS 
Development Performance,Ó 
in 
Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference on Information 
Systems
, Dec
ember 
12-15, St. Louis, MO, Paper 199
.  Hahn, J., Lee, G.
, and Howison, J.
 2013.
 ÒA Theoretical Framework for Requirements Research: A 
Complex Adaptive Systems Approach using the 
NK Fitness Landscapes Model
,Ó Working Paper, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore
, Singapore.
 K−ssi, T., Leisti, S., and Puheloinen, T. 2008. ÒI
mpact of Product Modular Design on Agile 
Manufacturing,Ó 
Mechanika
 (74:6), pp. 56 
-62. Kauffman, S.A. 1993
. The 
Origins of 
Order: Self
-Organizing and 
Selection in 
Evolution
. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
 Kauffman, S.A., and Weinberger, E.D. 1989. ÒThe
 NK 
Model of Rugged Fitness Landscapes and Its 
Application to Maturation of the Immune Response,Ó 
Journal of Theoretical Biology
 (141:2), pp. 211
-245. Korpela, M., Mursu, A., and Soriyan, H. 2002. ÒInformation Systems Development as an Activity,Ó 
Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work
 (11:1
-2), pp. 111
-128.
 Langlois, R.N. 2002. ÒModularity in Technology and Organization,Ó 
Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization
 (49:1), pp. 19
-37. Levinthal, D.A. 1997
. ÒAdaptation on Rugged Landscapes,Ó 
Management Science
 (43:7), pp. 934
-950.
 Mishra, D., 
and
 Mishra, A. 2011. 
ÒComplex 
Software 
Project 
Development: 
Agile 
Methods 
Adoption
,Ó Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and Practice 
(23:8), 
pp. 
549-564. Modha, J., Gwinnett, A., 
and Bruce, M. 1990
. ÒA r
eview of information systems development methodology 
(ISDM) selection techniques
,Ó OMEGA: the International Journal of Management Science
 (18:5), 
pp. 
473
Ð490.
   Yeo an
d Hahn / 
Problem Modularity 
in Information Systems Development
    Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland 2014
 17 Narduzzo, A., and Rossi, A. 2003. ÒModular Design and the Development of Complex Artifacts: Lesso
ns 
from Free/Open Source Software,Ó ROCK Working Papers, 21. Italy.
 Nejad, G., 
and
 Irani, H. 2012
. ÒDecentralized Principles: New Modular Software Development Principles, 
a Robust Object Oriented Approach
,Ó International Journal of Computer Applications 
(44:13), 
pp. 
61-65. Parsons, D., 
and 
Lal, R. 2006
. ÒHybrid Agile Development and Software Quality
,Ó in 
Proceedings of the 
14th International Software Quality Management Conference
, April 
10-12, Southampton
, UK, 
pp. 
283
-298. 
 Simon, H.A. 1996. 
The Sciences of
 the Artificial
. Boston, MA: 
The MIT Press
. Standish Group 2009
. ÒCHAOS Summary 2009,Ó The Standish Group, Boston, MA.
 Sweeney, T. 
2003. IT 
Executives 
Take a 
More 
Modular 
Approach to CRM 
Software. 
May 30, Available at 
http://www.techrepublic.com/article/it
-executives
-take
-a-more
-modular
-approach
-to-crm
-software
, Retrieved
 September 1, 2014.
 Ulrich, K., and Eppinger, S. 1999. 
Product Design and Deve
lopment 
(2nd ed.). New York: McGraw
-Hill.
 Vavpoti
!, D., and Vasilecas, O. 2012. ÒSelecting a Methodology for Business Information Systems 
Development: Decision Model and Tool Support,Ó 
Computer Science and Information Systems
 (9:1), 
pp. 135
-164.
 Xia, W., 
and Lee, G. 2005. ÒComplexity of Information Systems Development Projects: Conceptualization 
and Measurement Development,Ó 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (22:1), pp. 45
-83.
 Yan, X. T., Stewart, B., Wang, W., Tramsheck, R., Liggat, J., Duffy, A.H
., and Whitfield, I. 2007. 
ÒDeveloping and Applying an Integrated Modular Design Methodology Within a SME,Ó in 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Design
, August 28
-31, Paris, France.
  