 PAPERS
Project Management Journal, Vol. 45, No. 3, 21–34
© 2014 by the Project Management Institute

Published online in Wiley Online Library

(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/pmj.21410
June/July 2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      21ABSTRACT This research paper presents evidence from 
an exploratory survey on the use of agile 

project management (APM) practices and 

the presence of APM enablers in 19 medium- 

and large-sized companies from different 

industry sectors considering innovative 

projects. The results show that these com-

panies are possibly struggling to use their 

current management practices in the face 

of different project challenges. Additionally, 

the presence of some APM enablers indi-

cates opportunities to adapt the APM theory 

for different companies other than those 

in software development. Future research 

should explore the correlation between APM 

practices and enablers in order to develop 

“hybrid” management models for different 

industries.KEYWORDS:
 project management; agile 
project management; APM practices; APM 

enablers
Can Agile Project Management 
Be Adopted by Industries Other 

than Software Development?Edivandro C. Conforto
, Engineering Systems Division, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA

Fabian Salum
, Fundação Dom Cabral, Minas Gerais, Brazil
Daniel C. Amaral
, University of São Paulo, Brazil
Sérgio Luis da Silva
, Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar), San Carlos, Brazil
Luís Fernando Magnanini de Almeida
, Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar), San Carlos, 
BrazilINTRODUCTION Project planning and control is a challenge for companies engaged 
in developing new products and/or technologies. This problem has 

been discussed by those who have
 been critical of the use of tra-
ditional management methods (e.g., waterfall, linear phased-gate 
approach, or rigid detailed upfront planning followed by rigid execution) 

in this type of project (Andersen, 1996; Baccarini, 1996; Dawson & Dawson, 

1998; Williams, 1999; Maylor, 2001; Cohn, 2005; Shenhar & Dvir, 2007; Stef-

fens, Martinsuo, & Artto, 2007; Perminova, Gustafsson, & Wikström, 2008). 

The solution could be in establishing a mor
e “flexible” approach to new prod-
uct development, adaptable to the contingencies of the project environment 

(Thomke & Reinertsen, 1998; Verganti, 1999; MacCormack, Verganti, & Iansiti, 

2001; Smith, 2007; Biazzo, 2009).
This flexible approach has been recognized by the term agile project 
management (APM) or “agile methods.” According to the literature, the main 

focus of APM application has been the software industry (MacCormack, Ver-

ganti, & Iansiti, 2001; Qumer & Henderson-Sellers, 2008; Mafakheri, Nasiri, & 

Mousavi, 2008; Sheffield & Lemétayer, 2013). There is an implicit message in 

the APM literature reinforcing the need to implement or use APM as a “pure” 

approach, following the practices, tools, and techniques disseminated in 

this theory (Highsmith, 2004; Cohn, 2005; Schwaber, 2004). Although there 

is extensive evidence of effective APM use in the software industry, however, 

there is a lack of empirical studies in other types of industries and projects.
Considering this scenario, would it be possible to find evidence of APM 
use in other industrial sectors that do not formally adopt or recognize the use 

of agile project management theory?
In order to address this question, this research paper presents a conceptual 
framework to help with the identification of practices and enablers related to 

the APM approach. The framework was applied in an exploratory survey within 

a group of Brazilian companies. The in
vestigation covered 19 medium-sized 
and large-sized companies that are parts of the program of the Center of Refer-

ence on Innovation, of the Innovation Center at Fundação Dom Cabral (FDC 

CRI-Minas, Brazil). A characteristic these companies share is their experience 

in new product development and the fact that they do not yet formally recog-

nize the use of APM methods. The option to study new product  development 
 Can Agile Project Management Be Adopted by Industries Other than Software Development?22  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
studies focus on the identification of 
practices, most of them related to the 

software industry. Some examples are 

described in the works of Mafakheri, 

Nasiri, and Mousavi (2008), Qumer and 

Henderson-Sellers (2008), and Ganguly, 

Nilchiani, and Farr (2009). As a rule, 

these studies have focused on software 

development companies (information 

technology, IT) that assume the use of 

APM practices, tools, and techniques in 

their projects; in addition, the existence 

of practices and enablers has not been 

investigated together. The main source 

used for the evaluation is the set of prin-

ciples disseminated in the 
Manifesto for 
Agile Software Development
 (Beck et al., 
2001), resulting in a low-level descrip-

tion and lack of details.
This paper presents a preliminary 
research effort to identify practices and 

enablers together in non-software, but 

innovative, project environments. It 

necessary to elaborate on a concep-

tual framework to help with the collect-

ing of evidence of the implementation 

of APM practices, their use, and the 

presence of APM enablers, regardless of 

the project type, product, or industrial 

sector.
A Conceptual Framework to 
Identify APM Implementation
Several studies (Mafakheri, Nasiri, 
& Mousavi, 2008; Qumer & Hender-

son-Sellers, 2008; Ganguly, Nilchiani, 

& Farr, 2009; Sheffield & Lemétayer, 

2013) have provided evidence of the 

presence of principles promoted by the 

Agile Software Development
 Manifesto
 (Beck et al., 2001) in software develop-

ment projects and possible correlations 

with management practices and project 

results. However, the results generated 

are still inconclusive due to challenges 

with the empirical investigation of a 

cause and effect relationship; further-

more, there is consensus that the APM 

practices and enablers should be inves-

tigated together, not separately.
The primary research question 
addressed here is: Would it be possible 

to identify the use of APM practices and 
management. Recently, the Project 
Management Institute (PMI) launched 

a certification that recognizes prarcti-

tioners in the use of agile project man-

agement methods focused on software 

development projects, called the PMI 

Agile Certified Practitioner (PMI-ACP)
®. Consequently, it is important to clearly 

define the term “APM.” Hereinafter, the 

definition of agile project management 

adopted is “[...] 
an approach based on a 
set of principles, whose goal is to render 

the process of project management sim-

pler, more flexible and iterative in order 

to achieve better performance (cost, 

time and quality), with less manage-

ment effort and higher levels of innova-

tion and added value for the customer
” (adapted from Amaral, Conforto, Bena-

ssi, & Araújo, 2011; Conforto & Amaral, 

2010).With regard to studies that propose 
to apply this approach to new product 

development projects, the main focus 

is to identify the factors that influence 

its use. APM theory recommends the 

use of certain practices and tools, such 

as the concept of product vision, iter-

ative development; the use of visual 

artifacts such as boards, panels, and 

sticky-notes, and so forth (Highsmith, 

2004; Chin, 2004; Augustine, 2005, 

Boehm & Turner, 2004), hereinafter 

called “practices.” These authors have 

also recognized some of these “prac-

tices” as being dependent on the orga-

nization’s environment and the project 

context in which they are used. As a 

matter of fact, they consider the exis-

tence of some “enablers” necessary for 

APM implementation. These are factors 

that may influence the use of practices, 

techniques, and tools, according to the 

APM approach. We can cite the use of 

dedicated and co-located teams and 

the active customer involvement during 

the entire product development cycle 

(Hoda, Noble, & Marshall, 2011; High-

smith, 2004; Chow & Cao, 2008).
Additionally, there is room to 
explore the necessary “enablers” to 

having successful implementation and 

results from the APM application. Some 
projects is due to similarities with the 
projects from the software industry, such 

as creativity and the development char-

acterized by continuous cycles of proto-

typing and testing.Challenges to Applying Agile 
Project Management in New 

Product Development Projects
The term “agile project management” 
became known as a result of the dissem-

ination of a set of methods developed 

specifically for the software industry, 

including Scrum
 (Schwaber & Beedle, 
2001; Schwaber, 2004), 
Lean Software 
Development
 (Poppendieck & Poppen-
dieck, 2003), Crystal
 (Cockburn, 2004), 
Feature Driven Development 
(FDD) 
(Palmer & Felsing, 2002), 
Adaptive Soft-
ware Development
 (Highsmith, 2000), 
Dynamic System Development Method
 (DSDM) (Stapleton, 1997), and 
Extreme 
Programming
 (Beck, 1999). These meth-
ods were called “lightweight” or “agile” 

and their creators joined forces to draw 

up a manifesto, called the 
Manifesto for 
Agile Software
 Development
 (Beck et al., 
2001), which can be considered the first 

step in the expansion of this approach.
Since then numerous books have 
been published describing agile proj-

ect management practices and tech-

niques (Chin, 2004; Highsmith, 2004; 

Augustine, 2005; Cohn, 2005; Sliger & 

Broderick, 2008; Wysocki, 2009; Cohen, 

2010; Goodpasture, 2010; Cobb, 2011). 

A broader analysis of these books indi-

cates that most of them are still lim-

ited to software development projects. 

Some authors (e.g., Highsmith, 2004; 

Chin, 2004) argue, however, that these 

practices, techniques, and tools can 

be adapted to other types of products 

and project environments, whose char-

acteristics resemble software projects 

that are innovative and have a dynamic 

development environment experienc-

ing constant change.
This possibility has been investi-
gated and discussed in recent studies 

(Smith, 2007; Cooper, 2008; Conforto 

& Amaral, 2010). APM is now widely 

known as one approach for project 
 June/July 2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      23We then reached the set of articles 
for complete reading and study, which 

comprised 192 studies, as per “Quantity 

of Articles Selected” (see Table 1). Based 

on the detailed analyses of the articles, 

new studies were also identified through-

out the references (manual cross-search 

analysis). This final set of selected articles 

was carefully read in order to identify 

practices and enablers. The results of the 

analyses of the SLRs were compiled in 

a database, and finally, 30 studies were 

considered for this research. In the fol-

lowing two sections, we explain the ele-

ments of the conceptual framework.
APM Practices
A project management practice is a spe-
cific type of “management action” that 

contributes to the execution of a process 

and that may employ one or more tech-

niques and tools (PMI, 2008, p. 433). 

The majority of the studies analyzed 

contained management practices with-

out the detailed descriptions of tools 

and techniques. The analysis resulted 

in a set of 23 “actions,” 54 techniques, 

and 21 tools, which were categorized 

according to the original source (article 

or book) as having a tendency toward 

a “traditional” or “agile” project man-

agement approach or, in some cases, 

both. Table 2 summarizes these results 

(adapted from Eder, Conforto, Schnet-

zler, Amaral, & Silva, 2012).
Tseng, Dahm, Poolman,  Preminger, 
Canales, & Montori, 2008;  Brereton, 

Kitchenham,  BuTurner, & Khalil, 

2007, Levy & Ellis, 2006; Biolchini, 

Mian, Natali, & Travassos, 2005). The 

set of articles that composed the SLR 

was extracted from a list of 87 journals, 

published over a period of 20 years, 

from the areas of product development, 

project management, manufacturing, 

and enterprise management and it also 

considered books on APM theory. The 

main database used in the research and 

cross-database search was the Web of 

Science.
The searches were performed first 
on each journal individually and were 

organized according to two objectives, 

as shown in Table 1. The selected articles 

served as the basis for the identification 

of practices and enablers related to APM 

theory (cited in the literature review).
The articles were selected using a 
series of iterative “reading filters and 

content analysis,” with the support of 

a set of inclusion criteria and quality 

evaluation requirements to attain the 

article and the objectives of the search as 

listed in Table 1. For example, SLR1 com-

prised a set of 8,159 articles. This set was 

subjected to filter 1, which consisted of 

reading the title, keywords, and abstract. 

The articles selected in this step then 

passed through filter 2, which involved 

reading the introduction and conclusion.
the presence of enablers in companies 
recognized to be users of the traditional 

project management approach from dif-

ferent industry sectors that do not for-

mally adopt or recognize the use of APM 

theory? By identifying the existence of 

practices and enablers it would be pos-

sible to investigate if the organizational 

environment is favorable or unfavorable 

for adoption of the APM approach.
Considering this research question, 
we decided to build a conceptual frame-

work based on two key elements: prac-

tices and enablers. The basic premise 

of the framework is that the application 

of the agile management approach is 

linked to the use of practices, tools, and 

techniques disseminated in the APM 

theory; however, its use will depend on 

the existing “enablers,” which are favor-

able conditions to the proper applica-

tion of the APM practices. With a better 

comprehension of these two dimen-

sions, it will be possible to identify if the 

necessary conditions are in place for 

the practices to be implemented, or at 

the very least, if there is room for their 

development, regardless of whether 

these pre-conditions exist or not.
The challenge was to identify the 
practices and enablers to be observed 

and compose the conceptual frame-

work; therefore, for this matter, a 

Systematic Literature Review (SLR) 

procedure was adopted in a grounded 

literature analysis in order to help the 

researchers identify a set of practices 

and enablers to be empirically observed. 

The SLR protocol was developed spe-

cifically for this work, based on studies 

from the software development, clinical 

(medicine), and social research areas 

(Montori, Swiontkowski, & Cook, 2003; 

Wright, Brand, D Spindler, 2007; 
#Search Objectives
Quantity of Articles RetrievedQuantity of Articles SelectedReferences in UseSLR1To identify studies (case research, surveys, theoretical reviews) that 
present practices from the APM approach8,1595910
SLR2To identify studies (case research, surveys, theoretical reviews) explor-
ing enablers related to the APM approach9,63413320
Table 1:
 Quantity of articles retrieved and selected—Systematic Literature Review.
ActionsTechniquesTools
Traditional project management approach9314
Agile project management approach8171

Cited in both approaches6616

Total 235421
Table 2:
 Number of practices identified.
 Can Agile Project Management Be Adopted by Industries Other than Software Development?24  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
Turner, 2004; Highsmith, 2004; Augus-
tine, 2005). The team’s commitment 

to and involvement with updating the 

project plan, help to monitor the prog-

ress, and must also be encouraged (#5 

in Table 3).
The APM authors explain that 
involvement in both the planning and 

control of the project contribute to 

improve interaction and effective com-

munication among the project’s team 

members (Boehm & Turner, 2004; High-

smith, 2004; Augustine, 2005), as well as 

the development of professionals who 

can learn, operate, and adapt in the face 

of complex project environments (Win-

ter, Smith, Morris, & Cicmil, 2006). This 

practice has also been discussed in the 

area of product development since the 

1980s (Takeuchi & Nonaka, 1986) and 

also in manufacturing (Vázquez-Bust-

elo, Avella, & Fernández, 2007). More-

over, it is one of the principles described 

in the Agile Manifesto
 (Beck et al., 2001).
In iterative planning, the activities 
of the project plan are updated more 

frequently (#6 in Table 3). According 

to APM theorists (Boehm & Turner, 

2004; Highsmith, 2004; Augustine, 

2005; Cohn, 2005), the plan should 

be updated at the end of each itera-

tion (e.g., short development cycles, 

on average up to 4 weeks). Within the 

perspective of the traditional project 

management theory, in general, the 

project plan should be revised after a 

major milestone or a phase conclusion, 

although this is not considered a rule. 
thus differing from the traditional way 
of presenting the scope of the product 

design, usually in the form of a work 

breakdown structure (WBS) or bill of 

material, with a predominantly textual 

and detailed description of the project 

activities and tasks to be performed, 

complemented by detailed product per-

formance parameters.
Another relevant difference refers 
to the planning activity and the plan’s 

horizon (#3 in Table 3). Instead of a 

single plan for the entire project, being 

revised and improved phase by phase, 

it is performed iteratively, repeating 

the planning cycle several times along 

the project life cycle (Boehm & Turner, 

2004; Highsmith, 2004; Schwaber, 2004; 

Augustine, 2005; Cohn, 2005). This 

practice, called iterative planning (#3 

in Table 3), is in line with one of the 

fundamental principles of APM theory, 

in other words, iterative development 

or the rapid and continuous delivery of 

parts of the product (Highsmith, 2004; 

Augustine, 2005; Cohn, 2005), thereby 

obtaining continuous feedback from the 

customer to be able to respond to con-

stant changes in requirements, needs, 

risks, new opportunities, and so forth.
Iterative planning also requires the 
involvement of the project’s team in 

the planning and controlling of activi-

ties. Developing activities using self-

managed and self-directed teams (#4 

in Table 3) is also relevant to ensure 

their commitment and involvement in 

developing the project plan (Boehm & 
We carried out a comparison among 
the practices from the traditional lit-

erature and the agile management 

approach literature in order to identify 

which actions, tools, and techniques 

were clearly different according to the 

two approaches. The main purpose was 

to identify a group of management prac-

tices that clearly differentiate the use of 

the agile project management approach 

from other approaches. The result was 

six management practices that are being 

considered in this study, as indicated in 

Table 3.
The use of the product vision con-
cept (#1 in Table 3) and simple project 

plan communication tools and pro-

cesses (#2 in Table 3) are two prac-

tices advocated in the APM theory 

( Highsmith, 2004; Chin, 2004; Augus-

tine 2005; Cohn, 2005). This differs from 

the practice of defining the product and 

project scope (PMI, 2008, p. 112). The 

concept of “vision” foresees the use 

of visual tools such as visual boards, 

sticky-notes, figures, or drawings to pro-

vide a simple description of the general 

design, and also requires a high degree 

of interactions between team members 

and active collaboration with custom-

ers and key stakeholders. At the same 

time, it focuses on the core problems 

and challenges the team will have to 

face in innovative projects, and helps 

to identify which key aspects are valued 

most by the customers or market, not 

“how” to develop the product. It uses 

metaphors, figures, and prototypes, 
 #APM Management PracticesReferences (cited in the literature)
1Use of the “product vision” conceptHighsmith (2004); Augustine (2005)
2Use of simple project plan communication tools and processesHighsmith (2004); Cohn (2005); Chin (2004)

3Use of iterative planningEisenhardt & Tabrizi (1995); Boehm & Turner (2004); Highsmith (2004); Schwaber 
(2004); Augustine (2005); Cohn (2005)4Developing activities using self-managed and self-directed 
teams in the project planTakeuchi & Nonaka (1986); Boehm & Turner (2004); Highsmith (2004); Augustine 
(2005); Vázquez-Bustello, Avella, & Fernández (2007)
5Use of self-managed and self-directed teams in the project 
plan monitoring and updating activitiesTakeuchi & Nonaka (1986); Boehm & Turner (2004); Highsmith (2004); Vázquez-
Bustello, Avella, & Fernández (2007)
6Frequently apply project plan monitoring and updating 
processes Eisenhardt & Tabrizi (1995); Andersen (1996); Boehm & Turner (2004); Highsmith 
(2004); Augustine (2005); Cohn (2005)Table 3:
 Management practices related to the agile project management approach.
 June/July 2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      25(1)  Characterization of the company, 
respondent, and types of product devel-

opment projects; (2) Identification of 

APM practices; and (3) Identification 

of APM enablers. Because the objec-

tive of this study was an exploratory 

survey, the questionnaire was created 

without considering a single standard 

scale. Each question allowed only one 

response alternative that best described 

the reality of the company regarding the 

practices and the enablers identified in 

the literature.
The questionnaire was applied at a 
group of companies that participate in 

the community of practice organized 

by the Fundação Dom Cabral of Minas 

Gerais (MG, Brazil), called the Refer-

ence Center on Innovation of Minas 

Gerais (FDC CRI-Minas). The Dom 

Cabral Foundation is one of the main 

institutions for executive education pro-

grams and benchmarking for profes-

sionals and business managers of large 

Brazilian corporations.
The companies that participate in 
the FDC CRI-Minas meet regularly to 

exchange experiences and knowledge 

about different innovation-related top-

ics. In one of these meetings, representa-

tives from the 19 companies in the state 

of Minas Gerais discussed the topic, 

“how to manage innovative projects.” 

The questionnaire was emailed before 

the meeting to professionals involved 

in the areas of project management, 
the organization
 that are directly or indi-
rectly related
 with
 the implementation of 
the agile project
 management
 approach 
that may 
impact the
 performance and
 use of
 a given practice
, technique or tool
” (adapted from Almeida, Conforto, Silva, 

& Amaral, 2012). Ta4 illustrates a 

set of potential APM enablers extracted 

from the literature.
Forty-one enablers were identi-
fied and classified into four categories: 

organization, process, project team, 

and project type, as shown in Table 4 

(adapted from Almeida et al., 2012). 

The ones that appeared most frequently 

and are cited in the articles extracted 

from the theory are investigated in this 

study, as indicated in Table 5. The focus 

of this study is not to describe in detail 

each enabler, because they are widely 

discussed in areas such as product 

development, manufacturing, organiza-

tion theory, and project management. 

Additionally, this work is limited to the 

empirical observation and characteriza-

tion of these enablers in a group of 19 

companies.
Field Research Method
The conceptual framework presented 

in the previous section was deployed 

into a questionnaire with multiple-

choice questions, based on the tables 

of selected practices and enablers 

(see Tables 3 and 5). The question-

naire was divided into three sections: 
However, unlike the APM approach, 
this review focuses solely on correcting 

deviations, because the project plan has 

already been detailed up through the 

end of the project.
It should be noted that the practices 
described in this study do not repre-

sent the majority of practices, tools, and 

techniques comprised in APM theory, 

but only a small and selected sample, 

focusing on the main critical differ-

ences that characterize the use of the 

APM approach. These practices were 

selected based on an extensive inves-

tigation of the literature (Eder et al., 

2012), by means of a systematic litera-

ture review as described earlier.
APM EnablersIn the APM literature it is not difficult 
to find discussions targeting the impor-

tance of the pre-conditions or existing 

factors that are needed for the success-

ful use of APM practices, tools, and 

techniques. Some theorists often list 

principles that are, in fact, conditions 

to be observed and developed. In this 

study we refer to such conditions as 

“APM enablers.” The term, “enablers,” 

was borrowed from texts in the area of 

manufacturing, which discuss the con-

cept of “agility” in organizations and 

manufacturing processes (Vázquez-

Bustelo, Avella, & Fernández, 2007). In 

this research paper, “APM enablers” are 

defined as “internal or external factors 
to 
OrganizationProcessProject TeamProject Type and Others
1. Organizational structure type2. Organizational culture
3. Entrepreneurial culture
4. Learning organization
5. Agile-style work environment
6. Acceptance of agile methodology 
7. Adequate reward for agile use
8. Emphasis on speed
9. Performance measuring10. Knowledge management systems
11. Multidisciplinary teams
12. Resource competition
13. Strong executive support
14. Decentralized decision making1. Capability of reconfiguration2. Process automatization
3. Process modularity
4. Easy access to information 
5. Formalization
6. Frequent development milestones7. Process concurrency
8. External integration1. Self-direct teams2. Team autonomy to make 
decisions3. Team leadership

4. Team dedication

5. Team knowledge about 
agile6. Team experience/expertise

7. Project manager experience
8. Team size

9. Team location
10. Multidisciplinary team1. Product succession planning2. Urgency to complete the project (pace)
3. Goal clarity
4. Project complexity
5. Project newness
6. Support systems, computer-aided 
design (CAD); computer-aided engi-

neering (CAE)7. Customer involvement
8. Collaborative work
9. Suppliers’ involvementTable 4:
 Enablers from the systematic literature review (Adapted from Almeida et al., 2012).
 Can Agile Project Management Be Adopted by Industries Other than Software Development?26  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
for each  question or item observed. A 
simple mean and median were applied 

to identify the most latent responses 

of companies that had more than one 

respondent per project in the same 

company.Results and Analysis
The Use of APM Management Practices
Table 6 summarizes the percentage of 
companies that presented APM-related 

practices. For example, in practice 3 

(Table 6), 58% of the companies develop 

the plan “in macro form at the beginning 

and in detail in each phase.” Regarding 

practice 6, 42% check the progress per-

formance status on a monthly basis (see 

Table 6). These findings corroborate 

with the predominant form of planning 

in these types of companies (e.g., detail-

ing by phase or throughout the devel-

opment of the project). This means 

that using a traditional approach was 

not a surprise in this set of companies 

because of their nature, mainly from 

the manufacturing area, which usually 

adopts traditional project management 

methods.
Because APM is a theory at an 
intermediate stage of development 

(Edmondson & McManus, 2007), the 

scales and variables are new and need 

to be further explored; therefore, it was 

decided to use techniques of qualita-

tive analysis, content analysis, explor-

atory statistics, and preliminary tests 

(Edmondson & McManus, 2007). Each 

question or element of the question-

naire (related to practices and enablers) 

was analyzed individually.
The primary purpose of this re-
search effort was to identify the pres-

ence of APM practices and enablers in 

companies operating in different indus-

try sectors, in addition to the software 

industry. These analyses contributed 

to deepening our empirical knowledge 

about this research topic in these com-

panies. The results underpinned the 

discussion of the theoretical implica-

tions for this community of research-

ers and professionals. The data are 

presented according to the group of 

19 companies (or, as per the unit of 

analysis, 19 projects), using as a ref-

erence the percentage of companies 
R&D, and product development. All the 
companies answered and returned the 

questionnaires, totaling 48 respondents. 

The unit of analysis was the project. The 

respondents were asked to consider one 

project with some degree of innovation 

to answer the survey. The companies in 

question are distributed in the following 

industrial sectors: mining (5), steel and 

metallurgical industry (4), auto indus-

try (3), energy (2), engineering projects 

(2), consumer goods (1), electronics (1), 

and telecommunications (1), for a total 

of 19 companies.
As for the sizes of the 19 companies 
in terms of revenue (in U.S. dollars), 

five reported revenues of over US$5 

billion; eight reported between US$0.5 

and US$5 billion; three made between 

US$50 and US$500 million, and three 

reported revenues of up to US$50 mil-

lion. All the participants in this study 

have been working directly in the areas 

of projects and/or innovation, and are 

distributed as follows: 55% are manag-

ers of product development or R&D 

departments, 39% are analysts, and 6% 

are directors.
#APM EnablersReferences (cited in the literature)
1Organizational structure typeVázquez-Bustelo, Avella, & Fernández (2007); Chen, Damanpour, & Reilly (2010); Liu & Yetton 
(2007); Chow & Cao (2008); Shenhar (2001)2Multidisciplinary project teams (various compe-
tences)Eisenhardt & Tabrizi (1995); Vázquez-Bustelo, Avella, & Fernández (2007); Verganti (1999); 
Zirger & Hartley (1996); Olausson & Berggren (2010)3New product development process formalization 
levelChin (2004); Highsmith (2004); Li & Atuahene-Gima (1999); Chen, Damanpour, & Reilly (2010)
4Customer/stakeholder involvement in the 
 product development process
Boehm & Turner (2004); Highsmith (2004); Augustine (2005); Stockstrom & Herstatt (2008); 
Hoda, Noble, & Marshall (2011); Chow & Cao (2008)5Supplier or partner involvement in the product 
development processEisenhardt & Tabrizi (1995); Zirger & Hartley (1996); Chen, Damanpour, & Reilly (2010)
6Project team members’ experience (in years)Yusuf, Sarhadi, & Gunasekaran (1999); Highsmith (2004); Chow & Cao (2008); Chen, 
Damanpour, & Reilly (2010)
7Project manager experience (in years)Eisenhardt & Tabrizi (1995); Yusuf, Sarhadi, & Gunasekaran (1999); Highsmith (2004); Chow
 & 
Cao (2008); Chen, Damanpour, & Reilly (2010)
8Project team size (number of project team 
members)Smith & Reinertsen (1992); Boehm & Turner (2004); Highsmith (2004); Chow & Cao (2008); 
Qumer & Henderson-Sellers (2008); Mafakheri, Nasiri, & Mousavi (2008)9Project team dedication (time dedicated exclu-
sively for the project)Highsmith (2004); Cohn (2005); Vázquez-Bustello, Avella, & Fernández (2007); Chow & Cao 
(2008); Zirger & Hartley (1996); Chen, Damanpour, & Reilly (2010); Smith & Reinertsen (1992)
10Project team locationVerganti (1999); Zirger & Hartley (1996); Chin (2004); Highsmith (2004); Augustine (2005); 
Chow & Cao (2008); Qumer & Henderson-Sellers (2008); Chen, Damanpour, & Reilly (2010)
Table 5:
 Selected enablers related to the agile project management approach.
 June/July 2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      27 responsibility; however, 47% of the 
companies have declared that the proj-

ect plan is somehow “created collabora-

tively, with shared responsibility” (e.g., 

the project plan is developed in col-

laboration with the project team mem-

bers). This is a practice indicated in the 

APM approach (Boehm & Turner, 2004; 

Highsmith, 2004; Augustine, 2005). As 

for the responsibility for updating the 

project plan (practice 5, Table 6), the 

most traditional form of data collection 

predominates (68% of companies), in 

which the project manager is responsi-

ble for collecting and updating the proj-

ect progress. For 16% of the companies, 

this activity is totally under the respon-

sibility of a specific department, which 

in this case, could be the engineering 

department responsible for the proj-

ect, or the project management office 

(PMO), which could be responsible for 

the administrative activities of the proj-

ect (PMI, 2008, p.11). For the other 

16% of the companies, this is a shared 

responsibility, which is more suitable 

for the APM approach.
Project team self-management and 
shared responsibility are discussed in 
and communicate the project plan to 
the team and stakeholders. The novelty 

of these findings, however, lies within 

the high percentage of respondents in 

the citing of practice 1,”minimal textual 

description” (53%) which is a favorable 

indication of the agile project manage-

ment approach or adaptation of current 

practices. It is important to consider 

that the companies did not mention 

visual boards, pictures, drawings, and 

so forth (practice 2) as disseminated in 

the APM approach. We
 assumed that, 
in general, these companies are con-

strained by the traditional mindset and 

continue to use written and very tex-

tual scope statement documents. They 

most likely faced barriers doing this in 

innovative projects and have created 

a simpler way to generate these docu-

ments. If they had been familiar with 

the “vision concept,” perhaps they could 

have adapted this concept to create bet-

ter project scope documents in their 

specific project environments.
With regard to practice 4 (see 
Ta6) “project planning responsibil-

ity,” 48% of the companies declared 

that this is the project manager’s 
In this regard, just one company 
(5%) reported the use of iterative plan-

ning (developed by iteration), in other 

words, developed in cycles. This could 

be a rich example of a company oper-

ating in traditional sectors, generally 

applying traditional management mod-

els but using the iterative planning for 

some projects with some degree of inno-

vation. Nevertheless, the most interest-

ing evidence was the predominance of 

the use of phased planning instead of 

detailing the entire plan at once, then 

following with execution. It is relevant 

because of the fact that somehow, some 

of these companies have challenges cre-

ating a complete and detailed project 

plan. The two pieces of evidence make 

the hypothesis that one alternative is to 

use iterative planning for the projects 

with technology and innovative chal-

lenges rather than creating a detailed 

plan upfront.
An analysis of practices 1 and 2 has 
provided evidence that the companies 

tend to employ traditional practices, 

with tools such as Gantt charts and text 

editors or spreadsheets, and textual doc-

uments to describe the project’s scope 
Practice (number as per T3/Questionnaire)
Scale/Results re Shown in Percentages#Aspect EvaluatedTraditional ApproachIntermediateAgile Approach
3Project planning approachDetailed then revisedMacro then detailed in each phaseDeveloped by iteration
37%58%5%
6Project plan updating fre-
quencyEnd of each phaseMonthlyWeekly
37%42%21%
1Project scope description 
(detailing)Purely textual and detailedTextual description with additional 
informationMinimal textual description (then detailed and revised)10%37%53%
2Tool used to communicate the 
project planUse of project scheduling tools, such as Gantt charts or WBSUse of text editor or spreadsheetsUse of visual panels and boards, 
pictures, drawings, and so forth68%32%—
4Project planning responsibilityCreated by a department or the 
project management office (PMO)Created by the project managerCreated collaboratively; shared 
responsibility5%48%47%
5Project’s plan progress and 
updating responsibilityDepartment or PMO responsibilityProject manager responsibilityShared responsibility
16%68%16%
Table 6:
 Management practices observed in the sample.
 Can Agile Project Management Be Adopted by Industries Other than Software Development?28  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
(practice 1, Table 6); the predominance 
of the phased planning approach and 

the application of a less textual descrip-

tion of the project scope, combined 

with minimum revisions of plans and 

the high percentage of team members 

involved in the development of the 

project plan. This result can be inter-

preted as relevant evidence pointing out 

that some companies (deliberately or 

not) are moving toward the use of agile 

management combined with traditional 

management practices.
Thus, the emerging hypothesis is 
that these companies, as well as software 

development companies are confronted 

with the limitations of traditional proj-

ect management approaches and are 

incorporating “flexible” management 

approaches (e.g., agile management 

practices) at least in the projects aimed 
project, and its  influence on the results 
of the project, the company’s goals, and 

the value it provides for the customer in 

order to act properly.
In short, among the practices exam-
ined here, we found three practices that 

companies are adopting with adher-

ence to the APM theory. For example, 

the frequency of updating the project 

plan (practice 6, Table 6), the use of 

a minimal textual description, rather 

than a detailed description and revised 

to define the project scope (practice 1, 

Table 6), and the shared responsibility 

to create the project plan (practice 4, 

Table 6). The researchers did not expect 

this result because these companies 

declare themselves as not being users of 

the agile management approach. Fur-

thermore, there are companies apply-

ing some variance of  iterative planning 
the APM theory as fundamental manage-
ment practices (Boehm & Turner, 2004; 

Highsmith, 2004; Augustine2005). The 

emphasis on simplicity, iterative devel-

opment and customer involvement 

in the product development process 

requires that the team members have a 

strong grasp of the technical aspects of 

the product, as well as of the manage-

rial aspects. For years, self-management 

has also been discussed in the clas-

sical theory of product development 

(Takeuchi & Nonaka, 1986) and in texts 

from the manufacturing sector related 

to the “agile manufacturing” concept 

(Vázquez-Bustelo, Avella, & Fernández, 

2007). According to the APM approach, 

it is important, for example, for each 

team member to be able to identify 

and understand the possible risks and 

impacts of a change in the product or 
Enablers (as per Table 5/ 
Questionnaire)Scale#QuestionTraditional ApproachIntermediateAgile Approach
6Project team members’ experi-
ence No previous experience<1 year1–2 years2–3 years>4
——21%79%----
7Project manager experienceNo previous experience<1 year1–2 years2–3 years>4
10%11%11%26%42%
8Project team size (number of 
people)More than 5021–5013–209–126–81–5
5%5%6%21%21%42%
10Project team members’ locationsVirtual teamsSame siteSame buildingSame room
10%21%58%11%
4Customer/stakeholder involve-
ment in the project planningNot involvedInvolved without influenceInvolved with influence
5%58%37%
5Supplier and partner involve-
mentNot involvedDevelopment phaseConception phaseAll project phases
10%53%21%16%
1Organizational structure typeWeak matrixBalanced matrixStrong matrixProject oriented
16%37%31%16%
3Product development process 
formalizationStandardizedPartially standardized
37%63%
2Multidisciplinary project teamsNot multi-functionalSome key departmentsMost of the departments
21%68%11%
9Project team dedication (time 
allocated to work on the project)<25% of time26%–50% 
of time51%–75% of time76%–90% 
of timeFull time (>90%)32%31%16%16%5%
Table 7:
 Enablers observed in the sample.
 June/July 2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      29The active involvement of custom-
ers/stakeholders plays a fundamental 

role in the APM approach. The litera-

ture indicates several positive aspects, 

including increased speed of innovation 

by the firm; it avoids excessive costs 

of features that are not demanded by 

customers; reduces the time and cost 

of product development; reduces errors 

related to business requirements; there 

is a higher product quality through bet-

ter understanding of customer needs; 

and a greater ability to negotiate cus-

tomers’ expectations (Benassi, Junior, 

& Amaral, 2011). Additionally, the sup-

plier involvement in product develop-

ment can also help to reduce cycle time 

and avoid delays, and in principle, may 

affect the application of APM (Filippini, 

Salmaso, & Tessarolo, 2004). Collabora-

tive development (co-design) with sup-

pliers and partners presents challenges, 

but has become a common practice 

in industry (Trygg, 1993; Filippini, Sal-

maso, & Tessarolo, 2004).
The survey indicates that half of the 
companies (58%) have involved the cus-

tomer/stakeholders in the project plan-

ning but without any influence (Enabler 

4, Table 7). One reasonable explanation 

could be the challenge to involve cus-

tomers due to unavailability (e.g., have 

easy and direct access to them), and 

another reason is that the majority of 

clients participated in the project devel-

opment didn’t have 
the responsibility 
and accountability
 as per the “product 
owner,” as defined in the APM approach. 

However, 37% of the companies are with 

early customer/stakeholder involve-

ment, which is consistent with the APM 

theory. Given the type of company that 

manufactures consumer goods, there is 

an inherent difficulty in including the 

customers due to the geographical dis-

tance or challenges in reaching them, 

and the challenges involved in proto-

typing products. Therefore, this result 

would not be expected in this sample of 

industries. Furthermore, the suppliers’ 

involvement occurs late in the process; 

in general, they are involved during the 

development phase after the pre-design 
These authors provided evidence on 
innovative projects regarding the more 

necessary use of small teams, co-

located and being fully allocated. Agile 

management–related texts (Boehm & 

Turner, 2004; Highsmith, 2004; Augus-

tine, 2005), focusing on software devel-

opment projects, describe the explicit 

need for working with small co-located 

teams (up to 15 professionals). In addi-

tion, dedicating time and effort to a 

single project is strongly recommended 

by some APM authors (Highsmith, 2004; 

Cohn, 2005), especially for those with a 

high degree of innovation. This allows 

for greater concentration on the work, 

focus and commitment, creativity and 

interaction among team members, sup-

ported by a shared and holistic vision of 

the project’s challenges and goals.
Hence, albeit only intuitively, some 
companies of the sample already orga-

nize their innovative project teams in 

accordance with this trend, which rein-

forces the importance of these enablers 

for innovative business environments. 

On the other hand, for some types of 

projects and companies, the most impor-

tant element is the easy access to data to 

enable faster decision making. This is 

supported by Carbonell and Rodriguez’s 

(2006) argument, which highlights that 

more important than the team’s co-loca-

tion is the rapid and easy access to infor-

mation and team members.
These data reveal an important 
aspect for future research. Are commu-

nication tools and use of virtual teams 

(as 10%, according Enabler 10, Table 7) 

capable of delivering the same result of 

co-located teams in agile project man-

agement projects? The evidence col-

lected suggests that researchers who 

intend to investigate agile practices for 

the non-software industry should con-

sider the development of management 

models, practices, and tools aiming to 

consider distributed or virtual team 

members, as it has previously been 

discussed in the software development 

area (Ramesh, Cao, Mohan, & Xu, 2006; 

Hossain, Ali Babar, & Paik, 2009; Lee & 

Yong, 2010).
at developing highly innovative prod-
ucts under dynamic environments that 

require a more responsive, fast-learn-

ing-execution approach.
The Presence of APM Enablers
Table 7 describes the companies in 
terms of the presence of enablers or 

organizational conditions that may be 

ideal or useful for APM implementation. 

In general, the project team has over 

two years of experience (79%), and the 

experience of the project manager can 

also be considered relevant (i.e., over 

two years of experience in 68% of the 

companies) as described in the Enabler 

6 and Enabler 7 columns, respectively 

(Table 7). According to Table 7, this 

looks like the best fit for APM approach 

implementation and it is aligned with 

the APM theory; however, this doesn’t 

mean that a lack of experience is irrel-

evant in the traditional approach.
The companies have small project 
teams (up to 12 professionals in 84% of 

the cases), as described as the “project 

team size” (Enabler 8, Table 7). There 

is also a tendency to employ multidis-

ciplinary project teams (68%) grouping 

competences from key departments, 

even though they do not cover all areas 

of the organization (Enabler 2, Table 7).
All these enablers contribute to 
the APM implementation. The major 

challenge is regarding the co-location 

(Enabler 10, Table 7) and team dedica-

tion (Enabler 9, Table 7). Only 11% of 

the companies had teams working in 

the same location (e.g., in the same 

room), and only 5% had team members 

working full time on their projects. Most 

projects have teams working on projects 

on a part-time basis only (e.g., from 26% 

to 50%, or less than 25% of the total time 

available allocated). We can imply that 

these projects are coordinated and exe-

cuted along with other projects, simul-

taneously.Team “size” and “location” are 
aspects that have been studied since 

the 1990s in the product development 

research (Smith & Reinertsen, 1992; 

Zirger & Hartley, 1996; Verganti, 1999). 
 Can Agile Project Management Be Adopted by Industries Other than Software Development?30  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
Final Remarks and Future 
Research
This study presents an exploratory sur-
vey within 19 medium-sized and large-

sized companies operating in different 

industrial sectors, with respect to prac-

tices and enablers related to the imple-

mentation of the agile management 

approach to new product development 

projects.
The results indicate evidence of 
favorable aspects for APM implementa-

tion; for example, the favorable pres-

ence of some APM enablers, such as: 

the project team and project manager 

experience; the project team size; and 

the new product development process 

formalization level. These aspects indi-

cate that the companies surveyed have 

some characteristics and organizational 

enablers similar to companies from the 

software industry, which is considered 

a source of motivation to develop and 

pursue the application of agile man-

agement practices. Additionally, there 

is evidence of APM practices being 

applied in these companies, including: 

creating the project scope with minimal 

textual description (practice 1, Table 6); 

creating the project plan collaboratively 

with shared responsibility (practice 4, 

Table 6); and using a plan updating 

approach on a weekly basis (practice 6, 

Table 6).
These companies are experienc-
ing the use of some agile management 

practices even though they do not 

belong to the software industry sector. 

Deliberately or not, project manage-

ment practitioners are trying to adapt 

APM practices for their contexts and 

challenges. This is probable, as these 

companies might be struggling to adapt 

their current and formalized project 

management processes to fit a more 

innovative portfolio of projects.
Furthermore, this study identified 
the potential barriers for APM imple-

mentation in more “traditional indus-

tries.” There are some enablers that can 

challenge the use of the agile project 

management approach, such as: the 

restriction to assign full-time dedication 
been faced to proper align their product 
development processes to fit innova-

tive project needs. This result shows 

the same tendency observed in software 

developing companies: the search for 

new management models for innova-

tive and fast changing dynamic projects, 

which has resulted in the rise of the agile 

project management approach.
It should be noted that the partially 
formalized process could contribute 

toward a better adaptation to differ-

ent types of projects, with a higher or 

lower degree of innovation. This also 

would allow the application of “agile 

approaches,” which are more suitable 

for each type of project to be incorpo-

rated, assumed, and defended by APM 

authors such as Boehm and Turner 

(2004). These researchers empha-

size the need for a sufficient balance 

between agile practices and formaliza-

tion to allow for reliability, responsive-

ness, traceability, and quality of results. 

Therefore, in order to properly apply 

APM in more innovative companies it 

would be ideal to identify the balance 

between formalization and flexibility, 

pursuing the development of leaner 

processes.
In summary, there is evidence point-
ing out that the companies surveyed, 

aside from their industry sector, are 

facing similar issues and challenges 

as those of software companies in the 

development of innovative products. 

The companies surveyed, in most cases, 

are performing innovative projects using 

experienced and cross-functional teams 

managed by experienced project man-

agers. Additionally, there is a tendency 

to have less formalized processes, and 

therefore empowering the team with 

some degree of autonomy to make deci-

sions. Moreover, it was clear that the 

existence of challenges can be nega-

tive for APM implementation, such as: 

difficulties in having co-located team 

members; the need for functional man-

agers due to the type of organizational 

structure; and the difficulties in having 

full-time dedicated project team mem-

bers working on one project at a time.
or concept phase (Enabler 5, Table 7). 
These characteristics do not favor the 

implementation of the agile manage-

ment approach, because the feedback 

possible from customers and suppliers 

is required to be given as soon as pos-

sible after the early stages of the project.
With regard to the “organizational 
structure type” (PMI, 2008, p.28), 

Enabler 1 (Table 7), was identified 

mainly as a balanced matrix (37%) or 

strong matrix structure (31% of the com-

panies), which could be useful for APM 

implementation, although not ideal. 

Agile management literature does not 

mention which is the best organiza-

tional arrangement for this approach. 

Despite this, the authors (Highsmith, 

2004; Cohn, 2005; Chow & Cao, 2008; 

Chen, Damanpour, & Reilly, 2010) claim 

the need for full dedication from the 

project team, which means that having 

project-oriented organizational struc-

tures would be the best, because they 

are more likely to have fully dedicated 

project teams. The project-oriented and 

strong matrix structure should be the 

best condition for implementation of 

the APM approach. They could con-

tribute by providing total autonomy in 

decision making for the project man-

ager and the project team; almost half 

of the studied companies have project-

oriented or strong matrix structures as 

shown in Table 7.
The enabler “product develop-
ment process formalization” (Enabler 

3, Ta7) is considered the positive 

aspect for manufacturing firms working 

with complex and innovative projects. 

The studied companies have experi-

ence in the use of project management 

models and practices; therefore, they 

presented evidence of institutionalized 

product development processes, so we 

expected to find 100% of the projects fol-

lowing well established and formalized 

processes and practices. Nevertheless, 

the majority of projects (63%) were con-

sidered as using “partially” standardized 

processes. It is unexpected and interest-

ing evidence. It is a sign of the pitfalls 

and limitations these companies have 
 June/July 2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      31answers and presents limitations. First, 
the research faced the challenge of 

defining all questions that composed 

the survey with standardized questions 

and scales. Nevertheless, we didn’t find 

well-developed instruments, as a result 

of the newness of the APM theory and 

the lack of studies in the project man-

agement literature. Second, it does not 

allow for generalizations. The results 

and evidence collected are relevant only 

for the sample of companies investi-

gated in this study on a broader per-

spective. The questionnaire was applied 

to a few professionals in the organi-

zations investigated and the answers 

were related to a single project. Thus, 

the findings encourage further explo-

ration with a larger set of companies 

and multiple projects, including mul-

tiple research methods; for example, 

in-depth case studies to collect more 

detailed data regarding the use of man-

agement practices and the presence of 

enablers.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the 

Brazilian research funding agencies 

FAPESP and CAPES, and the current 

scholarship provided by CNPq Brazil. 

We also thank FDC CRI-Minas for its 

valuable partnership in the develop-

ment of this research, and the contribu-

tions of Juliana Schnetzler, Samuel Eder, 

Luiza Soares, and Raoni Pereira. We are 

very thankful for the insightful com-

ments and suggestions made by the two 

anonymous reviewers and the 
Journal’s 
editor during the review process.
References
Almeida, L. F. M., Conforto, E. C., Silva, 

S. L., & Amaral, D. C. (2012).
 Fatores 
críticos da agilidade no gerenciamento 

de projetos de desenvolvimento de novos 

produtos. 
Produto & Produção, 13
(1), 93–113.Amaral, D. C., Conforto, E. C., 
Benassi, J. L. C, & Araújo, C. (2011).
 Gerenciamento Ágil de Projetos: 

Aplicação em produtos inovadores.
 São 
Paulo, Brazil: Saraiva.
team members; in other words, how to 
“scale” APM. The use of APM in globally 

distributed teams is still evolving and 

there is a lack of compelling empirical 

results. According to our results, this 

is one critical limitation that emerged 

from the analysis that should not be 

overestimated due to the complexity of 

working with distributed team mem-

bers, even considering the traditional 

project management approach. In this 

sense, APM should be further explored 

and adapted for these circumstances 

and contingencies.
Another way to develop “hybrid” 
management models is to have a deep 

understanding about the role of the “agil-

ity” construct in the project management 

theory as well as its relation with manage-

ment practices and project performance. 

This assumption raises new questions: 

Which APM practices are more relevant 

for the “agility”? Do “hybrid” manage-

ment models contribute to “agility” and 

product and project results? In addition, 

future work should also focus on find-

ing evidence regarding the correlation 

between enablers and practices, which is 

represented by the question: What APM 

enablers are more relevant to supporting 

APM implementation? It is important to 

investigate whether or not APM enablers 

contribute to the successful implementa-

tion of APM practices.
Last, this study does not address 
or discuss the results or effects of the 

implementation of APM practices and 

its correlation to the APM enablers, or 

even, project and product performance. 

So, there is room to investigate some 

statements of causality by raising the 

following questions: Does the use of 

APM practices and enablers contrib-

ute to better product and project per-

formance? Does the combination of 

practices and enablers result in bet-

ter “agility” in the project management 

perspective? And, furthermore, what 

does “agility” really mean for the proj-

ect management theory and the deploy-

ment of “hybrid” management models?
Like all types of exploratory research, 
this study raises more  questions than 
project teams; the challenge of co-locat-
ing all project team members; the diffi-

culty in creating large multidisciplinary 

teams (with all project competences 

involved); the challenge of involving 

customers with a high degree of influ-

ence in project development; and the 

most superficial involvement of sup-

pliers.
Thus, the final answer to the title of 
this article is considered positive. We 

judge that this exploratory study has met 

sufficient results to propose the hypoth-

esis that the APM approach could be 

adapted to non-software companies, 

or more traditional industry sectors, at 

least for innovative projects or even for 

some parts of the project that require a 

more flexible management approach. 

The project management research com-

munity should further investigate how 

to develop “hybrid” management mod-

els, considering APM and traditional 

approaches, in order to balance the 

“agility” needs and barriers identified.
Unlike software development com-
panies, manufacturing organizations 

and companies operating in similar sec-

tors as those studied here, are usually 

more complex in terms of the quantity 

and interaction between parties; the 

level of complexity of the products; the 

product’s cost; the technological chal-

lenge and high cost to prototype the 

product in the early development stages; 

the number of professionals involved in 

the design phase, and ultimately, team 

members who are often dispersed glob-

ally. Compared with software develop-

ment projects, their projects usually 

have a long-term development cycle. If 

these characteristics are considered as 

restrictions in similar companies, then 

the APM theory should evolve in order 

to overcome these obstacles and be 

recognized as one possible approach for 

some specific types of projects in this 

kind of particular environment.
One key aspect for the evolution 
of the APM as an alternative manage-

ment approach for the types of com-

panies studied here is the investigation 

on how to work with distributed project 
 Can Agile Project Management Be Adopted by Industries Other than Software Development?32  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
Edmondson, A., & McManus, S. (2007).
 Methodological fit in management field 

research. 
Academy of Management 
Review, 32
(4), 1155–1179.Eisenhardt, K., & Tabrizi, B. N. (1995).
 Accelerating adaptive processes: Product 

innovation in the global computer indus-

try. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 
40(1), 84–110.Filippini, R., Salmaso, L., & Tessarolo, 
P. (2004).
 Product development time 
performance: Investigating the effect of 

interactions between drivers. 
Journal of 
Product Innovation Management, 21
(3), 199–214.Ganguly, A., Nilchiani, R., & Farr, J. 
(2009). Evaluating agility in corpo-
rate enterprises. 
International Journal 
Production Economics
, 118(2), 410–423.Goodpasture, C. J. (2010).
 Project man-
agement the agile way: Making it work 

in the enterprise.
 Fort Lauderdale, FL: 
J.Ross Publishing.
Highsmith, J. (2000).
 Adaptive software 
development: A collaborative approach 

to managing complex systems
. New York, 
NY: Dorset House.
Highsmith, J. (2004).
 Agile project man-
agement: Creating innovative products.
 Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Hoda, R., Noble, J., & Marshall, S. 
(2011). The impact of inadequate cus-
tomer collaboration on self-organizing 

agile teams. 
Information and Software 
Technology, 53
(5), 521–534.Hossain, E., Ali Babar, M., & Paik, H. 
(2009). Using Scrum in global software 
development: A systematic literature 

review.
 In: Proceedings of 2009 Fourth 
IEEE International Conference on Global 

Software Engineering, 175–184.
Lee, S., & Yong, H. S. (2010).
 Distributed 
agile: Project management in a global 

environment. 
Empirical Software 
Engineering,
 15(2), 204–217.Levy, Y., & Ellis, T. (2006).
 A systems 
approach to conduct an effective litera-

ture review in support of information sys-

tems research. 
Informing Science Journal, 
9, 182–212.of technological complexity
. Journal of 
Business Research, 59
(2), 225–232.Chen, J., Damanpour, F., & Reilly, R.R. 
(2010). Understanding antecedents 
of new product development speed: A 

meta-analysis. 
Journal of Operations 
Management, 28
(1), 17–33.Chin, G. (2004).
 Agile project manage-
ment: How to succeed in the face of 

changing project requirements.
 New York, 
NY: Amacom.
Chow, T., & Cao, D. B. (2008).
 A survey 
of critical success factors in agile soft-

ware projects. 
The Journal of Systems and 
Software, 81
(6), 961–971.Cobb, C. G. (2011).
 Making sense of agile 
project management: Balancing control 

and agility.
 Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc.
Cockburn, A. (2004).
 Crystal clear: A 
human-powered methodology for small 

teams.
 Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley 
Professional.
Cohen, G. (2010).
 Agile excellence for 
product managers: A guide to creating 

winning products with agile development 

teams.
 Silicon Valley, CA: Super Star Press.
Cohn, M. (2005). Agile estimating and planning. New York, NY: Prentice Hall 
PTR.
Conforto, E. C., & Amaral, D. C. (2010).
 Evaluating an agile method for plan-

ning and controlling innovative projects. 

Project Management Journal, 41
(2), 73–80.Cooper, R. (2008).
 Perspective: The 
stage-gate idea-to-launch process—

update, what’s new, and NexGen 

Systems. 
Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 25
(3), 213–232.Dawson, R., & Dawson, C. (1998).
 Practical proposals for managing 

uncertainty and risk in project plan-

ning. International Journal of Project 
Management, 16
(5), 299–310.Eder, S., Conforto, E. C., Schnetzler, J. 
P., Amaral, D. C., & Silva S. L. (2012).
 Estudo das práticas de gerenciamento 

de projetos voltadas para desenvolvim-

ento de produtos inovadores. 
Produto & 
Produção, 13
(1), 148–165.Andersen, E. (1996).
 Warning: Activity 
planning is hazardous to your project’s 

health! International Journal of Project 
Management, 14
(2), 89–94.Augustine, S. (2005).
 Managing agile 
projects.
 Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall PTR.
Baccarini, D. (1996).
 The concept 
of project complexity: A review. 

International Journal of Project 

Management, 14
(4), 201–204.Beck, K. (1999).
 Extreme program-
ming explained.
 Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, 
A., Cockburn, A., Cunningham, W., 

al. (2001).
 Manifesto for agile software 
development.
 Retrieved from 
http://agilemanifesto.org.
Benassi, J. L. G., Junior, L. D. F., & 
Amaral, D. C. (2011). 
Evaluating meth-
ods for product vision with customers’ 

involvement to support agile project man-

agement. In: 
Proceedings of International 
Conference on Engineering Design
, ICED, 
Technical University of Denmark.
Biazzo, S. (2009).
 Flexibility, structura-
tion, and simultaneity in new prod-

uct development. 
Journal of Product 
Innovation Management, 26
(3), 336–353.Biolchini, J., Mian, P. G., Natali, 
A.C. C., & Travassos, G. H. (2005).
 Systematic review in software engineer-

ing. Tech. Report RT-ES 679/05, Systems 
Engineering and Computer Science 

Dept., COPPE/UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro/RJ, 

Brazil.
Boehm, B., & Turner, R. (2004).
 Balancing agility and discipline:A guide 

for the perplexed.
 Boston, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Brereton, P., Kitchenham, B. A., 
Budgen, D., Turner, M., & Khalil, M. 
(2007). Lessons from applying the sys-
tematic literature review process within 

the software engineering domain. 
The Journal of Systems and Software, 80
(4), 571–583.Carbonell, P., & Rodriguez, A. I. (2006).
 Designing teams for speedy product 

development: The moderating effect 
 June/July 2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      33Li, H., & Atuahene-Gima, K. (1999). 
Marketing’s influence and new product 

performance in Chinese firms. 
Journal of 
International Marketing
, 7(1), 34–56.Liu, L., & Yetton, P. (2007).
 The con-
tingent effects on project performance 

of conducting project reviews and 

deploying project management offices. 

IEEE Transactions on Engineering 

Management, 54
(4), 789–799.MacCormack, A., Verganti, R., & Iansiti, 
M. (2001). Developing products on 
internet time: The anatomy of a flex-

ible development process
. Management 
Science, 47
(1), 133–150.Mafakheri, F., Nasiri, F., & Mousavi, M. 
(2008). Project agility assessment: An 
integrated decision analysis approach. 

Production Planning & Control, 19
(6), 567–576.Maylor, H. (2001).
 Beyond the Gantt 
chart: Project management moving on. 

European Management Journal, 19
(1), 92–100.Montori, V., Swiontkowski, M., & 
Cook, D. (2003).
 Methodologic issues 
in systematic reviews and meta-anal-

yses. 
Clinical Orthopedics and Related 
Research
, 413, 43–54.Olausson, D., & Berggren, C. (2010).
 Managing uncertain, complex prod-

uct development in high-tech firms: 

In search of controlled flexibility. 
R&D Management, 40
(4), 383–399.Palmer, S. R., & Felsing, J. M. (2002).
 practical guide to feature-driven devel-

opment
. New York, NY: Prentice Hall PTR.
Perminova, O., Gustafsson, M., & 
Wikström, K. (2008).
 Defining uncer-
tainty in projects: A new perspec-

tive. 
International Journal of Project 
Management, 26
(1), 73–79.Poppendieck, M., & Poppendieck, T. 
(2003). Lean software development: An 
agile toolkit for software development 

managers.
 Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley 
Professional.
Project Management Institute. (2008).
 A guide to the project management body 

of knowled
ge (PMBOK® guide)
 – Fourth 
edition. Newtown Square, PA: Author.
Qumer, A., & Henderson-Sellers, B. 
(2008). An evaluation of the degree 
of agility in six agile methods and its 
applicability for method engineering. 

Information and Software Technology, 

50(4), 280–295.Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Mohan, K., & Xu, P. 
(2006). Can distributed software devel-
opment be agile? 
Communications of the 
ACM
, 49(10), 41–46.Schwaber, K. (2004).
 Agile project man-
agement with SCRUM.
 Redmond, WA: 
Microsoft Press.
Schwaber, K., & Beedle, M. (2001).
 Agile software development with Scrum.
 New 
York, NY: Prentice Hall.
Shenhar, A. J. (2001).
 One size does not 
fit all projects: Exploring classical con-

tingency domains. 
Management Science, 
47(3), 394–414.Shenhar, A. J., & Dvir, D. (2007).
 Reinventing project management: The 

diamond approach to successful growth 

and innovation.
 Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press.
Sheffield, J., & Lemétayer, J. (2013).
 Factors associated with the software 

development agility of successful proj-

ects. 
International Journal of Project 
Management
, 31(3), 459–472.Sliger, M., & Broderick, S. (2008).
 The software project manager’s bridge to 

agility.
 Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley 
Professional.
Smith, P. G. (2007).
 Flexible product 
development: Building agility for changing 

markets.
 San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Smith, P. G., & Reinertsen, D. G. (1992).
 Shortening the product development 

cycle. 
Research Technology Management, 
35(3), 44–49.Stapleton, J. (1997). 
Dynamic systems 
development method
. Boston, MA: Addison Wesley.
Steffens, W., Martinsuo, M., & Artto, 
K. (2007).
 Change decisions in product 
development projects. 
International 
Journal of Project Management, 25
(7), 702–713.Stockstrom, C., & Herstatt, C. (2008).
 Planning and uncertainty in new product 
development. 
R&D Management, 38
(5), 480–490.Takeuchi, H., & Nonaka, I. (1986).
 The 
new new product development game: 

Stop running the relay race and take up 

rugby. 
Harvard Business Review
, January-
February, 137–147.
Thomke, S., & Reinertsen, D. (1998).
 Agile product development: Managing 

development flexibility in uncertain 

environments. 
California Management 
Review, 41
(1), 8–30.Trygg, L. (1993). 
Concurrent engi-
neering practices in selected Swedish 

companies: A movement or an activity 

of the few. Journal of Product Innovation 
Management
, 10(5), 403–415.Tseng, T. Y., Dahm, P., Poolman, R.W., 
Preminger, G. M., Canales, B. J., & 

Montori, V. M. (2008).
 How to use a 
systematic literature review and meta-

analysis. 
The Journal of Urology, 180
(4), 1249–1256.Vázquez-Bustelo, D., Avella, L., & 
Fernández, E. (2007).
 Agility drivers, 
enablers and outcomes: Empirical test of 

an integrated agile manufacturing model. 

International Journal of Operations 

& Production Management, 27
(12), 1303–1332.Verganti, R. (1999).
 Planned flexibility: 
Linking anticipation and reaction in 

product development projects. 
Journal of 
Product Innovation Management, 16
(4), 363–376.Williams, T. (1999).
 The need for 
new paradigms for complex  projects. 

International Journal of Project 

Management, 17
(5), 269–273.Winter, M., Smith, C., Morris, P., & 
Cicmil, S. (2006).
 Directions for future 
research in project management: The 

main findings of a UK government-

funded research network. 
International 
Journal of Project Management, 24
(8), 638–649.Wright, R. W., Brand, R. AW., 
& Spindler, K. P. (2007).
 How to 
wrsystematic review. 
Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research
, 455, 23–29. Can Agile Project Management Be Adopted by Industries Other than Software Development?34  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
Wysocki, R. K. (2009).
 Effective project 
management
: Traditional, agile, extreme
 – Fifth edition. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Yusuf, Y. Y., Sarhadi, M., & 
Gunasekaran, A. (1999).
 Agile manu-
facturing: The drivers, concepts and 

attributes. 
International Journal of 
Production Economics, 62
(1–2), 33–43.Zirger, B. J., & Hartley, J. L. (1996).
 The effect of acceleration tech-

niques on product development time. 

IEEE Transactions on Engineering 

Management, 43
(2), 143–152.Edivandro C. Conforto
, PhD, is a Research 
Fellow at Massachusetts Institute of 

Technology (MIT), Engineering Systems 

Division (ESD)–SSRC/CEPE, where he is 

responsible for global studies related to 

program and project management and 
innovative product development in high-

technology industries. His current research 

examines the moderating factors and 

effects of the “Agility Theory,” management 

practices and organizational factors on prod-

uct development and project performance 

and how to transform organizations by com-

bining different management approaches 

for dynamic business environments. His 

work on agile project management applied 

to innovative product development received 

international recognition from institu-

tions such as PMI, IPMA, and POMS. The 

results of his work have been published in 

international conferences and journals, and 

he is the co-author of the first book on agile 
project management applied to innovative 
projects published in Brazil. He can be 
contacted at conforto@mit.edu
Fabian Salum
 is professor at Fundação 
Dom Cabral, Program Director–PCS 

Partners of Sustainable Growth, Professor 

and Research Member Innovation Center 

in FDC–Brazil and has an MSc degree in 
Administration and is a candidate for the 

PhD program. Since 2010, he has coordi-

nated research on innovation in medium-

sized and large-sized companies in Brazil 

and models strategies for sustainable 

growth. Professor Salum is the author of 

books and chapters of books on the themes 

of innovation and strategic business man-

agement. He is also the author of papers 
presented at international seminars (EGOS, 

ACADEMY), a Candidate for Best Paper of 

division International Management by semi-

nar AOM—Academy of Management—

Orlando, USA, 2013, and a speaker at 

different seminars in Brazil and abroad. He 

can be contacted at fabian@fdc.org.br
Daniel C. Amaral
 is professor at the 
University of São Paulo, Brazil, and has 

a PhD degree in product development 

management. His research interest areas 

include methods and tools for product 

development and innovation management, 

especially those related to project manage-
ment. Since 2008, Professor Amaral has 

coordinated two research programs about 

agile project management; the results have 

been published in Project Management 
Journal
®, Technovation, Product: 
Management & Development, Production,
 and at international conferences, includ-

ing ICED, IPDMC, POMS, and some PMI 

events. He can be contacted at amaral@

sc.usp.brSérgio Luis da Silva
 holds a PhD in 
Mechanical Engineering from University 

of São Paulo, Brazil. He is an Associate 

Professor in the area of Technological and 

Managerial Information of the Department 

of Information Sciences and a Supervisor 

in the graduate program of Production 

Engineering at Federal University of São 

Carlos (UFSCar). His current research 

interests include new product development 

and knowledge management. His research 

has been published in, among others, 

the Journal of Technology Management 
& Innovation, International Journal of 

Automotive Technology and Management, 

Product: Management & Development, 

and Concurrent Engineering.
 He can be 
contacted at sergiol@ufscar.br
Luís Fernando Magnanini de Almeida
 is a Physical Engineer and holds an MSc 

degree in Production Engineering, both 

from Federal University of São Carlos 

(UFSCar). He has worked in the Brazilian 

stages of F1 (2012), FIndy (2013), X Games 

(2014) and FIFA World Cup (2014). His cur-

rent research interests include new product 

development, project management, agile 

project management, and knowledge man-

agement. He can be contluisfer-

nando@dep.ufscar.br
