 STUDENT PAPER
April 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
73INTRODUCTIONResearch on product development methods and tools has grown fast
since 1995 (Brown & Eisenhardt, 1995). A recent study (Cooper, 2008)
emphasizes some aspects of product development that require 
further investigation (e.g., lean and agile procedures and better adap-
tation of methods to fit innovative product development). Although best
practices in project management have been widely disseminated since 1960
(Crawford, 2006; Kloppenborg & Opfer, 2002; Kolltveit, Karlsen, & Gro
nhaug2007; Shenhar & Dvir, 2007; Söderlund, 2004), there are some barriers when
these practices are applied to innovative and complex projects (Maylor,
2001), especially concerning product development.
Project managers are used to dealing with an ever-growing demand for
projects that aim at developing innovative and complex products. A project

complexity definition is necessary in order to cope with project manage-
ment challenges (Williams, 1999). Lean and agile project management
(APM) approaches have emerged to assist the adaptation of consolidated

project management practices to improve these projects. However, few
authors have proposed well-defined and pragmatic methods to apply these
approaches or provided systematic evaluations of their results. One of the

challenges that companies must face is the development of new tools and
methods to suit specific project management environments. This article
proposes a method for planning and controlling innovative product projects
using APM principles, followed by a procedure to use it, and the results of

two implementation cases.
Literature Review
Innovation is treated (Tijssen, 2002) as a consequence of basic research and

inventions that can be introduced in the market. Other authors (Dillon, Lee, &
Matheson, 2005) have argued that innovation is a source of value to cus-
tomers. However, a question remains in the field: How do companies plan

and control projects of innovative products in a project environment laden
with uncertainties? In an attempt to answer this question, a set of principles
and concepts for innovative product development projects has recently

emerged from the software development area (Chin, 2004; Highsmith, 2004),
known in the literature as APM. APM is “a set of values, principles, and prac-
tices that assist project teams in coming to grips with this challenging envi-

ronment” (Highsmith, 2004, p. 16).
Core APM values address both the need to build agile and adaptable
products and the need to create agile and adaptable development teams

(Highsmith, 2004, p. 16). APM principles, similar to Lean Thinking principles
Evaluating an Agile Method for
Planning and Controlling Innovative

Projects
Edivandro Carlos Conforto
, School of Engineering of S
~ao Carlos, University of S
~ao Paulo,
Brazil

Daniel Capaldo Amaral
, School of Engineering of S
~ao Carlos, University of S
~ao Paulo, Brazil
ABSTRACTThis article presents an extensive investigation
carried out in two technology-based companies

of the S
~ao Carlos technological pole in Brazil.
Based on this multiple case study and literature

review, a method, entitled hereafter IVPM2,

applying agile project management (APM) prin-

ciples was developed. After the method imple-

mentation, a qualitative evaluation was carried

out by a document analysis and questionnaire

application. This article shows that the applica-
tion of this method at the companies under
investigation evidenced the benefits of using

simple, iterative, visual, and agile techniques to

plan and control innovative product projects

combined with traditional project management

best practices, such as standardization.
KEYWORDS:agile project management
method; project planning and controlling;

innovative product projects
Project Management Journal, V
ol. 41, No. 2, 73–80© 2008 by the Project Management Institute

Published online in Wiley InterScience 

(www.interscience.wiley.com) 

DOI: 10.1002/pmj.20089 74April 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Planning and Controlling Innovative Projects
STUDENT
PAPER
(Smith, 2005), are based on flexibility
and simplicity. They are developed by

iterations and add value to customers

by means of short-time deliverables

(Chin, 2004; Highsmith, 2004). Core
APM values are : (1) employ iterative
feature delivery, (2) deliver customer

value, (3) champion technical excel-

lence, (4) build adaptive teams, 
(5) encourage exploration, and (6) sim-
plify (H
ighsmith, 2004, p. 28). APM
focuses on people development, self-managementand self-discipline, par-
ticipatory decision making, customer

focus, and less bureaucracy. Although
the literature on APM proposes a set of
values and principles to be applied in

the context of innovative products,

there are not many empirical studies
evaluating the effectiveness when
applied to the development of project

management tools and methods.
Project Planning
There are many techniques and meth-
ods to manage projects, each one for a
specific project management process

(PMI, 2004). However, some authors,
such as White and Fortune (2002), have
identified that a restricted set of meth-

ods and tools are used in practice, of
which project management software
and Gantt charts are the most relevant.

In addition, theoretically, research on

project management has taken into
account common assumptions, such as
prescriptive, normative theory, ground-

ed on ideal project planning and con-
trol models (Cicmil & Hodgson, 2006).
This evidence leads to the question of
how properly project managers have
been using project management tools
and which actions have been taken to
adapt these tools to meet project require-
ments. Another study (Maylor, 2001)
with transnational companies also evi-

denced the wide use of Gantt charts by
project managers to plan and control
projects, but with limited results. Most

innovative products are developed

under uncertainties in turbulent envi-

ronments, characterized by project

complexity, unpredictable activities,
and changes where the traditional
approaches have presented limitations
(Chin, 2004). Despite the extensive liter-
ature available on project management

(Kloppenborg & Opfer, 2002), there are

few studies that present advances on
how to plan and control innovative

product projects.
The APM approach is indicated for
innovative product development proj-
ects (Highsmith, 2004). Highsmith

suggests some directions for project
planning and control. For example, a
project plan should start with the

“product vision” (“vision box and eleva-

tor test statement”), followed by the
definition of the project scope (project
data sheet), and end with the project

plan (iterative feature plan). However,
there are two aspects to be considered.
First, the majority of the APM proposals

cannot be properly considered as tech-
niques. In the perspective of traditional
project management best practices,

such as a Gantt chart, program evalua-
tion and review technique (PERT), and
critical path method (CPM), a tech-

nique is based on a well-established

theory with well-specified procedures
for its use and implementation.Iterations and other APM recommen-

dations do not address this wide
spectrum and have been treated as
guidelines and principles that are not

supported by the literature. The second
aspect refers to the guidelines. They
must be appropriately evaluated

because not many studies have evalu-
ated these applications. In turbulent
environments, product development

projects rarely end according to the

original plan (Steffens, Martinsuo, &
Artto, 2007). Steffens et al. also empha-
size that in the traditional project

management approach, changes are
negative aspects, whereas in turbulent
environments they are prerequisites to

successful projects.
Project Control
Project control implies observing 

project execution so that potential 

problems may be identified in a timely
manner and corrective action may be
addressed, whenever necessary, to con-

trol the execution of the project (PMI,
2004). Similarly to project planning, the
control process includes many tools

and techniques. This study focuses only
on scope, time, and deliverables control.

The literature on project control pres-
ents many dimensions and approaches

to apply control techniques 
and tools.
Rozenes, Vitner, and Spraggett (2006)
provided an extensive review of the

literature on project control. They con-
cluded that in the project management
literature authors use a one-dimensional

control system in spite of not integrat-
ing project objectives at all. Rozenes et
al. also found evidence that the most
utilized multidimensional control 
system is the earned value (EV). The
disadvantage of EV analysis is its lack of

integration with other project dimen-

sions such as technology, quality, and
design.The role of APM control and plan-
ning surpasses merely taking corrective
actions and following plans (Highsmith,
2004). APM control plays an important

role in learning-in-progress and not
following a rigid plan, which does 
not imply that the control process or

standardization and procedures should

be given up, according to Highsmith
(2004). Highsmith emphasizes the defi-
nition of “what control.” He discusses

the necessity of simplicity, added value
to the customer, and focus on leader-
ship and development of team compe-
tences. He also argues that if plans 
are speculations or hypotheses about
the future, then frequent and effective

feedback is required to test them.
Considering the context and values
derived from the application of APM

principles to project management prac-
tices, Highsmith noted a self-disciplined
and self-managed team development.
The success of projects that adopt 
the exploration approach depends on
reality-based feedback. Adapting the

plan and project scope depends on

apprehending a wide range of informa-

tion, which includes the assessment of April 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
75the project progress, technical risks,
evolution of requirements, and ongo-

ing competitive market analysis,

argued Highsmith (2004).
Research Methodology
The research methodology was divided

into four phases: (1) a systematic litera-

ture review was carried out to identify

empirical studies of implementations

of agile methods in innovative product
development projects, which indicated
issues to be investigated in this field; 
(2) a diagnosis of project management

practices was carried out at two small
companies, where some problems and
difficulties in project management

were identified; (3) a method to plan
and control projects was developed by
means of action research (Coughlan &
Coghlan, 2002), and subsequently

implemented; and (4) after the imple-mentation, the method was evaluated

using a case-study method (Yin, 1989).
Data collection was carried out through

interviews, weekly observations, and
document analysis. A questionnaire
was applied to address two research

questions (RQs):
• RQ1: Did the method benefit the com-
panies’ project management?
• RQ2: Could it be considered agile? 
The data collected were analyzed in a
qualitative manner. It is important to
emphasize that there are many outputs
and activities in the planning and con-
trol phases (PMI, 2004), but only the
project scope, time, and deliverables
were evaluated in this study.
Results
Project Management Method
The method developed is entitledIVPM2 (Iterative and Visual Project
Management Method). It was based on

APM principles as described in the liter-
ature review. Figure 1 presents the
IVPM2; its components, followed by

their description; and a seven-stage pro-

cedure to use the method. All five com-
ponents of the IVPM2 were integrated
into planning and control projects in a

simple, visual, and interactive way.
•Phase and Project Deliverables
Model (PPDM):
The phase and proj-
ect deliverables model combined the
StartIterationDefine the phase andproject deliverablesThe PM andteam insert thedeliverables inthe whiteboardusing stickynotesThe deliverables areinserted in theDotProjectEnd of IterationPPDMProject teamThe project team getsthe information of
project performance and
takes actions (or replan)Software para Gestãode Projetos(DotProject)The dotproject generatesperformance reportsProject teamThe project team executes thework (deliverable) and inserts the
information on dotprojectProject teamDefine the workpackagesPPCWWAPWWeekly Activity Planning WhiteboardProject Planning and Controlling WhiteboardPhase and Project Deliverable ModelLegend:Information flowStages
New project1234567SPISPMSdotProjectProject Management SoftwareKey PerformanceIndicators (KPIs)Figure 1:
IVPM2–Method for planning and controlling innovative product development projects.
 76April 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Planning and Controlling Innovative Projects
STUDENT
PAPER
principles of stage-gates (Cooper,
Edgett, & Kleinschmidt, 2001) and

project life-cycle management. Some

standard phases and deliverables

were defined to guide the project
planning and execution. PPDM alsoincludes a simplified set of templates
used to collect, document, and organ-

ize all project information produced.
The templates have two objectives: toorganize the project information and

to guide the documentation and stan-dardization of project process.
•Project Planning and Controlling
Whiteboard (PPCW):
The PPCW wasdesigned to integrate the project phases
with the deliverables in a simple

timescale. The deliverables can be

defined according to their execution
phase. The project planning focuses on
defining deliverables instead of activi-

ties. At this stage, the project team does
not define the exact work that must 
be done, but only what is going to be

delivered, because they do not yet have
a clear view of the tasks and activities;they are only certain of the project

goals and mission. The deliverables are
inserted in the whiteboard using col-
ored sticky notes. Each project uses a

different color, and the deliverables are

organized on the board according to a
top-down priority sequence (highest
priority at the top).
•Weekly Activity Planning Whiteboard
(WAPW):
This whiteboard is used to
define some activities and work pack-

ages (WPs). Each activity is connected
to one or more PPCW deliverable. The
WAPW uses an iteration concept, by

having fast short-time results. The
whiteboard has the weekdays printed
at the top, divided into two periods on

each day (morning and afternoon).
WAPW also uses sticky notes to show
the input of tasks, activities, and WPs.
•Simplified Performance Indicator
System (SPIS):
A simple set of per-formance indicators was adapted to

measure the lead time of deliverables

by means of earned value added

(EVA). Based on the project baseline,

the project is measured in terms of
time spent, current progress, value
added, and deviation plan. The SPIS is

not applied to resources control.
•Open-source project management
software tool for supporting the port-

folio control (DotProject):
DotProject
consists of an online Internet-based
and open-source software for project

management (available at www.
dotproject.net). A customized module
was developed to generate project

performance reports based on the

SPIS. The role of the software is quite
different from traditional project
management. It is not used for plan-

ning and controlling project tasks, but
for registering project data to enable
the team to make decisions and man-
age the project portfolio. The team
uses the PPCW and WAPW to plan and
control projects.
Described next are seven stages
that represent a procedure to use 

the IVPM2, as shown in Figure 1. The
adapted procedure was the same at
both companies (hereinafter referred

as Company A and Company B), but

some changes were made in PPDM and
PPCW components, especially con-
cerning time-scale positioning.
It starts with the demand for a new
project (Stage 1). By means of a project
plan template, the risk analyses and

most of the product requirements are
defined. Changes may occur, but it is
important to have a general view of the

project goals and constraints. The proj-
ect team defines the deliverables and
the phases of the PPDM-based project,

taking into account its deadlines, con-

straints, and goals. The project manager
and the team insert the deliverables on
the PPCW (Stage 2) according to

descriptions of the project phases. Each
phase has standard activities. The PPCW
deliverables are inserted by means of

different-colored sticky notes (one color
for each project—in case the company
has more than one). Each sticky note

represents a deliverable and contains

the deliverable name and short descrip-

tion, estimated delivery date, and person
in charge. Each sticky note is organized
on the PPCW according to its priority,

phase, and delivery date.
Once the deliverables are placed on
the PPCW, they must be uploaded onto

DotProject (Stage 3). The software was
customized to fulfill the PPCW and
PPDM standards. It has “templates” of

each phase and deliverable to guide

users in their work. The DotProject deliv-
erables must have the estimated starting
and ending dates to enable the baseline
creation. The project managers, with all
team members, were able to define, 
at weekly short meetings (average 40

minutes), the WPs by decomposing 
the deliverables into measurable tasks
(Stage 4). Team members input the tasks

into the WAPW by means of sticky notes.

The information on these sticky notes

comprises the deliverable name, task

name, person in charge, and estimated

end date. The sticky note is inserted on
the day of the week that the work starts. 
The team member can break the tasks

and even reorganize his or her schedule
to better respond to project changes.
Once a WP is completed, the person in

charge of it logs in on DotProject and
inserts a brief comment with respect to
the task, and the percentile of each task

represented by the deliverable defined

on the PPCW (Stage 5).
At Stage 6, the DotProject software
generates the reports with project per-

formance indicators, as defined in the
SPIS. The reports are used to control
the project progress, value added, devi-

ation, and time spent. At Stage 7, the
project team analyzes the information
from the DotProject reports and uses it

to check the value added to customers,
their learning about the project uncer-
tainty, and the project progress to be

able to take adaptive actions and antic-ipate changes. All stages of this method
have been designed to be iterative,

integrated, and repeatable during the
project life cycle. The quantity of itera-
tions will depend on the type of the
project; its complexity and uncertainty

level must be considered. An iterative

project life-cycle management implies
 April 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
77defining deliverables, inputting them
into DotProject, defining, executing,
controlling WPs, and informing the
project team.
Case Application
Founded in 2003, Company A is a small

company that develops highly techno-logical products involving hardware
and software. They are specialized in

computer programming and integra-

tive hardware systems for education
and entertainment. The method was
applied to one of its projects in which

the goal was to develop a robot for edu-
cation and research computer labora-
tories. The robot includes features that

can be reprogrammed using modular
programming. Company B is a small
organization founded in 1998 encom-

passing small design enterprises that
support innovative product develop-
ment. It is specialized in industrial

design, prototyping, and engineering,
virtual simulation, and finite element
analyses. Most of its projects involve

collaborative tasks with partners such
as research labs, universities research
groups, and government agencies. The

method was applied to ten of its proj-

ects of new product development, but

only three were concluded by the end

of the IVPM2 implementation.Method Evaluation
A questionnaire was presented to 19
participants that had applied the

method. Figure 2 shows the percentile
frequency of the answers regarding 
the method analyses considering the

following criteria: (1) encourages proj-
ect innovation and creativity; (2) IVPM2
required team self-discipline and self-

management; (3) self-discipline andself-management contributed to better
project team performance and devel-

opment; (4) added value to the team

and customer; (5) IVPM2 provided to
visual communication and team view;
(6) the visual communication con-
tributed to better project results; (7) its
flexibility suits the project changes
requirement; and (8) its simplicity.

Each criterion is discussed in the para-
graphs that follow.
Has the method encouraged inno-
vation and creativity (Criterion 1)?
According to 68% of the respondents,
the method enabled process creativity

and innovation. But 32% were indiffer-
ent or disagreed. This aspect is critical
and relevant to their work due to the

innovative nature of product develop-

ment. The method provided accurate

data and organization without adding

much bureaucracy to their process.

They were able to adapt in face of
changes. The need for self-discipline
and its impact on the companies and
their projects were evaluated. Ninety-
four percent agreed that IVPM2
required self-discipline (Criterion 2),

and 100% agreed that self-discipline
had a positive impact on and improved
project results and team development

(Criterion 3). With both companies, the
project team discussed its deliverables
at short weekly meetings to keep the

project scope updated.
With respect to the value added to
customers and the project team
(Criterion 4), the graph shows that 100%

of the respondents agreed that IVPM2
added value to customers. A critical
and controversial point must be

addressed here. Both the approaches,
traditional and agile, can add value, but
in the cases in question, there is ample

evidence that a simple way of planningand controlling projects-by means of
sticky notes and a whiteboard, with the

support of project management soft-
ware, and a simple set of templates—
contributes more to customers and

project teams than does using concepts
based on traditional planning and con-
trol tools. Iterations with customers, by

means of regular phase review meet-

ings, helped the team deliver exactly

what the customer expected. In both
2411854654111066135135713181580%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
(8) Simplicity(7) Flexibility(6) Visual communication enabled better results(5) IVPM2 provided visual communication(4) Value added(3) Self-discipline enabled better results(2) IVPM2 required self-discipline(1) Encourage innovation and creativityTotally disagreeDisagreeIndifferentAgreeTotally agreeFigure 2:
Frequency of the answers extracted from the data interview reports.
 78April 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Planning and Controlling Innovative Projects
STUDENT
PAPER
companies, the project managers
expressed that their customers enjoyed

the results and the project organization

and procedures adapted.
Concerning the visual communica-
tion aspect, 68% agreed that IVPM2
contributed to the project team view

(Criterion 5), and 78% agreed that the

visual communication provided by 
the method contributed to better proj-
ect results (Criterion 6). In both compa-

nies, team members highlighted the
iterative development of all project
phases and deliverables during the

method application. In addition, the
project managers became more confi-
dent about the results: “It’s visual; it’s

easy to check whether or not the proj-

ect is running smoothly.”
With respect to project flexibility
(Criterion 7), 73% of the participants

agreed the method is flexible and
enabled project changes. Before the
method was implemented, they were

not able to meet project changes
requested by customer and market
changes. They had to follow a rigid

plan. The regular customer iteration
inherent to this method promotes 
the identification of changes during the

review of the phase gates. As regards

simplicity (Criterion 8), 74% were indif-
ferent or disagreed that IVPM2 is sim-
ple to use. Although only 26% agreed

that the method entailed some simplic-ity, most agreed that it improved their
project management skills. Regarding

research question 1 (RQ1), the project
management role in both companies
became faster than it had been (i.e.,

when they had to define all tasks and to develop an entire project plan 
by means of traditional project man-

agement methods). Their focus clearly
moved from project planning to project
exploration (execution) (Chin, 2004;

Highsmith, 2004). A parallel evaluation
was carried out and included a qualita-
tive analysis based on the data collect-
ed during the implementation process,

as discussed next.Regarding 
process and standardiza-
tionby means of PPDM, the team
developed a common view that provided
a better understanding of the project

deliverables and phases for both
Company A and Company B. They usu-
ally had to reinvent the project process

and documentation templates to regis-
ter project information. The templates
provided a historical file of the entire

project, enabling a fast retrieval of 
any project information, which refers
to RQ1. PPDM worked as a standard by

providing the companies with an

overview of the project management
life cycle. Analyzing 
project scope,deliv-
erables,and tasks execution
, the PPCWand WAPW, in turn, provided the team
with a holistic view of the major project
deliverables. This is a visual and itera-

tive way for project planning and con-
trolling by means of sticky notes and
whiteboards. The team got used to dis-

cussing project deliverables through
project progress on a weekly basis, and
taking adaptive actions, whenever they

judged necessary, to fulfill the project

goals and add value to customers. By
controlling tasks and reports
through
DotProject and a simple set of key per-

formance indicators (KPIs), faster and
accurate performance can be easily
checked. In addition, the software pro-

vided a chronological account of the
project data covering its entire life
cycle. Reports were automatically gen-

erated. The software assisted in the reg-

istration of project data by creating a
single file of the project history, thus
enabling preventive actions.
Regarding research question 2
(RQ2), by analyzing the 
organizationalbenefits, although the implementationin Company A was not as fast as in
Company B due to leadership commit-
ment and project team motivation,

project management activities were
reliable and organized in both compa-
nies. The visual and simplicity-related

aspects of the method have con-tributed to project flexibility, a sine qua
non in their project environment.

Some disadvantages arose during the

implementation (e.g., the necessity of

self-managing and self-disciplinedcapabilities to use the method). Eachteam member needed to contribute,

evaluate, and discuss the role of project
management in the APM approach.
Leadership and participant decision

making are mainstream and are rooted

in the lean thinking approach. The time
dedicated to project management dif-
fered at both companies. The use of this

method with project management soft-
ware helped to reduce planning time
and improve communication: “Now we

can see, every day, without much effort,
what we have to do, not only the project
manager, but all the project team mem-

bers”; “It became easier to discuss proj-

ect deliverables in view of PPCW.” On the
subject of some specific characteristics
of the method, such as visibility, user-

friendliness, and agility, the team mem-
bers agreed that it saves time in planning
and focuses on the execution phase.
Final Considerations
This study shows some of the gains and

challenges faced during the develop-
ment of a method to plan and control
innovative projects using agile princi-

ples, and its results suggest directions
for future research. Due to the charac-
teristics of the chosen investigation

design, this study presents some limita-

tions. It does not mean to neglect the
best project management practices
available in the literature, nor does it

intend to advance generalizations to all
types of project and companies. For the
specific companies under considera-

tion, which develop innovative prod-
ucts, the results evidence the feasibility
of adopting an agile method with sim-
ple and flexible techniques to plan andcontrol projects despite their perception.
Their projects are developed locally,

which involves uncertainties and
dynamic work requiring creativity,
innovation, and flexibility. In this con-

text, the method has contributed to
improve their project results. This study
has also identified that it is possible to
have benefits through the combination

of advanced techniques to manage a

group of projects (such as software and
 April 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
79metrics based in time) and simple 
and visual techniques, which may be

useful in the management of the project

team schedule.
This research also provides some
guidance on how to apply both
approaches together (traditional and

agile), such as the standardization and

the use of templates and procedures in
order to meet project requirements.
The results also show that commitment

to the role of project management is
very important to achieve successful
results. The participation of senior

management and project sponsors
contributed to the final results. The
implementation provided a holistic

view of the challenges found in the
management of projects at small com-
panies that have specific constraints,
such as resources and knowledge about

project management concepts, that
impact the way they manage their proj-
ects. For these companies, regular iter-

ations with their customers contribute
to add value and to better project deliv-
erables by anticipating project changes.

Despite the research limitations, both
RQs were addressed, but also need fur-
ther empirical research. Therefore

some questions for future research are

identified: (1) How can planning and
managing risk in innovative and com-
plex projects be kept simple and 

practical? (2) Given that PMO plays an
important role for project organization
and execution, how can a project man-

agement office (PMO) be used as astrategy to implement new approaches
based on APM principles? and (3)

Because resource and cost planning are
not dealt with by this method, how
should resource planning and cost

planning be dealt with?Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank 
FAPESP (S
~ao Paulo State Research
Fund-Brazil) for the financial support
to develop this research. They are also

grateful to theI
ntegration Engineering
Group (GEI2), Institute of Factory of

Millennium (IFM), and Advanced
Nucleus of Manufacturing (NUMA) for
technical support. Special thanks to the 
companies where the research was

conducted.References
Brown,S.L.,& Eisenhardt,K.M.
(1995,April).
Product development:
Past research, present findings, and
future directions. 
Academy of
Management Review,20
, 343–378.Chin,G.(2004).
Agile project manage-
ment:How to succeed in the face of

changing project requirements.
New York: Amacon.
Cicmil,S.,& Hodgson,D.(2006,
August).
New possibilities for project
management theory: A critical engage-

ment.Project Management Journal,
37(3), 111–122.Cooper,R.G.(2008,May).
Perspective:
The stage-gate idea-to-launch process—
Update, what’s new, and NexGen 
systems. 
Journal of Product Innovation
Management,25
(3), 213–232.Cooper,R.G.,Edgett,S.J.,&
Kleinschmidt,E.J.(2001).
Winning at
new products
. Cambridge, MA: Perseus.
Coughlan,P.,& Coghlan,D.(2002,
February).
Action research—Action
research for operations management.
InternationalJournal of Operations &

Production Management,22
(2),220–240.Crawford,L.(2006,August).
Developing organizational project
management capability: Theory and
practice. 
Project Management Journal,
37(3), 74–86.Dillon,T.A.,Lee,R.K.,& Matheson,D.
(2005,March-April).
Value innovation:
Passport to wealth creation. 
Research
Technology Management,48
(2), 22–37.Highsmith,J.(2004).
Agile project
management:Creating innovative

products.
Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Kloppenborg,T.J.,& Opfer,W.A.
(2002,June)
. The current state of 
project management research: Trends,

interpretations, and predictions.

Project Management Journal,33
(2),5–18.Kolltveit,B.J.,Karlsen,J.T.,&
Grønhaug,K.(2007,January).

Perspectives on project management.

International Journal of Project

Management,25
(1), 3–9.Maylor,H.(2001,February).
Beyond
the Gantt chart: Project management

moving on. 
European Management
Journal,19
(1), 92–100.Project Management Institute (PMI).
(2004).A guide to the project manage-
ment body of knowledge 
(PMBOK®guide)—Third edition. Newtown
Square, PA: Author.
Rozenes,S.,Vitner,G.,& Spraggett,S.
(2006,September).
Project control:
Literature review. 
Project Management
Journal,37
(4), 5–15.Shenhar,A.J.,& Dvir,D.(2007,June).
Project management research—The

challenge and opportunity. 
Project
Management Journal,38
(2), 93–99.Smith,P.(2005,July).
Book review:
Agile project management: Creating

innovative products. 
Journal of
Product Innovation Management,22,
369–376.Söderlund,J.(2004,November).
Onthe broadening scope of the research
on projects: A review and a model for

analysis. 
International Journal of
Project Management,22
, 655–667.Steffens,W.,Martinsuo,M.,& Artto,K.
(2007,October).
Change decisions inproduct development projects.
International Journal of Project
Management,25
, 702–713.Tijssen,R.J.W.(2002,May).
Sciencedependence of technologies: Evidence
from inventions and their inventors.

Research Policy,31
, 509–526.White,D.,& Fortune,J.(2002,
January).
Current practice in project
management—An empirical study.
International Journal of Project
Management,20
(1), 1–11.Williams,T.M.(1999,October).
Theneed for new paradigms for complex

projects. 
International Journal of
Project Management,17
(5),269–273. 80April 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Planning and Controlling Innovative Projects
STUDENT
PAPER
Yin,R.K.(1989).
Case study research—
Design and methods.
Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Edivandro Carlos Conforto
has a BSc in busi-
ness administration science. He holds a mas-
ter’s degree in production engineering from S
~aoPaulo University (USP), S
~ao Carlos School of
Engineering (EESC). As a master’s research stu-
dent, he gained relevant experience in product
development process improvement, developing

and implementation of project management
techniques and methods including PMO 
development, and project management training
applied to innovative product development for

small technology-based companies. He has pre-

sented research papers in production engineer-
ing conferences in Brazil and also at the PMI
Global Conference and recently received the

2008 International S
tudent Paper of the Year
Award (ISPYA), Latin America region, promoted

by the PMI Educational Foundation.
Daniel Capaldo Amaral
is a professor at the S
~aoCarlos School of Engineering, University of S
~aoPaulo–Brazil. He received a doctoral degree from
the University of S
~ao Paulo in 2002, developing
a knowledge management software tool for 

supporting the product development process.

Since then, he has conducted research in the

product development and innovation manage-
ment areas. He has published conference
papers in project management, including PMI

events in Brazil, and is currently supervising

master’s students. He has lect
ure and consul-
tancy experience on project and product 
development management and actually is

responsible for lecturing on these topics at 
the S
~ao Carlos School of Engineering.
