 December 2015/January 2016    Project Management Journal
    DOI: 10.1002/pmj  3Project Management Journal, Vol. 46, No. 6, 3–5
© 2015 by the Project Management Institute 

Published online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) 

DOI: 10.1002/pmj.21557
          From the Editor
  
 
 
Hans Georg 
 
 Gemünden 
 
 Dr. rer. oec. habil., Dr. h.c. rer. oec. et soc. 
 
 
   
 
Chair for Technology and Innovation Management 
,  Technische Universität 
Berlin 
,   
Berlin 
,  Germany 
 
           On 12 October, Mika Helinius, head of the Research Pro-
gram at Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland, posted the 

following on LinkedIn: “Europeans must be grateful for 

this 28-year-old Austrian man—legal student and entre-

preneur. He is doing alone more than all policymakers 

in Brussels to bring digital (SOFTWARE) services and the 

foremost data of citizens back to the people of Europe.” 

His post was commenting on the decision of the European 

court in the case  
Schrems v. Facebook
 , which declared an 
agreement on transferring the information of European 

citizens to U.S. organizations as not valid, because the 

assumption that the United States may be considered as 

a “safe haven” was not examined sufficiently as a valid 

assumption. 
 I do not share the enthusiasm of Mika Helinius, but 
his exemplary post documents that the policy of Euro-

pean institutions to take stakeholder concerns much 

more seriously today than a few years ago is very much 

applauded. This is also true in the case of the ENRON 

scandal, the FIFA scandal, and the Volkswagen scandal, 

in which strong U.S. institutions took care of stakeholder 

rights. When powerful institutions control and sanction 

violations of norms more, then consequently individuals 

and organizations will comply more strongly with such 

norms. Strong institutions protect stakeholder rights and 

not only do they strengthen corporate governance, they 

also strengthen project, program, and project portfolio 

governance. 
 In our survey on “ 
Future Trends in Project  Management 
in 2025, ” academic researchers and experienced project 
practitioners expect a stronger consideration of gover-

nance principles, including transparency, accountabil-

ity, responsibility, and fairness. (For the trend study, 

see Gemünden & Schoper,   2014  ; Schoper, Gemünden & 

Nguyen,   2015  . For the governance principles, see Aras 

& Crowther,   2010  ; Müller,   2016  ; Sankaran & Biesenthal, 

  2016  ; von Werder,   2011  .) Such ethical principles not 

only apply to project management roles such as project 

managers, program managers, project portfolio manag-

ers, and project management office managers, they also 

apply to all types of managers, owners, and citizens, 

specifically when they function in project management 
Foundations of Project Management Research: Stakeholders and Agile
roles, as supervising or resource-granting line managers, 

sponsors, customers, suppliers, politicians, regulators, 

reviewers, investigative journalists, and project oppo-

nents. Institutions that enforce governance principles will 

be strengthened, and cultural values will change along 

with professional roles. 
 This  
December/January issue
  of  
Project Management 
Journal
 ® is dedicated to the theme of  
stakeholder man-
agement
  in the realm of projects. This special issue on 
stakeholder management is edited by  
Pernille Eskerod, 
Martina Huemann,
  and  
Grant Savage,
  whose article 
describes the content and contribution of the articles in 

this special issue; their article also documents how stake-

holder thinking entered the realm of project management. 

Initially, stakeholder management was a concept derived 

from the resource-dependence view of firms and empha-

sized investors and market and development partners as 

important stakeholders, followed by the view extended 

toward a variety of other stakeholders that offer critical 

resources. The concept then also addressed the  
risks
  that 
organizations and individuals have at stake. Today the 

concept also embraces  
ethical issues
  as a core concern 
of stakeholder management. Thus, the meaning of stake-

holder management has changed from the management 

 of  stakeholders in the interest of a specific group of stake-
holders, in particular shareholders, to the management 

 for
  a multitude of stakeholders that might have conflict-
ing interests. This implies that the project manager is 

not only responsible for the interests of an organization 

that employs him or her as an organizational member or 

has contracted his or her services as a client, but is also 

responsible for the concerns of  
other  stakeholders that 
are not paying him or her. This view is very familiar to us, 

for example, as in the case of a doctor who is employed by 

a hospital, in other words, his or primary concern should 

be his or her patients. This is not the typical role expecta-

tion of a project manager or a project sponsor; however, 

the times are changing and we expect more change in 

the future. I want to emphasize that role expectations are 

changing with regard to not only project managers, but 

also project sponsors, project portfolio managers, and 

other professional roles. Stakeholder management will 

stay an ongoing central issue of project management, and 

there are many interesting research questions in this area. 
 I want to emphasize another important topic in this 
issue: our call for the new special issue, “ 
 
Exploring the 
Photo credit:
 Markus Bullick
 From the Editor4  December 2015/January 2016   Project Management Journal
    DOI: 10.1002/pmj Role of Agile Approaches for the Management of Projects
. 
 ” 
 Thomas Lechler
 ,  
Fred Niederman
 , and  
Yvan Petit
  are the 
editors of this special issue. 
 The  
Agile Manifesto
  was authored by practitioners who 
defined, out of their own experiences, four values and twelve 

principles to improve software development processes 

(Fowler & Highsmith,   2001  ). Many practitioners and scholars 

have come to believe that applying agile rules to software 

development processes has provided higher levels of produc-

tivity and improved efficiency than traditional approaches in 

at least some cases. This special issue seeks to explore a vari-

ety of new research questions that arise from the increasing 

diffusion of agile practices. The authors of the call describe 

them in more detail. 
 The  
Agile Manifesto
  comprises the following four values:
1.   Individuals and interactions  
over
  processes and tools 
2.  Working software  
over
  comprehensive documentation 
3.  Customer collaboration  
over
  contract negotiation 
4.  Responding to change  
over
  following a plan   
 What does the term “over” mean in these four statements? 
It is clear that they provide relevant statements about which 

of the pair-wise polar elements should be of higher priority. It 

is also evident that the term on the left-hand side is expected 

to have a greater influence on the success of a developed soft-

ware than the term on the right-hand side. The statements do 

not imply, however, that the terms on the left-hand side do 

 not  have a positive influence on the development of software 
development projects. Rather, the statements provide room 

for some balancing of the principles on the left-hand and 

right-hand sides. We could even interpret statements, such as 

exploration and exploitation, in the ambidexterity research 

tradition, or effectuation and causation in the entrepreneur-

ship research. In both research streams, the two orientations 

should be followed to a certain extent, and organizations 

capable of implementing both orientations should perform 

better; in other words, they should be efficient and effective 

at the same time. 
 All three streams of practices—agile approaches versus 
traditional approaches, exploration versus exploitation, and 

effectuation versus causation—can specify neither how to 

balance the opposing poles, nor what the right mixture of 

both polar approaches should be. We can only derive that a 

minimum amount of activity from the left-hand and right-

hand terms is required. These qualitative arguments do not 

deliver an exact value or range of values for the desirable 

fraction of both kinds of polar activities. We could add to this 

the assumption that the impact of the two polar activities is 

connected in a multiplicative way, not a linear way; if so, then 

the mixtures of both kinds of polar activities should probably 

lie in a smaller range of values compared to the assumption 

that the impact is connected in an additive way. 
 These speculations may help us to structure the problem 
but they do not provide satisfactory answers. Returning to 

the agile versus traditional methodology: We often find pro-

cesses and tools, comprehensive documentation, contract 

negotiation, and planning necessary and useful things—but 

how do we find the  
appropriate
  amounts? Should the balance 
between the two poles of these four polar scales  always  be the 
same? Should the “over”  
always  apply or should it vary? How 
much does it vary in reality? Why does it vary? What are the 

theoretical explanations as to why the mixture varies? Which 

influence does a variation of the mixture have on defined 

performance measures? Can we find moderator variables 

that explain for which boundary conditions agile matters 

more than for other boundary conditions? The research on 

such questions is scant. Despite the fact that agile method-

ologies are used on a broad scale in software development 

projects, theoretical insigh
ts and empirical findings are lag-
ging behind. 
 We also don ’ t know much about the negative “side effects” 
of agile methodologies. We may posit the following testable 

hypothesis:  
 
The more agile the underlying processes of soft-
ware development projects, the more fragile their results 

are. 
  Do we increase the speed and flexibility of our processes 
at the expense of the sustainability of their results? If this is 

true, then we could indeed assume:  
 
Agile, but fragile!
    The usual arguments in fav
or of agile approaches are: 
Agile means that we become quicker, more responsive, more 

solution oriented, more creative, and more pragmatic—the 

list of promises can be extended. But what about the negative 

side of more agile projects?
•   Do agile approaches consider risks sufficiently in a proactive 
way, or are they only strong in responding to them quicker? 
•  Is more learning within projects strengthened at the expense 
of less learning between projects? 
•  Does the better integration of co-developing customers mean 
that we may neglect to explain the functionalities of the new 

software to the remaining, less active customers and to train 

them intensively? 
•  Is motivation really increasing through agile approaches 
because you learn what is most important to your customer 

quicker, or does the increased workload only lead to more 

short-term gains and long-term burnout if there isn ’ t sufficient 

time for regeneration between projects, particularly if opportu-

nities for regeneration  
within
  projects might have decreased?   
 My simple answer to this question is: We need more 
research! I hope that more research has already been done, 

but it needs to be published! To address this, we are publish-

ing this special issue, so please use this unique opportunity to 

send us your submissions. 
 I would also like to request the following regarding your 
publications. Look not only at software projects; consider 
 December 2015/January 2016   Project Management Journal
    DOI: 10.1002/pmj  5also hardware, social, and organizational projects. The agile 
theme and the flexibility theme have long traditions in dif-

ferent management fields from which theoretical insights 

can be taken. For the development of a general theory of 

project management, it is very important to find out what 

can be generalized about different application fields, what is 

application-field specific, and why this is the case. 
 Another request concerns the process views of project 
management. In the new product development literature, 

many studies and several meta-analyses have already gath-

ered much empirical insight and theoretical knowledge about 

the usefulness of the four agile values. Investigations in this 

field have also analyzed process methodologies and bound-

ary conditions that help to accelerate processes. These inves-

tigations have also looked at the moderators that influence 

the impact of acceleration on performance; in particular, they 

have analyzed how the influence of acceleration measures 

may differ between projects, aimed at incremental versus 

radical product innovations, and also the differing influences 

of more traditional rigid stage-gate approaches and more flex-

ible overlapping process models. 
 In addition to the specialized articles, this issue also 
includes two articles on other subjects. 
 The  
seventh article
  in this issue, by  
Moses T. Adoko
 , 
 Thomas A. Mazzuchi
 , and  
Shahram Sarkani
 , “ 
 
Developing a 
Cost Overrun Predictive Model for Complex Systems Devel-

opment Projects
, 
 ” documents a decision support model for 
recognizing likely cost overruns in complex systems develop-

ment projects 
.  This decision will help project managers take 
measures in due time in order to better comply with their 

budget goals. In their quantitative study, the authors use a 

model with five known drivers of complex systems develop-

ment costs in order to estimate cost overruns. The study 

identifies schedule and reliability as the key determinants of 

whether or not a large complex systems development project 

will experience cost overrun. The editor of this article is Hans 

Georg Gemünden. 
 The  
eighth article , “ 
 
Cost Overruns in Hydrocarbon 
Megaprojects: A Critical Review and Implications for 

Research
 
 ,” is by  
Olugbenga Olaniran
 ,  
Peter E. D. Love
 ,  
David 
Edwards ,  
Oluwole Alfred Olatunji
 , and  
Jane  Matthews
 . Cost 
overruns are prevalent in hydrocarbon megaprojects in the 

oil and gas industry. A recent report indicates that 64% of 

ongoing megaprojects globally are facing cost overruns. 

This article provides a critical review of the extant literature 

and addresses the theories used to model the causal influ-

ence factors and their interrelationships of cost overruns 

in hydrocarbon megaprojects. Findings from the research 

indicate that the complex interactions between project char-

acteristics, people, technology, and structure and culture 

contribute to cost overruns occurring. The authors suggest 

using chaos  theory to explain how cost overruns arise in 

hydrocarbon megaprojects. The editor of this article is Hans 

Georg  Gemünden.  
  
References 
    Aras ,  G.  , &   Crowther ,  D.   ( 2010 ).
  Corporate social responsibility: 
A broader view of corporate governance . In   G.   Aras   &   D.  

 Crowther   (Eds.),  
A handbook of corporate governance and 
social responsibility
  (pp.  265 – 280 ).  Farnham, England :  Gower 
Publishing Limited .  
    Fowler ,  M.  , &   Highsmith ,  J.   ( 2001 ).
  The agile manifesto . 
 Software Development
 ,  
9 ( 8 ),  28 – 35 .  
    Gemünden ,  H. G.  , &   Schoper ,  Y.   ( 2014 ).
  First results of the new 
expert survey 2014: Future trends .  
Projektmanagement Aktuell
 , 
 25 ( 5 ),  6 – 16 .  
    Müller ,  R.   ( 2016 ).
  Governance and governmentality for projects: 
Enablers, practices and consequences
 .  Routledge Series on 
Corporate Governance .  New York, NY: Routledge .  
    Sankaran ,  S.  , &   Biesenthal ,  C.   ( 2016 ).
  Governance at the front-
end: Managing the clash of objectives in project organizations . 

In   R.   Müller   (Ed.),  
Governance and governmentality for projects: 
Enablers, practices and consequences
 .  Routledge Series on 
Corporate Governance .  New York, NY: Routledge .  
    Schoper ,  Y.  ,   Gemünden ,  H. G.  , &   Nguyen ,  N.   ( 2015 ).
  Future 
trends for project management in 2025
 . Working Paper.  Oslo : 
 BINorwegian Institute of Business .  
    von   Werder ,  A.   ( 2011 ).
  Corporate governance and stakeholder 
opportunism .  
Organization Science
 ,  
22 ( 5 ),  1345 – 1358 .    
