 April/May 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  3Project Management Journal, Vol. 48, No. 2, 3Œ5
 © 2017 by the Project Management Institute
Published online at www.pmi.org/PMJ
From the EditorHans Georg Gemünden, Dr. rer. oec. habil., Dr. h.c. rer. oec. et soc.,
 Professor of Project Management, BI Œ Norwegian Business
 School Department of Leadership & Organization, Oslo, Norway
The first article from 
Marte Pettersen Buvik
 and Sturle 
Danielsen Tvedt
 on 
ﬁThe Influence of Project Com
-mitment and Team Commitment on the Relationship 
Between Trust and Knowledge Sharing in Project 
Teamsﬂ
 examines the relationship among trust, commit
-ment, and knowledge sharing. The authors include two 
different foci of commitment that are highly relevant to 
project teams: team commitment and project commit
-ment. Their theory and findings show that propensity to 
trust and trustworthiness have a significant positive influ
-ence on team and project commitment and on the knowl
-edge sharing climate and knowledge sharing behavior. The 
authors also posited that project and team commitment 
mediate the influence of the two trust-related constructs. 
This mediation was confirmed for project commitment, 
but not for team commitment; thus, project commitment, 
defined as a belief in the goals at hand and willingness to 
engage in the project turned out to be more crucial than 
team commitment, which did not mediate the influences 
of trust. The findings are in line with previous studies that 
have found trust to be a significant predictor of the sharing 
of tacit knowledge and add to the existing literature that 
project commitment is an important intervening variable 
for knowledge sharing in projects. The editor of this article 
was Hans Georg Gemünden.
The second article is also on project teams. 
Amin 
Akhavan Tabassi, Kamand M. Roufechaei, Abu Hassan 
Abu Bakar
 and Nor™Aini Yusof
 address the theme: 
ﬁLink-ing Team Condition and Team Performance: A Trans
-formational Leadership Approach.ﬂ
 The authors argue 
that team building and team development can be studied 
as ongoing processes that are crucial to project success. 
Their analysis shows that the team condition, which is 
defined as the factors that contribute to making a great 
team, has significant direct and indirect impacts on team 
performance. The six factors of the team condition are 
(1) contribution, (2) communication, (3) responsibility 
and accountability, (4) experimentation and creativity, 
(5) conflict and competition, and (6) interpersonal rela
-tionships. The transformational leadership behavior of 
team leaders shows a mediating role between the team 
condition and the performance. The sample is taken from 
projects in the construction industry. In order to reduce 
the risk of common method variance, the research analy
-sis was completed using 94 teams from three different 
sources, within which team members rated their leader™s 
transformational leadership behavior. The team leaders 
evaluated the team™s conditions, and, lastly, the supervisor 
of each team rated the team™s performance. The editor of 
this article was Hans Georg Gemünden.
The third article by 
Marie Bengtsson
 and Lars 
Lindkvist
, ﬁMapping the Road to Future Projects: Road
-mapping as a Balancing and Transformation Process,ﬂ
 shows how roadmapping can bring about an increased 
focus on explorative activity and a stronger future orienta
-tion in an organization. Based on an exciting longitudinal 
case study in a large technology-based firm, this article 
documents that it may take two or more strategic initiative 
projects to change the direction of an organization. The 
first change project, a radical technology vision, presented 
in the first roadmapping attempt, contributed to creating 
an awareness of the value of looking long into the future. 
As this was far from sufficient, a second more bottom-up 
driven attempt with a stronger focus on collaboration and 
new knowledge generation was initiated to further the 
desired change over. Interestingly, the case study points to 
the significance of visualizations as a means to supporting 
knowledge generation, as well as protecting exploration. 
The editor of this article was Hans Georg Gemünden.
The fourth article in this issue by 
Tristano Sainati, 
Naomi Brookes,
 and Giorgio Locatelli
 on ﬁSpecial Pur
-pose Entities in Megaprojects: Empty Boxes or Real 
Companies?ﬂ
 addresses infrastructure megaprojects, 
which typically cost more than US$1 billion and are char
-acterized by vast impacts on the economy, society, and 
environment; long-term commitment; high involvement 
of public actors, such as governments, turbulent environ
-ment; significant risk for the sponsors; and high organi
-zational complexity. Such megaprojects involve hundreds 
of companies. Although megaprojects are important for 
modern economies and societies, they have a history 
of poor performance. Some of the explanations lie in 
the inherent complexity, difficulty, and uncertainty of 
the megaproject endeavor; others refer to governance 
challenges like strategic misinterpretations of decision 
makers, cultural distance and lack of effective collabora
-tion between project stakeholders; and poor front-end 
problem analysis, business planning, and engineering 
and design. The current article concentrates on the gover
-nance issue from a contracting perspective. One of the for
-mal governance instruments, widely used in megaprojects, 
Project Management Journal, Vol. 44, No. 6, 2Œ5 
© 2013 by the Project Management Institute

Published online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com).

DOI: 10.1002/pmj.21383
First, I want to share some very good news with the project 
management research community and all our readers inter-

ested in project management research. The deadline for the 

submission of papers to the PMI research conference has 

been prolongated to 13 January 2014.
The PMI® Research and Education Conference, ﬁStanding 
on the Shoulders of Giants: In Search of Theory and 

Evidenceﬂ will be held on 27Œ29 July 2014 in Portland, 

Oregon, USA.
We welcome conceptual, empirical, or theoretical work 
using project, program, or portfolio management as the subject 

or context of the research. PMI also solicits papers and sympo-

sia on project management education; doctoral students are 

encouraged to submit their work to the pre-conference 
doctoral colloquium. For submission guidelines and instruc-
tions, please contact PMI.org/REC2014submit. Conference 

registration is scheduled to open March 2014 and details can 

be found on PMI.org/REC2014.The December issue of Project Management Journal
® offers 
a rich variety of articles, each of which delivers a significant 

contribution to theory building in project organizing and new 

empirical findings with a high 
value of theory and practice. 
The first paper by Dietrich, Kujala, and Artto addresses a fun-

damental organizational design question in project manage-

ment: How should the interdependencies between different 

teams in a multi-team project be managed? There are many 

different coordination mechanisms, but each of them has its 
advantages and drawbacks and they can be combined in dif-
ferent ways, which differ in terms of coherence and potential 

synergies. The organizational design reflections stated in this 

article can also be used for the management of programs con-

sisting of an array of different projects or for the management 

of a project portfolio in which the management of interdepen-

dencies between projects is also a critical challenge.
The management of interdependencies between proj-
ects is an issue that has been neglected in multi-project 

management. Very often the interdependence is restricted 

to resource conflicts between projects and the solution is to 

identify the bottleneck resources and the projects that con-

flict with 
one bottleneck resource. The solution to this prob-

lem is often a muddling-through approach that delivers an 

immediate solution, yet doesn™t acknowledge that typically 

there are too many projects occurring at the same time, and 
that an organization usually experiences a number of bottle-

necks simultaneously. This bottleneck obstacle makes it dif-

ficult to assess the consequences of measures that have been 
taken to repair an immediate problemŠa problem that may 
only be a symptom of a much larger and obscure problem.
In addition, there are 
many kinds of different interdepen-
dencies between projects
 that have not been addressed sys-

tematically and simultaneously. Markowitz™s pioneering 

work showed that the risk of a portfolio of projects can be 

reduced if the project portfolio mixture combines projects, 

which in sum show a smaller covariance of cash-flow. Thus, 

managing 
risk interdependencies
 between financial invest-
ments, which could have been projects, in such a way that 

the overall risk of a portfolio of financial investments, which 

could have been projects, is reduced, has been an essential 

element of designing portfolios since long.
Organizational design theory made the claim that the 
kinds
 of interdependencies matter; in other words, for 
pooled, sequential, or reciprocal interdependencies, differ-

ent kinds of organizational coordination instrumentsŠor 
more precisely, different kinds of 
coherent mixes
 of coordina-
tion instrumentsŠshould be used. Regarding project portfo-
lio management, 
pooled interdependencies 
among scarce 
(human) resources during the development stage of a new 

product, process, or service, have been the focus of interest. 

But pooled interdependencies are not restricted to human 

resources in the development process or to financial 

resources in a more aggregated view. If potential users of a 

project can only cope with a limited amount of new products 

or product releases that are delivered to them, this creates a 

new, thus far, often neglected type of bottleneck. The ability 

and willingness of users or intermediaries may also create 

bottlenecks and thus ﬁpooledﬂ interdependencies. Transfer 

prices or prioritization systems have been proposed to solve 

the internal resource coordination problem, but do they also 

apply to the customer acceptance bottleneck problem? 

Taking a marketing perspective or a 
purchasing
 perspective, 
additional interdependence aspects have to be considered. 

If two projects share the same customer as a recipient, or the 

same supplier as a source, then these two projects need to be 

coordinated. (This may pertain to the following questions: 

When should which project be done? What should it deliver 

to other projects serving the same client?) Or: Do resource 
From the EditorHans Georg Gemünden, Dr. rer. oec. habil., Chair for Technology and 
Innovation Management, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Photo credit:
 Markus Bullick
2  December 2013    ˜  Project Management Journal
  ˜   DOI: 10.1002/pmjPhoto credit:
 Markus Bullick
 4  April/May 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
is the Special Purpose Entity or Vehicle (SPE/SPV). A formal 
definition of SPE is a key deliverable of this article. When SPEs 
are in place, megaprojects are statistically correlated with bet
-ter schedule and budget performance (Brookes & Locatelli, 
2015; Brookes, Locatelli, & Mikic, 2015). However, the term 
SPE is only defined vaguely. The legal, financial, and project 
management domains conceptualize the SPEs in different 
ways and their technical jargon results are quite fragmented. 
The authors address three research questions: (1) What is an 
SPE? (2) Which types of SPEs exist? (3) Why are SPEs used in 
megaprojects? The authors perform a systematic literature 
review of more than 3,000 documents published between 
1960 and 2014, which were systematically analyzed. The 
definition of an SPE is: 
ﬁThe Special Purpose Entity is a fenced 
organization having limited predefined purposes and a legal 
personality.ﬂ
 To answer the second research question, a set of 
ten distinctive features describing a SPE is used. The authors 
then discuss major issues of SPEs in the legal, financial, and 
project management domains and compare existing SPEs; 
overall, four outcomes are presented: the definition of SPE, 
the typology of existing SPEs, comparisons of existing SPEs, 
and descriptions of SPE uses in megaprojects The editor of 
this article was Andrew Davies.
Muhammad Mubbashar Hassan, Sajid Bashir,
 and Syed 
Moqaddas Abbas
 investigate the following theme: 
ﬁThe 
Impact of Project Managers™ Personality on Project Suc
-cess in NGOs: The Mediating Role of Transformational 
Leadership.
ﬂ Their study examines the extent to which proj
-ect managers™ personality determines project success through 
the mediating mechanism of transformational leadership. 
The context of the study are nongovernmental projects that 
focused on education and healthcare. Data were collected 
from 170 project managers who were engaged in 10 different 
programs in various areas of Pakistan. The results of the study 
indicate that Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Openness to 
Experience are direct positive predictors of project success, 
whereas transformational leadership acts as a mediator of 
these relations. Conscientiousness has only an indirect effect 
on project success through transformational leadership. No 
relation was found between Neuroticism and project success. 
The editor of this article was Ralf Müller.
The sixth article in this issue by 
Dominic D. Ahiaga-Dagbui, 
Peter E. D. Love, Simon D. Smith,
 and 
Fran Ackermann 
ﬁToward a Systemic View to Cost Overrun Causation in Infra
-structure Projects: A Review and Implications for Researchﬂ
 argues for a more comprehensive view. The methodological 
weaknesses in the dominant approaches adopted to explain 
cost overrun causation on infrastructure projects are explored 
in this article. A considerable amount of cost overrun research 
is superficial, replicative, and thus has stagnated the develop
-ment of a robust theory to mitigate and contain the problem. 
Future research should move from single-cause identification 
and the traditional net-effect correlational analysis to a search 
for causal recipes through systems thinking and retrospective 
sensemaking to address the high-level interactions between 
multiple factors. This article presents a very insightful literature 
analysis, which deserves further discussion and reflection. The 
editor of this article was John Steen.
The final article in this issue is by 
Jan Recker, Christoph 
Rosenkranz, Markus Hummel,
 and Roland Holten
 on ﬁHow 
Agile Practices Impact Customer Responsiveness and Devel
-opment Success: A Field Study.ﬂ
 Agile information systems 
development methods have become popular; however, which 
specific agile practice to use remains unclear. The authors argue 
that three types of agile practices existŠfor management, devel
-opment, and standardsŠwhich affect the customer responsive
-ness of software teams differently. The authors examine this 
theory in a field study of a large organization. They find that 
agile practices improve software team response effectiveness 
or efficiency, but not both. Agile standards do not improve 
response mechanisms but are still important to successful 
information systems development. The findings help discrimi
-nating agile practices and yield insights into how information 
development can be improved by using the right practices in 
the best way. The editor of this article was Fred Niederman.
References
Brookes, N. J., & Locatelli, G. (2015).
 Power plants as 
megaprojects: Using empirics to shape policy, planning, and 
construction management. 
Utilities Policy, 36,
 57Œ66.Brookes, N., Locatelli, G., & Mikic, M. (2015).
 Learning across 
megaprojects.
 Brussels, Belgium: Megaproject COST Action.
