 2  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Project Management Journal, Vol. 45, No. 3, 2–4
© 2014 by the Project Management Institute

Published online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com).

DOI: 10.1002/pmj.21426
Photo credit:
 Markus Bullick
methodological aspects of applying this approach in 
the context of knowledge management. Her systematic 

analysis got the prize for the best student paper at IRNOP 

in Oslo last year. The paper from Thierry Gidel, Gaël 

Buet, and Dominique Millet is much more pragmatic; 

it develops a method on how to assess the difficulty of 

integration in a vehicle-independent innovation project, 

from the pool of predevelopment projects, with a poten-

tial new vehicle project, and how to derive recommenda-

tions from this on how intensively and how early in the 

process integrative communication and planning activi-

ties should take place. Their hypothesis is: The needs for 

integration are not constant; rather, they vary consider-

ably. They develop a measure for the construct “intru-

siveness” and, depending on the value of this indicator, 

they offer varied recommendations on how to organize 

the integration process. This is a really well done study 

with high practical value. Based on some insight into the 

German automotive industry, I can say that the integra-

tion need is also clearly recognized, but the integration 

measures are much more static, following the saying, 

“one size fits all.”
The sixth and final paper from Rebecca Yang, Yaowu 
Wang, and Xiao-Hua Jin is a very interesting empirical 

study on stakeholders’ attributes, behaviors, and deci-

sion-making strategies in construction projects.
Following are abstracts of the papers in this issue. 
Have fun reading!
In the 
first paper
 “Project Leadership in Becoming: 
A Process Study of an Organi
zational Change Project” 
by 
Johann Packendorff, 
KTH Royal Institute of Tech-
nology, Stockholm, Sweden; 
Lucia Crevani,
 Mälardalen 
University, Västerås, Sweden; and 
Monica Lindgren
, KTH 
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, the 

authors develop and apply a process ontology to the study 

of project leadership.
First, the theoretical implications of a process ontol-
ogy as applied to project 
leadership are discussed, out-
lining an analytical framework in which the on going 

construction of action space and project direction is 

seen as involving constructions of project paths, posi-

tions, issues, and rhythms. Afterward, the framework was 

applied to a process study of an organizational change 

project in which a U.S. management control regulation 

was implemented in the Swedish subsidiary of a multina-

tional chemical firm.
This issue of PMJ presents a very interesting article from 
Johann Packendorff, Lucia Crevani, and Monica Lindgren 

who take a process view on project leadership in an orga-

nizational change project. They do not concentrate on 

a given leader who exerts a certain leadership behavior; 

rather, they take a processual view of how leadership is 

becoming during a project. This article is not only remark-

able because of its different conceptualization of lead-

ership, but also because of the ethnographic approach 

it uses for its comprehensive empirical analysis. I see 

three major themes in project and program management, 

which deserve further research and quality publications: 

(1) Megaprojects, which are delivered externally from a 

network of suppliers to a customer organization; (2) man-

agement of complex project landscapes, i.e., multi-project 

management; and (3) management of major organiza-

tional transformations. The article offers a new, interest-

ing conceptual lens and an interesting empirical method 

for the analyses of such cases.
The next two papers have to do with major changes in 
how projects are organized, particularly in the software 

and media industries. Agile methodologies are intensively 

diffusing and used in new application areas, and new 

forms of agile are being developed; additionally, hybrids 

of conventional process methodologies and agile meth-

odologies are discussed and applied. The paper from Edi-

vandro Carlos Conforto and coauthors offers the results of 

a survey, which documents the situation in Brazil and how 

barriers in traditional industries can be overcome. The 

other paper on agile methodologies comes from Michael 

Jahr; it offers a formalized quantitative analysis and shows 

how the performance of agile can be assessed and that 

hybrid strategies offer better results. The review process 

for this paper was done by my colleague and departmen-

tal editor, Gary Klein, who had to reject many quantitative 

papers because they were not sufficiently current. This 

paper, however, is current and has a high practical value 

for this emerging new management approach because it 

provides a quantitative assessment and demonstrates the 

value of hybrid solutions.
The next two papers are action research papers. The 
paper from Chivonne Algeo concentrates more on the 
From the EditorHans Georg Gemünden, Dr. rer. oec. habil., Chair for Technology and 
Innovation Management, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany
 June/July 2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      3The fourth paper
 by
 ChivAlgeo,
 University of Tech-
nology Sydney–DAB, Sydney, Australia, is 
“Exploring Proj-
ect Knowledge Acquisition and Exchange Through Action 

Research.”
The qualitative study was conducted with six project man-
agers based in public or private organizations in Australia, 

using interviews and observations to understand how project 

managers acquire and exchange knowledge when they are 

managing projects. Data were collected through three action 

research cycles in which the existing situation was examined, 

reflected upon, and changes were implemented and then 

evaluated over eighteen months. Hereby, the analysis made 

use of grounded theory techniques.
To examine how project managers acquire and exchange 
knowledge, multiple perspectives were sought. These per-

spectives represented what the participants said they did 

to exchange knowledge; what they actually did when being 

observed; and what their work colleagues said they did when 

managing projects.
The fifth paper
 in this issue 
“Synchronization of Innova-
tion and Vehicle Projects: Proposal of a Management Tool 

at Renault SAS” 
is from 
Thierry Gidel
, Université de Tech-
nologie de Compiègne, Picardie, France; 
Gaël Buet, Renault 
SAS, Guyancourt, France; and 
Dominique Millet
, Université 
de Toulon, Cote d’Azur, France.
To remain competitive, the automotive industry must 
innovate to fulfill demanding customers. Therefore, a better 

control of the innovation process is necessary and especially 

crucial for the integration of these innovations into vehicle 

projects, as well as supporting the understanding and antici-

pation of the decisions and choices of all actors involved.
The article discusses the steps toward the creation of a 
supporting management tool by demonstrating the impor-

tance of the identification and synchronization step for 

improving the amount and quality of innovation projects 

in vehicle projects. Hereby, the authors introduce the man-

agement tool “Profilor,” which is based on the concept of 

intrusiveness and aims to manage the interplay between 

innovation projects and vehicle projects. The objectives are 

to increase and optimize the amount and value of innovation 

projects integrated into vehicle projects.
A key element in the study is the flexible innovation 
process. Although organizations tend to define innovation 

processes that are supposed to be implemented within the 

company, the authors demonstrat
e that, in 
addition to the 
classical “long-term” innovation process, a “fast track” innova-

tion process should be implemented. This flexible approach, 

however, is in need of even more interactions between the 

departments.
The sixth and
 final paper
 in this issue by 
Rebecca Yang, 
RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia; 
Yaowu Wang
, Har-
bin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China; and 
Xiao-Hua 
Jin, 
University of Western Sydney, Australia: 
“Stakeholders’ 
The authors argue that project leadership work can be 
studied as a series of social activities and events in which 

actors, projects, and organizational contexts are all in con-

stant and mutually interacting flux, rather than as traits, 

styles, and competences of individual project managers.
The second paper
 by 
Edivandro Carlos Conforto
, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology; 
Fabian Ariel Salum
, Fundação Dom Cabral, Minas Gerais; 
Sérgio Luis da Silva
, Federal University of São Carlos; 
Daniel Capaldo Amaral
, University of São Paulo; and 
Luis Fernando Magnanini de 
Almeida, Federal University of São Carlos, Brazil: 
Can Agile 
Project Management Be Adopted by Industries Other than 

Software Development?”
 investigates the use of agile proj-
ect management (APM) practices and the presence of APM 

enablers in various industries.
In the past, the software industry has been the main focus 
of the flexible APM approach; thus, this study presents a con-

ceptual framework to address the identification of practices 

and enablers related to the APM approach to find evidence of 

APM in other industrial sectors. The framework was applied 

in an exploratory survey within 19 Brazilian medium and 

large-sized companies that have experience in new product 

development projects but do not yet formally recognize the 

use of APM methods.
Results indicate evidence of favorable aspects to imple-
menting APM, as the presence of some APM enablers indi-

cates opportunities to adapt the APM theory for different 

companies. Further, the study also identified potential barri-

ers for APM implementation in more “traditional industries.” 

Consequently, the authors propose the hypothesis that the 

APM approach could be adapted to non-software companies, 

at least for innovative projects, and suggest further research to 

explore the correlation between APM practices and enablers 

aimed at developing “hybrid” management models for com-

panies beyond the software industry.
The third paper
 “A Hybrid Approach to Quantitative 
Software Project Scheduling Within Agile Frameworks” 

from 
Michael Jahr, 
European University of Applied Sciences, 
Neuss, Germany, focuses on the quantitative project schedul-

ing problem in IT companies that apply the agile manage-

ment philosophy.
This article combines mathematical programming with 
an agile project flow, using a modified multi-mode resource 

constrained project scheduling model for software proj-

ects. Hereby, it is shown that agile methods and traditional 

approaches are not contrary ways and that quantitative 

models are a useful support to project management in agile 

frameworks.
The proposed approach can be used to generate sched-
ules as benchmarks for agile development iterations. Further, 

tests showed that using a hybrid approach with a modified 

process flowchart can significantly improve the adherence 

to deadlines and budgets and reduce the project cycle time.
 From the Editor4  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
involved another 15 interviews with construction practition-
ers to verify the outcomes of the previous phases.
Findings suggest that three stakeholder attributes (power, 
urgency, and proximity) and four types of stakeholder behav-

iors (cooperative potential, competitive threat, opposite posi-

tion, and neutral attitude) are perceived by practitioners 

as important to dealing with stakeholders’ claims. Further, 

research indicates that to deal with stakeholders with a com-

petitive threat or neutral attitude, project managers need to 

communicate and negotiate with them more. Overall, engag-

ing stakeholders regularly 
and establishing long-term rela-
tionships are considered critical for successful management.
Attributes, Behaviors, and Decision-Making Strategies in 
Construction Projects: Importance and Correlations in 

Practice”
 is based on three research questions: (1) Which 
stakeholder behaviors are more distinct in construction prac-

tice? (2) Which decision-making strategies are mostly used in 

construction projects? And (3) Do the answers of the afore-

mentioned two questions vary according to project types?
The study was conducted in three phases with interviews, 
a questionnaire survey, and a case study as the primary 

research methods. Hereby, six interviews with industrial 

professionals were conducted in the first phase, and 183 

questionnaires completed in the second phase. The last phase 
