 June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  3Agile Methods on Large Projects in 
Large OrganizationsBrian Hobbs
, School of Management, University of Quebec at Montreal, Canada
Yvan Petit
, School of Management, University of Quebec at Montreal, Canada
Project Management Journal, Vol. 48, No. 3, 3Œ19
© 2017 by the Project Management Institute
Published online at www.pmi.org/PMJ
PAPERS
PAPERS
INTRODUCTIONAgile methods have taken software development by storm since the 
publication of the 
Agile Manifesto
. In recent years, agile methods have 
become highly prevalent in the software industry (Abrahamsson, 
Conboy, & Xiaofeng, 2009; Dingsøyr, Nerur, Balijepally, & Moe, 
2012) and today, it is one of the hottest topics in project management. Project 
Management Institute has created the PMI Agile Certified Practitioner (ACP)
® certification, and 
Project Management Journal
® will be publishing a special 
issue on the topic in the future.
Although there have been multiple attempts to apply agile principles to 
non-software projects (Conforto, Salum, Amaral, da Silva, & de Almeida, 2014; 
Highsmith, 2003; Petit & Levesque, 2015), current research is limited to the 
field of software development, the field in which agile methods have become 
prominent; it focuses on two levels of analysis: the individual project and the 
organizational context in which projects are carried out. The agile literature 
has focused almost exclusively on the former while almost completely ignor
-ing the latter (Dingsøyr et al., 2012).
The advantages of using agile methodologies identified in the literature 
include: a working environment that supports creativity and productiv
-ity, rapid adaptation to change, and value for the customer because of the 
improved identification of needs and priorities and faster multiple deliver
-ies of functionalities (Schwaber, 2004; Thomke & Reinertsen, 1998). These 
advantages are more readily obtained with certain types of projects in certain 
contexts (Boehm & Turner, 2005). Kruchten (2013) identified what is referred 
to as the ﬁagile sweet spot,ﬂ which consists of small collocated teams work
-ing on small, non-critical, green field, in-house software projects with stable 
architectures and simple governance rules. Most of the writings on agile 
methods report on situations that are close to the sweet spot, and projects and 
contexts with the opposite characteristics are examined much less extensively 
in the literature (Dingsøyr, Fægri, & Itkonen, 2014; Dingsøyr & Moe, 2014; 
Dingsøyr et al., 2012). Studies of projects outside the sweet spot have revealed 
that they are much more problematic (Dikert, Paasivaara, & Lassenius, 2016). 
Leffingwell (2010) showed that there are a number of impediments to the 
scaling of these practices in large multi-site, multi-customer, and multi-
project organizations. During preliminary interviews prior to undertaking 
this research, the authors discovered several large organizations that had 
been experimenting with agile methods over a period of five years or more 
and that these organizations are struggling to scale from a few agile teams 
to an organization-wide implementation of agile methods. These observa
-tions are consistent with the results of a survey of 3,880 participants, in which 
VersionOne (2016) found that organizations are continuing to scale agile 
beyond single teams and single projects and that more energy is being put 
into scaling agile across the enterprise. The overall objective of this research is 
Agile methods have taken software devel
-opment by storm but have been primarily 
applied to projects in what is referred to as 
the ﬁagile sweet spot,ﬂ which consists of 
small collocated teams working on small, 
non-critical, green field, in-house software 
projects with stable architectures and simple 
governance rules. These methods are being 
used more and more on large projects, but 
little documentation is available in the aca
-demic literature. This article investigates the 
adoption and adaptation of agile methods 
for use on large projects in large organiza
-tions. The empirical study is based first on 
case studies, followed by a survey to validate 
and enrich the case study results. The results 
are somewhat paradoxical in that some fea
-tures are common to almost all observations, 
whereas others show extreme variability. 
The common features include use of Scrum 
methodology and agile coaches, as well 
as the non-respect of the agile principle of 
emergent architecture.
KEYWORDS:
 agile; scale; Scrum; 
traditional; flexibilityABSTRACT ˜ 4  June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
to fill this gap by examining projects and 
contexts that are not in the agile sweet 
spot, specifically large software projects 
in large organizations.
The research questions at the 
project level are: 
What challenges are 
encountered when applying agile meth
-ods to large multi-team software projects 
and what practices have been developed 
to alleviate these challenges?
 The litera
-ture that has examined these questions 
has most often taken an approach that 
contrasts and/or mixes agile and tradi
-tional project management approaches 
(Boehm & Turner, 2003, 2004, 2005; 
Conforto et al., 2014; Sommer, Hede
-gaard, Dukovska-Popovska, & Steger-
Jensen, 2015; −pundak, 2014). This 
research aims to go beyond this some
-what simplistic approach based on a 
rich description of practice in specific 
contexts.
At the organizational level, this 
research examines the implementation 
of agile methods in large organizations 
as it has unfolded over time by tracking 
implementation strategies and succes
-sive adaptations. The adoption of agile 
methods by a large complex organization 
requires experimentation and adapta
-tion of the methods to the organization™s 
structure, culture, product/service strat
-egy, human resource management poli
-cies, customer interfaces, project roles 
and governance structures, including 
program and project portfolio man
-agement. At the same time, the orga
-nizational context is influenced by the 
implementation of agile methods. The 
research question at the organizational 
level is:
How does the context of large complex 
organizations affect the adaptation and 
adoption of agile methods and vice versa?
For a complete research report, 
including the survey instrument see 
Hobbs and Petit (in press).
Literature Review
Agile Approaches
Agile methodologies are specific ap
-proaches, designed in response to the 
specific challenges of the software 
 
industry (i.e., high uncertainty, short 
development cycle, no physical deliver
-able) and used to implement flexibil
-ity in the project management process 
(Agile Alliance, 2001; Lindvall et al., 
2004).Agile approaches are best defined 
by Scott W. Ambler (2009) as:
ﬁAgile software development is an evo
-lutionary (iterative and incremental) 
approach which regularly produces high 
quality software in a cost effective and 
timely manner via a value driven life
-cycle. It is performed in a highly collab
-orative, disciplined, and self-organizing 
manner with active stakeholder participa
-tion to ensure that the team understands 
and addresses the changing needs of its 
stakeholders. Agile software development 
teams provide repeatable results by adopt
-ing just the right amount of ceremony for 
the situation they face.ﬂ (p. 6)
Conboy (2009) conceptualizes the 
agile approach from two related con
-cepts: flexibility and leannessŠtwo 
concepts inspired from the flexible 
mass production systems led by the 
Toyota production system since the 
1950s. Conforto, da Silva, Di Felippo, 
and Kamikawachi (2016) analyzed 59 
definitions covering the concept ﬁagile.ﬂ 
They propose a comprehensive defini
-tion of the agility construct covering: 
the entity, the event, the degree, the 
trigger, the purpose, and the circum
-stances, as follows: 
ﬁAgility is the proj
-ect team's ability to quickly change the 
project plan as a response to customer or 
stakeholders' needs, market or technol
-ogy demands in order to achieve better 
project and product performance in an 
innovative and dynamic project environ
-ment.ﬂ
 All agile approaches share com
-mon values and principles, as stated 
in the Agile Manifesto
 (Agile Alliance, 
2001) and subsequent publications by 
authors of the 
Manifesto
 (Highsmith, 
2010; Levin, 2012; Schwaber, 2007). 
Of these methods, Scrum (Schwaber, 
2004; Schwaber & Sutherland, 2013) 
and Extreme Programming (XP) (Beck, 
2000), are by far the best-known and 
most widely used.
Agile and Traditional Project 
Management Approaches
Agile approaches are often presented 
in opposition to the more traditional 
project management principles and 
practices (Fernandez & Fernandez, 
2008). For example, the 
Agile Mani
-festo
 (Agile Alliance, 2001) proposes 
four core values and twelve principles, 
which are presented in opposition to 
the traditional software development 
project values (for example, ﬁRespond
-ing to change over following a planﬂ). 
This opposition is particularly relevant 
when agile is introduced in large orga
-nizations where established processes 
and project management practices are 
already in place. Boehm and Turner 
(2005) simply question: 
ﬁHow do you 
merge agile, lightweight processes with 
standard industrial processes without 
killing agility?ﬂ
 (p. 31)
Some authors recommend a bal
-anced combination of plan-driven tradi
-tional project management and an agile 
approach to managing projects, stating 
that the flexibility of an agile approach 
should be balanced with the advantage 
of a more traditional approach through 
a risk-based analysis (Al-Zoabi, 2008; 
Boehm, 2002; Boehm & Turner, 2003, 
2004). Anantatmula and Anantatmula 
(2008) show empirically that such a 
combined approach may be very valu
-able for the management of projects 
in an IT environment. It has also been 
shown that agile methods could be com
-bined with stage-gates in large organi
-zations (Karlstrom & Runeson, 2005). 
This might lead to a different combi
-nation and alignment of the software 
development phases with the project 
management phases. Another option, 
according to Vinekar, Slinkman, and 
Nerur (2006), would be to have both the 
traditional and the agile methodologies 
co-exist in separate subunits within an 
ambidextrous organization. The issue 
then becomes to develop criteria for 
selecting which method to use on each 
project (Barlow et al., 2011); adoption 
of one method over the other would 
often be based on the organization™s 
 June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  5corporate culture (Gruver & Mouser, 
2015; Iivari & Iivari, 2011).
Scaling Agility (or not)
Although agile methodologies have 
provided flexibility in the software 
development process, most benefits 
have been achieved with small proj
-ects composed of one or a few dedi
-cated self-managed teams (Kruchten, 
2013). For some organizations, the issue 
might become whether or not to adopt 
agile approaches, considering the size 
and legacy of their systems and prac
-tices. Kruchten attempts to answer this 
dilemma by proposing some scaling fac
-tors, which might distinguish the con
-texts in which agile might be easier to 
introduce than others.
There has been very limited research 
on the topic of large-scale software devel
-opment projects using agile approaches 
(Dyba & Dingsøyr, 2008; Razavi & Ahmad, 
2014), although a number of specific cases 
have been investigated, for example, in 
the oil industry (Grewal & Maurer, 2007); 
in large software and product develop
-ment organizations (Gruver & Mouser, 
2015; Lindvall et al., 2004 ; Mahanti, 2016); 
in regulated environments (Fitzgerald, 
Stol, O™Sullivan, & O™Brien, 2013); and at 
BMC Software Infrastructure (Gat, 2006). 
In these cases, the level of scaling var
-ies significantly (in terms of project size, 
number of teams, and number of sites). 
To help categorize the varying levels of 
scaling, Dingsøyr et al. (2014) suggest a 
taxonomy of scale of agile software devel
-opment projects based on the number 
of teams, where small-scale corresponds 
to one team, large-scale to two to nine 
teams, and very large-scale to more than 
ten teams. Based on this scale, the main 
focus was on large-scale projects using 
agile in this research.
Challenges Facing Large Organizations 
Trying to Implement Agile Approaches
While agile methodology seems suited 
for small collocated teams in which 
the customer can be directly involved, 
there are a number of impediments to 
the scaling of these practices in large 
multisite, multi-customer, and multi-
project organizations. At the 2004 Uni
-versity of Southern California Center for 
Software Engineering (USC-CSE) Annual 
Research Review, Boehm and Turner 
(2005) identified some of the challenges 
to implementing agile processes in tra
-ditional development organizations. 
The result was a collection of change-
related challenges and a list of nearly 
40 perceived barriers to agile implemen
-tation in large organizations. Many of 
these challenges were related to scope 
or scale, but some were related to the 
clash between the agile and traditional 
cultures; for example, development pro
-cess conflicts, variability in subsystems 
developed that might not integrate eas
-ily, different life cycles, and difficulty in 
using agile on legacy systems.
Leffingwell (2007) groups the chal
-lenges of scaling agile into two broad 
categories: (1) those inherent to the 
methods themselves, ﬁbecause of the 
fixed rule bases and assumptions built 
into the methodsﬂ (p. 87); and (2) chal
-lenges imposed by the enterprise that 
ﬁwill prevent the successful application 
of the new methodsﬂ (p. 87). Included 
in the first category are challenges such 
as: number and size of teams, difficulty 
in making the customer an integral part 
of the team, collocation, emergence of 
the architecture, lack of requirements 
analysis, and documented specifica
-tions. The impediments related to the 
enterprise would include: clashes with 
the existing process and project man
-agement organizations, existing formal
-ized policies and procedures, corporate 
culture, fixed schedule/fixed function
-ality mandates, and people organized 
by discipline rather than product line.  
Mahanti (2006) found similar chal
-lenges adopting agile practices in large 
organizations but identified the prime 
challenge as the integration of agile 
projects with the project environment's 
existing processes.
Scaling Frameworks
The literature on scaling agile has been 
dominated by consultants proposing a 
number of frameworks (Agilealliance.
org) developed in recent years to 
facilitate the use of agile principles in 
larger projects. According to the sur
-vey performed by VersionOne (2016), 
the most commonly used is Scaled 
Agile Framework (SAFe
®), which has 
evolved from the Rationale Unified 
Process (Leffingwell, 2015). Scott W. 
Ambler (2009) initially proposed a scal
-ing model, called Agile Scaling Model 
(ASM), which evolved into the frame
-work called Disciplined Agile Deliv
-ery (DAD) (Scott W. Ambler & Lines, 
2014; DADŠDisciplined Agile Delivery, 
2015). Under this model, projects can 
be scaled based on factors such as team 
size, geographical distribution, regula
-tory compliance, domain complexity, 
organizational distribution, technical 
complexity, organizational complexity, 
and enterprise discipline. Other recent 
frameworks include: Large-Scale Scrum 
(LeSS) (Larman, 2015; Larman & Vodde, 
2014), and Nexus (Schwaber, 2015). All 
these frameworks attempt to preserve 
the benefits of agile while improving the 
links to larger organizations (Gruver & 
Mouser, 2015). Because of their recent 
introduction on the market, it is very 
difficult to assess whether these frame
-works have indeed properly addressed 
some of the issues related to scaling 
agility and how organizations are actu
-ally implementing them.
Investigating the Use of Agile in Large 
Projects and Large Organizations
Little has been reported in the literature 
on the interplay between agile methods 
and the accompanying organizational 
arrangements (Kettunen, 2007). How
-ever, Kettunen (2009) suggests that further 
improvements in software development 
could be inspired by 
 organization-oriented 
business concepts, such as concurrent 
engineering, multi-project management, 
and being proactive.
At the XP 2010 conference in Trond
-heim, Norway, practitioners were polled 
on what they felt should be the most 
relevant research topic in their fields. 
The topic of ﬁagile and large projectsﬂ 
 6  June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
came first on the list (Freudenberg & 
Sharp, 2010). The exercise was repeated 
in 2013 and Scaling Agility once again 
came among the top topics of interest 
(Dingsoyr & Moe, 2013). This is con
-sistent with the assessment of Ågerfalk, 
Fitzgerald, and Slaughter (2009), who 
suggested two of the top research top
-ics in flexible and distributed informa
-tion system (IS) development should be: 
(1) organizational selection, adoption, 
and adaptation of agile methods and 
(2) agility at the organizational level. It 
is the ambition of this research to fill this 
gap in the research on these two topics.
Methodology
Little is known about the subjects investi
-gated in this research and for this reason, 
the study is exploratory. The research 
was conducted in two phases. During 
the first phase, qualitative case stud
-ies were conducted. The second phase 
was a survey to confirm and enrich the 
results of the case studies. The research 
can, therefore, be said to employ a mixed 
method (Tashakkori & Teddlie, 1998). 
A total of 48 substantially complete 
responses to the survey were received. 
The respondents were 44 years of age 
with 5.6 years of experience with agile 
methods. Their current roles vary a great 
dealŠin decreasing order of prevalence 
they are: program managers, IT manag
-ers, project managers, ScrumMasters, 
agile coaches, business or product unit 
managers, portfolio managers, busi
-ness analysts, product owners, technical 
leads, and one software factory director. 
The respondents come from a diversi
-fied group of experienced practitioners. 
A sample of 48 responses is too small to 
support most multivariate analyses. The 
results from the case studies and the 
survey are very consistent. In addition, 
the survey results quantify the trends 
observed in the case studies. The con
-sistency between the results from the 
two phases is indicative of the generaliz
-ability of the results. Comparison with 
another recent survey by VersionOne 
(2016) (N ˜ 3,880) with several simi
-lar questions reveals that respondent 
demographics, the descriptions of the 
implementation of agile methods, the 
benefits derived for the use of agile 
methods, and the obstacles to imple
-mentation were very similar. The simi
-larities indicate that the 48 responses to 
the survey in this research are represen
-tative of a larger population. Note that 
the survey in this research contained 
several questions not included in the 
VersionOne survey; however, further 
research with larger sample sizes would 
be necessary to validate the generaliz
-ability of the results presented here.
The Qualitative Case Studies
Large organizations doing several large 
software projects were investigated. 
These types of organizations were cho
-sen because they are ideal sites for 
exploring the use and impact of agile 
methods outside of the agile sweet spot 
at both the project and organizational 
levels. One of the central features of agile 
methods is the presence of customer 
representatives in the role of product 
owner. This is also one of the prob
-lematic features in the application of 
agile methods in large organizations; for 
this reason, organizations with different 
types of relationships with customers 
were investigated. The customers vary 
in two important dimensions: number 
of customers and internal versus exter
-nal customers.
Three case organizations were used 
to explore both the project and organi
-zational levels of analysis. In each orga
-nization, interviews and analyses of 
documents were the primary sources of 
data. Interviews were conducted at both 
the organizational and project levels. 
The people targeted for organizational 
level interviews included members 
of senior management, program and 
portfolio managers, directors of proj
-ect management offices, champions of 
agile methods, and line managers. The 
people targeted for project level inter
-views included ScrumMasters, prod
-uct owners, project managers, analysts, 
and system architects. An interview 
guide was prepared based on previous 
work (Petit & Besner, 2013), the litera
-ture review, and the research questions. 
The questions asked during the early 
part of the interview were open-ended. 
The interview guide provided a list of 
information that should be collected 
during the interview, but not a list of 
questions to be asked directly except 
as follow-up questions as the interview 
progressed. The interview guide was 
tested during several interviews and 
revised accordingly. Data relative to 
each level of analysis (project versus 
organizational) were provided in many 
of the interviews. The separation by 
level of analysis was, therefore, carried 
out during the analysis of the inter
-views. All interviews were recorded, 
transcribed, and analyzed using ATLAS.
Ti software.
The original research design called 
for the analysis of three projects com
-posed of three or more development 
teams in each of three case study orga
-nizations. These were carried out in a 
financial services company, a company 
producing large complex systems they 
sell to outside customers, and a public 
organization. A total of 41 interviews, 
with an average duration of one hour, 
were conducted. The interviewees are 
presented in Table 1.
The analysis of the nine projects in 
three case study organizations revealed 
a very high level of variability in the 
organizations™ contexts and histories, 
the organizational arrangements and 
role definitions that accompanied the 
implementation of agile methods, and 
the management practices that were put 
in place on each of the projects inves
-tigated. The analysis of the three case 
studies provided a good understand
-ing of these organizations. However, 
it was not clear to what extent they 
were representative; in other words, 
the authors did not feel that the satu
-ration point had been reached in the 
interviews (DiCicco-Bloom & Crabtree, 
2006). For this reason, three additional 
90-minute interviews were conducted 
with key informants in three additional 
organizations. The three organizations 
 June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  7Large SystemFinancialPublicTotal
Number of interviewsAverage 
Duration (minutes)Number of interviewsAverage 
Duration (minutes)Number of interviewsAverage 
Duration (minutes)Number of interviewsAverage 
Duration (minutes)Project Manager 565.6 264 3791069.3Scrum Master 241.5 566.6 452.31156.8Product Owner 168 361.7463.3Executive 344.7344.7PMO or Portfolio Manager 246.5 274.5460.5Analysts 156156Line Manager 166166Architect 149652.7752.1Total / average
1257.251066.61956.94159.4Table 1:
 Summary of interviews from nine projects in three organizations.
were selected to be in industries simi
-lar to the initial cases (i.e., financial 
services, large system development, 
and the public sector). The comple
-mentary interviews investigated the 
level of the organization and one spe
-cific large project, for an overall total 
of twelve projects in six organizations. 
The interviews were again recorded, 
transcribed, and analyzed using ATLAS.
Ti. In two of the organizations, one 
key informant was interviewed. In the 
third organization, two informants par
-ticipated in one interview. There were 
many similarities and several significant 
differences between the six organiza
-tions investigated. After examining the 
interviews, the understanding of the use 
of agile methods on large software proj
-ects in large organizations was deemed 
sufficient to adequately support the 
preparation of the survey for phase two, 
because that saturation point had been 
reached.
The Survey Instrument
The survey instrument requested the 
participation of practitioners who were 
able to provide a high-level descrip
-tion of a software development project 
with at least three development teams 
carried out in an organization with at 
least 2,000 employees. However, two 
responses with 1,600 and 1,652 employ
-ees, respectively, were retained in the 
sample. Three development teams are 
sufficient to produce coordination chal
-lenges not found with a single team. 
The minimum number of three devel
-opment teams was based on the results 
of the analysis of the projects in the six 
organizations that participated in phase 
one and contact with the agile commu
-nity of practice over several years, which 
showed that projects with significantly 
more than three development teams 
are relatively rare. Setting the minimum 
number of employees at 2,000 was some
-what arbitrary, but the researchers are 
aware that agile methods are used pri
-marily in small organizations and that 
setting the limit higher would make it 
difficult to gather sufficient survey data. 
An organization with 2,000 employ
-ees is large enough to have the effects 
of specialization and formalization 
that characterize large organizations 
(Mintzberg, 1979). The survey instru
-ment, which includes 91 questions, is 
available in the research monograph 
(Hobbs & Petit, in press). Due to spatial 
constraints, the full questionnaire could 
not be included in this article. A sum
-mary description of the survey instru
-ment is provided in Table 2.
Data Collection and Analysis
Invitations to participate in the sur
-vey were distributed through several 
channels. The Project Management 
Institute provided logistical support 
for distribution. Invitations were also 
distributed through two decentralized 
international networks of groups ded
-icated to agile methods (Agile Tours 
and Agile Alliance). These communities 
organize annual conferences under the 
brand ﬁAgile Tour,ﬂ including the agile 
community of practice in the authors™ 
home city, which collaborated in this 
research. Invitations were also dis
-tributed using social media and the 
authors™ personal networks. A total of 
48 substantially complete responses to 
the survey were received. All of the case 
study organizations and the majority of 
the organizations of the survey respon
-dents use agile methods in contexts in 
which traditional software project man
-agement methods are well established. 
However, a minority of survey respon
-dents reported on contexts in which all 
software development projects employ 
agile methods. Respondents in con
-texts in which both traditional and agile 
methods are employed responded to 
the final section of the survey ques
-tionnaire. The objective of this section 
is to investigate the process by which 
agile methods have been implemented 
into contexts dominated by traditional 
methods and investigate how organiza
-tions allocate projects to traditional and 
agile methods. This section of the sur
-vey also investigated the impact of the 
 8  June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
Section 1. Respondent demographicsSection 2. The relevant organizational context:a. Which in most cases is only a part of the organization, a division or subsidiary, for example
b.  
The years when agile methods were used for the first time on small projects and on large projects. From the case studies and a general knowledge of the context it is known that many organizations, but not all, implement agile methods first on small projects.c. The level of maturity in the use of agile methodsd. The presence of an agile community of practicee. The total number of projects and the proportion employing agile methodsSection 3. A specific large project that employed agile methods:a. The level of knowledge of agile methods of people involved in this projectb. Types of deliverable, scope, and duration
c. Level of integration with other systemsd. Number and duration of sprintse. Project organization:i. Number and composition of development teamsii. Other teams or committeesiii. Other individualsf.  
Project initiation, activities related to architecture and to the planning of sprints before the beginning of software development per se, often referred to as sprint zerog. Agile practices employedh. Benefits and disadvantages of agile methods and project performanceSection 4. The transition from traditional methods to agile methods.From a general knowledge of the field, it is known that most large organizations had well-established traditional project management methods prior to implementing agile methods and that in most cases the two are present. However, some organizations use agile methods exclusively. For these 
reasons, section four of the survey was completed only by respondents in contexts where both methods are currently in use. a. Decision rules for determining which projects use agile methodsb. Performance objectives that motived use of agile methodsc. Organizational objectives that motived use of agile methodsd. Strategy for implementing agile methods, including change managemente. Organizational characteristics that supported implementationf. Organizational characteristics that are obstacles to implementationg. Performance outcomesh. Organizational change outcomesi. New and changed organizational roles, particularly for project managers, ScrumMasters, and product ownersTable 2:
 Survey questionnaire (overview).
introduction of agile methods in orga
-nizations with well-established tradi
-tional methods. A total of 35 responses 
to this final section were received; the 
remaining 13 respondents, or 27%, are 
in contexts in which all projects are 
managed using agile methods.
The Case Study Organizations
All of the case study projects devel
-oped and/or made significant changes 
to large complex systems with multiple 
interconnections to adjacent systems. 
All six organizations have introduced 
agile methods into a context in which 
well-established traditional project 
management methods are in place.
The two financial services companies 
have formalized structures and proce
-dures and a high degree of specialization. 
The business processes in this type of 
organization make extensive use of 
complex computer systems, which are 
interconnected internally and with other 
organizations, including customer orga
-nizations and suppliers of information. 
The software projects are all related to 
the development and/or updating of 
systems used by operational employ
-ees of the company, by employees in 
other organizations that are connected 
to their systems, and by online custom
-ers. In this type of organization, internal 
business units are the project customers 
from which product owners are drawn. 
However, as stated in the literature and 
shown in the results of this research, the 
role of product owner is problematic. 
Financial services is an important sec
-tor in which large-scale agile projects 
are found; 26% of the respondents to the 
survey are from this sector and it is the 
second most common industry after soft
-ware reported in the VersionOne (2016) 
survey.
 June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  9The two companies that produce 
large complex systems that are sold 
to other organizations for use in their 
internal business processes have very 
different relationships with their end 
users. The product is used by multiple 
independent customer organizations, 
which are often in competition with 
each other. In addition, the contractual 
process through which the prod
-uct is sold often specifies what is to 
be delivered in rather precise detail, 
which introduces rigidities difficult to 
reconcile with the flexibility of agile 
methods and the idea of updating 
and reprioritizing the product back
-log continuously. In these two compa
-nies, the product owner role is filled by 
product managers with the authority 
and the interest in directing product 
development.
The systems in the two public sec
-tor organizations are numerous, large, 
interconnected internally and with 
other organizations, many of which are 
also in the public sector, but not all. 
The information technologies in these 
two organizations are very different. 
One has many large, poorly perform
-ing legacy systems based on outdated 
technology. The tight integration of 
the systems, the specialization of both 
people and organizational units, and 
the activities used to integrate and 
test all changes before the infrequent 
releases into production, all create 
obstacles to the use of agile methods. 
The organization has a plan to update 
its databases and systems with a view 
to making them less tightly integrated 
and more amenable to more frequent 
releases.
The other public sector organiza
-tion has up-to-date technology. The 
part of the organization investigated is 
responsible for a shared communica
-tion channel facilitating communica
-tion between software modules, and the 
end users are internal to the organiza
-tion. The challenge in this organization 
is to respond more quickly and more 
adequately to priority system develop
-ment requests.
ResultsThe results presented here are based 
on the qualitative case studies, comple
-mented by references to results from 
the survey questionnaires. The infor
-mation from the qualitative case stud
-ies and the information from the survey 
are very consistent. The consistency 
indicates that the case study results are 
representative of trends that go beyond 
the six case study organizations. How
-ever, an accurate measure of the extent 
to which they are generalizable would 
require a much larger sample. The 
results are presented in four groups: 
(1) motives and strategies for imple
-menting agile methods, (2) the impact 
of agile implementation on organiza
-tional roles, (3) the impact of agile 
implementation on project initiation, 
and (4) agile project organizations.
Motives and Strategies for 
Implementing Agile Methods
Motives for Implementing Agile Methods
The literature on agile methods claims 
that these methods provide many per
-formance advantages when compared 
with traditional methods (Dubey, Jain, 
& Mantri, 2015; Serrador & Pinto, 2015; 
Sheffield & Lemétayer, 2013; Stoica, Mir
-cea, & Ghilic-Micu, 2013). According to 
the respondents, the organizations met 
the performance objectives, which justi
-fied the decision to use agile methods.
In addition to the performance 
objectives (such as improved speed and 
quality), organizations are also pursuing 
organizational change objectives. Both 
the interviews and survey report that 
the following organizational change 
objectives are both used to justify the 
use of agile methods and realized dur
-ing implementation. The objectives are 
presented in decreasing order of men
-tion in Table 3 and are based on Sec
-tions 4a, b, and c of the survey.
All the organizational change objec
-tives reported in both the interviews 
and the survey, with the exception of 
improved software engineering prac
-tices, are inter-related. Together they 
represent significant changes in the 
organizational culture, the working cli
-mate, and leadership,
Note that in some of the case study 
organizations and in the survey data, 
improved software engineering prac
-tices is one of the organizational change 
objectives. This is the case in which the 
poor performance of traditional meth
-ods is one of the justifications for using 
agile methods. Software engineering 
practices are not directly related to agile 
methods; however, the agile principle 
that ﬁContinuous attention to technical 
excellence and good design enhances 
agilityﬂ (Agile Alliance, 2001) can be 
seen to imply a link between software 
engineering excellence and agile meth
-ods. It is reasonable to assume that 
improved software engineering prac
-tices are at least in part responsible 
for the performance improvements 
associated with the change. In these 
situations, agile methods seem to ben
-efit from performance improvements 
Improved collaboration between development teams.59%Better communication and understanding between developers and end users.55%Better collaboration among organizational units.50%Improved satisfaction of personnel.44%Empowerment of personnel.39%Improved software engineering practices.37%Better organizational climate.35%Increased motivation and commitment of personnel.33%Change from command and control to servant leadership.26%Table 3:
 Objectives of implementing agile.
 10  June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
that are at least in part attributable to 
improvements in software engineering 
practices that could have been imple
-mented without the implementation of 
agile methods. It is plausible that the 
momentum of the change to agile meth
-ods, with significant support from upper 
management, made improvements in 
software engineering practices easier to 
implement. It is also plausible that the 
frequent integration, tests, and demos 
created an environment that fosters 
improvements in the quality of the code.
In several of the case studies, the 
change to agile methods was motivated 
in part by the demands of young quali
-fied software developers. In labor mar
-kets where the demand for qualified 
developers exceeds the supply, these 
workers can be considered volunteer 
labor in that they can choose the place 
where they work. In these situations, 
being able to provide a suitable working 
environment may provide organizations 
with a competitive advantage in that 
they are better able to recruit and retain 
qualified personnel.
Implementation Strategies
The implementation strategies of all 
six case study organizations and 74% of 
the organizations of survey respondents 
started with pilot projects. All of the 
development teams in the case studies 
and all but one in the survey had agile 
coaches. The role of the agile coaches 
was primarily to support the imple
-mentation of Scrum on development 
teams; however, the implementation 
strategies have very little else in com
-mon. The extent to which agile methods 
have become well-established in these 
six organizations varies a great deal. 
The six organizations are presented in 
approximately decreasing order of the 
extent to which agile methods are well 
established.
One of the organizations experi
-mented with agile methods on small 
projects in one department between 
2007 and 2009 and deployed these 
methods on all their software develop
-ment projects between 2010 and 2013. 
Agile methods on both large and small 
software development projects are now 
well-established throughout the firm. 
The other five organizations are in the 
early stages of implementation, particu
-larly for large projects. A second orga
-nization has been using agile methods 
on small projects for five years and 
just completed one large and very suc
-cessful project using agile methods. 
Agile methods are well on their way 
to becoming well established for both 
large and small projects in this orga
-nization. A third organization is the IT 
department of a public organization 
composed of approximately 250 people, 
where agile was introduced following 
years of unsuccessful projects for which 
traditional methods were used. This 
organization was one of the case stud
-ies in which a scaling framework was 
usedŠa mixture of Nexus and LeSS. 
Their goal is to gradually move away 
from project development to more 
continuous deliveries using a central 
databus (i.e., a shared communication 
channel facilitating communication 
between software modules). In a fourth 
organization, agile methods are cur
-rently being applied for the first time 
on pilot projects. The implementation 
is being sponsored by the CEO and the 
board of directors in response to an 
external audit, which showed that both 
the organization™s software develop
-ment projects and its legacy systems are 
performing very poorly. A new vice pres
-ident and a new senior manager have 
been brought in to manage the imple
-mentation process. Contrary to recom
-mendations in the literature (Kruchten, 
2013) and the practice in most other 
organizations, they have selected large 
projects as the pilots for implemen
-tation. The strategy is to show that 
agile methods can be applied to large 
projects and to demonstrate the com
-mitment of upper management to the 
large-scale conversion to agile methods. 
At the time of the interviews, the pilot 
projects had been underway for two 
years. The pilot projects are well along 
the learning curve that accompanies 
change in the organization and in meth
-ods, and several indicators show that 
the performance of the pilot projects 
is meeting expectations. It seems likely 
that upper management will continue 
to support the large-scale conversion to 
agile methods in this organization. The 
fifth organization implemented agile 
methods on one large project between 
2008 and 2012. This organization is a 
small R&D and product development 
unit of a large multinational firm. In this 
organization, the project was very suc
-cessful and might have led to further use 
of agile methods in this unit, but due 
to an unrelated reorganization of the 
multinational firm, several small R&D 
units were closed, including this one. It 
is not possible to know what impact this 
experiment has had if any. In the final 
organization, several small projects 
have been completed using agile meth
-ods since 2005. The early pilots were the 
results of local and personal initiatives. 
Initially, a set of rules was used to deter
-mine whether to use agile or traditional 
methods; however, these rules were not 
formalized and, at the time of the inter
-views, the document containing the 
rules could not be located. In 2007, the 
CIO declared that all software develop
-ment projects should use agile methods, 
but the resistance from the personnel 
in the IT department resulted in only a 
limited number of projects using agile 
methods. Agile methods were only used 
when a champion of these methods was 
on the team. People on other teams 
said that ﬁagile methods are flexible, 
so we will be flexible and change agile 
methods to our liking.ﬂ Since they pre
-ferred traditional methods, there was 
little change. Many projects did analy
-sis sprints, followed by development 
sprints, which were followed in turn by 
integration and test sprints. After a long 
series of sprints, a product could be 
demonstrated to customers and poten
-tially released. In 2013, a new CIO put 
an end to the use of agile methods and 
returned to traditional methods. The 
case study projects in this organization 
were all initiated in the period prior to 
 June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  112013. In the period following the inter
-views, a new CIO started to support 
local initiatives to use agile methods, in 
part because of the poor performance of 
traditional methods.
It is difficult to draw conclusions 
from a small sample, however, imple
-mentation in only one of the six orga
-nizations relied almost entirely upon 
initiatives by local champions, and this 
implementation has been unsuccess
-ful over an extended period of time. 
The survey results also show that bot
-tom-up implementation strategies are 
used infrequently (14% of responses). 
This implementation strategy might 
not lead to large-scale deployment as 
shown by the final case study. The sur
-vey results also indicate considerable 
variability: 33% of organizations imple
-mented agile methods on large and 
small projects the same year, whereas 
the remaining organizations used agile 
methods on small projects for up to 
nine years before implementing them 
on large projects. The survey results 
also show a great deal of variation in 
the proportion of projects using agile 
methods in the organization: from 9% to 
100%, with an average of 55%. It is clear 
that both the strategies for implement
-ing agile methods and the success of 
implementation vary a great deal.
The Agile Sweet Spot
The fact that most organizations use 
agile methods on some projects but not 
all begs the question: What are the char
-acteristics of projects selected for the 
use of agile methods? Kruchten (2013) 
identifies the conditions under which 
agile methods are easier to implement 
and produce better results more consis
-tently. In several of the case study orga
-nizations, choices are being made as to 
which projects employ agile methods 
and which do not. During the interviews 
in these organizations, respondents 
were asked to identify the character
-istics used to select projects for agile 
methods; none of these organizations 
had a clear policy regarding which 
projects should be done using agile or 
traditional methods. The survey results 
report that only 23% of organizations 
using both agile and traditional meth
-ods have a clear policy. It seems that 
in many cases the choice to use agile 
methods is influenced, to a consider
-able extent, by the personal preferences 
of managers and project personnel.
The Impact of Agile Implementation on 
Organizational Roles
The implementation of agile methods 
introduces many significant changes to 
the roles and responsibilities within the 
organization.
The Role of Project Manager
All the case studies and, all but one 
of the survey responses, show that the 
implementation of agile methods has 
a significant impact on the role of the 
project manager; they also show that 
the impact varies considerably from one 
organization to the next. The Scrum
-Masters and the self-organizing teams 
of the agile method have taken over 
the project manager™s responsibilities 
for the detailed planning of activities. 
The changes to the project manager™s 
role in the coordination of develop
-ment teams show mixed results. In 
some cases, the coordination between 
teams is accomplished largely through 
the Scrum of Scrums, a regular meeting 
of the ScrumMasters, typically attended 
by the project manager. Note, however, 
that in a small number of cases, project 
managers are doing more to coordinate 
teams, a variability that merits further 
investigation. The project manager role 
is also reported to be more strategic 
and involve more effort in stakeholder 
management.
In one of the case study organi
-zations, they experimented with the 
removal of the project manager role 
and concluded that, for small projects 
with only one development team, the 
project manager role could be filled 
by the ScrumMaster, but have elected 
to maintain the role modified for proj
-ects with several development teams. 
However, in another of the case study 
organizations, and in 6% of the survey 
responses, the project manager role has 
been eliminated. The implementation 
of agile methods can have a very sig
-nificant impact on the role of the project 
manager, but a better understanding 
of the circumstances under which the 
project manager role changes and how 
it changes is needed.
The Role of ScrumMasters
The Scrum methodology was used in 
all the case study organizations. This 
is consistent with the dominant posi
-tion of this methodology in the agile 
community worldwide (VersionOne, 
2016). The ScrumMaster has a very 
central role in this method. All of the 
development teams in the case studies 
and all but one in the survey responses 
have ScrumMasters. The introduction 
of ScrumMasters is not problematic 
because a clear model for the role is 
well-established (Cohn, 2009; Schwa
-ber, 2004, 2007; Sutherland, Viktorov, 
Blount, & Pintikov, 2007), resources 
for training and coaches are readily 
available, and a labor market of trained 
ScrumMasters exists. In many organiza
-tions, experienced ScrumMasters from 
small projects are available at the time 
large projects using agile methods are 
undertaken. In the case study organi
-zations, the ScrumMasters had been 
mostly programmers/analysts or team 
leaders before becoming ScrumMas
-ters. This is a major change, particularly 
for those who previously had a techni
-cal programmer/analyst role. The agile 
coaches work very closely with those 
responsible for planning and coordinat
-ing the team™s work as well as the team 
processes.
The Role of Product Owners
The architype of the product owner 
as presented in the agile literature 
(Schwaber, 2004, 2007) is a person with 
both the knowledge and the authority 
to make changes to the product backlog 
and reprioritize at the beginning in 
each sprint. In this architype, the prod
-uct owner is available to development 
 12  June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
teams, often on a full-time basis. In the 
reality of large-scale agile projects, the 
product owner does not always have 
the knowledge, authority, and avail
-ability portrayed in this architype. The 
product owner role is problematic. Both 
the case study and the survey results 
show that the lack of understanding of 
this new role is the biggest challenge for 
product owners. In both the case studies 
and survey results, the level of knowl
-edge of agile methods and the support 
for implementation are lower for busi
-ness unit managers than for all other 
groups, including upper management.
The product owner needs to be avail
-able, knowledgeable of business needs, 
and have the authority to make deci
-sions. All three of these characteristics 
pose problems. Making people with 
these characteristics available to devel
-opment teams means making them less 
available for other roles within the busi
-ness unit, which creates tension around 
the issue of their availability. In one of 
the case study organizations, the busi
-ness units appoint people with very lim
-ited availability, business knowledge, 
and decision-making authority, which 
in turn causes delays in decisions and 
many referrals back to those in authority 
in the business unit, and results in addi
-tional delays. This is quite a hierarchical 
organization in which managers tend 
not to delegate very much. The role of 
product owner in agile methods is out of 
sync with this organization™s culture. In 
this case, the difficulties with the prod
-uct owner role brought major differences 
between the agile culture and the host 
organization™s culture to the forefront.
The product owner represents the 
customer or the end user organization. 
A key part of this role is the identifica
-tion and prioritization of the features in 
the product backlog at the end of each 
sprint. In traditional development there 
is no mechanism or incentive to make 
frequent and precise adjustments to pri
-orities, but with agile methods these 
take place at the end of each sprint. 
The product owner role is radically dif
-ferent from the role of the customer 
organization in traditional develop
-ment methods in which the customer 
specifies requirements and approves 
the scope at the outset, approves the 
project at milestones, makes change 
requests, and accepts the final product 
at project closure and commissioning. 
In traditional development, meetings 
between customer representatives and 
project representatives are infrequent 
and structured. The customer represen
-tative does not meet the members of the 
development team. In agile methods, 
the product owners are members of the 
project team who meet with the Scrum
-Masters and development teams very 
frequently, at a minimum at the end of 
each sprint. In many cases, the product 
owners are full-time members of devel
-opment teams.
Both the case studies and the survey 
show that a lack of decision-making 
authority is also a significant issue for 
a minority of product owners, and that 
most product owners need to address 
questions to the customer organization. 
Questions are submitted once a week 
on average and typically receive a reply 
within a few days; in a minority of orga
-nizations, however, the response time 
is much longer. In one of the case study 
organizations, a committee of manag
-ers from the business unit was set up to 
respond to such questions.
In cases in which the client is an 
internal business unit that will use the 
system in its internal operations, the 
product owner must know the busi
-ness and is normally recruited inter
-nally. However, the role is different 
in situations in which the system is 
sold to organizations or people outside 
the company. In the two case study 
organizations in which the customer is 
external to the organization, the prod
-uct owner role is filled by a product 
manager. There are challenges in this 
role, particularly when a well-specified 
product has been sold under contract 
or when a high profile customer makes 
very specific requests. In two of the case 
study organizations, the use of agile 
methods that require the product owner 
to update, groom, and reprioritize the 
product backlog had the effect of mak
-ing the product manager much more 
responsive to requests for clear direc
-tion than had previously been the case.
In the case of systems sold out
-side the firm, there are additional 
problems. The marketing and product 
management departments have both 
the contact with and the knowledge of 
customers and markets. The ways in 
which these departments function tra
-ditionally is not in sync with agile meth
-ods, which are very flexible and refine 
priorities at the end of each sprint and 
frequently produce potential releases. 
Changing the functioning of the market
-ing and product management roles to 
be in better sync with the agile develop
-ment methods is a major organizational 
change, the detailed study of which 
is outside the scope of this research 
and, to the best of our knowledge, has 
not been researched. One of the case 
study organizations is examining what 
this might entail; they refer to it as 
ﬁagile end-to-end,ﬂ but it has yet to 
be implemented. A significant part of 
the problem is the fact that systems 
are sold under contract and that these 
contracts specify the scope and fea
-tures of the systems to be developed 
and delivered. The question as to how 
to use the flexibility of agile to deliver 
systems specified by contract remains 
largely unanswered. The answer may lie 
with different types of contracts, but this 
would mean restructuring the industrial 
sector, which is neither simple nor with
-out consequences.
In two of the case study organiza
-tions, there is a product owner on each 
development team who was responsible 
for answering team member questions 
and for preparing the user stories for the 
upcoming sprints. Most survey respon
-dents (98%) report having product own
-ers on development teams but, in 32% of 
the cases, they were part-time employ
-ees. In these case studies and in 60% of 
the survey responses, hierarchical rela
-tionships exist between product owners 
on the development team and a product 
 June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  13manager or ﬁchief product owner.ﬂ The 
latter is the person to whom the product 
owners on each development team turn 
for direction and advice. The product 
owner teams meet regularly to address 
issues and establish priorities.
In four case studies, there was not a 
product owner on each team. In three 
cases, an effective solution was adopted, 
but in one case no effective solution was 
found. In two effective cases, a prod
-uct manager with authority and interest 
filled the role. In the other effective case, 
there was a very high level of commit
-ment from the customer organization 
and very good collaboration between 
the customer organization and the proj
-ect organization to the point that they 
referred to themselves as a team. In 
the ineffective case, the product owner 
had insufficient knowledge, availability, 
and decision-making authority. In this 
case, the implementation of agile was 
unsuccessful.
The Role of Analysts
The roles of functional and system ana
-lysts are rare in descriptions of agile 
methods in the literature (Hoda, Noble, 
& Marshall, 2013; Omar, Syed-Abdullah, 
& Yasin, 2011). Two of the case study 
organizations took radically different 
approaches to the roles of analysts. In 
one organization the roles have been 
eliminated. Another organization has 
an analyst on each development team. 
The other case study organizations have 
analysts in the project organization, but 
not on the development teams. The 
survey responses indicate that 30% of 
development teams have functional 
analysts as team members. In cases in 
which the ScrumMaster was previously 
a system analyst, he or she is able to 
bring this expertise to bear on the proj
-ect. The question of the roles of analysts 
remain largely unresolved.
The Role of Architects
All of the case study organizations had 
architects in the project organization, 
but not on the development teams. In 
most cases, an architecture team was 
part of the project organization. The sur
-vey respondents indicated that 53% of 
their development teams have architects 
as members, at least part-time, and that 
50% of their project organizations have 
architecture teams. The projects with 
both an architecture team and archi
-tects on their development teams tend 
to have architects on the teams on a 
part-time basis. Architects on the devel
-opment teams are also members of the 
architecture teams where these exist. In 
the case study organizations, functional 
analysts on development teams are also 
members of a team led by a system 
architect. The roles of architects and 
system analysts begs the question: How 
is the system architecture developed on 
large agile projects? This is the subject 
of the next section.
The Impact of Agile Implementation 
on Project Initiation
Sprint Zero
The expression ﬁsprint zeroﬂ is often 
used to identify the early activities of an 
agile project before coding begins. Dur
-ing the interviews, several respondents 
used the term, but the activities to which 
they referred varied considerably from 
one person to another even in the same 
organization. Seventy-three percent of 
the survey respondents reported using 
the term. Table 4 summarizes the list of 
activities that interviewees included in 
the expression iteration zero, followed 
by the percentage of survey respon
-dents who include these activities in the 
sprint zero. This pattern is very similar 
to that observed in the case studies.
All of these activities would need to 
be done early in the project, but most 
respondents explicitly exclude some of 
them from what they consider to be 
the sprint zero. There is obviously a 
semantics problem, as the respondents 
who use the expression ﬁsprint zeroﬂ do 
not agree on its meaning. All of the case 
study projects and 89% of the survey 
respondents reported devoting time to 
these activities prior to the beginning 
of development per se. An examination 
of the projects that did not devote time 
to these activities prior to the beginning 
of development per se revealed that 
they were smaller projects and projects 
considered to be emergencies. Although 
there is a clear pattern for the major
-ity of projects, there is considerable 
variation.
System Architecture and Front 
End Planning
One of the agile principles (Agile Alli
-ance, 2001) is: ﬁThe best architectures, 
requirements, and designs emerge from 
self-organizing teams.ﬂ However, activi
-ties related to system architecture before 
the beginning of software development 
per se were observed in all the case stud
-ies and in all of the survey responses, 
except for three, which stands in stark 
contrast to the agile principle of emer
-gent architecture. All interviewees 
reported that the time and effort invested 
in architecture and front end planning 
prior to the beginning of development 
were significantly less than those with 
traditional methods. On average, survey 
respondents reported devoting half the 
time employed with traditional meth
-ods. However, there was considerable 
variability in responses, with some sur
-vey respondents reporting no difference, 
whereas others reported very significant 
differences. The fact that some sur
-vey respondents reported no differ
-ence is intriguing and deserves further 
investigation.
Interviewees were asked what pro
-portion of the sprints was planned 
before development began and the 
responses varied a great deal. In one 
The planning of sprints71%The production of a summary high-level architecture66%The writing of user stories for the first sprints66%The creation of the product backlog60%The creation of epics51%Table 4:
 Activities included in the sprint 
zero.
 14  June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
case study organization all of the sprints 
were planned in details up front. It 
should be noted that this case study 
organization had a strong culture, 
which required that projects be well 
defined prior to approval. In other orga
-nizations, only a very small number 
of sprints were planned in advance. 
The survey respondents report that, on 
average, 34% of sprints were planned 
up front, but showed the same vari
-ability, with responses ranging from 
0% to 100%. This may be an indica
-tion that, in some contexts the manage
-ment of projects has much in common 
with traditional methods that plan the 
entire project in detail before starting 
execution in a plan-driven approach. 
The survey respondents report that, on 
average, 57% of the features actually 
delivered were in the product backlog at 
the outset. There is again considerable 
variation among the responses.
The scope is defined in detail in 
user stories, which are typically not 
produced far in advance. All the case 
study organizations and 79% of sur
-vey respondents report that user stories 
are prepared three sprints in advance 
or less. The most common pattern is 
therefore to produce a summary archi
-tecture, to plan one third of sprints, and 
to define more than half of the product 
backlog prior to beginning development 
per se and to produce user stories one to 
three sprints in advance during project 
execution. There is, however, a great 
deal of variation
Integration with Other Systems
A prominent feature of the case study 
interviews was the frequent mention 
of issues related to the integration of 
the system being developed or modi
-fied with many other systems within the 
organization and with systems external 
to the organization. Likewise, survey 
respondents report that their projects are 
integrated with an average of ten other 
systems. Interviewees report that the 
integration with other systems prevented 
the frequent deliveries of software fea
-tures to users because of the integration 
and testing required and because of orga
-nizational policies that limited releases 
to a few times a year, violating the agile 
principle of frequent releases (Agile 
Alliance, 2001). Fifty percent of survey 
respondents report that organizational 
or technical constraints delayed the 
deployment of functionalities ready for 
use. There was, however, a great deal of 
variation in the duration of delays; 11% 
of respondents reported delays in excess 
of one year, whereas the remaining report 
an average delay of 3.6 weeks.
The project teams in the case study 
organizations are organized to deal with 
the integration issue. The primary strat
-egy is to have human resources avail
-able to the team that are experts in 
the integration with the other systems. 
This reduces the impact of testing and 
integration with other systems some
-what but, despite these measures, the 
delays in delivery remain significant. 
In several of the interviews, the impact 
of the organization™s technology was 
brought up as an explanation for the 
impossibility to remove this barrier to 
the frequent releases. Two of the case 
study organizations are changing their 
database structures to make the systems 
less interdependent and to allow more 
frequent releases; this, however, is a 
very expensive and long-term goal.
Agile Project Organizations
Project Organizations
All the case study projects have rather 
large project structures. The case 
study projects have four development 
teams, on average, whereas the projects 
described in the survey are largerŠ
with an average of nine development 
teams. In addition to the development 
teams, the project organizations had 
many other individual members and 
other committees or teams. On aver
-age, 94 people worked on the projects 
in the survey during the most intensive 
period (full-time equivalent). As stated 
earlier, most projects have resources 
within the project structures and out
-side these structures to deal with the 
issue of integration with other systems 
and most, but not all, projects had 
project managers. A small proportion 
of the committees, such as the steer
-ing committees and client acceptance 
committees, have the role of coordi
-nating with the rest of the organiza
-tion. But the majority of the teams, 
committees, and individual members 
play roles in the coordination of the 
work of the development teams. Spe
-cialized personnel on the development 
teams tend to also be members of the 
corresponding specialist teams where 
the coordination within their area of 
specialization takes place. One of the 
most common features of the project 
organizations is the Scrum of Scrums in 
which the ScrumMasters meet regularly 
with other participants, including the 
project manager. Four of the six case 
study organizations have such teams, 
and 75% of the projects described in 
the survey do as well. Although there is 
great variety in the particular structures 
set up to manage each project, there 
is a common pattern of having a large 
number of teams or committees and 
individuals in specialist roles, in addi
-tion to the development teams.
Development Team Composition
The recommended size of development 
teams is between five and nine mem
-bers (Dingsøyr et al., 2014; Schwaber, 
2004; Schwaber & Sutherland, 2013). 
However, one of the case study projects 
and 16% of the projects described in the 
survey have larger development teams: 
between 10 and 15 members accord
-ing to survey results. All of the case 
study projects have a full-time Scrum
-Master on each team, whereas 98% of 
the development teams described in 
the survey have ScrumMasters, some 
of whom were part-time. All of the case 
study development teams and 96% of 
the teams described in the survey have 
daily stand-up meetings, which is a fea
-ture of the Scrum methodology. There 
is an effort to maintain stable team 
composition in all the case study proj
-ects and in 89% of the organizations 
described in the survey.
 June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  15All members of each of the case 
study development teams are collo
-cated and worked in open space envi
-ronments, whereas 54% of the teams 
described in the survey do as well. The 
teams in five of the six case study orga
-nizations are located geographically 
within one kilometer (approximately 
one half of a mile) of each other and, 
in almost all cases, in the same build
-ing. The development teams described 
in the survey are much more dispersed 
geographically: 60% have members in 
different time zones, which is consis
-tent with the VersionOne (2016) sur
-vey results. The development teams in 
the case study organizations and in the 
survey have much in common. The dif
-ferences can largely be explained by 
the differences in the data collection 
methods, between interviews in orga
-nizations in the authors™ home city, and 
an online survey.
DiscussionThe results from the case studies and 
from the survey are very consistent. In 
most cases, the results are very simi
-lar, whereas in a few cases the sur
-vey adds details and perspectives to 
the more limited number of projects 
and organizations in the case studies. 
The results are somewhat paradoxical 
in that some features are common to 
almost all observations, whereas others 
show extreme variability. The common 
elements are:
 Scrum is the dominant methodology 
and almost all projects have Scrum
-Masters who have daily stand-up 
meetings. Agile coaches are used to 
support ScrumMasters and develop
-ment teams;
 Implementation strategies almost 
always start with pilot projects, which 
are almost always small and simple 
projects;
 The front ends of the projects are 
remarkably similar. The activities of 
the front end include the planning of 
sprints, the production of a summary 
architecture, the writing of epics and 
user stories, and the creation of the 
product backlog. The time and effort 
devoted to these activities are signifi
-cantly less than those with traditional 
methods;
 Approximately two-thirds of the scope 
is defined at the outset in the product 
backlog, but the detail is provided only 
one or two sprints in advance in user 
stories; and
 The project organizations are quite 
large. In addition to the develop
-ment teams, the project organizations 
have several other teams, commit
-tees, and individuals with special
-ized expertise who are responsible 
for the coordination of the work of the 
development teams and the technical 
excellence of their respective areas of 
specialization.
Within this common pattern, there 
is considerable variability. Some of the 
most significant areas of variation are:
 Despite a few common features, the 
implementation strategies vary signifi
-cantly;
 Despite the similarities found in the 
front ends of projects, the meaning of 
the term most commonly used to iden
-tify the front end ﬁsprint zeroﬂ varies a 
great deal even within organizations;
 The extent of front-end planning of 
sprints varies from almost no planning 
to the planning of all the sprints prior 
to approval and initiation; and
 There is extreme variability in the 
details of the project organizations.
Both common patterns and the 
objects of great variability are impor
-tant results; from a research perspective 
both identify opportunities for further 
research. Because this is an exploratory 
study of a subject that has received 
little attention in the research literature, 
additional studies are needed to confirm 
both common patterns and the objects 
of variability. Further research should 
investigate the reasons for both. From a 
practitioner perspective, it is important 
to know the choices other organizations 
have made after some experimentation 
with agile methods on large projects so 
as to benefit from their experience.
Returning to our research questions:
 At the project level is: What chal
-lenges are encountered when apply
-ing agile methods to large multi-team 
software projects and what practices 
have been developed to alleviate these 
challenges?
 At the organizational level is: How does 
the context of large complex organiza
-tions affect the adaptation and adop
-tion of agile methods and vice versa?
Three levels of analysis can be distin
-guished in the results: the development 
team, the project, and the interaction 
between the project and the organization.
The Development Team Level
The investigation of development teams 
is not the focus of this research, because 
agile team functioning is addressed 
abundantly in the literature. For this rea
-son, the literature review did not include 
this topic; however, interviewees spon
-taneously provided detailed descrip
-tions of their development teams and 
several questions related to the topic 
are included in the survey instrument. 
The examination of this information 
has led to the observation that the inter
-nal functioning of agile development 
teams is very similar regardless of the 
number of development teams in the 
project. Agile methods are based on 
self-organized teams in which there is 
limited specialization among the team 
members. In a few cases, there was 
tension between the high level of spe
-cialization in the large bureaucratic 
organizations and the flexibility of agile 
teams, but this was managed locally 
within the teams and did not present a 
major challenge. Agile team functioning 
is not addressed further here.
The Project Level
The differences between small and large 
projects are more at the project level. 
Projects with only one development 
 16  June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
team typically have a limited number 
of other human resources in the proj
-ect organization outside the develop
-ment team; these are typically a product 
owner; technical specialists such as 
architects, analysts, testers, and docu
-mentarists. Single development team 
projects often do not have a project 
manager because this role is filled by 
the ScrumMaster. Larger projects are 
faced with three organizational chal
-lenges: the coordination of multiple 
development teams, the organization of 
a greater number of specialists outside 
the development teams, and the inte
-gration with other systems. The three 
are interrelated.
Larger projects have multiple teams 
or committees of specialists, including 
the meeting of ScrumMasters in Scrums 
of Scrums. When there are product own
-ers on development teams, they typi
-cally meet on a product owner team with 
a more senior product owner or product 
manager. When specialists are full-time 
or part-time members of development 
teams, they typically meet on specialist 
teams where they deal with both issues 
related to their area of specialization 
and the coordination of the develop
-ment teams as it relates to their special
-ization. The administrative coordination 
takes place in the Scrums of Scrums, 
usually attended by the project man
-ager. Frequent demos, testing, integra
-tion, and retrospectives are at the heart 
of agile methods because they provide 
additional opportunities for the coordi
-nation among development teams and 
across areas of specialization.
Large projects also create challenges 
for the project manager role. Most agree 
that the impact is significant, but it 
is difficult to see a generalizable pat
-tern in the adjustments taking place. 
In some situations, project managers 
devote more effort to the coordination 
of development teams, but in others 
less. In a minority of cases, the project 
manager role has been abolished. Most 
agree, however, that cases in which the 
project manager role has been main
-tained, it has become more strategic 
and is focused more on stakeholder 
management. It is too early in the evo
-lution of the management of large agile 
projects to come to a definite conclu
-sion on this subject.
Interaction between the Project 
and the Organization
Most other challenges are related to the 
interaction between the projects and the 
organization. The implementation of 
agile methods in a large organization with 
well-established traditional methods is a 
significant organizational change. As with 
any significant change, management sup
-port is critical (Young & Poon, 2013). The 
acceptance and support of IT and busi
-ness unit managers as well as develop
-ment personnel are also very important. 
Being knowledgeable of agile methods is 
a necessary condition for support.
One of the biggest challenges is 
the relationship between the project 
and the client organization, which is 
related to the challenges with the role 
of product owner. The transition from 
traditional to agile methods is a radical 
change. Business unit managers are, 
on average, less knowledgeable and 
less supportive of agile methods. Agile 
methods require them to prioritize their 
needs much better, be more involved in 
projects, commit significant resources, 
and respond more quickly to requests 
for clarification of business rules and 
priorities. They also create ambiguity 
as to the exact nature and scope of the 
project deliverable. Two elements are 
keys to the creation of an effective work
-ing relationship between the business 
unit and the project; first, the creation 
of a partnership between the customer 
organization and the project based on 
a clear understanding of each other™s 
context and needs; and second, the role 
of product owner. One cannot be effec
-tive without the other.
There are conflicts between large 
traditional organizations and agile prin
-ciples that are related to structures, pro
-cesses, and culture (Iivari & Iivari, 2011). 
One of the biggest challenges is the dif
-ference in role definitions between the 
two. The strategy organizations have 
adopted to dealing with all of these 
problems is to use pilot projects to iso
-late the problems and to develop new 
processes and new role definitions. The 
project approval process in traditional 
organizations that requires project 
parameters be well-defined in advance 
is another significant challengeŠthis is 
both a process and a cultural issue. For 
internal projects, the solution has again 
been negotiating special arrangements 
on pilot projects. For projects with con
-tracts with external customers, the issue 
has yet to be resolved, specifically in 
relation to scope definition. A change 
in leadership style, from command and 
control to styles approaching servant 
leadership, is again a very significant 
change organizations are addressing on 
pilot projects (Greenleaf, 2002). It is too 
early in the evolution of these changes 
to know how they will develop in the 
future.
ConclusionAgile methods are being used more 
and more on large software projects 
in large organizations. The use of agile 
methods in this context requires sig
-nificant adaptations at both the project 
and organizational levels. There are fun
-damental contradictions between large 
bureaucratic organizations with well-
established traditional software devel
-opment methods and agile principles 
and practices. The resolution of these 
contradictions is currently ongoing but 
is still incomplete. Some aspects of the 
forms these will take in the future are 
already quite clear, but others will only 
become clear as the evolutionary pro
-cess progresses. This is a subject that will 
require further research as the adoption 
and adaptation processes progress.
Future Research
Some of the most important outstand
-ing questions are:
 What will the project manager™s role 
be in the future? Will there be proj
-ect managers in this type of context? 
 June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  17Will the answers to these questions be 
contingent upon yet to be unidentified 
conditions? To date, the effect of the use of agile 
methods has been primarily at the 
project level, with little or no reconcep
-tualization at the program or portfo
-lio level. However, scaling frameworks 
that propose solutions at these lev
-els are gaining in popularity. How will 
agile methods affect program and port
-folio management?
 Projects with internal business units 
as customers are in a situation quite 
different from those with external cus
-tomers under contract:
 For internal projects, how will the 
relationship between business 
units and projects evolve and will 
this fundamentally change the 
entire organization?
 For external projects, how will the 
use of agile methods for systems 
development effect the entire 
organization, with redefinitions of 
the roles of other departments 
and the relationships with cus
-tomers, in what might become 
ﬁagile end-to-end?ﬂ
References
Abrahamsson, P., Conboy, K., & 
Xiaofeng, W. (2009).
 ‚Lots done, more 
to do:™ The current state of agile systems 
development research. 
European Journal 
of Information Systems, 18
, 281Œ284.Ågerfalk, P. J., Fitzgerald, B., & Slaughter, 
S. A. (2009).
 Introduction to the special 
issue: Flexible and distributed information 
systems development: State of the art and 
research challenges. 
Information Systems 
Research, 20
(3), 317Œ328.Agile Alliance. (2001).
 Manifesto for agile 
software development
. Retrieved from 
http://agilemanifesto.org/
Al-Zoabi, Z. (2008).
 Introducing 
discipline to Xp: Applying Prince2 on 
Xp projects.
 Paper presented at the 
Information and Communication 
Technologies: From Theory to 
Applications, 2008, ICTTA 2008, 3rd 
International Conference.
Ambler, S. W. (2009).
 The agile scaling 
model (ASM): Adapting agile methods for 
complex environments
. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/
 Scott_Ambler/publication/268424579
 _Adapting_Agile_Methods_for_Complex
 _The_Agile_Scaling_Model_ASM
 _Adapting_Agile_Methods_for_Complex
 _Environments/links/
 55003e780cf28e4ac347ee34.
pdf?origin=publication_detail
Ambler, S. W., & Lines, M. (2014).
 Scaling agile software development 
disciplined agility at scale.
 Retrieved from 
disciplinedagileconsortium.org
Anantatmula, V. S., & Anantatmula, M. 
(2008). Use of agile methodology for IT 
consulting projects.
 Paper presented at 
the PMI Research Conference, Warsaw, 
Poland.
Barlow, J. B., Keith, M. J., Wilson, D. W., 
Schuetzler, R. M., Lowry, P. B., Vance, 
A., & Giboney, J. S. (2011).
 Overview and 
guidance on agile development in large 
organizations. 
Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems, 29
, 25Œ44.Beck, K. (2000).
 Extreme programming 
explained: Embrace change
. Boston, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Boehm, B. (2002).
 Get ready for agile 
methods, with care. 
Computer, 35
(1), 64Œ69.Boehm, B., & Turner, R. (2003).
 Observations on balancing discipline 
and agility.
 Paper presented at the Agile 
Development Conference, 2003.
Boehm, B., & Turner, R. (2004).
 Balancing 
agility and discipline: A guide for the 
perplexed
. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Boehm, B., & Turner, R. (2005).
 Management challenges to implementing 
agile processes in traditional development 
organizations. 
IEEE Software, 22
(5), 30Œ39.Cohn, M. (2009).
 Succeeding with agile: 
Software development using Scrum.
 London, England: Pearson Education.
Conboy, K. (2009).
 Agility from first 
principles: Reconstructing the concept 
of agility in information systems 
development. 
Information Systems 
Research, 20
(3), 329Œ354.Conforto, E. C., Amaral, D. C., da Silva, 
S. L., Di Felippo, A., & Kamikawachi, 
D. S. L. (2016).
 The agility construct 
on project management theory. 
International Journal of Project 
Management, 34
(4), 660Œ674.Conforto, E. C., Salum, F., Amaral, D. 
C., da Silva, S. L., & de Almeida, L. F. M. 
(2014). Can agile project management 
be adopted by industries other 
than software development? 
Project 
Management Journal, 45
(3), 21Œ34.DiCicco-Bloom, B., & Crabtree, B. F. 
(2006). The qualitative research interview. 
Medical Education, 40
(4), 314Œ321.Dikert, K., Paasivaara, M., & Lassenius, 
C. (2016).
 Challenges and success factors 
for large-scale agile transformations: A 
systematic literature review. 
Journal of 
Systems & Software, 119
, 87Œ108.Dingsoyr, T., & Moe, N. B. (2013).
 Research challenges in large-scale agile 
software development.
 Paper presented at 
the ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering 
Notes.
Dingsøyr, T., Fægri, T. E., & Itkonen, 
J. (2014). 
What is large in large-scale? 
A taxonomy of scale for agile software 
development. 
Product-focused software 
process improvement
 (Vol. 8892 in 
the series
 Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science
, pp. 273Œ276). New York, NY: 
Springer.
Dingsøyr, T., & Moe, N. B. (2014). 
Towards principles of large-scale 
agile development: A summary of the 
workshop at Xp2014 and a revised 
research agenda,
 Agile methods: Large-
scale development, refactoring, testing, 
and estimation
 (Vol. 199 in the series
 Lecture Notes in Business Information 
Processing
, pp. 1Œ8). New York, NY: 
Springer.
Dingsøyr, T., Nerur, S., Balijepally, V., 
& Moe, N. B. (2012).
 A decade of agile 
methodologies: Towards explaining agile 
software development. 
Journal of Systems 
and Software, 85
(6), 1213Œ1221.Disciplined Agile Delivery (DAD). 
(2015). Retrieved from http://www
 .disciplinedagiledelivery.com
 18  June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
Dubey, A., Jain, A., & Mantri, A. 
(2015). Comparative study: Waterfall 
v/s agile model. 
International Journal 
of Engineering Sciences & Research 
Technology, 4
(3), March.
Dyba, T., & Dingsøyr, T. (2008).
 Empirical studies of agile software 
development: A systematic review. 
Information and Software Technology, 50
, 833Œ859.Fernandez, D. J., & Fernandez, J. D. 
(2008). Agile project management: 
Agilism versus traditional approaches. 
The Journal of Computer Information 
Systems, 49
(2), 10Œ17.Fitzgerald, B., Stol, K.-J., O™Sullivan, 
R., & O™Brien, D. (2013).
 Scaling agile 
methods to regulated environments: An 
industry case study.
 Paper presented at 
the Proceedings of the 2013 International 
Conference on Software Engineering.
Freudenberg, S., & Sharp, H. (2010).
 The 
top 10 burning research questions from 
practitioners. 
Software, IEEE, 27
(5), 8Œ9.Gat, I. (2006).
 How BMC is scaling agile 
development
. Paper presented at the 
IEEE Agile 2006 Conference.
Greenleaf, R. K. (2002). 
Servant 
leadership: A journey into the nature of 
legitimate power and greatness
 (25th anniversary ed.). Costa Mesa, CA: Paulist 
Press.
Grewal, H., & Maurer, F. (2007).
 Scaling 
agile methodologies for developing a 
production accounting system for the oil 
& gas industry.
 Paper presented at the 
Agile Conference (AGILE), 2007.
Gruver, G., & Mouser, T. (2015).
 Leading 
the transformation: Applying agile and 
devops principles at scale
. Portland, OR: 
IT Revolution.
Highsmith, J. A. (2003).
 Cutter 
consortium reports: Agile project 
management: Principles and tools. 
Cutter Consortium, 4
(2), 2Œ4.Highsmith, J. A. (2010).
 Agile project 
management: Creating innovative 
products
. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Addison-Wesley.
Hobbs, B., & Petit, Y. 
Agile methods on 
large projects in large organizations.
 Newtown Square, PA: Project 
Management Institute, Newtown Square, 
PA (in press).
Hoda, R., Noble, J., & Marshall, S. 
(2013). Self-organizing roles on agile 
software development teams. 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 
39(3), 422Œ444.Iivari, J., & Iivari, N. (2011).
 The 
relationship between organizational 
culture and the deployment of agile 
methods. 
Information and Software 
Technology, 53
(5), 509Œ520.Karlstrom, D., & Runeson, P. (2005).
 Combining agile methods with stage-
gate project management. 
IEEE Software, 
22(3), 43Œ49.Kettunen, P. (2007).
 Extending software 
project agility with new product 
development enterprise agility. 
Software 
Process: Improvement and Practice, 12
(6), 541Œ548.Kettunen, P. (2009).
 Adopting key 
lessons from agile manufacturing to 
agile software product development: 
A comparative study. 
Technovation, 
29(6/7), 408.Kruchten, P. (2013).
 Contextualizing 
agile software development. 
Journal of 
Software Maintenance and Evolution, 
25(4), 351Œ361.Larman, C. (2015).
 Less. Retrieved from 
http://less.works/
Larman, C., & Vodde, B. (2014).
 Large-
scale Scrum: More with less.
 Boston, MA: 
Addison Wesley Professional.
Leffingwell, D. (2007).
 Scaling 
software agility: Best practices for large 
enterprises.
 New York, NY: Pearson 
Education.
Leffingwell, D. (2010).
 Agile software 
requirements: Lean requirements 
practices for teams, programs, and the 
enterprise
. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Addison-Wesley.
Leffingwell, D. (2015).
 SafeŠScaled Agile 
Framework
. Retrieved from http://www
 .scaledagileframework.com/
Levin, G. (2012).
 Program management: 
A life cycle approach.
 Boca Raton, FL: 
Auerbach Publications.
Lindvall, M., Muthig, D., Dagnino, 
A., Wallin, C., Stupperich, M., 
Kiefer, D., . . . Kahkonen, T. (2004).
 Agile software development in large 
organizations. 
Computer, 37
(12), 
26Œ34.Mahanti, A. (2006).
 Challenges in 
enterprise adoption of agile methodsŠ
 A survey. 
Journal of Computing and 
Information Technology, 14
(3), 197Œ206.Mintzberg, H. (1979).
 The structuring of 
organizations: A synthesis of the research
. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Omar, M., Syed-Abdullah, S.-L., & Yasin, 
A. (2011).
 The impact of agile approach 
on software engineering teams. 
American 
Journal of Economics and Business 
Administration, 3
(1), 12Œ17.Petit, Y., & Levesque, M.-M. (2015).
 Assessing the application of agile principles 
in non-IT projects
. Paper presented at the 
IRNOP, London, England.
Razavi, A. M., & Ahmad, R. (2014).
 Agile development in large and distributed 
environments:A systematic literature 
review on organizational, managerial 
and cultural aspects
. Paper presented at 
the 8th Malaysian Software Engineering 
Conference (MySEC), Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia.
Schwaber, K. (2004).
 Agile project 
management with Scrum.
 Redmond, WA: 
Microsoft Press.
Schwaber, K. (2007).
 The enterprise and 
scrum
. Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press.
Schwaber, K. (2015).
 Nexus
. Retrieved 
from https://www.scrum.org/Resources/
The-Nexus-Guide
Schwaber, K., & Sutherland, J. (2013).
 The Scrum guideŽ: The definitive guide to 
Scrum: The rules of the game.
, Retrieved 
from http://www.scrumguides.org/
Serrador, P., & Pinto, J. K. (2015).
 Does 
agile work? A quantitative analysis of agile 
project success. 
International Journal of 
Project Management, 33
(5), 1040Œ1051.Sheffield, J., & Lemétayer, J. (2013).
 Factors associated with the software 
development agility of successful 
projects. 
International Journal of Project 
Management, 31
(3), 459Œ472. June/July 2017  ˜  Project Management Journal
  19Sommer, A. F., Hedegaard, C., 
Dukovska-Popovska, I., & Steger-
Jensen, K. (2015).
 Improved product 
development performance through agile/
stage-gate hybrids. 
Research Technology 
Management, 58
(1), 34Œ44.−pundak, M. (2014).
 Mixed agile/
traditional project management 
methodology: Reality or illusion? 
ProcediaŠSocial and Behavioral 
Sciences, 119
(0), 939Œ948.Stoica, M., Mircea, M., & Ghilic-Micu, 
B. (2013).
 Software development: Agile 
vs. traditional. 
Informatica Economica, 
17(4), 64Œ76.Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, 
J., & Pintikov, N. (2007).
 Distributed 
Scrum: Agile project management with 
outsourced development teams
. Paper 
presented at the Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 
Hawaii.
Tashakkori, A., & Teddlie, C. (1998). 
Mixed methodology: Combining 
qualitative and quantitative approaches
 (Vol. 46). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Thomke, S., & Reinertsen, D. (1998).
 Agile product development: Managing 
development flexibility in uncertain 
environments. 
California Management 
Review, 41
(1), 8Œ30.VersionOne. (2016).
 10th Annual State 
of Agile Report
. Retrieved from https://
versionone.com/pdf/VersionOne-10th-
Annual-State-of-Agile-Report.pdf
Vinekar, V., Slinkman, C. W., & 
Nerur, S. (2006).
 Can agile and 
traditional systems development 
approaches coexist? An ambidextrous 
view. Information Systems Management, 
23(3), 31Œ42.Young, R., & Poon, S. (2013).
 Top 
management supportŠAlmost always 
necessary and sometimes sufficient 
for success: Findings from a fuzzy set 
analysis. 
International Journal of Project 
Management, 31
(7), 943Œ957.Brian Hobbs, PhD, PMP,
 has been a Professor at the School of Management of the University of Quebec at Montreal, Canada, in the Master™s 
Program in Project Management for more than thirty years; this program, of which he is a past director, 
is accredited by PMI™s Global Accreditation Center. 
He founded the Project Management Research Chair at the University of Quebec in Montreal in 2007 and held the Chair until 2015. Professor Hobbs holds a degree in Industrial Engineering, an MBA, and a PhD in Management and has served terms on both PMI™s 
Standards and Research Members Advisory Groups and is currently a member of the PMI-Montreal Board of Governors. He received the 2012 PMI Research Achievement Award and, along with his colleague, 
Monique Aubry, received the 2012 International 
Project Management Association Research Award 
for their work on PMOs. In 2013, he received the Research Career Achievement Award from the School 
of Management and in 2015 became a PMI Fellow. He 
can be contacted at hobbs.brian@uqam.caYvan Petit, MEng, MBA (Insead), PhD, PMP, 
PfMP,
 has been an Associate Professor at the 
University of Quebec at Montreal (ESG UQAM), 
Canada, since 2010. His research interests are port-folio management, agile methods, and uncertainty 
management and he has over 25 years of experi-ence in project management, primarily in software 
development and R&D in the telecommunications 
industry. Professor Petit has been a member of the 
Canadian committee on the ISO TC-258 on Project 
Portfolio Management and is now a member of the 
PMI Standards MAG (Member Advisory Group) and is 
the program director for the post-graduate programs 
in project management at ESG UQAM. He can be 
contacted at petit.yvan@uqam.ca