 Cover to CoverProject Management Journal, Vol. 47, No. 1, e4
 © 2016 by the Project Management Institute 

Published online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) 

DOI: 10.1002/pmj.21569
e4  February/March 2016    Project Management Journal
    DOI: 10.1002/pmj      Agile software development has 
been around for decades, but its 

adoption by traditional project 

management was slow. Early in 
the 2000s, there were numerous articles 

and related debates about whether or 

not the pure agile approach for software 

development could coexist with PMI ’ s  
A Guide to the Project Management Body 

of Knowledge (PMBOK 
®  Guide)
 . In many 
circles, these two approaches were viewed 

as mutually exclusive. Of course, over time, 

this perception has greatly diminished 

and now project managers in the software 

development space are encouraged, if not 

expected, to be able to work on both sides 

of the fence. 
 Denise Canty ’ s book helps guide project 
managers through their role when managing 

agile projects and teams. For instance, many 

project managers managing pure agile or the 

more commonly applied “agilistic” or adap-

tive projects are still required to plan out the overall project 

timeline, forecasting staffing requirements and total project 

budgets in a manner consistent with waterfall and traditional 

types of projects. 
 The book starts with an overview of some of the prin-
ciples that are common to most agile projects, but from the 

point of view of a traditional project manager. Examples of 

such principles include that the agile approach is geared to 

delivering high-quality products that are value-focused. This 

is not to say that other more traditional project management 

approaches are not concerned with delivering quality prod-

ucts on time and in budget, but rather that the focus with agile 

is on the value delivery over process and documentation. The 

author also stresses that change and risk are inherent in an 

agile environment, which is in contrast to the typical project 

management approach of risk avoidance (or strongly con-

trolled risk) and minimization of change. The key difference 

is in the acceptance of change and risk as part of the delivery 

process. This in turn, reshapes the project manager ’ s role 

to be more adaptive in the application of traditional project 
management processes in order to meet the 
demands of a continuously changing busi-

ness  environment. 
 One section that project managers might 
find particularly useful is Ch3, which 

compares and contrasts two of the most 

popular agile methodologies: Scrum and 

XP. This chapter provides an excellent over-

view for the novice agile project manager of 

two techniques that are often used concur-

rently. Additional agile methodologies are 

discussed later in the book (Cha17). 

Also, because agile is very team-centric, 

Canty addresses important topics such as 

stakeholder engagement (Cha5), peo-

ple skills (Cha11), and the agile team 

concept (Cha12). 
 The author walks the reader through 
some of the typical tools (Cha4), docu-

mentation (Cha6), and types of track-

ing and reporting (Cha7) used when 

running an agile project. Chovides 
an excellent overview of the project management process 

as it applies to working on an agile project. Key to the agile 

approach is how the work is broken down. Requirements are 

gathered as user stories, then each user story is assigned a 

priority and a level of effort based on the team ’ s capability and 

capacity. This composes the product backlog from which the 

team can do their release and sprint planning. The product 

backlog combined with the sprint retrospectives and current 

input from the business enable a more effective mechanism 

to effect change. 
 Most disciplines include some sort of professional certifi-
cation and the agile world is no different. Ch13 provides 

a quick rundown of the more common industry certifications 

that are available to the agile practitioner. It should be noted 

that any certification is just the starting point, as it only docu-

ments that the holder has demonstrated an understanding 

of the principles related to that specific knowledge area. It is 

imperative for the holders of the certification to develop their 

expertise through actual application. Canty ’ s book assists the 

traditional project manager in 
doing just that.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agile for Project Managers 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
by Denise Canty  
 
 
 
 
 
   CRC Press ,  2015 , ISBN: 
9781482244984, hardcover,  240  pp., 

$56.96 Member, $59.95 Nonmember. 
  Reviewed by Greg Indelicato,
  PMP, Managing Director – Indelicato Project 
Solutions, Plano, TX, USA. 