 PAPERS
Project Management Journal, Vol. 45, No. 3, 35-45
© 2014 by the Project Management Institute

Published online in Wiley Online Library

(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/pmj.21411
June/July 2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      35ABSTRACT In this article we focus on the quantitative 
project scheduling problem in IT companies 

that apply the agile management philosophy 

and Scrum, in particular. We combine math-

ematical programming with an agile project 

flow using a modified multi-mode resource 

constrained project scheduling model for 

software projects (MRCPS
SP). The proposed 
approach can be used to generate schedules 

as benchmarks for agile development itera-

tions. Computational experiments based on 

real project data indicate that this approach 

significantly reduces the project cycle time. 

The approach can be a useful addition to 

agile project management, especially for 

software projects with predefined deadlines 

and budgets.KEYWORDS:
 software project scheduling; 
quantitative project management; agile 

software development; Scrum
A Hybrid Approach to Quantitative 
Software Project Scheduling Within 

Agile FrameworksMichael Jahr
, European University of Applied Sciences (EUFH), Department for Industrial 
Management, Neuss, Germany
INTRODUCTION Developing individual software applications in complex projects is a 
multi-layered task. In projects with predefined deadlines and bud-

gets, managers must oversee delivery dates and control project costs. 

Traditional production industries (e.g., in the automotive sector or 
the metalworking industries) can make use of quantitative methods and mod-

els to support project management. In this article we combine quantitative 

scheduling with an agile project flow called Scrum (Martin, 2002), creating a 

hybrid approach. Scrum is an agile project management concept that focuses 

on working software rather than creating strict schedules. Based on a real-life 

case, we present a modified multi-mode resource constrained project sched-

uling model (MRCPS
SP) and add it to a given Scrum flow. Practical tests have 
shown that using the hybrid approach with a modified process flow chart 

significantly improved the adherence to deadlines and budgets. Therewith 

we show that agile methods and traditional approaches are not contrary ways, 

and that quantitative models are a useful support to project management in 

agile frameworks. The structure of the article is as follows: The second section 

briefly deals with some fundamentals of traditional planning methods and the 

agile methodology; thereby, possible connections between both approaches 

are focused on. Furthermore, the real-world case of an IT company that man-

ages its projects with Scrum is described. The company’s actual scheduling 

problems within the used Scrum environment, as well as the aims and scope, 

are highlighted. The third and fourth sections deal with the used quantita-

tive methodology and present a hybrid approach to combining quantitative 

scheduling and agile frameworks. The hybrid Scrum flow is tested based on 

real data in the fifth section and assessed in the sixth section; finally, the sev-

enth section provides a summary and recommendations for further research.
The Quantitative Software Project Scheduling Problem
Traditional Planning Versus Agile Project Management
In traditional industries (e.g., the automotive sector), planning and the result-
ing plans are process oriented and aimed at sequencing the necessary opera-

tions. The focus lies on standardized operations that try to eliminate procedure 

uncertainties. The corresponding planning methods have developed over 

many decades. As a result, there are efficient operational research methods 

and models available (Steinrücke, 2011; Steinrücke & Jahr, 2012), which can be 

applied to generate, for example, effective production plans. Compared with 

traditional industries (e.g., metal working and automotive), the IT industry is 

a younger industry. Hence, different approaches to organizing work and jobs 

have emerged to challenge the traditional plan-driven ways; therefore, each 
 A Hybrid Approach to Quantitative Software Project Scheduling Within Agile Frameworks36  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
all product owners, ScrumMasters, and 
senior developers because these peo-

ple have the most expertise. Our main 

questions focused on the adherence to 

delivery dates and the relations between 

costs and budgets. After the analysis, we 

were able to outline a typical project run, 

which is exemplified in the following 

example. A national finance company 

ordered a new application consisting of 

three modules (i.e., User Stories): client 

administration, cross-selling manage-

ment, and order management. Next to 

a product owner and ScrumMaster, a 

Scrum team consisting of seven mem-

bers (two senior and five regular devel-

opers) was established. The desired 

specifications were analyzed by the 

entire project team and a project dura-

tion period of 16 weeks was estimated, 

which already included a two-week time 

buffer. A corresponding delivery date for 

the last module was stipulated with the 

customer, and the project budget was 

calculated based on the project team 

size (nine people), the estimated project 

duration (five work days per week), and 

an average daily cost rate for person-

nel of €1,500 (US$2,100), totaling up to 

€1,080,000 (US$1,512,000). User Stories 

one and two should be developed in 

two iterations of six weeks each, and 

the last User Story in a single itera-

tion of four weeks. The iterations were 

intended to be closed periods (sprints) 

in which the product owner may not 

influence the Scrum team. Short daily 

meetings contained brief feedback 

sessions, mostly addressing technical 

questions. After iteration one, roughly 

one third of the first module was com-

pleted due to unexpected complexity; 

thus, next to the second User Story, the 

unfinished first User Story also had to 

be programmed into iteration two. So, 

in the end, neither of the User Stories 

was completed after iterations two and 

three. At the stipulated delivery date, no 

module was delivered. In the meantime, 

the Scrum team was split up to work 

on several User Stories simultaneously, 

which increased the problems. Last, a 

second Scrum team of five additional 
 applications) and large projects (new 
software applications up to entire plat-

forms); for the software projects in the 

considered company a modified version 

of Scrum is used. The enterprise occa-

sionally mandated a specialized IT con-

sultancy that provided Scrum coaches 

to support the process flow and respond 

to organizational questions. There are 

three roles in the Scrum project process 

(Schwaber, 2004): The product owner, 

who has a business background and 

operates as a project manager, includ-

ing responsibility for deadlines, budgets, 

and project teams. Next to the product 

owner is the ScrumMaster, a software 

programmer, who serves as a link to 

the Scrum team, which consists of the 

software developers and encompasses a 

team of up to 15 members. The Scrum-

Master has a supporting and administra-

tive role. In contrast to the company’s 

five product owners and five Scrum-

Masters, the Scrum teams were mostly 

rearranged for each new project. Two 

types of software developers are distin-

guished. One small group of 15 people 

is built by the senior programmers with 

longtime professional experience. The 

larger group of up to 40 people includes 

the regular programmers. A software 

application consists of several functional 

modules, so-called User Stories, which 

contain descriptions of the desired spec-

ifications. One or more User Stories are 

developed in single closed cycles (itera-

tions or sprints) in which the Scrum 

team works without external influence. 

At the end of the iteration, the team pres-

ents the results to the product owner; 

hence, the iteration time boxes are fixed, 

whereas the scope is difficult to predict.
Deficiencies in the Project Management 
Process
To analyze the project management pro-
cess we attended the iteration planning 

meetings, short daily meetings, and the 

retrospectives of five different projects, 

which were handled simultaneously 

by different project teams over a time 

period of three months. During this time 

we conducted informal interviews with 
 individual application is programmed 
within a distinct software project. The 

basis for a flexible project management 

approach is the 
Agile Manifesto
 (Agile 
Alliance, 2001; Nachamai, Senthil Vadivu, 

& Tapaskar, 2011; Jalali & Wohlin, 2011). 

Its goal is to develop the most practicable 

solution that fulfills the actual custom-

er’s needs rather than the possible best 

result (Frank Cervone, 2011; Takeuchi 

& Nonaka, 1986). An established agile 

project management concept is Scrum 

(Schwaber, 2004; Reifer, 2002). Salo and 

Abrahamsson (2008), for example, sur-

veyed the use of agile software develop-

ment methods and Scrum in European 

industrial organizations. Their results 

indicate that the appreciation of the agile 

methods and their individual practices 

appears to increase once adopted and 

that Scrum is used rather systematically. 

Under these circumstances, traditional 

and agile methods seem to be contrary 

ways; however, software projects with 

defined specifications and contracted 

deadlines, as well as budgets, thus face 

strict targets. Here, most notably quanti-

tative management support can comple-

ment agile methods and contribute to 

meeting deadlines and budgets. In the 

next section, we describe a real-life case 

of an IT company using Scrum to manage 

strictly targeted projects. Subsequently, 

we present a variation of the Scrum pro-

cess, including quantitative scheduling.
Case Study of an IT Company Using 
Scrum
In the considered case, we analyzed the 
software project scheduling process and 

the project management in an enterprise 

that develops individual software pro-

grams in the finance sector. The com-

pany was selected because it is one of 

the market leaders in the field of indi-

vidualized banking applications and, 

furthermore, represents a forerunner in 

modern agile project management in 

its segment. The company focused on 

sales and administration applications in 

its product portfolio. In principle, the 

company distinguished between small 

projects (redevelopments of existing 
 June/July  2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      37iteration. The latter can be achieved by 
simple data adjustment (see later).
Depicting the Development Process 
With an Activity-on-the-Node-Graph
With the AoNG, we aim for an accurate 
depiction of the specific software devel-

opment process (Figure 1). The boxes 

represent the activities and the arrows 

represent the activity orders that lead 

to predecessor and successor relations, 

which at first counteract the continuous 

agile software development philosophy, 

but we can then use this approach later 

on to extend the agile framework and 

support project management (see later). 

To improve an AoNG thus becomes 

part of the extended agile project man-

agement framework creating a hybrid 

approach (Figure 2). We present the 

AoNG, which was created by the Scrum 

team and supported and examined by 

the Scrum coaches as described in the 

case study from the previous section. 

The developed basic AoNG includes 

15 activities; here, all activities were 

considered that (possibly) involved 

software developers (i.e., all activities 

consuming available software program-

mer time and capacity). This approach 
tive schedules, which can be used as 
a benchmark or basis for the project 

phases (iterations). These schedules 

must enable resource allocation con-

cerning (in-)experienced software 

developers and delivery cycle times. 

Both aspects are needed to meet dead-

lines, control costs, and calculate prod-

uct prices respectively. Therefore, we 

decided to depict the software develop-

ment process with an Activity-on-the-

Node-Graph (AoNG, see next section) 

in order to apply a mathematical opti-

mization approach to determine the 

desired objective quantitative schedule 

(see later). Thus, the AoNG is the basis 

for quantitative scheduling and the 

central element of our approach. From 

the process point of view, the (senior) 

computer programmers are the key fac-

tors in the actual software development 

process rather than the additional agile 

roles (i.e., product owners and Scrum-

Masters); hence, the AoNG must ful-

fill two requirements: First, it must be 

 created focusing on all potential activi-

ties involving software developers. Sec-

ond, it must be flexible enough so that 

separate activities can be removed in 

case they are not necessary for a specific 
regular  developers was added. The proj-
ect was finalized with a project dura-

tion period of 34 weeks (213% of the 

estimated duration). The project costs 

totaled €2.89 million (US$4,046,000) 

(268% of the estimated costs). Based 

on the described project and the inter-

views, we could determine that the 

major problems were massively overrun 

deadlines and project costs, which con-

sistently escalated irrespective of the 

project type. Project teams systemati-

cally underestimated project durations 

and costs. The Scrum flow normally 

contains several elements to rethink 

the operating cycles and to learn from 

completed iterations (e.g., the iteration 

review and the retrospective; see later). 

The senior developers indicated that 

the Scrum teams had difficulties esti-

mating the project parameters (times, 

complexity), because each project was 

individual without standardization. 

They concluded that within the com-

plex development phases, the overview, 

including deadlines and scopes, was 

often lost; therefore, the project man-

agement was in need of an effective tool 

to benchmark the iteration cycles and 

to estimate the project costs. The com-

pany management claimed four central 

requirements:
1. Delivery dates must be met.
2. Project budgets must be met.

3. Adherence to agile methods and to 
the basic Scrum process.
4. Simple processes and methods appli-
cable to small and large projects.
In the following sections we pre-
sent a hybrid approach to extending the 

existing Scrum flow by using a quantita-

tive scheduling approach to supporting 

the project teams.
Modeling Software Projects 
With a Modified Resource 

Constrained Project 

Scheduling Approach
Quantitative Software Project Modeling
Our primary goal was to support soft-
ware project management with objec-
123456789101112131415Activities1. Functional and technical requirements analysis
2. Architecture (Re-)Design
3. Interface (Re-)Design
4. Data Base (Re-)Design

5. Functional Modules (Re-)Design
6. Coordination with customer
7. Architecture (Re-)Programming
8. Interface (Re-)Programming
9. Data Base (Re-)Programming
10. Functional Module (Re-)Programming
11. Testing and Bug-Fixing
12. Software Integration

13. Testing and Bug-Fixing
14. Customer Presentation
15. Delivery of Sprint-Increment
Figure 1:
 Activity-on-the-node-Graph (AoNG) for activities in the Scrum sprints.
 A Hybrid Approach to Quantitative Software Project Scheduling Within Agile Frameworks38  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
readings please refer to Drexl and Gru-
enewald (1993), Brucker (2002), Hor-

bach (2010), and Behrouz, Hojjat, and 

Esmaeil (2012). Due to the considered 

problem structure in software projects 

we applied the multi-mode type with 

time lags and non-constant resources. 

To use the MRCPS
SP for the quantitative 
scheduling, we focus i=1, . . ., N activi-

ties. Thereby S
j represents all succes-
sors j of job i. The model formulation 

allows for a random number of modes, 

which can represent any kind of special-

ized employee. In the considered case 

study, two types of software developers 

were distinguished (i.e., regular inex-

perienced software programmers and 

experienced senior software program-

mers, which formed the minor group). 

Each activity can be executed by one of 

these software developer types, which 

is depicted by modes m
i = . . ., M
i. To 
perform activity i in mode m
i takes p
i,mi time units. A maximum iteration cycle 

time, which is needed for computa-

tion as an upper limit, is given by T 

and the maximum project duration is 
determined by PD. By   
PD ___ T   the number of 
iterations can be estimated. The actual 

iteration cycle times and the actual 
iteration increment is delivered (activ-
ity 15). As explained earlier, we explic-

itly incorporated coordination activities 

that can function as time buffers (activi-

ties 6, 11, 14, and 15) but can also be 

excluded from consideration. By devi-

ating from this AoNG, other processes 

can be depicted, which in general, are 

independent from the  mathematical 

optimization model presented in the 

next section.Multi-Mode Resource Constraint 
Project Scheduling for Software 

Projects With Time Lags and Non-

Constant Resources (MRCPS
SP)For quantitative scheduling we decided 
to make use of approved operations 

research methodology. Specifically, 

we aimed at implementing a modi-

fied multi-mode resource constraint 

scheduling model for software projects 

(MRCPS
SP) in order to schedule, for 
example, the derived AoNG described 

earlier. The resource constrained project 

scheduling problem (RCPSP) is one of 

the basic problems in production plan-

ning and has already been intensively 

discussed (Brucker, Drexl, Möhring, 

Neumann, & Pesch, 1999). For further 
proved to be the best practice in proj-
ects that had to meet specific deadlines.
First, the project team analyzes 
the product requirements to be devel-
oped in the following iteration (activity 
1). By data adjustment, activity 1 can 

be ignored and thus shifted to a pre-

iteration planning; then, the affected 

software components were designed 

or redesigned if already existing com-

ponents or old products had been 

addressed (activities 2 through 5). 

Afterward, the product concepts should 

be reviewed with the customer before 

development (activity 6). Software rep-

resents a complex product, so at least 

one software programmer was always 

involved as the expert in each customer 

interaction and hence missed the actual 

programming stage. Moreover, this 

activity can be used as an additional 

time buffer; software development takes 

up the major part (activities 7 through 

10). A first testing phase (activity 11) is 

used to test the single modules and to 

prepare the software integration (activ-

ity 12). The second testing phase (activ-

ity 13) aims at a functional iteration 

increment, which is then presented to 

the customer (activity 14). Finally, the 
Iteration(Fixed Time Boxwith schedule asbenchmark)DailyMeetingComparison ofproject progressand scheduleIteration Scheduling Meeting(Scheduling of Time Box,Resources and Iteration Backlogor Scope Benchmarking) Review Meeting(Feature presentation anddelivery) Project Planning Meeting(Product Backlog and UserStory prioritization) Retrospective(Reßecting and identiÞcationof potential improvements) MRCPSSPModeladjustmentandUser StoryprioritizationModel andDataadjustmentModelandDataimprovementIteration startIteration endingFigure 2:
 Hybrid quantitative software project scheduling.
 June/July  2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      39iiiiiiMLF
N
i,m,fi,m,tf
i1m1
tEFxCfR
===


 (5)
Xi,mi,t  (0,1) 
i  N,
mi Mi, t = EF
i, . . ., LF
i (6)
In the objective function (Equation 
1) the iteration cycle time is minimized; 

next to this, different objectives are pos-

sible. For example, the scheduling could 

aim at minimized iteration costs, which 

could lead to longer iterations. Here, the 

deadlines were of special importance so 

that it was preferred to strain the bud-

get in favor of the duration. The cho-

sen model formulation requires that the 

earliest and latest start times, as well as 

the finish times, are calculated by sim-

ple forward and backward recursion in 

advance, using the shortest durations for 

all jobs (Alvarez-Valdes & Tamarit, 1989). 

This procedure is known from the unca-

pacitated precedence diagram method. 

Constraint (Equation 2) is the completion 

restriction ensuring that each job is exe-

cuted using exactly one mode (i.e., senior 

or regular software developer). Through 

constraints (Equation 3) the precedence 

relations between the activities are deter-

mined; thereby, minimum time lags  d 
i,j  min  can be set and these can be used to incor-

porate an additional time buffer between 

two activities. In constraints (Equation 

4) and (Equation 5), the capacities for 

(non-)renewable resources are provided; 

finally, constraint (Equation 6) indicates 

the binary restrictions. The model pre-

sented allocates the available software 

developers to activities and considers 

the capacities and budget. The result is a 

schedule that indicates the activity finish 

time and which developer type (senior 

or regular software developer) will exe-

cute which activity. Therewith, important 

assistance is rendered. The project man-

ager is given clear indication for resource 

planning, and the project teams receive a 

feasible schedule they can rely on.
Measuring Software Code 
Programming With a Three-Step 

Function Point System
The scheduling model presented 
as sumes that the personnel resources 
developer capacities and the available 
iteration budget. Clearly, if all single 

iteration schedules are feasible, then 

the project can be expected to meet the 

deadline and the total project budget. 

We use this simple appearing idea as 

a guideline. All activities consume the 

available (non-)renewable resources. 

In Table 1 the notation used for the 

MRCPS
SP is summarized.
The MRCPS
SP can be formulated as 
follows:
NNiiNMLF
N,m,t
m1tEF
Minimize Z t
 ·x=== (1)
s.t. 
iiMLF
i,m
i,tmi1tEF
ix1iN
=== (2)
()jjiijijjMLF
MLF
minj,m,ti,mi,ji,m
i,tm1tEFm
i1tEF
itxtpdx
··====
−

 iN, jS
j
 (3)
iimin{t+p(i,m)i}Ni,m,ki,m,
k,mi
ii1=max{t, EFi}xCmM,
=
   
 k  K 
(t), t  T (4)project duration as accumulated itera-
tion cycle times are computed by the 

approach and thus are a central result 

and benefit. The software developers 

are further represented by non-constant 

renewable resources k=1, . . ., K
(t). The 
estimation of software developer capac-

ity is an intricate problem. To the best 

of our knowledge, there is no com-

pletely satisfying approach available, so 

that there is a tendency to neglect any 

kind of quantitative capacity evalua-

tion. In fact, the proposed model can be 

formulated as unconstrained version. 

Nevertheless, we are convinced that 

any unconstrained scheduling violates 

realistic management; so, we borrowed 

an interesting element from the agile 

framework (i.e., story points) and used 

them in a derived form for the model 

formulation. Later we explain this 

aspect in more detail. Next to capaci-

tated renewable resources (manpower) 

the project budget is also restricted 

(non-renewable resource out of R
). 
The iteration budget is determined by
  Project price
  ____________________  Number of iterations
  . A feasible sched-
ule must consider both the available 
IndicesNMiK (t) 
RSjTSet of activitiesSet of modes for activity i  N representing skill levels with m
i  Mi Set of non-constant renewable resources representing manpower with k  K(t) Set of non-renewable resources representing budget with f  RSet of successors j  N of job i 
 NPlanning horizon representing the maximum sprint duration Parameters
 C 
k,m      C 
f    d 
i,j  min EFiLFipi,miPD  i,mi,k      i,mi,f     Available mode dependent capacity of renewable resource k 
 K(t) (available manpower)
Available capacity of non-renewable resource f 
 R (available sprint budget)
Minimum time lag between activity i  N and successor activity j 
 NEarliest finish time of job i  N calculated by uncapacitated critical path analysis 
Latest finish time of job i  N calculated by uncapacitated critical path analysis
Duration of activity i  N executed with mode (skill level) m
i  Mi Maximum project duration
Usage of renewable resource k  K(t) by activity i  N with mode m
i  MiUsage of non-renewable resource f  R by activity i 
 N with mode m
i  MiVariables
xi,mi,t Binary variable indicating whether activity i  N is finished in time period t 
 T 
with mode mi  Mi (xi,mi,t = 1) or not (x
i,mi,t = 0)
Table 1:
 Notation MRCPS
SP. A Hybrid Approach to Quantitative Software Project Scheduling Within Agile Frameworks40  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
offer reliable cycle times to schedule 
deadlines and cost information for 

budget planning. As a consequence, 

the MRCPS
SP must be integrated into 
the agile method, for example, Scrum 

( Figure 2). We therefore vary the Scrum 

process. The agile methodology is hence 

extended by “traditional” quantitative 

scheduling approaches.
Thereby, with the MRCPS
SP model 
an additional flow is added to the regu-

lar Scrum elements (i.e., Review, Ret-

rospective, and so forth; see Figure 2) 

leading to extended tasks. Quantitative 

scheduling is first used in the initial 

project planning phase, which includes 

User Story prioritization. Beyond this 

stage, scheduling becomes a recurring 

part of the process. For each sprint 

(iteration), a schedule is computed and 

used as a benchmark and controlling 

instrument in the following Review 

Meeting and Retrospective. The Scrum 

team experiences can be directly incor-

porated into the model parameters; 

then, the next schedule for the succeed-
ing sprint is computed restarting the 

process until the end of the project.
User Story Prioritization in the Project 
Planning Meeting
The MRCPS
SP model can be used to pri-
oritize the User Stories (superior soft-

ware modules). A product backlog is 

created by the product owner, which 

contains all customer requirements, 

ideally classified in clear separate 

modules. For example, an account-

ing business application can be sepa-

rated into modules (User Stories) for 

salary or asset accounting. The Scrum 

team, including the product owner and 

ScrumMaster, discuss the User Stories 

in an upfront project planning meeting 

and stipulate the MRCPS
SP parameters 
using the AoNG (a possible stipulation 

process is described later). The product 

owner then computes a feasible sched-

ule for each User Story receiving four 

possible sorting rules:
1. Highest Cycle Time (HCT)
2. Lowest Cycle Time (LCT)
complexity was measured in a redupli-
cation scheme. Because the software 

developers were used to this method, 

we agreed to adopt this procedure, even 

though deviating methods (e.g., expo-

nential style data) possibly would have 

more common in other indus-

tries. So, each activity is evaluated in a 

three-step function points system, with 

4 points assigned for simple activities, 

8 points for complex activities, and 16 

points for extremely complex activities. 

For example, an activity A can be simple 

to solve for a senior programmer and 

also for a regular programmer, so that 

the specific activity A is evaluated with 

4 points to indicate the complexity for a 

senior programmer and 4 points to indi-

cate the complexity for a regular pro-

grammer. However, an activity B can be 

simple to solve for a senior programmer 

but complex for a regular programmer. 

Therefore, the activity B is evaluated 

with 4 points for senior programmers 

and 8 points for regular programmers. 

This approach is basically an arbitrary 

assumption, but the practical tests 

showed very good results (see later). 

Measuring the software programming 

activities aiming at the best accuracy 

is an element for further research. The 

proposed modeling is not limited to this 

approach and is flexible with regard to 

the measuring methodology.
Integrating Quantitative 
Project Scheduling Into an 

Agile Project Management 

Framework
A Hybrid Approach for Quantitative 
Software Project Management
In the previous sections, a quantita-
tive scheduling model was presented to 

support software project management. 

These kinds of models typically refer 

to operation sequencing problems. The 

agile management concept works dif-

ferently; here, iteration time boxes are 

fixed and the scope is intended to be 

variable. However, objective quantita-

tive schedules can operate as bench-

marks and decision bases because they 
used are capacitated (renewable 
resources), which correctly depicts the 

fact that employees can only deliver 

a specific performance during their 

working hours. Whereas in production 

industries these performances can be 

measured in specific quantity units or 

time units, measuring software pro-

grammer performance (e.g., software 

code) is more complex, especially in 

agile frameworks where programming 

teams work in given fixed time boxes. 

Without external interference, results 

are presented at the end of the iteration; 

in software projects with fixed deadlines 

and limited budgets, however, the cycle 

times and costs must be appraisable 

to some degree for the project man-

ager; therefore, performances must be 

assessed. Agile frameworks, and notably 

Scrum, include a so-called “function 

point system,” which is a dimension-

less evaluating system (Albrecht, 1979; 

Abrahao, Poels, & Pastor, 2006). In 

general, these function points or story 

points represent a relative estimation 

independent of the expertise and pro-

ductivity of the individual developer; 

hence, using these elements for capac-

ity evaluation is an inaccuracy. But, 

we make use of the fact that Scrum 

teams are familiar with evaluating soft-

ware modules by function points and 

transfer this mechanism on activities as 

defined in the AoNG. Thus, two aspects 

are assumed. First, software develop-

ers have a specific available capacity 

on a daily base, whereby senior and 

regular developers are assigned the 

same amount. Second, even though the 

developers possess the same capacity, 

each activity complexity and difficulty 

differs for senior or regular developers 

consuming different capacity quanti-

ties. This is explained by varying experi-

ence levels. For example, programming 

software code for business applications 

(e.g., finance algorithms) is less complex 

for a senior developer due to a certain 

degree of experience. A regular devel-

oper must be worked in the business 

topics. Within the pure Scrum process 

of the considered company, the activity 
 June/July  2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      41vary the  existing Scrum methodology 
and extend it with a quantitative man-

agement tool, which can easily be inte-

grated into the flow (see Figure 2). The 

central beneficiary is the responsible 

project manager (product owner) who 

is equipped with schedules to organize 

the User Stories and to control the proj-

ect progress; moreover, deadlines can 

be set and costs managed.
Practical Test and 
Computational Experiments
Test Scope and Selected Projects
To test our approach we randomly 
chose three Scrum teams, which were 

designated as team alpha, team beta, 

and team gamma. For these teams, we 

asked the group of product owners to 

select four typical projects from two 

kinds of projects (revision of existing 

software projects and development of 

new software projects) (Table 2). These 

four projects should be managed using 

the new hybrid flow. Furthermore, to 

guarantee that these projects repre-

sented ordinary projects, we compared 

our results with one historically simi-

lar sample project, which was man-

aged by one of the teams with the pure 

Scrum flow without using the MRCPS
SP used as strict targets; furthermore, they 
serve as a benchmark. Like the entire 

agile philosophy, the model depends 

on continuous advancements and fine-

tuning; this is achieved by repeated dis-

cussion of the model parameters (e.g., 

activity times, capacities, time lags). 

Thus, the iteration scheduling meeting 

is set upfront before the actual develop-

ment phase (i.e., the iteration). During 

the meeting, MRCPS
SP can be used to 
determine the next iteration time box. 

Along with the prioritization from the 

previous step, the product owner can 

keep the overview. The iteration is a 

closed time period in which the devel-

opment team works without external 

interference; here, the computed sched-

ule serves as a benchmark or guideline, 

respectively. The same applies to the 

short daily meetings. Clearly, meeting 

the schedule is an ideal situation, but 

it gives a solid basis for discussions 

and helps to identify problems early 

enough to inform the customer. The 

modeled time lags and buffer activi-
ties can be used to give the schedule 

a natural flexibility. After the iteration 

review, the retrospective offers addi-

tional space for improvements of the 

quantitative model, for example, by 

adjusting the basic AoNG. In total, we 
3. Highest Capacity Consumption 
(HCC)
4. Lowest Capacity Consumption (LCC)
The cycle times can be used to 
determine the fixed time boxes for the 

iterations. On the one hand, it is pos-

sible to develop the User Stories starting 

with the most time consuming modules 

(HCT) with descending order to handle 

the complex modules first, which can 

be the longest tasks. On the other hand, 

the swift programmable modules can 

be preferred in ascending order (LCT) 

to build up time buffers. Concerning 

the capacity consumption, the implicit 

resource planning of the MRCPS
SP can 
be used. During periods when few pro-

grammers are available (holidays, sick 

days) User Stories with less capacity 

consumption are favored (LCC). When 

all staff members are available, the 

more capacity consuming modules are 

programmed (HCC).
Iteration Scheduling and Application 
in Scrum
The MRCPS
SP model is intended to 
deliver quantitative management and 

decision support, including cycle times, 

needed resources, and development 

costs. The computed schedules can be 
Redevelopment Projects for Existing ProductsNew Product Development Projects
Project ClassScrum
Hybrid approach including MRCPSSPScrumHybrid approach including MRCPSSPParameter/projectSample Project AProject 1Project 2Sample Project BProject 3Project 4
Scrum teamalphagammaalphabetabetabeta

Planned price calculation cost rate5,000€ (US$7,000) p.d.4,400€ (US$6,160) p.d.4,400€ (US$6,160) p.d.5,000€ (US$7,000) p.d.4,400€ (US$6,160) p.d.4,400€ (US$6,160) p.d.(Maximum) iteration length 30 days25 days25 days30 days25 days25 days

Iterations (sprints)333548

Senior software developers (individual capacity)2 (N.N.)1 (4 function 
points)2 (4 function points)2 (N.N.)2 (8 function 
points)2 (4 function points)Regular software developers (individual capacity)4 (N.N.)4 (4 function 
points)3 (4 function points)3 (N.N.)3 (6 2/3 function 
points)3 (4 function points)User Stories (functional modules) 3437210
Note. p.d.: per day; N.N: Nomen nominandum.Table 2:
 Project parameters related to the project types (existing and new projects) and the sample projects.
 A Hybrid Approach to Quantitative Software Project Scheduling Within Agile Frameworks42  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
guided by only focusing on the elements 
used to schedule the sprint. At the end 

of this coordination process, a sprint 

schedule is created, which is under-

stood and, more importantly, accepted 

by each team member. In the following 

 section we briefly describe the process. 

At first, the sprint increment and hence 

the goal for the current sprint must 

be defined. This naturally results from 

the current project progress or product 

status, respectively (e.g., which func-

tional module must be developed in 

the current sprint). Then, the sprint 

backlog is defined. Note: At this point 

only basic elements are defined; the 

technical specifics are designed in the 

sprint. Typically, the presented AoNG 

holds for the development process; if 

adjustments are needed, then the Graph 

can be changed. Now the basic settings 

are discussed in the team based on the 

defined AoNG. The questions are:
1. How long does each activity take 
for senior developers and regular 

 developers?
regular developers with €750 (US$1,050). 
Activity durations are mode-dependent 

(see earlier). The project durations were 

split up among the ascertained iterations. 

Thereby, the last iterations were assumed 

to be short sprints, including the remain-

ing project days. For example, project 

2 encompassed 60 days. The first two 

sprints could theoretically make use of 

the maximum sprint durations, whereas 

the final sprint had only a shorter length 

of 10 days available.
Coordination and Stipulation 
Process
The Scrum teams preferred to integrate 
the stipulation process concerning the 

model parameters and the actual itera-

tions into one flow chart (Figure 3). 

In this section, we present the proce-

dure, which is an explicit form of the 

hybrid flow presented in the previous 

section. The basic idea is that each 

sprint is planned by the project team 

and that the team members primarily 

discuss the given model settings and 

parameters; thereby, the discussion is 
model in each project class (sample 
projects A and B). In Tables 2 and 3 we 

present parameters based on real com-

pany data. Thereby, the general project 

parameters in Table 2 were modified 

due to confidential company informa-

tion settlements and to prevent any lead 

back to the considered enterprise. The 

data, thus, represent real projects but 

allow no conclusion at all to the consid-

ered company and its data. Beyond this, 

the key performance indicators (KPIs) 

in Table 3 indicate real data.
Projects 1 and 2 represented exten-
sions of existing applications; in contrast, 

projects 3 and 4 included completely 

new software. Given parameters were 

the target costs, which referred to the 

actual product prices and the target dura-

tions, which were derived from stipulated 

delivery dates. Durations were always 

measured in work days. To calculate the 

actual software developer costs in the 

tested projects, the products of function 

points and monetary unit (€) per function 

point were used. Senior developers were 

evaluated with €1,250 (US$1,750) and 
Project ClassRedevelopment Projects for Existing ProductsNew Product Development Projects
ScrumHybrid approach  including MRCPS
SPScrumHybrid approach  including MRCPS
SPProjectSample Project AProject 1Project 2Sample Project BProject 3Project 4
Cost/key performance indicatorProject costProject cost

Target project costs300,000€ 
(US$420,000) 330,000€ (US$462,000) 264,000€ (US$396,600)650,000€ (US$910,000)396,000€ (US$554,400)792,000€ (US$1,108,800) Total costs843,000€ 
(US$1,180,200) 279,000€ (US$390,600) 258,000€ (US$361,200) 1,675,000€ (US$2,345,000)464,000€ (US$649,600)724,000€ (US$1,013,600)Absolute cost deviation+543,000€ 
(US$760,200) –51,000€ (US$71,400) –6,000€ (US$8,400) +1,100,000€ (US$1,540,000)+68,000€ (US$95,200) –68,000€ (US$95,200) Relative cost+281%84.55%97.73%+258%117.17%91.41%

Performance (cost)+181%–15.45%–2.27%+158%+17.17%–8.59%

Duration/key performance indicatorProject durationsProject durations

Target project duration60 days75 days60 days130 days90 days180 days

Total duration175 days60 days63 days350 days88 days158 days

Absolute duration deviation+115 days–15 days+3 days+220 days–2 days–22 days

Project relative duration +292%80.00%105%+269%97.78%87.78%

Performance (duration)+192%–20.00%+5.00%+169%–2.22%–12.22%
Table 3:
 Results and comparison of project performances related to the project types (existing and new projects) and the sample project
s. June/July  2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      43 parameters. The questions to be ans-
wered here are:
1. Which team capacities are measured in 
function points?
2. What is the sprint budget?

3. How does an activity consume avail-
able capacity measured in function 

points?
Again, the parameters are discussed 
until an agreement has been achieved. 

All settings and parameters are detailed 

enough so that the project team can 

already account for identified complex-

ity but are still superficial enough to 

guarantee a clear workflow. The process 

is kept lean; then, the schedule can be 

computed and set for the current sprint.
This procedure is repeated after 
every sprint until the last sprint of the 

project is finished. At this point, the total 

costs and durations can be ascertained. 

By incorporating a quantitative sched-

uling model, the agile development pro-

cess becomes more “plan-driven” than 

without; yet, the computed schedule 

only provides a work frame including 

activity finish times and the allocation 

of developer types to activities. The 

slight flexibility restriction is overcom-

pensated by capacities and budgets, 

which are now taken into account.
Computational ResultsFor the model implementation, the stan-

dard software package GAMS-CPLEX 

was used. GAMS-CPLEX is established 

modeling software that makes use of 

a simple syntax and distinct solution 

procedures to solve, for example, mixed 

integer linear programs. Due to the 

small problem instances in the itera-

tive scheduling frame, all calculations 

were solved in short elapsed time. In 

Table 3, the results and KPIs are listed. 

One central result was that in all four 

projects the computed schedules were 

sufficient for the practical implementa-

tion and did not exceed the upper dura-

tion limits. In comparison with similar 

sample projects, considerably better 

performances concerning the project 
These settings can be discussed 
until an agreement is found. When 

an agreement is found, the start and 

finish times for the MRCPS
SP model 
must be determined. The project team 

proceeds by discussing the model 
2. Should there be time lags as addi-
tional time buffers and, if so, between 

which activities?3. Are senior developers and regular 
developers available during the sprint 

or only one group?
StartDeﬁne sprint-increment
Deﬁne sprint-backlog
Agreement
on basicsettings?Set (current sprint) =  +1Set MRCPS basic settings:(pi,m, di,j, Mi, K, R)(Re-)Deﬁne AoN Graph forcurrent sprint NoSet MRCPS parameters:(Ck,m, Cf, i,m,k, i,m,f) Yes
Determine earliest and latest ﬁnishtimes (EFi, LFi) by forward andbackward recursionYes
Determineschedule withMRCPSAgreement
onparameters?
NoOptimalSchedule
found?
NoSet MRCPS schedule assprint-schedule and
execute current sprint Yes
EndSetProject cost =  sprint costsProject duration =  sprint durations
Yes
NoSet =1 for the ﬁrst sprint=          ?[]PDTFigure 3:
 Process flow chart.
 A Hybrid Approach to Quantitative Software Project Scheduling Within Agile Frameworks44  June/July 2014    
  Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
PAPERS
costs and durations were achieved. This 
is a clear indication that the proposed 

approach can also be used for project 

planning in advance, which was not 

applied here. The project teams applied 

a rather safety-oriented strategy and 

made use of all activities in the AoNG, 

including the “buffer” activities num-

bers 6 and 14. In project 2, the project 

duration was split up into three sprints. 

The theoretical sprint lengths were 

25 work days for the first two sprints 

and 10 days for the last sprint. The 

available sprint budgets were €88,000 

(US$123,200) each.
Scheduling with the flow chart pro-
cedure in project 2 led to a delivery 

delay of three days; however, the proj-

ect costs were less than the available 

project budget. In contrast, in project 3, 

the delivery date was met with two addi-

tional buffer days but the project costs 

were considerably higher by 17.17%. 

This was due to the fact that the objec-

tive is to minimize the sprint cycle time; 

thus, the scheduling tends to allocate 

faster and hence more cost-intensive 

resources (senior personnel). An objec-

tive focusing on the cost minimization 

can lead to different results. In this case, 

management clearly required that the 

project durations be minimized. On the 

other hand, projects 1 and 4 showed 

significant time and cost savings. For 

example, project 4 could be finished 

22 days before the delivery date and 

project 1 could be completed 15 days 

before the delivery date, respectively. 

Both project cost savings compensated 

for the loss generated in project 3.
Assessment of the Hybrid 
Quantitative Software Project 

Scheduling Approach
Company Feedback
After the practical tests, we repeated the 
interviews with the senior developers, 

ScrumMasters, and the product owners. 

Additionally, we also had talks with the 

Scrum teams who conducted the test 

projects. For all involved parties the 

improvements concerning  deadlines 
and budgets were a clear benefit. Devi-
ating from the general hybrid flow pre-

sented earlier and the pure Scrum flow, 

the software developers preferred to 

integrate planning activities into the 

development phase (see Figure 3). This 

was explained by the fact that planning 

activities also took time from the pre-

defined available project time, which 

must be taken into account. Further-

more, it was stated that incorporating 

a mixed integer linear program into 

an agile project flow was an unfamil-

iar approach; specifically, the develop-

ers mentioned reservations against a 

“plan-driven” model. Still, the simplic-

ity of negotiating few clear parameters 

was positively emphasized. Concerns 

were expressed regarding the AoNG 

as the critical basis of the quantitative 

approach. These concerns focused on 

the necessity to change or even recre-

ate the AoNG in case new products are 

incorporated into the business portfo-

lio. For the current two project classes, 

the developed Graph appeared to be 

accurate and flexible enough. Adding 

new activities could lead to impair-

ments. Thus, the responsible company 

management team decided to launch 

the presented hybrid flow for projects 

concerning the existing project port-

folio. Projects for new product types 

should initially be managed with the 

pure Scrum flow to gather experience 

for adjusting the AoNG.
Benefits and Limitations
The practical test for the presented 
hybrid flow showed significant improve-

ments for meeting deadlines and bud-

gets; therefore extending the agile flow by 

quantitative models proved to be a use-

ful approach. Notably, the benchmark-

ing effect of such quantitative schedules 

is emphasized. The responsible project 

management team is equipped with 

objective and reliable tools to stipulate 

deadlines. Deviations from the schedule 

can be used to steer the project and thus 

take necessary steps; thus adherence 

to deadlines is significantly supported. 

Moreover, resources can be planned 
as capacities are explicitly considered; 
however, at this point, the approach can 

be improved. Measuring development 

capacities by a function point system 

proved to be a practical solution in the 

tests. Nevertheless, the model allocated 

developers following a mathematical 

logic. Scarce resources are preferred. 

Before using the approach, resources 

must be distinguishable by their costs. 

For the practical test of our approach, we 

were able to compare our results using 

two sample projects. Even though these 

projects represented the company’s com-

mon standard, far-reaching statements 

concerning general performances in soft-

ware projects cannot be made. In general, 

the mathematical model is independent 

from the AoNG; yet, the process mod-

eling must be accurate. The presented 

AoNG was sufficient for the considered 

company but a direct transferability to 

other enterprises is not given, so the 

approach can only reveal the full effect if 

the processes are depicted properly.
Summary and Recommendations 
for Further Research
In this article we focused on quantita-
tive software project scheduling within 

agile project management frameworks 

in IT companies. Although traditional 

sequence-oriented approaches and 

modern agile methods seemed to be 

contrary ways, we showed that an agile 

project flow can be complemented 

by a quantitative model. We present 

a modified multi-mode resource con-

strained project scheduling model for 

software projects (MRCPS
SP) and incor-
porate it into a Scrum project flow. 

Within the model, multiple modes rep-

resenting experts and regular develop-

ers and renewable resources as well 

as non-renewable resources (e.g., bud-

gets) were taken into account. Practi-

cal tests based on real data indicated 

significant improvements. By using 

this approach, deadlines were met 

and budgets kept under control. The 

approach is limited by the underlying 

process modeling represented by an 
 June/July  2014      Project Management Journal
     DOI: 10.1002/pmj      45 Activity-on-the-Node-Graph. To guar-
antee positive effects, the process depic-

tion must be accurate. Yet, the results 

indicated that the approach can be used 

for project scheduling in advance and 

is only valid for adequate AoN-Graphs. 

This implies that the software develop-

ment process can be further improved 

with additional total project schedul-

ing models. For measuring developer 

capacities, an estimation based on a 

modified function points system was 

used. Although the results proved to be 

good, further research is indicated to 

improve this aspect in order to achieve 

precise depictions. The scheduling was 

based on work days, which is a rather 

rough assumption. Therefore, novel 

process-time scheduling models must 

be developed that are applicable in the 

IT industry and enable, for example, 

(non-)parallelized multi-project, multi-

mode scheduling with additional con-

straints (i.e., [non-]renewable resources 

and preemption). In our study we were 

able to show that agile methods and 

traditional approaches are not contrary 

worlds. In fact, quantitative models can 

be important tools to support project 

management in agile frameworks. The 

combination of quantitative project 

management and agile flows is a prom-

ising research direction. We believe that 

hybrid quantitative project manage-

ment approaches can be a great ben-

efit for software project managers and 

beyond for other industries. We would 

welcome an active discussion on this 

topic.References
Abrahao, S., Poels, G., & Pastor, O. 

(2006). A functional size measurement 
method for object-oriented conceptual 

schemas: Design and evaluation issues. 

Software & System Modeling,
 5(1), 48–71.Agile Alliance (2001).
 Manifesto for Agile 
Software Development.
 Retrieved from 
  http://www/agilemanifesto.org
Albrecht, A. J. (1979).
 Measuring appli-
cation development productivity. IBM 

Application Development Symposium, 

White Plains, NY: IBM, 83–92.
Alvarez-Valdes, R., & Tamarit, J. 
M. (1989). Heuristic algorithms 
resource-constrained project 

 scheduling. In R. Slowinski & J. Weglarz 

(Eds.), 
Advances in project scheduling 
(pp134–143). Amsterdam, Holland: 

Elsevier.
Behrouz, A. N., Hojjat, N., & Esmaeil, M. 
(2012). A branch-and-bound procedure 
for resource leveling in multi-mode 

resource constraint project scheduling 

problem. 
Research Journal of Sciences,
 1(7), 33–38.Brucker, P. (2002).
 Scheduling and 
constraint propagation. 
Discrete Applied 
Mathematics,
 123, 227–256.Brucker, P., Drexl, A., Möhring, R., 
Neumann, K., & Pesch, E. (1999).

Resource-constrained project schedul-

ing: Notation, classification, models, 

and methods. 
European Journal of 
Operational Research,
 112, 3–41.Drexl, A., & Gruenewald, J. (1993).
 Nonpreemptive multi-mode resource 

constrained project scheduling. 
IIE Transactions,
 25(5), 74–81.Frank Cervone, H. (2011).
 Understanding agile project manage-

ment methods using Scrum. 
OCLC 
Systems & Services,
 27(1), 18–22.Horbach, A. (2010).
 A Boolean satisfi-
ability approach to the resource-con-

strained project scheduling problem. 

Annals of Operations Research,
 181, 89–107.Jalali, S., & Wohlin, C. (2011).
 Global 
software engineering and agile prac-

ticesA systematic review. 
Journal of 
Software
: Evolution and Process,
 24, 643–659.Martin, R. (2002).
 Agile software develop-
ment: Principles, patterns, and prac-

tices.
 Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Education.
Nachamai, M., Senthil Vadivu, M., & 

Tapaskar, V. (2011).
 Enacted software 
development process based on agile 

and agent methodologies. 
International 
Journal of Engineering Science and 

Technology,
 3(11), 8019–8029.Reifer, D. J. (2002).
 How good are agile 
methods? IEEE Software,
 19(4), 16–18.Salo, O., & Abrahamsson, P. (2008).
 Agile methods in European embedded 

software development organisations: A 

survey on the actual use and usefulness 

of Extreme Programming and Scrum. 
IET Software,
 2(1), 58–64.Schwaber, K. (2004).
 Agile project 
management with Scrum.
 Redmond, WA: 
Microsoft Press.
Steinrücke, M. (2011).
 An approach 
to integrate production-transportation 

planning and scheduling in an alumin-
ium supply chain network. 
International 
Journal of Production Research,
 49(21), 6559–6583.Steinrücke, M., & Jahr, M. (2012).
 Tactical planning in supply chain 

networks with customer oriented 

single sourcing. 
International Journal of 
Logistics Management, 23
(2), 259–279.Takeuchi, H., & Nonaka, I. (1986).
 The new product development game. 

Harvard Business Review
, January–
February.
Michael Jahr,
 PhD, is Professor of 
Business Administration, European 

University of Applied Sciences (EUFH), 

Department for Industrial Management, 

Neuss, Germany. Professor Jahr received 

his Doctorate in Business Economics from 

Greifswald University in 2013 and was a 

Research Associate in the Department 

of Law and Economics, Greifswald, 

University, Chair of Business Administration 

and Entrepreneurship from 2009 to 2011; in 

2009, he earned his Master of Science in 

Economics degree from the University of 

Cologne. He can be contm.jahr@

eufh.de