 PAPERS
4December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
The Challenge for an Advanced Understanding of 
Project Management
The new challenges and possibilities leading to a new understanding of proj-
ect management are presented in Figure 1. Our world and society, with their

markets, people, and organizations, do not develop in a predictable way
(continuous, stable, linear), but unpredictably (discontinuous, unstable,
nonlinear). This is situated in a crucial phase with totally new challenges,

leading to an increased complexity (Figure 1, top left).
Parallel to these changes, a rapid growth of complex new technologies
and innovations in industrial and social products can be seen (Figure 1, top

right)—for example, micro- and biosystems, nanotechnology, and biological
or living systems (particularly human-social systems or gene technology)
(Saynisch, 1997, 2002). Highly complex situations that need to be mastered

by management are the result (Figure 1, center). Traditional methods lose
their efficiency to master this.
The keys to a new management understanding are new insights and per-
ceptions in natural and social science (evolutionary and chaos theory, self-

organization, synergetic, brain research, social systems theory, theory of
complex systems, etc.), offering to strike a new path for project management
(Figure 1, bottom center). How can these theories be applied or put into

practice in concrete projects? This was the task of the research program
“Beyond Frontiers of Traditional Project Management” (Saynisch, 2003,
2004, 2005a; Saynisch & Lange, 2002).
These situations demand a cooperation of 
systemic-evolutionary
(self-organizing) and 
system-technological(constructive) determined principles.
Project Management Second Order (PM-2) meets these requirements

(Saynisch, 1997, 2002, 2005a, 2005b).
PM-2 integrates the former traditional approach in project management
(Project Management First Order) with the results of the research program

“Beyond Frontiers of Traditional Project Management” (Saynisch, 2003,
2004; Saynisch & Lange, 2002). It is a reference model that is recommended
for specific demands. Project Management Second Order is to be considered

a future management system meeting the challenges and requirements of

the third millennium.
The Research Program “Beyond Frontiers of Traditional 
Project Management”
On the research program, interdisciplinary study teams have been working
under the direction of Manfred Saynisch on new cognitions, concepts, and rec-

ommendations for project management. World-class thinkers and scientists,
Mastering Complexity and Changes 
in Projects, Economy, and Society 

via Project Management Second 

Order (PM-2)
Manfred Saynisch
, MSPM Foundation for PM and SPM-CONSULT, Munich, Germany
ABSTRACTProject Management Second Order (PM-2) is
based on new insights in modern natural and
social sciences, which were analyzed in a

research program. This was explained in a  previ-
ously published article in this journal (Saynisch,
2010). PM-2 is a new paradigm and will be the

leading concept for the next decades. The concept
of PM-2 was awarded the IPMA Research Award
2007 and the International Centre for Complex

Project Management Research Prize 2010. The

model represents a reference model. This article
will explain the genesis of PM-2 as well as the
principles, methods, and processes. Further, prac-

tical use will be discussed and real examples of
transfer will be shown as well as PM-2 in the con-
text of project-oriented companies. Integration

aspects of CPMCS (ICCPM), ICB3 (IPMA), 
PMBOK®
Guide/OPM3®
(PMI) as a future view will be
shown.
KEYWORDS:advanced project manage-
ment; traditional project management; complex
project management; complex projects; evolu-

tionary management; evolutionary acquisition;
self-organization; Project Management First
and Second Order; Cybernetics First and

Second Order; agile project management
Project Management Journal, Vol. 41, No. 5, 4–20
© 2010 by the Project Management Institute
Published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)
.DOI: 10.1002/pmj.20167 December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
5such as Ervin Laszlo, especially with his
theory of evolution, and Heinz von
Foerster, with his Cybernetics Second
Order, have acted as protagonists.
On this research program, we have
for the new challenges analyzed a great
deal of modern natural and social scien-

tific theories with a focus on their rele-

vance to project management. Although
the great number of elaborated themes
and their outcomes focalize to single

phenomena of perceptions, characteris-
tics, and possible actions, these particu-
lar results with their respective limited

scope cannot configure a comprehen-
sive holistic management system.Additionally, an umbrella function is

necessary to link all these particular
results in a systemic way. Therefore, we
have developed the Project Management

Second Order. As a highlighted result of
the research program, PM-2 shows a 
new
paradigm
, but also new solutions to newchallenges in project management. The

concept of PM-2 was awarded the IPMA
Research Award 2007 (International
Project Management Association

[IPMA], 2007; Steeger, 2007) and 

the ICCPM Research Prize 2010

(International Centre for Complex

Project Management, www.iccpm.com).
The subjects and results of the
research program (1990 until 2000) were
extensively presented in a documenta-

tion book (Saynisch & Lange, 2002).
Comprehensive descriptions are pre-
sented in several congress papers

(Saynisch, 2003, 2005b, 2005c, 2007).
Furthermore, this research program was
explained and discussed in detail in a
previously published article (Saynisch,

2010). As a new paradigm in project
management, PM-2 meets the challeng-ing and trend-setting requirements of

Bredillet (2007) for a new perspective
and approach in project management
research. These requirements were

based on inductive knowledge, qualita-
tive paradigm, constructivist epistemol-
ogy, speculative thoughts, nontraditional

logic, and moving beyond the classical
management perspective.
Limits of Traditional Project
Management
Traditional 
management understandingis represented, for example, by the 12
Knowledge Areas described in the Project
Management Institute’s 
A Guide to the
Project Management Body of Know
ledge(PMBOK®Guide)
—Fourth Edition
(Project Management Institute [PMI],
2008a) and most elements of the IPMACompetence Baseline, Version 3.0

(ICB3, 2006) as well as ISO 10006
(International Organization for Standard-
ization, 1997). It is based mainly on a

mechanical, monocausal, nondynamic,linear structure and a discrete view of
human nature and societies and their

perceptions, knowledge, and actions. It
works on the basis of reductionist
thinking and on the Cartesian/

Newtonian concept of causality (the
mechanistic science). Traditional proj-
ect management cannot solve these
widespread profound challenges,

described in the first section of this arti-
cle. We will call this widespread tradi-
tional management understanding
“Project Management First Order (PM-
1).” (This was explained and discussed
in detail in a previously published arti-

cle in this journal [Saynisch, 2010].)
The Genesis of Project
Managements to PM-2 
The First Project Management
Understanding—The Project
Management of First Type and 
First Order

Project management has its origins in a
concept that was developed in the United
States at the end of the 1950s for large-

scale undertakings and megaprojects in

the aerospace and defense industries
(Figure 2, top, left, and center). The
implementation and application of this
concept in other industry sectors (e.g.,
building, plant construction, and data
processing, as well as in smaller-scale

projects) has been a significant issue over
the last four decades. Professional project
management organizations, especially in

the United States and Europe (e.g., PMI,
IPMA, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Projekt-
management E.V. [GPM]), have devoted

themselves to project management prac-
tices and have published guidelines andstandards (the 
PMBOK®Guide
[PMI,2008a], ICB3 [IPMA, 2006], DIN standards

[Lange & Bechler, 2005], and ISO 10006

[ISO, 1997]) in this respect. The focus is on

the forward planning of specific approa-

ches and action plans (e.g., planning
GlobalizationFundamental, rapid,and radical changesin society and economyStrong increase in complexity requires anew management approach with the characteristics of paradigmProject Management 2nd Order (PM-2).TraditionalProject ManagementPM of hard and soft methods(PMBOK®Guide, ICB,ISO 10006)PM 1st OrderNew understanding in natural andsocial science (theory of evolution andchaos, self-organization, synergetics,theory of complex systems, etc.)Research ProgramBeyond Frontiers of PMInnovationRapid growth ofcomplex, new technologiesin industrial and social productsFigure 1:
Efficiency model on the way to Project Management Second Order.
Source. 
Saynisch (2005b, 2005c). Adapted with permission.
 6December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Mastering Complexity and Changes in Projects, Economy, and Society
PAPERS
PAPERS
phase, achievement of objectives). The
approaches (Saynisch, 1995, 2002) con-
sider the goal and object-oriented system
(product) rather than the project partici-

pants. In recent years, these guidelines
and standards have incorporated the
“people” aspect of projects on the basis of

organizational and HR development,

described in the following section. In
Figure 2, this is represented by the vertical
dotted arrow.
The Second Project Management
Understanding—The Project
Management of Second Type and 
First Order

Since
the 1980s, project management
has additionally focused on the behaviorof the human beings in organizations,

mainly on the basis of organizational
and HR development (Saynisch, 1995,
2002). This project management of the

second type and first order (Figure 2,
bottom center) is based on a behavior-
oriented understanding of project

management and takes “soft factors”

such as human interaction and
changes of attitude into account.The Common Roots of First and
Second Type

It is striking that both types of project

management have the same origins
(Figure 2, left). The branched yet entire-
ly separate roots spring from American
philosopher and teacher J. D. Dewey,

who developed his concepts in the firsthalf of the nineteenth century. Dewey
was also one of the few philosophers (in
addition to Karl Marx) who dealt with
Charles Darwin’s evolution theory and
incorporated some of Darwin’s princi-

ples in his concepts. The initiator of sys-
tems engineering, A. D. Hall (1962),
defined his systems engineering

process on the basis of Dewey’s prob-

lem-solving concept for humanthought and action. The educational
concept of learning in project groups

and team dynamics is based on thework of Dewey and Kilpatrick in the
1920s (Dewey, 1938; Dewey &

Kilpatrick, 1935; Saynisch, 1991, 1995,
2002).Integration in a New and Systemic
Concept of Project Management,PM-2

The research program “Beyond
Frontiers of Traditional Project
Management” analyzed (from 1990

onward) new perspectives and insights
in the natural and social sciences,
which paved the way for project man-

agement concepts (Figure 2, center).

One significant finding of this research

program was the development of a new
understanding of project management
(Figure 2, right) as Project Management

of the Second Order.
Research Results for the Basic
Concept of PM-2
Literature Review
After a number of years of work in the

research program, in 1997 there was a

maturation of the insight that all of the

preliminary findings since 1990 are not
sufficient for building a new compre-
hensive system of project manage-

ment. We have subsequently searched

for the missing link, but have not foundany suggestions in the literature. There-
fore, we have “been on our own” in

finding a solution, which will be pre-
sented in the next section of this article.
Only recently have papers on some
closely related concepts been pub-
lished. For example:
• the EPSRC Network’s “Rethinking
Project Management” (Winter, Smith,

Cooke-Davies, & Cicmil, 2006);
• the PMI-funded research project
“Exploring 
the Complexity of Projects:
Implications of Complexity Theory on
Project Management Practice” (Cicmil,
Cooke-D
avies, Crawford, & Richardson,
2009; Cooke-Davies, Cicmil, Cr
awford, &
Richardson, 2007);
• the Complex Project Managers
Competency Standard (CPMCS)
(International Centre for Complex
Project Management [ICCPM], 2008);

and• the project-oriented company—
multiproject firms at the edge of
chaos (Geraldi, 2008).
(We will discuss two of these papers
later in this article.)
Need for Two Cybernetic Cycles of
Control

PM-2 is a universal draft for 
masteringcomplexity in projects
and project 
management. PM-2 assumes that tradi-

tional project management will further-

more play an active and important role.

But this traditional approach has to be

monumental, extended to a project
System TheoryCybernetic Iv.Bertalanffy, WienerSystems-EngineeringA.D. HallProblem-solvingJ. DeweyProject-learningGroup-DynamicK. Lewin192519301940195019601970198019902000Year
Project-GroupsPsycho-, Social-, andPedagogics SciencesOrganization-Dev.Cybernetic II (ConstructivistCognition Theory (v. Foerster u.a.))Evolution-+ Chaos-Theory,Self-Organization, Theory ofComplex Systems (Laszlo, Riedl,Jantsch, Maturana, Santa Fee Inst. u.a.)Social Systems (Luhmann)OriginalPMConceptAFSCM-375,DOD, NASA1960 ffProject Management of1st TypePM of Hard FactorsProject Managmentof 2nd Type:PM of softfactorsIntegration to aSystemicProjectManagementProject Manage-ment 2nd OrderPM-2Project Management 1st OrderProjectManagement2nd OrderCold WarIntercont.-RocketsSatellitesResearch-Program:Beyond Frontiers ofTraditional PMFigure 2:
The genesis of project management to PM-2 (Saynisch, 1995, 2002, 2005b).
 December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
7management that considers dynamic,nonlinear, and multicausal structures

and processes, as well as principles of

self-organization, evolution, and net-

working.
A project is a strongly goal-oriented
system with a defined finishing point in
time. Projects are determined by their

goals. Evolutionary and self-organizational
processes do 
not strive for conclusion at a
defined point in time. Evolutionary/

self-organizational processes are not
determined by 
goals. They are processes
without a specific destination. Therefore,

evolutionary and self-organizational-
based management methods cannothelp to reach the fixed goal in a project.
For an effective attainment of proj-
ect goals at the defined finishing pointin time, we need the linear processes
and the Cartesian causality and the
Newtonian logic
from traditional proj-
ect management. But evolutionary and
self-organizational-based management

methods are necessary to master com-
plex and uncertain situations on the
way to the defined finishing point in
time for a project. A well-balanced
interaction of traditional project man-
agement and the evolutionary and self-

organizational principles is the mes-

sage of the Project Management
Second Order.
PM-2 is the enabler for simultane-ous, synchronous acting and usage of:
• high evolutionary dynamics, autopoi-
etic or living systems, chaotic envi-

ronment, self-organizational process-
es, and human-social systems; and
• processes for technical configuration,
design, and realization (machine sys-
tems), with the features of clear calcu-
lability and planned forecasting.
The basic architecture and process
model of PM-2 (Saynisch, 2005b, 2005c,

2008a, 2008b) is demonstrated in
Figure 3. The horizontal time arrow in
the center represents the processes of

the project-product—the product

processes. 
This arrow of time starts with
the idea (start of a project) and ends with

the project result, deliveries, or 
the real
product, the defined finishing point.
Two cybernetic cycles navigate and
directly control this project-process in

an interactive, complementary, and

cooperative sense.
In our research program, we have
found, that for the differentiation of the

traditional view of project management
and the new complexity view, the fol-
lowing scientific approaches and theo-

ries with features of paradigm are most
important factors:
• CyberneticsF
irst Order vs. Cybernetics
Second Order (von Foerster, 1981,
1994),• classical logic vs. transclassical logic
(Günther, 1976–1980),
• allopoiesis vs. autopoiesis (Maturana,
1982),• order vs. edge of chaos, and
• Cartesian/Newtonian/Enlightenment
vs. modern sciences (e.g., quantum
theory, theory of evolution).
The First Cybernetic Cycle—
Traditional Project Management
The first cycle (named 
World 1
) repre-
sents the traditional management

approach. The term 
World 1
is, in addi-
tion to the succeeding explanations,
outlined in the section “The Creation of

a Systemic Architecture and Process

Model of PM-2.” 
The principle of 
Cybernetics First
Order
is the logic of this kind of control
in World 1. That means an observer
(manager) acting outsideof the system(von Foerster, 1981, 1994; Wiener,

1961). The observer (manager) moni-

tors and checks the system and theproject-pr
oduct processes. He or she
compares the monitoring results against

planned data and intervenes if neces-
sary from his or her outside position
into the system. The small vertical

arrows (information flow) symbolize
this approach.
Classical logic(since Aristotle), or
bivalent logic
, acts as the decision basis(i.e., yes/no logic). Acting is determined
by techniques and hard facts, based on
the Cartesian/Newtonian/Enlightenment

paradigm, the “mechanistic” sciences.
The Second Cybernetic Cycle—
Complexity Management
The other cycle (on top, in the follow-

ing, named World 2
) represents the
monumental extension of traditional
project management to the manage-

ment of complexity. The term 
World 2
is, in addition to the succeeding expla-
nations, outlined in the section “The

Creation of a Systemic Architecture and
Process Model of PM-2.”
World 2 considers dynamic, nonlin-
ear, and multicausal structures and
processes, as well as principles of self-
organization, evolution, and network-

ing. The principle of Cybernetics

Second Order is largely the logic of this

kind of control. That means an observer
Complexity ManagementTraditional Project Management
Cybernetic 1st Order - Command and Control
Hard Reality – Plan/Actual – Hard Acting
Project/Product Processes
RESULTS
Project-
ClosingCybernetic 2nd Order – Dynamic - Catalyst
Systemic-evolutionary – Self-organization

Emergence - Instability

Transclassical

LogicConfiguration and Realization of Project-Object/Product
Project-Executing and Expiration - Project-Dynamic
IDEAProject-
InitiatingFigure 3:
The basic architecture and process model of PM-2 (Saynisch, 2005b, 2005c, 2008b, 2008c).
 8December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Mastering Complexity and Changes in Projects, Economy, and Society
PAPERS
PAPERS
(manager) acting insideof the system(von Foerster, 1981, 1994). This repre-

sents the principle of “management in

projects/complexity.”
It is difficult to achieve a clear
understanding of the important, but
abstract cybernetic principle of “acting

inside of the system” because profes-

sional blinkers have to be overcome! A
good example for understanding thefeatures of this principle is the concept

of “complex responsive processes of
relating (CRPR)” (Stacey, 2001). This
concept is based in many thinks on
principles of Cybernetics Second Order,
while recognizing and acting inside of
the system.A significant part of control will take
place inside of the system, in the project-
product processes. The partial overlap
of the box “complexity management”

with the horizontal time arrow of the
project-product processes in Figure 3
symbolizes this approach. Such self-

adjusting and self-organizational capa-
bilities are self-evident and incorporated
into the structure by natural systems

(life systems), but not in the project-
product processes. In these processes,
these capabilities must be specifically
(and artificially) incorporated (Malik,

1984, 2004).A very small part of control is similar
to the first cycle, the traditional princi-

ples of management. This is symbol-
ized by the huddled small vertical
arrows.
Transclassical or dialectic logic
(multivalent logic) acts as the decision
basis (Günther, 1976–80; Kramer, 2002).

Operation is indeterminate and based
on the new emerging paradigm of mod-
ernsciences (see the first two sections of

this article), which considers dynamic,
nonlinear, and multicausal structures
and processes, as well as principles of

self-organization, evolution, and net-
working.
Complexity theory
can be definedbroadly as the study of how order,

structure, pattern, and novelty arise

from extremely complicated, apparent-

ly chaotic systems and, conversely, how
complex behavior and structures
emerge from simple underlying rules

(Cooke-Davies et al., 2007). Complexity
theory is based on the historically pri-
mary developed theories of chaos, evo-

lution, self-organization, cybernetics,
and systems by integrating elements of
these.
Complexity in the project environ-
ment comes not only from individual
structural elements and their interac-

tions, but also from the dynamic effects

of each of these changing and theninteracting as they change, causing fur-
ther change in other parts of the system

(Whitty & Maylor, 2007). Complex proj-
ects are characterized by a degree of dis-
order, instability, emergence, nonlinear-

ity, recursiveness, uncertainty, irregular-
ity, and randomness (ICCPM, 2008).
Broadly defined, we can recognize
four types of project complexity, stated
in Table 1 (Remington & Pollack, 2007).
ConclusionsBoth these cybernetic cycles govern the

project-product process directly and

immediately. PM-2 is therefore an inte-
grated approach of the two cybernetic
cycles, 
with several processes and tech-
niques. PM-2 represents a 
“dual cybernet-
ic cycle”
principle. The main characteristic
is the 
coexistence
of a management ofcomplexity (evolution, self-organization,
edge of chaos) and the traditional man-
agement. Finding the 
proper balance
between complexity and traditional
management will be the future man-
agement art.
The Creation of a Systemic
Architecture and Process Model

of PM-2
The Systemic Architecture and Process
Model
The systemic structure and process
model for design and guidance of com-
plex projects by PM-2 is described in
Figure 4. This model concretizes the
PM-2 concept. The architecture of this

model is composed of four Worlds

(Saynisch, 1997, 2002, 2005a). It is
founded on the basic architecture
shown in Figure 3.It has been extended

by two additional fields:
• the universe of the human behavior
(World 3) and
• the universe of ground rules and ways
of thinking (World 4).
These four Worlds show superposed
reciprocal actions (Saynisch, 1997,
2002, 2004, 2005b, 2005c). These will be

represented in Figure 4 by sectoral

overlapping of the Worlds. The term
World
for each field and/or cycle was
chosen as a result of the highly individ-

ual features. Each field exhibits its own
bodies and schools of thought, separate
logics, and action modes.
What is the context of PM-2, PM-1,and the four Worlds? Misunderstandings
about this frequently arise. PM-2 as an
TypeComment
Structural complexityNumerous individual structural elements;
often described as “complicated”
Technical complexityComplexity in project-product, among others,
from technical or design problems
Directional complexityUnshared goals and goal paths, unclear
meanings and hidden agendas
Temporal complexityResults from unanticipated environmental
impacts, such as legislative changes or civil

unrest
Table 1:
Types of project complexity.
 December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
9advanced form of project management
incorporates PM-1 and all other ele-
ments of the four Worlds, which deal
with complexity, for a holistic manage-

ment system of single projects (from
simple projects to complex projects).
Therefore, apply the formula:
PM-2World 1 
234; orPM-2PM-1World 2 
partial
World 3 
4.PM-1 as traditional project manage-
ment correlates World 1 and the tradi-

tional aspects inherent in Worlds 3 and 4
(techniques and hard facts, based on the
Cartesian/Newtonian/Enlightenment

paradigm, the “mechanistic” sciences)
for a holistic management system of sin-gle projects (without complex projects).

Therefore, apply the formula:
PM-1World 1 
partial Worlds 3
and 4.The work carried out in Worlds 1
and 2 controls the project-product
process directly and immediately.
However, the additional Worlds 3 and 4

control the project-product process

indirectly, with a more infrastructural

and logistical character.
The four Worlds will be explained in
detail in the following chapter.
The Four Worlds as Basic Elements 
of PM-2
World 1
is the universe of a traditional
approach
to project management. The
principle of Cybernetics First Order is
the logic of control. Acting and tech-

niques are in the center of control.
Problem solving comprises primary lin-
ear and goal-oriented information pro-

cessing (e.g., plan/actual comparison
and mode of acting). The international
standards of project management—

PMBOK®Guide
(PMI, 2008a), ICB-3 ofIPMA (2006), and ISO 10006 (International
Organization for Standardization [ISO],
1997)—deal extensively with this World

(see the “Limitsof Tr
aditional Project
Management” section).
Nearly 75% of the project manage-
ment literature has been covering these
themes for more than 45 years.
World 2
is the universe of the man-agement of complexity
. The principle of
Cybernetics Second Order is the logic 

of control. Mastering of high evolution-

ary dynamics, of complex instabilities,
and of situations with self-organization
and/or self-reference is important.

Important methods are communica-
tion, observation, and perception of

project dynamics. Problem solving pri-
marily comprises the consideration of a
system approach, thinking in networks,
and circular processing. “Control”

means more influence and emergence
of consciousness instead of precise and
quantitative plans or duty points—for
example, by interventions, supervi-
sions, or audits.
This World has to this point very
rarely been discussed within project

management literature.
World 3
is the universe of humanbehavior. Man and his behavior in
groups or organizations is in the center
of control. Project culture will also be
an important part. In World 1 and 2, the

object logic dominates the objectdimension. In World 3, the logic of
behavior (e.g., values, personal atti-

tudes, personal interests) dominates.

Important methodical approaches
include, among others, motivation,
coaching, reflections, support of learn-

ing, leading with confidence and goals,
and communication of visions. The
“behavioral competences” of the

IPMA’s ICB-3 can be mainly located in
this World. Also the competence stan-
dard of ICCPM (2008) can partly be

classified here 
(see the “PM-2 vs.
Complex Project Managers Competency
Standard [CPMCS]” section). W
orld 3 iscomposed of elements that deal with
the traditional approach to project
management as well as of elements 
that deal with the management of 
complexity.
The project management literature
in this World has been growing in the

last decade.
Foundations,ways of thinking,sys-
temic views,and networking
are impor-
tant aspects of the universe of World 4
.Ways of thinking and the principles of
acting will influence the other three

Worlds. Also, it can be focused only for

the control tasks in World 1 or 2. Thinking

in cycles, the principle of pilgrim steps
WORLD 2Complexity ManagementWORLD 3Collaborators/PersonsBehavior – Project-Culture
WORLD 1Traditional Project Management
Cybernetic 1st Order - Command and Control
Hard Reality – Plan/Actual – Hard Acting
WORLD 4FoundationsWays of
ThinkingProject/Product Processes
RESULTS
Project-
ClosingCybernetic 2nd Order – Dynamic - Catalyst
Systemic-evolutionary – Self-organization

Emergence - Instability

Transclassical

LogicSystemicViews
NetworkingCircular
Processes
Configuration and Realization of Project-Object/Product
Project-Executing and Expiration - Project-Dynamic
IDEAProject-
InitiatingFigure 4:
The systemic architecture and process model of PM-2 (Saynisch, 1997, 2002, 2004, 
2005b, 2005c).
 10December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Mastering Complexity and Changes in Projects, Economy, and Society
PAPERS
PAPERS
(two forward, one backward), and net-
worked jumps between the steps of prob-

lem solving are ways of thinking and act-

ing principles in World 4 for applications

in World 2. On the other hand, for exam-
ple, foundations and principles of mea-
surement are elements for applications in

World 1. World 4 is composed of elements

that deal with the traditional approach to
project management as well as of ele-
ments that deal with the management of
complexity.
Assurance of 
systemic guidancerules(e.g., principles for scenarios of
noncontrollable situations) and addi-
tional systemic evolutionary principles
are further elements of World 4. The

interconnectedness with the project-

environment process is also part of this
World 4—for example, the networking
to company aspects (project portfolio

management,or 
the “project-conscious
management”; compare the “PM-2 vs.
Project-Oriented Company—Multiproject

Firms at the Edge of Chaos [MUPEC]”
subsection; Geraldi [2008]). But also the
connections to stakeholders and the
relations to political framework condi-
tions or legal requirements are part of
World 4.
For the principles, methods, and
procedures of the single World levels,
steps or modules can be created within
the respective World, focusing on vari-

ous characteristics.
Scope and Domain of Model
The generic model of PM-2 represents a
reference model
. It is valid for all types
of projects in different fields of business

and function. As a well-defined model,
it is characterized by a high degree of
abstract thinking. For concrete applica-

tion in projects (i.e., an organization,
software, or research and development
project) or within a company, it must

be adapted accordingly. The result is an
independent model based on a new,
concrete application level.
The previous explanations for the con-
cept of PM-2 are focused on the presenta-

tion and execution of a single project. For

the management of a project-oriented
company (program/portfolio manage-
ment), for example, these explanations do
not apply. A company is less defined by
obtaining a fixed time schedule than by

competitiveness and growth. In this con-

text, complexity management (World 2)
plays an important role. For future proj-

ects, the PM-2 approach is to be expanded
to meet this demand. This situation is dis-
cussed by Ger
aldi (2008) and Rietiker(2006). Further 
discussions are in the “PM-2
vs. Project-Oriented Company—Multiproject
Firms at the Edge of Chaos (MUPEC)” sub-
section.Potential Use of PM-2
PM-2 is an ideal draft for 
masteringcomplexity in projects and project man-
agement. Figure 5a shows the two
dimensions of complexity (structure

adapted by Jaafari, 2003):
1. Environmental (e.g., society and
economy) and2. Project (e.g., new technologies)
.Traditional project management
(First Order) covers only the field of

lower complexity. Project Management
Second Order covers all fields of com-
plexity (Saynisch, 2005b, 2005c).
Environmental Complexity
Society and EconomyProject Complexity
e.g. New Technologies
Project Management 1st
Order - PM-1
Project Management 2nd
Order - PM-2
Very HighHighMediumLowLowMediumHighVery High
Environmental Complexity
Society and EconomyProject Complexity
e.g. New Technologies
Project Management 1st
Order - PM-1
Project Management 2nd
Order - PM-2
Very HighHighMediumLowLowMediumHighVery High
Control mainly by
WORLD 1Cybernetic 1st Order
Control mainly by
WORLD 2Cybernetic 2nd Order
Figure 5a:
Mastering of complexity through PM-2.
Figure 5b:
Different tools for mastering of complexity through PM-2.
 December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
11Depending on the project types and
the specific situation of complexity, dif-

ferent tools of World 1 (Cybernetics 

First Order) and World 2 (Cybernetics

Second Order) need to be applied to reach
the goals. This is shown in Figure 5b.
Implementation of PM-2 in
Different Project Types
Some examples for the types and man-
ifold layers of the reciprocal actions and
fluctuations of crucial points that can
explain the tailoring of PM-2 for appli-

cation in different project types follow
(Saynisch, 2002, 2003, 2005b, 2005c;
also see Figure 6).
Construction projects
based on con-ventional technologies and in the homecountry can be controlled primarily by
World 1. The reason for this is that the

object system can be sufficiently deter-mined and the acting system shows a
low complexity.
A fundamentally different situation
will emerge if the construction project
is carried out in another field of culture

(e.g., with Islamic culture). The scope of

the construction project contains a
high degree of self-executions in this
field of culture. In this case, World 3

emerges and the control processes of
World 1 need to be expanded to World 2.
For example, this is the situation when

a European contractor performs a proj-
ect in an Arab country.
If 
research and development proj-
ectscontain advanced technologies
(e.g., biotechnology), an extensive and
simultaneous control from World 1 

and 2 is needed. If such projects
expand to a “megaproject” (e.g., the
new European Galileo Project or the

historical Apollo Project), it will be nec-

essary to simultaneously control it
from all four Worlds.
If 
organizational projects
exhibit ahigh potential for effects of self-reference,
the control must be performed mainly by
World 2, with the support of World 3. In

most cases of organizational projects, IT

systems (software and installation of

computer hardware) are integrated. If

this case occurs, an additional control
with the methods of World 1 would be
necessary.
Global projects
are mostly global in
scope and are executed by team mem-
bers native to and located in many cul-
tures and countries. To deal with the
impact of these cultural issues, World 3
will play an important role. Further-

more, the control processes of World 1

have to be expanded to World 2, and
World 4 will play an important role.
Principles, Methods, and
Processes in PM-2
Principles,Methods,and Processes 
in World 1
Concepts of action in World 1 (i.e., tra-
ditional project management) do not

require further explanation. Good gen-
eral descriptions can be read in interna-
tional standard works such as the

PMBOK®Guide
(PMI, 2008a), the ICB3of IPMA (2007), and the ISO 10006 (ISO,
1997). The PMBOK®Guide
is limited toWorld 1, whereas the ICB also refers to
the methods in World 3. Both of them
include some elements of World 4.
Concepts of Action as Well as
Principles and Strategies in World 2
General
The following broadly defined descrip-
tion of concepts explains the meaningof principles, strategies, and approach-
es that have an effect on PM-2 in addi-tion to or instead of traditional con-
cepts in World 2. They partly refer to

World 3.
In his work on self-organization,
Probst (1987) described 45 planning and

guiding principles for organizations in
self-organizing systems. Probst demon-
strates numerous principles and proce-

dures for management on the basis of

the theory of self-organization. These are
likewise principles for action in World 2.
Malik (1984, 2004) also discusses sev-
eral approaches for solutions in his work.
In their work on evolutionary manage-
ment, Laszlo and Laszlo (1997) define 18
principles. Laszlo and Laszlo present
many principles for an evolutionary
management. The authors cluster these

into three principles: (1) organizational
principles, (2) strategic principles, and
(3) operative principles. All of these are

principles for handling in World 2.
These principles of Probst, Malik,
and Laszlo and Laszlo are established

witha 
focus on general management, not
especially for project management. But
they can be easily transferred with-

out deficit into the world of project

management.Especially for project management,
we have developed numerous principles,
Project Types
Construction Proj.
(traditional)Construction Proj.
(in other culture)
R & D - Projects
(Megaprojects)
Organizational Proj.
(self-reference)
Organizational Proj.
(with IT systems)WORLD 1WORLD 2WORLD 3WORLD 4
R & D - Projects
(advanced techn.)Figure 6
:Implementation of PM-2 in different project types (great circles represent high influence 
of World 1, 2, 3, or 4; Saynisch, 2005c, 2008).
 12December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Mastering Complexity and Changes in Projects, Economy, and Society
PAPERS
PAPERS
methods, and techniques in the research
program “Beyond Frontiers of Traditional

Project Management.” These are con-

densed into 30 theses, which are present-

ed in the documentation book (Saynisch,
2003; Saynisch & Lange, 2002). In the
competency standard of ICCPM (2008),

numerous procedures are described.
This is to make clear that numerous
concepts of action already exist for World
2. Due to the space constraints of this
article, only some selected elements of
acting concepts of the concept descrip-
tion will be explained in the next section.An Overview of Selected Concepts of
Action
The following named concepts of
actions are based on interpretations by

Probst (1987), Laszlo and Laszlo (1997),
and the 30 theses in the documentationbook (Saynisch, 2003; Saynisch &

Lange, 2002). These selected concepts

of actions are clustered in basic princi-
ples, key principles, and operative prin-
ciples and shown in Figures 7, 8, and 9.
Detailed Description of Selected
Elements of Acting Concepts (Saynisch,
1997,2002)
Interventionist Planning and Control

(Key Principle in Figure 8).
As theclassic approach, the control organiza-
tion acts outside of the system, theprinciple of Cybernetics of First Order.

Self-organizing systems can realize new
common values due to disturbances
(analogies to the attractors of the chaos

theory). Management can try by direct-
ed disturbances to motivate systems to
transform themselves in order to com-

ply with aims. The setting of conditions
is the basis for desired aims.
Experimental Planning and Control
(Key Principle in Figure 8).
Controlling
is part of the system: this is a feature of
Cybernetics of Second Order or

Cybernetic of observing systems.
Experimental planning and control is
not limited to one solution but attempts
several possibilities. For example, keep-

ing variation (mutation) and evaluation

(selection) of possibilities are the ele-

ments of experimental planning and
Basic Principles:Forecast to multiple horizons by extrapolating the future, not the past.
Cyclic action on a strategic and detailed basis.Learn to handle ambiguities, uncertainties, and insecurities.
Multi-interpretative thinking (instead of “right” and “wrong” use “as well
as”).Reductions and trivialities destroy the system. Paradoxes can be
innovative.Keep processes going—there are no final solutions.
When radical change is needed, engender transient chaos.Complexity can only be mastered by increased complexity (volitive
situation, dialectic logic).Figure 7:
Basic principles.
Figure 8:
Key principles.
Figure 9:
Operative principles.
Key Principles:Handling open aims–evolutionary development of aims.Practice a variety engineering. Create and keep mutations. Do not destroy

 mutations.
As an observer’s guiding principle the following concepts are possible:
 1. Interventionistic planning and control.

 2. Experimental planning and control.
Planning and control as calculable interventions in self-organization.
 Principles:
 • Planning is to be considered a process of observation (like soft
  system methods) rather than a basis for deviation analyses.
 • Stabilizing high complexity by revised planning and deciding.
Operative Principles:Use of audit- and review principles.

Control handling by setting frame conditions.
Variation of classic planning approach, the controllable planning.
Creation of temporary, networked, interdisciplinary structure.
 December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
13control. Thus, it corresponds to the basic
principle of evolutionary planning.
With the concept of experimental
planning and control, the effects recur-

sively lead back into the process.
Therefore, expectations and effects of
planning are related to each other, and

planning and control becomes an

experiment.
The basic principle is to gain knowl-
edge for checking previously set

hypotheses and to reintegrate this
knowledge into the planning process.
This is also the principle of the leading

project in the research program.
Experimental planning and control
is a challenging process. The result is

successful if the desired state is approx-

imately obtained.Controllable Planning (Operative
Principle in Figure 9).
This is a varia-
tion of the classic planning approach.
Also, within the traditional planning
and control process, the feedback prin-

ciple is used, but only in the case ofdeviations—and reluctantly in the
majority of cases. Mostly, the feedback

principle is limited to a part of the
problem-solving process. The approach
for PM-2 is that as of the project start,

planning is to be adjusted to many feed-
back processes (planning revisions).
This “controllable planning” func-
tions according to the principle: “Better

plan roughly and control quickly (fre-
quently) than plan in detail and control
slowly (sparingly). Whoever plans too

much in detail loses time and chances.”
The author has had good experiences fol-
lowing this principle in the research and

development (R&D) field for 40 years.
Comprehensive,Integrated Principles,
Methods,and Processes—A Continuum
of Project Management
There are still more extensive planning
and guiding approaches that already
symbolize a comprehensive system.
Many times traditional approaches and

advanced principles will integrate to a

higher level of approach and processes.
The distinction between World 1 and
World 2 is an analytical categorization
that is necessary for precise and consis-
tent analysis, scientific discourse, clear
descriptions, 
understandable teaching orlearning, and unambiguous communica-

tions. But applications or practical works
use integrated, holistic, or systemic
processes and modes of actions, not ana-

lytical categorizations. Such an integrated

higher level of approaches and processes
points out a characteristic of “continu-
um.” You cannot “teach” a continuum of

processes like analytical distinct elements,
but you can “train” the application.
With this view of a practical
approach, PM-2 represents not only the
management of World 2; PM-2 is
designed as a management system for
the continuum of Worlds 1, 2, 3, and 4.
PM-2 therefore also includes the tradi-
tional management approach, PM-1

(see the “Principles, Methods, and

Processes in World 1” subsection). A
management system related to each
separate World is singularly not viable

in a practical approach for mastering
complex projects.
Extensive planning and guiding
approaches already exist that symbol-
ize a system, a continuum. Some exam-
ples of relevant items for general man-

agement in this context are:

• universal methodology of problem
solving (St. Gallen) (Ulrich & Probst,
1988) and• Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) of
Checkland (1981; Checkland &Scholes, 1999).
Relevant items especially for project
management in this context are, for

example, a set of actions in the compe-
tency standard of ICCPM (2008). For
example: “Wave planning—in complex

projects the planning process is usually
recursive and nonlinear, rather than lin-
ear. Wave planning plots nodal points

for gathering information, design, and
implementation, allowing nonlinear
and recursive patterns to be portrayed

in a linear model” (ICCPM, 2008). Also

some principles, methods, and process-

es, described in the “An Overview of

Selected Concepts of Action” and
“Detailed Description of Selected
Elements of Acting Concepts (Saynisch,

1997, 2002)” subsections represent a
continuum—for example, the “control-
lable planning.” In the book 
Tools for
Complex Projects
, Remington and
Pollack (2007) describe a set of tools and
techniques that mostly integrate tradi-

tional and advanced approaches—for
example, the “multimethodology in
series or in parallel.”
Acyclic acting principle(iterations,
circular processes, feedback) seems to
prevail as a common and central princi-

ple among many methodical approach-

es in the research program (Saynisch &
Lange, 2002), as also selectively
described earlier. Part of this principle is

theevolutionary paradigm
of theprocess “variation–selection–keeping.”
The cyclic acting principle is similar to

the method of “wave planning,” with its
recursive character. Wave planning is
regarded as a diversification element of

a more application-level of the generic

principle of cyclic acting.
Furthermore, in this context,
“Ashby’s Law” is a central principle. It is

the law of the necessary variety for con-
trolling complex systems: “Only Variety
Can Absorb Variety” (Ashby, 1970). To

control a system absolutely, a range of
variety (or complexity) of the control
element that displays the same range of

variety of the controlled system at mini-
mum is necessary. In the same way that
we cannot translate Shakespeare with a

vocabulary of 3,000 words (Malik, 1984,
2004), if the control element exhibits
less variety, then a deficit of variety

exists and the system is out of control.
The Phenomenon of Evolutionary
Overlapping of Traditional Methods
Human beings have become what they
are by evolutionary processes—thus,
they think and act according to evolu-

tionary principles. This is roughly one
of the most important postulates of the
evolutionary epistemology theory (EE)

(Riedl, 1985; Riedl & Wuketis, 1987).
As infants, human beings still act
according to evolutionary principles. 
 14December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Mastering Complexity and Changes in Projects, Economy, and Society
PAPERS
PAPERS
At the latest, in kindergarten, school, or
professional training, this natural

behavior is suppressed by submission

to the rules of the monocausal world,

the world of fixed realities (normal
socialization)—that is, World 1. Natural
gifts cannot be completely overlapped.

Thus, within the action of manage-

ment, evolutionary overlappings
emerge among classic principles (e.g., if
traditional management principles do

not offer sufficient assistance). Mostly,
they are not recognized as such (since
this happens unconsciously) but are

regarded as new (sometimes flexible)
varieties of traditional principles.
Malik (1984, 2004, p. 120f) correctly
characterized this paradoxical situation

of how an evolutionary approach is
defined as the success of a traditional
approach: “These apparent paradoxes

are in reality the result of self-deception
like an optical illusion. We are subject to
the illusion to be confronted with (tra-

ditional) management where in reality
the result was accomplished on an evo-
lutionary basis.”
Therefore, the use of evolutionary,
systemic operating modes is already
much further practiced than some tra-

ditional management theorists are

ready to admit.
Demonstration and Verification—
PM-2 in “Real Life” Today
Finally, concrete situations demon-
strate that some elements of PM-2 (par-
ticularly World 2) have already been
transformed into practical use and are

presently regarded as “state of the art.”

These concrete situations represent
simultaneously a continuum of princi-
ples and methods, as described in the

“Comprehensive, Integrated Principles,
Methods, and Processes—A Continuum
of Project Management” subsection.
The New “Evolutionary Acquisition
Model”of DOD
Maybe everyone knows that project
management was developed by the

Department of Defense (DOD) in con-

junction with NASA in the early 
1960s. AFSCM 375 was one of the first
documents to be published on project
management. Today, DOD again takes

on a leading role by incorporating new
ideas for a future project management.
DOD developed a new acquisition
model, called evolutionary acquisition
(EA) that reduces cost and cycle times
(Software Engineering Institute, 2001).
EA will be used for large, complex,
and software-intensive projects.
Evolutionary acquisition means an
acquisition strategy to adapt to a

changing environment by rapidly
acquiring and sustaining a supportable
core capability and incrementally

inserting new technology or additional
capability.
In an evolutionary approach, as
shown in Figure 10, the delivery to the
user is divided into two or more blocks,
with increasing increments of capabili-

ty. Block 1 provides the initial deploy-
ment capability. The technology is
developed somewhere and adopted on

trial. If successful, it becomes the sub-

ject of advanced technology demon-

stration (ATD). In the acquisition pro-

gram phase, the evolutionary acquisi-

tion will begin. The key of the concept is
that the acquisition occurs in asequence of blocks, with each block
culminating in fielding some fraction of
the whole program’s capability. In each

block of cycling processes, an evolu-
tionary approach will be performed
(also called “spiral development” by

Boehm). Important features of the con-
cept are:
• Evolutionary acquisition implies evo-
lutionary requirements.
• Evolutionary acquisition also implies
evolutionary fielding with impacts on

training and sustainment.
This evolutionary acquisition strat-
egy is primarily an application of the
“Evolution First Order,” the concept of
Darwin. The term 
Evolution First Order
was explained in detail in a previously

published article in this journal
(Saynisch, 2010).
Evolutionary Processes in the Agile
Software Development—Agile Project
Management

In the past, progress in software engi-

neering consisted of the introduction of

ever more precise operating models.
S&TProjects
DemonstrationProjects
123Acquisition Program
ATDs, ACTDs, JWEs,
prototyping and risk reduction
Spiral developmentwithin blocksIntegrated Engineering
and Production (Block 1)
Block 2Block 3IOCRequirements
Technologies
ACTDAdvanced [Concept]Technology Demonstration

JWE Joint Warfare Exercise
IOC Initial Operating CapabilityFOC Final Operating CapabilityTransition
ACQUISITIONDECISIONFlexible Process
Disciplined Process
DODI 5000.2 Acquisition Process: from Idea to Fielding
Figure 10:
The new “evolutionary acquisition model” of DOD (according to Software Engineering
Institute, 2001).
 December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
15But for reaction of rapid innovation
cycles, to ensure survival on the mar-

ket, they became far less suitable. A

change of some former values became

necessary, for which the term “agile
development” was chosen.
At the beginning of a project, aims,
as before, are determined and set by

means of a development strategy with
which they are to be achieved. The
development strategy has to give an

answer to the question of how many
releases are necessary for a product and
which value each release offers to the

customers. The process of planning not
only takes place once at the start of the
project, but cyclically, always before 

the start of the release development.

Each release is given to the customer in
real operation, and the experiences
there go directly back into the develop-

ment of the next release.
This agile operating mode is very
similar to the previously described “evo-

lutionary acquisition model” of DOD.
Ultim
ately, it is also an application of the
cyclic evolution process “variation–

selection–keeping.” Therefore, the agile
project management corresponds to
the principles of PM-2, a precise coop-

eration of World 1 and World 2. But the

phenomenon of the evolutionary over-
lapping of traditional methods (see the
“Comprehensive, Integrated Principles,

Methods, and Processes—A Continuum
of Project Management” subsection)
emerges at this point, because the evo-

lutionary elements are realized uncon-
sciously (Saynisch, 2006).
PM-2 Versus Complex Project
Managers Competency Standard
(CPMCS)
The International Centre for Complex
Project Management (ICCPM) estab-
lishes the CPMCS (ICCPM, 2008). This

standard defines complex project man-
agement as an emerging natural exten-
sion of traditional project management

to create a specialist profession. The

standard moves away from existing

approaches and identifies new project

management competencies. Project
managers need to accept that theimplementation of complex projects is

a dynamic system and, to a large
degree, unknowable. Detailed long-

term planning is, therefore, impossible.
Indeed, applying traditional project
management approaches, with their

focus on long-term planning, rigid
structures, precise work-breakdown
structure definition, and elaborate con-
trol rules, is counterproductive—it will

drive the complex project toward fail-

ure (Saynisch, 2007).
The CPMCS moves away from tradi-
tional philosophies, approaches, and

languages, which cannot adequately
describe complex projects. Instead, this
standard uses a systems thinking philo-

sophical approach and methodology,
based upon the premise that “you can-
not understand a whole through ana-

lyzing its parts.” Therefore, “Views” 
provides insights from multiple per-
spectives that together provide holistic

understanding; and a holistic under-
standing of the competencies required
for the project management of com-
plexity can only be achieved through

using multiple views. The standard
establishes nine new competencyareas, titled “Views” (e.g., “View 4:

Innovation, Creativity, and Working
Smarter” and “View 6: Systems
Thinking and Integration”).
The CPMCS make a clear distinc-tion between traditional project 
management (existing and expanded
traditional competencies) and complex

project management (new complex
project management competencies).
Therefore, the CPMCS principles are

similar to the concept of PM-2,described in the “Research Results for
the Basic Concepts of PM-2” and “The

Creation of a Systemic Architecture and
Process Model of PM-2” sections.
Both the CPMCS and PM-2 deal
with a paradigm shift in project man-
agement. Both are concerned with the
inability of traditional project manage-

ment to successfully deliver complex
projects and programs. Both radically

redefine project management with
many additional principles, methods,
and processes. Both deal with complex

systems, which are defined as unpre-
dictable, nonlinear, unstable, disor-

dered, emergent, and so on.
But there are also 
differences.
TheICCPM standard is focused on large
projects: international aid, defense, cli-
mate change, disaster relief, mergers,

policy implementation, pandemics,
national development, and change inlarge organizations, as well as construc-

tion of major plants. As a reference
model, PM-2 is valid for all types of
projects in different fields of business.

PM-2 is characterized by a high degree
of abstract thinking.
Furthermore, the ICCPM standard
mainly deals with competences—PM-2
is focused on the following trinity:
processes, structures, and manage-
ment systems. In addition, the ICCPM

standard was established in 2005 in
Australia and has had budget resources;
PM-2 was launched ten years earlier in

Germany with no financial support,
with the only resources being the great
engagement of personal involvement
of team members. Finally, one impor-

tant difference is the orientation of
contents:• a scientific basis on the PM-2 side
(PM-2 assures more detailed and
transparent deduction of the under-
lying research in modern sciences)

and• application and implementation
details on the ICCPM standard side.
Therefore, both concepts comple-
ment each other. There is synergy in the

potential of both concepts and integra-
tion activities.
PM-2 Versus Project-Oriented
Company—Multiproject Firms at 
the Edge of Chaos (MUPEC)

The previous explanations for the con-
cept of PM-2 are focused on the presen-
tation and execution of a single project

(see the “Scope and Domain of Model”

section). The general identification

model of PM-2 is a horizontal time
 16December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Mastering Complexity and Changes in Projects, Economy, and Society
PAPERS
PAPERS
arrow, representing the project-process
with the two cybernetic cycles of com-

plexity and traditional management,

which navigate and control this 

project-process. This is demonstrated
in Figure 3. For the management of a
project-oriented company, for exam-

ple, these explanations do not apply. A

company is less defined by obtaining a
fixed time schedule than by competi-
tiveness and growth. This situation is

discussed by Rietiker (2006).
But complexity management also
plays an important rule at project-

oriented companies with their 
program/portfolio management. For
these challenges, Geraldi (2008) has

established a remarkable conceptual

model. This specifically defines the
edge of chaos (coexistence of order and
chaos) for multiproject firms based on

the match between the complexity of
the project portfolio and flexibility of its
organizational units. The general iden-

tification model of this basic approach
for project-oriented companies is a
map to assess this match and mismatch
of complexity and flexibility. This map
proposes four regions or organizational
archetypes: the creative-reflective, the

mechanic structured, chaotification of

order, and bureaucratization of chaos.
Both conceptual models, the PM-2
and the multiproject firms at the edge of

chaos (MUPEC), include some similari-
ties. For mastering complex situations
in the world of projects, both deal with a

coexistence and balance
between order
and chaos, between traditional and
complexity management, as an essen-
tial characteristic for the challenges.
For a future comprehensive
“rethinking of project management”

and for an emergence of a radical new
view of a systemic project management
world, an integration approach of both

models and perspectives (single project
and company) will be necessary. But
this is a challenge for future research.

The significance of both models and
perspectives has been highlighted by

awarding of the IPMA Research Award

in 2007 and 2008 (IPMA, 2007, 2008).The Future—Integration Aspects
of PM-2, CPMCS, MUPEC, ICB3,

and PMI Standards
The previous project management
knowledge field, represented by stan-

dards of the IPMA and PMI and based on

traditional management understanding

(see the “Limits of Traditional
Management” section), will not resolve
the profound challenges. It furthermore

remains an important position (the

“Need for Two Cybernetic Cycles of
Control” subsection). But this previous
knowledge field must integrate with the

advanced models, which deal with com-
plexity, such as PM-2, MUPEC, or the
CPMCS (see the “Research Results for the

Basic Concept of PM-2,” “The Creation of
a Systemic Architecture and Process
Model of PM-2,” “Potential Use of PM-2,”

“Implementation of PM-2 in Different

Project Types,” and “Principles, Methods,
and Processes in PM-2” sections and the
“PM-2 vs. Complex Project Managers

Competency Standard [CPCMS]” and
“PM-2 vs. Project-Oriented Company—
Multiproject Firms at the Edge of Chaos

[MUPEC]” subsections). This section
deals with the integrated view of the con-
text and relations of PM-2, MUPEC, the
CPMCS, IPMA ICB3, and PMI standards
(Saynisch, 2008a, 2008b).
Integration of Previous Project
Management Knowledge Field With
CPMCS and MUPEC

In Figure 11 you will note in three verti-

cal columns the ICB3 of IPMA with itstechnical, behavioral, and contextual
competences, as well as the four levels

of competences in the ordinate. The
three vertical columns of the 
PMBOK®Guide 
(PMI, 2008a),Organizational
Project Management Maturity Model

(OPM3®) (PMI, 2008b), and theStandard for Program Management

(PMI, 2008c) and the Standard for
Portfolio Management
(PMI, 2008d)flank the ICB3. The three vertical

columns of the PMI’s Program/
Portfolio Management, 
OPM3®, andcontextual competences of ICB3 repre-
sent the integrated view of multiple
projects, while the other three vertical

columns represent a single project.
On the top of the three vertical
columns of a single project in the area

of traditional management is the field

of CPMCS with nine views for the man-agement of complexity. The CPMCS has
ComplexProjects
CompetencyStandard ICCPM
ABCDContextual CompetencesBehavioral CompetencesTechnical Competences
PMBOK®Guide – 12ElementsTraditional PM
PMIIntegrationof Projects
Single Project
PMIIPMAA, B, C, D = IPMALevel11Focus on Integrationin Transition
Transition of
Traditional to Complex
Multi-Project at
Edge of ChaosProgram/Portfolio
ManagementOPM3®Figure 11:
Integration of previous project management knowledge field with CPMCS and MUPEC.
 December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
17no focus on integration of projects; it
concentrates on a single project. You
will note that this field represents a
higher level of competency as the A-
level of ICB3, maybe level A++.Furthermore, it will be clear that the
CPMCS complements the traditional

management by the management of

complexity. You can see that the com-
plexity and the scope of competencesincreases from bottom to top.

Analogous to the CPMCS at a singleproject, the MUPEC represents a higher
level of competency for complexity sit-
uations at integration of projects.
Additional Integration With PM-2—
The Umbrella Function of PM-2
The PM-2 with its four Worlds is pic-
tured at left in Figure 12. The relations

of PM-2 to the CPMCS, IPMA ICB3,and PMI standards are represented by
arrows; the broadness of the arrow

represents the intensity. With World 2,

the complexity management corre-

sponds primarily and intensively with

the CPMCS of ICCPM. Also, Worlds 3
and 4 show relations to the CPMCS.
World 3 corresponds primarily with

the behavioral competences of ICB3.

World 1, the traditional project man-
agement with direct control of project
processes, corresponds primarily and

intensively with the PMBOK®Guide
and the technical competences of
ICB3. Furthermore, World 4 is related
with PMI’s 
Standard for Program
Management
(PMI, 2008c) andStandard for Portfolio Management
(PMI, 2008d), OPM3®(PMI, 2008b),the contextual competences of ICB3(IPMA, 2006), and the MUPEC.
PM-2, with its feature of reference
models, acts as an umbrella for the ele-

ments of the CPMCS, ICB3, and PMIstandards. PM-2 will assure a frame-
work for integrative reorientation of

these concepts and standards.
Conclusions and Perspectives
The descriptions of PM-2 in the preced-

ing sections give an answer to the

challenge for an advanced understand-

ing of project management for mastering
complex projects and will therefore be
the concept in project management for
the coming decades.
The conclusions as well as the chal-
lenges for the future are that PM-2, with
its feature of reference models, will help
to develop and integrate the wide-

spread competencies for the manage-
ment of complex projects in the tradi-
tional and advanced field. These devel-

opment and integration operations
should be implemented:• in a systematically and transparent
manner;
• based on a transparent deduction from
modern natural and social scientific

theories with their paradigms;
• with transparent differentiation into
traditional and new complex project
management aspects as well as sys-

temic views;• with tailoring aspects to segmentation
into types or categories of projects;

and• with a systemic and separation view
to personal competences and organi-

zational processes. 
CompetencyStandard ICCPM
ABCDPMIIntegrationof Projects
Single Project
PMIIPMAMulti-Project at
Edge of ChaosWORLD 2Complexity ManagementWORLD 3Collaborators/PersonsBehavior – Project-Culture
WORLD 1Traditional Project Management
Cybernetic 1st Order - Command + Control
Hard Reality – Plan/Actual – Hard Acting
WORLD 4FoundationsWays of
ThinkingProject / Product Processes
RESULTS
Project-
ClosingCybernetic 2nd Order – Dynamic - Catalyst
Systemic-evolutionary – Self-organization

Emergence - Instability

Transclassical

LogicSystemicViews
NetworkingCircular
Processes
Configuration and Realization of Project-Object/Product
Project-Executing and Expiration - Project-Dynamic
IDEAProject-
InitiatingPM-2Program/Portfolio
ManagementOPM3®Contextual CompetencesBehavioral CompetencesTechnical Competences
PMBOK®Guide – 12ElementsFigure 12:
Integration aspects of PM-2 with CPMCS, MUPEC, ICB3, and PMI standards—The umbrella function of PM-2.
©1998/2008 SPM-CONSULT—M. Saynisch
 18December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Mastering Complexity and Changes in Projects, Economy, and Society
PAPERS
PAPERS
PM-2 assures the overcoming of the
“Paradox of Project Control” stated by

Svetlana Cicmil (Cicmil et al., 2009).
The research and development of
PM-2 and its environment is still in a
draft state. We need an 
internationalresearch initiative
for extendedresearch and development on these

subjects to come to better practical
solutions. Furthermore, we need inten-
sive and new education and training

programs all over the world that reflect
the ideas and thought patterns of PM-2.
We also need further research for:
• an integration approach of the PM-2
conceptwith the conceptual model ofMUPEC, the integration of single-

project aspects with the viewpoints of

program/portfolio, as described in the
“PM-2 vs. Project-Oriented Company—
Multiproject Firms at the Edge of
Chaos(MUPEC)” subsection.
• a comprehensive and integrated sys-
tem of the principles, methods, and

procedures in World 2’s respective
management of complexity, which are
very roughly sketched and mostly

only listed in the “The Four Worlds as
Basic Elements of PM-2” subsection
and the “Principles, Methods, and

Processes in PM-2” section. This sys-

tem or methodology should consist oflogical and transparent structures
(e.g., clusters, breakdowns, and net-

works) and detailed descriptions,
including their relationships and
interfaces, which provide holistic

understanding (systems thinking) andpromote practical implementations.
• suitable adaptation at conditions of
the PM-2 reference model by concrete
applications.
This article should be understood as
a call to begin the discourse, to fulfill the
requirements of Bredillet (2007, 2008)
for a new perspective and approach in

project management research.
Acknowledgment
The preparation of this article has been

supported by the Manfred Saynisch

Project Management Foundation

(info@mspm-stiftung.de).References
Ashby,W.R.(1970).
An introduction to
cybernetics(5th ed.). London:Chapman and Hall.
Bredillet,C.(2007).
From the editor—
The link research-practice, part 3.
Project Management Journal,31
(1),3–4.Bredillet,C.(2008).
From the editor—
Mapping the dynamics of the project

management field: Project manage-
ment in action (part 1). 
Project
Management Journal,39
(4), 2–4.Checkland,P.(1981).
System thinking,
systems practice.
Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Checkland,P.,& Scholes,J.(1999).
Softsystems methodology in action
.Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Cicmil,S.,Cooke-Davies,T.,Crawford,
L.,& Richardson,K.(2009).
Exploringthe complexity of projects:Implications

of complexity theory on project man-
agement practice.
Newtown Square, PA:
Project Management Institute.
Cooke-Davis,T.,Cicmil,S.J.K.,
Crawford,L.H.,& Richardson,K.

(2007).We’re not in Kansas anymore,
Toto: Mapping the strange landscape
of complexity theory. 
Project
Management Journal,38
(2), 50–61.Dewey,J.(1938).
Logic:The theory of
inquiry.
New York: H. Holt and
Company.
Dewey,J.,& Kilpatrick,W.H.(1935).
Der Projekt-Plan.
Weimar, Germany:
Bohlau.
Geraldi,J.G.(2008).
The balancebetween order and chaos in multi-
project firms: A conceptual model.
International Journal of Project

Management,26
, 348–356.Günther,G.(1976–1980).
Beiträge zur
Grundlegung einer operationsfähigen
Dialektik
[Contributions for a basis of
condition of operation dialectic]. Band

1 bis 3. Hamburg: Meiner.
Hall,A.D.(1962).
Methodology for sys-
tems engineering.Princeton, NJ: Van
Nostrand Reinhold.
International Centre for Complex
Project Management (ICCPM).(2008).
Complex project manager competency
standards,version 3.3.
Sydney,
Australia: Author.
International Organization for
Standardization (ISO).(1997).
ISO10006:Quality management—

Guidelines to quality in project man-
agement.Geneva: Author.
International Project Management
Association (IPMA).(2006).
IPMAcompetence baseline,version 3.0
.Retrieved January 15, 2008, from

http://www .ipma.chInternational Project Management
Association (IPMA).(2007).
Retrieved
January 15, 2008, from
http://www.ipma.ch/awards/resawards/

Pages/winners.aspx
International Project Management
Association (IPMA).(2008).
Retrieved
January 25, 2009, from http://www
.ipma.ch/awards/resawards/Pages/

winners.aspx
Jaafari,A.(2003).
Project management
in the age of complexity and change.
Project Management Journal,34
(4),47–57.Kramer,U.(2002).
Dialektische logik—
Vom neuen im werden [Dialectic
logic—Of the re-emergence in becom-

ing]. In M. Saynisch & D. Lange (Eds.),
Neue Wege im Projektmanagement—
Ergebnisse aus Forschungsprojekten

1990–2000(pp. 127–133). Stuttgart,
Germany: GPM-Verlag
Nürnberg/Stuttgart.
Lange,D.,& Bechler,K.J.(2005).
DINnormen im projektmanagement
[DINstandards in project management].
Bonn/Berlin, Germany: BDU-
Servicegesellschaft and Beuth.
Laszlo,E.,& Laszlo,C.H.(1997).
Management-Wissen der 3. Art.
Wiesbaden: Gabler (1997)—
The insightedge—An introduction to the theory
and practice of evolutionary manage-
ment.Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Malik,F.(1984).
Strategie des Manage-
ments komplexer Systeme 
[Strategy of
management complex systems].
Bern/Stuttgart, Germany: Haupt.
 December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj  
19Malik,F.(2004).
Systemisches
Management,Evolution,

Selbstorganisation 
[Systemic manage-
ment, evolution, self-organizing].
Bern/Stuttgart, Germany: Haupt.
Maturana,H.C.(1982).
Erkennen:Die
Organisation und Verkörperung von
Wirklichkeit 
[Perception: Organization
and embodiment of realness].
Braunschweig, Germany: Vieweg,
Probst,G.J.B.(1987).
Selbstorganisation—Ordnungsprozesse
in sozialen Systemen aus ganzheitlicher

Sicht 
[Self-organization—Processes of
order in social systems from a systemic

view]. Berlin, Germany: Parey.
Project Management Institute.
(2008a).A guide to the project manage-
ment body of knowledge (PMBOK
®guide)—Fourth edition. Newtown
Square, PA: Author.
Project Management Institute.
(2008b).Organizational project man-
agement maturity model (OPM3®)—Second edition. Newtown Square, PA:

Author.
Project Management Institute.
(2008c).The standard for program
management(2nd ed.). Newtown
Square, PA: Author.
Project Management Institute.
(2008d).The standard for portfolio
management(2nd ed.). Newtown
Square, PA: Author.
Remington,K.,& Pollack,J.(2007).
Tools for complex projects.
Aldershot,Hampshire, UK: Gower.
Riedl,R.(1985).
DieSpaltung des
Weltbildes—Biologische Grundlagen
des Erklärens und Verstehens 
[The
splitting of the conception of theworld—Biological foundations of
explanation and understanding].
Berlin/Hamburg, Germany: Parey.
Riedl,R.,& Wuketis,F.M.(Eds.).
(1987).Die Evolutionäre
Erkenntnistheorie 
[Evolutionary episte-
mology]. Berlin/Hamburg, Germany:

Parey.
Rietiker,S.(2006).
Der neunte
Schlüssel—vom PM zum projektbe-
wussten Management 
[The ninth key—
From project management to project-
conscious management]. Bern,

Germany: Haupt.
Saynisch,M.(1991).
Am Anfang wardas System. Zur Genealogie des

Systems-Engineerings und des

Projektmanagements [At origin has
been the system—An interactive
genealogy of systems engineering and

project management]. In K. W. Krathky
(Ed.), 
Systemische Perspektiven—
Interdisziplinäre Beiträge zu Theorie

und Praxis 
(pp. 189–206)
.Heidelberg,
Germany: Carl Auer Verlag.
Saynisch,M.(1995).
Business reengi-
neering—Radikale veränderung-
sprozesse mit projektmanagement 2.

Ordnung [Business reengineering—

Radical change-processes via project
management second order]. In 
D. Lange (Ed.), 
Management von 
projekten—Know-how aus der
Beraterpraxis
(pp. 247–278)
.Stuttgart,
Germany: Schäffer/Poeschel.
Saynisch,M.(1997).
Radikale
Innovationen schaffen und managen—

Wenn alte Rezepte nicht mehr helfen
(Teil 1 
2) [Create and manage radical
innovations—If old recipes do not

help].Gablers Magazin,
6–7/97 and8/97. Wiesbaden, Germany: Gablers
Verlag.
Saynisch,M.(2002).
Neues verständnis
von projektmanagement: Das projekt-
management 2. ordnung [Advanced

insight of project management: Project
management second order]. In M.
Saynisch & D. Lange (Eds.), 
Neue wege
im projektmanagement
(pp. 115–126).
Nürnberg/Stuttgart: GPM.
Saynisch,M.(2003).
Neue wege im pro-
jektmanagement—Ergebnisübersicht
des forschungsprogramms von

1990–2000 [Beyond frontiers of tradi-
tional project management—Results of
the research program 1990—2000]. In 

G. Kerber, R. Marré, & A. Frick (Eds.),
Zukunft im projektmanagement—
Beiträge zur “InterPM”
(pp. 221–258).
Heidelberg, Germany: dpunkt.
Saynisch,M.(2004,June).
Results of the
research programme “Beyond frontiers
of traditional project management.”
Presented at the 18th IPMA World-
Congress, Budapest, Hungary.

Retrieved September 15, 2004, from
http://www.ipma.ch
Saynisch,M.(2005a).
Beyond frontiers
of traditional project management—
The concept of project management

second order (PM-2) as an approach of

evolutionary management. 
World
Futures—The Journal of General
Evolution,61
, 555–590. Saynisch,M.(2005b).
Mastering com-
plexity and changes in projects,econo-

my and society by project management
2nd order (PM-2)
. Presented at the
19th IPMA World-Congress, New Delhi,

India. Retrieved January 12, 2006, from
http://www.ipma.ch
Saynisch,M.(2005c).
Projektmanagement 2. Ordnung (PM-2)
Management im Zeitalter hoher

Komplexität und radikaler
Veränderungen [Project management
second order (PM-2)—Management in

the age of high complexity and radical

changes]. In T. Möller & K. Spang (Eds.),
Tagungsband 22.Internationales
Deutsches Projektmanagement Forum

2005(pp. 105–116). Nürnberg,
Germany: GPM Verlag.
Saynisch,M.(2006).
Agile projektman-
agement prinzipien—Ein evolutionärer
management ansatz? [Agile principles

of project management—An approach
of evolutionary management?]. In 
B. Oestereich (Ed.), 
Agiles projektman-
agement—Beiträge zur konferenz
“InterPM 2006 “ (pp. 273–304).
Heidelberg, Germany: dpunkt.
Saynisch,M.(2007,November 29–30).
A radical redefining of PM for mastering
complex projects—The project man-
agement 2nd order (PM-2). 
Proceedings
of ICAN Conference 2007 at University of

Technology,Sydney,Australia.
Saynisch,M.(2008a,April).
Mastering
complex projects by project manage-

ment 2nd order (PM-2):Synergy and

integration potentials of CPMCS and

PM-2. Presented at 2. KSF des CCPM in
Frankfurt, Germany.
 20December 2010
Project Management Journal
DOI: 10.1002/pmj 
Mastering Complexity and Changes in Projects, Economy, and Society
PAPERS
PAPERS
Saynisch,M.(2008b).
To cope with
complexity and changes in projects by
radical redefining of PM—The project

management 2nd order (PM-2).
Proceedings of the 22nd IPMA World
Congress,Rome,Italy
(pp. 164–169). 
Saynisch,M.(2010).
Beyond frontiers
of traditional project management: 
An approach to evolutionary, self-

organizational principles, and the
complexity theory. 
Project Management
Journal,41
(2), 21–37. Saynisch,M.,& Lange,D.(Eds.).
(2002).Neue wege im projektmanage-
ment—Ergebnisse aus forschungspro-

jekten 1990–2000 [Beyond Frontiers of
Traditional Project Management—
Results of the research program

1990–2000]. Nürnberg/Stuttgart: GPM. 
Software Engineering Institute (SEI).
(2001).Spiral development and evolu-
tionary acquisition (Special report
CMU/SEI 2001-SR-005). Pittsburgh,
PA: Carnegie Mellon University.
Stacy,R.D.(2001).
Complex responsive
processes in organizations
. New York:
Routledge.
Steeger,O.(2007,April).
PM derKomplexität unserer heutigen 

Welt anpassen—M. Saynisch nahm
IPMA-Forschungspreis entgegen
[Adapt project management to the

complexity in today´s world—M.Saynisch received IPMA research
award]. 
projekt MANAGEMENTaktuell
,pp. 12–15. 
Ulrich,H.,& Probst,G.J.B.(1988).
Anleitung zum ganzheitlichen Denken
und Handeln 
[Tutorial for holistic
thinking and acting]. Bern, Germany:

Haupt.
von Foerster,H.(1981).
On cybernetics
of cybernetics and social theory. In 

G. Roth & H. Schwegler (Eds.), 
Self-
organizing systems (pp.102–105).
Frankfurt, Germany: Campus.
von Foerster,H.(1994).
Wissen und
Gewissen 
[Knowledge and conscience].
Frankfurt, Germany: Suhrkamp.
Whitty,S.J.,& Maylor,H.(2007).
Andthen came complex project manage-
ment. In J. A. Kisilinscki, & S. Sroda,
Project management:Proceedings of the

IPMA World Congress,Cracow,Poland
(pp. 371–376). Cracow, Poland: National
Association of Project Management

Poland. 
Wiener,N.(1961).
Cybernetics 
(2nd ed.).New York: Wiley.
Winter,M.,Smith,C.,Cooke-Davies,T.,&
Cicmil,S.(2006).
Rethinking project
management—Final report
. EPSRC
Network 2004–2006. Retrieved February
10, 2008, from http://www.mace.

manchester.ac.uk/project/research/
management/rethinkpm/final.htm
Manfred Saynisch
, Dipl-Ing, has more than 40
years’ experience in project management on

important national and international projects. 
He is one of the pioneers of project and configu-
ration management in Germany and he further
developed both disciplines. He has been head of

project control as well as of the Organization
Department at the R&D Division in one of the
largest mechanical engineering/production com-

panies in Europe for many years. In 1985, he
founded his own consultancy, SPM-CONSULT—
Systems and Services in Project and Process

Management. He has lectured on project man-

agement at various universities. In 2006, he

founded the MSPM Foundation, a foundation for

project management for which he holds the posi-

tion of senior executive president. In the field of
project and configuration management, he has
published more than 120 articles and books. He

published the first book in Europe on configura-
tion management (1984). He has presented
papers at eight IPMA World Congresses and two

PMI Congresses. In 2007, he won the IPMA
Research Award and in 2010, the ICCPM
Research Prize. He is the founding and honorary

member, past member of the board of trustees,
and member of the Research Advisory Board of
the German Association of Project Management

and one of the first German members of PMI. He

is a member of various professional committees,
including the German Standardization Board
(DIN) for project management and configuration

management, and the editorial boards of the
International Journal of Project Management
(from its founding in 1982 to 2001) and the

German journal 
projektMANAGEMENTaktuell
(since its founding in 1989). He founded and
has directed (since 1990) the research program

“Beyond Frontiers of Traditional Project

Management.” He may be contacted at
info@spm-consult.de.
