 January/February 2003
IEEE SOFTWARE
97BOOKSHELFthis lack of efficiency exists in rela-
tively simple tasks, how much exists

when switching between highly cre-
ative work, such as a new system de-
sign, and a consultantÕs work pro-

posal? The team swapping of matrix

management can compound this
with the loss of performance gains

associated with team bonding.Slack documents many of theproblems of cutting staff ÔoverheadÕ
and expecting managers to do their
own administration work. The poor
performances of various failing or-
ganizations are traced back to the
overlooked causes of time-starved
teams, stressed and fearful staff, and
overstaffed projects.Ninety years after the work ofFredrick Taylor (
The Principles ofScientific Management), the modernworkplace challenges the ÒProcess
ObsessionÓ because it stifles effec-
tiveness and empowerment. Com-

mand and control is not a creative
environment for innovation. De-
Marco reexamines the definition of
quality and the motivation and ef-
fectiveness of quality programs. He
also shines a bright light on the silli-
ness of a blind adherence to a par-
tial definition of quality that ne-
glects broader concerns.While Slack takes only a few hoursto read, it will make you think for
weeks. This is one of the best books on
technology management in a long
time. It recognizes the humanity of or-
ganizations while pointing the way to
real effectiveness and efficiency. It

challenges all the good ideas that have
become movements in the hands of
consultants by pointing back to the
original intentions.Just as with the Treatise on Comedy
in The Name of the Rose, there will besome consultants that would rather
burn this book than allow managers to
hear its message: efficiency programs
can and do harm organizational effec-
tiveness. I will keep a tight hold on my
copy and read chapters from it often.Carol A. Longis a software developer and project man-ager working in a software process improvement group and
searching for the mythical perfect project. Contact her at 
carollong@bcs.org.uk.Tips to Improve Soft-
ware DevelopmentAnthony AkinsAgile Software Developmentby Alistair Cockburn, Addison-Wesley,

Boston, 2001, ISBN 0-201-69969-9,
278 pp., US$34.99.Over the last couple of days, IÕvebeen trying to figure out how to de-

scribe Agile Software Development
byAlistair Cockburn. ItÕs not a textbook.

ItÕs not a cookbook. ItÕs definitely not

a silver bullet, guaranteed to solve all
of your software development project

problems. So, what is it? How about a
multilayered collection of thoughts
and ideas on how to adapt our ap-
proach to software development to fit

the current situation and organiza-

tion? ThatÕs a mouthful, but itÕs the

most concise and accurate description
IÕve been able to come up with.Three main sections make up Ag-ile Software Development. The firstsection is concerned with abstract
thoughts concerning software devel-
opment: how people communicate

and how teams work and collabo-
rate. The second section is more con-
crete and presents the concepts and
elements of software methodologies.

The third section focuses on agile
software development: what it means
to be agile, with principles and sug-gestions for building your own agiledevelopment methodology. 
Cockburn presents ideas and in-formation for those new to software
development, as well as to those who
are Òlong in the tooth.Ó Everyone
from sponsors to project managers,
technical leads, process and method-
ology designers, and software devel-
opers can learn and benefit from this
book. He provides different lessons
for different folks but continually fo-
cuses the readerÕs attention on two

fundamental and daunting problems: If communication is fundamen-
tally impossible, how can the peo-

ple on a project manage it? If all people and all projects are
different, how can we create any

rules for productive projects?The pessimistic among us might
feel there is no hope. Truth is, weÕll

probably never get software develop-
ment perfect, but we can get better,

and for me, thatÕs what 
Agile SoftwareDevelopmentis all about: getting bet-ter at what we do through communi-
cation, collaboration, insight, study,

practice, and experimentation. 
Every chapter presents a collectionof ideas, problems, and suggestions

related to a particular aspect of soft-

ware development. Each chapter ends
with ÒWhat should I do tomorrow?Ó

and helps the reader apply what they
have read to their own project, work,

and organization. Depending on your
level of understanding, Cockburn
might ask you to observe your own
organization and compare what you
see to what you read, start applying

the concepts of what you read to your

own work, or teach the concepts you
read to others.
Applying the ideas raises yourlevel of awareness of the issues the

chapter covered and helps you see
different ways to communicate, work
as a team, and develop software. Af-
ter my initial read, I came across
three immediately useful ideas. The
first was using the whiteboard as a
way to force and focus design in the
small. The second was using a reflec-
tion workshop as a simple and effec-ÒAgile Software
DevelopmentÓis not a
textbook. ItÕs not acookbook. ItÕs definitelynot a silver bullet,guaranteed to solve all ofyour software
development projectproblems. So, what is it? 98IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
BOOKSHELFtive way to encourage continuouslessons learned and improvements.
Finally, the book made me think of

ways to adapt a software methodol-
ogy to the project, environment, and
the organization (instead of the other
way around).Agile Software Developmentrein-forced many of my fundamental be-

liefs about software development and
at the same time exposed me to new

concerns and ideas. An example of
this comes from the section ÒAgile
and Self Adapting,Ó where Cockburn
identifies five sweet spots of effective
software development: 1.Two to eight people one room.
Face-to-face communication is the cheap-
est and most effective form of com-

munication. Find a way to ensure
people can communicate face to face
whenever possible. 2.Onsite usage experts.They knowwhat they want (or if they donÕt

they can probably recognize what
they donÕt want), so make every ef-

fort to give your team exposure to

the people who will use the soft-
ware. Successful projects find ways
to get fast and effective user feed-
back from the beginning of the proj-
ect to the end.3.One-month increments.People areable to focus their efforts for about
three months, but not much longer,

so you donÕt want increments

longer than three months. You also

want to allow enough time to get
something meaningful done. One

month is a good size, but adapt the

duration of your increments to fit
the situation. 4.Fully automated regression tests.Thisgives developers the confidence to
make changes, because the auto-
mated tests will tell them if they
broke something since the last time

the tests ran. If you canÕt fully auto-

mate regression, look for ways to
provide feedback on software
changes.5.Experienced developers. People whoknow what they are doing are invalu-
able. If you need six experienced peo-
ple but you can only get four, con-

sider adding less experienced people,
but realize you will need more than

six (maybe 10, maybe more) to get
the work done of six experienced
people. Can you use this book? If youÕrehappy with the state of software
development in your organization,
well, maybe not. You might want

to read it to see if the ideas and
principles documented in his book
are similar to the ones you follow.

For the rest of us, Agile SoftwareDevelopmentprovides ideas andguidance to open our eyes to more
effective and efficient methods of
developing software.Anthony Akinsis a developer and consultant at VLA Fu-tures.  Contact him at asakins@ureach.com
Demystifying Soft-ware ArchitectureDeependra MoitraApplied Software Architecture byChristine Hofmeister, Robert Nord,

and Dilip Soni, Addison-Wesley,

Boston, 2000, 422 pp., US$44.95.With software fast becoming cen-
tral to most products and services
and getting increasingly complex,
amalgamated with constantly chang-

ing technologies, the architecture of
software systems assumes para-
mount importance. If you are look-
ing for help and guidance in gaining

a solid footing in software architec-
ture, then look no further. 
AppliedSoftware Architectureis a nicely con-ceptualizedand well-written book,

full of practical insights and real-life
examples.This book will be of great use to many and particularly good for
novice and budding software archi-
tects. Practicing architects will benefit
from access to the holistic approach
presented in this book. Software engi-
neers planning to become software ar-
chitects will find it a good self-help
guide. It is also an excellent resource
for corporate universities in training
their engineers on software architec-
ture, and it will aid university students
and researchers wishing to dig deeper
into the discipline and its relationship
to software quality. Managers keen to
understand what considerations areinvolved in architecting a software sys-
tem will also find this a useful addition
to their bookshelf. There are various
books on the subject, but this one is
particularly noteworthy because of its
pragmatic coverage, insightful treat-
ment, and detailed real-world cases.Backed by the authorsÕ years of in-dustry experience, the book clearly ex-
plains how to think about software 
architecture, how to evolve and design
a competitive software architecture,
and the role of architecture in the de-

velopment process. It teaches you rules
and techniques and shares with you a
proven, structured process for design-
ing winning architectural solutions. It
shows you how to trace influencing
factors and requirements through the
architecture, sequence and organize
design activities, make architectural
design tradeoffs, support system per-

formance and reliability requirements,
and align architecture with business

goals, among other things. All the il-
lustrations are based on UML nota-
tions, and each chapter provides point-
ers for additional reading. The book
has a good and relevant bibliography,

a well-presented glossary, and numer-

ous useful tables and figures.Four views, one integratedapproachFirst, the authors give an overviewof how to structure architectural de-
sign tasks in general, then they ex-
plain how to define these tasks and

apply them to software architecture

design. The entire book and its ap-
proach are based on four software
architecture views: conceptual, mod-
ular, execution-oriented, and code-

based. The authors use their experi-
ences architecting a large industrial
image acquisition and processing sys-
tem to illustrate and support the con-

cepts and techniques introduced in
each architectural view. 
Next, the authors present the mostcritical aspect of architecting software
systems, global analysisan integrated

framework and approach for looking
at software architecture. This discus-
sion teaches you how to analyze orga-
nizational, technological, and product