 62IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/07/$25.00 © 2007 IEEEThe key to successful systems is build-ing what the stakeholders desire. In
a way, this point can hardly be gain-

said: nobody wants to build what
the stakeholders donÕt desire. But as

usual, the devil is in the details. I will contrast two examples to illus-
trate what it can mean to build what
stakeholders desire:Project A is a role-playing game on a
portable device for the teenage market. Project B is an embedded software sys-
tem for controlling a railway lineÕs op-

erations.Project AÕs product manager is in no
doubt that the key to success is building
what its teenage consumers want: excite-
ment, speed, a feeling of mastery, and so

on. These emotional experiences are very
far from traditional requirements, as
David Callele recently argued (ÒEmotional
Requirements in Video Games,Ó 
Proc.14th IEEE IntÕl Requirements Eng. Conf.,IEEE CS Press, pp. 299Ð302) And beyond
them, what players want is hard to pin
down because the market changes fast,
and at any moment a competitor (a pow-
erful negative stakeholder) might produce
a game that transforms expectations for all

future products. Other stakeholders include regulatorswho decide on the publicÕs behalf, for in-
stance, whether the game is excessively vi-
olent or sexual. Such stakeholders are im-
portantÑthey can even be show-stopping.
The regulator, in turn, is influenced by

politicians, who respond to public mood.
Clearly, balancing the regulatorsÕ desires

with the playersÕ is essential, but so is de-
feating the competition: building what
negative stakeholders donÕt
desire. Finally,
project A is a commercial success if it
makes moneyÑthat is, if it satisfies its fi-
nancial beneficiaries, such as company di-
rectors and shareholders.The onion model in figure 1 illustratesthe competing stakeholder pressures that
the product manager must mediate for
project A.Project B is different. Its project man-
ager and lead engineer know that the key
to success is building a railway that works
safely, safely, safely. The safety regulatorÕs

approval is mandatory, but first the pro-

ject must integrate all the subcontractor
components to make a system that actu-

ally works. So, the interfaces specified in

the systemÕs architecture are crucial. In

theory, the system team can work out the

interfaces in advance and impose require-
ments on subcontractors so that, for ex-
ample, a signaling systemÕs output exactly
pointThe devil is in thedetails of who the
stakeholders are andwhat they desire.
Building What Stakeholders DesireIan AlexanderContinued on page 64 0740-7459/07/$25.00 © 2007 IEEEMarch/April 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
63ThereÕs an old saying in software de-
velopment that the users donÕt know

what they want until you give them

what they asked for. Experienced de-

velopers often smile ruefully when

they hear this, having been told atleast once in their careers that a system they

had delivered was totally unacceptable
when it was exactly (as far as they could
tell) what was requested. ThereÕs more to

delivering good software than following or-
ders. Here, I describe what positive role de-
velopers can play in discovering and ex-
ploring requirements.ItÕs certainly an exaggeration to say that
the worst thing you can do is deliver exactly
what the users tell you. Making promises
and not delivering anything is worse. Deliv-
ering what you want to develop without re-

gard to what they want is worse. But

putting most of yourself on the shelf while
you develop is certainly far from the best

way to deliver satisfying software.One superficial critique of DWTTY(Do What They Tell You) is that it leads to

lots of change requests. Actually, this is a

strength of listening and responding to
what customers tell you. Requests for
change are a sign that customers are en-
gaged, they care, they are thinking. What-
ever developers do beyond DWTTY, they

shouldnÕt lose this sense that the customers

want to continue improving the system.
What happens when developersDWTTY? First, the features requested are

often more expensive than they need to be.
There are generally several ways to imple-
ment any given feature. By discussing a
feature with customers, developers can of-
fer options with their associated costs. Sec-
ond, the requested features can lack coher-

ence. Developers have the unique
advantage of being able to see a whole do-
main with fresh eyes. Sometimes they can
uncover hidden commonality between
seemingly diverse operations and so dra-
matically simplify the interface. Third,
customers often have a monolithic under-
standing of the system they envision, lead-
ing to riskier development. It often takes
the developersÕ help to see how to slice the
system into incremental releases, each de-

livering value. So, DWTTY leads to more
expensive, less coherent systems delivered
in large, risky releases.Aside from these technical problems,
DWTTY suffers from the fatal flaw of lack

of responsibility. ÒHey, donÕt whine to me.

I just did what I was toldÓ isnÕt a respon-

sible position. Software development
works best when everyone involved ac-
cepts responsibility for the systemÕs value.

Responsible developers apply their creativ-
ity and effort more fully and avoid short-ThereÕs more 
to delivering good
software than doing
what the customer
tells you.counterpointDonÕt Just DWTTY
Kent Beck
Continued on page 64 64IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
cuts that remove value from systems.
There are many alternatives toDWTTY. A binary-thinking developer

would say, ÒWell, if they arenÕt in

charge, then IÕm in charge.Ó This strat-

egy denies customers their right to be
responsible for the system. The devel-
oper, with a necessarily shallow under-

standing of the domain, will likely
make many wrong decisions, especially
in the critical early development stages.The question isnÕt, ÒWhoÕs in charge?Ó
but rather, ÒHow can we work to-

gether?ÓThe second edition of 
Extreme Pro-gramming Explainedlists 14 principlesconsistent with development excel-
lence. All of them apply to the require-

ments dialogue. I could go through all
14 principles, but I only have 750
words and IÕm eager to see what my

worthy opponent has to say, so IÕll
mention one and let you explore therest. The principle of baby steps sug-
gests working in small, concrete steps.
If we apply this principle to require-

ments, the requirements dialogue will
encourage everyone to achieve some-
thing concrete quickly and frequently.

Baby steps create feedback, reduce
wasted effort, and encourage trust

among the team members. 
Overall, a team could manifest these
fits the train. But if the train has al-
ready been designed, the system team
facesa difficult integration task. The
train manufacturer is a powerful stake-holder, and the project can only make
progress by negotiation. Preferably,

less powerful stakeholdersÕ desires
arenÕt trampled underfoot. The onion

model for this case would look very
different from figure 1.I hope these examples show that
phrases like Òwhat the stakeholders de-
sireÓ conceal a multitude of perils.
Dealing with those desires involves
trade-offs among large opposing forces
that vary widely from project to pro-
ject. The first step is to find out who

the stakeholders are, and they will in-

clude not only beneficiaries but also
the negative stakeholders, whose de-
sires should notbe met. So, should we give stakeholderswhat they desire? ItÕs impossible to

please everybody, of course, but overall

satisfaction of the key stakeholdersÕ de-
sires is crucial for product success.
Ian Alexanderis an independent consultant specializingin requirements engineering for systems in the automotive,
aerospace, transport, telecommunications, and public-service

sectors. Contact him at iany@easynet.co.uk.counterpointcontinued from page 63continued from page 63pointThe wider environmentThe containing systemThe systemPressure tomake profit Director,
shareholder(financial beneficiary)
 Productmanager(purchaser)DeveloperThe public Politician(politicalbeneficiary)
Mediaregulator Competitor(negativestakeholder)PressuretoinnovateOperationalsupportInterfacingsystem Player (functional beneficiary)
 Player (normaloperator)The product (a video game)             Pressure to    regulate violentand sexual imagery
Pressure tomake gameenjoyableMaintenanceoperatorUser/consumerFigure 1. The onion model of video game stakeholder relationships. March/April 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
65principles in many ways. An Extreme-Programming-style team might sit to-
gether, pair a customer and a developer

for challenging tasks, or release soft-
ware to production weekly. A waterfall-

style team might use the same principles
to hold joint design sessions, train the
developers as users of the system to bereplaced, or split the release cycle inhalf (two releases a year will encourage
more collaboration than one). 
The precise practices arenÕt as im-
portant as the intent behind the prac-
tices. If everyone on the team accepts

responsibility for the systemÕs value, if

developers commit to listening to the
customersÕ real needs, if customers di-gest feedback about their wishes, then
the whole team will accomplish much

more than they would if the developers
just Òdo what they tell me.Ó
Kent Beckis the director of Three Rivers Institute insouthern Oregon. Contact him at kent@threeriversinstitute.org.Kent BeckÕs point about just taking orders is well taken,
as is his statement that practices arenÕt as important as in-

tent. If that means appropriate agility for each project, few
would gainsay it. His illustration of a Òwaterfall-style teamÓ

using appropriately agile practices such as joint design ses-
sions is very welcome. 
It canÕt always be right to develop the requirements dur-
ing codingÑstill less, while concrete is being poured and
metal is being cut. But itÕs certainly right to select a life cycle

that encourages dialogue, with iteration in Òbaby steps.Ó
Those steps could be creating mock-ups and prototypes in
any formÑsketches, diagrams, film, acted scenes, clay mod-

els, whateverÑfollowed by feedback from stakeholders. On a much larger scale, iteration can take place over can-didate designs that might meet the customerÕs goals. These are

then traded off according to how well theyÕre predicted to per-

form. The developersÕ role here might be to propose alterna-

tive designs. The customer sets the goals and evaluates the
alternatives against all the stakeholdersÕ points of view. If com-

plete agreement isnÕt reached first time, as is likely, then the

developers explore the refined goals and design options in
search of a better compromise. The detailed requirements ef-
fectively flow from this repeated trade-off cycle.
We seem dangerously close to agreeing that appropri-
ate agility is far better than believing what youÕre told at the
start. Waterfall activities make sense only within an appro-

priate life cycleÑvery likely, an iterative one.
Ian RespondsI would like to thank Ian Alexander for his clear exposi-tion of the case for Òimplement customer desiresÓ as a devel-
opment metaphor. His diagram, in particular, admirably sup-

ports his points. However, IÕm not convinced that his picture

of development is sufficient to guide projects.
My most serious objection is the lack of feedback loops in his model. ÒDesiresÓ arenÕt a static target to be met or

missed. If together the team can choose to defer a difficult-

but-not-urgent task, and if the customers later decide that the
whole area of functionality neednÕt be implemented, I would

argue that they have been extremely effective even though

they didnÕt Òimplement customer desires.Ó
Software development at its best is a rich web of relation-ships among people with different perspectives who choose

to work together on common goals. Everyone is responsible

for stating their needs, listening to the needs of others, and
working toward those goals. In the process, they get some of
their needs met and leave others to be met in other ways. ItÕs

not just what the customers want (or what the programmers
want, for that matter), itÕs what everyone can accomplish to-

gether that spells success or failure.Kent Responds
VISITUSONLINE 
www.computer.org/

softwareThe authority on translating software theory into practice, 
IEEE Softwarepositionsitself between pure research and pure practice, transferring ideas, methods, and

experiences among researchers and engineers. Peer-reviewed articles and columns

by real-world experts illuminate all aspects of the industry, including process im-

provement, project management, development tools, software maintenance, Web

applications and opportunities, testing, usability, and much more.
