 IÕm not all that sure about the di-
rection that model-driven devel-
opment appears to be taking.
DonÕt get me wrongÑIÕm a firm

believer in modeling. ItÕs just that

I think that thereÕs a lot more to
development than this. HereÕs my point:

We need to distinguish between 
generativeMDDand Agile MDD. Generative MDD,epitomized by the Object Management
GroupÕs Model Driven Architecture, is

based on the idea that people will use very
sophisticated modeling tools to create very
sophisticated models that they can auto-
matically ÒtransformÓ with those tools to

reflect the realities of various deployment
platforms. Great theoryÑas was the idea
that the world is flat. In my opinion, gen-

erative MDD is a lost cause for the current
generation of developers. Agile MDD will
be a struggle to pull off, but at least it has

a chance of succeeding. I believe that modeling is a way to thinkissues through before you code because it
lets you think at a higher abstraction level.
You can also do this by writing a test be-

fore you write functional code, along the
lines of test-driven development. But this
isnÕt a TDD discussion, so IÕll say nothing
more. IÕm also a firm believer in something that
I call Agile Model Driven Development

(AMDD). An agile model is just barely
good enoughÑit meets its goals and no
more. Because Òjust barely good enoughÓ is
relative, you can consider a sketch, a Uni-
fied Modeling Language statechart, or a de-
tailed physical database model as an agile
model in the right situations. Following an

AMDD approach, I typically use very sim-
ple tools, such as whiteboards and paper,

when I work with users to explore and an-

alyze their requirements. Simple tools are
easy to work with, inclusive (my stakehold-
ers can be actively involved with modeling),

and flexible, and theyÕre not constraining.
TheyÕre exactly what I need when IÕm ex-

ploring the problem domain and identifying

my system architecture.
When it comes to detailed AMDD designmodeling, IÕll often use sophisticated model-
ing tools such as Together ControlCenter

(www.borland.com/together/controlcenter)

or Poseidon (www.gentleware.com) for ob-
Has it been 10years already?The Òuber-
modelingtoolÓ
vision rears itsugly head yetagain.counterpointSeptember/October 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
71Agile Model DrivenDevelopment Is Good
EnoughScott W. Ambler, 
Ronin InternationalContinued on page 72 counterpointcontinued from page 7172IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
formsÕ use as well as you might use as-sembly language to create a Web-based

customer relationship management sys-
tem; theyÕre simply not the most appro-

priate way to express the systemÕs struc-

ture and behavior.
IÕm not saying that we have to expresseach and every detail of our system spec-

ification in one or more UML models.
But weÕre much better off than we are
with 3GLs alone: models donÕt have to

become platform dependent. A reason-
able MDA tool lets you add system spec-
ifications at various abstraction levels
and keeps them synchronized. The con-
cept of marks(mapping-specific annota-tions that you can attach to model ele-
ments) helps keep the models themselves
free from unnecessary platform specifici-

ties. With this kind of technology, we can

provide each bit of system specification
in the formalism thatÕs most appropriate

for this purpose. Examples of such tools
include Interactive ObjectÕs ArcStyler

(www.arcstyler.com) and CompuwareÕs

OptimalJ (www.optimalj.com).
MDA is built on a solid founda-tion, including the Meta-Object Facil-
ity and UML, which are both well-
adopted, ever-maturing formalisms for
specifying metamodels and models. The
agreement to use UML for most model-
ing activities takes us a lot farther than
we were in the days when we could
only agree to use ASCII for the pro-
gramming languages. Today, you can

automatically create UML profiles for a
metamodel given in MOF. Several pow-

erful technology- and domain-specific
metamodels and corresponding UML
profiles have already been standard-
izedÑfor example, Enterprise Distrib-
uted Object Computing or Java Speci-
fication Request 26 for the Java 2
Platform, Enterprise Edition. The better
MDA tools can let users extend and
customize existing model transforma-
tion rules. Also, standards to specify
portable model transformations are un-
derway (see the work on MOF 2.0 for
queries, views, and transformations).Many projects have successfully de-ployed MDA using appropriate tool sup-
port (see www.omg.org/mda/products_

success.htm). The development of repos-itories and tools using UML is itself an
excellent example of applied MDA: You

can download the models from theOMG Web server and use them right
away as input to an MDA model trans-
formation. The UML metamodelÕs 

size alone caters to the substantial sav-
ings that an MDA approach yields in this
scenario.Software engineers are seeing astrong pull toward model-centric de-
velopment. University classes already
teach undergraduate students UML,
and bookshelves are beginning to fill
with MDA material. MDA is here to
stayÑjust as 3GLs were (and still
are) some decades ago. We are now

taking the next evolutionary step.
From all IÕve seen, IÕm convinced that
MDA is the way to go. ItÕs ready for

prime time.Axel Uhlis a software architect in the team developingthe architectural IDE ArcStyler at Interactive Objects Software
and is pursuing a PhD in software architectures for scalable
Internet search at Aachen University. He is actively contribut-

ing to the OMG's MDA standardization efforts. Contact him at
axel.uhl@io-software.com.pointcontinued from page 70ject modeling and ERwin (www3.ca.com/Solutions/Product.asp?ID=260)
for data modeling. Tools such as these

make sense when youÕre trying to

generate code. AMDD implores you

to work with the simplest (not just
simple) tools and depending on your

goal, sometimes the simplest tool is
quite sophisticated. Many developers,

however, choose not to work with

tools such as this and prefer simply to

work with integrated developmentenvironments such as Eclipse (www.
eclipse.org) or Visual Studio (http://

msdn.microsoft.com/vstudio). Every-
one doesnÕt need, or want, sophisti-

cated modeling tools. Notably with
AMDD, programmers write the code
progressively in step with the modelsÑ
AMDD promotes an evolutionary ap-
proach, in which implementation oc-
curs iteratively and incrementally.
To me, generative MDD is based on
an incredibly wobbly foundation.First, we donÕt yet have a standard
modeling language that suffices for
real-world needs, making it difficult
for developers to work together effec-
tively. Every system that IÕve ever built

has both a user interface on the front
end and a database on the back end,
yet UML still doesnÕt address these

fundamental issues. Yes, the common

rhetoric says all you need to do is ap-
ply a few stereotypes to existing UML
diagrams, but as my work on a UML
 September/October 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
73data modeling profile shows (see www.agiledata.org/essays/
umlDataModelingProfile.html), thereÕs a lot more to it than

this, and IÕve just scratched the surface (IÕm also eager to re-
ceive feedback on this work).Second, people simply donÕt have the modeling skills. ItÕs
hard enough to teach people how to create a sequence dia-
gram or statechart on a whiteboard, let alone with a com-

plicated modeling tool. We need to learn to crawl before we

walkÑor run. IÕll be impressed if most developers start

sketching in this in the coming decade.Third, the tools arenÕt there. There are some interesting
tools such as Bridgepoint (www.projtech.com/prods) and

Codagen (www.codagen.com), but theyÕre not in wide use.

The OMG appears to promote the idea that you can cobble
a toolset together via the XML Metadata Interchange stan-
dard, but I question that too. For this vision to work, tool
vendors would need to actually support the XMI specifica-
tion as defined. Yet, past experiences with C
ORBAORB (Ob-ject Request Broker) interoperability show that vendors willoften claim support for a standard but then implement theirown version of it for competitive reasons. Interestingly
enough, numerous modeling tool vendors support XMI, yet
I canÕt find a pair of tools that let me model in both and ex-

port back and forth without loss of information. Go figure.The bottom line is that AMDD is a stretch for most de-
velopers and, at best, the executable MDD vision is viable in
only a few situations. The MDD community should focus

on whatÕs practical and not on ivory tower theories.
Scott W. Ambler
is a senior consultant with Ronin International (www.ronin-intl.com). He
is thought leader of the Agile Modeling methodology (www.agilemodeling.com), a contributing edi-

tor with Software Development(www.sdmagazine.com), and a member of FlashlineÕs (www.
flashline.com) Software Development Productivity Consortium. His latest book is Agile DatabaseTechniques
(John Wiley & Sons, 2004). Contact him at scott.ambler@ronin-intl.com.Scott and I agree that modeling generally is good. How-ever, I disagree that 
generative MDD, as Scott calls it, orModel Driven Architecture is a lost cause. Several industrial
software development projects have already proven it. Take,

for example, Deutsche Bank Bauspar or the Austrian Na-
tional Railroads, reporting total savings around 40 percent

for their first MDA project.With MDA, you can integrate any modeling languagethat you use with your domain experts by using the Meta-

Object Facility (MOF), thus benefitting from automated model

verification and transformation.
MDA does not prevent evolutionary approaches with an
iterative and incremental development process. We use the

MDA tool ArcStyler to develop ArcStyler itself in a team and
proceed iteratively and incrementally without problems, par-
ticularly without MDA-related ones.All MDA modeling languages are formally specified in
the same metamodeling language MOF: a rock-solid founda-
tion. UML profiles used for model representation are also

standardized, as is the specification language for model
transformations.
UML was intentionally kept concise, without domain speci-fics. Instead, UML offers lightweight extensibility, permitting

the creation of UML profiles for metamodels formally speci-

fied in the MOF. You can even create profiles automatically

using MDA.I think that AMDD incurs the cost of modeling but stops
before reaping the true benefits. I will always try to gain

value from my models using MDA, as Scott does for the
tests. IÕve seen MDA pay off so many times, in numerous

real-world projects. So, I remain firmly convinced that it

works.Axel RespondsSigh. The good news is that Axel and I didn't agree. Thatwould have been boring, and in many ways it's because IÕm
focused on the present and Axel is focused on the future. The
reason IÕm not very excited about MDA is because I've heard

similar visions in the past, visions that all failed miserably:Integrated Computer-Aided Software Engineering. I-CASEemerged in the 1980s and failed because the tools couldn't
keep up with changing technology. Few developers had

the requisite modeling skills or the desire to learn them,

and although the tools generated 80 to 90 percent of the
code, the extra 10 percent typically required 90 percent

of the effort.
Application Development Cycle. Not only wasn't the mar-
ket ready for AD/Cycle, it saw through IBM's transparent
veil and realized that its real goal for AD/Cycle was to sell
products and services instead of the stated altruistic aims.
Common Object Request Broker Architecture. Even though
most CORBAvendors complied with the specification, atleast partly, getting their "standard" ORBs (Object Request

Brokers) to work together in practice was very difficult. Ap-

parently, the vendors found significant marketing benefit in

saying their tools were "CORBAcompliant" yet little benefitin making it easy to work with their competitorsÕ products.I'm jaded when it comes to the MDA because I just don'tsee how it doesn't suffer from the same problems that sank 

I-CASE, AD/Cycle, and C
ORBA. Don't get me wrong, I would
be very happy to see the MDA vision succeed because IÕm

clearly pro-modeling and, like most developers, like to work

with good tools that increase my productivity. I'm just not go-

ing to hold my breath waiting.Scott Responds