 66IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
0740-7459/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEEIn April 2000, the Internet bubble burst and
the business world was brought back to re-
ality, discovering that business fundamen-

tals hadnÕt changed. However, it isnÕt so

clear whether the fundamental rules of soft-
ware development have changed. I worked as a software process consultantto two Internet startups during the boomÑ

letÕs call them XYZ.net and PQR.com to pro-

tect their identities, as both are still in busi-
ness. XYZ.net focused on fundamental
infrastructure services for Internet users and,
when I joined them, was about to start work
on its third generation of software to support
its upcoming initial public offering. PQR.com
was an online electronic retailer in the process
of re-architecting its system to support its pro-
jected growth and to position itself for a fu-
ture IPO. The two common factors between
the companies were my involvement and the
fact that both organizations were facing phe-nomenal business growth and thus needed tore-architect and redevelop their systems. They
were also hiring new developers to help them
deliver this new software: XYZ.net had
grown from three to 30 developers in less

than a year, and PQR.com had grown from

the original two founders to 25 developers in
a similar time frame. Both companies felt they
needed a more mature software process that
included software modeling. Both organiza-
tions had very young staffÑthe average age
was in the mid-20sÑand both had team-
oriented cultures.Furthermore, both companies wanted todefine, and then train their staff in, a version
of the Rational Unified Process1tailored tomeet their specific situations, with extensions
from other software processes.2,3Both or-ganizations wanted to be able to claim to po-
tential investors that they were using an ac-
credited software process yet didnÕt want
focusLessons in Agility fromInternet-Based
DevelopmentScott W. Ambler, 
Ronin InternationalAt the peak of the Internet revolution hype, we were inundated by
claims that the fundamental rules of business had changed. To

support this new business paradigm, new companies sprang up
virtually overnight, often delivering very good software veryquickly. I wondered whether the rules of software development had also

changed. Were we witnessing a paradigm shift in the way we develop soft-

ware? Was there something to the concept of Òdevelopment in Internet timeÓ?
The authordescribes two
Internet startup
companies that
adopted effective
and efficient
modeling and
documentation
practices, one taking
a communal, team-
based approach and
the other a chief-
architect approach.
They found a 
Òsweet spotÓ where
modeling efforts can
provide significant
benefit without
incurring the costs
of onerous
documentation.engineering Internet software
 unnecessary bureaucracy to slow them down.Both organizations needed to improve their
modeling practices; senior management felt
that although they had bright, talented devel-
opers, they werenÕt as effective as they could

be. The developers at the two organizations
had mixed feelings about this, with attitudes
ranging from ÒitÕs about timeÓ to Òmodeling

is a waste of time; all I need is source code.Ó  The tailored version of the RUP needed toinclude an enterprise architecture modeling

process that would define their technical and
application infrastructures. This enterprise ar-
chitecture effort was beyond the RUPÕs scope,

which focused on the software process for a
single project instead of a portfolio of proj-

ects. Furthermore, both organizations needed
effective approaches to their modeling and
documentation on individual projects. Al-
though the RUP clearly included sophisti-
cated modeling processes, each organization
felt the RUP approach to modeling was too
cumbersome for Internet-based development
and wanted to find a better way to work.Communal architectureTo architect the new generation of
XYZ.netÕs software, the company intro-

duced an architecture team comprising the

technical leads from each development
team, the vice president of systems, the chief

technology officer, the quality assurance

and testing manager, and several senior de-

velopers. The first week the team met for

several afternoons to identify where they
were going, what their fundamental require-
ments were, and then to propose an initial
architecture to support these needs. When
they werenÕt modeling the new architecture,

everyone worked on their normal day-to-
day jobs. XYZ.net was a round-the-clock
operation: no one could simply stop evolv-
ing the existing software. This had the side
benefit of giving people time to reflect on

the proposed architecture as well as to dis-
cuss ideas with co-workers. During the architecture modeling sessions,they drew diagrams on whiteboards. At first,
the team tried to use a CASE tool connected

to a projector but found this to be insuffi-

cientÑthe person operating the tool could
not keep up with the conversation, and the

tool wasnÕt flexible enough to meet our needs

(they needed more than the Unified Model-

ing Language4diagrams that it supported).The whiteboard also required little training
to work with and allowed them to swiftly

switch back and forth between modelers. As

the team modeled, people would provide in-
put and insights, question assumptions, share
past experiences, and even talk about poten-
tial implementation strategies. The simpler

tool enabled them to work together as a

team. Whenever they needed permanent doc-
umentation, they would simply draw the

models on paper and then scan them to pro-

duce electronic copies. Occasionally the team

would capture the model in a CASE tool, but

the scanner approach was more common be-

cause few developers had access to the CASE
tool due to platform incompatibilities.
The team drew UML diagrams but foundthey needed a much wider range of tech-
niquesÑsome of the software was written in

procedural languages, so they needed nonob-
ject diagrams such as structure charts. They
also drew dataflow diagrams to depict work-

flow issues and free-form diagrams to depict
the systemÕs technical architecture. 
Once the initial architecture model was in
place, they continued to meet almost weekly

(only when they needed to). The meetings
were typically one or two hours long and al-
ways included an informal agenda that iden-
tified one or more issues to be addressed. The

owner of each issue was responsible for ex-
plaining it, what he or she saw as the likely

solution, and potential repercussions of this

approach. Often, someone would come to an

architecture session with the issue mostly

solved; the group would simply review it and
provide appropriate feedback. Presentations
were typically done in a Òchalk talkÓ manner,

in which the owner would describe an issue
by drawing on the whiteboard. This worked
well because many people would already be
familiar with the issue, having been involved
in earlier discussions with the owner outside

of the architecture modeling sessions. Introducing a chief architectTaking a different approach, PQR.com
decided to hire an experienced senior devel-

oper as a chief architect, an Òold guyÓ in his
early 30s who had built scalable systems be-
fore. He spent his initial week with the

company learning about the business and
the current status of the systems, mostly

through discussions with senior IT and op-
erations staff. He then ran small modeling
March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
67Bothorganizationsneededeffectiveapproaches to theirmodeling anddocumentationon individualprojects. sessions to identify architectural require-ments as well as potential architectural so-
lutions. His approach was to hold one-hour
Òchalk talkÓ sessions involving two or three
other people, followed by several hours of
modeling privately with a diagramming tool
and a word processor to explore and docu-
ment what he had learned. He then posted

his models as HTML pages on the internal
network where everyone, developers and
business people alike, could view them and

potentially provide feedback. It was quite
common for people to schedule an im-
promptu meeting with him to discuss his

work or to simply send him an email.
Documenting the architectureBoth organizations chose to documenttheir architecture to make it available to all
their software developers. Their approaches
had several interesting similarities:Official documentation was HTML based.
Both companies chose HTML (and JPEG
or GIF pictures) to support the wide range
of operating systems the developers used,
thus making the documentation accessible
to everyone. Furthermore, the developers
were intimately familiar with HTML and
had existing tools to view and edit the
documents. They created only overview documenta-
tion. To remain effective, both compa-

nies documented only overview infor-

mation pertaining to the architecture,
recording the critical information that
developers needed to know to under-
stand how it worked. The documenta-

tion was primarily focused around an
architecture diagram showing major
software services deployed within the
technical environment, with overview

descriptions for each software service or
system and appropriate links to the doc-

umentation pages maintained by indi-
vidual project teams. A printout of the

architectural documentation would
have been no more than 15 pages.The information architecture wasnÕt

special. The databases and file storage
systems appeared on the system archi-

tecture diagram along with applications
and software services. The data team
was treated the same as any other proj-
ect team: all the teams provided func-
tionality that other teams needed, andeach team in effect was the customer of

several other teams. This required
everyone to work together to resolve
any configuration and release manage-
ment issues. This was unlike many or-
ganizations where the data team is con-

sidered a corporate infrastructure team
that supports application development
teams. At both companies, every team

was an infrastructure team.Modeling and documentation were sepa-
rate efforts. Both companies realized that
the act of modeling and the act of writing

documentation are two distinct efforts.

In the past, most developers did not have
significant experience modeling, so they
equated it to using sophisticated CASE
tools that generated detailed documenta-
tion. After experiencing several modeling
sessions using simple tools such as white-
boards, after which someone wrote up

the appropriate summary documentation

(if any), they learned they could achieve
the benefits of modeling without incur-
ring the costs of writing and maintaining
cumbersome documentation.
The main difference in their approacheswas how architectural documentation was
updated over time. PQR.com had a desig-
nated owner of the documentation, the chief
architect, whereas XYZ.net took a more

communal approach and allowed anyone to
update the documentation. At PQR.com,
people were required to first discuss their sug-
gestions with the chief architect, who then
acted accordingly. At XYZ.net, people would

first talk with the perceived owner of a part of
the documentation, typically the person ini-
tially assigned to that aspect of the architec-
ture, and then update it accordingly. No one

seemed to abuse this privilege by changing the
architectural documentation to further their
own political goals. One reason was that the
XYZ.net developers were a closely knit team.
Second, because all HTML pages were man-
aged under their version control system, there
was a record of who changed each page.Comparing the two modelingapproachesLetÕs compare the two approaches to en-
terprise architectural modeling with regard

to several critical factors:The maindifference in theirapproacheswas howarchitecturaldocumentationwas updatedover time.68IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
 Calendar time. XYZ.netÕs architecture
team required less calendar time to de-
velop their initial architecture and then
to evolve it over time, because several
people worked on it in parallel.Acceptance. The communal approachtaken by XYZ.net clearly resulted in
quicker acceptance by the developers
for two reasons. First, representatives of
each development team participated in

the architectural team, and they effec-
tively ÒsoldÓ the architecture to their
teammates, often simply by asking for
their help when they were working on

portions of the architecture. Second,

everyone could update the architecture
documentation as they required, thus

promoting a sense of ownership.Cost. PQR.comÕs approach required less
overall effort because the chief architect
performed most of the architectural

modeling, enabling his co-workers to
focus on other tasks. Control. The chief architect at PQR.comprovided a single source of control, al-
beit one that became a bottleneck at
times. The team approach provided sev-
eral sets of eyes working on any given

aspect of the architecture, although its
shared ownership of documentation
provided opportunities for mischief 
(although to my knowledge none ever
occurred).Correctness. Both approaches resultedin scalable architectures that met the
needs of their respective organizations.
Process compatibility. Both approachesworked well within a RUP environment,
although the chief-architect approach
seemed to be better attuned to the 
RUP than the communal-architecture
approach.Project-specific modelingThe project process was similar at bothorganizations: systems were developed in a
highly iterative manner and released incre-
mentally in short cycles ranging from six to
12 weeks, depending on the project. The
marketing department wrote the initial re-
quirements documents, typically high-level
needs statements. The IT department heads

and the project leads did a reality check on
these documents to rework unrealistic ideas

before presenting them to the teams. Mod-
eling sessions occurred as each project teamrequired, with some team members meeting

with appropriate project stakeholders to
work through an issue in detail. These mod-
eling efforts were similar to those performed

by the XYZ.net architecture team: people

met and worked on the models as a team
around a whiteboard. Often, they would de-

velop several models at onceÑperhaps sev-
eral use cases along with some screen
sketches, some sequence diagrams, and a
class diagram. They did not have Òuse case
modeling sessionsÓ or Òclass modeling ses-
sionsÓÑjust modeling sessions. At XYZ.net, the development teams had
one to eight members, each of whom fo-

cused on one part of the overall infrastruc-
ture. At any given time, each team would be

at a different place in the project life cycle.

Sometimes two or more teams would need

to schedule their releases simultaneously to

enable various subsystem dependencies. The
individual teams knew of those dependen-
cies because they worked closely with the
developers from other teams, often walking

across the floor or up the stairs to sit down
and talk with them.
These modeling sessions differed fromtraditional ones. First, they iteratively did
the minimal amount required that let them

start coding, with most modeling sessions
lasting from 10 minutes to an hour. Second,

each modeling sessionÕs goal was to explore

one or more issues to determine a strategy

for moving forward; the goal wasnÕt simply

to produce an artifact. Their goal was to
model, not to producemodels.Developers worked with technical writersto produce the release notes, installation
procedures, and user documentation. The
release notes were the formal documentation
for the subsystems, written as HTML pages
and posted online so that all internal devel-
opers could see them. The release notes typ-
ically summarized the newly implemented
requirements, the design (diagrams were
typically scans of their primary sketches and
were posted as JPEG files), and a listing of

the files making up the subsystem. Luckily,

XYZ.net developers were already producing
release notes following this process in their
premodeling days, so the only change they
needed to implement was to add the design
diagrams that presented an overview of their
work. At first, some developers included de-March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
69The projectprocess wassimilar at bothorganizations:systems weredeveloped in ahighly iterativemanner.
 tailed diagrams in their release notes, butthey quickly found that they provided little
value. When the developers wanted detailed
information, they went straight to the source

code, which they knew was up to date.
Developers also worked closely with testengineers. The developers needed help unit-
testing their software, and the test engineers
needed help learning the software to de-
velop acceptance tests for it. Before soft-

ware could be put into production, the

quality assurance department first had to
test it to ensure that it fulfilled its require-
ments, it was adequately documented, and
it integrated with the other subsystems.
The development process worked similarlyat PQR.com, with teams of three to six peo-
ple. Developers from the various teams

worked closely together, helping one another

where necessary. PQR.com developers took a

more formalized approach to documentation,
writing requirements documents, design doc-
uments, and technical release notes. The re-
quirements documents were based on the ini-
tial marketing requirements documents and
the requirements models produced from
them. The requirements document was writ-
ten in parallel with development of the design
document and source code and was typically
finalized during the last week of an iteration:
the teams worked iteratively, not serially, so

they could react to new and changing require-
ments as needed. A requirements document
included a use case diagram and detailed use
cases for the release as well as related business
rules, technical (nonfunctional) requirements,
and constraints as required. Design docu-
ments included screen specifications when ap-
plicable (typically just a JPEG picture of an
HTML page) and applicable overview dia-

grams; also, the developers preferred source
code to detailed design diagrams.An interesting similarity between the two
companies was their approach to data: their

data efforts were treated just like develop-

ment projects. However, the data teams

worked differently than the other project

teams, investing more time in detailed mod-

eling. At both companies, the data groups

used a CASE tool to create physical data
models of their relational database schemas.
The tool generated and reverse-engineered
data definition language (DDL) code, includ-
ing database triggers, thereby making the ad-
ditional detailed modeling effort worthwhile.
Dissension within the ranksSeveral individuals at XYZ.net didnÕt ap-
preciate the need for an increased effort in
modeling and documentation. This was due
to one or more factors: they perceived them-

selves as hard-core programmers, they pre-
ferred to work alone or with others of simi-

lar mindsets, or their people skills needed
improvement. Moreover, they typically didnÕt

have good modeling and documentation
skills, nor did most of their co-workers. For

all but one person, a combination of peer
pressure and the ability to see Òwhich way
the winds were blowingÓ motivated them to
go along with adopting a tailored version of
the RUP, albeit with a little grumbling. The

lone holdout required minor disciplinary ac-
tion: the head of development had a few per-
sonal chats with him, he wasnÕt allowed to

move on from his current project until he had

written the documentation and the quality

assurance department had accepted it, and

his promotion to team lead was put on hold

for a few months. There were few problems at PQR.com,
likely because its staff was more aware of

modelingÕs benefits to begin with. People

had various levels of modeling skills, so they
received training, but nobody was actively
antagonistic toward increased levels of
modeling as long as they received training.Comparison with traditional projectdevelopmentHow was this different from traditionaldevelopment practices, particularly of typical
RUP instantiations?  From the 50,000-foot

level, it wasnÕt different at all. Both compa-

nies identified requirements and then archi-
tected, designed, coded, tested, and deployed
their software. However, at ground level,

there were some interesting differences.First, development started with the enter-prise architecture model. To fit in with and ex-

ploit other systems, all project teams started
with the existing enterprise architecture

model because it showed how their efforts fit
into the overall whole. When the project
teams delved into the details, they sometimes
discovered the need to update the architec-
ture, which they did following their organiza-
tionÕs chosen practices, described earlier.
Development was also highly iterative.Project teams did a little modeling, coding,

and testing and then repeated as necessary.
An interestingsimilaritybetween thetwo companieswas theirapproach todata.70IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
 They did not take the serial approach ofcompletely developing and accepting the re-
quirements model, then completely develop-
ing and accepting an analysis model, and so
on. This let them react swiftly to changes in
their highly competitive markets and rap-
idly deliver software to their end users.
Also, modeling was streamlined. Theymodeled just enough and then got on with
implementation, avoiding analysis paralysis
while at the same time showing that their

models actually worked (or didnÕt) by writ-

ing code based on them.Moreover, both organizations used sim-
ple modeling tools. With the exception of

the two data teams, the projects preferred
simple sketches on whiteboards over dia-
grams created using sophisticated CASE
tools. This sped up the modeling process, al-
though it might have slowed development
when developers could not automatically
generate code from their modelsÑa feature

of many modern toolsÑor reverse-engineer
existing code to create diagrams to help
them understand it.
Finally, documentation in the two proj-
ects was minimal. Both companies im-
proved the quality of their system documen-

tation and managed to find the Òsweet
spotÓ where it was just barely enough to
meet their needs and no more. Many tradi-
tional projects produce far more documen-

tation than they need, reducing their ability
to implement new features and sometimes
even causing the project to fail completely.
5Setting the foundation for agile
modelingMy experiences on these two projectsprovided significant insights for what was to
become the Agile Modeling methodology.
6AM is a practice-based methodology for ef-
fective modeling and documentation of soft-
ware-based systems. Principles and values
guide the AM practices, intended for daily
application by software professionals. AM is
not hard and fast, nor is it a prescriptive
processÑin other words, it does not define
detailed procedures for how to create a given
type of model. Instead, it provides advice for
how to be effective as a modeler.
This is different from modeling methodolo-gies such as Iconix7or Catalysis8that suggest
a specific collection of modeling artifacts and
describe how to create those artifacts. WhereIconix promotes applying use case models, ro-
bustness diagrams, UML sequence diagrams,
and UML class diagrams, AM suggests that

you apply multiple models on your projects

and the right artifacts for the situation. AM is

complementary to most traditional modeling
methodologiesÑit does not replace Iconix and
Catalysis but instead provides complementary

advice for improving your effectiveness with
them. AMÕs scope is simply modeling and doc-

umentation. It is meant to be used in conjunc-
tion with other agile software processes9,10such as Extreme Programming,11Scrum,12and the Dynamic System Development
Method,13as well as Ònear-agileÓ instantia-
tions of the Unified Process.AM adopts the values of XPÑsimplicity,
feedback, communication, and courageÑand
extends it with humility. These values are

used to derive a collection of principles (see
Table 1) that in turn drive AMÕs practices (see

Table 2). Nothing about it is truly new. It is a

reformulation of concepts that many software
professionals have been following for years.March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
71Table 1The principles of agile modelingCore principlesSupplementary principles
Assume simplicityContent is more important than 
representationEmbrace changeEveryone can learn from everyone else
Incremental changeKnow your models
Model with a purposeKnow your tools 
Multiple modelsLocal adaptation
Quality workMaximize stakeholder investment 
Rapid feedbackOpen and honest communication 
Software is your primary goalWork with peopleÕs instincts 
Enabling the next effort is your secondary goal
Travel light
Table 2Agile modeling practicesCore practicesSupplementary practices
Active stakeholder participationUpdate only when it hurts 
Apply the right artifactsUse the simplest tools 
Collective ownershipApply modeling standards 
Consider testability Apply patterns gently 
Create several models in parallelDiscard temporary models 
Create simple contentFormalize contract models 
Depict models simplyModel to communicate 
Display models publiclyModel to understand 
Iterate to another artifactReuse existing resources 
Model in small incrementsModel with othersProve it with code Lessons learnedXYZ.net and PQR.com were successful
because they followed a collection of com-

monsense approaches. LetÕs explore the les-

sons learned at XYZ.net and PQR.com and
see how they relate to AM.
People matter.
Everyone worked to-gether to make the effort succeedÑit

was as simple as that. We operated un-

der a philosophy along the lines of the
Agile AllianceÕs Òvalue of individuals

and interactions over processes and
toolsÓ9and Alan M. DavisÕs 131st prin-
ciple, ÒPeople are the key to success.Ó14You donÕt need nearly as many docu-

ments as you think. Both companiesbuilt mission-critical software very
quickly, software that is still in opera-

tion several years later and that has been
modified significantly sinceÑand we
did so without creating mounds of doc-

umentation. Fred Brooks provides simi-
lar advice with what he calls the docu-
mentary hypothesis: ÒAmid a wash of
paper, a small number of documents be-

come the critical pivots around which
every projectÕs management evolves.Ó
15In short, the teams followed the principle

ÒTravel light,Ó producing just enough

documentation and updating it only
when they needed to, much along the
lines of AMÕs practice ÒUpdate only

when it hurts.Ó Communication is critical
. The amount
of required documentation was reduced
because both organizations had a high-
communication environment. Develop-
ers worked closely together, face-to-face

with their co-workers and customers
(either marketing and sales staff or the
chief technology officer). Models were
left on the walls so that everyone could

see them, as AM suggests with its prac-

tice ÒDisplay models publicly.Ó By do-

ing this, developers could refer to the
models when explaining their strategies
to others and often received valuable
feedback, often simply in the form of

questions, from people who had taken
the time to look over the models. We

had rediscovered DavisÕs 136th princi-

ple, ÒCommunication skills are essen-
tialÓ and his 8th principle ÒCommuni-
cate with customers/users.Ó14Modeling tools arenÕt nearly as useful as

you think. Although we honestly tried
to use the leading UML modeling tool at
the time, as well as an open source soft-
ware offering, the tools simply didnÕt of-

fer a lot of value. We werenÕt interested

in creating a lot of documentation, and
the tools didnÕt generate code for our

deployment environment. The only use-
ful CASE tools were the data-modeling

tools from which diagrams were printed
and DDL code generated. We did, how-

ever, take advantage of some simple

tools, whiteboards and flip charts, and
were very effective doing so. This expe-
rience reflects the findings and tech-

niques of the user-centered design com-

munity in the late 1980s16and iscaptured in AMÕs practice ÒUse the sim-

plest tools.ÓYou need a wide variety of modeling

techniques in your intellectual toolkit.The techniques of the UML, although
useful, were not sufficientÑboth com-
panies needed to perform process, user
interface, and data modeling. Further-
more, each developer understood some
but not all of the modeling techniques
that we were using, resulting in the

teams stumbling at times because some-
one would try to model something using

an ill-suited technique. These concepts

are captured in AMÕs principle ÒMulti-

ple modelsÓ and its practice ÒApply the
right artifact(s)ÓÑadvice similar to
what everyoneÕs grandfather has likely

said at some point, ÒUse the right tool
for the job.Ó The concept of requiring

multiple modeling techniques is nothing
new; in the 1970s, structured methods

such as those promoted by Chris Gane
and Trish Sarson
17supported this con-
cept. As the teams modeled, they would

often work on two or three diagrams in

parallel, each of which offered a differ-
ent view on what they were discussing,

and would move back and forth be-
tween the diagrams as appropriate, sim-
ilar to AMÕs practices ÒCreate several

models in parallelÓ and ÒIterate to an-
other artifact,Ó respectively.
Big up-front design isnÕt required
. Al-though XYZ.net spent a few afternoons

formulating their initial enterprise ar-
chitectural strategy, they quickly got
XYZ.net andPQR.com weresuccessfulbecause theyfollowed acollection ofcommonsenseapproaches.72IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
 down to work. Similarly, the chief ar-
chitect at PQR.com also created an ini-

tial high-level model. Then he started to
work with individual teams to imple-
ment portions of it, updating his model

as required. Both companies discovered
that they didnÕt need weeks or months

of detailed modeling and documenta-
tion to get it right, that hours were suf-

ficient. Instead, they worked along the
lines of AMÕs practice ÒModel in small

increments,Ó modeling the architecture
a little and then either exploring strate-
gies by proving them with code or sim-

ply starting work on the actual software
itself. In his essay ÒPassing the Word,Ó
15Brooks provides similar adviceÑthat
architects must be able to show an im-

plementation of their ideas, that they

must be able to prove that their archi-

tecture works in practice.Reuse the wheel, donÕt reinvent it
. AtXYZ.net, we took advantage of open
source software whenever we could,

building mission-critical systems quickly
and effectively as a result. Through open
source we had rediscovered DavisÕs 84th

principle: ÒYou can reuse without a big

investment.Ó We reused more than just

open source software; we also adopted

industry standards wherever possible,
existing architectural strategies wher-
ever possible, and applied design pat-
terns when applicable. We discovered

there was a wealth of material available
to us when we chose to reuse it, sup-

porting AMÕs practice ÒReuse existing

resources.ÓAgile approaches to software develop-
ment worked for these two Internet-
based companies. Both XYZ.net and
PQR.com applied existing, proven principles
of software development in new ways to de-
liver complex, mission-critical software in a
highly iterative and incremental manner. The

lessons they learned apply beyond Internet de-
velopment: most organizations can benefit
from a shared architecture across projects as

well as more effective and efficient modeling
and documentation practices. Many of the

Òmodern dayÓ principles and practices of
leading-edge development processes are the
same (or slightly modified) principles and
practices of yesteryear. Although the funda-

mentals are still the fundamentals, the way in
which the fundamentals are applied has
changedÑagilely, not prescriptively.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
References1.P. Kruchten, 
The Rational Unified Process: An Intro-duction, 2nd ed., Addison Wesley Longman, Reading,
Mass., 2000.2.S.W. Ambler, ÒEnterprise Unified Process,Ó 2001,
www.ronin-intl.com/publications/unifiedProcess.htm.
3.S.W. Ambler, 
Process PatternsÑBuilding Large-ScaleSystems Using Object Technology
, Cambridge Univ.
Press, New York, 1998.
4.Object Management Group, ÒThe Unified Modeling
Language (UML), Version 1.4,Ó 2001, www.omg.org/

technology/documents/formal/uml.htm.5.J.A. Highsmith III, 
Adaptive Software Development: A Collaborative Approach to Managing Complex 
Systems, Dorset House, New York, 2000.
6.S.W. Ambler, 
Agile Modeling, John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 2002.
7.D. Rosenberg and K. Scott, 
Use Case Driven ObjectModeling with UML: A Practical Approach, AddisonWesley Longman, Reading, Mass., 1999.
8.D.F. DÕSouza and A.C. Wills, 
Objects, Components,and Frameworks with UML: The Catalysis Approach,Addison Wesley Longman, Reading, Mass., 1999.
9.K. Beck et al., ÒManifesto for Agile Software Develop-
ment,Ó 2001, www.agilealliance.org.
10.A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development, AddisonWesley Longman, Reading, Mass., 2002.
11.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming ExplainedÑEmbraceChange, Addison Wesley Longman, Reading, Mass.,
2000.12.M. Beedle and K. Schwaber, 
Agile Software Develop-ment with SCRUM, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River,
N.J., 2001.13.J. Stapleton, 
DSDM, Dynamic Systems DevelopmentMethod: The Method in Practice, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Mass., 1997.14.A.M. Davis, 
201 Principles of Software Development,McGraw Hill, New York, 1995.
15.F.P. Brooks, 
The Mythical Man Month: Essays on Soft-ware Engineering, Anniversary Edition, 2nd ed., Addi-son-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1995.
16.J. Greenbaum and M. Kyng, eds., 
Design at Work: Co-
operative Design of Computer Systems, Lawrence Erl-baum Assoc., Hillsdale, N.J., 1991.17.C. Gane and T. Sarson, 
Structured Systems Analysis:Tools and Techniques
, Prentice Hall, Upper SaddleRiver, N.J., 1979.
March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
73About the AuthorScott W. Ambler
is president of and a principal consultant for Ronin International, Inc.(www.ronin-intl.com) and author of several software development books, including 
The ObjectPrimer2/e (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001) and 
Agile Modeling(John Wiley & Sons, 2002).His professional interests focus on identifying and exploring techniques to improve software
developersÕ effectiveness. He received a masters in information science and a BSc in computer
science, both from the University of Toronto.  He is a member of the IEEE and ACM. Contact

him at scott.ambler@ronin-intl.com.