 I 0 This model lets you develop multiple finctions concun-en& fiom requirements speczfication to system test. It has been used to develop a large- scale communication gstem. n Loncurrent, Development Process Model MIKIO AOYAMA, Fujitsu ment cycle has 
become a major goal h software development, yet few conven- tional process models address 
this issue. In an effort to shorten 
the cycle, devel- opers are looking 
at ways to alter the de- 
velopment process from sequential to concurrent. As th~s trend continues, the 
need for a concurrent process model is growing. In the mid 1980s, we at Fujitsu created a model that lets 
you develop 
multiple functions concurrently 
over the entire 
development process - from re uire- the last five years, we have applied the concurrent-development model 
to the development of a large-scale communi- cation system and 
have produced more than one 
million hes of source code. A sdar system developed with 
a conven- tional, sequential 
process model had 
a development cycle of one year. Our de- velopment cycle was three months. The complexity of concurrent devel- mens specification to system test. 9 For opment forced us to add new process- management techtuques and 
to reengi- neer conventional ones. 
We drew much of the model's underlying philosophy from the principles of continuous pro- 
cess improvement found in Japanese 
production systems for hardware 
assem- bly. Shortening the development 
cycle was an important goal of 
the project, be- 
cause communication systems are rapid- 
ly evolving to provide hundreds of new features such 
as Integrated Services of Digital Networks and computer-com- 
munication-integrated services. However, our initial goal expanded 
to a reengineering 
of the entire 
develop- ment process. Part of the reason is that a short development cycle makes 
the pro- ject riskier 
but helps expose potedal problems in the development process it- self. We found, for example, that we were forced to manage the process more carefd- ly. To control the process, as well as the - ~~ ~____~~ 46 07407459/93/07M)/w46/$03 00 0 IEEE JULY 1993  managing large-scale projects. 
In this article, I describe some of the lessons learned in managing 
the concur- rent model, focusing on 
the management of the concurrent process itself and touch- ing briefly on organizational issues. 11 EVOLUTIONARY CHANGE Figure 1 shows the two-dimensional nature of the changes in software develop- 
ment. Along one axis, the process is mov- ing from sequential 
to concurrent; along 
the other, &om centralized to distributed. Within these axes are four 
types of process model: + Centralized, sequential. This model reflects the conventional development 
process. Development teams are located within a single organization or at a single site, and development proceeds sequen- tially from requirements 
specification to system test. This model can be widely 
ap- plied to developing large-scale systems, 
from business-data-processing to real- time, mission-critical systems. 
Its draw- backs are a long development cycle and difficulty in allocating large 
numbers of developers in a single site. + Centralized, concurrent. Deveiop- ment teams are still within the same orga- nization or at the same site, but teams are developing multiple features concur- 
rently. While this model can shorten the 
development cycle, it creates a new, com- plex problem: how to coordmate multiple concurrent activities. + D&lmted, sequential. Development is split among teams that are not located within the 
same organization. Typically, this occurs when some 
part of the process, like coding, is conaacted to 
multiple soft- ware houses. Although process manage- ment is not as complex as that in concur- 
rent development, resource distribution 
causes many problems. 
It is costly to collect and disseminate information 
among distributed development 
teams. Divihg the process into multiple teams may block the smooth flow of information and development 
knowledge. + Dfibuted, concurrent. Multiple de- 
velopment organizations 
are concurrently 
develop- ing multiple features of a system. This is the ulti- mate model for downsiz- ing the development pro- cess and 
organization. The complexity is almost double that of any other model because you 
are combining distribution 
and concurrency issues, but the benefits are well worth the trouble. 
The shorter development model first to a centralized, concurrent 
model, and Snally to a dismbuted concur- 
rent model. The evolutionary path de- 
pends largely on where the development effort is to begin with. 
For example, our first transition was to concurrency, since our initial goal was to shorten the 
development cycle. However, the con- WHAT current process is much 
EVOLUTIONARY more complex than a tra- ditional process, 
so we PATH YOU also learned much about TAKE DEPENDS process management. 
.. Our work in developing LARGELY ON and verifymg 
new man- WHERE YOU agement techniques 
helped us be better pre- pared for the second tran- sition, to a distributed concurrent model. For ARE TO BEGIN WITH. cycle helps exposepoten- tial problems in the 
development process, which can lead 
to more reliable, 
cost-ef- fective products. Ths evolution, which 
affects every- thing from individual developers 
to entire 
projects, caused 
us to rethink the develop- ment process. We evolved from a centralized, sequential 
example, we were able 
to use our process-definition and redesign techniques in maintaining 
a common pro- cess baseline among geographcally dis- tributed development 
teams. Everyone spoke the same development 
language, and maintained a consistent 
level of qual- ity in both the development work and the resulting products. 
IEEE SOFTWARE 47  ! I 4 Base svstem: Release 1 1 Lr 4 Enhancement Release 1 Figure 2. Serial deuekpnent uemis concurrent deuelopment. 
In serial development, an enhancement can be onCV a jinciion; in concuirent rta™elopment it uzn be a unit that c0mpﬂSes niiiltipk $maions or modules. Both .y?msshmn are iwhing, hit at diffwent speeds. 171 conciiwent dezdopment, we can delivw ??iziltip~e~ii2.s in less time becansr enhanremeiits are being done with pipelinedproce.sse.i nnd cyclic tmctimz, not wth n serial process. Cm2seyrwnt,$, integration aid qrtem test can be ihne endie?; and there i.r less time hemeen re1ea.ses. CONCURRENT DEVELOPMENT iMoreover, because 
conventional niodels 
include some concurrent entities, devel- opers face n~any of the same problems in 
concurrently executing processes that they face in concurrent development. + Conaiweniy is coarse-pined. In se- quential models, some program modules are 
Figure 2 shows the concurrent 
devel- opment model, which 
differs from con- 
ventional process models in three 
wavy: + Concmwncy is in the entiir process. Even conventional se- quential process models 
have some process enti- 
ties that can be executed c o ncu rr en t 1 y i 
m pl e- 
mented at lower develop I WE BORROWED concurrently. In our model, however, the en- tire develo~ment Drocess ment levels, where the concvrrency unit is at the module. or fine-prained. v can be executed concur- PHllOSOPHlES level. In concurrent de- rently. velopment, 
the concurr- 
+ It allows ‚process in ency unit can be a feature the lurge. ﬂVarious process 
ENT that comprises multiple models - from the wa- functions or modules. terfall and spiral models The developer must to the new pmdignls™ and 
other varieties™ - have been proposed. However, these tradi- 
tional models focus on a single sequence 
of software-development processes; concur- rent development focuses on the 
concur- rent execmion of 
multiple processes, just 
as programming in the large focuses on the execution of 
multiple programs. 
therefore deai with how 
processes and 
products interact at higher levels, which most 
mdi- dona1 inodels ignore. 
CHALLENGES The structure and dynamic behavior 
of a concurrent development process are much more complex than in conventional 
models. We found some 
issues to be sim- 
ilar to those encountered in 
the produc- tion process of Japanese hardware 
sys- tems, which emphasize 
continuous process improvement?,™ 
The heart of these production 
systems is 
the careful or- chestration of various management tech- niques for 
the production process. Al- though we certainly see differences between them and software development, 
we have borrowed some 
of their underly- 
ing philosophes. 
In process management, 
we identified several challenges sternming directly from 
the nature 
of concurrent development. The most significant 
is the complicated interaction among concurrent 
processes and products 
that may be updated concur- 
rently. Figure 
3 shows th~s complex inter- 
action. An enhancement is a unit that 
com- prises multiple functions 
or modules. Ll/lultiple enhancements can be developed concurrently and integrated 
as a system, then delivered to customers as a release. Process interactions. The developer must 
consider two 
types of process interactions 
in concurrent development: multiple-en- 
hancement and multiple-release. 
The de- velopment of a release involves 
multiple enhancements that may interact each other. The delay of an 
enhancement may affect other enhancements and 
may delay 
the entire release. In multiple-release interactions, the 
delay of a release may 
require reschedul- 
ing the development ofsuccessive releases. 
If the delay exceeds some threshold ab- 
sorbed by successive releases, the cumula- tive delay can 
jeopardize the project. Product interactions. Multiple teams working on related enhancements 
may disrupt the system™s continuity. In re- quirements specifications, for example, this can cause 
inconsistent or incomplete spec- 
ifications. In design and implementation, 
simultaneous updates to 
a single module inay date that module™s consistency. 
These problems are 
familiar in the 
de- sign of concurrent systems, but interac- 
tions among requirements specifications 
are at a higher level than those encoun- 
48 JULY 1993  tered later 
during design and implementa- 
tion. In higher level development pro- cesses, interactions are intangible 
and are created as specifications are elaborated. 
Furthermore, in integration and system 
test, we must ensure 
that multiple releases developed concurrently have not violated the consistency of the entire 
system. IMPLEMENTATION MANAGEMENT To manage concurrent development, we created the system shown in Figure 
4, which consists 
of five main elements, inte- 
grating a range of management tech- 
niques together with a support environ- 
ment. Elements in 
this system are not new in and 
of themselves, but their 
implemen- tation is novel because 
we are applpg them to a concurrent-development scheme. We had to invent new manage- ment techniques and reengineer old ones. The focus of 
thls article is on process man- agement, although 
I briefly present the 
other four elements 
to give a picture of the complexity we faced: + Procesr management. Process man- agement deals with defining 
and instanti- ating development 
processes, assigning 
development teams, and controhg the execution. The developer must 
visualize the process and its interactions and decou- 
ple them, which means 
restructuring the 
process model's 
underlying concurrent- development process. To accommodate dynamic behavior, process 
control must reach every level 
of the process structure, from entire project 
to release and 
en- hancement as well as from team 
to indi- Figure 3. Diagram of the interactions 
in the conczirrent-development process model, which shows the complexiq of interacting enhancements and 
releases. lntwactim are either indirect 
01' direct. Examples 
of indirect interaction 
are conjicting enhancement requirements and implementation 
consistency (upper centw). Direr, 
interactions imliide the intwference of'individzral regnirements and implementation 
issues along the conrnrrent-development 
path of enhancement 1 ... enhancement i For example, a delq (delays are denoted mith thick, black arrows) in enhancement i's 
unit test (upper 
right corner) may delay the unit test of 
other enhancements 
in tht same releuse. Thus, the integration test 
must be rescheduled, mhich, 
in nux, may affect the entire development 
schedule of rekase 2 and delay the start 
of developmenn, on r-eka.c.e 3. ,2lor-eove7; ifan enhancement in a subsequent release issufficiently major, it may be nnder development conrnrrently 
with the p-reuious release. 
In the figure the dekqed 
unit test ofrelease 2 has delayed enhancement j in release 3. The main 
task in managing conczirrent development is 
to deconpk these 
interactions to avoid coi?flicts rrnd inconsi.stencq. In the bottom third of the figure, interactions have 
been szicces&lb decoupled, 
so intwference is at a minimnm. IEEE SOFTWARE 49  1 Produci manaaement I er of develooerr for worklood ___ ... . .___. . . 
... . vidual developer. For the 
large-scale con- munications project, therefore, 
we de- scribed the entire development process 
up to the details ofthe individual developer's task, and analyzed them. 14% then resmc- tured a conventional process model 
to support concurrent 
development and 
de- veloped a process-rnanagenieiit system. 
I describe our work in more sider how produczs differ according to the processes that produced them. 
We sepa- rated products 
into two categories: tangi- 
ble and intangible. 
In requirements speci- 
fication and design, products are intangble and concurrently elaborated 
by multiple teams. 
The interaction in this 
process is difficult to manage automati- 
cally, so we have taken the detail in the 
next section. 
+ Pqiea nm?uagement. Project management must efficiently assign 
and control development re- 
sources to ensure produc- 
tivity and qualiq over multiple releases. From an economical point 
of view, the number 
of developers MOST MODELS IGNORE HOW TO DEAL WITH PROCESS AND PRODUCT INTER ACT1 ON I AT THE 1' involved in the projects should be fixed because ~1 rapidly changng debelop- LEVELS. 11 ment project. I cyclic process-enaction model 
that can it- ers and 
re$eaI ers costs almost every as- pect of development. To cope with these problems, 
we developed a ~ review-and-inspection approach together with process control and or- coordinate with research 
labs and other software-engineering groups in 
the intro- 
duction of 
new technologies. The PSET also works as a management-support cen- 
ter by collecting and distributing various 
statistics and consulting 
each develop- 
ment group. 
The main advantage to having the PSET was that they, 
as project insiders, 
could understand real needs 
in managing concurrent development and 
bring the latest practical technology 
to the develop- ment teams. + Sofru.ai-e-enginee1-i?ig eiiviroizrnerzt. We developed an integrated software-en- 
gineering environment that is indispens- able to implementing and 
operating the concurrent-development system in large- 
scale projects. The environment provides a balanced view to process, project, and 
product management and 
support man- agement techniques 
as a system. PROCESS MANAGEMENT Concurrent-development processes have two distinct process dynamics. First, 
because you must manage 
the processes along with the process definition, you must be able to decouple the interaction in 
the development activities of multiple teams. Second, 
you must manage 
a variety of events that happen arbitrarily and 
en- able Inany people 
to share information 
.. . eanizational SLIDDOIT. In ~ about these events. 
11 lower level processes, an integrated configuration- 
management system plays the central role 
in manag- Because none of the traditional process models accommodate these 
dynamics, we decided to adapt one 
to concurrent develop- ment We chose the waterfall model be- ll ~~ c, , ing tangible products. 
cause, although it has been 
the subject of + O~gmizrrtion vmi- much debate, 
it is sd widely used, 
and it agemalt. To implement seemed a well-definedstartingpointforevo- concurrent development, lution 
to concurrent development 
We re- we established a Project 
, engineered it to 
fit concurrent development Software Engineering ~ through the iteration 
ofthree processes: Team within the develop- 1. Define the process. Cooperating with develop- 
2. Redesign &e process structure. 
" -ch laboratories, the PSET's I 3. Rede5ign process 
enaction. eratively assign a fixed number ofdevelop- major roles were 
to define the develop- ers from one development process 
to an- ment process; manage the products; coor- 
other. dinate the software-integration process; + A-odurt managemelit. To manage develop and 
implement management 
products along with 
concurrent develop- techniques; plan, 
specify, and develop 
ment processes, the developer must 
con- software-engineering environments; and 
Defining the process. We used a process 
I' model to define the highly complex 
smc- me and dynamic 
tiehavior ofthe concur- rent development process. 
As part of our model, we developed a visual process de- I 50 JULY 1993  scription language, YPL 
(YAC II-oriented Process-Description Language), which 
is an extension 
of the YAC tree-structured chart.‚,™ Figure 5 gives a sample of YPL notation. YPL 
let us use the same lan- 
guage for 
the development process that was used to describe objects 
in the 
com- munications system. We have defined our entire development process 
- from proj- 
ect planning, to requirements specifica- tion to delivery in YPL. As we continually reengineered 
the de- fined process, 
the PSET coordinated input from the development teams 
to help elaborate the process definition. 
We used the definition in many 
ways, including to analyze development 
cost. Redesqn process structure. Our goal in re- 
designing the structure was to fit the pro- cess to concurrent 
execution as well as cut redundancy. A key part of hs was to con- trol the synchronization of concurrency, especially in the middle of the cycle. To satisfy our goal, we 
incorporated several mechanisms: + P7acess-dependent management vim. The software-integration process sepa- 
rates the entire development process 
into two subprocess categories, upper and 
lower. The upper subprocess category 
covers requirements specification to pre- integration test. The lower subprocesses 
cover integration test 
to product 
delivery. The two categories have different man- agement requirements. 
The management of upper subprocesses 
focuses on decou- pling interactions 
among multiple teams; 
the management of lower subprocesses 
fo- cuses on the quality assurance 
of the single integrated system. 
+ Decoupling of interactions. One of the major drawbacks of the waterfall model is that identifymg problems in require- 
ments specifications is often postponed until the very end of the development process. In concurrent development, this drawback 
is more serious because 
the coupling of multiple functions 
or en- hancements is more complex. Futhermore, this coupling causes inter- ference among development teams. To avoid these problems, 
we have 
added a series of 
reviews, wluch take place 
in the 
System-integration document 
form Enhancement-history report Module list f Inteoration/svstem-test olon 8ﬂ 1 Project manager - 8.2 - Name: System-integration 
Chair: Project 
manager Participants: enhancement 
Decisions: review meeting 
List of enhancement modules 
to manager involved in the 
release I) Accept/reject integration 1 Integration/system-test plan i en hancement K21ntegration schedule 8,3 Conflictingmodule check 8.3 , List of conflicting enhancements 
and modules 
DN- System-integrotion- 32 review operation 
manual TOL- Conflict-check 54 operation manual 
Participants: enhancement 
8.6 9 Repeat for a11 modules - Module type? Detailed Integration plan 
Figure 5. (A) Graphical notation of YPL, the language used to describe the entire development process. Datelopers ran 
use YPL to define both the development process and objects in the communication system being developed. (B) YPL description ofpart of a process. illustrating some of the YPL notations in (A). The lefipart of the box defines the procedure, the center defines the 
dataflow (procedure inputs and outputs), and the right side defines the 
firther reference to the procedure. .. IEEE SOFTWARE 51  -1 .. ' ~~~~~~~~:eintegrotion test System integrotion Integrotion/syrtem 
tesQ Figure 6. A model showing 
the cyclic enaction $'the concurrent-development pcess. Teams A, B, and C (whose members are denoted ty a circle atop 
a triangle) are working on enhancements 1,2, and 3, respectively. When preintegratiun tests have been completed, these enhancementsare integrated 
into rekase nand passed to the test team. The development teams move 
on to the development of the next release, which consists of enhancements k,j, andm. Becaweenhancement k 
isa major enhancement in the rekase ofa 
large-scale feature, its hehpment period is hubk that of the minw enhancements (j and m). Therefwe, team D initiates the 
development of enhancement k 
the same time thq, initiate release n. The number of developers is theoretically unchanged over multiple releases, ji-om n through n+l, and so on, but in this case, Team D joins team A. upper subprocesses. After each 
teaminter- nally reviews the specifications and design, multiple teams must conduct 
intensive internam reviews to iden* the expected influence ofthe funaion 
or enhancement on later p of the development process. 52 + Software integration. 
This is a key point in the synchronization of develop- ment processes and products 
with multi- ple enhancements. During this step, mul- tiple enhancements, concurrently 
developed by multiple teams, are inae- mentally integrated into 
a single 
system. After intensively reviewing the previous development processes and quality levels, the products, modules, and documents 
go into a project repository 
under the control 
of PSET The process is also used to re- solve conflicting updates. + Preintegratirm testing. 
This step en- sures the conformance of the interface be- 
tween the baseline system and 
the changed or newly created modules. 
It oc- curs before 
software integration. + Concllwent testing. During integra- 
tion test and system 
test, multiple replicas of integrated software are concurrently 
tested by multiple test teams 
that are 
geo- graphically distributed. Although 
each en- hancement must 
pass a preintegration test, we focusd on conformance among multiple functions. We also added 
a mechanism to support the 
management of th~s testing. Redesign process ermction. Managing pro- 
cess execution, or enaction, has two main goals. The first is to assign the workload to multiple teams 
who are concurrently 
de- veloping multiple enhancements. 
The second is to control the 
workload over multiple releases. To meet these goals, we developed a cyclic-enaction model, shown in Figure 6, and supporting management techniques. 
The model's core idea is that the 
develop- ment of each enhancement must be com- pleted within a fixed time and iterated 
over multiple releases. The enaction model lets us develop multiple features 
with a fixed workload because 
a fixed number of devel- 
opers moves &om one enhancement to 
another. However, it raises another chal- lenge - how to precisely control process, project, and products over multiple 
re- leases when each process 
instance must 
meet an exact development schedule (just- 
in-time management). 
The cyclic-enaction model used a pe- 
riod of six months as the development time, with a 
release being delivered at the 
end of three months 
and at the end of the six months. In the first three months, the teams completed 
the upper 
subprocesses; in the next three months, the 
products went through the 
lower subprocesses.  We needed supporting project-man- agement tecluuques 
because although we could fix the total workload theoretically, for large-scale development, such 
a con- straint is not realistic for managing pro- jects safely. 
We had to allow for some workload fluctuations, and hence some 
productivity loss, which the techniques are 
designed to overcome. Also theoretically, we could shorten de- livery time by shortening the development cycle. In our model, however, the develop- ment cycle can be no shorter than the test period (hee monb); a shorter cycle could sadice both productivity 
and quality. EXPERIENCE From applymg the model to a large- scale communications system over 
the last five years, we have learned much about how to improve the development 
process. What we have learned can be viewed in many contexts. Conppn'son to sequentid devsbpn#nt. In another project, we used a conventional process model to develop a communica- tions system with 
an architecture 
similar to that of the large-scale system to which we applied the concurrent-development 
model. In the following description, S1 represents the system developed with 
a se- quential process; S2 is the system devel- 
oped with the concurrent 
process. There are several significant points of comparison: + hgth of deuehpment cy.. The re- lease cycle 
of S1 was one year; the release cycle of S2 was three months - a 75-per- cent reduction. + Ease ofcomtnution. Unlike the 
se- quential-development model, the concur- rent-development model let 
us divide the large-scale software 
into small subsystems and incrementally consmct the whole system. Also unlike a sequential approach, 
concurrent development provides practi- cal management techniques to incremen- 
tally deliver 
the large-scale software 
sys- tem in a short and fixed interval. Ths let us get quick feedback 
fi-om customers on the releases delivered. + Smoothness of project management. Standard deviation 
Number in sample Figure 7. Development workhadfir two communication systems with similar architectures. SI was deuelopea with aseqiientialprwess; Sz was developed with a conciirrentprwess. The development of SI isalmort compktt 
aftw 30 months; the 
deuelopmat ofS, islager andstill evolving. Although the 
peak mwkload of S, kachuzllj fmr times that of S,, fw comparison, the figure shows the workloadr nwmalized with 
peak values. Flwtuution. 
in workload are due to both 
size and 
number of developers. Thejlmlations are much knfir S,, primrib became the connivent model lets ymi fix the nnmbw .fdevelopenfiom enhancement to 
ahancment an6 prmides the qclic-enaction model, which 
hebs recover productivity lossfPom wwkloadjluctuatim. IEEE SOFTWARE 53  Concurrent development made project 
management smoother. Figure 
7 shows the development workload - which in- cludes changes in 
the number of develop- ers - for both 
SI and s,. Uhle the work- load for developing SI follows the conventional Railey curve 
proposed by Lawrence Pumum and colleagues,' that of S, is almost fixed. We evaluated the fluc- niques into a system. At the heart of the 1 mtem are the 
five maior conceots: 
+ Flexible manufmring yam. This DroDertv is somewhat wecific 
to hardware i II, assembly, and is bound by the phpical + smooth production 
by narrowing the fluctuation of production size and 
pre- cisely managing the 
flow of products, + standardization of work, + flexible manufacturing to enable + continuous process 
quick changes on the production 
line, imorovement, and + intelligent automa- 
in terms of the standard 
COMPRISES In the development and implementation 
of ALL THE the concurrent-develop- fluctuations in nine major 
ELEMENTS ment process, we found a treasure of management ESSENTIAL TO techniques in 
these prin- the fluctuations are 
rela- A SOFTWARE ciples. Although the tech- 
niques are slanted toward 
hardware assembly, which is rather different 
from software develop- 
ous process improvement Thg the same tuation of development size and 
workload for 
SI deviation from 
the aver- age. Table 1 gives the size and nine minor enhance- 
ments. As the table 
shows, tively small and 
well con- trolled. The workload fluctua- tion in Table 
1. 1 1.7 per- cent, is also very low compared with the ment, 
we believe many ideas are 
directly size fluctuation. We believe &us is due to applicable because the focus is on continu- 
the cyclic-enaction model. Changes in workload 
(number of de- he concepts, we can identify much rele- 
velopers) causes 
productivity loss as 
well as vance to concurrent development: stress to corporate management. 
This is a + Smoothpodwtzon. This idea works as strong argument for using concurrent de- a central principle 
of project management 
velopment (whch lets you fix the number because a consistent development 
size is of developers), especially 
for large-scale key 
to cyclic process exe- OUR MODEL tion, FACTORY. I systems. In addition to size and workload, the 
PSET was an important factor in the smoothness of project management. 
The development of the management tech- 
niques and support environment 
was nei- ther quick nor pdess. The PSET had to elaborate the 
techques as the project de- 
veloped, and 
this continous improvement 
made a significant 
difference long term. 
system of management techniques for 
concurrent development shares some 
of the concepts 
of the "lean" development system developed and implemented 
bv TA-ichi Ohno and colleagues ofTovota.';' cution withm a 
fixed pe- riod. Software develop- 
ment has one major ad- 
vantage over hardware 
assembly: the control 
of products flow. In just-in- time hardware produc- 
tion, managers must 
have a way to eliminate inven- 
tory. In software develop- ment, any products 
can be transmitted though 
a _. constraints of tools and products. 
We may need &IS principle in the future, 
but so far, we have not been emphasizing 
it in soft- ware development. + Continmuc procea impmvement. This is extremely important in software devel- 
opment., as already described 
+ Intelligent automation. 
The produc- tion system puts more emphasis on pro- cess than automation, but if it is auto- mated, the system must 
be intelligent so that it 
can stop automatically when prob- 
lems occur. n7e can 
implement this princi- ple somewhat in the management tech- 
niques and development environment, 
but it is still difficult to automate the 
higher level development processes. Al- though many computer-aided software- 
engineering environments 
have been de- 
veloped, little attention has been paid to th~s issue. Comparison to the software factory. We be- lieve concurrent development 
is an ad- 
vanced form of the software-factory ap- proach. For example, our model comprises all nine of the elements Michael 
Cusumano identified in a software 
fac- tory: which can catego- 
IT ALSO SHARES I THE WS GOAL OF CONTINUOUS PROCESS IMPROVEMENT. rized in four groups: 
- + Work and skill standardization + Continous process improvement by com- mitment to process im- provement, a product- process focus 
and segmentation, process- quaky analysis and con- 
trol, tailored and central- 
ized process R&D, communication network dynamic standardization, 
and incremental product 
work. This is a basic principle in producing any standardized product. 
The produc- + Computer-aided tools 
and integra- tion system Drovides mechanisms not onlv ' tion + Standardization of improvement The lean production 
syscm -which gets its name from continuous-improvement 
techniques that eliminate redundancy 
(fat) from the production process - integrates a variety of 
production management tech- 
to standard;= the work 
process but also io predict performance, 
which may 
be diffi- 1 cult in current development practices. Ad- 
ditional study 
of development processes and menics will help this problem. + Systematic reusability 
The first three groups are common 
to lean production and concurrent develop- 
ment. Although 
not directly related, 
soft- ~ ware reuse is also practiced in 
concurrent '~ ~ -, 54 JULY 1993  I™ development. Concurrent 
development adds another requirement to software fac- tories. The conventional WE ENDED UP ENGINEERING I NEW PROCESS. and the total cost over 
factory approach focuses on productivity 
and qual- ity with little attention to 
the development cycle multiple cycles. Concur- rent develop-ment™s sys- AN ENTIRELY tematic way of developing software systems with a fixed number of developers enhances 
pro- ductivity and quality. The need for a shorter development cycle is also receiving 
attention in the 
software factory. 
Comparison to CMMs. The Capability Maturity Model, developed by the Soft- ware Engineering Institute,ﬂ and our de- 
velopment process share 
the same goal: continuous improvement 
of the software process. The CMM defines five maturity levels. To implement the concurrent 
develop- ment system, we had to have a well-de- fined and mature underlying 
software process - at least level 
2, the repeatable level in 
the CMM. It is widely recognized in hardware production that just-in-time production helps uncover potential pro- 
cess problems that might not 
be exposed 
in conventional production 
systems. We experienced the same effect in implement- 
ing concurrent 
development. We were able to discover many weak points in 
the development process, management, and development environments 
through a concurrent-development model. Solving 
each problem required 
patience, but 
the result was a much-improved development process and 
environment. lthough our 
initial goal in imple- 
& enting the 
concurrent-develop- ment model was to shorten the 
develop- ment cycle, we ended up reengineering the entire 
development process. 
The problems we identified open up a chal- lenge to managing the flexible and eco- 
nomical development of large-scale 
soft- ware systems. 
Several areas 
warrant future study 
to refine the model and management tech- niques both theoretically 
and practically. From a process-engineer- ing point of view, 
we should further study modeling techniques for 
concurrent development. YPL can model the pro- 
cedural view of the pro- cess and define 
the start 
and end of concurrency, but it is sdl weak in mod- 
:ling multip,, 
views of 
processes - func- ional, structural, 
and behavioral. We be- 
ieve object-oriented modeling 
is more ippropriate for 
concurrent development ind warrants more investigation.7 
In practice, the model evolved to ac- :ommodate distributed 
concurrent devel- )pment, in which multiple development 
sites are geographcally distributed. (I his was necessary primarily 
because of Tokyo™s high density, 
which forced teams 
to locate in distant areas.) There are many complex management issues associated 
with the distributed 
model, so it is worth investigating technology for collaborating 
distributed development 
teams in concur- 
rent development. Our special interest is which tech- niques developed 
for concurrent develop- ment can be commonly used in other de- velopment projects. 
We hope 
various management tech- 
niques developed in the 
concurrent devel- opment system can 
be applied to other 
development projects. Future stud) 
is necessary from both theory 
and practice 
since our management system 
is still evolving. + REFERENCES 1. M. Aoyama, ﬁConcurrent Development 
of Software Systems: 
A New Development Paradigm,ﬂ 
ACM 2. W. Agresti, New Paradigmsf&rSojiware Development, IEEE CS Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 
1986. 3. L. Ostenveil, ﬁSoftware Processes are Software 
Too,ﬂ hc. Int™l Conz Sojiware Eng., IEEE CS Press, 4. T Ohno, Tqota Production System, Diamond Publications, Tokyo, 1978 (in Japanese; English @ansla- 
5. D. Roos et al., The Machine That Changed the World The Story ofLean Prodimion, Harper Perennial, 
6. M. Aoyama et al., ﬁDesign Specification in Japan: Tree-Smctured Charts,ﬂ 
IEEE Sofiare, Mar. 1989, 7. M. Aoyama, ﬁDismbuted Concurrent Development ofsoftware 
Systems: An Object-Oriented Pro- 
8. L. Pumum, Sojiware Cost Enrmatiun and Life-Cycle Conhol, IEEE CS Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 
1980. 9. M. Cusumano,~upan™xS~are Fmmes, Oxford University Press, New 
York, 1991. S0fN)re Eng. Notes, Juty 1987, pp. 20-24. Los Alamitos, Calif., 
1987, pp. 2-13. tion is available from 
Productivity Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1988). NewYork 1990. pp. 31-37. cessModel,ﬂ Prw. Cmpruc, IEEE CS 
Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 
1990, pp. 330-337. 10. M. Paulk et al., ﬁCapability Maturity Model for Software,ﬂ Tech. Report CUU/SEI-91-TR-24, 
ADA240603, SoftwareEng. Inst., Pittsburgh, 
1991. Mikio Aoyama is a supemsor at Fujitsu Ltd. His research mterests include real-nme I hs- mbuted software systems, software-development 
enmronments, and software-process 
management Aoyama received a BS and an MS m elecuomcs from Okayama University. 
He is L member of the IEEE Computer 
Smety, ACM, Information Processmg 
Soaety ofJapan, and hhtute of Elecuomcs, 
hformahon, and &mmulvcahon Engmeers, Japan 
Address queshons about thls amcle to 
Aoyama at Fujitsu Ltd., Busmess Swtchmg Software Div., 2-12-5 Shuno-odnaka, Nakahm-!a, Kawasah 
2 11 Japan, Internet 
Iloo@mla.nakahara.fujim CO jp IEEE SOFTWARE 55 