 0740-7459/14/$31.00 © 2014 IEEE
 MARCH/APRIL 2014
  |  IEEE SOFTWARE
97
FEATURE:
 SECTION TITLE
FEATURE:
 SATURN
Simulation-
Based 

Embedded Agile 

Development
Jason Ard, Kristine Davidsen, and Terril Hurst
Raytheon Missile Systems
// 
When tailored to work in conjunction 
with agile principles, simulation-centric 
development can dramatically improve 
product quality, reduce cost, and rapidly 
deliver reliable working code. 
//AEROSPACE SOFTWARE DEVEL-
OPERS 
are constantly driven to de-
liver higher-quality products faster 
and cheaper. One recent assignment 
mandated going from a notional 

paper design to initial ˜ ight tests in 

only 10 months. Previous timelines 
for similar products had ranged 
from two to three years. Although 

we commonly leverage simulation 

and embedded software frameworks 
for high-level reuse, there is often 
no similar preexisting product that 

can be adapted to meet customer re-
quirements due to the wide diversity 
of customer needs. At the beginning 
of a project, there is typically no ex-

isting hardware, ˚ rmware, nor test 
equipment. When those resources 
do become available, they are often 

insuf˚ cient to support the simultane-

ous needs of all system developers.
In addition to typical software 
constraints such as available mem-

ory, throughput, and performance, 

the real-time embedded nature of 
our products routinely imposes re-
quirements such as tight execution 

timing, concurrency, and confor-
mance to hardware interfaces. There 
are many ways for a missile test to 
go awry, so safety and reliability are 

always high priority. With any new 
design, our requirements are not 
fully understood at the outset and 

are subject to change. Nevertheless, 

starting very early in our product life 
cycle, we must demonstrate func-
tional software in parallel with de-

veloping the hardware.
To deal with these challenges, 
we combine a software-in-simula-

tion (SiS) architecture (see Figure 

1), with the set of practices collec-
tively known as agile software de-
velopment. We use simulation not 

just for periodic performance assess-

ment, but daily, to provide continu-
ous feedback for collaborative design 
and development. 
Software-in-Simulation 
Our embedded software consists 

of many different modules, such as 
guidance and control algorithms, 
seeker and signal processing algo-

rithms, messaging and control logic, 

and hardware device interfaces. In 
the past, many of our projects devel-
oped the ˜ ight simulation software 

and the embedded software sepa-

rately. This approach frequently re-
sulted in integration problems, and 
implementation issues were not be-

ing discovered until late in the de-
velopment cycle. We transitioned to 
agile software development to ad-

dress such dif˚ culties and identi˚ ed 

a need to demonstrate and test the 
˜ ight software much earlier. 
As shown in Figure 1, in SiS, the 
hardware device drivers and embed-
ded software algorithms in our sim-
ulated test and evaluation environ-
ment are the same ones that we ˜ y. 

Figure 2 illustrates how SiS allows 

us to use simulated hardware com-
ponents and environments so that 
s2ard.indd   972/6/14   4:42 PM 98 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
FEATURE:
 SATURN
software development and hardware 
development can be conducted in 
parallel. The ˜ ight software under-
goes no modi˚ cations before being 

cross-compiled for execution on the 

embedded processor. 
Agile Supports SiS 
Agile software development is a set 

of methodologies emphasizing 
frequent delivery of the most 

valuable working software, 
close collaboration and frequent 
communication,
self-organizing teams that learn 
as they collaborate, and
mechanisms to handle changing 
requirements without crisis.
While simulations containing 
embedded software need not be de-
veloped in an agile manner, Scrum™s 

agile framework helps realize 

greater bene˚ ts from a SiS approach. 
One Scrum event is the sprint re-
view, in which the development 

team demonstrates what was ac-

complished during the sprint. It can 
be challenging to have something 

visual to demonstrate with embed-

ded software development as there 
is often little to ﬁsee.ﬂ We might get 
only a blinking light or a wiggling 

˚ n. Developing software in simula-

tion helps everyone see the missile 
˜ ying and track trends in perfor-
mance. When such feedback is used 

in the sprint review as well as daily 
collaboration, these collective learn-
ing opportunities allow more nimble 

responses to necessary changes in 

requirements and design.
Historically, keeping track of the 
myriad stakeholder concerns dur-

ing a rapid development cycle has 

been a signi˚ cant challenge. We have 
learned the hard way that integrat-
ing large volumes of work developed 

by independent groups can be time-
consuming and painful. 
 Changes 
to a single component often impact 
multiple technical concerns, and fre-

quently multiple developers might 
edit the same components concur-
rently for different reasons. When 

such changes are made by isolated 

subgroups and then merged into the 
whole in batch form as large integra-
tion events, separation of concerns 
and traceability of change effects can 

become insurmountable challenges. 
Practicing continuous integration 
within each two-week sprint and 

following the agile principle of close 

and frequent collaboration between 
stakeholders helps us develop soft-
ware without getting stuck on such 

integration issues. All of the contrib-

utors to the embedded software use 
a common simulation as the tool to 
develop and test their changes. This 

helps us avoid the drawbacks of big-
bang integration, where large change 
sets are brought into the software 
baseline as discrete events. SiS allows 

all system contributors (simulation 
and embedded software developers, 
algorithm developers, performance 

analysts, hardware developers, and 

systems testers) to operate in the 
same, continuous-integration en-
vironment. It can get hectic in this 

shared environmentŠ where there 

are lots of moving partsŠbut it is 
worth it because we are able to in-
tegrate smaller pieces more rapidly 

and thereby have more frequent and 
focused learning opportunities re-
garding our system. 
For example, we recently inte-
grated the device communication 
layer into one of our simulations. 
When we ˜ ew this software in the 

simulation, we immediately saw the 

missile spin out of control and crash 
into the ocean. In a short time, the 
issue was traced to a misprinted ac-

celeration sensor scale factor in the 
hardware documentation. This re-
sulted in the navigation software be-

ing unable to calculate how fast the 

missile was spinning or which way 
was up. Fortunately, we caught a 
potentially catastrophic ˜ ight fail-

ure early in the development timeline 

at near-zero cost. After con˚ rming 
Hardware emulationSoftware emulationFlight software(algorithms and device drivers)SimulationReal hardwareFIGURE 1. 
Software-in-simulation (SiS) architecture. The hardware device drivers and 
embedded software algorithms in our simulated test and evaluation environment are 

the same ones that we ˜ y. SiS allows us to use simulated hardware components and 

environments so that software and hardware development can be conducted in parallel.
s2ard.indd   982/6/14   4:42 PM MARCH/APRIL 2014 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
99with the hardware supplier that the 
device documentation was indeed 
wrong, we modi˚ ed our embedded 
software. In less than a day, we were 

back ˜ ying smooth. 
SiS Supports Agile
Prototyping can be dif˚ cult to imple-

ment in early development, when the 
physical assets needed to construct 
a prototype system do not yet exist. 

SiS facilitates earlier development of 

functioning embedded software by 
providing digitally modeled compo-
nents. This allows us to write the 

device drivers and algorithms and to 

observe their impact on the system 
before having the actual devices. 
Simulation provides virtual hard-
ware for developing and testing our 

software. As hardware becomes 
available, the corresponding hard-

ware models are validated by com-

paring measured system and subsys-
tem responses to simulated responses 
to assure that the simulation models 

accurately represent the hardware. 

Furthermore, the virtual hardware 
provided by the simulation extends 
the testing environment throughout 

the project™s lifespan. In some cases, 

this simulated virtual hardware is 
absolutely necessary due to cost and 
safety issues. It would be problem-
atic if we had to ˚ re a real rocket 

booster during each launch sequence 
in integration and test.
A central tenet of agile develop-
ment is to learn as we go and to in-
corporate that learning in the next it-
eration. Using SiS, small increments 
of software are developed and the re-

sults of the changes are observed and 
analyzed, helping us manage com-
plexity and write better software. 

Areas of the system that have not 

yet been developed can be stubbed 
out with simplistic simulation com-
ponents and then replaced and up-

dated iteratively. We can shorten our 

integration cycles to as little as a few 
minutes using the simulation. SiS 
also facilitates concurrent hardware 

development and integration because 
we can swap hardware components 
such as a ˚ eld-programmable gate 

array (FPGA) or embedded proces-

sor onto a known working software 
con˚ guration and test the full end-
to-end effects on the system. SiS al-

lows us to integrate continuously, 

constantly exercising the embedded 
˜ ight software, giving us higher con-
˚ dence and more accurate system 

performance predictions.
Simulation performance predic-
tions aid in achieving the agile goal 

of responding to changes in require-
ments quickly. In one case, while de-

veloping a system with a motor that 
utilized a new type of fuel, our sup-
plier discoveredŠone year into the 

projectŠthat it was unable to create 

a usable form of the new fuel. With-
out a usable fuel, there could be no 
product, and the whole project was in 

jeopardy. The design had to change. 
We considered several alternate 
forms of fuel from multiple suppli-

ers. Using the simulation, we showed 

the impact that each new fuel would 
have on system performance. These 
timely results provided our technical 

leadership with the data needed to 

rapidly adapt the design and continue 
working toward production.
Regardless of the procedure used 
to develop a new software-intensive 

system, the process can be decom-
posed into the phases of require-

ments development, design, code, 

and test (see Figure 3). Simulation 
feedback is used throughout the pro-
cess, adding new and earlier paths 

between design, development, and 

test. This helps close the loop be-
tween the iterative phases, which is 
particularly important in agile devel-

opment because all phases must oc-

curŠto some degreeŠduring each 
two-week sprint. 
SiS also provides a great way to 
Simulation environmentmodels˜˚˛˝˙˛˚ˆˇSimulationhardwaremodelsˇˇ˘Simulationhardwareinterfacesˇ˚Drivers/ softwareinterfacesˇ˘Flight softwarealgorithmsˆˇFIGURE 2. 
Layered view of SiS architecture. Environmental models stimulate hardware models, which send data through interface 
objects to the embedded software. 
The algorithms in turn issue commands which travel back through the hardware interfaces to 

control the simulated hardware.
s2ard.indd   992/6/14   4:42 PM 100
 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
FEATURE:
 SATURN
achieve the agile objective of fre-
quently demonstrating product up-
dates to users and other stakeholders. 
Details regarding hardware- driver 

code maturity, internal message-pass-

ing operations, or processor-loading 
optimization are often too low-level 
to be demonstrated independently. 

However, exercising these embedded 

capabilities in a system-level simula-
tion provides a more tangible feel to 
the product. Through simulation, us-

ers can see how the embedded soft-
ware and algorithms are ˜ ying the 
missile toward its target.
Letting Simulation
out of the Box
When initially exploring system de-
signs that advance current technology, 
understanding of requirements can be 
notional at best. As we begin imple-

menting these requirements, we dis-

cover unforeseen design constraints. 
Agile development frameworks such 
as Scrum expect and plan for change 

to accommodate the inherently itera-

tive nature of requirements develop-
ment. Our use of Scrum facilitates the 
maturation of our requirements with 

minimal to no crisis because it occurs 
during sprint planning.
Through continuous prototyping, 
developing, and testing, the agile SiS 
methodology allows us to update 
our requirements iteratively, feed-
ing our Scrum product backlog be-
tween successive sprints. Simulation 

provides a means for exercising the 

skeletal system to monitor and assess 
system properties and performance 
as the system matures. Model ˚ del-

ity is enhanced iteratively as needed, 
providing increasing levels of detail 
and accuracy over time. 
Simulation development is a 
micro cosm of the overall system de-
velopment process shown in Figure 
3. Strict discipline is required to es-

tablish and maintain the simula-

tion™s credibility to suit the evolving 
needs of system developers. System 
and subsystem requirements must be 

stated in a way that enables verifying 
that they are correctly implemented 
in the simulation. The more stringent 

the simulation requirements, the 

more effort and expense are required 
to develop suf˚ cient ˚ delity within 
the simulation. Reference data from 

real-world tests must be obtained in 

order to evaluate whether the simu-
lation is suf˚ ciently accurate for its 
intended use, which continuously 

evolves. Simulation accreditation ef-
forts can incur additional time and 
expense. In SiS, simulation changes 

should be accompanied by ongo-
ing regression testing to assess the 

health of the simulation and to de-
tect any change in the predicted sys-
tem performance. 
While considerable cost savings 
can be obtained through simulation, 
creating and maintaining a reliable 
simulation environment is not free. 

Before building a simulation, the 
savings in development cost and risk 
must be weighed against the costs 

of simulation development. In cases 

where hardware is readily available 
and well suited for the required test-
ing, the costs of simulation develop-

ment might not be warranted. This 

might occur when developing soft-
ware for an existing, easily accessible 
hardware asset, such as a cell phone. 
The special constraints of the 
avionics domain have led us to use 

simulations in nontraditional ways. 

Unlike ˚ eld-testing cell phone or au-

tomobile software, when we ˚ eld-
test the embedded processor on a 
missile, we don™t get it back. By us-

ing SiS to perform virtual ˜ ight 

tests, we avoid the prohibitive cost 
of ˜ ights and preserve our hardware 
assets. Scrum theory is founded on 

making decisions based on known 
experiences. We justify procuring 
expensive and long-lead-time hard-

ware components using knowledge 
DesignWrite codeImplement designSimulate/testTest resultsDeveloprequirementsDrives designrequirementsStakeholder inputUpdate designPerform design studiesUser/stakeholderreviewFix bugsExecutecodeFIGURE 3. 
Requirements and design are updated from simulation prototyping. Simulation feedback is used throughout the 
process, adding new and earlier paths between design, development, and test, which helps close the loop between the iterative 

phases.
s2ard.indd   1002/6/14   4:42 PM MARCH/APRIL 2014 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
101
acquired from simulation to deter-
mine whether one system design per-
forms better than another. As hard-
ware components become available, 

we use them in tests to validateŠ

not replaceŠvirtual simulated com-
ponents. We update the simulation 
with measured data from hardware, 

and we continue to use virtual hard-

ware everywhere we can, freeing up 
hardware assets to be used by oth-
ers. By the time the hardware com-

ponents of the system start to re-
semble a missile, the simulation has 
matured to the point of being instru-

mental in preparing for ˜ ight tests.
In your business, you will inevi-

tably be asked to deliver a soft-
ware-intensive product in less 
time, with higher quality, and with 
greater reliability. Here is how you 

can get there:
Build your reusable resources 

using architectural patterns that 

will help create a system that is 
easy to modify, scale, and loosely 
couple the embedded and simula-

tion software. This will allow you 
to build up the system iteratively.
Use agile practices, such as the 
Scrum framework, which will 

allow you to adapt to changing 
requirements that result from the 
inevitable learning that occurs 

when designers observe working 

software.
For the engineers who are de-

veloping the simulation, soft-

ware, tests, and even hardware, 

establish a shared development 
environment featuring a com-
mon repository, simulation, and 

test suite.
Think of simulation not as a 

destination or side activity but as 

an integral part of your devel-
opment process, to be utilized 
continuously throughout the 
product development life cycle.
Using these techniques, we have 
been able to meet aggressive dead-
lines, demonstrate value to our cus-
tomers, and satisfy our ˜ ight test ob-
jectives. With simulation-based agile 

software development, you too can 

achieve success developing your em-
bedded software.
JASON ARD 
is a simulation lead and software architect in 
the Performance Simulations Department at Raytheon Missile 
Systems. He is a certi˜ ed ScrumMaster and SEI Software 

Architecture Professional. Since joining Raytheon in 2007, Ard 

has developed integrated ˚ ight simulations, computer-in-the-

loop simulations, image-processing algorithms, and software 

architectures on numerous programs. He received BS degrees 

in applied physics and in computer science from Brigham Young 

University. Contact him at Jason_M_Ard@raytheon.com.
KRISTINE DAVIDSEN 
is a senior principal software engineer 
at Raytheon Missile Systems. In her 14-year career, she has 

worked in test, distributed systems, and embedded software 

development. Davidsen received a BS in mathematics from the 

University of Arizona. She is a certi˜ ed ScrumMaster, a member 

of the Society of Women Engineers, and a member of IEEE. 

Contact her at kldavidsen@raytheon.com. 
TERRIL N. HURST
 is an Engineering Fellow in Raytheon 
Missile System™s Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis Center in 

Tucson. His specialties include design and analysis of simula-

tion experiments and simulation veri˜ cation and validation. 

Prior to joining Raytheon in 2005, Hurst worked for 27 years at 

Hewlett-Packard Laboratories on data storage technologies and 

systems. He received a PhD in mechanical engineering from 

Brigham Young University. Contact him at terril.hurst@raytheon.

com.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Take the CS Library 
wherever you go!
IEEE Computer Society magazines and Transactions are now 
available to subscribers in the portable ePub format.
Just download the articles from the IEEE Computer Society 
Digital Library, and you can read them on any device that supports 
ePub. For more information, including a list of compatible devices, visit
www.computer.org/epub
s2ard.indd   1012/6/14   4:42 PM