 0740-7459/03/$19.00 © 2003 IEEEPublished by the IEEE Computer SocietyIEEE SOFTWARE
93requirements
Editor: Suzanne Robertson The Atlantic Systems Guild suzanne@systemsguild.comNo one paying attention to software de-velopment recently could miss the
raging methodology war. On one side

you find formalists, who remain fondof the word Òprocess,Ó emphasize de-

tailed planning to produce qualityproducts, and aspire to a level of repeatabilitythat evokes manufacturing imagery. On the
other side you find agilists, who value Òindi-viduals and interactions over processes and
toolsÓ and Òresponding to change over fol-

lowing a planÓ (ÒManifesto for Agile Software

Development,Ó http://agilemanifesto.org) and
who dislike manufacturing imagery applied to
knowledge work.Each camp likes to describe the other in
extreme terms. Agilists highlight the short-
comings of waterfall methodologies, with

which they identify formalists. According to

agilists, the formalist approachÕs orientation

toward planning means that by the time you
finish a system, the problem it solves has
changed; you might build software with few
defects this way, but when youÕre done, itÕs

the wrong software. Formalists accuse agilists
of trying to turn back time to when develop-

ers started by immediately slinging code.
Many systems built this way evolved into
hairballs of complex, unmanageable code,formalists say; without plenty of planning up
front, youÕll invariably make a mess.The notion of requirements is central to
this debate. Formalists canÕt see how agilists

expect to build anything that works without
thoroughly analyzing requirements. Agilists
canÕt see the point in spending a lot of time

analyzing requirements because theyÕre go-
ing to change anyway.
This conflict is nothing less than growing
pains associated with a transition from an in-

dustrial to a knowledge economy. Even as
they try to move the debate forward, com-

batants bang repeatedly against a conceptual
wall propped up by the word requirements.

As we explain this, weÕll inevitably reveal

where our sympathies lie, so here they are:
We think agilists are at the leading edge of an

important shift in how we will manage work

in a knowledge economy. ItÕs hard to see this

right now because the metaphor the word

ÒrequirementsÓ evokes tilts the battlefield
against agilists.The need for a new metaphorFormalist software developers can musterto their cause many words weÕve rightly asso-Beyond Requirements:Software Making as Art
Rob Austin and Lee DevinQuality is meeting requirementsÑor is it? Rob Austin and Lee Devin challenge this fa-miliar metaphor for requirements and introduce a new one based on their experience in
an industry that seems far from software developmentÑor is it? What are your opinions
on this subject? ÑSuzanne Robertson 94IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
REQUIREMENTSciated with the developed worldÕs eco-
nomic successes since the Industrial
RevolutionÑstructure, rigor, and re-

peatability, for example. The formalist

methodsÕ closeness to these reassuring
words leaves agilists out in the cold,
vulnerable to labeling with a very dif-
ferent set of wordsÑunstructured,
loose, and ad hoc. Agilists insist their
methods are none of these things, but
they lack a solid history. Formalists

can point to industrial successes in
manufacturing. Agilists have no equiv-
alent success story to invoke. Or so
they think. We believe they havenÕt

looked enough.There is an ÒindustryÓ that rou-
tinely develops new products under
harsh deadlines and produces valuable
outcomes that operate with great preci-
sion even though itÕs impossible to an-

ticipate those outcomes. This industryÕs

methods are rigorously structured and
highly reliable, although they might ap-

pear ad hoc or chaotic to uninitiated
observers. The industry, which we sug-

gest as a model for software develop-
ment, is the collaborative artsÑmore
specifically, theater.
This suggestion might appear out-rageous at first. However, a good the-

ater, operating under a deadline as

firm as any in business (opening
night), creates a product that, al-

though uniquely and intentionally in-
novative in every run, nevertheless fin-
ishes within 30 seconds of the same

time every performance. The product

has a form no one could have pre-

dicted. It adapts each night to audi-

ence differences and other changing
aspects of performance just as an agile

development process adapts to chang-
ing requirements.For four years, weÕve studied col-laborative artists in theater and com-
pared their practices to those emerging
in agile software development. The
similarities in structure, methods, and
ways of discussing work are startling.
Both theater production and software
development are special cases of what
we call 
artful making, the emergingmodel for work in a knowledge econ-
omy. Many people assume that eco-

nomic value creation is becoming
more scientific. In places, this is true.The broader tendency, though, is for
work to become more like art.The structure of artful making
Artful making, whether in soft-ware development or theater, has a

recognizable structure. ItÕs iterative

and thus involves doing and doing
again, trying things many different
ways. It deemphasizes planning in fa-
vor of learning from experience. It
delegates control to makers them-
selves, aspires to enhance individual
and idiosyncratic talents, and uses the
environmental uncertainty of ongo-
ing change to fuel innovation.A theater rehearsal makes manyprototypes of the ultimate product;
each one feeds back into the processÑ
an exponential, unpredictable, creative
cycle. The final product appears as a
result of the work, not as a precon-
ceived goal the work achieved. In re-
hearsal, the actors play a scene, discuss
it with the director and each other,

then play it again. They retain both the
first version and the discussion as ma-
terials from which to make the next

version. That next version develops,
moves forward, and creates new fea-
tures from consultation and iteration.Agile software developers follow asimilar process. They build a rough
prototype quickly and take it to the
customer for discussion. Everyoneknows this is step one, not the end.ItÕs not a mere unfinished version of a

final product, but a step in the prod-
uctÕs development. The developer and

the customer play with the prototype,
during which time the developer gets
new ideas about the larger problem,
and the customer discovers possibili-
ties that didnÕt exist until created

from this interaction. The resulting
product answers questions no one
knew how to ask initially.
This cycle (consult, build, consult,build some more) can continue as long
as time permits. At some point before

a deadline, the prototype will be good
enough for the customer. Then, the it-

erations can end, or they can continue
to explore avenues opened up in the
process, generated by the act of mak-
ing. The whole transaction changes
from finding to making, from prob-

lem-solving to creativity.
Artful making is not always the bestapproach, even in knowledge work.

Where prototypes are too expensive to

build or where failed prototypes have
great consequences, formalist methods
remain the best choice. But in software
development and other knowledge
work, information technologies in-
creasingly enable simulation, rapid
prototyping, and low-cost testing and

consequence assessment. The technolo-
gies lower the costs of working itera-
tively and bring us to the brink of a
new way of organizing work for the
knowledge economy.
Why ÒrequirementsÓ is toolimitingMany people not involved in the-ater suppose that playmaking intends
to reproduce the authorÕs intentions

precisely. If this were true, the script

would be a specification and the ac-
tors would be like assembly line
workers trying to build a product to
conform to the spec. But it is not re-
motely true. A script is not detailed

enough to be a specification; it con-

tains words to be spoken and a few
stage directions, but the actors, de-

signers, and the director must make
the majority of choices. The words in

the script are like high-level con-
straints for a software system, the
Formalists can point toindustrial successes inmanufacturing. Agilistshave no equivalentsuccess story to invoke.
Or so they think. Webelieve they havenÕtlooked enough. January/February 2003
IEEE SOFTWARE
95REQUIREMENTSequivalent to an accounting systemÕs
generally accepted accounting princi-
plesor a medical systemÕs government
regulations. In those too, most of the

choices that make the system good or

bad are left to developers, designers,

and managers.The difference between a good and
bad system is not how well it meets
the requirements you know in ad-vance. Meeting requirements is a nec-
essary but insufficient condition for
producing an excellent system. What
makes a system great is details thatare not specifiable in advanceÑas-
pects that must evolve in the making.
A production of ShakespeareÕs 
Mac-bethis not great merely because theactors said all the words perfectly. To

be successful, the play must have vi-
tality, a life that is created every night

anew. Similarly, a system must do

more than meet requirements known

in advance. As long as our processes
are structured for conformance to ad-

vance specs, weÕll have problems be-
cause software developmentÕs essence

is creation, not conformance. That
doesnÕtÑwe repeat, doesnÕtÑmean

the process canÕt be rigorous. ItÕs time

to stop defining software develop-mentÕs success in terms of meeting re-
quirements. It just doesnÕt work that

way. In a rapidly changing world, it

canÕt.
Rob Austinis an assistant professor at the Harvard Busi-
ness School. Contact him at Morgan T91, Soldiers Field, Boston,
MA 02163; raustin@hbs.edu.Lee Devinis a dramaturg at the PeopleÕs Light and
Theater Company in Malvern, Pa. Contact him at PeopleÕs

Light, 39 Conestoga Rd., Malvern, PA 19355; ldevin1@

swarthmore.edu.They coauthored Artful Making: What Managers Need to KnowAbout How Artists Work 
(Prentice-Hall/Financial Times), to be
published in the spring.UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO AT
COLORADO SPRINGSThe University of Colorado at Col-orado Springs seeks a renowned scholar
in Computer Science, preferably in the
areas of software engineering or com-
puter communications and networks.
This position is endowed by El Pomar
Foundation, one of the largest private
foundations in the west. El Pomar Foun-
dation creates opportunities for Col-
orado's future through proactive philan-
thropy and innovative partnerships.This position offers a unique oppor-tunity for a candidate to have two re-
lated leadership roles.  Twenty-five per-

cent of the El Pomar Professor's time will
be devoted to bringing technical exper-
tise to CITTI, the University affiliated
Colorado Institute for Technology

Transfer and Implementation.  The re-

maining seventy-five percent of the El

Pomar Professor's time will be as a fac-
ulty member with the Computer Sci-
ence Department.  To see a detailed description of the
postion please go to
http://csweb.uccs.edu/positions/elpo-
marad.htmCandidates must have the qualifica-tions, experience, and professional
stature appropriate for the academic
rank of professor of computer science
and a demonstrated commitment to
excellence in research and teaching.

Applicants should send a letter describ-
ing qualifications and experiences, cur-
riculum vita, and contact information
for five references.  Salary and other

support costs are negotiable. Applications and nominationsshould be directed to the El Pomar Pro-fessor Search Committee, Department
of Computer Science, University of Col-
orado at Colorado Springs, P.O. Box

7150, Colorado Springs, CO 80933.
Applications for this position may be
sent electronically to a confidential e-
mail address,
elpomarsearch@cs.uccs.edu.   
Applications will be reviewed be-ginning February 1, 2003 and continue

until the position is filled.  The Univer-

sity of Colorado is an Affirmative Ac-
tion/Equal Opportunity employer and
encourages a diversity of applicants.CIGITAL LABS
Opportunities in theResearch Labs
Cigital makes software better. Our solu-
tions help companies increase produc-
tivity while mitigating the business risks
inherent in software. At Cigital Labs, we
specialize in researching, developing

and applying next-generation technolo-
gies that help our clients repeatedly de-
velop and deliver software better and
faster. We are currently searching for ex-

ceptional researchers at all levels to be-

come integral parts of our research

team.Director of Science:Will be re-
sponsible for determining the direction
of scientific and technical research at

the labs. Successful candidate must
have at least ten years of experience
winning, managing and growing cut-
ting-edge research initiatives. Must pos-

sess strong scientific research skills and a

proven track record of: (1) winning re-
search contract/grants, (2) publishing

peer-reviewed articles, and (3) pushing
forward an organizationÕs overall re-

search agenda. 
Research Scientist: 
Successful can-didate must have a Ph.D. in ComputerScience and have performed notewor-

thy research in the field of software as-

surance. Excellent writing skills, a good
publishing record and demonstrated
potential for obtaining external re-
search funding are required. Must be

willing to mentor junior staff members.Research Associate:
Successfulcandidate must have a Masters in Com-
puter Science (or equivalent) with a
strong background in core computer
science areas. Must possess excellent re-
search and analytical skills and the

wherewithal to tackle difficult, open-
ended problems. Must be a self-moti-
vated, quick learner with the ability and
interest to rapidly absorb new technolo-
gies.Our researchers must be familiar
with cutting-edge technologies in the
fields of software assurance (reliability,

safety, security), software engineering

(OOA/D, test planning, execution and
automation) or software analysis. In ad-
dition to performing research, candi-

dates at all levels are responsible for in-
vestigating new areas for proposals,
writing and presenting papers, and
pushing the technology envelope. Cigital is located in Northern Vir-
ginia, just minutes outside of Washing-

ton, DC, in one of the nationÕs fastest

growing technology regions. As the
leading authority in the field of software
assurance, Cigital offers an excellent
salary and benefits package, along with

a casual, relaxed atmosphere centering
around highly motivated teams.If you are committed to excellenceand want to be involved with tomor-
rowÕs technology today, visit

http://www.cigitallabs.com and email

your resume to jobs@cigital.com.
Cigital Inc., 21351 Ridgetop Circle,

Suite 400, Dulles, VA 20166. 
Career  Opportunities
 Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
