 70IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEECurrent software development methods andsoftware process improvement approaches (ISO
9000, Capability Maturity Models, SPICE, andBOOTSTRAP, for example) are typically effective inlarge-scale, long-term development efforts with

stable and disciplined processes.1In contrast,Internet-speed software development involves
rapid requirement changes and unpredictable
product complexity. Such environments require

software development approaches that balance
flexibility and disciplined methodology.
2Ð4High-visibility Internet software leaderssuch as Microsoft and Netscape have adopted
agile development methods for this new arena.
Whether these practices support traditional
software engineering principles and will result
in high-quality software isnÕt clear, however.

On the basis of our multiphase study of 10

software development organizations over
three years, in conjunction with findings from
a Discovery Colloquium on best practices for

fast-paced software development, we examine

how and why practices used to develop soft-
ware at Internet speed differ from traditional

software development. Internet-speed developmentpractices emerge
Working at Internet speed changes how
software development is organized. ThefocusIs Internet-Speed SoftwareDevelopment Different?
To compete in the digital economy, companies must be able to de-
velop high-quality software systems at ÒInternet speedÓÑthat
is, deliver new systems to customers with more value and at a

faster pace than ever before. However, applying quality soft-
ware development practices on a widespread basis has met with serious ob-
stacles. The Internet environment intensifies software development prob-
lems by emphasizing shorter cycle times. the state of the practiceDeveloping software at Internet speed requires a flexible development
environment that can cope with fast-changing requirements and an
increasingly demanding market. Agile principles are better suited
than traditional software development principles to provide such an

environment. Richard Baskerville and Balasubramaniam Ramesh, 
Georgia State UniversityLinda Levine, Software Engineering InstituteJan Pries-Heje, IT University of CopenhagenSandra Slaughter, 
Carnegie Mellon University grounded theory analysis in Phase 1 of ourstudy (see the ÒStudy MethodsÓ sidebar) un-
covered three major causal factors: A desperate rush-to-marketA new and unique software market envi-
ronmentA lack of experience developing software
under the conditions this environment
imposedAs a result, a new development process that
depends on new software development cul-

tures evolved. In this process, software prod-uct quality becomes negotiable. Eight identifi-able practices characterizing the Internet-
speed software development process emerged
from Phase 1.
5Develop in parallelIn a marketplace with faster and faster re-lease cycles, companies must deploy new fea-
tures quickly or competitors will get out there
earlier and snatch away customers. One way
to increase speedis to use overlapping parallel

development. Releases can be totally devel-
oped in parallel or staged onto the market
such that design, development, and quality as-November/December 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
71Our study used a mixed-methods research design1 involvingthe collection of multiple kinds of data. Case studies of Internet-

speed software development in Phase 1 were complemented with
a Discovery Colloquium on Internet-speed development in Phase 2.
Phase 1: Internet-speed development casestudiesDuring the first phase in Fall 2000, we conducted detailedcase studies of Internet software development at 10 companies

in two major metropolitan areas. Our objective was to under-

stand how and why Internet-speed software development differs

from traditional software development. We collected data through open-ended interviews and ana-
lyzed it using grounded theory.
2With this methodology, we
can develop a theory for a problem under investigation without

prior hypotheses. The analysis identified core categories and
their interrelationships, explaining how and why Internet-speed

software development differs from traditional approaches.
Phase 2: Discovery ColloquiumPhase 2 objectives were to synthesize knowledge on bestpractices for quality and agility in Internet-speed software devel-

opment. We held a one-day Discovery Colloquium on Innova-

tive Practices for Speed and Agility in Internet Software Devel-

opment3using innovative open-forum search techniques toenable what has been called  Òcreative abrasion.Ó
4Colloquiumactivities were designed to expand understanding of the inter-
face between business issues and Internet software development

through dialog; explore promising practices for Internet software

development; and engage participants in a vision-based ap-

proach to identifying emerging models, strategies, and direc-
tions addressing challenges in Internet software development. 
Grounded in Kurt LewinÕs action research model,search
conference participants Òbring the whole system in the roomÓ to

exchange views and learn from each other (http://future-

search.net/). Like other forms of action research, participants

share observations, engage in collaborative analysis, and logi-
cally test discoveries in an interactive debate. Search confer-ences produce data and findings coincidently.
The colloquium benefited from the Phase 1 findings and in-cluded interviewees from Phase 1 companies as well as se-

lected experts. Software practitioners from entrepreneurial small

companies and large Òbrick and mortarÓ companies, Internet

business strategists, and leading software development experts

also participated. Methodological perspectives represented a

broad spectrum: from adherents of agile methodologies to ad-
herents of traditional software process disciplines. 
Participants joined one of several breakout groups dedi-
cated to exploring a core issue. The groups first identified ob-
servations relating to their core issue, and then developed hy-

potheses about possible associated factors and dynamics. The
groups tested the hypotheses, identifying linkages, contradic-
tions, and interdependencies among them. The groups then
delved into underlying assumptions to further build dialog from

generative ideas and to allow for divergence and convergence

of insights with maximum cross-fertilization. They identified

principles, promising practices, and other dynamics.The Discovery ColloquiumÕs foundations in action research
are reflected in how data collection, analysis, and social action
are conflated into one flowing exercise. We took part in the

colloquium as participant-observers. All of the participants, op-

erating in various groups, explicated the concepts from their
practical experiences. The groups then operated analytically on
these concepts in a socially situated forum. Both data and
analysis emerged in the mode of action learning.
We based the results reported in this article on discussions
in a group focused on agile software development.References1.A. Tashakkori and C. Teddlie, Mixed Methodology: Combining Qualitative
and Quantitative Approaches, vol. 46, Sage Publications, 1998.2.A. Strauss and J. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory
Procedures and Techniques, Sage Publications, 1990.
3.L. Levine et al., Discovery Colloquium: Quality Software Development @ In-
ternet Speed, SEI tech. report CMU/SEI-2002-TR-020, ESC-TR-2002-020,

Software Eng. Inst., Carnegie Mellon Univ., 2002.
4.D. Leonard, When Sparks Fly: Igniting Creativity in Groups, Harvard Busi-
ness School Press, 1999.Study Methods surance all occur simultaneously, but sequen-
tially on different releases. Sometimes develop-
ers begin coding even before they fully under-
stand a projectÕs requirements. Development

proceeds in anticipation of the features that
will be required in the productÕs final version. 
Release more oftenÒPeople have a perception of Internet speed.They expect it. So weÕve had to scope our de-
livery or deliver a smaller set of features,
thereby releasing more often,Ó said one man-
ager we interviewed. Requirements can stay
fluid when a companyconstantly monitors and

prioritizes the features that will be included in
successive releases of the product. Features that
canÕt be completed in time can slip from one

release to the next. Similarly, the company can

introduce an important new feature rather late
in the process when market conditions require
it. The fast cycle time removes much of the
trauma of slipping a feature. Depend on toolsMany of the companies we visited makeheavy use of development tools and environ-
ments that speed the design and coding
process. The infrastructure and tools provided
by new technologies offer much of the func-

tionality that used to be custom-built in tradi-

tional software development. One developer
estimated that Ò50 percent of development is

already taken care of by the tools we use.Ó
Implant customers in the development environmentCustomer involvement in traditional soft-ware development is usually through reference
groups or steering committees, which can slow
development. When requirements are fuzzy and
fast-changing, intimate access to customers
slashestime delays and ensures that high-priority

features are correctly identified. Customers
move their normal working environment to the
development environment to shorten cycle
times. This ÒimplantationÓ lets customers par-

ticipate closely in all phases of development. In-

ternet projects rely on this close involvement

rather than a formalized requirements manage-
ment process. It provides customers with im-
mediate feedback on the costs and schedule im-
plications of requirements changes and leads to
good strategies for chunking requirements into
logically cohesive releases.Establish a stable architectureA fixed architecture helps anchor a rapiddevelopment process, which is never quite sta-
ble. It allows similarity among releases and the
largest possible reuse of components. A three-
layer architectureÑdatabase, business logic,
and user interfaceÑis common. Some companies we interviewed focused ondeveloping a common architecture and stan-
dardizing it across applications. They viewed
this as an investment that would pay huge div-
idends by facilitating development of scalable
and maintainable systems. Other companies
did not apply this practicebecause throwaway

systems might not need stable architectures to
operate. The effects of bad architecture can
emerge far downstream in the product evolu-
tion. By that time, the product might be under-
going a complete redevelopment. Assemble and reuse componentsInternet-speed development can be achievedoften only if developers maximize reusable
components, rather than craft the software
from scratch. ÒInternet speed needs reuse. We

need to take components or assets and know
how to put them together,Ó one developer said

during our interview. A manager from the

same company continued, ÒThe strategy is to
acquire, integrate, and assemble components
with wrappersÑto get things done quickly.Ó 
Component reuse at all levels of the archi-tecture (business logic, interfaces, and back-
end infrastructure) was prominent among
companies interviewed. Software development
involves achieving interoperability and inte-
gration among components developed else-
where or purchased off the shelf. 
Ignore maintenanceThe short life span of Internet-speed soft-ware means that developers rarely give main-
tenance serious consideration. One small soft-
ware house said, ÒProducts are not
documented: no design document, no require-
ments specification. If the person who origi-
nally did it is gone, it takes a much longer
time. Often we can start from scratch. It leads

to a throw-away mentality.Ó When software is

retired quickly and replaced with newer ver-
sions developed from scratch, this cavalier at-

titude might avoid the serious maintenance
problems that can occur in long-lived, tightly-
coupled, and complex software. Software
developmentinvolvesachievinginteroperabilityand integrationamongcomponentsdevelopedelsewhere orpurchased offthe shelf.
72IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
 Tailor the methodology daily
The processes and methods the companiesused in Internet software development varied
considerably depending on project team compo-

sition and product type. Some companies devel-
oped an overall framework within which proj-
ect teams could tailor their methodologies daily.

With the intense demands for speed, many com-

panies used just enough process to be effective.
Often the tendency was to skip phases or tasks
that might impede their ability to deliver the
software on time, although this might be done
at the risk of producing lower quality software. Principles behind the practicesWe can easily relate the practices found in
Phase 1 of our study to similar practices in
more traditional software development. Al-
though no single characteristic distinguishes
this new software process, the collection of

practices and the way they are used is unique
and remarkably common to Internet-speed
software development processes. Traditional

software development sometimes employs a
select few of these practices, but seldom does

it use several of them together. Further, the

practices are often extreme when compared to
seemingly similar practices observed in tradi-
tional software development. For example, the
typical frequency of Internet-speed software

releases is greater than packaged software by
orders of magnitude.Is Internet-speed software developmenttruly different from traditional software de-
velopment, and if so, how? For this question,
we must consider the principles correspon-
ding to the practices. In Phase 2, we held a
Discovery Colloquium, aiming to understand
the issues faced by organizations attempting
to develop quality software at Internet speed
(see the ÒPrinciples or Practices?Ó sidebar).
Although the findings from the colloquium
distinguished Internet speed as a set of prac-
tices, it denoted the underlying principles as
principles of agility. Agility, which came to

software engineering through agile manufac-

turing, invokes design principles that facili-
tate rapid redesign and reconfiguration of a
systemÕs components for entirely new applica-

tions. Internet-speed practices are a profes-
sional implementation of certain agile soft-
ware development principles, which Phase 2
sought to discover. 
Agile development principles We first identified rival hypotheses and un-
derlying assumptions about agile methodolo-
gies and their role in Internet-speed software

development vis-‹-vis traditional software de-
velopment. Colloquium participants explicitly
generated some hypotheses: Agile methods are more effective than tra-
ditional methods.November/December 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
73In a strict dictionary sense, a 
principleis a fundamentaldoctrine or assumption, while a practiceis how users customar-
ily apply the principle. The principles of software engineering
continue to emerge, and distinguishing practice from principlewill always bring contention among experts. For example, 
as Table A shows, the Agile ManifestoÕs principles (http://

agilemanifesto.org/principles.html) partly overlap practices 

and principles from our study.
Principles or Practices?Table A Comparison of selected Agile Manifesto principles and Internet-speed practicesand Discovery Colloquium agile principles
Agile Manifesto principles Internet-speed practices and Discovery Colloquium agile principles
Satisfy the customer through early and continuous Good software development methodologies engage the customer
delivery of valuable software
Welcome late and changing requirements; harness change Methodologies must accommodate requirements change
for the customerÕs competitive advantage

Self-organizing teams develop the best architectures, Software processes require good teamwork regardless of methodology
requirements, and designsDeliver working software frequentlyRelease more often
Business people and developers must work together Implant customers in the development environment
daily throughout the projectRoutinely reflect on the teamÕs effectiveness and tune behaviorTailor the methodology daily
 Internet-speed development is fundamen-tally different from traditional develop-

ment, so it requires agile methods.Agile methods are effective when the time
horizon is short and not as effective over
the long term.Agile methods arenÕt really new, but their

implementation is extreme.Key insights emerged when these hypotheseswere discussed:Basic principles of software development
exist, are known, and are immutable. You can implement a software develop-

ment principle in many ways. ItÕs impor-

tant to identify the principles and discern
how the practices differ from one method-

ology to another. 
Every agile method practice has an analog
in traditional development. Environments dictate practices, not princi-
ples. Some combinations of practices are
superior in specific environments. Thus,
different environments require different
implementations for effectiveness. Project size impacts software development
practices. How a developer composes a productÕs life

cycle over time changes how the developer
attacks the problem. Choosing a softwaredevelopment life cycle such as waterfall orspiral dictates the choice of practices. Based on these insights, the group membersgenerated a set of metaprinciples underlying
agile software development. The first column

in Table 1 lists these metaprinciples.
Traditional versus agile principles
In our search for a good traditional set of
principles to compare with agile principles, we

reviewed well-known publications on the topic,
such as Barry BoehmÕs ÒSeven Basic Principles

of Software Engineering,Ó
6and AlanDavisÕs
ÒFifteen Principles of Software Engineering.Ó7We adopted a set of principles, listed in column

two of Table 1, rigorously developed in a work-

shop on software development standards held
in Montreal using a multistage Delphi study in-
volving well-respected researchers and practi-
tioners.8It exemplifies the best attempt to dateto define general metaprinciples for traditional

software development.Table 1 shows the overlap resulting from our
comparison of the Montreal workshop

metaprinciples to the agile development princi-
ples that emerged from our colloquium. Each
set also has some distinctive and nonoverlap-
ping principles: 11 metaprinciples from the
Montreal workshop with no comparable agile
metaprinciple in the Discovery Colloquium, and74IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
Table 1 Internet-speed versus traditional software development metaprinciples Discovery Colloquium on Internet-speed software developmentMontreal Workshop on software development standards
Several equally valid approaches to accomplishing a development goal existEstablish a flexible software process 
Good software development methodologies engage the customerInvest in understanding the problem
Methodologies must accommodate requirements changeChange is inherent to software; therefore, plan for and manage it
Current agile methods are a simple instantiation of a set of practices that To improve design, study solutions to similar probl
emsseem to work; successful methods derive from the basic principles of software developmentAll software processes require teamwork The project environment constrains what software development practices will be effectiveMixing and matching methodologies can have unintended consequencesApply and use quantitative measurements in decision makingBuild with and for reuseControl complexity with multiple perspectives and multiple levels of abstractionRigorously define software artifacts Manage quality throughout the life cycle as formally as possibleMinimize software component interactionProduce software in a stepwise fashionSet quality objectives for each deliverable productMake trade-offs explicit and document themIdentify and manage uncertainty Implement a disciplined approach and continuously improve it  three agile metaprinciples with no comparablemetaprinciple from the Montreal workshop.
Five metaprinciples correspond. The one-to-one
correspondence is not totally complete as Table

1 shows. Several principles from the Montreal
workshop could be related, albeit more indi-
rectly, to principles from the colloquium, and

vice versa. For our analysis, the important prin-
ciples are those that could not be related.We consider this analysis in three parts: 
Overlapping set of traditional and agile
principlesTraditional principles with no equivalent

agile principleAgile principles with no equivalent tradi-
tional principleAgile principles prioritize speed, responsive-ness, and improvisation rather than quality or
cost as traditional principles do. Contrary to
traditional software developmentÕs emphasis

on control, discipline, formality, and rigor, ag-

ile principles stress informal knowledge ex-
change, collaboration, and experience, and ac-
knowledge more sensitivity to tailoring project
practices to environmental conditions. Agile
principles are essential for managing software
projects in volatile settings where fast-changing
technologies and markets drive fast-changing
skills and knowledge.The overlapping principlesÑsuch as flexi-bility and responding to changeÑare essential
for keeping processes aligned with changing
requirements. Both agile and traditional prin-
ciples stress the importance of developing to-
ward a Òjust-rightÓ set of requirements. Internet-speed practices anddevelopment principlesIs Internet-speed software development dif-ferent? Our analysis of software development

principles reveals that whereas certain agile

principles overlap traditional principles, others
differ. However, how these differences in princi-

ple are reflected in differences in practice is un-

clear. WeÕve identified eight Internet-speed de-

velopment practices (described earlier in the

ÒInternet-speed development practices emergeÓ

section). To understand how these practices re-

late to principles, we analyze how they are com-

patible with agile principles and incompatible

with the traditional development principles that

have no counterpart in agile development.
Compatibility of Internet-speed developmentpractices and agile principlesEach Internet-speed development practicecan also be found in traditional software devel-
opment. What distinguishes the practices is

how Internet-speed developers combine and ap-
ply them. Although weÕd like to be able to map
practices to principles in a one-to-one align-

ment, the real world of software development is

too messy to support such a crisp analysis.One or more of the practices can be combinedand used to implement each principle. However,

some practices are clearly more prominent than
others in enacting each principle. We consider

the seven agile principles identified in Phase 2 in
terms of how they are supported and enacted by
the eight practices identified in Phase 1.Accept multiple valid approaches.This princi-ple is supported by the practice of Òtailoring
the methodology daily.Ó  It becomes more suc-

cessful when combined with frequent releases

because different methodologies can be isolated

when used for different releases. A stable archi-
tecture a tool orientation, and component-

based development combine to enable this
fluid view of methodology by providing a
framework to constrain and contain the be-
havior of system components that might have
been developed with different approaches.Engage the customer. The Òcustomer implan-tationÓ practice supports this principle. Engag-
ing the customer and providing frequent re-
leases gives customers immediate satisfaction
as they see their ideas and requirements em-
bodied in a new release.Accommodate requirements change.Mostpractices are complementary in accommodat-

ing changing requirements. Frequent releases

and parallel development permit last-minute
changes in an imminent version of a product.
Fixed architecture and fluid methodology in-
teract to help manage the product while relax-

ing controls on the software process. Compo-
nent-based development and tools speed the
software creation process. Ignoring mainte-
nance loosens concerns about the impact of
last-minute changes on maintainability. Even

customer implantation facilitates requirements
change by improving communication.Build on successful experience.Component-November/December 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
75Both agile andtraditionalprinciplesstress theimportance ofdevelopingtoward a Òjust-rightÓ 
set ofrequirements.  based development facilitates successful com-ponent reuse, but agile practices highly value
developersÕ knowledge as well. The ÒrightÓ
people can mean project success. In some par-
allel development projects, specialized teamsÑ
requirements, programming, quality control,
and so onÑroll releases out in stages. Many

development tool environments have mecha-
nisms to preserve information and notes on ar-
chitecture, design, or implementation deci-

sions. Customer implantation lets customers
and developers exchange tacit knowledge and
facilitates construction based on deep knowl-
edge of software development and the applica-
tion domain. Develop good teamwork.Good teamwork canresult from the right mix of people and the

right process framework. Customer implanta-
tion helps achieve the right mix of people and
knowledge. Methodological flexibility lets a
team find their ideal working style given the

mix of characters in their group. Frequent re-

leases yield small chunks of well-defined prob-
lems that help teams more quickly understand

the task and how to work together.
Conform to project environment constraints.Methodological flexibility permits agile devel-
opers to vary their approaches or improvise
when environmental constraints change. A
stable architecture that helps standardize and
decouple product components makes this flex-
ibility possible. Frequent releases also let de-

velopers quickly revisit and fix problems that

arise because of unrecognized environmental
constraints.Prepare for unexpected consequences from
software process innovation.MethodologicalflexibilityÕs Òmix-and-matchÓ strategy of deal-

ing with development issues as they arise can
create problems. Certain Internet-speed devel-
opment practices mitigate these problems by
placing boundaries on process innovation and
compensating quickly when unexpected conse-
quences arise. A stable architecture, component-
based development, and an established develop-
ment tool environment constrain process
innovation. Compensatory practices for quickly
fixing innovation-driven problems are also
available. Frequent releases, enabled by parallel
development, let developers correct problems as
they occur.
Incompatibility of Internet-speed develop-ment practices and ÒorphanedÓ traditional
principles Many ÒorphanedÓ traditional principles(that is, those that were ignored by the agile

methods group in the Discovery Colloquium)
appear to be motivated by the need to increase
quality and lower software development costs. In Internet-speed development, developerspractice parallel development, frequent re-

leases, customer implantation, and disregard
for maintenance in ways that let them forego

formal specification, design, and documenta-
tion overhead. At least seven traditional prin-
ciples promote such formalisms and conflict

with how these practices are applied in Inter-

net-speed development. These traditional
principles include Quantitative measurementsFormal quality management throughout
the life cycleRigorous software artifact specifications
Stepwise software productionFormal quality objectivesExplicit documentation of trade-offs
Identification and management of uncertainty(Participants in the Montreal workshop do ac-knowledge the difficulty of implementing their

principles in some contexts, particularly in en-
vironments requiring agility.)
Other traditional principles, while more or
less ignored by agile developers, only partly
conflict with Internet-speed development
practices. A good example is the principle of
building with and for reuse. In general, agile
developers try to build Òwith reuse,Ó but less
Òfor reuse.Ó Developers might reuse compo-

nents from component libraries wherever pos-

sible butÑconsistent with the practice of ig-
noring maintenanceÑrarely take the time to
develop their own components other than for
their own immediate applications. Another partially served traditional principleis the minimization of software component in-
teraction. Although agile development doesnÕt

explicitly hold this principle, it does get served
somewhat accidentally because Internet-speed
development heavily uses component libraries
whenever possible. The traditional principle of continuous im-provement to disciplined processes is also

partly and accidentally served. Internet-speed
Good teamworkcan result fromthe right mix ofpeople and theright processframework.76IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
 development approaches are continuouslytuned to align the team and its objectives. In

this sense, improvements are continuous.

However, the degree to which agile developers

value these approaches for their ÒdisciplinedÓ
nature is negligible.Our analysis suggests at least four im-
plications for software management:Cost and quality do not drive Internet-
speed software development. Rather, de-

velopment speed is paramount. Develop-
ment costs become more aligned with

operating costs. Quality becomes nego-
tiable, a notion of quality-in-use where the
exact quality requirements are a moving
target in play with functionality and prod-
uct availability.
Project management in Internet-speed de-

velopment differs from project manage-

ment in traditional development. Projects
do not begin or end, but are an ongoing
operation more akin to operations man-
agement. Development problems are
chunked into small jobs that can be rolled
out as small, tailor-made products. 
Maintenance in Internet-speed develop-
ment is sometimes merged into the specifi-

cation-build-release cycle along with new
functionality, or maintenance cycles be-

come small project cycles (maintenance re-
leases) interspersed with larger project cy-
cles (functional releases).
Human resource management differs in
Internet-speed development. Team mem-

bers are less interchangeable, and teams
require people with initiative, creativity,

and courage as well as technical knowl-
edge, experience, and drive. The right can-
didates are more difficult to describe,

identify, and place on Internet-speed de-

velopment teams.Many Internet-speed development practiceslook deceptively similar to long-standing soft-
ware development practices. However, a close

examination of how Internet-speed develop-

ment practices unfold, and the agile principles
to which these practices respond, reveals that
Internet-speed software development is a fun-

damentally new way to develop software.References1.D. Harter, M. Krishnan, and S. Slaughter, ÒEffects of
Process Maturity on Quality, Cycle Time, and Effort in

Software Product Development,Ó Management Science,vol. 46, no. 4, Apr.2000, pp. 451Ð466.
2.M.A. Cusumano and D.B. Yoffie, ÒWhat Netscape
Learned from Cross-Platform Software Development,Ó
Comm. ACM, vol. 42, no. 10, Oct. 1999, pp. 72Ð78.3.M.A. Cusumano and D.B. Yoffie, ÒSoftware Develop-
ment on Internet Time,Ó 
Computer, vol. 32,no. 10,
Oct. 1999, pp. 60Ð69.4.M. Iansiti and A. MacCormack, ÒDeveloping Products
on Internet Time,Ó 
Harvard Business Rev.
, vol. 75, no.5, Sept./Oct.1997, pp. 108Ð117.
5.B. Ramesh, R. Baskerville, and J. Pries-Heje, ÒInternet
Software Engineering: A Different Class of Processes,Ó
Annals of Software Eng., vol. 14, no. 1Ð4, Dec. 2002,pp. 169Ð195.6.B.W. Boehm, ÒSeven Basic Principles of Software Engi-
neering,Ó J. Systems and Software, vol. 3, no. 1, Mar.
1983, pp. 3Ð24.7.A.M. Davis, ÒFifteen Principles of Software Engineer-
ing,Ó IEEE Software, vol. 11, no. 6, Nov./Dec. 1994,
pp. 94Ð101.8.P. Bourque et al., ÒFundamental Principles of Software
EngineeringÑA Journey,Ó
J. Systems and Software, vol.62, no. 1, May 2002, pp. 59Ð70.November/December 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
77About the AuthorsRichard Baskerville
is a professor and chair of computer information systems atGeorgia State University. His research interests are information systems development and secu-

rity. He received a PhD from the London School of Economics. He is a member of the IEEE

Computer Society, the ACM, and the British Computer Society. Contact him at

baskerville@gsu.edu. 
Balasubramaniam Rameshis an associate professor of computer information sys-tems at Georgia State University. His research interests include requirements engineering and

traceability in systems development, knowledge management, data mining, and Web services.

He received a PhD in information systems from the Stern School of Business, New York Univer-

sity. He is a member of the IEEE, the ACM, AAAI, and AIS. Contact him at bramesh@gsu.edu.
Linda Levineis a senior member of the technical staff at Carnegie Mellon UniversityÕs
Software Engineering Institute. Her research focuses on acquisition of software intensive sys-
tems, agile software development, system of systems interoperability, diffusion of innovations,

and knowledge integration and transfer. She received a PhD in rhetoric from Carnegie Mellon

University. She is a member of the Association for Information Systems, National Communica-

tion Association, and cofounder and vice chair of IFIP Working Group 8.6 on Diffusion, Transfer

and Implementation of Information Technology. Contact her at ll@sei.cmu.edu.
Jan Pries-Hejeis an associate professor at the IT University of Copenhagen. He is also aprofessor of software engineering and management at the IT University of Gothenburg. His re-
search focuses on leadership and organizational issues relating to software development. He
received a PhD in computer science and business administration from Copenhagen Business
School. He is a member of AIS and the Danish Computer Society. Contact him at jph@itu.dk.
Sandra Slaughteris an associate professor of information systems at Carnegie MellonUniversity. Her research focuses on productivity and quality improvement in software develop-

ment and management of development professionals. She received a PhD in information sys-
tems and business administration from the University of Minnesota. She is a member of the
ACM, the Association for Information Systems, and the Academy of Management. Contact her
at sandras@andrew.cmu.edu
