 28 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | PUBL
IS
HED BY TH
E IEEE COMPUT
ER SOC
IE
TY
 0740-7459/12/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
PRIMARILY FOUNDED AS 
method
-ologies for software projects executed 
at a single location, agile methodolo
-gies have shown promising results in 
multisite projects, with many adopters 

and practitioners spread out across the 
globe. Meanwhile, during the past de
-cade, thought leaders and practitioners 
have recognized the role of agile testing 

or testing in agile projects and have ar
-ticulated the signi˜cance of related en
-gineering practices such as test-driven 

development, behavior-driven develop
-ment, and test automation. 
Agile testing in distributed teams 
is driven by how the teams are struc
-tured at each location. For development 
projects, a logical approach is to have 
two or more distributed teams focus 
on independent modules or functional
-ities. In this case, teams in each loca
-tion are cross-functional, with one or 

more test engineers focused on test
-ing activities. This structure provides 
for optimal communication as well as 
dependencies across sites. With main
-tenance projects, it™s bene˜cial to con
-sider independent testing teams in ad
-dition to cross-functional ones. This is 

because cross-functional teams focus 

on the current iteration, whereas in
-dependent testing teams focus on the 

current release and contribute to areas 

such as security testing, performance 

testing, maintenance, and enhancing 
automated test suites. 
In this article, I present an inter
-view I conducted with Johanna Roth
-man and Lisa Crispin in March 2012, 

when I met with them at Belgium Test
-ing Days 2012. The goal of my inter
-view was to understand their perspec
-tives on technical debt in agile teams 
with speci˜c reference to agile testing 

and distributed teams. I also share my 

thoughts on the need for geographi
-cally distributed teams to become more 

aware and aligned to effectively man
-age technical debt.
The 
Interview
Bavani: ﬁTechnical debtﬂ is a common 
term used by agile teams. What are the 

implications of technical debt on agile 

testing teams? What does it mean, or how 

does it matter, to agile testing teams? 
Rothman: 
I don™t really think of testing 
teams in agile. I think of project teams 
in agile. When many project teams 
transition to agile, they accumulate 

technical testing debt. They have lots 

of manual tests, but not too many au
-tomated tests. So, if you have a lot of 

manual tests, how do you keep up with 

the demand of the iteration, or ˚ow, if 

you™re using Kanban? It™s really an issue 
of making it to the end of the iteration 
and getting it done. Then you have this 

product owner saying, ﬁI want a fea
-ture! I want a feature!ﬂŠI wrote a re
-lated blog posting called ﬁDo You Have 

Feature-itis?ﬂ
1The issue is that developers are new 
to agile. They don™t realize that testers 
have to keep up. They don™t realize 
that their job is to help testers. And the 

product owner doesn™t realize that he 

or she can™t get all these features right 
now. Also, the product owner doesn™t 
want to put technical debt into the it
-eration. You have all these people who 

are new to agile, and none of them re
-alize that you have to rank technical 
Distributed Agile, 
Agile Testing, and 

Technical Debt
Raja Bavani, 
Mindtree
// 
An interview with Johanna Rothman and Lisa Crispin aims 
to reveal perspectives on technical debt in agile teams with 
speci˜c reference to agile testing and distributed teams. 
//FOCUS:
 TECHNICAL DEB
T  NOV
EMB
ER/
DE
CEMB
ER 2012
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 29debt. Everyone™s ˚oundering. In the 
meantime, how do you get the product 
out the door? 
First, don™t think about agile testing 
teams; think about project teams that 
are new to agile. Second, think about 
how we get technical debtŠwhether 
it™s architecture debt, testing debt, unit 

testing debt, or system testing debt. It™s 

a hard thing. The faster you rank it, the 
easier it is to get the product out the 
door. The more technical debt you rank 

in the earlier iterations, the fewer fea
-tures you get. You have this push and 

pull about how many features you get 

versus how much technical debt you 

pay off. There™s no one right answer.
Bavani: How do you relate technical debt, 
agile, and agile testing teams? 
Crispin: 
Technical debt is central to the 
de˜nition of agile. Elizabeth Hendrick
-son calls it the acid test for agile: if a 
team is agile, it delivers business value 

frequentlyŠat least every one to four 

weeks, depending on the customer™s 
preferenceŠadapting to the chang
-ing needs of business at a sustainable 
pace. A sustainable pace is the key. This 

is where technical debt comes in. You 
can™t maintain a sustainable pace if you 
have technical debt. 
With reference to agile testing 
teams, I personally prefer to have cross-

functional integrated teams, but there 

could be good reasons to have separate 

testing teamsŠfor example, companies 
that produce embedded software might 
need separate teams for testing.
Bavani: 
When the product is very criti
-cal and the acceptance criteria are strin
-gent, we set up an independent testing 

team. There™s also a development team 

that does coding, unit testing, and accep
-tance testing. The testing team performs 

functional and other types of tests. What 
are the repercussions of inadequate 

tech
nical
 debt management on agile test
-ing teams?
Rothman: 
That™s really hard. That™s 
where you have to ˜nd a way to part
-ner with remote teams to start working 
together. I understand the challenges of 

distributed teamsŠI teach workshops 

on them, I™ve been writing about them, 
and I know that managers all over the 
world think that it™s a perfectly ˜ne 

thing to do. I think they™re lunatics. 
You have to start partnering with 
the people who are remote to you. The 

more critical the product, the more 

critical it is to partner testers with de
-velopers. You have to start thinking 

about how you™ll de˜ne ﬁdone.ﬂ Does 

it mean partially done, as in it™s ready 

for testing, or fully done, as in it™s ready 
to release? That™s when Kanban is very 
helpful. It makes works in progress 

transparent. It allows you to ask, ﬁDo I 

want acceptance criteria on what I turn 
into the testing queue?ﬂ Inside the itera
-tion, if you have technical debt on work 
products transferred from the develop
-ment team to testing, you have a situ
-ation that™s not helping anybody. This 

is why I really like thinking about value 

streams. If you™re working in iterations, 
˜ne. You can use a Kanban board and 
start looking at the queues and value 
streams.
Bavani: 
Sometimes the management of 
technical debt doesn™t happen in the right 
way. It becomes a catch-up game. When 

that happens, engineers who are respon
-sible for testing suffer. What are the ef
-fects of this that you see?
Crispin: 
It affects everybody, because if 
we™re not managing technical debt, we 
have code that isn™t well designed, well 
written, easy to maintain, or supported 

by automated tests. So, if we want to 

change that code, it will take a long 
time for us to ˜gure out what it does. 
If we don™t have adequate test coverage, 

we™ll have to spend a lot of time doing 

manual testing. Testing will become 
more and more of a bottleneck. This in
-volves a lot of risks because there are 
so many unknowns. It will affect every
-body on the team. 
Bavani: 
Should agile testing teams be 
aware of technical debt and participate 
in discussions related to it? How can they 

contribute?
Rothman: 
I think it™s worthwhile to 
talk about the de˜nition of ﬁdoneﬂ and 
the steps the software goes through to 
MEE
T THE 
EXPER
TSJohanna Rothman
 is an eminent author and speaker. She works with companies to 
improve how they manage their product development to maximize management and 
technical staff productivity and to improve product quality. She has authored several 
books, white papers, and articles. Visit her website at www.jrothman.com.
Lisa Crispin 
is an agile testing coach, author, and speaker. She specializes in 
showing testers and agile teams how testers can add value and how to guide develop
-ment with business-facing tests. She has authored several books, white papers, and 
articles. Visit her website at www.lisacrispin.com.
 30 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFOCUS:
 TECHNICAL DEB
Tmove from requirements all the way 
through to the ˜nal deployment and 
testing. Testing starts at different times 
depending on the kind of life cycle you 

choose. Are testers partially responsible 

for setting the acceptance criteria? If 
so, then they™re also partially respon
-sible for de˜ning ﬁdone.ﬂ That means 
that they™re responsible from the very 

beginning. 
Let™s get testers involved from the 
very beginning. If you have an agile 

development team in one location and 
an agile testing team in another loca
-tion, how do you get these two teams 
together to decide on the acceptance 

criteria? This is a big challenge, but it™s 
possible to handle. 
Bavani: 
Lisa, do you think testers can sur
-vive by standing alone and being ignorant 
of technical debt?
Crispin: 
I don™t think they can stand 
alone. I really feel that everybody 
needs to take responsibility for qual
-ity and for keeping technical debt at 
a manageable levelŠthat includes de
-velopers, testers, system administra
-tors, business analysts, and database 
administrators. Everybody involved in 
delivering software needs to be aware 
of it because technical debt can cross 

many areas. Consider a database team 

that isn™t doing a good job of version 
control on database changes; there can 
be mistakes in the database, columns 

that aren™t used anymore, or poorly 

named columns that cause confu
-sion. All these contribute to technical 

debt. This can happen in any area. So, 
I think the whole team has to make a 

meaningful commitment to do some
-thing about technical debt. They also 
need some management support to 
budget time to manage technical debt. 
There are a number of reasons, in 
my opinion, for incurring technical 
debt: we get rushed, or we want to meet 
a business deadline. That™s okay. The 

problem is that we don™t go back and 

pay off that technical debt before the 
next deadline, so the debt never stops, 
it just gets worse.
Bavani: 
Test automation is one of the 
core focus areas of agile testing teams. 
How can they understand and manage 

technical debt related to automation de
-sign or scripting? Are they aware of tech
-nical debt?
Rothman: 
I think some testers are, but 
not enough of them. I was just working 
with a client a few weeks ago where the 
developers were using XP and the tes
-ters weren™t inside the iteration. They 

were doing manual testing outside the 
iteration. I said to them, ﬁYou aren™t re
-ally doing XP. You know that, right?ﬂ 
They said, ﬁWe™re not?ﬂ I said, ﬁIf the 
developers are doing XP and testers are 
doing manual testing outside the itera
-tion, you aren™t doing XP. You don™t 
have a releasable product at the end of 
the iteration.ﬂ They said, ﬁOh – okay.ﬂ 
I found that kind of distressing. 
They didn™t realize that just having 
developers do XP wasn™t XP. The tes
-ters don™t know how to write auto
-mated tests. The developers don™t even 

know what XP really is. I think, in 
that particular instance, the fact is that 

testers were unaware of test automa
-tion and incapable of doing it. I told 
the company that if it doesn™t work on 

test automation fast, it would require a 
lot of long-term effort to pay off that 
technical debt. It was creating an entire 

product with zero test automation!
Crispin: 
That™s an excellent point. Au
-tomation test code is code. It™s as valu
-able as production code, so all the same 

criteria apply to it. I have met many 

teams working in agile environments 

whose intentions were to automate all 
tests. That intention was good, but the 
teams weren™t necessarily automating 

in a good way: they didn™t pay atten
-tion to test design; their test scripts had 
lots of duplication; and they didn™t ex
-tract duplicate code into reusable com
-ponents. So they spend all of their time 

maintaining their regression tests. This 
defeats the purpose. 
You need automated tests to free up 
your time to do more important things, 
such as manual exploratory testing. If 
you spend all of your time executing 

and maintaining your automated tests, 

you don™t get any return on investment; 
it™s a complete waste. We have to think 
about technical debt in our automated 

scripts, too. That™s why I feel like peo
-ple who have expertise in code design, 
such as the developers who write pro
-duction code, also need to be involved 
in the design of automated test scripts. 
In my own team, developers have al
-ways been involved in automating the 
unit tests and API level tests. The GUI 

test automation is left to us as the tes
-ters, and we enjoy doing that automa
-tion because we all have programming 

backgrounds. We do a good job of it 

and get good returns on those tests. 
Even so, we still feel that if program
-mers were involved in helping us design 
the tests, we would spend less time in 
maintaining them. So, on my team, we 
are actually making an effort to get the 
The whole team has to make 
 a meaningful commitment to do 
 something about technical debt.
  NOV
EMB
ER/
DE
CEMB
ER 2012
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 31programmers more involved in helping 
us to design GUI tests. 
There™s de˜nitely room for improve
-ments in this area. I think what happens 

too often is that some team is tasked 

with, ﬁOkay, you™re the automation 
teamŠgo and automate the tests,ﬂ and 
they don™t get the help they need, and 

they don™t realize that they need help 

until they™re in trouble. That™s too late.
Bavani: 
In this context, what are the chal
-lenges you see in distributed teams? How 
can we address these challenges? 
Rothman: 
One of the key things is that 
you get geographically distributed 
cross-functional teams togetherŠliter
-ally and physically together in one lo
-cation. There are smart people all over 
the world. To start distributed agile, try 
and bring everyone together for release 
planning at the very beginning of the 

project. Everyone knows this. 
Managers will often say, ﬁThat™s 
so expensive!ﬂ But if you really want 

a product that will release in your life
-time with as few defects as you prob
-ably want, you do it. You either pay for 

travel now or pay for defects later. It™s 

impossible for us to trust each other if 

we™ve never met each other. Trust is the 
very ˜rst thing you have to create.
Let™s say you and I meet each other. 
We work together for a few days. We 
have dinner together. You show me pic
-tures of your family. You become a real 

person to me! And now, I know you. 

When I say to you, ﬁThat isn™t accep
-tance criteria,ﬂ or you say to me, ﬁThat 
isn™t what ‚done™ means,ﬂ we can ˜ght 
it out and get it together because we 

understand each other. Now, you have 
a face, an attitude. I understand what 
you mean. When you send me an email, 

I can hear your voice in the email. 
Without this initial meeting and 
working together, when you receive my 

email, you probably don™t know when 

I™m having a bad day or that I have 
150 other emails to read, so I brie˚y 

respond, ﬁOkay.ﬂ I mean, ﬁOkay.ﬂ 

I™m not mad at you, I™m just saying, 
ﬁOkay.ﬂ That™s what we do in real life. 
The problem is that email divorces all 

the music from our words. This is the 
problem with geographically distrib
-uted teams. I truly advocate that people 
come together and build trust in dis
-tributed teams.
Crispin: 
I work with a distributed team 
on a small scale. We had one developer 
in India and the rest of us in Colorado. 
Even on such a small scale, you see 
problems with the time difference. If the 
developer in India checks in some code 

and the developers in Denver feel that 

the code isn™t designed well, then either 
they have to change it or they have to 
ask him to change it. If they™re going to 

ask him to change it, they have to wait 

another day. If you blow that up into 
global companies working in different 
areas with several teams around the 

globe, you just multiply that problem. 

So, I think you have to pay extra atten
-tion to making technical debt visible. 
There are lots of tools available to 
quantify technical debt, such as con
-tinuous integration tools. You can set 

up factors and criteria in these tools to 

give you a monetary amount of your 

technical debt based on the code com
-plexity, automated test coverage, and 

so on. This will let you ask, ﬁWhat is 

our level of technical debt? Is it grow
-ing in such a way that it is impacting 
our velocity? Do we need to stop and 
spend some time on this?ﬂ
In my own team, we spend a 
two-week sprint every six months to 

manage our technical debt. In this 
sprint, we don™t deliver any business 
value, we just pay off technical debt. 

It™s too risky to do any major refactor
-ing or upgrade to your tools or frame
-works when you are trying to deliver 

business functionality. So, although we 

try to refactor all the time, we feel that 

we need that two-week sprint to keep 
our technical debt under control. This 
is magni˜ed with distributed teams. 

They have to make it even more vis
-ible and make sure that they invest that 

time. It™s an investmentŠit™s going to 
pay off. By reducing technical debt, the 
velocity is going to improve. Their busi
-ness can count on a continuous stream 

of value coming out of that develop
-ment team.
The 
Implications
According to Jim Highsmith, technical 

debt, if not managed properly, can de
-stroy predictability, which can in turn 

impact market capitalization.
2 Israel 
Gat, who has done signi˜cant work in 
quantifying and identifying the ˜nan
-cial cost of technical debt, warns that 
neglected technical debt can lead to a 

broad spectrum of dif˜culties from 
collapsed road maps to an inability 
to respond to customer problems in a 

timely manner.
3 (You can read some 
of my related blog posts at www.blogs.
 mindtree.com/author/raja-bavani.)
Martin Fowler conceptualized and 
divided technical debt into four quad
-rants.
4 He said it™s worth understand
-ing the differences between prudent 

and reckless debt created because of 
You either pay for travel now 
 or pay for defects later. 
 32 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFOCUS:
 TECHNICAL DEB
Tdeliberate or inadvertent actions. His 
model motivated me to think further 
about the learning needs and alignment 
among distributed teams so that geo
-graphically distributed teams can be
-come better at managing technical debt. 
Learning and experiencing the vari
-ous types of technical debt and techni
-cal debt management involves every
-one in project teams. It™s not suf˜cient 
for teams to be merely aware of what 
constitutes technical debt; they must 

be aligned to manage technical debt 
in order to deliver business value. This 
is complex and critical in projects ex
-ecuted across multiple sites. The four-

quadrant model shown in Figure 1 can 
help teams understand this phenomenon 
and prompt them to manage it better.
Distributed agile teams are aware 
when team members have a common 
understanding of the meaning of tech
-nical debt and are mindful of it. These 
teams recognize technical debt either 

instantaneously or during reviews and 
retrospectives. Teams that are unaware 
neither have a common understanding 
about the meaning of technical debt 
nor are they mindful of it. 
Distributed teams are aligned when 
they have a common understand
-ing about how to organize and man
-age technical debt, and they pay it off 
to increase business value delivered to 

stakeholders. Distributed teams aren™t 

aligned when they lack a common un
-derstanding on how to organize and 

manage technical debt, become reactive 

in paying off technical debt, and even
-tually fail to deliver business value.
Aware and Aligned
Teams that are aware and aligned en
-sure positive results in managing tech
-nical debt. They can differentiate be
-tween trivial code quality issues and 

technical debt. They prioritize techni
-cal debt, consider tradeoffs (alternative 
approaches that will lessen the impact 
of the debt or to pay it off entirely), and 

make informed decisions while accu
-mulating as well as paying off technical 
debt. Even if one or more team mem
-bers trigger technical debt by accident, 
the team recognizes it during reviews 
and retrospectives. 
Unaware and Aligned
Teams that are unaware of the con
-text or meaning of the term ﬁtechnical 
debtﬂ might consider trivial issues or 
technical tasks to be part of it. These 

teams lack the ability to distinguish be
-tween messy code and a design ˚aw. In 
this case, design tradeoffs won™t be the 
only triggers to make additions to the 

list of items that constitute technical 

debt. These teams also don™t know how 
to prioritize technical debt. When team 
members improve their awareness of 

technical debt, they™ll start delivering 
value by paying off the technical debt.
Aware and Not Aligned
Simply being aware of technical debt 
doesn™t necessarily result in business 
value. When agile teams don™t have 
an organized approach for accumulat
-ing and managing technical debt, it™s 

highly likely that they™ll deliver messy 
and rigid software that™s dif˜cult to 
maintain. 
These teams do know how and when 
they accumulate technical debt. How
-ever, because of their unorganized ap
-proach, they tend to blame a lack of 

time for releasing a product with techni
-cal debt, or they pay off technical debt 

without tradeoffs and don™t deliver any 

business value. This is because when 

teams aren™t aligned, there™s no guar
-antee that they™ll systematically pay off 

technical debt. This approach doesn™t 

deliver value to project sponsors. In 

distributed agile projects, this situation 
might also lead to the blame game.
Unaware and Not Aligned
Teams in this quadrant pose high risks 
because they accumulate technical 
debt unknowingly and don™t attempt 
to pay it off.  Such teams encounter 
˜˚˛˝˙ˆˇˆ˜

ˆ

FIGURE 1. 
Technical debt quadrants. The four-quadrant model can help teams understand 
and manage technical debt better.
  NOV
EMB
ER/
DE
CEMB
ER 2012
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 33major issues such as messy code or 
other forms of technical debt. 
To manage technical debt, dis
-tributed agile teams need to 
be aware and aligned. They 
must track technical debt and know the 
value generated by paying it off. They 

must also include user stories related 
to paying down some of the technical 
debt in future iterations so that techni
-cal debt dwindles over a period of time. 
In addition to understanding accu
-mulating and paying off technical debt 

related to the application or product 

being developed or maintained, testers 
must be aware and aligned to manage 
the technical debt accumulated during 

the design, coding, and maintenance 

of test automation scripts. The signi˜
-cance of technical debt management di
-rectly affects the economics of software 

maintenance. Building and maintaining 

software systems under optimal costs is 
the key to success with current global 
economic trends. Rothman™s and Crisp
-in™s perspectives emphasize the fact that 

technical debt is a signi˜cant concept 
for everyone in the software engineer
-ing community. With the adoption of 
distributed agile, internalizing a con
-cept like technical debt becomes critical 

among global teams.
References
 1.
 J. Rothman, ﬁDo You Have Feature-itis?,ﬂ 
blog, 22 June 2011; www.jrothman.com/blog/
mpd/2011/06/do-you-have-feature-itis.html.
 2.
 J. Highsmith, ﬁThe Financial Implications of 
 Technical Debt,ﬂ blog, 19 Oct. 2010; http://
jimhighsmith.com/2010/10/19/the-˜nancial
 -implications-of-technical-debt.
 3.
 I. Gat, ﬁTechnical Debt,ﬂ 
Cutter IT J.
, vol 23, 
no. 10, 2010, pp. 3Œ6.
 4.
 M. Fowler, ﬁTechnical Debt Quadrant,ﬂ 14 
Oct. 2009; www.martinfowler.com/bliki/
TechnicalDebtQuadrant.html.
Selected CS articles and columns 
 are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
ABOU
T THE 
AUTHORRAJA BAVANI 
is chief architect of Mindtree™s Product Engineering Services 
(PES) and IT Services (ITS) groups. His research interests include code qual
-ity, distributed agile, customer value management, and software estimation. 

Bavani received a postgraduate diploma in computer science from Bharathi
-dasan University, India. He™s a member of IEEE and the IEEE Computer Society. 

Contact him at raja_bavani@mindtree.com.
3-6 December 2012
Taipei, Taiwan
The ﬁCloudﬂ is a natural evolution of distributed 

computing and the widespread adaption of 

virtualization and Service Oriented Architecture. In Cloud 

Computing, IT-related capabilities and resources are 

provided as services, via the Internet and on-demand, 

accessible without requiring detailed knowledge of the 

underlying technology. IEEE CloudCom 2012, steered by 

the Cloud Computing Association, brings together cloud 

computing researchers and related technologies.
Register today! 

 