 0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEPublished by the IEEE Computer SocietyIEEE SOFTWARE
15software construction
Pragmatic Software Configuration ManagementSteve BerczukEditors: Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas The Pragmatic Programmersandy@pragmaticprogrammer.com 
dave@pragmaticprogrammer.com
Whenever I start a new software pro-ject, I look at the infrastructure the
team has in place for doing things

like setting up a development
workspace, building, doing ver-
sion management, and so onÑthethings that belong to the larger topic known

as software configuration management
(SCM). I worry about these elements be-
cause, in a sense, IÕm lazy. I want

to direct my energies into produc-

ing code that works and is main-
tainable. When I have to spend a
lot of manual effort dealing with

infrastructure issues, I suspect
that IÕm not generating as much

value for the organization as I
would if I could focus more on
the steps for writing code (this in-
cludes understanding require-
ments and testing). Workspace
management, integration, and build are im-

portant developer tasks, but they shouldnÕt

require excess effort. 
Often an organizationÕs SCM mechanisms
donÕt help with the work of building software

as much as they could. Either no mechanisms
exist for doing common tasks or the
processes to use those mechanisms are too

complicated and become tasks in themselves.

On a daily basis, developers shouldnÕt notice

SCM that much, and what they do notice,
they should eagerly embrace because these
things help them do their jobs. When devel-

opers donÕt find SCM processes to be helpful,

itÕs often because the processes donÕt serve the

organizationÕs goals well. This tends to be

due to two issues: first, basic SCM structures
are lacking and, second, the structure doesnÕt
fit well into the development environment. In
our book Software Configuration Manage-ment Patterns: Effective Teamwork 
(Addi-son-Wesley, 2003), Brad Appleton and I saw

this as a perfect application for pattern lan-

guages (see the related sidebar). Here is a

brief overview of the essential patterns for a

basic, agile SCM environment. Codelines and policiesThe first thing software developers should
do before providing a solution is to be sure

that they understand the problem (see D.C.
Gause and G.M. WeinbergÕs book 
Are Your
Lights On? How to Figure Out What the

Problem Really Is,
Dorset House, 1990).Two itemsÑcodelines and branching, and

stabilityÑare especially relevant for this task.
A codelineis a progression of the set of
source files and other artifacts that make up
some software component as it changes over
time. A codeline has a purpose associated
with it, described in the 
Codeline Policy. Acodeline that forks off from another code-

line for the purposes of parallel development
is often called a 
branch.When confronted with a version control
tool, you might be tempted to branch fre-

quently to isolate development work efforts.

Branching codelines that might need recon-
nection later will require merging, which of-

ten works well with proper tool support but

can be error-prone. Merging is a reason many

people swear off branchingÑeven when it
makes senseÑor shun version control tools.
In many cases, most development can occur
on a single development line, a Mainline.  16IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
SOFTWARE CONSTRUCTION
We often think about SCM pro-
cesses as controlling change tightly
and ensuring stability. In many situa-

tions, this is not necessary. Each de-

velopment stream (or codeline) should

have an appropriate Codeline Policy
that describes what pre-check-in tests
to run and so on. Because many ap-
plications donÕt need 100 percent

ready-to-ship-at-any-time stability, we

can establish a Codeline Policy that
gives us an Active Development Line
,where we slightly favor progress over

stability.
Of course, at some point weÕllwant to have code that you can ship at
a momentÕs notice. Once we ship a

version of a product, for example, we

might want to allow for changes to

make patch releases. This code shouldbe on a Release Line, which is a code-line with a Codeline Policy that favors
stability over progress.Getting started with
developmentManaging change is a universalproblem in software development.

On the whole, change is good; with-

out it, nothing gets done. However,

developers need some control over
their development environment. A
development workspace
is where de-
velopers put artifacts that they need to
code, build, and test. These artifactsÑ

such as source files, libraries, and con-

figuration filesÑcan be shared(in

whole or in part) or private to each
developer. In a shared workspace,

any change instantly affects other de-velopers using the workspace. Nor-
mally, itÕs good to be in synch with

your team, but most people need a
window of time to work free of

change. Giving developers each a Pri-vate Workspace, 
where they can inte-grate changes appropriately and build
the whole system if needed,provides

this.You can use a 
Repositoryto pop-ulate a Private Workspace with the

right versions of the things that a
developer needs. The Repository is
the central place where all project
components reside, providing Òone-
stop shoppingÓ for setting up or up-
dating a workspace. Projects often
use components from other sources.

You can use a special 
Third-PartyCodelinein the Repository to man-An SCM Pattern LanguageA pattern
is loosely defined as a so-lution to a problem in a context. Pat-

terns are proven solutions. 
Pattern lan-
guagesare a grammar that describes
how to fit the patterns together to make

something meaningful. The software configuration manage-ment pattern language describes how to

build a development environment that will
have the correct amount of SCM infrastruc-
ture to create software more quickly and
reliably. Of course, SCM is only part of the

picture (if an often neglected part); you still

need good development and coding prac-
tices. But the SCM pattern language will

help you solve problems so you can focus

your energy on more difficult tasks.
Figure A shows a map of the portion of
the pattern language I discuss in this col-

umn. Each box represents a pattern. Each

patternÕs name tells you the structure you

should create (Mainline, Release Line, Pri-
vate Workspace). YouÕll need to read the

pattern to know more details about how

and when to apply it, but the pattern

names form a useful vocabulary for discus-

sion. In our book, 
Software ConfigurationManagement Patterns: Effective Teamwork, 
Brad Appleton and I have grouped the pattern language into two sections: pat-
terns about workspaces and patterns about organizing codelines. In the interests of space, the main text provides an overview

of the workspace patterns after a brief description of some key codeline patterns.
MainlineActive Development LineIntegration BuildSmoke Test
Third-Party CodelineRegression Test
Unit Test
Private System BuildRepository
Private Workspace
Figure A. Part of the software configuration management 
pattern language. An arrow pointing from pattern A to pattern

B means two things: you apply pattern B when pattern A 
already exists and pattern B helps pattern A work. SOFTWARE CONSTRUCTION
age this external code in a way thatÕs
similar to how we manage internally
written code.
Testing, building, andintegrationAfter you and your team membershave done some coding, you need to
incorporate these changes into the
build. A central Integration Build ac-complishes this by building from the
codelineÕs latest state. Before you

submit changes for the Integration
Build, you must verify that your
changes, when combined with every-
one elseÕs changes, will not break the

build. You can do this by performing

a Private System BuildÑalocal version
of the Integration Build incorporating
your changesÑin your workspace to
ensure that the code accurately reflects

the system that the Integration Build
will create.Testing is a complicated issue. Too
much time spent testing means less
time coding and a larger interval be-
tween when you make a change and
when others can integrate it. Too lit-

tle time spent testing means that
youÕre more likely to introduce er-

rors. Performing a Smoke Test
beforeyou check in your changes lets you
ensure that that the system works

well enough to share with others. We

can rely on a Smoke Test to be enough

for pre-check-in validation only if the
Smoke Test is supported by a 
UnitTest, 
which lets us exhaustively testthe component that weÕre working

on and closely related components.
To catch any errors that might slip

through, we must also use a centrally
run Regression Test
that tests the sys-
tem for known error conditions.
Does it matter?Using these patterns together cangive you a much improved and more
agile development environment. YouÕll

have more time to spend on coding
and less on supporting activities.
When used together, the practices sup-

port each other. Adding a single prac-

tice to your environment can help a

little, adding practices that support it

can help a lot, and missing one can
hurt. In one instance, using the Active
Development Line pattern improved
the teamÕs morale and productivity

and the codeÕs quality. Simplifying the

pre-check-in testing worked well be-
cause the supporting practices (Unit
Tests, Private Workspaces, and so on)

were already in place.Patterns and pattern languages
help place solutions in context.
Although many best practices ex-ist, there is no one way to imple-
ment them, and sometimes best
practices conflict. The SCM pattern

language lets you establish basic
SCM practices that help your team
work effectively.
Steve Berczukhas been developing object-orientedsoftware applications since 1989, often as part of geographically
distributed teams. HeÕs currently looking for a new opportunity.

Contact him at steve@berczuk.com; www.berczuk.com.
DATA BASE ADMINISTRATOR: 
Design database, code, test,implement. Establish database
parametrs. Control access. Select
codes of utility program for moni-
toring performance. B.S. req'd in

comp. science/appl.math. 40

hrs./wk.; Job site  L.A., Contact A.

Sarafian (213) 624-6462. Fax (213)
624-3538SUBMISSION DETAILS:
Ratesare $10.00 per line (ten lines mini-

mum). Average five typeset words

per line, eight lines per column

inch. Add $10 for box number.

Send copy at least one month prior
to publication date to: Marian An-
derson, Classified Advertising, IEEESoftwareMagazine, 10662 Los Va-
queros Circle, PO Box 3014, Los

Alamitos, CA 90720-1314; (714)
821-8380; fax (714) 821-4010.

Email: manderson@computer.org.
Career  Opportunities
Professors of Computer and
Software Engineering and 

Chair of Software Engineering
Department of Computer EngineeringWe are presently seeking candidates to fill several positions of
Professor of Computer Engineering and Software Engineering, as well
as a prestigious position of Chair of Software Engineering.In addition to teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels,successful candidates will work in one of the departmentÕs fields of

research: software engineering, engineering large software systems,
embedded computer systems, networking and mobile computing.Successful candidates must have a Ph.D. in a related area and the academic background required to become a member of the 

.The new Department of Computer Engineering is rapidly expandingand presently includes over a thousand students. Researchers are
provided with the necessary space and technical support, a modern
computer environment and special funds to help them start up their
research projects. For more information, visit the department website 
at www.gi.polymtl.ca.Please send your curriculum vitae in French, your academic credentials,the names of three references and reprints of recent papers to:









The application review process will begin immediately and willcontinue until the positions are filled.According to Canadian Immigration requirements, Canadian citizens and permanent residents will be preferred. We are an 

equal-opportunity employer.
