 30IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEEuseful.) However, theyÕre frustrated with the
difficulty of scaling up and integrating them
into traditional, top-down systems develop-
ment organizations. When pressed for rea-
sons, the usual response is a daunting litany of
barriers.In March 2004, the University of SouthernCalifornia Center for Software Engineering
(USC-CSE) Affiliates Annual Research Review

held the fourth in a series of annual work-

shops to identify as many of these barriers as
possible and to discuss whether or not they
represented real conflicts with traditional en-

gineering (http://sunset.usc.edu). Participants
included agile developers, traditional aero-
space and telecommunications developers, ag-
ile method creators, and academics. The re-
sults were a collection of change-related

challenges and a list of nearly 40 perceived
barriers to agile implementation (see the ÒCat-
egories of Barriers to Agile ProcessesÓ side-bar). Workshop participants arrived at a con-

sensus that some of these perceived barriers
were nonproblems (for more on these, see the
ÒNonproblemsÓ sidebar).They categorized the other barriers either
as problems only in terms of scope or scale, or

as significant general issues needing resolu-
tion. From these two categories, weÕve identi-
fied three areasÑdevelopment process con-
flicts, business process conflicts, and people

conflictsÑthat we believe are the critical chal-

lenges to software managers of large organiza-
tions in bringing agile approaches to bear in
their projects.Development process conflictsThis is the first and perhaps most obvious
area of difficulty. How do you merge agile,

lightweight processes with standard industrialfocusManagement Challenges to Implementing Agile
Processes in Traditional

Development Organizations
Our discussions with traditional developers and managers concern-ing agile software development practices nearly always contain
two somewhat contradictory ideas. They find that on small,

stand-alone projects, agile practices are less burdensome andmore in tune with the software industryÕs increasing needs for rapid devel-

opment and coping with continuous change. (The ÒAgile ProcessesÓ sidebar
explains more about their characteristics and why you might find them project management
Barry Boehm, 
University of Southern CaliforniaRichard Turner, 
Systems and Software ConsortiumManagers faceseveral barriers,
real and perceived,
when they try 

to bring agile
approaches into
traditional
organizations. These
strategies can help
address them. processes without either killing agility or un-dermining the years youÕve spent defining and
refining your systems and software engineer-
ing process assets? Forging alloys of such dis-
parate materials is technically and manageri-
ally challenging, and managers must be
creative to succeed.
The annual workshops have indicated thatseveral large aerospace, manufacturing, and IT
companies have begun experimenting with ag-
ile methods. Most have used enthusiastic agile
early-adopters on small pilot programs consist-
ing either of pure agile methods applied to iso-
lated (or possibly failing) projects or a hybrid
of agile and traditional methods in a generally
low-risk application. While almost all these pi-
lots have been successful, the companies have
been only minimally able to extend, evolve, or
interoperate the agile processes or products.Variability
Managing variability in subsystems andteams has proven difficult. If both agile and tra-

ditional teams are developing software for the

same product, they can develop radically differ-

ent artifacts that might not integrate easily.

Without some means of coordination, an agile

teamÕs domain assumptions, GUIs, or commer-

cial off-the-shelf choices could vary signifi-
cantly from other developersÕ counterpart as-

sumptions. Product functionality might change

in order of delivery, or the agile team might

change its design specifics as properties emerge
and the team incorporates customer feedback.
Consider interface definitions. If the agileteam evolves its own interfaces, it might leave
other parts of the team at risk for developing
against a changing standard. However, the tra-

ditional approach of locking the interface spec-
ification early could encumber the agile teamÕs

need to refactor some part of their design.Larger organizations must pay specific atten-tion to identifying how to synchronize teams.
Some organizations have experienced success
with medium-sized teams-of-teams, but multiple
15-minute daily meetings can become unten-
able. Finding enough competent team leaders
who possess the necessary mix of technical, peo-
ple, and agility skills can also prove difficult.Different life cyclesWorking with different life cycles is also
difficult. Agile processes focus on immediately
delivering functionality, while traditional
methods focus on optimizing development over
a longer period. The traditional longer life cy-

cles require adjustments to the agile processes.

For example, the documentation traditional

methods require for training and support isnÕt a

natural output of agile methods.
On the other hand, test-driven design is anexample of an agile process that readily sup-

ports work in the maintenance phase by auto-
matically providing regression tests.In fact,

agile development makes the entire develop-

ment cycle much more like a maintenance

phase by providing short, focused iterations.Legacy systemsApplying agile processes to legacy systems,whether within maintenance or as new develop-
ment, raises numerous issues. Legacy systems
generally arenÕt easy to refactor or disassemble

to accommodate agile replacements that need to
build capability in increments. Legacy systemsmight also institutionalize awkward and oftensclerotic business processes that are embedded
in the culture and arenÕt easy to refactor away.
RequirementsDifferences between how agile and tradi-tional approaches perform the requirements
process can also cause problems. Agile require-
ments tend to be primarily functional and rea-
sonably informal. This might or might not
work in your systems engineering verification
and validation approach. Strengthening the ag-

ile requirements approach to provide addi-

tional information might be necessary. For ex-

ample, you might need to add information to
stories or other requirements statements to
more specifically address nonfunctional re-
quirements such as reliability or security.
SuggestionsThe following approaches can help organi-zations integrate agile practices into their tra-
ditional processes.Do some serious preparationup front. Con-duct a significant analysis of existing and pro-
posed processes to identify mismatches in

process requirements and expectations.Build up processesrather than tailoring themdown. Look at the projectÕs needs and select

only those process assets that seem indispen-
sable. Of course, watch for instances in which
September/October 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
31How do youmerge agile,
lightweightprocesses withstandardindustrialprocesseswithout killingagility?  you might need more rigor and add necessary
process components.Define specific functionality or responsibilitiesthat youÕre going to address with agile ap-
proaches. Small, GUI-intensive applications
with short life cycles are an example. As we
mentioned earlier, maintenance can also be a

good place to experiment with agile approaches.Develop architectures that support compart-mentalization of agile and traditional teams.
Identify an Òagility levelÓ characteristic for
your architectural evaluations. Look for areaswhere requirements will likely change rapidlyor where the design approach is unclear and

designate these as agile opportunities.Realign or redefine traditional milestone re-viewsto better fit an iterative approach. Fash-ion the standard reviews to be more like the

Life Cycle Anchor Point milestones in the

Win-Win Spiral
1or Rational2processes. Movethe preliminary design review out to where it

makes sense to talk about the design based on
developed code and prototypes.Implement agile practices that support exist-32IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
In general, agile methods are lightweight processes thatemploy short iterative cycles, actively involve users to establish,

prioritize, and verify requirements, and rely on a teamÕs tacit

knowledge as opposed to documentation. A truly agile method
must be iterative (take several cycles to complete), incremental
(not deliver the entire product at once), self-organizing (teams
determine the best way to handle work), and emergent (processes,

principles, and work structures are recognized during the proj-
ect rather than predetermined). Figure A shows an example of

an agile process flow.
Key concepts and practicesThe practices espoused to support these values vary with
the method. They belong to three general areas:communication (for example, metaphor and pair programming),management (for example, planning game and fast cycle/
frequent delivery), and
technical (for example, simple design, refactoring, and
test-driven design).Examples of these agile concepts and practices include thefollowing:Embracing change: Seeing change as an ally rather than
an enemy. Change allows for more creativity and quicker

value to the customer.
Fast cycles, frequent delivery: Scheduling many releases

with short time spans 
between them forces 
implementationof only the highest priority functions, delivers value to the

customer quickly, and speeds requirements emergence.

Timeboxing, for example, establishes specific time frames

that are then filled with as much prioritized functionality
as can be developed.Simple design: Designing for the battle, not the war. The

motto is YAGNI (You ArenÕt Going to Need It). The anti-

motto is BDUF (Big Design Up Front). Strip designs down
to cover just what youÕre developing. Since change is in-
evitable, planning for future functions is a waste of effort.
Refactoring: Restructuring software to remove duplication,
improve communication, simplify, or add flexibility with-

out changing its behavior; just-in-time redesign.Pair programming: A style of programming in which two

programmers work side by side at one computer, contin-

ually collaborating on the same design, algorithm, code,

or test.Retrospective or reflection: A post-iteration review of the

effectiveness of the work performed, methods used, and

estimates. The review supports team learning and estima-

tion for future iterations.Tacit knowledge: Establishing and updating project knowl-

edgein 
the participantsÕ heads rather than in documents
(explicit knowledge).Test-driven development: Developers and customers incre-

mentally write module or method tests before and during
coding. Supports and encourages very short iteration cycles.
Why implement agile approaches?Obviously, integrating agile approaches and philosophies
into traditional environments is difficult. Otherwise we wouldnÕt

be discussing the challenges. If itÕs so difficult, then why should

companies go to all this trouble? Here are a few reasons weÕve
come upon in our research:
Working software is often a better measure of progress

than a force-fit earned-value ratio.
You can often identify unnecessary or low-value functions

early and therefore not spend time implementing them.Agile Processes ing processes or new organizational priorities.Practices that support existing processes might
include prioritizing requirements (helpful in
keeping on schedule when new requirements
emerge) or test-first and continuous integration
(helpful in finding problems earlier rather than
later). An example of a new organizational pri-
ority that could benefit from agile methods is
rapid application development. It can be aided
by such practices as continuous integration,
pair programming (pairs typically spend 20
percent more effort but 40 percent less calen-
dar time), and timeboxing or its large-system
counterpart, Schedule as Independent Variable.
Evaluating risksis the best overall approach todetermining how much agility (or any attribute,

for that matter) is enough. For each project de-

cision, consider the risks of too much versus too

little agility and the counterpart risks of doing

too much planning and architecting. For exam-
ple, our C
OCOMOII-based analysis3of howmuch architecting is enough indicates that for a

10 million source line of code project, devoting
30 to 40 percent of the project schedule to

planning and ar
chitecting is best. On theother hand, a five percent investment is usu-
ally enough for a 10,000 SLOC product. The

percentage is closer to zero if the product isSeptember/October 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
33Short cycles force you to focus on specific capabilities,
can require more specific descriptions of functionality,

and can identify misconceptions between the customer
and developer earlier.
Agile is more suited to emerging requirements and ca-
pability-based specifications than traditional top-down

approaches.Agile provides rapid value to the customer, often delivering

capability while traditional methods are still sorting out plans.
Agile methods empower developers who might be suffer-

ing from the over-constraint of heavy processes.Agile practices arenÕt new, have been proven over time,

and generally work as well as or better than some cur-

rently accepted practices.Product backlog:Prioritized product features desired by the customersNew funtionality is demonstratedat end of sprintSprint backlog:Featuresassigned to printBacklog itemsexpandedby teamEvery 24 hours
30 daysScrum: 15-minute daily meetingTeam members respond to basics.

1)  What did you do since last Scrum meeting?

2)  Do you have any obstacles?

3)  What will you do before next Scrum meeting?
Figure A. The Scrum process: An example of an agile process flow. (Source: Advanced Development 
Methods, Inc., www.ControlChaos.com).
 being developed on top of a mature architec-tural framework and middleware package.As a final comment on this challenge, we
believe that it represents a part of the larger is-
sue of integrating advances in software devel-
opment approaches into the traditional sys-

tems engineering approach. We address this

larger issue in the ÒOpinion: Managing the In-
tegration of Software Engineering and Systems
EngineeringÓ sidebar.
Business process conflictsAn often-overlooked difference between ag-
ile and traditional engineering processes is the
way everyday business is conducted. Estima-

tion, resource loading, and slack calculations
can vary significantly. The level of uncertainty

and ambiguity that exists in any evolutionary
or iterative process, particularly in long-term

estimates, is most likely higher with agile ap-

proaches. WeÕre still caught in the certainty/am-

biguity conundrum; our business processes and

infrastructure require near-perfectpred
ictionsof difficult-to-estimate tasks rather than en-
couraging experimentation and evolution with
knowable short-term results but accepting of

long-term haziness.Human resourcesOrganizations must learn to accommodatehuman-resource issues such as timekeeping,
position descriptions, team-oriented versus
individual rewards, and required skills. Agile

development team members often cross the

boundaries between standard development
position descriptions and might require signif-

icantly more skills and experience to ade-
quately perform. Paradoxically, HR depart-

ments and procedures frequently get in the

way of empowering people to pursue nontra-
ditional approaches that require organizations

to revisit legally vetted and audited policies
and procedures.Progress measurementTraditional contracts, milestones, and
progress measurement techniques might be in-
adequate to support agile processesÕ rapid pace.Contracts and payments tend to be based on
MIL-STD-1521 milestones like preliminary
and critical design reviews, which have almost
no meaning in an agile environment. Tradi-

tional earned-value processes are difficult if not
impossible to apply to agile work because of
work breakdown structure inadequacies and
the flexibility timeboxing requires. In some
cases, agile measurements, such as require-34IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Participants at the 2004 USC-CSE Annual Research Review identified three
categories of real and perceived barriers to implementing agile processes.NonproblemsQuality assurance systemsAgile inadequate for managing defectsRefactoring is reworkAgile is monolithicQuantitative managementExtension/effectiveness of automatic testing to acceptance/system integration
Perception that agile is extreme or a fad; not responsibleAgile projects are unmanagedProblems only in terms of size or scopeConfiguration managementEarned value tools: Agile focuses on features and business value, tradi-
tional focuses on activitiesStakeholder sign-off requirements
Planning documentationDeployment, life cycle support (training): Long-term life cycle sustain-

ment, decay rate of tacit knowledgeRisk managementContracted/planned inch-pebble milestonesProcess QA/standard processesProcess standards (IEEE, DoD, EIA)Designing for the battle, not the warSignificant issuesResource loading, slack, timekeeping, capital evaluationRequired colocation, customer accessNonfunctional requirementsDocumentationCritical design reviews (milestones)Contractual and source selection issuesInterfacing/integration with other methodologies/disciplines
Predictability, perfect knowledge
Statutory/regulatory constraints
HR policies and processesSystem interface control
Roles, responsibilities, and skillsAgile work on legacy systemsFormal requirements
System engineering V-process model
Maturity assessmentsTraditional engineering measurements
Cost estimationCategories of Barriers to Agile Processes
 ments burndown (the number of requirementsor functions in the backlog list that have been
accomplished) or story completion, have been
successfully used as reasonable substitutes for
more traditional measures.Process standard ratingsOne area of conflict for mature organiza-
tions will be in how agile processes will affect

their ratings with respect to CMMI, ISO, or

other process standards. We feel that agile is in

line with much of the Level 5 concept of con-

stantly adapting to improve performance. Un-
fortunately, most agile methods donÕt sup-

port the degree of documentation and infra-

structure required for lower-level certification;

it might, in fact, make agile methods less ef-

fective. ItÕs possible that enlightened apprais-

ers can find ways to include agile methods as 
alternative practices in many instances, 
although safety-critical areas or components 
requiring some form of certification call for
rigorous appraisals.SuggestionsYou can address business process issues in
numerous ways. Also, several research topics

promise possibilities for solutions.Address HR issueswhen you begin your pilotproject so that you can test their impact on

traditional processes. This might cause initial

delays, but it can save considerable confusion
and hard feelings if issues arise mid-project.
Apply throughput accounting
rather than costaccounting in software development projects.

David Anderson discusses this extensively in
Agile Management for Software Engineering.4Develop management and architectural prac-ticesfor hybrid agile and plan-driven meth-ods. Establish some standard characteristics
and patterns that support separating stable
components from those with evolving require-
ments or environments.Investigate and update contracting practicestosupport agile concepts. Disburse payments
upon delivery of running software or demon-

stration of progress rather than completion of

artifacts or reviews. Develop contracting pro-

visions and incentives for client satisfaction
that support agile development.
Identify incompatible assumptions (modelclashes) and compatible assumptions (syner-gies)between agile and traditional methodswithin your organizational processes. Work to

eliminate as many clashes as possible while en-
couraging synergies.Conduct empirical studies of which classes of
change are more unpredictable and therefore
suited for agile methods and which are more
predictable and suitable for traditional plan-
driven methods.Research how to modify or reconceive legacysystems to enable and help agility-compatiblere-engineering and maintenance, replacement,
or extension.Establish guidelinesfor safe and agility-compatibleprocess maturity assessments. The SEI and
other process improvement centers need to
quickly address this. They have acknowl-
edged agile methods, but havenÕt established

a standard for lead assessors to handle them.September/October 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
35A number of the barriers participants identified and considered during
the USC workshop were deemed to be nonproblems. This indicated that ei-
ther the perception was false (a myth) or that organizations could easily
eliminate the issue without significant changes to either the agile or tradi-
tional ways of doing business.Most of the myths stem from misunderstanding. One reason for this is a
lack of clarity about the intent and actual operation of agile practices such
as refactoring or pair programming. Often, engineers in particular react

viscerally rather than cerebrally to ideas that are self-proclaimed as Òex-
treme.Ó These myths also often arise from encounters with counterfeit agile

methodsÑfor example, poor software developers claiming to use agile

methods when in reality theyÕre simply hacking.Nonproblems that are easy to eliminate include those having to do withquality and management. Generally, organizations can deal with these by

adopting broader definitions of traditional terms. Measurement is critical in

agile methods, particularly in establishing development velocity values criti-

cal to timeboxing. However, organizations might need to reinterpret these

measures to fit easily into existing processes. Quality and defect manage-
ment are also intrinsic to most agile methods, but the activities donÕt neces-

sarily match one to one with some of the traditional approaches. With a bit
of imagination and good will, pair programming, test-driven development,
and daily builds can be part of most traditional quality and acceptance

programs. Management in agile methods is often defined as protecting the
developers from the remainder of the organization or as coachingÑcer-

tainly aspects of good management in any discipline.The Nonproblems
 People conflictsPeople issues are by far the most critical in
improving management of engineering and de-
velopment personnel. Addressing them is vital
to the adoption and integration of agile meth-
ods and practices into your processes. People
issues are at the heart of the agile movement,

and much of the paradigm change is aimed at
empowering individuals by supporting reason-
able goals, shorter feedback cycles, ownership,
and flexibility.
Management attitudesMigrating from traditional to agile manage-
ment attitudes can be difficult. Large-scale
management processes such as earned value
and statistical process control evolved from a
manufacturing paradigm and tend to cast em-
ployees as interchangeable parts. Managersalso tend to associate employees with specific
roles that might cause difficulty in the multi-
tasking characteristics of agile team members.
Project managers in most agile methods play
two primary roles: protector and coach. They
act as a barrier between the organization and

the team to minimize unnecessary perturbation
during a sprint or development cycle and pro-
vide experienced technical help when neces-
sary. Many traditional managers also fill these

functions, but agile methods focus on them.Logistical issuesSome logistical issues directly affect peoplein agile environments. Agile teams must nearly
always be colocated. The typical agile work-
space requires pair-programming stations,
36IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
In the March 2000 issue of Computer, one of us (Barry
Boehm) described the need to Òchange from slow, reactive,

adversarial, separated software and system engineering pro-

cesses to unified concurrent processesÓ to address Òrapid de-
velopment of dynamically changing software-intensive sys-
tems.Ó1In the five years since that column, the software worldhas moved considerably toward more agile, concurrent pro-
cesses, but the hardware-intensive systems engineering disci-
pline has largely continued to use sequential document-driven
processes.Sequential approaches (based on the waterfall concepts of
relatively complete system requirements allocated down to the

hardware and software developers, who then provided com-

plete configuration items back to integration and validation
teams in a MIL-STD-1521 review-based development cycle)

worked well in a stable environment where software was a

small part of the system and software development was some-

what slower paced. In todayÕs environment, where software

and user interaction drives the majority of system functionality,

requirements tend to emerge with system use and to evolve

rapidly, and hardware is less expensive and also evolving, the

idea of establishing system requirements and specifications
without close interactivity with software is risky.
WeÕre in a transition period where software engineering
has aggressively embraced more iterative and concurrent
methods. Unfortunately, these methods are causing significant

issues for systems engineering, and only recently has the hard-
ware-intensive mainstream of systems engineering recognizedthat although waterfall-type approaches are required for hard-
ware production, planning, and preparation, they need to be
synchronized with the software spirals. The disconnects are
most visible in large network-centric systems-of-systems, where

software is responsible for large percentages of functionality
and infrastructure. Various organizations and standards groups (including the
Capability Maturity Model Integration) have made some ef-
forts to modernize and integrate the two disciplines. However,

they do not fully consider or mitigate software risks. For exam-

ple, the attempt to develop systems-of-systems by integrating
best-of-breed systems developed under total systems perform-

ance responsibility guidelines usually results in belated discov-
ery of incompatible commercial off-the-shelf, GUI, and archi-

tectural decisions. Integrated product teams that produce
unvalidated and poorly coordinated PowerPoint or UML archi-
tectural or high-level design solutions leave major risks to dis-
cover late in the development cycle. Or, consider the case of

iterative development in large systems. The traditional disci-
plines generally establish increments based on functionality
and focus on one build at a time, often without an overarching
architecture. This runs a risk of suboptimized early builds that
result in large amounts of breakage and rework in later incre-
ments where more stringent requirements are expected from

crosscutting attributes such as safety, security, and scalability.
Essential critical success factors are beginning to emerge.First, expectations management is a key component of any
evolving system. Agreeing to unrealistic schedules or budgetsOpinion: Managing the Integration of Software Engineering and Systems Engineering walls for status charts and assignments, a lay-out that allows team members to easily con-

verse to share information, and sufficient equip-ment to support continuous integration and

regression testing. (To those of us of a certain

age, this may be reminiscent of engineering
bullpens similar to those in the HBO series

From the Earth to the MoonÑonly with bet-
ter tools.)Handling successful pilotsThe negative impacts of how organizationshandle the success of pilot projects are often
overlooked in reporting outcomes. During the

USC workshop, Alistair Cockburn described
his experience with an all too frequently ob-

served response to a successful agile pilot: fire
or promote the manager and/or split up theteam. Of course, this does three things: it de-
stroys team relationships, both technical and
personal, it dilutes the knowledge gained and
lessons learned, and it sends the message that
trying new things might be hazardous to your
career.
Change managementChange management experts often describe
the organizational antibodies that begin to
gather as soon as something new appears in
the existing culture. Concerns of inadequacy
or obsolescence surface, jealousy about assign-
ments and business accoutrements is aroused,
and defense mechanisms rapidly deploy. This

can result in several destructive behaviors, in-
cluding the cultural crucifixion of change agents
or early adopters and the deliberate sabotage ofSeptember/October 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
37only to continuously revise them upward is a lose-lose position
in the long run.Second, systems and software engineering must proceedconcurrently but in a controlled, coordinated manner. This co-

ordination has been likened to an asynchronous machine of
engineering activities that requires periodic synchronization.
This synchronization can be formal or informal, but a mecha-

nism must exist for defining reasonable outcomes for relatively

short periods of time. ItÕs critical to establish ways to adjust

activities for risks and issues, analyzing downstream impacts

and using the results to replan for the next set of outcomes.Third, the development of systems that will evolve must bearchitecture driven. Prototypes and experimentation are cru-
cial to defining and characterizing an architecture that pro-
vides multiple development teams sufficient guidance to sup-

port the concurrency and coordination we mentioned earlier.

This is particularly true for systems whose components are out-

sourced, legacy, independently evolving, or built by subcon-

tractors. The architecture should be solidly in hand before any
contractual agreements are established to avoid unaffordable

rework and incompatible components.Compatibility of organizational structures and businessprocesses is the fourth factor. The lines of communication

among component developers, systems engineers, and archi-
tects must be conceptually high bandwidth and readily acces-
sible. Integrated product teams must not be allowed to evolve
into independent product teams. Management must not lose
sight of the importance of teamwork, flexibility, agility, and
broad vision in preventing stovepiping and local optimization.Contracts and incentive structures must reflect this understand-
ing as well.
Finally, as always, managing 
byrisks is more critical thanthe managing of risks. Risks exist at every level of the system
hierarchy. Many of those risks surface rapidly and, if man-

agement doesnÕt identify and respond to them, they can

quickly become serious program-threatening problems. Pro-
grams must actively seek out risks and discuss them across the

development hierarchy. They must intentionally watch for cross-

cuttingrisks. Mitigation plans and activities must undergo con-stant evaluation for effectiveness and be quickly changed if

theyÕre not performing as expected.
The time is ripe for software and systems engineers to com-
pare notes and learn from each other. Software is further

along in dealing with unpredictable requirements changes,
while systems engineering has a long history of successfully

integrating existing components. We believe we should move

intentionally toward a common set of lifecycle definitions and
processes that incorporate both disciplinesÕ needs and capital-
ize on their strengths.Reference1.B. Boehm, ÒUnifying Software Engineering and Systems Engineering,Ó
Computer, vol. 33, no. 3, 2000, pp. 114Ð116.
 38IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Clearly, agile
concepts willcontinue tomigrate intotraditionalorganizations(and vice versa)
through plannedor clandestinevectors.projects through direct or indirect methods.
Then thereÕs the problem of dealing with
employees who simply refuse to use new meth-

ods (weÕve identified them as Cockburn level-
ones3). Having a nonplayer (or someone play-ing for the opposing side) can disable any
team but is particularly damaging in an agile

context. Agile teams rely heavily on trust and

shared tacit knowledge to support pair pro-
gramming and shared ownership. This also
makes moot any efforts to measure the results.
People within the organization arenÕt the
only ones affected by the introduction of agile
methods. Stakeholders, particularly customers,
might need to play significantly different roles.

Many agile methods require (or at least
strongly suggest) onsite customers, significant
customer interaction and feedback, and cus-
tomer input for acceptance testing. Attention
to process matching and customer education is
necessary to smooth the transition.SuggestionsThe following practices can help in ad-dressing people issues.Understand how communication occurswithindevelopment teams. This is key to incorporat-
ing agile practices and teams. You can find a

good discussion in Alistair CockburnÕs 
AgileSoftware Development.5Educatestakeholders. Countering mythologythrough education is an ancient, honored tra-

dition. Learn as much as you can and share it

with customers, managers, and practitioners.
Engaging speakers to discuss experiences or
specific methodologies can help, but beware
the possibly negative impact of true believers.Translate agile and software issues
into man-agement and customer language. Engaging up-
per management and customers in fruitful dis-
cussion of software issues is often difficult

because of the Òeyes glaze overÓ response.
When you discuss technical issues with not-as-
technical-as-you people, remember to describe
issues in terms that the audience can easily

connect with.Emphasizevalue. Software engineering has tra-ditionally been value-neutralÑevery require-

ment, test case, object, or defect has been es-

sentially equally important. Agile methods
emphasize value in two ways. First, they nego-tiate and prioritize requirements so that ex-

pectations are managed and timeboxing can
work. Second, they acknowledge the value of
each team member, the team as an entity, and

the products the team produces to the organi-

zation and the customer.
Pick good people and reward the resultsof pi-lot projects. You donÕt need to create a dream

team, but definitely eliminate the level-ones in

your pilots. Show your appreciation for the
teamÕs work, regardless of the outcome. The

team members put their reputations on the

line for the organization, leaving themselves
vulnerable to the organizational antibodies.
DonÕt minimize that effort.
Reorientreward systems
to recognize both in-dividual and team contributions.WeÕve identified some barriers to in-

tegrating agile and traditional
methods as perceptual, not techni-
cal. However, weÕve also seen that many tech-

nical barriers do exist. We donÕt believe that

these are insurmountable and are confident
that organizations can overcome them with

diligence, patience, and work. Clearly, agile

concepts will continue to migrate into tradi-

tional organizations (and vice versa) through

planned or clandestine vectors. Research is
needed in several areas to provide new ap-
proaches and to harmonize the methods. For
example, the Systems and Software Consor-
tium is finalizing a document called 
Disci-plined Agility, which describes an approach toimplementing agile methods in high-maturity

and process-compliant environments Most
importantly, though, is the need to capture

metrics data and lessons learned from your ex-
periences. Data is critical to validate the inte-

gration activityÕs value and the return on in-

vestment. Lessons learned can support more
rapid integration, eliminate the repetition of
ineffective approaches and practices, and dis-
seminate experience across the organization
and throughout the community.
 September/October 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
39References1.B.Boehm, ÒAnchoring the Software Process,Ó 
IEEESoftware, vol. 13, no. 4, 1996, pp. 73Ð82.2.I. Jacobson, G. Booch, and J. Rumbaugh, 
The UnifiedSoftware Development Process, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
3.B. Boehm and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and Disci-pline: A Guide for the Perplexed, Addison-Wesley,
2004.4.D. Anderson, 
Agile Management for Software Engineer-ing: Applying the Theory of Constraints for BusinessResults, Prentice Hall, 2003.5.A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley, 2001.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
About the AuthorsBarry Boehm
is the TRW Professor of Software Engineering and director of the Center
for Software Engineering at the University of Southern California. His research interests includesoftware process modeling, software requirements engineering, software architectures, soft-
ware metrics and cost models, software engineering environments, and value-based software
engineering. His contributions to the field include the Constructive Cost Model (COCOMO), the Spiral Model, and the Theory W (win-win) approach to software management and require-

ments determination. He is a fellow of the ACM, AIAA, the IEEE, and INCOSEand is a member ofthe US National Academy of Engineering. He received his PhD from UCLA in mathematics. Con-
tact him at the Center for Software Eng., Univ. of Southern California, 941 W. 37th Place, SAL
Room 337, Los Angeles, CA 90089-0781; boehm@cse.usc.edu.Richard Turner
is a director at the Systems and Software Consortium. His research in-terests include establishing empirical profiles for software development and acquisition best
practices; employing spiral, risk-driven methods in large system-of-systems acquisitions; harmo-
nizing software engineering, systems engineering, and acquisition life-cycle models; and devel-
oping ways to measure return on investment for software and systems engineering processes
and process improvement. He was on the original author team for Capability Maturity Model
Integration. He coauthored Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed(Addi-son-Wesley, 2004), cowritten with Barry Boehm, and 
CMMI Distilled(Addison-Wesley, 2000,
2004). He received his DSc in engineering management from George Washington University.

HeÕs a member of the IEEE and I
NCOSE. Contact him at the Systems and Software Consortium, 2214 Rock Hill Rd., Herndon,VA 20170-4227; turner@systemsandsoftware.org.
Global software develop-ment has intensified over
the last decade, resulting
in an increased dispersion
of software development
lifecycle activities across
geographies. In spite of
the challenges and com-
plexities involved, many
software projects find that
organizing development in
geographically distributed
settings is a business ne-
cessity. Although some

theories and practices have
been researched and de-

veloped, the art and sci-
ence of global software de-
velopment is still evolving.CALLFORARTICLESGlobal Software DevelopmentThis issue seeks to provide a state-of-the-art account of approaches and practices involved in effectively managing 
global software development. WE SEEK SUBMISSIONS THAT 

¥ Articulate success strategies and lessons learned 
¥ Present proven techniques, models, and tools 

¥ Describe the problems and issues unique to global 
software development ¥ Report failure stories and distill learning on what 
doesnÕt work¥ Advance the body of knowledge on global software 
development and have a substantial potential to 
influence practiceGuest editors:Daniela Damian, Univ. of Victoria, B.C., Canada; 
danielad@cs.uvic.caDeependra Moitra, Infosys Technologies, Bangalore,
India; deependra@moitra.comFor author guidelinesandsubmission details, write to software@computer.org or go 
to www.computer.org/software/author.htm. For information about the 
issueÕs focus
or an article proposal, contact the guest editors.For the complete call, go to www.computer.org/
software/edcal.htm.PUBLICATION DATE: September/October 2006
SUBMISSION DEADLINE: 10 Jan. 2006
