 0740-7459/09/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
 November/December 2009   
IEEE SOFTWARE
 15
Editor: Grady Booch 
˜ IBM 
˜ architecture@booch.com
on architecture
As I discussed in my previous column (Sept./
Oct. 2009), we are in a period of global eco
-nomic funk, by virtually every measure that 
we can take. The bad news, as I noted be
-fore, is that this malaise appears to be sys
-temic and will likely linger for some time. 
The good news is that we™ve been here before over 
the yearsŠif not the centuriesŠand we™ve always 
seemed to get by. This is again not to discount or 
marginalize the human suffering that has followed 
in the wake of this current down market. Rather, 
my desire here is to celebrate the possible, and to 
consider the role of software in these lean times.
Although we may be in a period of material 
scarcity, we are graced with a cognitive surplus, an 
abundance that can fuel the production of software-
intensive systems. Software is still the most fungible 
and liquid of resources, and its supply is limited only 
by human imagination and labor. For this reason, 
in my previous article, I began to make the case that 
software-intensive systems are a necessary element 
in helping us operate, innovate, and even thrive in 
the face of lean economic times. Here, I™ll complete 
that discourse and offer a call to action.
Software™s Limitations
I ended last time with a survey of some domains 
that have been touched by software™s abundance, 
and offered examples ranging from social activity 
to the media. But it™s not just about politics and the 
arts. For example, Boeing has leveraged the vast, 
freely accessible services available on the Web to 
build a mashup for supporting disaster relief (www.
youtube.com/watch?v=6xB0psBjpjI&feature=chan
nel_page&fmt=18). Similarly, by mining informa
-tion about the departure and arrival of commercial 
˜ights, researchers were able to build a compel
-ling visualization of global ˜ight patterns (www.
liveleak.com/view?i=d2e_1229049414). The good 
folks at InSTEDD (Innovative Support to Emergen
-cies, Disease, and Disasters) have mined the abun
-dance of software to support the early detection of 
diseases (www.instedd.org).
And it™s not just about the Web: the worldwide 
Consultative Committee of Space Data Systems 
 (ccsds.org) has begun to formalize a rich platform 
for discussing the common problems in that ˚eld. 
Mind you, these are but four of probably many 
thousands of situational applications that groups 
have developed. In the presence of the Web™s rich 
primordial soup of nutrients, coupled with standard 
protocols and mechanisms that let services play 
well with one another, what can be done is limited 
largely only by human imagination.
Costs
To be fair in my reporting, this isn™t all entirely free; 
executing these software-intensive systems incurs 
real costs. For example, a simple search on Google 
generates approximately 0.2 g of CO
2, and an ex
-tended search has a carbon footprint of about 7 g of 
CO
2 (http://technology.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/
tech_and_web/article5489134.ece). Hardware costs 
are approximately 20 cents per giga˜op, while op
-erating costs eat about 3 watts per giga˜op (which 
is why data centers chew up lots of power). Finally, 
although software distribution costs are low, pro
-duction costs are notŠpeople must be paid. (Open 
source software is a different issue, but I™ll book
-mark that topic for later).
Speaking of costs, my IBM colleague Clay Wil
-liams, in a personal conversation, noted that ﬁsoft
-ware development is too often viewed as a cost 
center to be cut rather than as an asset of strategic 
Grady
 Booch
Software Abundance 
 in the Face of Economic 
Scarcity, Part 2
 16
 IEEE SOFTWARE   
www.computer.org/software
ON ARCHITECTURE
importance to be nourished.ﬂ The McK
-insey report ﬁInnovations in IT Manage
-mentﬂ (
McKinsey on IT
, Spring 2009) 
makes this point very clear: there are many 
opportunities in
 IT for fueling business, 
ranging from issues of daily hygiene to op
-portunities for creating entirely new mar
-kets. Michael Treachy and Fred Wiersman, 
in 
The Discipline of
 Market Leaders
 (Basic 
Books, 1997), suggest that effective busi
-ness strategies must involve some mixture 
of ef˚ciency-based, innovation-based, and 
customer-intimacy-based efforts. In other 
words, it™s not just about being the best at 
making the most widgets at the lowest cost; 
you™ll often end up delivering mediocrity, 
which no one will want over time. (But 
enough about the automotive industry –)
Pain and Progress
Ultimately, software development is an en
-gineering activity. That means not reaching 
for a perfect solution (there is no such thing, 
as perfection is the enemy of good enough), 
but rather evolving to a solution that opti
-mally resolves the static and dynamic forces 
on that system. For software-intensive sys
-tems, these forces include the usual business 
ones (cost, schedule, and mission) but also 
development, environmental, operational, 
and legal/ethical/moral forces. Where there 
are tensions in resolving these forces, you 
will feel pain. 
For software-intensive systems, custom
-ers often tell me about these points of pain:
 ˜How do I attend to new requirements 
without being saddled by legacy (but 
also not compromising that legacy)?
 ˜How do I integrate new technology 
into my existing code base?
 ˜How do I integrate my existing systems 
to extract greater value from the whole?
 ˜How do I simultaneously increase my 
agility in response to the market, im
-prove ef˚ciency and quality, and reduce 
costs?
 ˜How do I attend to assets introduced 
through acquisition?
 ˜How do I use software to improve mar
-ket ef˚ciency through the creation of 
dominant product lines?
 ˜How do I attend to a continuously re
-freshed stakeholder community, a glob
-ally and temporally distributed devel
-opment team, and inevitable leakage/
loss of institutional memory?
 ˜While doing all this, how do I continue 
to innovate?
A common thread that weaves through all 
these points of pain is architecture. My ex
-perience suggests that the presence of a rea
-sonably well-understood, syndicated, gov
-erned architecture has a positive impact on 
each of these points of pain.
Like a River
In a previous column (ﬁLike a River,ﬂ 
IEEE 
Software
, May/June 2009), I used the met
-aphor of the enterprise as a river, with the 
boats traveling along the river representing 
the mission of that enterprise. The enter
-prise™s architecture, then, is the collection 
of engineering decisions and artifacts that 
steer the ˜eet (the organization) through the 
forces acting upon it and guide it toward its 
mission. The important subtleties in this 
metaphor are that 
 ˜˜eets, not just single boats, are at sail; 
 ˜the forces are dynamic as well as in
-stantaneous; and 
 ˜there are many forces beyond our con
-trol, as well as indirect forces of our 
own making.
In my experience, all hyper-productive 
organizations tend to have life cycles that 
involve the growth of a system™s architec
-ture through the incremental and iterative 
release of testable executables. There are 
three important points here: 
 ˜Testable executables are the most im
-portant artifact of any development 
organization. 
 ˜Optimal solutions most readily emerge 
through the incremental and iterative 
delivery of stable intermediate forms.
 ˜Architecture-as-an-artifact is an es
-sential element in governing the course 
of that system and attacking risk as it 
evolves. 
Indeed, architecture-as-an-artifact is a 
man
 
ifestation of technical intellectual 
property and thus serves as an artifact of 
control. It involves active yet ˜exible bud
-geting of resources, checks and balances 
for the coevolution of architecture and im
-plementation, accountability for technical 
decisions, hedges for the future, diversi˚
-cation, appropriate measurements and in
-centives, cost controls, economics of scale 
via patterns, and actively attacking risk. I 
˚nd it particularly interesting that while 
every robust enterprise has institutional
-ized best practices for its ˚scal concerns, 
these ˚scal practices have also been ad
-vanced by the consequences of governing 
the architecture-as-an-artifact.
Now, it™s easy to be distracted by shiny 
objects: all too often, I™ll see projects in cri
-sis or projects that have just lost their way 
jump from one technology fad to another. 
However, to get to real development matu
-rity, you have to be ˚ercely disciplined. In 
Enterprise Architecture as Strategy
 (Har
-vard Business Publishing, 2006), Jeanne 
W. Ross, Peter Weill, and David Robertson 
observe that you™ll see business silos in the 
least mature organizations, but as those or
-ganizations move up to seizing software as 
a strategic weapon, they™ll increasingly fo
-cus on standardized technology, the forma
-tion of an optimized core, and, ˚nally, the 
emergence of an architecture of business 
modularity.
It™s tempting to overcontrol, however. As 
Clay Williams noted in a personal conver
-sation, ﬁWe often see people pursuing ef
-forts to make software production ‚factory-
like,™ believing that will solve some problem 
usually related to cost and schedule con
-trol.ﬂ The ﬁHitachi Software Worksﬂ of the 
1960s, automatic programming in the ™70s, 
process programming in the ™80s, and soft
-ware factories in the past decade have all 
failed, because software development isn™t a 
commodity cost center but rather a center 
of innovation. Thus, Williams continued, 
ﬁFor all but routine software development 
and deployment, this is a really, really bad 
idea.ﬂ We must have freedom to draw in
-novation from the cognitive surplus that 
drives software development.
This, then, is the seminal role of archi
-tecture: it addresses how we design the 
solution and how we design the orga
-nization. And thus, to that end, software-
intensive systems are an inescapable and 
necessary element in helping us operate, in
-novate, and even thrive in the face of lean 
economic times.
Grady Booch 
is an IBM Fellow and one of UML™s original 
authors. He also developed the Booch method of software 
development (
Object-Oriented Analysis and Design
, Addison-
Wesley, 1993). He™s working on a handbook of architectural 
patterns, available at www.booch.com/architecture. Contact 
him at architecture@booch.com.
