 18
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
on architecture
Editor: Grady Booch 
 IBM 
 architecture@booch.com
Architectural 
Organizational Patterns
Grady Booch
A number of elements separate vision from 
raw, running, naked code; collectively, 
these are what I™ve described as the lim
-its of software. For most organizations, 
the really naughty bits lie at the cusp of 
design and organization. What is the op
-timal design for a given system, a design that rea
-sonably balances all the forces that weigh in on 
the problem? In turn, what is the 
optimal organizational structure 
for developing, deploying, and 
evolving that system? 
The problems of design are 
largely technical; the problems 
of organization are largely so
-cial. Because the conjunction of 
these two elements mixes the 
technical and the social, there™s 
considerable tension at play in 
all economically interesting projects. Furthermore, 
that tension is never static. The presence of a run
-ning system, even if it™s incomplete, uncovers the 
real risks to the project. It also changes the way 
its stakeholders see the world, thus impacting the 
system™s design. Similarly, the organization you 
use to develop an interesting system is rarely the 
right one for deploying it or even evolving it once 
it™s in place. Injecting a software-intensive system 
into any context is never a zero-sum event.
To set the context for the discussion that fol
-lows, there are some fundamentals worth repeat
-ing. I™ve talked about each of these to some degree 
in previous columns, so let me summarize here:
All architecture is design, but not all design is 
architecture. A system™s architecture is de˜ned 
by its signi˜cant design decisions, where in my 
experience, ﬁsigni˜cantﬂ is measured by the 
cost of change.
Most architectures are accidental; some are 
intentional.
Every software-intensive system has an archi
-tecture, forged from the hundreds of thousands 
of small decisions made every day.
The code is the truth, but not the whole truth. 
Most architectural information is preserved in 
tribal memory.
All well-structured software-intensive systems 
are full of patterns.
As to that last point, the design patterns litera
-ture and practice are both deep as well as practical. 
Architectural patterns are less well studied, but for 
our purposes here, think of them as design patterns 
writ large or as named sets of coherently coopera
-tive design patterns.
Coplien and Harrison™s 
contributions 
The observation that all well-structured software-
intensive systems are full of patterns speaks to sys
-tem design, which is a technical problem. We can 
make a similar observation regarding a develop
-ment team™s social organization, and that™s exactly 
what Jim Coplien and Neil Harrison have done in 
their brilliant book, 
Organizational Patterns of 
Agile Development
 (Prentice Hall, 2004).
This is a tremendously wise book. For example, 
regarding the intricate dance between architecture 
and implementation, the authors properly note that 
ﬁdevelopment takes place at two levels: architecture 
and implementation. Both are ongoing, and they 
interact with each other strongly. New implemen
-tations suggest architectural changes. Architectural 
changes usually require radical changes to the im
-plementationﬂ (p. 332).
The book focuses on organizational patterns, a 
number of which are germane to the evolution of 
a system™s architecture. I could not articulate these 
patterns as well as they have, so I™ll let Jim and Neil™s 
work speak for itself.
One of the foundational patterns on which they 
report is the Developer Controls Process, which 
observes that projects should ﬁmake the developer 
 on architecture
Editor: Grady Booch 
 IBM 
 architecture@booch.com
 May/June 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 19
ON AR
CH
ITE
CTURE
the focal point of process informationﬂ (p. 
71). This makes in˜nite sense: code is the 
primary and essential artifact of any mean
-ingful software-intensive system, and code 
warriors need to be at the center of grav
-ity. Cope and Neil continue by offering a 
number of architect-related patterns. The 
Architect Controls Product pattern states 
that ﬁeven though a product is designed by 
many individuals, a project must strive to 
give the product breadth to cover its mar
-kets and to ensure smooth evolution, but it 
can™t be blindsided by pragmatic engineer
-ing and implementation concerns. Beyond 
advising and communicating with devel
-opers, architects should also participate 
in implementationﬂ (pp. 254
255). All the 
world-class architects I™ve had the privilege 
of working with were also programmers 
who weren™t afraid of coding.
Recognizing that one architect
 is singu
-larly insuf˜cient for most complex systems, 
Cope and Neil posit the Architecture Team 
pattern: ﬁYou need to create an architecture 
that is simple and cohesive, but that also ac
-commodates a variety of constituencies. 
Create a small team of ‚resonating minds™ 
to de˜ne the initial architecture in such 
a way that the team covers the expected 
partitioning of the systemﬂ (pp. 241
242). 
In my experience, this pattern extends to 
the problems of systems engineering. In 
a complex software-intensive system that 
also involves signi˜cant hardware elements 
(ranging from a spacecraft™s intricacies to 
globally distributed server farms), such a 
team should include more than just soft
-ware stakeholders. 
The authors go on to describe several 
patterns germane to the nature of that ar
-chitecture team: 
Lock ™em Up Together: ﬁA team of di
-verse people must come up with a single 
coherent architecture. Gather domain 
experts together in the same room to 
work out the architecture (or other stra
-tegic issues)ﬂ (p. 243).
Engage Customers: ﬁClosely couple the 
Customer role with the Developer and 
Architect roles, not just with QA or 
marketing rolesﬂ (p. 113).
Stand-Up Meeting: ﬁHold short daily 
meetings with the entire team to ex
-change critical information, update 
status, and/or make assignmentsﬂ (p. 
248).
Two other patterns worth mentioning 
relate to the process of coevolving the sys
-tem™s architecture and implementation: 
Named Stable Bases: ﬁIt is impor
-tant to integrate software frequently 
enough so that the base doesn™t be
-come stale, but not so frequently that 
you damage a shared understanding of 
what functionality is sound and trusted 
in an evolving software base. Stabilize 
system interfacesŠthe architectureŠ
about once a weekﬂ (p. 42).
Decouple Stages: ﬁDevelopment stages 
should be independent to reduce cou
-pling and promote the autonomy of 
teams and developersﬂ (p. 217).
Finally, Cope and Neil present four 
patterns relative to the connection be
-tween software architecture and social 
organization:
Conway™s Law: ﬁMake sure the orga
-nization is compatible with the product 
architectureﬂ (p. 192).
Organization Follows Location: ﬁThe 
architectural partitioning should re˚ect 
the geographic partitioning, and vice 
versaﬂ (p. 195).
Subsystem by Skill: ﬁSeparate subsys
-tems by staff skills and skill require
-mentsﬂ (p. 153).
Feature Assignment: ﬁAssign features 
to people for development. Feature de
-velopment has a ˜nite duration and is, 
therefore, an assignment, not a roleﬂ (p. 
265).
Five new patterns 
Building on their work, I posit ˜ve overarch
-ing architectural organizational patterns:
Big Dripping Hairball
Senior Designer
Chief Architect
Architecture Team
Architecture Control Board
Brian Foote and Joseph Yoder identi
-˜ed the Big Ball of Mud pattern as a ﬁhap
-hazardly structured, sprawling, sloppy, 
duct-tape and bailing wire, spaghetti-code 
jungle.ﬂ Such systems are typically created 
by developers organized as a Big Dripping 
Hairball, wherein the resulting system™s ar
-chitecture is entirely accidental. This isn™t 
necessarily an evil pattern; it™s appropriate 
to prototypes of new systems requiring in
-tense innovation. In such cases, however, 
we should discard this ˜rst prototype, 
harvest the experience, and apply it to the 
next version, developed under a more dis
-ciplined process.
To build small to modest-sized systems 
with a modest half-life, projects
 should iden
-tify a Senior Designer to devise an incremen
-tally more intentional architecture drawn 
from that person™s experience. As the risk 
to the projectŠtechnical and otherwiseŠ
grows, projects should identify a Chief Ar
-chitect; this pattern is appropriate for mod
-est to large-scale systems with a modest 
to long half-life. Although appropriate to 
green˜eld development, this pattern is espe
-cially relevant to brown˜eld systems requir
-ing extension or transformation.
As complexity and risk continue to grow, 
an Architecture Team is appropriate for 
large, complex, high-risk software
-intensive 
systems, particularly where there are many 
technical, contextual, business, and eco
-nomic dimensions. In such cases, architec
-tural evolution should be
 quite intentional. 
At the largest scales, we need an Architec
-ture Board. This pattern is appropriate for 
very large systems-of-systems with heavy 
economic weight, especially systems formed 
from many systems, some new, many old, 
and all largely in ˚ux.
As you might observe, these pat
-terns range from low-ceremony, 

low
-intentionality practices to high-
 ceremony, high-intentionality ones. At 
the low end, rabid innovation is pos
-sible but predictability and repeatability 
are suspect. At the high end, innovation 
moves more slowly but predictability and 
repeatability peak. The low end is liberal 
and risk embracing, the high end is con
-servative and risk resistant. The challenge 
for every organization is to ˜nd the sweet 
spot that provides the right balance of 
innovation, predictability, repeatability, 
and risk confrontation for any given proj
-ect at every given moment.
Grady Booch 
is an IBM Fellow and one of the UML™s 
original authors. He also developed the Booch method of 
software development (
Object-Oriented Analysis and Design, 
Addison-Wesley
, 1993). He™s working on a handbook of archi
-tectural patterns, available at www.booch.com/architecture. 
Contact him at architecture@booch.com.
