 48 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY 0740-7459/16/$33.00 © 2016 IEEESoftware 
Architects

in Large-Scale 

Distributed 

Projects
An Ericsson Case Study
Ricardo Britto and Darja −mite,
 Blekinge Institute of Technology
Lars-Ola Damm,
 Ericsson
// This story is about Ericsson architects, their 
roles and responsibilities, and the effort they 
spent guarding and governing a large-scale 
product developed by distributed teams. Instead 
of trendy approaches, a centralized approach was 
necessary to deal with legacy and distribution. 
//MUCH HAS BEEN 
written about 
software architects, their roles,
1Œ5
their responsibilities,
6Œ8
 and how 
they™re ﬁmade.ﬂ
9 Martin Fowler 
proposed this classi˜ cation of soft-
ware architects:
4Ł Architectus Reloadus
 makes 
important decisions early on, 

ensuring a system™s conceptual 
integrity.
Ł Architectus Oryzus
 addresses 
problems in a project by 
closely collaborating with the 
developers.
Philippe Kruchten summarized soft-
ware architects™ responsibilities, in-
cluding de˜ ning the architecture; 
maintaining its architectural integ-

rity; and consulting with, helping, 
and coaching development teams.
1Paul Clements and his colleagues de-
scribed architects™ skills and knowl-
edge, such as communication and 
learning skills.
10 Grady Booch
11
 and 
Frank Buschmann
12 have written on 
aspects of architects™ daily work.
However, most of the vast lit-
erature on software architects has 

focused on the architect as a ﬁone- 

soldier army.ﬂ This seems reason-
able in small projects but infeasible 
in large-scale projects, which require 

teams of architects.
1 Because many 
large-scale projects are spread across 
multiple locations, we raise three 
questions: What are software archi-

tects™ roles and responsibilities? How 

are they organized in large-scale 
distributed software projects? How 
does adding new teams in remote lo-

cations in˚ uence the architects™ role?
Here, we share our results from 
studying the development of a large, 

distributed software product at Erics-

son, a global leader in telecommu-
nications with sites worldwide. We 
focus on the architects steering this 

product™s development.
Roles and 
Responsibilities
The architectural paradigm em-
ployed in a software product™s ar-
chitecture affects how software 
architects carry out their work.
13Whereas most new products at Er-

icsson have a modular or service- 
oriented architecture, legacy prod-
ucts, such as the case we describe 

here, have a monolithic architecture.
FOCUS:
 THE ROLE OF THE SOFTWARE ARCHITECT
 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
49The scale and complexity of Er-
icsson™s software products, together 
with the distribution of development 
teams across multiple locations, also 

impact how architects perform their 

work. When teams and development 
locations are added to a project, it re-
quires extra support to guard prod-

uct integrity and mentor the teams 

while they climb the learning curve. 
In distributed environments, this in-
troduces several challenges. One Er-

icsson software architect referred to 
communication overhead: ﬁIt would 
be much easier to explain to the de-

velopers things about the product™s 

architecture if they were in Sweden, 
because most of the time we only 
communicate via the code review 

tool and email.ﬂ Another architect 

pointed out the necessity of guard-
ing and control: ﬁWhen multiple 
teams work together on a task, the 

developers across teams do not com-

municate as well as within a team. 
Therefore, they often introduce task 
con˜ icts that we ˚ nd in their code, 

which otherwise the teams would 
not identify themselves.ﬂ
To ensure cross-team and cross-
location alignment and to guard the 
complex system architectures, Erics-
son architects are organized in three 
levels (see Figure 1).
At the 
system level
, a team of ar-
chitects of the type 
Architectus Re-
loadus
 ensures that the products in-
cluded in a system can communicate 

with each other. They closely collab-

orate with product-level architects 

and coordinate the design of the 
features, interfaces, and protocols 
used in the systemŠthat is, the sys-

tem architecture. They also review 
product- level solutions and guard 
the system™s evolvability. These ar-

chitects are mostly in Sweden.
At the 
product level
, a team of 
architects ful˚ ls the 
Architectus 

Reloadus
 and 
Architectus Oryzus
roles. These architects, who are ex-

perienced, skillful developers, lead 
the design of technical solutions and 
guard the integrity and evolvability 

of the product and the system ar-

chitecture. They collaborate closely 
with system-level architects and soft-
ware development teams throughout 

solution implementation. They steer 
software design, ensure that design 
rules are followed, promote the use 

of design patterns, and ensure code 
quality through code reviews. They 

help guard the architecture and the 
deliverables™ quality. They also men-
tor the software teams by sharing 

their knowledge, providing feedback 

through code reviews, suggesting 
improvements, and helping out in 
urgent situations to speed up devel-

opment. These architects are also 

mostly in Sweden, and they™re this 
article™s main focus.
At the 
development team level
, senior developers called 
design leads

(or team-level architects) support the 
design of technical solutions. They 

ensure that their team follows the de-

sign rules and design patterns, which 
generally are de˚ ned by product-level 
architects. They also help product- 

level architects guard a product™s ar-

chitectural integrity and evolvability 
and help ensure the quality of deliv-
erables through code and documen-

tation reviews. The more expertise 

and experience design leads have, the 
more autonomous their teams are; 
they can provide more support to 

product-level architects with mentor-
ing and guarding.
The product and development 
team levels might vary slightly among 
123Design leads or team-level architects
(guardians and mentors, 
Architectus Oryzus)System-level architects
(guardians, Architectus 
Reloadus)    Product-level architects(guardians and mentors,Architectus Reloadus and Architectus Oryzus)A prioritized business use case is assigned to a system architect.The system architect performs impact analysis and forms a virtual team with representatives 
from the impacted products to de˜ne the solution.The product architect speci˜es the product-level design with the design lead from the employed 
development team (team members are included 
in the design work when applicable).The development team performs the detailed design and implementation with the product architects™ support.SystemDevelopmentteamProductFIGURE 1. 
The organization and work˜ ow of Ericsson™s software architects. This centralized approach aims to ensure cross-team 
and cross-location alignment and to guard the complex system architectures.
 50 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
FOCUS:
 THE ROLE OF THE SOFTWARE ARCHITECT
different Ericsson products. In our 
case, the product level was ﬁthickerﬂ 
and centralized almost all respon-
sibility for the overall design of the 

technical solutions to be imple-

mented in the product. The overall 
responsibility for guarding the prod-
uct architecture™s integrity and evolv-

ability was also centralized. This 

means that even the more experi-
enced teams were never fully auton-
omous. More recent products with 

a service- oriented architecture have 
a much thinner product level. That 
is, they have approximately 50 per-

cent fewer architects, and the teams 

shoulder much of the responsibility.
How Many Product-Level 
Architects Do You Need?
In our case study, the main factor af-
fecting the extent of the product-level 
architects™ involvement was the de-

velopment teams™ maturity. To vi-

sualize the product-level architects™ 

amount of work and area of respon-
sibility, we designed an authority 
matrix (see Figure 2). The curve in 

the matrix shows that as a team ma-

tures, it should get more independent 
and require less support from the 
product-level architects. The four ac-

tivities on the 
y-axis are those that 
concerned the product-level archi-

tects the most. The 
x-axis indicates 
the four levels of team maturity.
At level A, an immature team has 
no or very basic knowledge about 

the product™s code and architec-

ture. Level-A teams require much 

mentoring and support from the 
architects, even when implement-
ing (coding, testing, and document-

ing) noncomplex technical solutions. 
Product-level architects guide the 
teams during the implementation 
and are actively involved, with both 

reviewing and approving code.
At level B, teams have suf˜ cient 
knowledge to implement noncom-

plex technical solutions without 

much guidance. More knowledge-

able team members and design leads 
review the implemented code, but 
product-level architects still review 

most of the design and code.
At level C, experienced, ma-
ture teams with good knowledge 

of the product architecture imple-

ment complex technical solutions 
that have signi˜ cant architectural 
impact. These teams review and ap-

prove their own code. Product-level 

architects are involved only in ap-
proval when the architecture™s criti-
cal components are affected. (A 

critical component contains core 
functionality that executes key op-
erations.) Level-C teams also per-

form more solution design. Product-

level architects support these teams 
by mentoring the design of technical 
solutions and providing on-demand 

guidance in the initial implementa-

tion stages.
At level D, very experienced and 
rather autonomous teams implement 

complex technical solutions inde-

pendently, even ones affecting the 
product architecture™s critical com-
ponents. The code they implement 

doesn™t need product-level architects™ 
approval. Level-D teams also drive 
the design and review of technical 

solutions. Product-level architects 

are involved only in the technical-
solution design.
Our authority matrix is based 
on the product-level architects™ ex-
perience and the data we collected 
and analyzed in our case study (see 
the sidebar ﬁThe Ericsson Case 

Studyﬂ and Figure 3). In particular, 
Task implementationDesign of technicalsolutionsCode reviewsDesign reviewsABCDArea of product-levelarchitects™ responsibilityTeam learning and mentoring curveLevel of team maturityArea of teamresponsibilityFIGURE 2. 
The authority matrix. For a description of the maturity levels, see the main 
article. As a team matures, it should get more independent and require less support 

from the product-level architects.
 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
51our statistical analysis of the per-
formance data con˜ rmed that the 
more immature teams required 
more support from the product-level 

architects.
Figure 3a shows the teams™ distri-
bution. The Turkish team was classi-

˜ ed as level A. The ˜ ve recently on-

boarded Indian teams started at level 

A; four of them progressed to level 
B during our study. The four Swed-
ish teams and the US team were clas-

si˜ ed as level C. One Swedish team 
temporarily reached level D (product-
level architects joined the team), and 

a temporary level-D team comprised 

product-level architects, developers, 
and design leads from Sweden and 
India.
The Effort Needed to 
Guard and Mentor
The teams™ maturity also determined 
the number of required product-level 
architects. In our case study, the rule 
of thumb seemed to be that each 

level-C team needed approximately 

one-half of a product-level archi-
tect and that each level-A or level-B 
team needed one product-level ar-

chitect. As we mentioned before, no 

permanent level-D teams were in our 
case study. In cases involving criti-
cal work demanding speci˜ c archi-

tectural knowledge and quick de-
velopment, product architects might 
temporarily join a team to engage in 

coding and testing. Such teams can 

qualify as level-D teams.
Figure 3b shows the effort that 
product-level architects spent sup-

porting 12 teams (the teams we 

mentioned earlier, except the tem-
porary Swedish team) performing 
26 product customization tasks. 

The less mature teams (levels A and 

B) received signi˜ cant support from 
the product-level architects. In con-
trast, mature teams (levels C and 

D) worked more autonomously. We 

veri˜ ed these results™ statistical sig-
ni˜ cance using the Kruskal-Wallis 
one-way analysis of variance (sig-

ni˜ cance level = 0.01, 
p-value = 
0.008493).
Part of the effort involved men-
toring, which the product-level ar-

chitects provided though meetings 
THE ERICSSON CASE STUDY
Our case study (see the main article) investigated the 
development of a telecom product that has evolved for more 
than 15 years. At the time of our investigation, the product 
employed more than 150 employees (including 15 product-

level architects, 20 design leads, 100 developers working in 
22 teams, and 15 other supporting roles) in Sweden, India, 
Italy, the US, and Turkey. One team comprised only product-

level architects; each of the other teams consisted of a design 
lead and ˜ ve to eight developers.
The results presented here are based on the data from 
240 tasks carried out from January 2014 to June 2016. We 

employed the following data collection methods.
First, we performed archival research. We analyzed mana-
gerial documents (plans and reports) related to 26 product 

customization tasks (PCs), measuring the effort architects 
expended for development and support. Twelve teams partici-

pated in these PCs (for more on these teams, see the main ar-
ticle). We also surveyed the Gerrit code review repository to de-
termine the number of defects identi˜ ed through code reviews 

completed for a random selection of tasks: 10 PCs, 188 trouble 
reports (TRs), 9 product improvements (PIs), and 11 standard-
izations of market features (MFs). We manually categorized the 
defects using the ISO/IEC 25010:2011 standard.
1 The product™s 
unit manager validated the collected archival data.
Next, we conducted unstructured interviews with the unit 
manager and product-level architects. We collected their 
knowledge about how the architects were organized, the 

architects™ roles and responsibilities, and the development 
teams™ maturity.
Finally, we held four workshops with the unit manager 
and product-level architects to measure the 26 PCs™ task 

complexityŠ the dif˜ culty of performing them. We selected 
one of the PCs as the baseline and had participants measure 

the other PCs in relation to it. Using planning poker, they at-
tributed a positive integer (complexity points) to each PC. 
To check the assigned measures, the architects consulted 

technical-solution speci˜ cations whenever needed.
The PCs, PIs, and MFs resembled independent projects 
because they had start and end dates, a responsible team, 

and expected results. In general, PCs took 1 to 3 months, PIs 
took 1 to 2 months, and MFs took 2 to 6 months.
Reference
1. 
ISO/IEC 25010:2011ŠSystems and Software EngineeringŠ Systems 
and Software Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE)ŠSys-

tem and Software Quality Models
, Int™l Org. for Standardization, 
2011; www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=35733.
 52 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
FOCUS:
 THE ROLE OF THE SOFTWARE ARCHITECT
(videoconferences or teleconferences 
with remote teams) or synchronous 
chat. Most of the effort involved 
code reviews, which also provided 

mentoring opportunities and in-

volved clari˜ cation of architectural 
principles and improvement recom-
mendations. In some cases, support 

included detailed instructions that 

even contained code samples to facil-
itate the understanding of the design.
Problems That Product-Level 
Architects Prevented
To ensure the product architecture™s 
integrity and evolvability, product-
level architects review new and 
modi˜ ed code to identify defects 

that might harm the product archi-

tecture, induce technical debt, and 
complicate the architecture™s evolv-
ability. Although Ericsson devotes 

much attention to rigorous regres-

sion tests, not all defects can be 
caught automatically, especially non-
functional maintainability defects.
14Maintainability defects can lead to 

code entropy,
15 affecting the archi-
tecture™s integrity.
At Ericsson, new developers 
working on legacy products often 

have problems understanding the 

code™s structure, which leads to the 
fear of changing existing code and 
the tendency to duplicate code.
16This behavior is common in imma-

ture teams, and architects play a 
vital role in detecting such defects 
through code reviews, making code 

review a crucial asset.
Figure 3c contains results about 
defects revealed through code re-

views performed on 220 tasks. We fo-

cused on two subcategories of main-

tainability defects closely related to 
Ericsson architects™ guardian role: 
modi˜ ability and analyzability.
17The code reviews revealed 1,727 
defects; product-level architects dis-
No. of tasksMean total effortMean support effort (SE)Mean complexity (CP)Std. deviation (SE/CP)2,547.50 h160.50 h77.861.181,250589416611459606TotalFunctionalCompatibilityPortabilityPerformanceReliabilityMaintainabilityŠmodi˜abilityMaintainabilityŠanalyzability2.581.920.620.5941,747.25 h73.25 h42.500.8851,957.60 h68.60 h221.000.4332,944.33 h39.00 h233.330.51Teams in SwedenA team in the USTeams in IndiaA team in TurkeyA temporaryteam in SwedenA temporarymultisite teamTeams in IndiaLevel A(a)(b)Product-level architectsTeams(c)Level BLevel CLevel D4 teams reachedlevel B after one year14Level ALevel BLevel CLevel D47724286310176230FIGURE 3. 
Evidence supporting the authority matrix in Figure 2. (a) The distribution 
of the teams in our case study. (b) The effort the architects spent supporting the teams. 

The curve shows the mean ratio between the support effort and task complexity. (c) The 

proportion of different defects the product-level architects and the teams found. The 

more immature teams required more support from the product-level architects.
 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
53covered 72.38 percent of those de-
fects, and the teams discovered 
27.62 percent. Of those defects, 
85.18 percent were maintainabil-

ity defects, and the product-level 

architects revealed 72.40 percent 
of them. Considering that testing 
techniques don™t easily reveal main-

tainability defects, the product-

level architects™ active participation 
helped in early detection of defects 
that otherwise could have affected 

the product architecture™s integrity 
and evolvability.
Although the software ar-
chitects™ hierarchy, roles, 
and responsibilities we 
described aren™t unusual,
1,18
 they 
aren™t trendy, either. So, in this case 

study, why didn™t Ericsson fully em-
bark upon trendier approaches such 

as microservices
19 and agile ways of 
working?
The answer is, because of legacy 
code and distributed development. 

Although this case study imple-

mented many agile practices such as 
continuous integration, continuous 
delivery, and DevOps, certain limi-
tations prevented fully exploiting the 
new approaches.
The product™s monolithic archi-
tecture made relying on coordination 
by mutual adjustment problematic.
20However, this doesn™t automatically 

mean that Ericsson applied tradi-
tional coordination and control. The 
architects™ hierarchy wasn™t tradi-

tional in the sense that people higher 

up in the hierarchy could overrule 
the ones further down. Rather, it 
was a network of architects with 
CSI-IEEE CS Joint Education Award
CALL FOR AWARD NOMINA
TIONSDeadline 15 October 2016CRITERIAThe Computer Society of India (CSI) / IEEE Computer Society Education Award is 
a joint CSI-IEEE national society award that recognizes educators who have made 

ELIGIBILITYŁ 


Ł 
Ł 
NOMINATION REQUIREMENTS

AWARD



PRESENTATION



SUBMISSIONS
 54
 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
different focus areas who were in
-volved in decisions related to their 
competences. On the product level, 
the architects and other experienced 

developers had designated approval 

rights based on their competences. 
They governed this approval struc
-ture and process as they saw ˜t.
This governance structure was 
similar to large distributed open 

source projects such as Eclipse and 
Android. That is, the open-source 
community has also concluded that 

large development projects some
-times require a centralized approach 

to secure the software™s quality.
Finally, the architects™ hierarchy 
was also an answer to the challenges 
of distribution. Ericsson is no excep
-tion to the trend of offshoring parts 
of development to low-cost regions; 

much of its product development 
has become global. However, many 
offshore sites are infamous for high 
attrition rates. This means that em
-ployee turnover results in continu
-ous loss of expertise and the never-

ending demand for mentoring and 

steering. Knowledge loss also occurs 

from frequently moving resources in 
and out of products because of rap
-idly changing business needs. In such 
situations, the centralization of ar
-chitectural decisions such as we de
-scribed here secures the architectural 

knowledge™s stability and its avail
-ability for new developers and teams.
For a look at the present and fu
-ture of Ericsson software architects, 

see the related sidebar.
References
1. P. Kruchten, ﬁThe ArchitectsŠthe 
Software Architecture Team,ﬂ 
Proc. 

1st Working IFIP Conf. Software 

Architecture
 (WICSA 99), 1999, pp. 
565Œ583.
2.
 J.F. Hoorn et al., ﬁThe Lonesome 

Architect,ﬂ 
J. Systems and Software
, vol. 84, no. 9, 2011, pp. 1424Œ1435.
3.
 M.B. Romney, ﬁThe Software Archi
-tect,ﬂ 
Comm. ACM
, vol. 50, no. 5, 
2007, pp. 75Œ81.
4.
 M. Fowler, ﬁWho Needs an Archi
-tect?,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 20, no. 5, 
2003, pp. 11Œ13.
5. S. Sherman and I. Hadar, ﬁToward 

De˜ning the Role of the Software 

Architect,ﬂ 
Proc. 8th Int™l Workshop 

Cooperative and Human Aspects of 

Software Eng. 
(CHASE 15), 2015, 
pp. 71Œ76.
6.
 P. Kruchten, ﬁWhat Do Software Ar
-chitects Really Do?,ﬂ 
J. Systems and 

Software
, vol. 81, no. 12, 2008, pp. 
2413Œ2416.
7.
 A.B. Bondi, ﬁThe Software Architect 

as the Guardian of System Perfor
-mance and Scalability,ﬂ 
Proc. ICSE 

Workshop Leadership and Man
-agement in Software Architecture
 (LMSA 09), 2009, pp. 28Œ31.
8.
 A. Tang et al., ﬁOn the Responsi
 bilities 
THE PRESENT AND 
FUTURE OF SOFTWARE 

ARCHITECTS AT ERICSSON
The speed with which new technologies are introduced has compelled Erics
-son™s software architects to adapt quickly. For example, cloud computing 
forces architects to rethink existing architectures and use different approaches 
to design new ones. It™s no longer only about designing software to conform 

to a particular hardware speci˜cation, because virtual environments hide the 
underlying infrastructure.
At the same time, many new technologies and methods have reduced Erics
-son architects™ workload. For example, continuous-integration and continuous-

delivery tools require less manual effort to ensure that code changes don™t harm 
a product architecture™s behavior. To implement continuous integration and con
-tinuous delivery in our case study (see the main article), we adapted the prod
-uct™s architecture to maintain full backward compatibility despite the frequent 

releasesŠfor example, through strict version control of interfaces.
Ericsson also employs DevOps. In our case study, two product-level archi
-tects were dedicated to ensuring smooth collaboration between Ericsson™s de
-velopment team and one customer™s operation team. This shortened feedback 

loops, which led to better interaction with Ericsson™s customers.
Another trend in˚uencing the role of Ericsson architects is the agile trans
-formation. To be able to bene˜t from agile ways of working, teams are expected 
to have more autonomy, and architects serve primarily as mentors supporting 
the teams. Although Ericsson has tried to increase team autonomy for the case 

study™s product, the company has focused on increasing autonomy for more re
-cent products not limited by legacy architectures.
Finally, Ericsson architects must be prepared to work on products developed 
at multiple locations. As in many other large organizations, corporate cultures 
and ways of working differ among Ericsson™s distributed units. So, software ar
-chitects are often expected to possess strong leadership skills and the ability to 
align the philosophy, traditions, and attitudes toward quality and maintainability 
across all development locations.
 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
55of Software Architects and Software 
Engineers in an Agile Environment: 

Who Should Do What?,ﬂ 
Proc. 4th 

Int™l Workshop Social Software Eng.
 
(SSE 11), 2011, pp. 11Œ18.
9. 
B. Correa, ﬁHow Are Architects 

Made?,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 30, no. 
5, 2013, pp. 11Œ13.
10. 
P. Clements et al., ﬁThe Duties, 

Skills, and Knowledge of Software 

Architects,ﬂ 
Proc. 6th Working 

IEEE/IFIP Conf. Software Architec-

ture
 (WICSA 07), 2007, pp. 20Œ22.
11. 
G. Booch, ﬁThe Architect™s Journey,ﬂ 

IEEE Software
, vol. 28, no. 3, 2011, 
pp. 10Œ11.
12. 
F. Buschmann, ﬁValue-Focused Sys-

tem Quality,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 
27, no. 6, 2010, pp. 84Œ86.
13. 
J. Lewis and M. Fowler, ﬁMicroser-

vices: A De˜ nition of This New 

Architectural Term,ﬂ 25 Mar. 2014; 

http://martinfowler.com/articles

/microservices.html.
14. 
M.E. Fagan, ﬁDesign and Code 

Inspections to Reduce Errors in Pro-

gram Development,ﬂ 
IBM Systems J.
, vol. 15, no. 3, 1976, pp. 182Œ211.
15. 
C.E. Ebeling, 
An Introduction to 

Reliability and Maintainability 

Engineering
, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, 
2009.
16. 
G. Hanssen et al., ﬁSoftware Entropy 

in Agile Product Evolution,ﬂ 
Proc. 

43rd Hawaii Int™l Conf. System Sci-

ences
 (HICSS 10), 2010, pp. 1Œ10.
17. 
ISO/IEC 25010:2011ŠSystems and 

Software EngineeringŠSystems and 

Software Quality Requirements and 

Evaluation (SQuaRE)Š System and 

Software Quality Models
, Int™l Org. 
for Standardization, 2011; www.iso

.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?cs

number=35733.
18. 
J.Y. Bang et al., ﬁHow Software Ar-

chitects Collaborate: Insights from 

Collaborative Software Design in 

Practice,ﬂ 
Proc. 6th Int™l Workshop 

Cooperative and Human Aspects of 
Software Eng.
 (CHASE 13), 2013, 
pp. 41Œ48.
19. 
A. Balalaie, A. Heydarnoori, and P. 

Jamshidi, ﬁMicroservices Architec-

ture Enables DevOps,ﬂ 
IEEE Soft-

ware
, vol. 33, no. 3, 2016, pp. 42Œ52.
20. 
H. Mintzberg, 
Mintzberg on Man-

agement: Inside Our Strange World 

of Organizations
, Free Press, 2007.
Selected CS articles and columns 
are also available for free at 

http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
RICARDO BRITTO 
is a PhD candidate in the Blekinge Institute 
of Technology™s Department of Software Engineering. His 
research interests include large-scale agile software develop-
ment, global software engineering, search-based software en-
gineering, and software process improvement. Britto received 
an MSc in electrical engineering from the Federal University of 
Rio Grande do Norte. Contact him at rbr@bth.se.
DARJA −MITE 
is a professor in the Blekinge Institute of Tech-
nology™s Department of Software Engineering and a part-time 
research scientist at SINTEF Information and Communication 
Technology. Her research interests include the effect of global-
ization and offshoring on software companies, large-scale agile 
software development, and software process improvement. 
−mite received a PhD in computer science from the University 
of Latvia. Contact her at darja.smite@bth.se.
LARS-OLA DAMM 
works at Ericsson, where he manages soft-
ware development teams working on large distributed projects. 

His main research interest is software process improvement. 
Damm received a PhD in software engineering from the Ble-
kinge Institute of Technology. Contact him at lars-ola.damm@
ericsson.com.
@securityprivacy
FOLLOW US
