 8 IEEE SOFTWARE   
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/09/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
Contact Editor: Brian Brannon 
˜ bbrannon@computer.org
The Voice of Evidence article ﬁWhat 
Do We Know about Agile Software 
Development?ﬂ (by Tore Dybå and 
Torgeir Dingsøyr, Sept./Oct. 2009, 
pp. 6Œ9) was enlightening. Now we 
need articles on what we know about 
all of software development, and what we 
don™t know about software development.
Implicit in the article is the fact that one 
size ˜ts nobody, at least not the agile style. 
The table does indicate that agile is good 
for learning through experimentation.
Experimentation isn™t development; at 
best, it™s research. Research precedes de
-velopment and should not be mistaken for 
it. Whatever solution might actually result 
from agile has zero chance of being the 
proper one that the entire system needs. 
Having been in this game for some 45+ 
years, I™ve seen, and suffered from, way too 
many management fads and silver bullets 
du jourŠnone of which did anything ex
-cept enrich a few fast-talking consultants. 
Until software folks realize that they™re 
merely one part of developing a system, 
we™ll continue to have the same problems 
and continue to suffer from fads that solve 
nothing in spite of the hype. 
My son won a team programming con
-test in high school. The teams had four 
hours to code solutions to four problems. 
He got a perfect score from the judges af
-ter coding all of them himself. For problems 
that small, you don™t really need to do any
-thing except conceive of a solution and write 
it down. The teams with multiple members 
ran into communications and decision-
making problems that slowed them down.
Analogously, small projects will suffer 
from a ﬁfull-boatﬂ CMMI style of instanti
-ation. For larger problems, agile approaches 
are clearly useless (except as the front end to 
do research to guide decisions before pro
-ceeding). We can never coordinate all the 
pieces of a humongous problem with an 
agile approach. It would be refreshing if all 
the purveyors of universal solutions ˜nally 
admitted that their approach is good only 
for selected subsets of problems.
In an article long ago in a commer
-cial software magazine, someone actually 
went through several ﬁmethodologiesﬂ 
and showed where they worked and where 
they did not, and said why. That inconve
-nient truth did not change anybody™s mind. 
Management that had been to a sales pitch 
seminar remained convinced that their cho
-sen solution was the answer to everything 
and continued to force it on the program
-mers. And likewise, consultants and sellers 
of software oil continue to push their ﬁrem
-edyﬂ as good for curing all ailments. Soft
-ware folks must realize that they™re just a 
part of an overall systems development pro
-cess and stop trying to control things that 
are beyond their scope and ability. Until all 
software projects cooperate with the devel
-opment of the entire system, our resulting 
systems will continue to have problems.
IEEE Software
 needs to concentrate 
on systems architecture and systems de
-velopment in order to determine what ap
-proaches to the software portion of systems 
might be appropriate.
William Adams
Independent consultant 
williamadams@ieee.org 
Tore Dybå and Torgeir Dingsøyr respond:
The response to our Voice of Evidence col
-umn on what we know from studies of ag
-ile software development includes a num
-ber of claims about the suitability of agile 
methods. Some of these claims require an 
answer.
First of all, we agree that we need more 
knowledge of software development in gen
-eral. Empirical studies of actual develop
-ment practices will provide better knowl
-edge of what works for whom, when, and 
how. This applies to traditional as well as to 
agile development.
Further, we agree that one size doesn™t ˜t 
all. Tailoring methods to a project™s needs 
is likely to improve its outcome. However, 
there™s little empirical research on which we 
can base guidelines for tailoring. Also, there 
are few secondary studies such as ours on 
agile development that seek to synthesize 
existing knowledge.
Adams distinguishes between experi
-mentation and development. However, the 
integration of these has been found to be a 
de˜ning characteristic in new product de
-velopment, which shares many characteris
-tics with software development.
Finally, Adams claims that agile develop
-ment is ﬁclearly uselessﬂ for larger problems. 
There™s no evidence supporting this claimŠ
no empirical research of agile methods for 
large projects exists. Yet, there are examples 
of large projects using agile methods.
In response to Hakan Erdogmus™s From the 
Editor column ﬁArchitecture Meets Agil
-ityﬂ (Sept./Oct. 2009, pp. 2Œ4) – I guess it 
all depends.
The moment you choose a platform, 
you™ve selected a (high-level) architecture. 
Most projects don™t have this level of lux
-ury. Later, the choice of an implementation 
language will tend toward a small set of ar
-chitectures; the use of certain tools will de
-˜ne certain architectures. These are all lev
-els of architectural choice. 
Within each of these, there are usually 
further project-speci˜c choices to be made. 
I think the agile discussion really focuses on 
these levels, not on what I™d call macro-level 
architecture.
Of course, this more detailed level is not 
usually hard to achieve, with one key pro
-viso. Attention must be paid to real decou
-pling and proper encapsulation techniques 
to allow the ˚exibility needed for reshaping 
an architecture in an agile manner. Without 
this level of expertise and professionalism, 
we™ll probably see the evolution of the pop
-ular Rats™ Nest architecture. I assume that 
even now there is a cloud-based version of 
this in development.
George Brooke˜
Oak Lodge Consulting
george@oaklodgeconsulting.co.uk
An Agile Cure for All Ills?
letters
