 0740-7459/12/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
 MARCH/APRIL 2012
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 81Editor: 
Frank Buschmann
Siemens Corporate Technology
frank.buschmann@siemens.com
THE PRAGMATIC 
ARCHITECT
TIME AND AGAIN, 
the software community 
discusses whether architects should code.
1 Although broad consensus exists that they 
should, some voices argue that architects™ re-
sponsibility for entire systems and their archi-

tectural integrity doesn™t necessarily require 

coding.
2 At least these responsibilities limit 
the time architects can spend writing code. 
But how can architects balance coding activi-
ties with their other duties? And because all 

coding should have a clear contribution to 

their architectural work, how can they en-
sure that they code at appropriate ﬁplacesﬂ in 
the architecture, addressing architecturally 

signi˜ cant aspects? Let™s explore.
Where Architecture and Code Meet
A key aspect of architecture is to guide a 

system™s implementation. All code artifacts 
should adhere to a common vision, inter-
act effectively with one another, and com-

prise code that follows appropriate rules and 

guidelines. Architecture spawns an imple-
mentation space for a system, and it™s the 
developer™s task to choose a speci˜ c realiza-

tion within that space. However, design and 

implementation aren™t entirely independent 
from one another, and some realization op-
tions directly impact architecture.
The following code snippet outlines the 
signature of a service 
TagManager
 that man-
ages the metadata of business logic objects 

in a map of so-called tags. Tags are de˜ ned 

as key value-pairs; they™re used to advertise 
the metadata for other objects or the run-
time to derive speci˜ c actions or adapt their 

behaviorŠfor instance, to instantiate an ob-

ject eagerly or lazily dependent on its current 
usage context:
class TagManager {

 ... /** assign a string value to the identi˜ er ﬁtagNameﬂ */

 public void set(string tagName, string value);

 ...}After publishing the class interface, de-
velopers discovered that more operations 
were necessary to use it effectivelyŠfor in-

stance, a method to remove a tag from the 

map. Unfortunately, modifying a released 
interface required going through a time-
intensive change-request process. Develop-

ers thus tunneled the request for the remove 

operation through an existing method to 
the class implementationŠwhich they could 
change without such ritual. In particular, 

they extended the parameter 
tagName
 of the 
set
 method with a pre˜ x indicating that a re-
move operation should be performed:
tag.set(ﬁr:ﬂ + tagName, new string() );
The implementation of the 
set
 method 
checked for the existence of the ﬁ
r:ﬂ pre˜ x 
in the 
tagName
 and removed the tag from the 
map if it was present, ignoring the second 
parameter of the call; otherwise, the method 

performed the original 
set
 operation. This 
programming trick didn™t break existing 

code and let developers add new operations 

to the class without any interface changes. 

From a programmer™s perspective, it was a 
reasonable response to avoid a complex and 
progress-blocking change request. 
Actually, however, the developers implic-
itly modi˜ ed the contract of the class and 
thus an aspect of the system™s architectureŠ
Code Matters!
Frank Buschmann and Jörg Bartholdt 
 82 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
THE PRAGMATIC ARCHITECT
although the class interface™s signature 
didn™t change. There were additional 
class responsibilities, explicit depen
-dencies to a speci˜c syntax for tag 
names, and increased complexity in the 
method™s code and in the code calling 
the method. Developmental qualities 
thus suffered, most obviously maintain
-ability, extensibility, and testability.
Code to Guide and Get Feedback
Ultimately, a system™s architecture is 
de˜ned by its code, not by its design 
models and diagrams. Bertrand Meyer, 
the creator of the Eiffel language, put it 
more vividlyŠﬁBubbles don™t crashﬂŠ
therefore, ﬁAll you need is code!ﬂ Con
-sequently, it™s the architect™s responsi
-bility to pay attention to codeŠnot just 
to avoid architectural drift and discover 
design ˚aws but also to identify coding 
aspects that impact architecture. The 
advice of the software community for 
addressing these issues is simple and di
-rect: an architect also implements.
3 While most architects generally ac
-cept this insight, the challenging ques
-tion is this: How can they balance their 
responsibilities for the entire system 
with the need to stay in touch with de
-velopment? If architects get lost in myr
-iad local code details, it becomes dif
-˜cult for them to de˜ne a sustainable 
architecture vision and drive its con
-crete design and realization. Yet, if they 
stay away from the system™s code, they 
won™t get feedback on their designs™ 
habitability, nor will they discover the 
devil in the (code) details that™s of ar
-chitectural signi˜cance!
Consequently, all of an architect™s 
coding activities must have a clear 
contribution to their main responsibil
-ityŠthe system™s architecture, and its 
suitability to meet its requirements and 
business case, its architectural whole
-ness and integrity, and its usability for 
developers. Architects shouldn™t code 
because they™re the smartest developers 
on the team, want to demonstrate their 
coding skills, or just for funŠtheir ob
-jectives for programming should be to 
guide, educate, understand, and get 
feedback.
Programming to guide and educate 
teaches developers to focus on the ar
-chitecture and design aspects whose 
realization is critical to success so that 
the architecture receives the architect™s 
prominent attention. This practice tends 
to encourage developers to invest more 
care into writing idiomatic, high-qual
-ity code. Examples from our own cod
-ing practice include the intended use of 
important interfaces and the economic 
realization of critical usage scenarios.
Programming to understand and get 
feedback helps architects make prag
-matic and sustainable design decisions 
and experience the consequences of 
their own designs. For example, a col
-league recently focused his program
-ming activities on exploring how to 
best avoid LOH (large object heap) 
fragmentation in .NET and thus de
-sign the system™s data model and data 
management functionality accordingly. 
In general, this coding practice is ex
-tremely helpful to ground an architect™s 
decisions and avoid the creation of de
-sign pearls that appear sound from a 
design perspective but are hardly usable 
in practice. 
If the architects from our previous 
story had coded to ﬁtestﬂ the usability 
of the 
TagManager
 class, they would have 
likely discovered its ˚aws and adjusted 
the interface before it was published 
for broad use. Thus, they would have 
avoided the developmental de˜ciencies 
caused by abusing an existing method 
signature for request tunneling.
If the architects had actively partici
-pated in coding, they would have likely 
discovered another issue with class 
Tag
-Manager
. With the ability to set, change, 
remove, and observe tags, it became a 
˜ne-grained communication infrastruc
-ture between business logic objects. 
As tags got stored in a central process, 
even the communication of two busi
-ness objects in the same process in
-volved two remote calls. Such usage led 
to signi˜cant performance degradation, 
jeopardizing the architecture™s quality.
Agile Coding Practices
The focus on guidance and feedback 
also suggests programming practices 
that foster leadership and active pro
-grammer assistance. Architects should 
code to support developers in doing their 
job and enable them to make sustainable 
code-level decisions for their area of re
-sponsibility. Programming on the criti
-cal path or taking explicit ownership for 
the most challenging components is in
-appropriate for this purpose: Architects 
would dominate programming rather 
than guide it or even demonstrate mis
-trust in the developers™ skills rather then 
empowering them to create economic 
code to bene˜t the system. 
Two agile programming practices, 
pair programming and test-driven de
-velopment (TDD), appear most suitable 
for leadership-oriented coding.
Pair programming lets architects 
program on all parts of the systemŠ
even on the critical pathŠwithout tak
-ing explicit ownership of the code.
3,4
 By pairing up with all developers on the 
team, they also get an overview of the 
entire code base and in-depth feedback 
on the habitability of their architecture. 
Through direct interaction with devel
-opers, they can give focused, concrete 
guidance on how to implement the ar
-chitecture. Likewise, they can discover 
and address architecture drift, de˜cien
-cies, and code-level details of architec
-tural relevance early and proactively. 
They can even improve their own cod
-ing skills when pairing with expert 
programmers.
Through programming tests, archi
-tects can guide the speci˜cation and 
realization of architectures from the 
ﬁoutside.ﬂ
5 Tests for end-to-end user 
scenarios, key quality attributes, and 
risky design and technology decisions 
stress architecture sustainability. Tests 
for component interfaces and externally 
  MARCH/APRIL 2012
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 83THE PRAGMATIC ARCHITECT
accessible APIs provide direct feedback 
on architecture usability. Pragmatic ar
-chitects use the results of such tests to 
drive their own design work. The tests 
also form a framework for developers: 
they can program directly and explic
-itly toward de˜ned architecturally rel
-evant aspects.
Agile programming practices let ar
-chitects control the time they spend on 
coding and move around to set a dedi
-cated focus on the most important as
-pects of coding for the system™s archi
-tecture. Development progress isn™t 
dependent on the architect™s constant 
presence in coding, and architects can 
balance their coding activities with all 
their other duties according to the archi
-tecture™s current needs.
Architecture doesn™t stop when 
it comes to programming. 
Designs must be codi˜ed ap
-propriately to avoid architecture drift. 
Code-level aspects like interface design 
and usage are often of architectural 
signi˜cance, requiring the architect™s 
guidance and decisions. Consequently, 
coding isn™t a complementary activity 
for architects but an integral part of 
a professional practice of their craft. 
Thus, architects should explicitly assign 
time for programming. However, they 
should be aware that programming isn™t 
an end in its own right but one of many 
activities that guide and drive the design 
and realization of sustainable architec
-tures. Then, coding isn™t a price that 
architects must pay to win developers™ 
respect but an important measure to en
-sure that they create sustainable designs 
that developers ˜nd habitable.
References
 1.
 S. Brown, ﬁSoftware Architecture for Devel
-opers,ﬂ 
Coding the Architecture
, online book; 
www.codingthearchitecture.com.
 2.
 B. Vande Ghinste, ﬁDo Architects Need To 
Code?ﬂ blog; http://blogs.msdn.com/b/
 architectsrule/archive/2010/05/07/do
 -architects-need-to-code.aspx.
 3.
 J.O. Coplien and N. Harrison, 
Organizational 
Patterns of Agile Software Development
, Prentice-Hall, 2004.
 4.
 K. Beck, 
eXtreme Programming Explained: 
Embrace Change
, Addison-Wesley, 2004
 5.
 F. Buschmann, ﬁTests: The Architect™s Best 
Friend,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 28, no. 3, 2011, 
pp. 7Œ9.
FRANK BUSCHMANN 
is a senior principal 
engineer at Siemens Corporate Technology, where 
he™s a principal architect in the System Architecture 
and Platform Department. Contact him at frank.
buschmann@siemens.com.
JÖRG BARTHOLDT 
is a senior engineer at Siemens 
Corporate Technology, where he™s a senior certi
-˜ed software architect in the System Architecture 
and Platform Department. Contact him at joerg.
bartholdt@siemens.com.
Selected CS articles and columns 
 are also available for free at 
 http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
IEEE SOFTWARE
 CALL FOR PAPERS
Bridging Software Communities
 through Social Networking











The advent of social networking sites has fundamentally 
altered how software development communities of stake
-holders communicate, collaborate, learn from, and coordi
-nate with one another. In many cases, social networking has 
eliminated boundaries and upended traditional hierarchies 
that constrain the ˚ow of information within and between 
organizations. Networking technologies have enabled teams 
of developers to work together to produce software, groups 
of customers to easily share usage information, and develop
-ers and customers to exchange knowledge directly. 
Our goal with this issue is to publish articles by re
-searchers and practitioners who recognize and support 
connected communities of stakeholders at all scales. We 
hope that practitioners will gain knowledge on how social 
networking can play a role in all aspects of the software 
product life cycleŠfrom conception and development to 
delivery, use, and reuseŠand understand the potential 
advantages and possible challenges that lie ahead.


For more information about the special issue, contact the 
guest editors:
Jan Bosch, Professor, Chalmers University 
 of Technology, Sweden, jan@janbosch.com
Margaret-Anne Storey, Professor, University 
 of Victoria, Canada, mstorey@uvic.ca
Andrew Begel, Microsoft Research, USA, 
 andrew.begel@microsoft.com
For the full call for papers: 
 http://www.computer.org/software/cfp1
For author guidelines: 
 http://www.computer.org/software/author.htm
For submission details: software@computer.org
To submit an article: 
 https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/sw-cs
