 Web 2.0, Ajax (Asynchronous Java-Script and XML), Web services, and

related technologies are complicat-

ing Web application engineering. As

application complexity increases,
so doesthe wish for a silver bullet. Alot of Web 2.0 frameworks promise to make de-

velopersÕ lives easier. But do they?
Ruby on Rails is a novel Web 2.0 framework
that attempts to combine PHPÕs simple immedi-

acy with JavaÕs architecture, purity, and quality.

ItÕs certainly one of the most promising frame-

works that have emerged for agile Web 2.0 ap-

plication development. Here, weÕll first look
briefly at underlying RoR principles and then
take a closer look at its components.RoR principlesRoR forms an environment and providesall the tools for developing business-critical,database-supported Web applications. It in-

cludes all the so-called Web 2.0 features, such

as support for Ajax. Its basic objectives, how-

ever, are simplicity, reusability, expandability,

testability, productivity, and maintainability.

Six RoR principles contribute significantly to
these objectives.MVC architectureRoR implements a model-view-controllerarchitecture. MVC clearly separates code ac-
cording to its purpose. Three subframeworks
play a significant part in this separation: Active
Record, Action View, and Action Controller.

These subframeworks appear across the middle
of the component diagram in figure 1.Convention over configurationRoR avoids configurations in their broad-est sense. The only configuration file is calleddatabase.yml; it contains the type, user name,and password for an application database. For
every project, developers can define three dif-
ferent databases: development, test, andproduction. The RoR framework firmly in-tegrates the RoR components to cooperate
even without configuration. Developers can
overwrite conventions to make special func-
tions and individual adjustments possible. 0740-7459/07/$25.00 © 2007 IEEENovember/December 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
105software technology
Editor: Christof Ebert Vector Consulting 
christof.ebert@vector-consulting.de
Ruby on Rails
Michael B−chle and Paul Kirchberg
Web applications are getting ever more complex, and many of us wonder how to master the
technology challenges of creating highly dynamic, good-looking pages without too much over-
head. Ruby on Rails is an open source framework developed to increase programmer produc-
tivity and reduce entry barriers to programming Web applications. In this issueÕs column,

Michael B−chle and Paul Kirchberg look into RoR and contrast it with other frameworks.I look forward to hearing from both readers and prospective column authors, about this col-umn and the technologies you want to know more about. ÑChristof Ebert DonÕt Repeat Yourself
The DRY principle requires every
piece of system knowledge to have a
unique, definite, and relevant represen-
tation. This approach means developers
repeat themselves seldom or never. In

this context, a piece of knowledge can
be data or metadata, logic, functional-
ity, or an algorithm. As an environ-

ment, RoR is designed to make singular
declarations and reuse as easy as possi-
ble. The DRY principle is striking, for
example, in Active Record, which de-termines attributes and class values ex-
clusively in the database and not in the
program code.ScaffoldingThe database scheme and the scaf-foldconsole command let RoR createa basic skeleton of controllers and view
templates that have create-retrieve-
update-delete (CRUD) functionality. In

many programming situations, RoRalso offers generators that save a lot oftime for recurring elements, such as a
login form. The automatic creation of project
scaffolding saves time and lets the de-
veloper immediately start work on the
applicationÕs core functionality.
Immediate feedbackDevelopers can get an up-to-date sta-
tus of their program by reloading it in
the browser. No additional time is in-

volved in deploying the program. RoR
doesnÕt require projects to compile and

execute first.RubyRoR is based on the dynamicallytyped, object-oriented Ruby program-
ming language. Yukihiro Matsumoto in-

troduced this language in 1995. Immedi-
ately when the browser calls up Ruby
code, the Web serverÕs Ruby interpreter

processes it. In comparatively little code,
developers can cover a large amount of
functionality by combining loops and ar-
rays in blocks. Ruby code is easy to read
and based heavily on the languages Perl,
Python, Smalltalk, and Lisp.RoR framework componentsFigure 1 shows the most important
RoR framework components. Figure 2
presents a programming example in
Ruby, the inevitable ÒHello WorldÓ

program.Active RecordThe Active Record subframework es-tablishes the connection between the do-
main objects and the database. It trans-
forms the CRUD functions that come
from the Action Controller into SQL
commands, sends the requests to the
database, and returns the received results
to the Action Controller. Active Record

also validates whether a user is entitled
to access or change a specific record. The subframework follows the Ob-ject/Relational Mapping pattern. In
ORM, classes are directly related to
database tables. The records represent
class objects; the table columns represent
the attributes. Usually, ORM requires a

comprehensive configuration via XML.
The Active Record conventions enable106IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGY
DeliverView
Action ViewAction Web Services
Action MailerRequestDeliverDeliverDelegateSendWeb server
ActionControllerSendRedirectDispatcherActiveRecordCRUDRequestDataDataLoadDatabaseFigure 1. Ruby on Rails framework components. The Active Record, ActionView, and Action Controller subframeworks establish a fundamental model-

view-controller architecture.Figure 2. The ÒHello WorldÓ program in Ruby. File A is the Ruby code listing;

File B is the HTML template for hello_controller.rb.
FFi
il
le
e 
 A
A:
: 
 .
..
./
/a
ap
pp
p/
/c
co
on
nt
tr
ro
ol
ll
le
er
rs
s/
/h
he
el
ll
lo
o_
_c
co
on
nt
tr
ro
ol
ll
le
er
r.
.r
rb
bccl
la
as
ss
sHelloController < ApplicationControllerdde
ef
findex@@m
me
es
ss
sa
ag
ge
e= “Hello World!”een
nd
deen
nd
dFFi
il
le
e 
 B
B:
: 
 .
..
./
/v
vi
ie
ew
ws
s/
/h
he
el
ll
loo/
/i
in
nd
de
ex
x.
.r
rh
ht
tm
ml
l<html><body><%=@mme
es
ss
sa
ag
ge
e%></body></html> November/December 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
107SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGY
RoR to avoid this requirement. Via 
ActiveRecord::Base, RoR activatestables when theyÕre called in the database
and creates the required class automati-

cally. The Òconvention over configura-

tionÓ principle bypasses the configura-
tion effort usually required to combine

data and variables. Active Record classes

thus receive their attributes directly from
the database table definition.To represent inheritance in a rela-
tional database, RoR uses an additional
pattern, Single Table Inheritance. RoR

associations are defined by a foreign
key in the database and a declaration of
the corresponding table name (in plural
by convention, but the developer can
change this) in Active Record. A collec-
tion of validation methods lets RoR au-
tomatically check entered data in the
HTML form regarding its existence or
specific format. If the validation fails,
RoR creates an error message and dis-
plays it in the HTML form (we describe
this further in ÒAction ViewÓ).
Action ControllerThe Action Controller is the centralsteering unit. It receives requests and

returns a view to the client. Within this

component, the developer defines ac-tionsthat determine how the controllerwill react to specific HTTP requests.

The controller receives a request from
a URL, processes it as an action or ob-
ject and sends the right view back to
the browser. RoR uses Pretty URLs,

which the Apache Web server, for exam-

ple, makes possible through the mod_
rewrite function.
Additionally, the Action Controller
can run an action through a before-filter

prior to performing itandthrough an

after-filter upon completion. The be-

fore-filter can log specific actions, such
as forwarding to a login page. The after-

filter is especially useful in handling op-

tions, such as checking whether the user
wants an encoded transfer method for

the serverÕs response.
Action Controller also establishesthe connection to Active Record and
supplies data from the database to Ac-
tion View, Web Services, and Mailer.

Additional functions include, for ex-
ample, session handling.Action ViewAction View presents data. Typically,
RoR represents data in the HTML for-

mat. In any case, RoR defines templates

to separate the presentation layer from

the rest of the application. RoR has var-
ious template forms. The most impor-
tant are R
HTMLand RXML.RHTMLtemplates mix Ruby codewith HTML; during runtime, process-
ing the Ruby code fills the templates

with content. In this case, the R
HTMLtemplate encloses the Ruby code in a
tag of the form 
<%...%>. To create XML files, RoR uses its
own builder library. The builder trans-

fers Ruby commands into XML tags.
RoR makes preimplemented helper

methods available. These methods are
especially useful for format conver-
sions, format boxes, error messages,
and site management. Action Web Services
Through Action Web Services,
RoR supports XML-RPC-based and
SOAP-based Web services, thus facili-

tating the publishing of functionality
and the inclusion of external services.
Active Controller supports the lighter-

weight REST (
Representational StateTransfer)approach.
RoR also supports Ajax frame-works such as Prototype and script.
aculo.us, which makes it easier for de-
velopers to use Ajax to design interac-
tive, user-friendly RoR applications.
Alternative Web frameworks 
There are many alternative Web 2.0
frameworks. The four we introduce here
are among the most popular.
Apache StrutsThis Java-based Web framework is a
classic representative of the MVC archi-
tecture. Struts focuses on the interaction
between the controller and view. The

controller component is a Java servlet
that defines process control in a config-

urable XML file. JavaBeans provides ac-
cess to the modelÕs data, and JavaServer

pages represent the view component. For more information, see http://
struts.apache.org.Tapestry
In contrast to the action-drivenStruts, Tapestry follows an event-

oriented approach that also lets devel-
opers implement Web applications ac-

cording to MVC pattern. Because the
Tapestry approach is event-oriented, it

corresponds more to the implementa-
tion of user interfaces with Swing or

the Abstract Window ToolkitÑthat is,

it strongly abstracts from the actual

technology of the Web.
For more information, see http://
tapestry.apache.org.
CocoonAs an XML publishing framework,Cocoon follows a completely different
approach. It focuses on representing
data that either already exists in XML
format or will be stored in XML for-

mat. Cocoon sets up a flexible presen-
tation layer on this XML database to
support separation between presenta-
tion and content. It bases document
publishing on XSLT (Extensible Style

Sheet Language Transformation).
For more information, see http://
cocoon.apache.org.ASP.NET
Comparable to Java 2 EnterpriseEdition, MicrosoftÕs .NET framework

comprises an application platform that
also supports distributed server-based

applications. ASP.NET is the central

component for Web development. It lets

developers choose their programmingIn Ruby on Rails, Active Record classes receive theirattributes directly from the database 
table definition. 108IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGY
language from all available .NET lan-
guages. One advantage of the ASP.NET

approach is the combination of client-
and server-based programming. So, for

example, developers can use the same
script languages for both and can deter-
mine the processing place via an option.For more information, see www.
asp.net.We used RoR to develop an alumni
system (http://ali.ba-ravensburg.de

and http://rubyforge.org/projects/alumnionrails) on a Solaris operatingsystem with a MySQL database man-
agement system and Apache server. RoR

proved a stable, sophisticated, state-of-
the-art framework for agile Web engi-

neering. Although weÕve briefly dis-
cussed only its main components here,
RoR has other features to support effi-
cient Web engineering, such as test sup-

port. The ÒRuby on Rails ResourcesÓ
sidebar has more information.RoR embodies the basic principles ofthe Agile Manifesto (http://agilemani-
festo.org). It abstains from heavy toolsand focuses instead on Òindividuals and
their interactions.Ó The principles of
scaffolding and immediate feedback
provide a first operable version early in
the development cycle. The system is de-

veloped incrementally in small steps.

The scaffolding gives developers an op-
erable version of the current system at

all times. This helps developers work ef-

ficiently in cooperation with the cus-
tomer, discuss all topics directly in rela-

tion to the running system, and

implement changes much faster. How-

ever, as in all Web frameworks, good

software is still the work of good pro-

fessional developers. Like all frame-
works, RoR is no Òsilver bullet.Ó
Michael B−chleis a professor of business informationsystems at the University of Cooperative Education, Ravensburg,
Germany. Contact him at baechle@ba-ravensburg.de.
Paul Kirchberg
is a professor of business informationsystems at the University of Cooperative Education, Ravensburg,
Germany. Contact him at kirchberg@ba-ravensburg.de.
Ruby on Rails ResourcesProbably the standard book for Ruby on Rails is Agile Web Development
with Railsby Dave Thomas and David Heinemeier Hansson (2nd ed., Prag-
matic Bookshelf, 2007).For a brief overview of RoR and what Java can learn from it, see Bruce
TateÕs ÒCrossing Borders: WhatÕs the Secret Sauce in Ruby on Rails?Ó 2006;

www-128.ibm.com/developerworks/java/library/j-cb05096.html.
Aaron Rustad compares two frameworks in ÒRuby on Rails and J2EE: IsThere Room for Both?Ó 2006; www-128.ibm.com/developerworks/web/

library/wa-rubyonrails.
The official RoR site is www.rubyonrails.org. For a list of Ruby projects,
see http://rubyforge.org.