 24IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/07/$20.00 © 2007 IEEESoftware process assessment remains the bestway for an organization to begin an SPI program.
Assessments can highlight strengths and weak-
nesses in an organizationÕs processes and thereby

focus the SPI effort. However, to deal with re-

source limitations, small software companies need
short, light assessments. Furthermore, because
SSCs are using agile methods widely, these agile

approaches must be incorporated into any poten-
tial process assessment method.The Adept assessment method weÕve createdtakes into account the business realities facing
SSCs. Adept combines the CMMI Class C ap-

praisal guidelines3and an adapted Agility/Disci-
pline Assessment approach2,4in a unified model.While weÕve generated promising results using

each approach separately, our synthesis of these

practices offers opportunities for real SPI gains in

SSCs.Process improvement in small Irish software companiesThe Irish software industry is a key compo-nent of the national economy. According to

Enterprise Ireland, a development agency for
indigenous companies, at the end of 2004
more than 750 Irish-owned software busi-
nesses employed almost 12,000 people.5How-ever, the vast majority of these indigenous

Irish software organizations are microfirms,
with only 1.9 percent employing more than

100 people and more than 60 percent employ-
ing 10 or fewer.
6In a similar survey of 56 Irish software de-velopment organizations, the Centre for Soft-
ware Process Technologies (CSPT) found that

71 percent of the surveyed companies were in-
digenous, with most employing fewer than 20
people.7focusAdept: A UnifiedAssessment Method for
Small Software CompaniesLimited in scale and resources, small software companies find softwareprocess improvement a major challenge. Early-stage software compa-
nies focus on time to market, innovation, and creativity1and thus of-ten ignore SPI models such as CMM and CMMI, whose primary ini-tial emphasis is on achieving stability and predictability.
2So, to realize theirbusiness goals, small companies are increasingly attracted to agile methods,

which promise shorter development schedules and greater delivery flexibility.
SE challenges in small companiesFergal Mc Caffery, 
LeroÑthe Irish Software Engineering Research Centre
Philip S. Taylor, 
QueenÕs University Belfast
Gerry Coleman, 
Dundalk Institute of Technology
Adept combines twoprocess assessment
methods, one plan-
based and one
agile-based, without
dictating which one
to use. This makes
the lightweight
approach attractive
for small software
companies. Demand for lighter assessment methodsDuring the late 1990s, the SPIRE(SoftwareProcess Improvement in Regions of Europe)

program8reported positive experiences in ap-
plying the SPICE(Software Process Improvementand Capability Determination) model (www.

sqi.gu.edu.au/spice) in Irish SSCs. These com-
panies liked the ability to choose process areas

that directly related to their business goals.
However, the CSPT survey
7found that 46
percent of respondents believed formal assess-

ment methods were too cumbersome and ex-

pensive and that a less costly approach, such as
Class C CMMI appraisal methods, was prefer-
able.9In addition, recent research indicates that
indigenous Irish software companies still avoid
formal process assessment because of the high

cost and resources involved.10Plan-driven process assessmentPlan-driven process assessment methodsgenerally draw on either the ISO/IEC 15504

reference model11or the CMMI12model. Ananalysis by Alessandra Anacleto and her col-
leagues13of lightweight methods for SSCs pro-
duced the following criteria for plan-driven as-

sessment methods:low cost,detailed description of the assessment
process,guidance for process selection,detailed definition of the assessment model,support for identifying risks and improve-

ment suggestions,support for high-level process modeling,conformity with ISO/IEC 15504,
no specific software engineering knowledge
required from company representatives,
tool support, andpublic availability.
The Express Process Appraisal methodThe Express Process Appraisal9method isan example of an Appraisal Requirements for
CMMI (ARC) Class CÐcompliant method that

is suited to organizations with little SPI experi-

ence. Researchers have used EPA to assess six

process areas in six software development or-

ganizations.9All the companies agreed, prior tobeginning the assessments, that the following

six process areas were applicable: 
Project Monitoring and Control,Project Planning,Requirements Management,Configuration Management,Process and Product Quality Assurance, andMeasurement and Analysis.The EPA method involved two assessment
team members interviewing staff from the as-
sessed companies (a separate interview for each
process area). Normally, one hour was suffi-

cient to cover each area, and all the companies

appreciated that they could complete the on-
site assessment in one day. During each inter-

view session, one assessor led the questioning

while the other recorded notes. Subsequently,

both assessors reviewed their notes and dis-

cussed their findings.
The EPA method relies on information ob-
tained from interviewing company personnel
and performing limited cross-referencing
checks. Therefore, itÕs important that the ap-

propriate personnel are interviewed and that

they answer the interview questions truthfully

so that the findings will accurately reflect the

companyÕs strengths and weaknesses in each

appraised process area. The findings report

contains a list of recommendations that each

company must prioritize into an action plan
based on its goals and aspirations.The EPA is attractive and cost-effective to
small organizations because it requires only six
person-days of internal staff time (and six per-

son-days of external appraiser time). This fac-

tor has proved important to initiating SPI in
small organizations. The method contributed to
the Diagnosing stage in the I
DEAL(Initiating, Di-agnosing, Establishing, Acting, and Learning)
model.14This diagnosis provides an awarenessof the issues that require resolution in order for
the organization to improve. The organization

can then prioritize these issues on the basis of

its business goals.Results using EPA
Figure 1 summarizes the results of the sixcompaniesÕ EPA assessments in the form of a

score between 0 and 100 percent for five

process areas.15The Measurement and Analysisprocess area wasnÕt included in this chart be-

cause most of the companies couldnÕt answer

questions relating to it.
Each bar in the chart measures on averagehow well the six companies met that process
January/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
25More than 60 percent of indigenousIrish software
firms employ 10 or fewerpeople. areaÕs specific goals. A score of 0 percent would
mean that none of the companies supported that
process areaÕs specific goals at all, whereas a

score of 100 percent would mean that all the
companies fully supported that process areaÕs

goals. Researchers in the CSPT obtained the
scores by rating the answers to questions on
each specific practice as Ònot practicedÓ (value 0),
Òpartially practicedÓ (0.33), Òlargely practicedÓ
(0.67), and Òfully practicedÓ (1.0). They as-
sessed each goal by asking one to five questions
related to the specific practices within that goal.
They then averaged each companyÕs scores to

give a single score for each process areaÕs specific

goals.This study ranked the six process areasfrom the strongest CMMI compliance to the

weakest as follows:Project Monitoring and Control (PMC),
Project Planning (PP),Configuration Management (CM),Requirements Management (REQM),Process and Product Quality Assurance
(PPQA), andMeasurement and Analysis (M&A).The SEI reports the same ranking of process ar-
eas in terms of support (how well a companyÕs

practices support a goal) from its SCAMPIap-praisals.16The process-area profiles for the 18organizations appraised at Maturity Level 1 in-
dicate a very similar ranking in these six process
areas (from highest to lowest): PMC; PP; REQM;
CM; M&A, and PPQA. This shows that the
trends the CSPT observed in their small set of

company assessments resemble those reported
from S
CAMPIappraisals.15Agile methods and process assessmentAgile methods are empirical processes re-quiring frequent inspection and adaptive re-
sponse. TheyÕre not easily assessed using
ISO/IEC 15504 and CMMI, although we can
map some methods such as Scrum and XP to
ISO 900117and CMMI Levels 2 and 3.18JeffSutherland19claims that the parallel pipeliningof Scrum sprints might enable CMMI Level 4
or 5 compliance. This suggests that itÕs possible

to apply the lightweight process assessment
methods we mentioned earlier in this article to

organizations using an agile approach.
The Adapted Agility/Discipline methodOur aim was to have an efficient assessment,considering the limited time and resources avail-
able to SSCs, and to engage all team members.
To achieve this, we kept each section of the as-

sessment just detailed enough to be useful. AAD
is based on Barry Boehm and Richard TurnerÕs

Agility/Discipline Assessment method.2Theysummarized the strengths and weaknesses of the
agile and plan-driven methods using five critical
factors: Personnel Ability, Criticality of Soft-

ware, Team Size, Organizational Culture, and

Requirements Churn per Month. On the basis
of our initial experimentation, we also included
a Customer Involvement factor. Many organiza-

tions felt that the culture factor wasnÕt helpful,

so we replaced it with Team Distribution, which

is a major challenge for SSCs.Here, we report results from two contrast-ing companies. The first organization (OrgA)
develops a range of Internet-based software so-
lutions and employs five software developers.
The second organization (OrgB) develops cus-
tomer relationship management solutions, em-
ploys 20 developers, and is ISO 9001 accred-
ited. OrgA wasnÕt using any clear, purposeful

process but wanted to begin SPI; OrgB wanted
to investigate an agile approach.All team members in OrgA believed that theprimary risk they face is uninvolved off-site cus-
tomers. The goal was to turn their customers

into off-site agile believers (which weÕll call Off-
AB). Off-AB customers work well with Inter-
net-based products because of the straight-
26IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
10090
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
100Performance score (percent)ProjectMonitoringand ControlProcessPlanningConfigurationManagementRequirementsManagementProcess andProduct QualityAssuranceProcess area 6359555432Figure 1. Assessmentresults using the 
Express Process 
Appraisal method.  forward nature of accessing working software.OrgA has experienced a common occurrencefor SSCs: a customer desiring new functionality
at product handover. In this circumstance, OrgA

had to do further product development within
the original budget. The subsequent work led to
unplanned, badly paced software development
and schedule delay. The contractual arrange-

ment meant that OrgA received delayed pay-
ment. Such scenarios leave SSCs vulnerable. The
item OrgA rated most risky using an agile ap-
proach was personnel turnover. The practices

implemented in OrgA are discussed elsewhere.
4Results using the AADFigure 2a shows the risk factors plotted for
OrgB covering nine projects and 19 employees.

The Personnel and Customer Involvement fac-
tors show the greatest variation, as shown by the

gold ovals. Even though these factors are rated

subjectively, theyÕre central to an organizationÕs

success. The other factors display greater unifor-

mity and can initially be left unaddressed by

OrgB while it addresses Personnel and Customer

Involvement factors.When looking at the critical factors team byteam, we noted interesting differences. Figure 2b
shows that on one specific project, consisting of
a team of three people, we found differences re-
garding Personnel and Customer Involvement.
Analyzing these variations is important because
it can uncover genuine misconceptions affecting
team performance. Often, with greater unanim-
ity, teams can improve their performance.
When we collate the risk ratings, we can get
a general view of the environmental, agile, and

plan-driven risks in OrgB, as figure 3a shows.
All the risk categories appear to be similar, with

only a slight downward move from agile to
plan-driven risks. The red line shows that only

one person rated the agile risks as greater than
the plan-driven risks. In OrgBÕs case, this sug-

gests suitability for both agile and plan-driven
approaches. We can further analyze each risk

category team by team, as figure 3b shows.
We aim to keep both the agile overview and
project postmortem meetings for team members
to one hour each. At these meetings, we describe
the criticality factors and risk ratings and then
give each team member a short, six-page form
to read and complete where appropriate:Page 1.Explanation of assessment parts and
applicable project tablePage 2.Explanation of critical-factor categoriesPage 3.Example diagram and interpretation

Page 4.Blank 
diagram for team members to
plot risk factors, and space for any clarifying
commentsPage 5. Table of risk ratings

Page 6. Space for further commentsApproximately 50 people have filled out theJanuary/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
27ColocatedColocatedCriticalityCriticality(loss owing to(loss owing todefects™ impact)defects™ impact)RequirementsRequirementschurn (% reqschurn (% reqschange perchange permonth)month)ColocatedColocated20202525303033ComfortComfort505030301010On-siteOn-siteagileagilebelieverbelieverOff-siteOff-site00PersonnelCustomer involvementMany livesSingle lifeEssential fundsComfortDiscretionary funds
1510Not seated togetherMore than1 organizationTeam
distributionSize (no. ofpersonnel)Time zones
and cultureDifferent floorsor buildings300100301040302010ColocatedOn-siteagilebelieverOff-siteagile
believerOff-siteagile skepticOff-siteuninvolvedOff-siteuninvolved05030333505030301010On-siteOn-siteagileagilebelieverbelieverOff-siteOff-sitePersonnelCustomer involvementPercent atLevels 2 and 3Percent atLevel 1BPercent atLevels 2 and 3Percent atLevel 1BMany livesSingle lifeEssential fundsComfortDiscretionary funds
1510Not seated togetherTeam
distributionSize(no. of personnel)Time zones
and cultureDifferent floorsor buildings30010030104030201015202530ColocatedOn-siteagilebelieverOn-siteagile skepticOff-siteagile
believerOff-siteagile skeptic035
5030335351535202530RequirementsRequirementschurn (% reqschurn (% reqschange perchange permonth)month)Requirementschurn (% reqschange permonth)Criticality(loss due todefects™impact)Requirementschurn (% reqschange permonth)CriticalityCriticality(loss owing to(loss owing todefects™ impact)defects™ impact)Criticality(loss due todefects™impact)Plan drivenPlan drivenAgileAgilePlan drivenAgilePlan drivenPlan drivenAgileAgileAgilePlan drivenOn-siteagile skepticMore than1 organization(a)(b)Figure 2. OrgBÕs critical
factors: (a) individual 
results and (b) team 
results. The gold ovals
indicate that OrgB had

the greatest variation 
in the Personnel and 
Customer Involvement
factors. assessment form, taking on average around 45minutes to complete it.After the team has finished, we collate the re-sults and produce a visual presentation for the
whole organization, lasting no longer than two
hours. At this stage, the organization is free to
end its involvement with us. However, if the or-

ganization chooses to continue, we develop a
risk mitigation strategy. This stage isnÕt time-

boxed, because each strategy is unique to the or-
ganization concerned.The AAD assessment provides a minimallyintrusive yet visually stimulating way to get all

staff members thinking about SPI. ItÕs suited to

SPI initiatives in three organizational situations:

those not using any clear process, those wanting

to try an agile approach, and those wanting to

improve their process regardless of SPI model.When we examine the individual critical factors,the similarities and differences within the same
team become evident. The teams with the biggest
differences often struggle to perform at an opti-
mum level. When we present the results visually,

the team members often agree with our findings
and subsequently resolve their differences.Unifying the EPA 
and AAD approaches Given the successes of EPA and AAD, com-
panies might have to choose which method to
adopt. WeÕve resolved this for our work using

a new assessment method called Adept.BackgroundAdept is based on the EPA methodÕs struc-
ture but differs in several ways. Itincludes AAD;doesnÕt highlight either CMMI or ISO/IEC

15504, focusing on improvement rather
than certification;is based on relevant process areas from
CMMI and includes input from ISO/IEC
15504;enables the development of an SPI path
based on a companyÕs business goals; and
involves revisiting the companyÕs SPI pro-

gram after three months.
Adept fulfills most of the criteria that Anacletoand her colleagues13outlined; we considered it un-ecessary to support high-level process modeling,
or to make it publicly available. Adept also inte-
grates the ARC 1.1 requirements for a CMMI
Class C method. We developed questions from

both the CMMI and ISO/IEC 15504 covering 12
process areas, and we ask additional, nonscripted
questions as an interview proceeds. Adept also re-
lies on Boehm and TurnerÕs risk items and critical

factors, which now include Customer Involve-
ment and Team Distribution. The analysis of re-

sults contains graphs representing individual
teams and all teams across the organization.A key decision in developing Adept was toidentify the process areas most applicable to the
Irish SSCs; the ones we included are based on
previous research results.9,15We chose six of the
seven process areas associated with CMMI Ma-
turity Level 2 (REQM, CM, PP, PMC, M&A,

and PPQA) because they constitute the engi-
neering management basis of an organization
and the foundation upon which an efficient soft-28IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Environmental risksTechnology uncertainties
Plan-drivenrisksComplex systemof systems12345AgilerisksManystakeholders5432112345123456789101112131415
123456789
101415161718
19202019181716151413
121110
9876543
21111213(b)(a)Figure 3. Visualizing
OrgB risk ratings: 

(a) individual results
and (b) team results.
The colored triangles 
in 3b represent the
three people who 
plotted the risks. ware company is based. We omitted the seventh
area, Supplier Agreement Management, because
previous research indicated it wouldnÕt benefit

small Irish software companies as much as the
other areas.9Furthermore, omitting one processarea ensures that companies canÕt claim Level 2

compliance even if no issues or weaknesses are
discovered in the process areas appraised.After investigating the CMMI Level 3 processareas, we considered six of the 14 applicable:
Risk Management, Technical Solution, Verifica-

tion, Validation, Requirements Development,

and Product Integration. So, we included an as-

sessment component in Adept for each of these.
The process areas listed at CMMI Levels 4 and 5

would be of less benefit to companies that have
little SPI experience. As a result, Adept enables
assessment just in the 12 selected CMMI Levels
2 and 3 process areas.Four of the areasÑRequirements Manage-ment, Configuration Management, Project Plan-
ning, and Project Monitoring and ControlÑare

mandatory because, based on EPA assessment

results and SEI empirical data,16they are funda-mental to any software companyÕs success. We

also chose these mandatory process areas on the
basis of three factorsÕ overlap: those considered
to be the foundation process areas of the CMMI
model, those chosen in CSPT research to be most
applicable to small companies,15and those sup-ported by other previous research.
9,10To reduce the cost and time associated with
the assessment, we restrict on-site interviewing to
one day. We also limit Adept to six process areas

because this is the maximum that can be covered
reasonably in one day.
9So, in addition to beingassessed in the four mandatory areas, companies
can choose two more. On the basis of previous
research into process areasÕ applicability to
SSCs,9we advise companies against selectingM&A or PPQA unless these are directly linked

to their business goals.Carrying out an Adept assessment
Two assessors can perform an Adept as-
sessment. Figure 4 illustrates an assessmentÕs

eight stages:Stage 1: Develop assessment schedule andreceive site briefing. The assessment teamand the software company hold a prelimi-
nary meeting. All staff members receive the
AAD forms for completion and incorpora-
tion into Stage 5.Stage 2: Conduct overview briefing. Thelead assessor gives an overview of Adept for
the companyÕs members who will be in-

volved in subsequent stages.Stage 3: Analyze software documentation.The assessment team provides a brief in-
sight into project documentation.Stage 4: Conduct process-area interviews.The assessors interview key staff membersacross the six chosen process areas.Stage 5: Generate assessment results andcreate a report. The assessors produce afindings report by reviewing the data ob-
tained for each process area and from the
AAD assessment. This report contains a set
of strengths, issues, and suggested actions

for each process area evaluated.Stage 6: Deliver the findings report. The as-sessors present the report to the staff who

participated in the interviews.Stage 7: Develop an SPI path with the com-pany. The assessors collaborate with staff to
develop an SPI roadmap that focuses on the
companyÕs business goals.
Stage 8: Review the SPI path and produce afinal report. The assessors revisit the com-January/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
29On-site1. Develop assessment schedule and receive site briefing2 hours × 2 assessorsOn-site3. Analyze key documents3 hours × 2 assessors5. Generate assessmentresults andfinal report10 hours × 2 assessors2 hours × 2 assessors3 elapsed days (typically)5 elapsed days (typically)3 elapsed months (typically)2. Conduct overview briefing
8 hours × 2 assessors4. Conduct PA interviews
1 hour × 2 assessors6. Deliver final report4 hours × 2 assessors7. Develop SPI path withcompany3 + 2 hours × 2 assessors8. Reassess SPI path andproduce progress report Criticalfactors andrisk itemsFigure 4. The Adept assessment processÕs
eight stages. pany approximately three months after stage7 is completed and review progress against
the roadmap. This stageÕs outcome is an up-

dated SPI path and a final report detailing the
progress that has been accomplished along
with additional recommendations.Overall, Adept requires approximately 68person-hours of assessor time and 48 person-
hours of the appraised organizationÕs time.

Ideally, Stages 1 through 7 are completed over

two weeks, with Stage 8 happening approxi-
mately three months later.
The Irish software industry needs to ed-
ucate its managers in an SPI and qual-
ity agenda. AdeptÕs incorporation of
EPA and AAD helps in several ways. First, mar-

keting EPA and AAD has raised awareness of

SPI. Also, the assessments we performed raised

the education level of the assessed organiza-
tionsÕ employees. Additionally, the results pro-

vided a roadmap for SPI in the assessed organi-
zations, with some now following a clear SPI
path.Recognizing the need to give companies thewidest impartial choice of SPI options, Adept
enables a focused and tailored improvement
path based on a companyÕs operational con-

text and business goals. This approach doesnÕt

mandate a specific SPI model in advance of
company assessment; any SPI initiative is ex-
clusively tailored to the particular company.

Crucially, Adept aims to create a sustainable

SPI culture in SSCs and bring ongoing and
lasting benefit to the companies concerned.WeÕve also designed Adept to support the
objectives of Enterprise Ireland and Momen-

tum (the Northern Ireland Federation for In-
formation and Communication Technology).

These organizations ask that assessment mod-
els for small companies recognize thatimprovement is more important than cer-
tification,the time to prepare and perform the as-
sessment should be minimal, andthe assessment method should let compa-
nies select process areas that are most rel-

evant to their business goals.Tying in with the demands of Enterprise
Ireland and Momentum means that Adepthelps these agencies meet their goals. The twoagencies are developing strategies and pro-
grams, and making funding support available,
to encourage SSCs to engage in SPI. WeÕre dis-

cussing with EI and Momentum how to best

incorporate Adept within these efforts. WeÕre

also about to embark on a pilot scheme that
will lead to several Adept assessments in Irish
SSCs in the near future. We believe Adept will

be applicable internationally but expect it to
need refinements following the pilot and prior
to a wider rollout.References1.S.M. Sutton Jr., ÒThe Role of Process in a Software
Start-up,Ó IEEE Software, vol. 17, no. 4, 2000, pp.33Ð39.2.B. Boehm and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and Disci-pline: A Guide for the Perplexed,
Addison-Wesley,
2004.3.CMMI Product Team, 
Appraisal Requirements forCMMI, Version 1.1 (ARC, V1.1)
, tech. report CMU/SEI-2001-TR-034, Software Eng. Inst., 2001; www.sei.

cmu.edu/pub/documents/01.reports/pdf/01tr034.pdf.4.P.S. Taylor et al., ÒApplying an Agility/Discipline As-
sessment for a Small Software Organisation,ÓProduct-Focused Software Process Improvement, 7th IntÕl Conf.
PROFES2006ierimaa,
eds., Springer, 2006, pp. 290Ð204.
5.ÒSoftware Industry Statistics for 1991Ð2005,Ó 
Enter-prise Ireland, Aug. 2006; www.nsd.ie/htm/ssii/stat.htm.
6.M. Crone, ÒThe Irish Indigenous Software Industry: Ex-
plaining the Development of a Knowledge-Intensive In-
dustry Cluster in a Less Favoured Region,Ó Ersa 2002Dortmund:42nd Congress European Regional Science

Assoc., Economic Research Inst. Northern Ireland, 2006;www.erini.ac.uk/publications/PDF/NiercConf2.pdf.
7.F. Mc Caffery et al., ÒNorthern Ireland Software Indus-
try Survey,Ó 
Proc. 4th IntÕl SPICEConf. Process Assess-ment and Improvement, Critical Software CA & theSpice User Group, 2004, pp. 159Ð161.8.M. Sanders, ed., 
The SPIREHandbook: Better, Faster,
Cheaper Software Development in Small Organisations
,Centre for Software Eng., 1998.9.F. Mc Caffery, D. McFall, and F.G. Wilkie, ÒImproving
the Express Process Appraisal Method,Ó Product-Focused Software Process Improvement: 6th IntÕl Conf.
PROFES2005, LNCS 3547, F. Bomarius and S. Komi-
Sirvio, eds., Springer, 2005, pp. 286Ð298.
10.G. Coleman, ÒAn Empirical Study of Software Process
in Practice,Ó Proc. 38th Ann. Hawaiian IntÕl Conf. Sys-tem Sciences(HICSS38), Track 9, IEEE CS Press, 2005,
p. 315c.
11.Std. ISO/IEC 15504-3:2004ÑInformation Technol-
ogyÑProcess AssessmentÑPart 3: Guidance on Per-
forming an Assessment, IntÕl Organization for Stan-dardization, 2004.12.M.B. Chrissis, M. Konrad, and S. Shrum, 
CMMI: Guide-lines for Process Integration and Product Improvement,Addison-Wesley, 2003.
13.A. Anacleto et al., ÒExperiences Gained from Applying
ISO/IEC 15504 to Small Software Companies in Bra-
zil,Ó Proc. 4th IntÕl SPICEConf. Process Assessment andImprovement, Critical Software CA & the Spice UserGroup, 2004, pp. 33Ð37.30IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
We limit Adeptto six processareas becausethis is the
maximum that can bereasonablycovered in one day.
 14.TheI
DEALModel, tech. report, Software Eng. Inst., 2006;www.sei.cmu.edu/ideal/ideal.html.
15.F.G. Wilkie, D. McFall, and F. Mc Caffery, ÒAn Evalua-
tion of CMMI Process Areas for Small to Medium Sized
Software Development Organisations,Ó Software Process:Improvement and Practice,vol. 10, no. 2, 2005, pp. 189Ð201.16.Process Maturity Profile: CMMI V1.1 SCAMPIV1.1 ClassA Appraisal Results 2004 Mid-Year Update,
tech. report,Software Eng. Inst., 2004; www.sei.cmu.edu/appraisal-

program/profile/pdf/CMMI/2004augCMMI.pdf.17.G. Wright, ÒAchieving ISO 9001 Certification for an
XP Company,Ó 
XP/Agile Universe 2003, LNCS 2753,F. Maurer and D. Wells, eds., Springer, 2003, pp.

43Ð50.18.M.C. Paulk, ÒAgile Methodologies and Process Disci-
pline,Ó CrossTalk: J. Defense Software Eng.,
vol. 15,no. 10, 2002, pp. 15Ð18.19.J. Sutherland, ÒFuture of Scrum: Parallel Pipelining of
Sprints in Complex Projects,Ó Agile 2005, IEEE CSPress, 2005, pp. 90Ð102.AcknowledgmentsThis research is supported by the Science Founda-tion Ireland project Global Software Development for

Small to Medium-Sized Enterprises (GSD for SMEs)
as part of LeroÑthe Irish Software Engineering Re-
search Centre and the EU Program for Peace and Rec-

onciliation, administered by Cooperation Ireland.January/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
31About the AuthorsFergal Mc Caffery
is a senior research fellow at the University of Limerick in the GlobalSoftware Development for Small to Medium-Sized Enterprises project, which is affiliated with
LeroÑthe Irish Software Engineering Research Centre (www.lero.ie). His research focuses on

software process improvement models and methods. He received his PhD in intelligent adaptive
multimodal interfaces from the University of Ulster. Contact him at the Regional Development

Centre, Dundalk Inst. of Technology, Dundalk, Co. Louth, Ireland; fergal.mccaffery@lero.ie.
Philip S. Tayloris a research fellow in QueenÕs University Belfast. His research focuses
on using agile methods in small software companies and for global software development. He
received his PhD in software engineering from the University of Ulster. Contact him at the

School of Computer Science, QueenÕs Univ. Belfast, Belfast, BT7 1NN, Northern Ireland, UK;

p.taylor@qub.ac.uk.Gerry Coleman
is a member of the Department of Computing and Mathematics at Dun-dalk Institute of Technology. His research focuses on software process improvement in small

software companies. He received his PhD in software engineering from Dublin City University.

Contact him at the Dept. of Computing and Mathematics, Dundalk Inst. of Technology, Dun-

dalk, Co. Louth, Ireland; gerry.coleman@dkit.ie.
