 focus 2
60
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
requirements and agility
Agile Requirements 
Engineering Practices:
 An Empirical Study
Lan Cao, 
Old Dominion University
Balasubramaniam Ramesh, 
Georgia State University
The rapidly changing business environment in which most organizations oper
-ate is challenging traditional requirements-engineering (RE) approaches. Soft
-ware development organizations often must deal with requirements that tend 
to evolve quickly and become obsolete even before project completion.
1 Rapid 
changes in competitive threats, stakeholder preferences, development technology, and time-
to-market pressures make prespeci˜ed requirements inappropriate.
1Agile methods that seek to address the challenges 
in such dynamic contexts have gained much interest 
among practitioners and researchers. Many agile 
methods advocate the development of code without 
waiting for formal requirements analysis and design 
phases. (In this article, ﬁrequirements engineeringﬂ 
means the same thing as ﬁrequirements analysis,ﬂ as 
is common in the RE literature.) Based on constant 
feedback from the various stakeholders, require
-ments emerge throughout the development process. 
Evolving requirements in a time-constrained devel
-opment process cause the RE process for agile soft
-ware development to differ from that for traditional 
development.
Few studies report on RE in agile development 
(see the related sidebar). Proponents present agile 
methods as a panacea for all the ills of software 
development, often focusing on the proposed prac
-tices™ possible bene˜ts.
2 Critics, on the other hand, 
have focused on the challenges that agile practices 
might present. In contrast, we™ve been systemati
-cally studying the agile practices that developers ac
-tually follow. Using a qualitative study of 16 organi
-zations, we sought to answer two questions: What 
RE practices do agile developers follow? What ben
-e˜ts and challenges do these practices present?
How we conducted the study
Carolyn Seaman argues that software engineer
-ing™s blend of technical and human-behavioral as
-pects lends itself to qualitative study.
3 Qualitative 
methods let you delve into a problem™s complexity 
and develop rich, informative conclusions. For a rel
-atively ﬁuncharted landﬂ
4 such as agile RE, a multi
-site qualitative case study approach is appropriate.
To understand how and why agile RE differs 
from traditional RE, we collected data from 16 
organizations that employ agile approaches. (The 
ﬁStudy Participant Characteristicsﬂ sidebar pro
-vides details on the organizations. To protect their 
identities, we use pseudonyms.) These organizations 
are in three major US metropolitan areas.
The study had two phases. In the ˜rst phase, 
we conducted cases studies in 10 organizations 
that characterize themselves as involved in agile or 
high-speed software development. Although these 
An analysis of data 
from 16 software 
development 
organizations 
reveals seven agile 
RE practices, along 
with their bene˜ts 
and challenges.
  January/February 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 61
organizations didn™t explicitly follow any speci˜c 
ﬁbrandﬂ of agile methods, they followed RE prac
-tices that were similar to those suggested by agile 
methods such as Extreme Programming (XP) and 
Scrum. In the second phase, we collected data from 
six organizations that used XP, Scrum, or both.
The participating organizations represent a rich 
mix of ˜elds from healthcare to software develop
-ment and consulting. We collected data through 
semistructured interviews, participant observations, 
and documentation review. In each organization, 
we interviewed a variety of stakeholders, includ
-ing top management, product managers, quality 
assurance personnel, software developers, senior 
architects, and project managers. We also reviewed 
requirements documents such as story cards when 
available.
We conducted data analysis and data collection 
synergistically, as is common in qualitative research. 
Results from preliminary data analysis guided fur
-ther data collection. Although most interviewees fo
-cused on current or recent project experiences, their 
responses included information on multiple projects 
from previous experience. So, each organization 
was the unit of data analysis.
To analyze the data, we used the grounded-
theory method,
4 a well-established qualitative-
 research method. It lets you develop insights about 
a problem under investigation, without prior hypo
-theses. This approach is exploratory rather than 
con˜rmatory.
Data analysis involved open, axial, and selective 
coding.
4 In open coding, we identi˜ed groups of 
data and labeled them as agile RE practices, agile 
RE bene˜ts, or agile RE challenges. We performed 
axial coding to uncover relationships among prac
-tices, bene˜ts, and challenges. In selective cod
-ing, we identi˜ed larger patterns by systematically 
comparing the practices. We conducted additional 
interviews to gain clari˜cation on some concepts. 
To generate insights from this analysis, we focused 
on similarities and differences in agile RE prac
-tices among the 16 organizations. Two coders 
separately coded the data, and we compared the 
Although critics argue that agile software development 
approaches simply repackage established techniques,
1 others 
have recognized that requirements engineering
 in an agile 
environment is different.
2,3
 For example, agile methods such 
as Extreme Programming (XP) advocate RE throughout the 
development life cycle in small, informal stages.
4 However, 
from a requirements honesty viewpoint, agile development 
might negatively affect the requirements principles of pur
-posefulness, appropriateness, and truthfulness.
5In spite of the centrality of effective RE in agile develop
-ment, the agile-RE literature is limited to a few high-visibility 
case studies (such as at Microsoft and Netscape)
6 and ex
-perience reports.
7 Much research has focused on assessing 
and improving agile requirements approaches as de˜ned in 
popular agile methods such as XP and Scrum. Little is known 
about how real agile projects conduct RE. Also, it isn™t clear 
whether developers are actually using the practices that agile 
methods prescribe.
7Recent studies have identi˜ed several problems that could 
result from the lack of detailed requirements speci˜cations
8 and suggest several approaches to address these prob
-lems.
2,9,10
 These approaches include using explicit require
-ments negotiation,
10
 establishing traceability,
11
 incorporat
-ing aspect-oriented concepts,
12
 incorporating an explicit RE 
phase,
8 and using cooperative strategies for RE.
13
 Some of 
these approaches might help mitigate the challenges that our 
study identi˜ed (see the main article).
References
 1.
 H. Merisalo-Rantanen, T. Tuunanen, and M. Rossi, ﬁIs Extreme 
Programming Just Old Wine in New Bottles: A Comparison of Two 
Cases,ﬂ 
J. Database Management
, vol. 16, no. 4, 2005, pp. 41Œ61.
 2.
 F.E. Paetsch, A. Eberlein, and F. Maurer, ﬁRequirements Engineering 
and Agile Software Development,ﬂ 
Proc. 12th IEEE Int™l Workshops En
-abling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises
 (Wetice 
03), IEEE CS Press, 2003, p. 308.
 3.
 A. Sillitti et al., ﬁManaging Uncertainty in Requirements: A Survey 
in Documentation-Driven and Agile Companies,ﬂ 
Proc. 11th IEEE Int™l 
Symp. Software Metrics
 (Metrics 05), IEEE Press, 2005, p. 17.
 4.
 K. Beck et al., ﬁEmbracing Change with Extreme Programming,ﬂ 
Computer
, vol. 32, no. 10, 1999, pp. 70Œ77.
 5.
 F.A.C. Pinheiro, ﬁRequirements Honesty,ﬂ 
Proc. 2002 Int™l Workshop 
Time-Constrained Requirements Eng.
 (TCRE 02), 2002; www-di.inf.
 puc-rio.br/~julio/tcre-site/p3.pdf.
 6.
 M. Cusumano and D. Yof˜e, 
Competing on Internet Time: Lessons from 
Netscape and Its Battle with Microsoft
, Touchstone, 2000.
 7.
 J. Erickson, K. Lyytinen, and K. Siau, ﬁAgile Modeling, Agile Software 
Development, and Extreme Programming: The State of Research,ﬂ 
J. 
Database Management
, vol. 16, no. 4, 2005, pp. 88Œ99.
 8.
 J. Nawrocki et al., ﬁExtreme Programming Modi˜ed: Embrace Require
-ments Engineering Practices,ﬂ 
Proc. IEEE Joint Int™l Conf. Requirements 
Eng. 
(RE 02), IEEE CS Press, 2002, pp. 303Œ310.
 9.
 B. Boehm, ﬁRequirements That Handle Ikiwisi, COTS, and Rapid 
Change,ﬂ 
Computer
, vol. 33, no. 7, 2000, pp. 99Œ102.
 10.
 P. Grünbacher and C. Hofer, ﬁComplementing XP with Requirements 
Negotiation,ﬂ 
Proc. 3rd Int™l Conf. Extreme Programming and Agile 
Processes in Software Eng. 
(XP 02), Springer, 2002, pp. 105Œ108.
 11.
 M. Lee, ﬁJust-in-Time Requirements AnalysisŠthe Engine That Drives 
the Planning Game,ﬂ 
Proc. 3rd Int™l Conf. Extreme Programming and 
Agile Processes in Software Eng. 
(XP 02), Springer, 2002, pp. 138Œ141.
 12.
 J. Araujo and J. C. Ribeiro, ﬁTowards an Aspect-Oriented Agile Re
-quirements Approach,ﬂ
 Proc. 8th Int™l Workshop Principles of Software 
Evolution
, IEEE Press, 2005, pp. 140Œ143.
 13.
 O. Jepsen, ﬁTime Constrained Requirement EngineeringŠthe Cooper
-ative Way,ﬂ 
Proc. 2002 Int™l Workshop Time-Constrained Requirements 
Eng. 
(TCRE 02), 2002; www-di.inf.puc-rio.br/~julio/tcre-site/p5.pdf.
Related Work on Requirements Engineering in Agile Development
 62
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
results. Differences were resolved after detailed dis
-cussions. We then recoded the data to arrive at a set 
of practices common across these organizations.
The agile RE practices and their respective bene
-˜ts and challenges we present re˚ect the perceptions 
and beliefs of the software developers who partici
-pated in the study.
Agile RE practices
Our study identi˜ed seven agile RE practices in 
the organizations.
Face-to-face communication over written 
speci˜cations
According to the participants, agile RE aims to 
Study Participant Characteristics
Organization 
pseudonym
Industry and products
No. of employees 
interviewed
Organizational roles represented
Enco
Energy and communications.
Offers forecasting tools.
3VP of operations, project manager, and
 software developer
HealthCo
Healthcare and utilities.
 Offers an online service to help customers select health 
insurance and utility services.
6President & CEO, VP of technology 
 operations, director of marketing 
research, CIO, and developers
Venture
Across industries.
 Helps brick-and-mortar companies develop a Web presence.
4Director, chief ˜nancial of˜cer, chief 
operations of˜cer, and developer
Entertain
Film and television industry.
 Offers high-tech indexing and search tools online.
4Project manager, marketing specialist, 
senior Web developer, and quality 
 assurance specialist
HuCap
Administration.
 Carries out human-resource administration for other 
 companies online.
7Project manager, architect, user 
 interface designer, Web designers, 
 and Web developers
TravelAssist
Transport and tourist industry.
 Offers online services.
6Senior manager, project manager,
 quality assurance manager, lead 
 developers, and Web developers
ManageRisk
Across several industries.
 Offers insurance online.
3Human-resources manager, Internet site 
manager, and Internet site developer
Transport
Transportation and logistics industry.
 Offers services online.
6CIO, senior manager, project manager, 
architect, senior developer, and Web 
 developer
ServeIT
Consulting and services.
 We studied the part of the ˜rm that offers consulting 
 services for business-to-business communication.
6Senior manager, project manager, 
 quality assurance manager, quality 
 assurance specialist, and Web developers
HealthInfo
Healthcare information systems.
 Offers information systems solutions to hospitals, 
 physicians™ of˜ces, and home healthcare providers. 
2Senior software engineers
SecurityInfo
Security software.
 Offers software for Internet security.
5Software engineer, project lead, product 
manager, and quality assurance specialist
AgileConsult
Software consulting.
 Offers consulting services on agile software development.
2Senior developer and project lead
EbizCo
Packaged software development.
 Offers e-business connections and transactions.
1Senior software developer
FinCo
Online ˜nancial-transaction support.
 Offers online payments.
1Software developer
NetCo
Network software consulting.
 Offers services on developing network systems 
 and architectures.
2General manager and senior software 
architect
BankSoft
Banking information systems.
 Offers software that handles ˜nancial transactions.
1Senior software architect
  January/February 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 63
effectively transfer ideas from the customer to the 
development team, rather than create extensive doc
-umentation. So, their agile RE practice prefers face-
to-face communication over written speci˜cations.
Most organizations shun formal documentation 
of speci˜cations. Instead, they use simple techniques 
such as user stories to de˜ne high-level requirements. 
These short, abstract descriptions serve mainly as 
anchors for further discussions with customers. The 
developers discuss requirements in detail with the 
customers before and/or during development.
One exception is BankSoft, a company that de
-velops banking-industry software and whose com
-pany policy mandates formal documentation. How
-ever, even for such security-critical applications, 
face-to-face communication with the customer 
is a primary source of requirements. The project 
team meets frequently with the product manager, 
who serves as a surrogate customer to discuss the 
requirements and alternative solutions. Formal 
documentation of requirements doesn™t eliminate 
the need for frequent communication, because, as 
a BankSoft participant noted, ﬁEverything is am
-biguous; if you give me exactly what the customers 
want, they [the customers] are going to say, that™s 
neat, [but] I want something different.ﬂ
Bene˜ts. 
All 16 organizations rely extensively on 
face-to-face communication between the team 
and the customers. The participants reported these 
bene˜ts:
Customers can steer the project in unanticipated 
directions, especially when their requir
ements 
evolve owing to changes in the enviro
nment 
or their own understanding of the software 
 solution.
Informal communication obviates the need for 
time-consuming documentation and approval 
processes, which are perceived as unnecessary, 
especially with evolving requirements.
Challenges. 
Several participants reported that this 
practice™s effectiveness depends heavily on intensive 
interaction between customers and developers. For 
projects that can™t achieve such high-quality inter
-action, this approach poses risks such as require
-ments that are inadequately developed or, worse 
still, wrong.
The effectiveness of communication between the 
customer and team depends on several factors, in
-cluding customer availability, consensus among cus
-tomer groups, and trust between the customer and 
the developers, especially during the project™s early 
stages.
Many organizations reported that achieving on
-site customer representation is dif˜cult. In most of 
the projects we studied, product managers acted as 
surrogate customers. However, only two projects 
had a full-time, onsite product manager; the others 
had only part-time access.
When more than one customer group is in
-volved, with each concerned about different aspects 
of the system, achieving consensus or compromise 
in the short development cycle is challenging. The 
development team must spend extra effort to inte
-grate the requirements through negotiations with 
each group. For example, at NetCo, the project 
manager forced customers to physically participate 
in several meetings to discuss requirements, in order 
to achieve consensus.
Customers sometimes ˜nd it dif˜cult to under
-stand or trust the agile RE process. Many partici
-pants reported that establishing trust between the 
customer and developer, which is essential for agile 
RE, can be challenging. Customers familiar with a 
traditional development process might not under
-stand or trust the agile RE process, which doesn™t 
produce detailed requirements. One NetCo proj
-ect included three customer representatives, but 
only one had a positive opinion of agile RE. In this 
project, the project manager suggested that the 
two customers who didn™t have high con˜dence in 
agile methods weren™t ﬁgoodﬂ customers in terms 
of their ability to provide relevant information and 
feedback.
Iterative requirements engineering
In 14 organizations, requirements aren™t pre
-de˜ned; instead, they emerge during development. 
High-level RE occurs at the project™s beginning. 
During this brief process, the development team 
acquires a high-level understanding of the appli
-cation™s critical features. Reasons for commencing 
development without spending much time on RE 
initially include high requirements volatility, incom
-plete knowledge of the technology used in develop
-ment, and customers who can clearly de˜ne the re
-quirements only when they see them (ﬁI™ll know it 
when I see itﬂ).
In most organizations, agile RE continues at 
each development cycle. At each cycle™s start, the 
customer meets with the development team to pro
-vide detailed information on a set of features that 
must be implemented. During this process, require
-ments are discussed at a greater level of detail. Also, 
RE is often intertwined with design. This activity of
-ten results in a set of ˜ne-grained requirements and 
a preliminary design, and sometimes even an imple
-mentation plan, none of which is speci˜ed formally.
Customers 
sometimes 
 ˜nd it dif˜cult 
to understand 
or trust 
 the agile 
 RE process.
 64
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
Bene˜ts. 
Iterative RE has two reported bene˜ts.
First, it creates a more satisfactory relationship 
with the customer. Here™s how a SecurityInfo cus
-tomer compared his experience with agile RE and 
traditional RE: ﬁI think the difference for me came 
in the quality of the software [and] the stability of 
the software. – I think the agile [RE] lent itself to 
– a very robust rich implementation of features – 
[for] the ˜rst time.ﬂ
Second, requirements are clearer and more un
-derstandable because of the immediate access to 
customers and their involvement in the project when 
needed.
The participants suggested that iterative RE 
might be appropriate even in stable business envi
-ronments where the changes often come from un
-foreseen technical issues, especially when adopting 
new technologies. For example, FinCo used a beta 
version of the .NET framework, and the evolving 
technology caused several changes to the require
-ments and the system design. In many organiza
-tions, the customers aren™t clear at the outset about 
their requirements and are willing to explore the 
ways in which the evolving system can help their 
business goals. Flexible RE facilitates this joint dis
-covery of potentially interesting solutions.
Challenges. 
Participants reported three major 
challenges.
The ˜rst is cost and schedule estimation. Be
-cause none of the organizations follow a formal RE 
phase, the initial estimation of project size typically 
is based on the known user stories. Many of these 
might be discarded, and many more get added dur
-ing development. So, the original estimates must be 
adjusted (sometimes quite dramatically) during de
-velopment, as happened with HuCap. Because the 
project scope is subject to constant change, creating 
accurate cost and schedule estimates for the entire 
project is dif˜cult. Obtaining management support 
for such projects could be challenging.
The second challenge is minimal documentation. 
When a communication breakdown occurs owing 
to, for example, personnel turnover, rapid changes 
to requirements, unavailability of appropriate cus
-tomer representatives, or the application™s growing 
complexity, the lack of documentation might cause 
a variety of problems. These include, as one ServIT 
participant noted, the ﬁinability to scale the soft
-ware, evolve the application over time, and induct 
new members into the development team.ﬂ
The third challenge is neglect of 
nonfunctional 
requirements
, a major concern with iterative RE 
in agile development. Many participants acknowl
-edged that NFRs are often ill de˜ned and ignored 
during early development cycles. Customers often 
focus on core functionality and ignore NFRs such 
as scalability, maintainability, portability, safety, or 
performance. One common exception is the focus 
on ease of use, especially when the customers are 
intensely involved in providing constant feedback 
on the evolving system. Many participants, such 
as ServeIT and TravelAssist, suggested that the ten
-dency to ignore critical issues such as security and 
performance early in the process results in major is
-sues as the system matures and becomes ready for 
larger-scale deployment.
Requirement prioritization goes extreme
Agile development implements the highest-
 priority features early so that customers can real
-ize the most business value. All the organizations 
prioritize their feature lists repeatedly during de
-velopment as the customer™s and the developer™s 
understanding of the project evolves, particularly 
as requirements are added or modi˜ed.
The participants identi˜ed at least two impor
-tant differences between traditional and agile RE 
in requirements prioritization. First, in traditional 
RE, requirements are typically prioritized once. 
In contrast, in the 16 organizations, agile RE in
-volves prioritizing requirements in each develop
-ment cycle. Prioritization often happens during the 
planning meetings at the beginning of each cycle. 
Moreover, requirements are prioritized together 
with other development tasks such as incorporat
-ing changes to existing functionality, bug ˜xes, and 
refactoring.
Second, in traditional RE, many factors drive 
requirements prioritizationŠfor example, busi
-ness value, risks, cost, and implementation depen
-dencies. Customers identify the features that pro
-vide them the greatest bene˜t; developers identify 
technical risks, costs, or implementation dif˜cul
-ties. In contrast, agile RE practitioners uniformly 
reported that their prioritization is based predomi
-nantly on one factorŠbusiness value as the cus
-tomer de˜nes it.
Bene˜ts. 
Because customers are very involved in the 
development process, they can provide business rea
-sons for each requirement at any development cycle. 
Such a clear understanding of the customer™s pri
-orities helps the development team better meet cus
-tomer needs. Even BankSoft, which uses formal re
-quirement speci˜cations, also bene˜ts from frequent 
reprioritization of requirements because, according 
to one participant, ﬁwe were delivering high value 
every step of the way.ﬂ
Also, in contrast to traditional development, 
RE might 
 be appropriate 
even in stable 
business 
environments 
where the 
changes often 
come from 
unforeseen 
technical 
issues.
  January/February 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 65
where achieving reprioritization is dif˜cult, agile RE 
provides numerous opportunities for reprioritization.
Challenges. 
Using business value (often focused on 
time-to-market) as the only or primary criterion 
for requirements prioritization might cause major 
problems. For example, at FinCo, this approach 
resulted in an architecture that wasn™t scalable. At 
Transport, it resulted in a system that couldn™t ac
-commodate requirements (such as security and ef
-˜ciency) that might initially appear secondary to the 
customer but that become critical for operational 
success. Furthermore, some participants observed 
that continuous reprioritization, when not practiced 
with caution, leads to instability.
Managing requirements change 
 through constant planning
Accommodating requirements changes during 
development is a way of tuning the system to better 
satisfy customer needs. Changes are easier to imple
-ment and cost less in agile development, a NetCo de
-veloper observed: ﬁPlanning is a constant activity. – 
It™s constantly being revisited as these things change. 
Because we don™t make ˜xed plans, and try to con
-form to them, accommodating change is easier.ﬂ
Participants commonly reported two types of 
requirements changes: adding or dropping features, 
and changing already implemented features. At the 
end of each cycle, tests evaluate the implemented 
features. Customers provide feedback and can re
-quest major changes if their expectations aren™t met. 
In the 16 organizations, this kind of change is rela
-tively rare.
Such a low occurrence of major postdevelop
-ment change is interesting because this ability is of
-ten touted as an important bene˜t of agile processes. 
The study participants believe that frequent com
-munication between the developer and the customer 
during development obviates the need for changes 
after development. Before implementing a feature, 
the developer engages in detailed discussions with 
the customer to roughly understand what he or she 
needs. Also, the developer gets constant feedback 
from the customer as the features are implemented. 
Organizations that practice such intense interac
-tions reported a low need for major changes to the 
delivered features.
Bene˜ts. 
The early and constant validation of re
-quirements largely minimizes the need for major 
changes. As an AgileConsult developer described, 
most of the change requests are ﬁusually more a case 
of tweaks – spelling, little graphical things – for 
example, color, positioning.ﬂ
So, the cost of addressing a change request de
-creases dramatically compared to traditional soft
-ware development.
Challenges. 
In several organizations, such as FinCo 
and AgileConsult, the architecture the development 
team chose during the early cycles became inad
-equate as requirements changed. Redesign of the ar
-chitecture added signi˜cantly to project cost.
Refactoring
 changes software™s internal struc
-ture to make it easier to understand and cheaper 
to modify without changing its observable behav
-ior. However, for most participants, the need for 
refactoring isn™t always obvious, and the ability to 
refactor software depends on many factors, such as 
the developers™ experience and schedule pressure. 
Moreover, some participants reported that refactor
-ing, as an ongoing activity to improve the design, of
-ten doesn™t completely address the problem of inad
-equate or inappropriate architecture. Occasionally, 
the only alternative is to throw away the code and 
rewrite entire modules. One AgileConsult developer 
reported that, because of this problem, he had to re
-write large application modules (200Œ330 KLOC) 
about ˜ve times.
Prototyping
Many organizations, such as ServeIT, HuCap, 
Transport, and Venture, develop a prioritized list of 
features to settle requirements speci˜cation quickly. 
According to one ServeIT participant, ﬁThis helps 
reduce the margin of error. Piloting applications and 
releasing them to end users in iterative fashion are 
other useful practices.ﬂ
To a certain extent, the production software it
-self can be a form of operational prototype, a re˜ne
-ment of the code created for experimentation with 
required features. In several organizations, the rush 
to market encourages a tendency to deploy these 
prototypes rather than wait for robust implementa
-tions. The ability to quickly deploy newer versions 
of the products on the Internet also contributes to 
this tendency.
Bene˜ts. 
Instead of incurring the overhead involved 
in creating formal requirements documents, several 
organizations use prototyping to communicate with 
their customers to validate and re˜ne requirements. 
Eleven organizations regularly use prototypes to ob
-tain quick customer feedback on requirements.
Challenges. 
Some organizations are recognizing the 
risks of deploying prototypes in production mode. 
For example, at Entertain, maintaining or evolving 
prototypes is dif˜cult and has caused problems with 
 66
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
features such as scalability, security, and robust
-ness. Also, at TravelAssist, quick deployment of 
pr
ototypes in the early stages has created unrealis
-tic expectations among customers. They have been 
unwilling to accept longer development cycles that 
are necessary to develop more scalable and robust 
implementations as the product matures.
Test-driven development
TDD is an evolutionary approach in which de
-velopers create tests before writing new functional 
code. TDD treats writing tests as part of a require
-ments/design activity in which a test speci˜es the 
code™s behavior. ﬁYou write code that talks about 
what the system™s behavior should be. So you end up 
writing very explicit speci˜cations and not ‚tests,™ﬂ 
explained an AgileConsult developer.
Bene˜ts. 
Many organizations use tests to capture 
complete requirements and design documentation 
that are linked to production code. This traceability 
makes incorporating changes easy, claimed an Ag
-ileConsult developer: ﬁHaving those tests allows you 
to be more adventurous in terms of making changes 
and trying out ideas. ... You get very quick feedback 
if it goes wrong. – You write code that talks about 
what the system™s behavior should be.ﬂ
Challenges. 
A major challenge to TDD™s adoption is 
that developers aren™t accustomed to writing tests 
before coding. Most developers in the study admit
-ted that they don™t consistently follow this practice 
because it demands a lot of discipline. Another 
challenge is that TDD requires a thorough under
-standing of the requirements and extensive collab
-oration between the developer and the customer, 
because it involves re˜ning low-level speci˜cations 
iteratively. Owing to these challenges, most organi
-zations reported that they™re unable to implement 
this practice.
Use review meetings and acceptance tests
Almost all the organizations use frequent review 
meetings for requirements validation. At the end of 
each development cycle, they hold a meeting with 
developers, customers, quality assurance person
-nel, management, and other stakeholders. During 
the meeting, the developers demonstrate the deliv
-ered features, and the customers and QA people 
ask questions and provide feedback. However, for 
many organizations, these review meetings cover 
only minor issues. As the SecurityInfo project man
-ager described, ﬁWe basically get some minor feed
-back [from the review meetings]. – The big thing 
is when, at the start of the iteration, I sit down with 
the product manager [the surrogate customer] to 
talk about features. The PM sometimes brings up 
new things he found out as he was talking to more 
customers.ﬂ
Acceptance tests that the customer develops, 
sometimes with help from the QA personnel, are 
another means for validation and veri˜cation. Some 
organizations treat these tests as part of require
-ments speci˜cation.
Bene˜ts. 
In most organizations, the review meet
-ings primarily provide progress reports to the cus
-tomer and other stakeholders in the organization, 
even though the meetings™ original purpose is to re
-view the developed features and get feedback. The 
meeting™s perceived bene˜ts include the opportuni
-ties to ascertain whether the project is on target, to 
increase customer trust and con˜dence in the team, 
and to identify problems early during development. 
These meetings help considerably to obtain manage
-ment support for the project by providing frequent 
updates on project status and progress to project 
sponsors.
Challenges. 
The participants suggested that their 
agile RE practice focuses more on requirements 
validation than traditional approaches. However, 
it doesn™t address aspects of formal veri˜cation 
because there™s no formal modeling of detailed re
-quirements. Consistency checking or formal inspec
-tions seldom occur.
Although agile practices emphasize acceptance 
testing, several organizations ˜nd implementing 
such testing dif˜cult owing to the dif˜culty of access 
to the customers who develop these tests. So, many 
organizations use QA personnel to help customers 
develop these tests.
A comparison of agile RE practices
To develop a detailed understanding of the agile 
RE practices, we determined the degree to which 
the 16 organizations reportedly followed them (see 
table 1). Most of the organizations rank high or me
-dium for most of the practices. However, not all the 
organizations are encountering all the challenges 
of agile RE practices. Almost all the organizations 
reported that their most common challenges are 
the inability to gain access to the customer and ob
-taining consensus among various customer groups. 
TDD is the least-used practice (only six organiza
-tions adopt it) because, as we mentioned before, 
most developers aren™t accustomed to the discipline 
it requires. Surprisingly, although prototyping is 
considered one of the most established practices, al
-most one-third of the organizations don™t practice 
Agile RE 
practices 
 are neither 
panacea 
 nor poison 
 to the 
challenges 
intrinsic to RE.
  January/February 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 67
it. While the literature on traditional development 
laments the inadequate attention paid to reviews 
and tests, the 16 organizations use them extensively 
in agile RE.
Our study reveals that agile RE differs from 
traditional RE in that it takes an iterative 
discovery approach. Agile development oc
-curs in an environment where developing unambig
-uous and complete requirement speci˜cations is im
-possible or even inappropriate. These fundamental 
differences have led to the set of agile RE practices 
we report here. The study participants identi˜ed the 
intensive communication between the developers 
and customers as the most important RE practice. 
Instead of following a formal procedure to produce 
a complete speci˜cation that accurately describes 
the system, agile RE is more dynamic and adaptive. 
As we mentioned before, agile RE processes aren™t 
centralized in one phase before development; they™re 
evenly spread throughout development.
Although agile RE practices provide bene˜ts 
such as improved understanding of customer needs 
and the ability to adapt to the evolving needs of 
today™s dynamic environment, they pose several 
distinct challenges. The study suggests that agile 
RE practices are neither panacea nor poison to the 
challenges intrinsic to RE. Development organiza
-tions, therefore, should carefully compare the costs 
and bene˜ts of agile RE practices in their project 
environment.
References
 1.
 B. Boehm, ﬁRequirements That Handle I
KIWISI
, COTS, 
and Rapid Change,ﬂ 
Computer
, July 2000, pp. 99Œ102.
 2.
 J. Erickson, K. Lyytinen, and K. Siau, ﬁAgile Modeling, 
Agile Software Development, and Extreme Program
-ming: The State of Research,ﬂ 
J. Database Manage
-ment
, vol. 16, no. 4, 2005, pp. 88Œ99.
 3.
 C.B. Seaman, ﬁQualitative Methods in Empirical Stud
-ies of Software Engineering,ﬂ 
IEEE Trans. Software 
Eng.
, vol. 25, no. 4, 1999, pp. 557Œ572.
  4.
 A. Strauss and J. Corbin, 
Basics of Qualitative 
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing 
Grounded Theory
, Sage Publications, 1990.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit our 
Digital Library at www.computer.org/csdl.
Table 1
Agile requirements-engineering practices in 16 organizations
Adoption 
level
Practice
Face-to-face 
communication
Iterative 
REExtreme 
 prioritization
Constant 
planning
Prototyping
Test-driven 
development
Reviews 
 & tests
High
8910
88511
Medium
8566314Low
0202001None
0000510
0About the Authors
Lan Cao 
is an assistant professor of Information Technologies and Decision Sciences at 
Old Dominion University. Her major research interests are agile software development and 
software process modeling and simulation. She received her PhD in computer information 
systems from Georgia State University. Contact her at the Dept. of Information Technology 
and Decision Sciences, Old Dominion Univ., Norfolk, VA 23529; lcao@odu.edu.
Balasubramaniam Ramesh 
is a professor of computer information systems 
at Georgia State University. He studies requirements engineering and traceability, agile 
software development, and knowledge management. He received his PhD in information 
systems from the Stern School of Business, New York University. He™s a member of the IEEE, 
ACM, and the Association for Information Systems. Contact him at the Computer Information 
Systems Dept., Georgia State Univ., 35 Broad St., Atlanta, GA 30302; bramesh@gsu.edu.
Log on to our Web site to
 Ł Search our vast archives
 Ł Preview upcoming topics
 Ł Browse our calls for papers
 Ł Submit your article for 
   
publication
 Ł Subscribe or renew
www.computer.org/software
