 0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEEMay/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
21focuspeople and project management issues ratherthan technical issues.4Agile methods(see the related sidebar onpage 22) are a recent set of development tech-

niques that apply a human-centered approach
to software production.5The agile approachaims to deliver high-quality products faster,

producing satisfied customers. We conducted an empirical study to inves-
tigate whether agile methods change and im-
prove project management practices in soft-
ware companies. We based the study on

Henry PetroskiÕs approach, which says that

the Òanalysis of causes of failures can do more
to advance knowledge than all the successes
in the world.Ó6The underlying data samplecomprises managers of software companiesÑ
10 adopting agile methods and 10 using tra-

ditional (which, for simplicity, we call plan-

based) approaches.Structure of the investigation
Our study focuses on how well project
management deals with people (developers
and customers) and the development process
(planning and organization). We based the

studyÕs overall structure on Victor BasiliÕs

Goal/Question/Metric approach.7GQM aims to systematically develop agoal-oriented measurement program. The
measurement system has three levels: 
Conceptual: goal;Operational: question; and
Quantitative: metric.GQM defines a goal, refines this goal into
questions, and defines metrics providing infor-

mation to answer these questions. 
In our study, our goal was to monitor what
a project manager of a company (agile or plan-focus 1Project Management inPlan-Based and Agile
CompaniesSurveys of more than 8,000 projects show that most project fail-
ures involve stakeholder problems.1Notably, five of the top six
reasons for failure stem from communication problems between

the development team and the customer.
2In 2000, the Standish
Group identified 10 factors for project success. Of these, the second and

third most important were Òuser involvementÓ and an Òexperienced project

manager.Ó
3From this you can conclude that most projects fail because of 
adapting agilityMartina Ceschi, Alberto Sillitti, and Giancarlo Succi, 
Free University of Bolzano-BozenStefano De Panfilis, Engineering Ingegneria InformaticaSurvey results 
show that adopting

agile methods
appears to improve
management of 
the development
process and
customer
relationships. based) considers important to improve pro-cess, organize teams, and solve problems. Our
context was that of managers in local and in-
ternational software companies. We had several questions to considerÑ
namely, determining the main problems in the

development process and solutions adopted,
evaluating process planning and organization,
estimating the relationship with the customer,

and assessing the managersÕ actual knowledge

(benefits and disadvantages) of agile methods. We used a phone questionnaire to quantita-
tively measure the answers to these questions. The questionnaireThe nature of questionnaires leaves themopen to information loss and lack of integrity
of the collected data.8One way to address thisproblem is to collect a massive number of ques-
tionnaires.9However, this approach doesnÕt
work well in the case of software managers
because theyÕre typically very busy and itÕs dif-

ficult to obtain their time for these studies. 
To address these issues, we took extra care in
iteratively defining the questionnaire and in col-
lecting the data. We ensured that each question,

the questionnaire, and the responses adhered to
Giorgio MarbachÕs soundness principles.
8Thequestionnaire, as a whole, also followed Jean
Converse and Stanley PresserÕs psychological

criteria on question order and on avoiding criti-
cal terminology.
9The questionnaire comprises 25 questions
grouped in four sections: 
the company and the intervieweeÕs status,

primary software development problems,

and adopted solutions;the development processÕs planning and

organization;the relationship with the customer and
characteristics of good developers;the managersÕ knowledge of agile meth-
ods, their actual use, and the advantages
or disadvantages of their use.We began our process for finalizing the ques-
tionnaire and collecting data by asking a group

of students to evaluate the first draft, and six

managers from different companies to evaluate

the second. Next, we selected 20 respondents

from companies with some correspondence to

the authorsÕ primary researchÑ10 working in
agile companies and 10 in plan-based compa-
nies. We emailed the final questionnaire to the

managers and asked them to read it carefully.

We then collected the questionnaire responses

through phone interviews, which occurred typ-

ically one week after our email. We recorded

the interview results on paper and asked the in-
terviewees to check them by email. Only when

we received positive confirmation of the re-
sponses did we accept the questionnaire.
Survey sample
The 20 interviewees are project managers in
software companiesÑ19 males and one fe-
maleÑand the average age is 40. Eighteen man-
agers have a university degree and two have
completed secondary school. Seventeen compa-
nies, more than 80 percent, were founded after

the Õ80s. Fourteen of the selected companies are

located in Italy, five in the US, and one in

Switzerland.22IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Lean production is a set of practices focused on the continuous improve-ment of the production process, by identifying and removing anything that
doesnÕt add value to the customer.
1It was born in the manufacturing envi-
ronment, but many basic principles also fit the software industry.
Agile methodsapply the principles of lean production to the overall softwarelife cycle.
2So, these methods focus on providing value for the customer and
support requirements variability, but they donÕt fit every application domain.
The agile approach is more people-oriented rather than process-oriented.3,4This means that it depends heavily on individual skills. Agile methods claim
that people make projects successful and that no process will ever make up
for the lack of the development teamÕs skill; so, a processÕs role is to support

the development team.5Moreover, these methods promote the cohesion of
team members and developer and customer interaction.
Two popular agile techniques are Extreme Programming and Scrum. XP
is a collection of principles and practices that aims at enabling successful
software development despite vague or constantly changing requirements in
small- and medium-size teams.6Scrum aims to manage the developmentprocess through an empirical approach that applies the ideas of industrial
process control theory to software development.
6References1.T. Ohno, 
Toyota Production System: Beyond Large-Scale Production
, Productivity Press, 1988.2.T. Poppendieck and M. Poppendieck, 
Lean Software Development: An Agile Toolkit for Soft-
ware Development Managers, Addison-Wesley, 2003.
3.K. Beck et al., ÒManifesto for Agile Software Development,Ó 2001, http://agilemanifesto.org.

4.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained, Addison-Wesley, 2000.
5.J. Highsmith and A. Cockburn, ÒAgile Software Development: The People Factor,Ó 
Com-puter, Nov. 2001, pp. 131Ð133.
6.P. Abrahamsson et al., 
Agile Software Development Methods
, VTT, 2002; www.inf.vtt.fi/
pdf/publications/2002/P478.pdf.Agile Methods The sample contained 10 companies that de-fined themselves as agile and 10 that didnÕt. The

companiesÕ business areas differÑfor example,
consulting, services, and software development.
Most have a large number of employees, and
only three have fewer than 10 employees. All the

companies were exposed to production process

changes over the years. The main causes for
such changes included changes in customersÕ re-
quirements (50 percent), technology changes (70
percent), and other reasons (40 percent) such as
failure with the prior development process, the
wish to improve the processÕs efficiency and ef-

fectiveness, or the adoption of quality systems
(such as ISO 9001).We canÕt consider this sample as representa-
tive of the entire population of software com-
panies. Nevertheless, the agile and plan-based
companies selected share similar characteris-
tics: the companiesÕ years in the market, busi-
ness areas, and number of employees, and the
respondentsÕ roles, gender, age, and education.
Results analysisThe number of managers our study consid-
ered is small, and itÕs not possible to perform a

complex statistical analysis. Therefore, we based

our analysis on the comparison of percentages.
Primary problems 
According to 15 managers, the main prob-
lem in software development is delivering prod-

ucts with all the features on time. The Standish

GroupÕs 2000 C
HAOSsurvey of 8,000 projectsobtained a similar result: only 26 percent of the
projects were completed on time, on budget,
and with all the originally planned functions.
3Approximately 50 percent of the plan-basedcompanies and 10 percent of agile companies
believe they have a difficult relationship with
their customers (see Figure 1a).However, agile companiesÕ customer rela-
tionships are not so difficult to manage. In

fact, one of the main problems solved by

adopting agile methods is the customer rela-
tionship (see Figure 1b).The selected managers adopted different,sometimes multiple, solutions for delivering
software with all the features on time: using
new development methods such as Extreme
Programming (XP) and Scrum (half the man-
agers), improving productivity processes (more
than half the managers), and focusing on peo-
ple (customers and developers) by improvingcommunication and knowledge transfer suchas small size and good communication be-
tween customers and developers (30 percent of

the managers).Planning and organizationMost of the considered agile and plan-basedcompanies (70 percent) include in their process
incremental code development (see Figure 2a).
Half of the plan-based companies also split the
process into tasks, and 40 percent split them
into phases. Moreover, a considerable number

of companies use prototypes before developing
the final product.Agile companies prefer to organize their
processes in more releases and pay attention to

activity planning. Most agile companies tend to
May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
23(a)(b)LQSHCRWCEDCDMRWDHTE
9080
70
60
50
40
30
20
1007060
50
40
30
20
100ProblemsPercent of companiesPercent of problems mitigatedDSWAFOTO
LQSHCRWCEDCDMRWDHTE
ProblemsDSWAFOTO
10%0%60%20%30%20%40%20%AgilePlan-basedDSWAFOT 
Difficulty to deliver the software with all required functions on timeLQS Lack of qualified staff

HC High competition

RWC Relationship with customers

EDC Excessive documentation of code

DMRWD Difficulty in managing relationships within the development groupHTE High turnover of employees

MR Managing requirements

O OtherFigure 1. (a) Primary
software development
problems and (b) 
software development 
problems mitigated 
by adopting agile 
methods. plan and, consequently, to develop only essen-
tial functionality at each iteration. However,

this doesnÕt mean they donÕt carefully plan their

development processes. In fact, theyÕre more

satisfied with the way they plan their projects
than plan-based companies are (see Table 1).
Eight-five percent of the managers would
like to improve process planning, even though
70 percent of managers are sufficiently satisfied

with it and 20 percent are very satisfied.
ItÕs interesting how companies use common
planning and organization tools to improve the

development process. These tools include Gantt

charts (65 percent), PERT (Program Evaluation

Review Technique) charts (40 percent), the crit-

ical path method (20 percent), and others (30

percent). The main method that agile and plan-basedcompanies use for the feasibility analysis and for
planning is based on past estimations and expe-
riences (see Figure 2b). However, itÕs difficult to

have enough homogeneous projects over the
years in order to calculate reliable estimates; re-
quirements, development teams, technologies,
and customer needs change in every project, and
most developers donÕt develop exactly the same

product twice.
Customer relationshipsBoth agile and plan-based companies havecollaborative customer relationships. How-
ever, the way they manage them differs. Sixty

percent of the agile companies have their cus-
tomers on-site, meaning that the customer is
directly available for most of the project. A

smaller number of plan-based firms (40 per-
cent) use this practice as well.Understanding what customers really wantrequires their constant involvement in the proj-
ect. This participation implies interaction be-tween the customer and the development team
to allow quick response to changes. In this con-
text, itÕs difficult to keep the contractÕs vari-

ables (scope, price, and time) fixed over time.
Thus, agile companies tend to regulate their
customer relationships with flexible contracts
instead of fixed ones that predefine functional-
ities, price, and time (see Figure 3a).Increased customer contact creates a high-quality link between the development team
and the customer. Consequently, agile com-

panies are more satisfied with their customer

relationships than plan-based companies (see
Figure 3b).Agile and plan-based companies disagreeon what constitutes the most important cus-

tomer problems. Most plan-based companies
(70 percent) consider changing requirements
one of their more critical issues (see Figure 3c).
24IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
(a)(b)PSTPWDUP
CPBSDPPNF8070
60
50
40
30
20
100PSPID
AgilePlan-basedFunction pointsDevelopment processEstimation toolsCOCOMO8070
60
50
40
30
20
100Past estimationOther
AgilePlan-basedPSP Precise subdivision of phases
PST Precise subdivision of tasks

PWD Precise, wide documentation at the end of every phase

UP Use of prototypes before the final product

CPBSDP Careful planning before software development production

PNF Planning of only necessary functions

ID Incremental development of code after customer evaluation
Percent of companiesPercent of companiesFigure 2. Process management: (a) how firms organize and plan their
development process and (b) the estimation tools used in agile and
plan-based companies.Table 1ManagersÕ satisfaction with project planningSatisfactionAgile (%)Plan-based (%)
Not at all020
Not very 00
Sufficiently8060
Very2020
 ItÕs difficult for a company with a traditional
development process to respond rapidly to un-

expected changes, especially if the implemen-

tation phase has already started. Every modi-

fication runs the risk of affecting the project
plan and the process organization. Typical solutions for coping with changing
requirements includeattempting to anticipate the requirements

that could change over time during the
analysis phase;creating an initial, detailed requirements
specification through formal documents;applying more constraints on the con-
tracts; and simply attempting to please the customer

and complying with requests. However, all such solutions are not satisfactory.
Agile companies worry less about variations
in requirements. They use an iterative process,
during which the customer may refine and mod-
ify requirements. Moreover, having the customer

on-site encourages requirements changes.Typically, the surveyed plan-based companies
deliver the entire product in one batch at the end
of development, and customers can evaluate the
system only at the end. Consequently, their cus-

tomers frequently demand to speed up the proj-
ect, a common and substantial problem. Often,
these customers donÕt understand the actual

complexity of implementing their requests. To address this problem, plan-based com-
panies often 
develop the product with parallel teams,
communicate with customers to explain

the problems of delivering the product too
quickly, and 
use prototyping and allocate additional
time in the budget as a precaution.Agile companies encounter the request todeliver the final product faster less often be-

cause of the frequent product releases during

development. Incrementally delivering func-
tionality in a sequence of releases appears to
better satisfy customer needs. 
Qualities of good developersBoth agile and plan-based companies havesimilar responses about what qualities good
developers have. In both cases, they highlightthe ability to work in groups, with a clear pref-erence for developers who can work in teams
(50 percent of the answers) over developers
with high individual ability (20 percent) or
who are strongly motivated (30 percent).Some patterns exist in the answers: nearly all
the companies that consider teamwork as the
May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
25(a)COSFC
7060
50
40
30
20
1007060
50
40
30
20
1008070
60
50
40
30
20
100AgilePlan-basedAgile
Plan-basedAgile
Plan-basedCRCWP
(b)(c)RDPTQCR Collaborative relationship with the client
COS Client on site 

FC Fixed contracts

CWP Contracts with variable prices

VR Variable requirements

RDPTQ Request to deliver product too quickly

UC Unsatisfied clients

UF Too many useless features

O OtherUCUF
SatisfiedType of relationships
ProblemsSatisfaction levelNot very satisfiedVery satisfied
VRO
Percent of companiesPercent of companiesPercent of companies
Figure 3. The customerrelationship: (a) types
of relationships, (b)
satisfaction level, and
(c) typical problems. most important quality consider motivation sec-
ond most important and high individual ability
third. Moreover, all respondents who said that

motivation is the most important quality con-

sider the ability to work in groups second and

high individual ability the least important.
Thus, all respondents show an interesting regu-
larity in their opinions on this topic.
The interviewed managers adopted severalsolutions to improve these three developer qual-
ities: continuous training improves individual
abilities, and regular communication and proj-
ect involvement improves teamwork ability and
motivation.Agile methodsThe last part of the questionnaire deals withthe managerÕs knowledge of agile methods and

of their advantages and disadvantages. About
90 percent of the plan-based company man-
agers know about agile methods even if they
donÕt use them. This means that these ap-

proaches are a well-known phenomenon.The main causes for nonadoption of agilemethods are superficial knowledge of the
topic, resistance inside the company and fromcustomers, and large or geographically sepa-rated teams. These results correspond to XPÕs

limits as pointed out by Kent Beck.
5A perfect correspondence exists between
knowledge of agile methods and knowledge of
XP. All the plan-based and agile companies

know XP, but only 60 percent of the agile com-

panies and none of the plan-based ones know
about Scrum.Regarding the advantages of the use of agilemethods, recall the correlation between soft-
ware developmentÕs main problems and the

problems that agile methods address (see Figure

2). Adopting the agile approach offers a good

solution for the top two software problems. According to our study, introducing agile
methods also offers improvements in quality, re-

quirements management, customer satisfaction,
and team satisfaction. The main problems

caused introducing agile methods are the lack of

a detailed preliminary cost evaluation and the
troubles new concepts (such as pair program-

ming, test first, and customers on-site) cause. The
primary difficulty seems to be cultural: people
(customers and developers) donÕt easily accept

drastic changes in traditional environments. 
26IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Table 2Summary of results
Survey questionsAgile companiesPlan-based companies
Why have you modified your  Changes in the customersÕ requirements, 50%Changes in the customersÕ requirements, 50%
development process?Changes in the technology, 70%Changes in the technology, 70%
Other reasons, 40%Other reasons, 40%
Which is your most difficult  Delivering the software with all the 
features on time, 70%Delivering the software with all the features on time, 80%software development problem?Customer relationship, 10%Customer relationship, 50%
Which software development Delivering the software with all the features on time, 40%
Ñ Ñproblems have you solved byCustomer relationship, 60%
adopting agile methods?
How do you plan and organize Incremental code development, 70%Incremental code development, 70%

the software process?Precise subdivision of tasks, 30%Precise subdivision of tasks, 40%
Precise subdivision of phases, 20%Precise subdivision of phases, 50%

Use of prototypes, 20%Use of prototypes, 40%
Planning only essential functions, 50%Planning only essential functions, 20%
How do you consider your Not very satisfied, 10%Not very satisfied, 30%

relationship with your customer?Satisfied, 60%Satisfied, 50%
Verysatisfied, 30%Very satisfied, 20%
What are the most important Variable requirements, 50%Variable requirements, 70%

problems that you usually face Requests to deliver the product too quickly, 40%Requests to deliver the product too quickly, 60%
with customers?
What is a developerÕs most Ability to work in a group, 50%Ability to work in a group, 50%

important quality?High individual ability, 20%High individual ability, 20%
Motivation, 30%Motivation, 30%
 May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
27Results summary
Table 2 summarizes this studyÕs main ques-
tions and answers. In addition to the conclu-
sions reported throughout the article, we fur-

ther expand a few observations here. We noted that while environment variables
(both requirements and technology) affect all
the companies, the agile ones can better protect
the customer from most of the negative effects.Additionally, almost all the plan-based com-
panies say they know agile methods. However,

many managers only have a superficial knowl-

edge of them and are not aware that agile
methods comprise a set of development meth-
ods and not a single one. This limited knowl-
edge contributes to the nonadoption of such
techniques; however, large or geographically

separated development teams are often the pri-
mary cause.This studyÕs main limitation is the small
sample size, which results from the investiga-

tionÕs structure of addressing top managers.

The total number of top managers is limited,

and we only interviewed one per company. It

was difficult to persuade these managers to
spend time in an interview; however, this diffi-

culty makes the study more interesting be-
cause it includes valuable information col-
lected directly from top decision makers.This article has given a first analysis of
the advantages and disadvantages of
adopting agile methods from a proj-ect management perspective. 
Because sample size limited the study, we
plan to expand our data with input from other

top managers.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the interviewed managers for their time
and for their useful feedback. This work was partially
supported by the Free University of Bolzano-Bozen,
FIRB (Italian Fund for Basic Research) project MAPS
(agile methodologies for software production); Euro-
pean Social Fund 
project Teleacademy of the auto-
nomous province of Bolzano-Bozen; and the Interre-
gional project, Software District, promoted by the
innovation office of the autonomous province of South
Tyrol (thanks to the help of Maurizio Bergamini Ric-

cobon and Frantz Shıpf). References1.J. Johnson, ÒTurning Chaos into Success,Ó 
SoftwareMagazine, Dec. 1999, p. 30. 
2.B. Boehm, ÒSoftware Engineering Is a Value-Based Con-
tact Sport,Ó IEEE Software, Sept./Oct. 2002, p. 97. 
3.ÒE
XTREMECHAOS,Ó The Standish Group, 2001,www.standishgroup.com/sample_research/PDFpages/

extreme_chaos.pdf, p. 4.4.R. Thomsett, 
Third Wave Project Management,
Your-
don Press, 1993.5.K. Beck et al., ÒManifesto for Agile Software Develop-
ment,Ó 2001, http://agilemanifesto.org.6.H. Petroski, 
To Engineer Is Human: The Role of Fail-
ure in Successful Design, Vintage Books, 1992.
7.V.R. Basili, 
Software Modeling and Measurement: TheGoal/Question/Metric Paradigm, tech. report CS-TR-2956, Dept. Computer Science, Univ. Maryland, Col-

lege Park, 1992.8.G. Marbach, 
Le Ricerche di Mercato, Utet, 1996.9.J.M. Converse and S. Presser, 
Survey Questions: Hand-crafting the Standardized Questionnaire, Sage, 1986.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
About the AuthorsMartina Ceschi
is a research assistant and PhD student at the Faculty of Computer Sci-ence at the Free University of Bozen, Italy. Her research interests include agile project man-

agement and requirements management. She received a Laurea in economics from the Univer-
sity of Trento. Contact her at the Faculty of Computer Science, Free Univ. of Bozen, Piazza

Domenicani, 3, I-39100, Bolzano, Italy; martina.ceschi@unibz.it.Alberto Sillitti
is an assistant professor at the Free University of Bozen, Italy. His re-
search interests include software engineering, component-based software engineering, Web Ser-

vices integration and measurement, agile methods, and open source. He received his PhD in
electrical and computer engineering from the University of Genoa and is a professional engi-
neer. Contact him at the Faculty of Computer Science, Free Univ. of Bozen, Piazza Domenicani,

3, I-39100 Bolzano, Italy; alberto.sillitti@unibz.it.Giancarlo Succiis a professor of software engineering and the director of the Centerfor Applied Software Engineering at the Free University of Bozen. His research interests include
agile methodologies, open source development, empirical software engineering, software prod-
uct lines, software reuse, and software engineering over the Internet. He received a PhD in
electronic and computer engineering from the University of Genoa. Contact him at the Faculty
of Computer Science, Free Univ. of Bozen, Piazza Domenicani, 3, I-39100 Bolzano, Italy; 

giancarlo.succi@unibz.it.Stefano De Panfilisis the director of the Research and Development Laboratory of
Gruppo Engineering. His research interests include software development and process cus-
tomization, support, monitoring, and control. He received a Laurea in mathematics from the
University of Rome - La Sapienza. Contact him at the Engineering Ingegneria Informatica
S.p.a., Via San Martino della Battaglia 56, I-00185 Roma, Italy; depa@eng.it.