 36 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY 0740-7459/16/$33.00 © 2016 IEEEStrategic 
Prototyping for 

Developing Big 

Data Systems
Hong-Mei Chen and Rick Kazman,
 University of Hawaii at Manoa
Serge Haziyev,
 SoftServe
// 
A proposed model provides cost-effective, 
systematic risk management in agile big data system 
development. It uses prototyping strategically and only 
in areas that architecture analysis can™t suf˜ciently 
address. Developers use less costly prototypes 
instead of blindly building full-scale prototypes. 
//BIG DATA SYSTEM 
development 
faces more and greater risks than 
traditional small-data system devel
-opment. These risks stem from
1,2
Ł the ˜ve 
v™s of big data (volume, 
variety, velocity, veracity, and 

value),
Ł paradigm shifts,
Ł rapid proliferation of big data 
technology,
Ł rapid technology changes,
Ł the dif˜culty of selecting big 

data technology,
Ł the complex integration of new 
and old systems, and
Ł the short history of big data sys
-tem development.
For example, small-data sys
-tems focus on data at rest (stored in 
the database). In contrast, big data 
systems emphasize data in use and 
data in motion, which drives data 
management to unfamiliar territory 

such as NoSQL.
Moreover, in small-data system 
development, dataŒprogram inde
-pendence is a core principle. Archi
-tecture decisions are relatively triv
-ial. In big data system development, 

dataŒprogram dependence is the 

norm, so architecture design becomes 

critical and poses great risks if done 
poorly.
2 Many new architectural pat
-terns have recently become dominant 

in big data development, such as hor
-izontal scaling, data lakes, polyglot 
persistence, the Lambda Architec
-ture, and massively parallel process
-ing. And the system development 

paradigm has shifted, from focusing 

on coding in small-data system de
-velopment to orchestration and tech
-nology selection in big data systems. 

There are a large number of emerg
-ing big data technologies (both open 
source and proprietary), many of 
which are provided by new vendors 

or open source projects. This height
-ens risks in technology selection.
So, cost, schedule, and quality 
risks are more pronounced in big 

data system development. Manag
-ingŠidentifying, understanding, and 
mitigatingŠthese risks is critical for 
system success, and the methods for 

doing this differ for big data system 

development.
To provide cost-effective, sys
-tematic risk management in agile 

big data system development, we 
developed the RASP (Risk-Based, 
Architecture-Centric Strategic Pro
-totyping) model. An embedded 

multiple-case study of nine big data 
projects at SoftServe, a global out
-sourcing ˜rm, validated RASP. On 
the basis of our experiences, we de
-veloped techniques to help architects 
deal with strategic prototyping.
FOCUS:
 BIG DATA
  MARCH/APRIL 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 37Toward Strategic 
Prototyping
Traditionally, small-data manage
-ment, following the rapid-application-
 development methodology, primarily 
and implicitly relies on 
horizontal evo
-lutionary prototyping
 to help man
-age risks. Evolutionary prototyping is 
needed when requirements are uncer
-tain, technologies are new, no com
-parable system has been previously 
developed, or experimentation or de
-sign evaluation is necessary to assess 

solutions. In horizontal evolutionary
 prototyping, all system functions are 
developed with limited, but increasing 
functionality per release.
However, this approach is chal
-lenged by the data scale and com
-plexity of big data systems. For ex
-ample, our early studies (not yet 

published) revealed that data re
-trieval performance with a 100-node 
Hadoop system differed dramati
-cally from that with a 500-node sys
-tem. It™s naive (and incorrect) to as
-sume linear scale-up. The scarcity 

of benchmarks in big data systems 
aggravates these problems. Creating 

prototypes has always been expen
-sive and time-consuming and is even 

more so in big data system develop
-ment. And prototyping can™t iden
-tify many risks, such as vendor or 
product survivability for commercial 
products, and the community™s size 

and vigor for open source products.
Alternatives to Prototyping
Alternatives to prototyping in
-clude simulation, formal analytical 
models, and architecture analysis. 
Simulation is viable primarily in 

mature domains, in which critical 

system properties can be abstracted 
and modeled.
Typically, formal analytical mod
-els are used in domains with critical 
requirements, such as hard real-time 
deadlines or safety-critical prop
-erties. But the cost, steep learning 

curve, and dif˜culty of creating and 

scaling such models make them pro
-hibitively expensive for most com
-mercial projects.
Architecture analysis has been 
a relatively inexpensive way to gain 
early insight into a system™s proper
-ties and risks. For traditional small-
data systems, architecture design 
is straightforwardŠit™s an 
N-tier 
client-server design. So, architec
-ture analysis has been largely taken 
for granted and omitted. However, 
in big data systems, many paradigm 

shifts underscore the importance 

of an explicit architecture design 
and analysis process.
2 Architecture 
analysisŠunderstanding the con
-sequences of design decisionsŠis 
critical and should occur early in the 

software lifecycle. It identi˜es not 

only architecture-related risks (for 
example, regarding performance, 
availability, security, modi˜ability, 

and integrability) but also process 

risks (for example, regarding re
-quirements, tools, and methods) and 

organizational risks (for example, 

regarding the big picture, awareness, 
scope, and unrecognized needs).
3Our Approach
Architecture analysis usually takes 
much less time and costs much 
less than prototyping. However, it 
can™t address all risks. For instance, 

only prototyping can verify a new 

big data component™s real-time 
performance or assess runtime re
-source consumption thresholds, scal
-ability limits, and so on. Prototyping 

and architecture analysis each have 

pros and cons. So, we combine them.
We consider three kinds of pro
-totypes. 
Throwaway prototypes
 are also called rapid prototypes or 
proofs of concept. In 
vertical evo
-lutionary prototypes
, one or more 
system components are developed 
with full functionality in each re
-lease. Vertical evolutionary proto
-types are generally more suitable 
for big data system development 
than horizontal evolutionary proto
-types, as our case studies showed. A 

minimum viable product 
(MVP) is 
an evolutionary prototype that has 

only those core features that allow 

product deployment, minimizing 

the time spent on an iteration. An 
MVP emphasizes hypothesis testing 
by ˜elding the product with real us
-ers and collecting usage data. The 
data helps con˜rm or reject the hy
-pothesis, letting developers make 
additional design decisions.
Cost (money, time, and effort) and 
effectiveness issues drove us to advo
-cate strategic prototyping, but only in 

areas that architecture analysis can™t 

adequately address. By strategic pro
-totyping, we mean ˜rst employing an 

architecture-based approach to iden
-tify and analyze risks and then us
-ing less costly throwaway prototypes 

and vertical prototypes when neces
-sary. This contrasts with building full 

(horizontal) evolutionary prototypes 
Cost, schedule, and quality risks 
 are more pronounced in big data 
 system development.
 38 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
FOCUS:
 BIG DATA
blindly, as in conventional small-data 
system development.
The Case Studies
The nine case studies that we con-

ducted at SoftServe covered
Ł network security and intrusion 

prevention,
Ł online-coupon Web analytics,
Ł a cloud-based mobile-app devel-

opment platform,
Ł a telecom e-tailing platform,
Ł Web analytics and marketing 
optimization,
Ł healthcare insurance operational 
intelligence,
Ł an ultra-large-scale travel site,
Ł an operations intelligence plat-

form for a content delivery net-

work, and
Ł a big-data-as-a-service platform.
Details on the case studies are at 
http://itm-vm.shidler.hawaii.edu
/BDCases/CaseStudies.htm.
The case studies and SoftServe™s 
extensive practical experience show 

that big data system development 

differs qualitatively from small-

data system development. In the 
case studies, most of the schedule 
and effort went into value discovery 

(from big data), architecture analy-

sis, prototyping, and orchestration 
of off-the-shelf commercial and open 
source components. In contrast, in 

small-data system development, a far 
higher percentage of schedule and 
effort goes straight into program-

ming. Given that the development 

processes differ, we need different 
methods for designing and analyz-

ing big data systems. And given that 

these systems are large, complex, 
and risky, an important aspect of 
this development process is deter-

mining whether, when, and where to 
prototype, as we™ll show.
An Architecture-
Centric Approach
RASP can stand alone, but we in-
tegrated it into BDD (Big Data De-
sign), our architecture-centric ag-
ile development methodology (see 

Figure 1).
1,2
 BDD aims to address 
big data™s inherent complexity (size, 
scale, heterogeneity, ambiguity, and 
so on). As Herbert Simon explained, 

architecture is the key to dealing 

with complexity: complex systems 
that exhibit near-decomposability 
Innovation processUse case developmentStrategic development planning1. Business and innovation goals2. Constraints and concerns1. Choose a reference architecture10. Architecture analysis: BITAM3. BD-DFD2. Form the architecture landscape4. Establish an iteration goal5. Choose the elements to decompose3. Quality attribute scenarios4. Big data architecture scenarios6. Choose design concepts and data models 7. Instantiate the architectural elements8. Sketch views; record decisions and metadata9. Evaluate each iteration BDDRASPValue discoveryRequirements analysisDesignImplementation and testingEvaluation:  technical and business dimensionsDesignconcept catalogIdentify the risks inbusiness goals, alignment, and strategyFeasibility study andUI mockups(throwaway prototyping)Technology riskmitigation (verticalevolutionary andthrowawayprototyping)Identify the risks in missing,con˜icting, ambiguous, orunderspeci˚ed architecturalrequirements Identify the risks ineach decision made(or not made)related to high-priorityscenarios and alignmentwith business goalsMinimum viable product(MVP)Identify risks in futurerequirements andnew goals or strategiesSpikeSpikeSpikeSpikeArchitecture analysisStrategic prototypingFIGURE 1. 
The RASP (Risk-Based Architecture-Centric Strategic Prototyping) model integrated with the BDD (Big Data Design) 
development methodology. BD-DFD stands for big data data˜ ow diagram; BITAM stands for Business and IT Alignment Method. A 

spike is a miniature project aimed at answering a speci˚ c quality attribute question.
 MARCH/APRIL 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
39are easier to describe and understand 
and have simpli˜ ed behavior.
4 Be-
cause big data development focuses 
primarily on orchestration instead of 
coding, an architectural approach to 

technology selection and system in-

tegration is critical.
The relationship between archi-
tecture design and agility has been 

debated over the past decade. An 

architecture-centric approach facili-
tates rapid iterations with less dis-
ruption, as well as lower risk and 

cost, by creating appropriate archi-
tecture abstractions.
5 For example, 
assume an architect anticipates that 

a technology family will rapidly 
change (by introducing capabili-

ties or adding new members). If that 

architect is prudent, he or she will 
insert an abstraction layer as an in-
termediary between the technology 

family and the rest of the system, 

to insulate the system from such 
changes. So, an architecture-based 
mind-set can lay the foundation to 

support agility in both initial system 
construction and future iterations in 
big data system development.
The left side of Figure 1 outlines 
BDD, which differs from typical 
small-data system development.
6The latter typically comprises re-
quirements analysis, conceptual de-
sign, selection of a database manage-
ment system, logical design, physical 

design, prototyping, implementa-

tion, and performance evaluation. In 
contrast, BDD comprises value dis-
covery, requirements analysis, de-

sign, implementation and testing, 

and evaluation of the technical and 
business dimensions.
Value Discovery
Our multiple-case study of 25 large 
enterprises revealed that the par-
ticipants viewed big data as high 
risk and disruptive.
7 So, all the 
enterprises started development 

with value discovery. This phase en-
compasses an innovation process, 
use case development, and strate-

gic deployment planning, includ-

ing costŒbene˜ t analysis,
8 sourcing 
decisions, and talent management. 
The innovation process can be top-
down, bottom-up, or a mix. It™s of-

ten long, taking up to three years for 

some companies. High-level primary 
use cases that demonstrate the value 
of big data and opportunities for in-

novation are solicited or developed 

before any detailed requirements 
analysis. If companies don™t ˜ nd use 
cases that demonstrate value from 

big data, they typically don™t con-
tinue with experimentation and de-
ployment planning.
During value discovery, archi-
tecture analysis based on a rough, 
early design can help estimate the 
total cost of ownership and identify 

risks. This analysis includes elicit-

ing key functional and quality at-
tribute requirements as scenarios. 
Each scenario exercises some archi-

tectural alternatives; each alterna-

tive represents a signi˜ cant set of 
architectural decisions. The risks 
de termined in this phase focus on 
business strategy, the business 
goals™ validity, and  businessŒ IT 

misalignment. This phase often 
involves strategic decisions on 
whether to develop an MVP.
Also during this phase, developers 
might then create low-to-medium-
˜ delity UI mockups or architecture 
spikes
 to further understand technol-
ogies, clarify business and innovation 
goals and requirements, and demon-

strate value. In agile methodologies, 
a spike is a miniature project, typi-
cally driven by a user story, aimed 

at answering a speci˜ c question. An 
architecture spike is similar but is 
driven by a quality attribute ques-

tion, usually regarding performance; 

however, it could, in theory, address 
any system quality.
9 In an architec-
ture spike, developers typically create 

a prototype to address the quality at-
tribute question. They could develop 

the spike on the main branch, but 

they typically develop it on a separate 
branch and (if it™s successful) merge it 
with the main branch.
Requirements Analysis
Here, the regular agile lifecycle 

starts. The business and innova-
tion goals as well as the design con-
straints and architectural concerns 

from requirements analysis will 

become inputs for system design. 
Analysis of the architectural require-
ments, expressed as quality attribute 

scenarios, helps identify additional 

risks: missing, con˚ icting, ambigu-
ous, or underspeci˜ ed architecture 
requirements. The quality attri-
butes (such as performance, security, 
modi˜ ability, and availability), not 

functionality, drive architectural de-

cisions. So, the requirements analy-
sis activity must elicit, validate, and 
prioritize the quality attribute re-

quirements because this will guide 
Architecture is the key to dealing 
with complexity.
 40 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
FOCUS:
 BIG DATA
subsequent architecture design and 
technology selection.
Design
This phase performs architecture 

design, data modeling, and technol-
ogy selection in parallel, following 
the Attribute-Driven Design (ADD) 

method.
1,2,10,11
 An iterative process 
reuses well-known, assessed, and 
documented design primitives from 
a design concepts catalog
2 (an ex-
ample catalog is at http://smartdeci
sionsgame.com). This makes archi-
tecture design simpler, more capa-

ble, and more repeatable. The design 

steps use three catalog components:
Ł reference architectures and 

frameworks;
Ł design patterns, tactics, and data 
models; and
Ł a big data technology catalog.
In step 1, architects choose a refer-
ence architecture for a data analytics 
application. For example, they could 

consult the design concepts catalog 
and see four options: extended rela-
tional, pure nonrelational, data re-

˜ nery, and Lambda Architecture. 

They could also consult the catalog 
for speci˜ c technologies. For exam-
ple, if they need a messaging technol-

ogy for component integration, they 

could choose Apache Kafka, Ama-
zon Simple Queue Service, Apache 
ActiveMQ, or RabbitMQ.
In step 2, architects create an 
architecture landscape; in step 3, 

they design big data data˚ ow dia-

grams.
1,12
 In steps 4 through 9, they 
decompose a system and a context 
diagram and model them in detail, 
in multiple iterations. Each iteration 

establishes goals (step 4) and selects 

a quality attribute, architectural con-
cern, or system component to focus 
on (step 5). In step 6, architects select 
the design concepts (such as patterns, 

tactics, technologies, and frame-

works) and data models (based on 
inputs captured in the big data sce-
narios). In step 7, the instantiation 

of architectural elements includes 
selection of databases, analytics plat-
forms, and other big data compo-

nents. The technologies chosen for 

realizing conceptual components are 
critical architectural decisions; some-
times, steps 6 and 7 require experi-

mentationŠfor example, a spike.
In step 8, the architects document 
the design decisions and their ratio-

nale. Step 9 evaluates the design de-

cisions on the basis of iteration goals 
and measurements taken from any 
internal prototype or MVP.
In step 10, BDD employs BI-
TAM (Business and IT Alignment 
Method),
13 a lightweight architecture 
analysis method based on the Archi-

tecture Tradeoff Analysis Method,
14to identify risks and, in particular, 
misalignments. This analysis identi-
˜ es risks concerning the architectural 
decisions made (or not made) relative 

to the high-priority scenarios. The 

risks aren™t ˜ xed at this point; risk 
mitigation is a separate, follow-on 
activity. Architects might mitigate 

the risks by
Ł changing the system™s design, re-

quirements, or business goals;
Ł making additional project man-
agement decisions (for example, 
retraining personnel or out-

sourcing parts of development); 

orŁ prototyping, experiments, more-

detailed analyses, or simulations.
Here, we focus on prototyping.
Implementation and Testing
In the implementation-and-testing 

phase, the architects ˚ esh out the 
architecture design and either replace 
prototypes (if they™re throwaway) or 
evolve them (if they™re evolutionary). 

And the architects plan and execute 

testing to con˜ rm adherence to both 
the functional requirements and 
quality attribute requirements.
Evaluation
After a set of design iterations, the 

architects might choose to more 
completely analyze the architec-
ture to discover risks and tradeoffs 

before committing to a release. At 

the end of each major development 
cycle or system release, architects 
can also perform architecture anal-

ysis to identify the risks of future 

requirements and new business 
goals and strategies. In addition, 
they can perform value discovery 

to continuously explore the antici-
pated value of the big data system 
they™re constructing.
Applying RASP
Because prototyping decisions are 

critical in big data system develop-
ment, architects should make them 
in a consistent, disciplined way. Be-

cause technology orchestration is the 

core of big data system development, 
such development relies heavily on 
prototyping and architecture analy-

sis for risk management. As we™ve 

shown, RASP can guide this proto-
typing and analysis.
On the basis of the lessons 
learned from our research with 

SoftServe, we developed questions 
that architects should answer and 

a decision ˚ owchart (see Figure 2) 

for them to follow before they em-
bark on a (relatively costly) proto-
typing effort.
In our case studies, employing 
standardized questions and deci-
sion procedures as well as architec-
ture analysis methods helped us plan 
 MARCH/APRIL 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
41prototyping systematically and stra-
tegically. For example, the questions 
focused on whether
Ł the technology was new,
Ł we had successfully used it 

before,
Ł signi˜ cant new requirements 
existed, and
Ł objective evidence substantiated 
product performance claims.
The answers to these questions helped 

us determine whether to prototype 
and how to evaluate the prototyping 
results. For example, an unsuccessful 

prototype might result in choosing a 
different technology, but another op-
tion is to soften some requirements. 

Our case studies exempli˜ ed each of 

these kinds of decisions.
 In each case study, we applied 
RASP alongside BDD (and its de-

sign concepts catalog) to system-

atically design and manage risk. 
Because each project had different 
business and innovation goals, their 

risks differed. However, consis-
tent risk themes emerged: technol-
ogy selection, performance of new 
technologies, total cost of owner-

ship, and integration of technologies.
We didn™t create a prototype un-
less we had determined that archi-

tecture analysis alone was inade-

quate to address risk. For two of the 
case studies, which required quick 
feedback on the budget and schedule 

for business decision making, archi-

tecture analysis alone suf˜ ced. The 
other seven case studies strategically 
employed prototyping, which helped 

minimize risk and was cost-effective. 
In each of these seven case stud-
ies, creating vertical evolutionary 
InitialarchitectureanalysisAssess the existing systemand identify gapsthat pose risks fornew requirements.Perform architectureanalysis, update theexisting architecture, andselect candidatetechnologies to replaceor augment existingtechnologies. Perform architectureanalysis, and selecta referencearchitectureand candidatetechnologies.YesIsthis agreen˜eldsystemdesign?NoThrowaway prototypeChange thecandidatetechnologyYesIs theselectedtechnologynew on themarket?NoWasit usedsuccessfully before forsimilar scenarios?NoYesYesHavetrusted sourcesﬁprovenﬂ the technologyfor speci˜cscenarios?YesYesNoNoYesNoDoes theprototype satisfythe speci˜cscenarios?YesArethere newrequirements thatpose technologyrisks? NoNoVerticalevolutionaryprototypeGo to thethrowaway-prototypechart for eachtechnology thatposes a risk.Reconsider the technologyselection, and go to thethrowaway-prototypechart.Integrate technologies andtest critical functionalityand quality attributescenarios.YesIsthere asigni˜cant riskwith a selectedtechnology?Create a rapid (throwaway)prototype to mitigate risksArethere more con˜gurations, data models, orresourcesto try?Is itpossible toﬁsoftenﬂ anyrequirements tomatch prototypecapabilities?NoYesArethere issuesdiscovered with anytechnologies?NoFIGURE 2. 
A strategic-prototyping decision ˜ owchart. Employing it will help software architects make decisions in a consistent, 
disciplined way.
 42 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
FOCUS:
 BIG DATA
prototypes and throwaway proto-
types took from two to six weeks, 
much less time than for horizontal 
evolutionary prototyping (although 

creating and evolving an MVP might 

take longer).
On the basis of these case stud-
ies and our prior experience, we cre-

ated and veri˜ ed seven guidelines 

for when to do architecture analysis, 
when to prototype, and under what 
conditions to deploy each kind of 

prototype:
Ł Architecture analysis might be 

the only feasible option when 
you need to make early decisions 
that have a project-wide scope. 

Then, you can employ throw-

away prototypes to make tech-
nology choices and demonstrate 
feasibility.
Ł Architecture analysis alone is in-

suf˜ cient to prove many impor-
tant system properties.
Ł Architecture analysis comple-
ments vertical evolutionary 
prototyping. Analysis helps 
you select candidate technolo-
gies; prototyping validates 

those choices and quickly gets a 

working system in front of the 
customer. This aids in eliciting 
feedback and prioritizing future 

development efforts.
Ł An evolutionary prototype can 
effectively mitigate risk if you 
implement it as a skeletonŠan 

infrastructure into which you 
can integrate components and 
technologies.
14 This helps miti-
gate integration risks, supports 
early demonstrations of user 
value, and aids the understand-

ing of end-to-end scenarios.
Ł Vertical evolutionary prototyp-
ing can help answer questions 
about systemwide properties 

but might need to be augmented 

with throwaway prototypes 
when requirements are volatile. 
When requirements change, 

new architecture analysis and 
throwaway prototypes might be 
needed (to help avoid falling into 

the ﬁhammer looking for a nailﬂ 

syndrome).
Ł Throwaway prototypes work 

best when you need to quickly 

evaluate a technology, to see 

whether it satis˜ es critical ar-
chitecture scenarios (usually 
related to quality attributes such 

as performance and scalability). 

They™re typically used for narrow 
scenarios that involve evaluating 
just one or two components.
Ł Whether to create an MVP is 
more of a business decision than 
a decision driven simply by tech-

nological risk. Typical business 

goals addressed include getting 
early user feedback and updat-
ing the product accordingly, 

presenting a working version to 

a trade show or customer event, 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
HONG-MEI CHEN 
is a professor of IT management in the 
Shidler College of Business at the University of Hawaii at 
Manoa. Her research interests include novel information system 
design and development methodologies, big data engineering 
and management, social customer relationship management, 
service engineering, software architecture, and businessŒIT 
alignment. Chen received a PhD in business administration from 
the University of Arizona. Contact her at hmchen@hawaii.edu.
RICK KAZMAN 
is a professor of information technology man-
agement at the University of Hawaii at Manoa and a principal 
researcher at the Software Engineering Institute. His research 
interests include software architecture, design and analysis 
tools, software visualization, and software engineering econom-
ics. Kazman received a PhD in computational linguistics from 
Carnegie Mellon University. He™s a senior member of the IEEE 
Computer Society. Contact him at kazman@hawaii.edu.
SERGE HAZIYEV 
is a vice president of software architecture 
at SoftServe. He leads the Architecture Group and designs, 
evaluates, and modernizes large-scale software solutions. He 
has a Software Engineering Institute Software Architecture 
Professional certi˜ cate and more than 17 years™ experience 
in enterprise-level solutions including big data, software as a 
service and cloud computing, service-oriented architecture, 
and carrier-grade telecommunication services. Contact him at 
shaziyev@softserveinc.com.
  MARCH/APRIL 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 43structuring the development 
process, checking team progress 
and alignment, or testing an out
-sourcing vendor using an MVP 
as a pilot project.
Richard Baskerville and 

Jan Stage advocated risk 
analysis for controlling 
evolutionary prototyping;
15 we™ve 
ex
 panded on this position. Our 
research, departing from prior 
prototyping approaches, demon
-strated that an architecture-centric 

approachŠ
 RASPŠcan help make 
risk management explicit, system
-atic, and cost-effective. The need for 
strategic prototyping is critical for 

big data system development, which 
involves high risk, high complexity, 
and immature technologies. RASP™s 

implementation of strategic proto
-typing provides a basis for value 

discovery with stakeholders, for rea
-soning about risks, for planning and 

estimating cost and schedule, and 
for supporting experimentation.
Prior studies analyzed how orga
-nizations decide whether to use pro
-totyping and what environmental 

and organizational variables (such 
as project size and developer, user, 

and organizational characteristics) 

affect the proper use of prototyp
-ing.
16 However, these studies pro
-duced no signi˜cant ˜ndings. Other 
researchers created a risk list to guide 
risk management, but that list in
-volved more than 100 factors, ren
-dering it impractical.
3 We believe our 
architecture-centric approach, based 
on primary use cases and prioritized 
quality attribute scenarios, provides a 

more intuitive, ef˜cient, and effective 

way to identify, mitigate, and contin
-uously monitor risks.
In particular, our strategic pro
-totyping decision ˚owchart and 
the associated guidelines help make 

RASP repeatable and prototyping 
cost-effective. Architects can plan 
and manage prototyping in a strate
-gic, disciplined fashion. However, no 
design or development method, no 
matter how thorough, can guaran
-tee success. The architectural agility 

created and the architecture analyses 
performed with RASP rely on the ar
-chitect™s training and discipline.
References
 1.
 H.-M. Chen, R. Kazman, and S. 
Haziyev, ﬁAgile Big Data Analytics 

Development: An Architecture-
 
Centric Approach,ﬂ 
Proc. 2016 

Hawaii Int™l Conf. System Sciences 

(HICSS 16), 2016, pp. 5378Œ5387.
 2.
 H.-M. Chen et al., ﬁBig Data System 

Development: An Embedded Case 

Study with a Global Outsourcing 

Firm,ﬂ 
Proc. 1st Int™l Workshop Big 

Data Software Eng.
 (BIGDSE 15), 

2015, pp. 44Œ50.
 3.
 L. Bass et al., 
Risk Themes Dis
-covered through Architecture 

Evaluations
, tech. report CMU/SEI-
2006-TR-012, Software Eng. Inst., 

Carnegie Mellon Univ., 2006.
 4.
 H. Simon, ﬁThe Architecture of Com
-plexity,ﬂ 
Proc. Am. Philosophical Soc.
, vol. 106, no. 6, 1962, pp. 467Œ482.
 5.
 S. Bellomo, I. Gorton, and R. Kaz
-man, ﬁToward Agile Architecture: 

Insights from 15 Years of ATAM 

Data,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 32, no. 5, 
2015, pp. 38Œ45.
 6.
 R. Elmasri and S. Navathe, 
Funda
-mentals of Database Systems
, 6th 
ed., Addison-Wesley, 2010.
 7.
 H.-M. Chen et al., ﬁAmazon in the 

Air: Innovating with Big Data at Luft
-hansa,ﬂ 
Proc. 2016 Hawaii Int™l Conf. 
System Sciences 
(HICSS 16), 2016, 

pp. 5096Œ5105.
 8.
 J. Asundi, R. Kazman, and M. Klein, 

ﬁUsing Economic Considerations to 

Choose among Architecture Design 
Alternatives,ﬂ tech report CMU/SEI-

2001-TR-035, Software Eng. Inst., 

Carnegie Mellon Univ., 2001.
 9.
 T.C.N. Graham, R. Kazman, and C. 

Walmsley, ﬁAgility and Experimenta
-tion: Practical Techniques for Resolv
-ing Architectural Tradeoffs,ﬂ 
Proc. 

29th Int™l Conf. Software Eng.
 (ICSE 

07), 2007, pp. 519Œ528.
 10.
 H. Cervantes, P. Velasco-Elizondo, 

and R. Kazman, ﬁA Principled Way 

to Use Frameworks in Architecture 

Design,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 30, 
 no. 2, 2013, pp. 46Œ53.
 11.
 H. Cervantes and R. Kazman, 
Design
-ing Software Architectures: A Practi
-cal Approach
, Addison-Wesley, to be 
published in 2016.
 12.
 H.-M. Chen and R. Kazman, ﬁAr
-chitecting Ultra-Large-Scale Green 
Information Systems,ﬂ 
Proc. 1st Int™l 

Workshop Green and Sustainable Soft
-ware
 (GREENS 12), 2012, pp. 69Œ75.
 13.
 H.-M. Chen, R. Kazman, and A. 

Garg, ﬁBITAM: An Engineering-

Principled Method for Managing Mis
-alignments between Business and IT 

Architectures,ﬂ 
Science of Computer 
Programming
, vol. 57, no. 1, 2005, 
pp. 5Œ26.
 14.
 L. Bass, P. Clements, and R. Kazman, 

Software Architecture in Practice
, 3rd 
ed., Addison-Wesley, 2012.
 15.
 R.L. Baskerville and J. Stage, ﬁControl
-ling Prototype Development through 

Risk Analysis,ﬂ 
MIS Q.
, vol. 20, no. 4, 
1996, pp. 481Œ504.
 16.
 B. Hardgrave, R. Wilson, and K. 

Eastman, ﬁToward a Contingency 

Model for Selecting an Information 

System Prototyping Strategy,ﬂ 
J. 

Management Information Systems
, vol. 15, no. 2, 1999, pp. 113Œ136.
Selected CS articles and columns 
are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
