 CASE: Reliability Engineering for Information Systems 
Elliot J. Chikofsky and Burt L. Rubenstein, Index 7i.chnolog.v You can use CASE environments in new ways to support the entire software 
life cyde, including reliability engineering, maintenance, documentation, and auditing. ~ March 1988 ~~ ei,elopers of information systems have historically been 
the last to apply computer-based 
t~ol~ to improve the quality, reliability, and pro- ductivity oftheir own work - a phenome- non known 
as the ﬁshoemaker™s childrenﬂ 
syndrome, from the story 
of the shoe- 
maker whose children never had new shoes because all new shoes were 
made for others. This tradition 
is changing as organizations involved in both commercial data processing and embedded real-time applications review their heavy investment 
in software and information systems. Having recently identified 
information systems as a capital resource, 
they nou realize their need for surer design and relia- bility. By introducing new CASE technol- ogy, they can achieve greater system development productivity 
while providing a new approach to engineering informa- tion systems reliably. 
total cost of data processing (the combined hardware and wttnare cost$),™.™ as Figure 1 shows. It \\it5 clcar that hardware costs were rapidly falling and that personnel COI~S in the labor-intensive 
solt\vat-e devel- opment arena were rising. 
The projection has turned 
OUI to be all too true. Today, the rapid pace 
at which hard- \\are innotations are announced, partic- ularly in the area of microprocessor technology, no\v well exceeds the capabil- ities of our softMare-de~eloprnent technol- ogy. Consider, 
lor example, the 
Intel 80286 processor, \\hicl1 can wpport mul- titasking operations. At the time of its introduction, the existing general-purpose operating \y\tcms for lBR4 PCs (such as MS-DOS and Xenix) had no way to use its capabilities. And then, before the 
first operating system (OS/2) was abailable 
to take full adbaritage of the 286, the 80386 processor made its debut with even 
greater As early as 1973, Barry Boehm 
capabilities. An entire generation 
of projected that software 
costs would, by processor hardware technology has 1985, reach or exceed 90 percent of the arrived and been superseded without any 0740-7459/88/0300/0011/$01 00 81988 IEEE ~~ ~~~ 
~~ 
11  Percent 00 80 60 40 20 Software maintenance 1955 1970 1985 Figure 1. Evolution of system-development costs (y-axis is percent of total cost). software to support it reaching the mar- ketplace! Further, the 
ability to develop software to meet new needs is rapidly losing 
ground to software maintenance. 
The US Air Force™s F-16 jet fighter, for example, has an $85-million budget for software devel- opment. On top 
of this, the Air Force is expecting to spend about $250 million in software maintenance 
- almost three 
times the development Organizations are now recognizing how the software 
crisis affects them. Randall 
Jensen of Hughes Aircraft, for 
example, has identified six key software problems 
resulting from systems-development approaches as commonly 
a~plied:~ products exceeding cost estimates, late delivery, inadequate performance, 
impossible maintenance, prohibitive modification costs, 
and unreliability. More than ever before, organizations 
are looking for workable solutions 
to increase the productivity 
of their systems- development staff, to improve the 
cost- effectiveness of 
the development process, and to ensure the reliability 
and quality of systems produced. Development approaches Since the mid-l970s, the 
approach to developing information systems has evolved with 
the growth of methods to aid both project management and specifica- tion. Organizations have turned 
to more formal methods 
of system development 
and, most recently, to automated tools to support these methods. Classical methods. The development of information systems and software has 
long been viewed as an art rather than a 
science. The programmer or analyst would wade 
through a loose collection 
of user 
wants and needs. Some time later, through some arcane and 
mystical process, 
a system would appear that, even though it did not 
meet all the user™s needs, was usually 
con- sidered better 
than what existed before. This classical approach was characterized by informal guidelines, lack of 
standardi- zation, and minimal documentation (usually produced as an afterthought). Some order was introduced in the early 1970s in the form of project-management 
methods based on models of the 
system- development life cycle. Since then, many packaged life-cycle methods - incor- porating directions, 
forms, and accep- tance standards - have been 
marketed commercially. Military 
standards for spec- ification and documentation practices in use today are examples of content-based life-cycle methods. These methods 
try to manage the development 
process by requiring that documents be produced at specific checkpoints, according 
to prescribed forms or document-content guidelines. The effectiveness of life-cycle methods has been limited by two key problems: lack 
of formality, resulting in inconsistency, and lack of 
maintainability. Most life- cycle methods stress the capture of documentation during the 
development process but do not adequately provide for the continued 
usefulness of the documents produced. The result is often notebooks full of completed forms or a set of Vic- torian novel-like narrative specifications, both of which 
are destined to sit on book- shelves gathering dust. The specifications produced are often incomplete, 
inconsis- tent, and incorrect, and are seldom updated with changes to the system. Formal methods. The need for greater 
productivity in the system-development life cycle led 
to the introduction of 
more formal methods 
in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Most methods were aimed at spe- cific stages of 
the life cycle and were based on different user viewpoints 
about the tar- get information systems. Structured analysis, introduced 
popu- larly by Tom DeMarco,™ applied 
some of the decomposition techniques that improve programming to the front-end 
requirements and analysis phases of the systems life cycle. 
Structured analysis grew out of structured design, 
which itself had grown out of structured programming. 
Through the use of 
structured dataflow diagrams and descriptions of 
data, the analyst could build up a systematic description of the information system™s logical (functional) and physical (imple- 
mentation) aspects. Management proce- dures provided manual validation of the dataflow diagrams via walkthroughs, and diagrams and data descriptions became deliverable parts of system documen- tation. Many variations of formal methods 
now exist. Well-known versions of struc- tured analysis include the 
Yourdon/ DeMarco and Gane/Sarson methods. 
Recent adaptations of structured analysis to specific needs of 
real-time systems 
development include the Ward/Mellor 
and Hatley methods. Data-oriented methods, applying similar principles 
to both data-centered design and data admin- istration, include the 
Warnier/Orr, Hol- land, Bachman, and Martin™s information- 12 IEEE Software  engineering approaches. The realm of structured design has the 
Yourdon/ Constantine and Jackson methods. 
Much fanfare accompanied the intro- duction of formal methods, 
but their man- ual nature has limited their general 
use and acceptance. Dataflow 
diagrams developed manually are difficult to modify and are seldom maintained 
with the system they 
represent. The effort and cost to develop complete and useful descriptions of an evolving system 
are hard to justify when 
the information 
is clearly not a lasting part of maintenance. What CASE offers With the spread 
of desktop computers, the mid-1980s have 
seen the introduction 
of automated environments 
and tools that make it practical and economical to use formal system-development methods. This technology, 
known as CASE, lets sys- 
tems analysts 
document and model an information system from its initial user requirements through design and imple- mentation and lets them apply tests for consistency, completeness, and confor- mance to standards. These techniques 
for software 
engineer- ing apply equally well to modeling hard- ware and human interfaces, so the acronym also refers to computer-aided sysfems engineering. Integrated in this field are models, tools, 
and techniques that open new areas for applying 
reliability engineering to information systems. Much like the children of the shoemaker 
who were always the last to get new shoes, 
computer professionals have traditionally 
been the last ones to apply the benefits of computer technology to the improvement 
of their own work. 
Now, however, with personal workstations becoming 
a com- mon resource, CASE environments let computer professionals develop 
and vali- date system designs 
and specifications, automating and 
enhancing the manual methods of the 1970s and 1980s. Features. A CASE environment pro- vides the analyst 
or systems developer with 
facilities for drawing a system™s architec- 
tural diagrams, 
describing and defining functional and data 
objects, identifying relationships between system 
components, and providing annotations to aid project management. The user™s various work products 
are stored in an integrated, nonredundant form in a central repository 
or dictionary on the workstation 
or on 
a central server or host system. 
The system definition as a whole can be checked 
for consistency and completeness. Analysis 
can be performed on the information 
collected or defined to date, thus supporting 
incremental devel- opment and the detection 
of inconsisten- cies and errors early in the life cycle. 
Documentation required 
by organiza- Computer professionals are usually the last to 
apply the benefits of computer technology to their own work. CASE is one of those benefits. tional or deliverable standards, such as DoD-Std 2167, can begenerated from the system description in the dictionary. Also, generators for 
database schemas and pro- gram code are being incorporated in, 
or interfaced to, CASE 
environments to pro- vide a 
step toward automated 
system generation. Figure 2 5hows 
key elements in a CASE system. Tools. A comprehensive CASE devel- opment environment for the front end of the life cycle 
integrates several component tools and facilities: The system developer 
can choose 
from at least seven 
basic diagram types, 
includ- ing dataflow diagrams (Yourdon/ 
DeMarco or Gane/Sarson notations), structure charts 
(Yourdon/Constantine or Jackson), entity-relationship diagrams, logical data models, and presentation graphs. Additional 
diagram types are available for real-time system develop- 
ment, including transformation graphs, 
state-transition diagrams, and decision matrices. The user can directly create dia- 
grams with the graphics-editing facilities on the workstation and then produce those 
diagrams for system documentation. Figures 2 and 3 demonstrate these graphics capabilities. Information about the user™s target 
system, entered 
incrementally via dia- grams and form screens, is integrated in a central dictionary. 
End-user screens and reports can be developed for the 
system under design with 
screen-paint facilities tied 
to the central 
dictionary. These 
form functional proto- types on the workstation that 
can be demonstrated to end users for evaluation 
and validation. Analysis facilities provide checks for consistency and completeness. Entity-list query capabilities combined with a general report writer allow 
user-definable analy- 
sis that can be 
tailored to meet project or organizational needs. Extended analysis utilities provide advanced conclusions 
about the integrity of a proposed design, including validation 
of data normalization and traceability of data elements through activities in 
the target-system description. Deliverable documentation can be 
organiLed graphically and can incorporate 
diagrams and text from the central diction- ary. This facility lets 
the user generate documentation that is internally consistent 
and true to the system design. The environ- ment provides links 
to desktop-publishing, page-layout, and Postscript output facilities. An open architecture 
for access to the central dictionary 
allows the integration 
of the CASE environment with other tools of the project or the organization. Import/export facilities let you bridge to other programs, transfer information among multiple analysts, 
and access other information resources, such 
as the cor- porate data dictionary (Figure 
3 shows data-dictionary integration). 
In addition, a programmer interface lets you access the system description in the central diction- 
ary from application programs to allow transfer of data, broader analysis, and specialized documentation. Established bridges and integrated packages connect 
the front-end environ- 
ment to many tools used in later stages of the life cycle. 
Links to code-generation March 1988 13  Figure 2. Key elements in a CASE system. This figure 
was generated 
from Index Technology™s Excelerator 
CASE Sys- tem and 
represents current CASE graphics capabilities. Data administrah 1 ~~~ dictionary Design documents management Figure 3. Data-dictionary integration. This figure 
was generated 
from Index Technology™s Excelerator 
CASE system and represents current CASE graphics capabi I ities. tools and fourth-generation languages, as well as to other types of development tools, give users a wide variety of options. Adaptability. A key feature of a well- developed CASE environment is adapta- bility. To be successful in a wide range of organizations and projects, the environ- 
ment must 
be able to operate on many hardware configurations 
in a consistent and user-friendly manner. To serve today™s development organizations, the 
same base environment should 
be avail- able on IBM PC-class and PS/Z-class machines, on engineering workstations from Sun, Apollo, 
and Digital Equipment Corp., and on 
a variety of local-area networks. Another important 
aspect of 
adaptabil- ity is 
how well the CASE environment can conform to an 
organization and project, rather than how much it makes the proj- 
ect conform to the idiosyncrasies of the tool. The CASE environment needs to be customizable so the user can adapt it to closely fit the organization™s 
development method, project-management standards, and information requirements. This 
ver- satility lets a single CASE environment support the organization even as projects, standards, and contractual obligations 
change. 14 IEEE Software  Percent improvement Feas,ioiiit) ReQUifefllentS Analysis/design Coding Test 1 n g Main t en a 11 ce Figure4. Productivity improvement in a system™s life-cycle phases when 
using a CASE tool (sources are two surveys of users of Index Technology™s Excelerator 
product). Benefits. Organizations using CASE environments have experienced 
various degrees of improvement in productivity. Users of Index Technology™, Excelerator 
environment, for example, 
have reported in surveys an aLerage of 30- to 40-percent impro\ement in the life cycle™s analysis 
and design phases (see Figure 4). Rut many of the user organizations also report that 
their key gain is in the quality of the sys- tems being developed, principally because 
they can detect errors and inconsistencies and refine specifications 
easily to reflect their own customer™s needs. 
Reliability engineering 
Besides serving as productivity aids 
to support the capture of 
system-design information, CASE environments provide 
new opportunities to use analysis tech- niques to assess the reliability of informa- 
tion systems before they are implemented. 
They also 
help audit a completed system against its design and maintain the 
system description as accurate documentation. Analysis. A CASE enbironment stores 
the systems description 
in an integrated form in a central repository 
or dictionary. It provides native facilities for inspecting and analyzing aspects of 
the system description, particularly in support of standard development methods such as structured analysis. With the 
system description in the dic- tionary, other 
forms of inspection can be made using database query techniques. 
For example, if the correctness 
of timing factors is important to a system™s 
success, an analyst can target those portions 
of the description that affect timing. The diction- ary can 
provide information not only about the specific timing attributes 
but also about all other components 
that affect these attributes. 
An analyst can also discover secondary effects, where 
the impact of an attribute was not explicitly defined but was implicit in the design of other parts 
of the system. 
The CASE environment thus forms 
a vehi- cle for reliability assessment 
as well as for system description. The CASE environment can help stan- dardize quality assurance 
and test processes for systems 
under development. 
By using the available 
system description 
for test planning, aided 
by automated CASE facilities, an organization can 
develop more rigorous coverage 
for test cases and can better determine if the fea- tures and components being tested 
match important paths 
in the system. 
Maintenance. When a system descrip- 
tion has been completed, the 
CASE envi- ronment can continue to serve as an active repository and reference encyclopedia 
for- the system™s builders 
and maintainers. The ease of making changes to the system description Icts the documentation be maintained with rhe system. When 
inaiii- tenance staff 
can use an up-to-date systeni description as a source of information 011 the system architecture, they arc encouraged to update it for theii- own ben- efit as they make system modilication.~. The result is more shocnlaker™s children with new and Laluable shoes. Audit. The same principle applies to auditing. M™ith an up-to-date system description supported by a CASE cnviroii- ment, the 
dictionary can serve as a key resource and r-ecord-keeping vehicle. 
Var- ious system components and 
their opera- tion can 
be compared to their intended function in the system description, and notes can be made in an auditor™s copy 
of the dictionary. 
The completed system can be more effectively evaluated against its design, and automated 
asGstance can be provided to trace requirements 
through design and into the finished system. Thuc, the CASE en\ 
ironment also becomes an auditor™s tool. This advantage 
can be fur- ther enhanced 
by customizing [he CASE environment to handle the 
specific attrib- utes required 
of the auditing 
or reliability evaluation task at hand. March 1988 15  The RATIONAL Environment.. . br Software Engineers 
The Company Rational was founded 
in 1980 to pro 
duce products which 
improve the 
productivity of software engineering teams building 
large and complex sys- 
tems. The RlOOO Development System is now in use 
by leading aerospace, commercial and defense organizations worldwide. mmmmmmmmmmm The Product Rational™s RlOOO provides a seamlessly 
integrated environment 
for the design, 
implementation, documentation, 
and maintenance of large software systems written in Ada. It provides compre- hensive facilities across the 
software lifecycle, including 
an Ada-compatible program design language, automatic 
generation of design documentation, 
interactive semantic 
analysis and design-rule checking, incremental 
compilation, configuration 
manage- ment and version control, and source- language debugging. Optimizing 
code generators and cross-debuggers pro- vide support for several 
popular appli- 
cation architectures. 
mmmmmmmmmmm The People Rational is a team 
of highly motivated, 
creative individuals dedicated to the production of quality products that deliver value to customers. We are looking for Software Engineers 
with strong experience in 
operating systems, 
design tools 
code generation or de- buggers to join this 
team. If you™d like to be a part of our fu- 
ture, please 
write us at 1501 Salado 
Dr., Mountain View, CA 94043. Attn: Human Resources. 
An equal opportu- nity employer. 
RATIONAL merging technology in CASE provides new and poten- 
tially invaluable support to 
aspects of systems work 
throughout the 
systems life cycle. There 
are broad 
opportunities for automating 
reliability-engineering tasks for information systems. As this technology 
matures, we can look 
forward to the incorporation 
of meaningful expert-system 
and artificial-intelligence capabilities 
to help the systems analyst, libraries of reusable system designs, and 
automated prototyp- 
ing of systems to help determine reliability. 
Existing developments 
in CASE put these possibilities 
within our grasp and offer a 
bright future for the entire area 
of information-systems reliability. 
-0- References 1. B. Boehm, ﬁSoftware 
and Its Impact: A Quantitative 
Assess- ment,ﬂ in Writingsof the Revolution, 
Yourdon Press, 
New York, 1982, pp. 267-289. 2. B. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1981. 3. W. Suydam, ﬁCASE Makes Strides toward Automated 
Software Development,ﬂ Computer Design, Jan. 1, 1987, pp. 49-70. 4. R. Jensen, ﬁPredicting 
and Controlling Software 
Development Costs: Metrics 
for Managers,ﬂ Proc. Second Ann. Excelerator Users™ Conf., XL Group, Cambridge, Mass., 
1986. 5. T. DeMarco, Structured Analysis and System Specification, 
Yourdon Press, 
New York, 1978. Elliot J. Chikofsky is director of research and technology at Index Technology and teaches graduate courses in software engineering 
and database management 
at Northeastern University. Before 
joining Index Technology, he worked on the University 
of Michigan™s 
ISDOS project. Chikofsky received a BS in computer and communication science and an MS in industrial and operations engineering, both 
from the University of Michigan. Burt L. Rubenstein is a vice president of research 
and technology at Index Technology. 
He was the original architect 
of the Excelerator CASE system. He has also worked 
at Index Systems 
and Digitial Equipment Corp. Rubenstein received a BS in management and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, where he also did 
systems research 
in the Laboratory 
for Computer Science. IEEE Software 