 0740-7459/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
 MAY/JUNE 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 13Editor: 
Jane Cleland-Huang
DePaul University,
jhuang@cs.depaul.edu
Are Requirements Alive 
and Kicking?
Jane Cleland-Huang
ABOUT 10 YE
ARS 
ago, I attended a 
large meeting for requirements engi
-neers and business analysts in Europe. 
At that time, one of the organizers 

asked how many of us thought agile 

methods would signi˜cantly impact the 
way mainstream companies developed 
software and managed requirements. 

None of us raised our hands. 
In hindsight, of course this seems 
particularly shortsighted. In our de
-fense, most of the people in that room 

had invested a signi˜cant amount of 
time developing techniques for improv
-ing the requirements process. We knew 
how important it was to identify rel
-evant stakeholders, proactively elicit 
requirements, analyze them carefully, 
identify trade-offs, emerge and nego
-tiate con˚icts, and specify clearly and 
unambiguously what the system needed 
to do and how it needed to be done. At 
that time, the agile movement seemed 

to be telling us to throw these practices 

away, threatening the whole concept of 
requirements as we knew it. 
On the other hand, around the same 
time, I coauthored a book with Mark 
Denne, then from Sun Microsystems, 
called 
Software by Numbers: Low Risk, 
High Return Development
 (Prentice Hall, 
2003), in which we laid out a highly 
incremental, ROI-driven approach to 
prioritizing and sequencing features. 
What I didn™t then realize is that we 

had serendipitously discovered an idea 

that ˜t naturally into the agile devel
-opment process. Our approach still 

assumed that we would identify stake
-holders and work with them to discover 
their needs, but instead of laying out a 
long-term development plan, it used a 

simple ˜nancial analysis to ˜gure out 

which features (architectural or func
-tional) to build ˜rst. Furthermore, the 
approach embraced change by allow
-ing the upcoming set of features to be 
determined as the project progressed. 
Consequently, I came to realize how 
requirements and agility could live side 

by side.
So, why am I focusing on agility in 
a column on requirements? For my de
-but installment of this column, I want 
to discuss the challenges that impact 

requirements processes today and the 
context in which most of us deal with 
requirements. Agility is certainly one of 

the major in˚uences. 
Changing 
Times 
As an academic, I™ve had the oppor
-tunity to engage in industrial projects 
of many sizes. Some of these projects 
are very linear in nature and basically 

follow the typical waterfall model, 

whereas others are agile and fully em
-brace concepts such as informal user 

stories, short delivery cycles, and 

changing requirements. From my per
-spective, both kinds of projects have 
had their own challenges, but in the 
end, both kinds of projects have been 

successful. 
The bottom line is that the IT en
-vironment we work in today is sim
-ply different from the environment 10 

years ago, and for this column to con
-tinue to address pertinent topics, it™s es
-sential that we understand the critical 

forces that drive requirements today.
For example, we can no longer as
-sume that projects will be preceded by 

stringent, up-front processes in which 

we carefully elicit all the requirements 

and then design a complete solution be
-fore jumping into the actual develop
-ment process. There are many assump
-tions that we might have made a decade 
ago that simply aren™t true today. 
We can no longer assume that 
it™s possible to bring all stakeholders 
 REQUI
REMENTS
I came to realize how requirements 
 and agility could live side by side.
 14 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | WWW.CO
MPUTER.ORG/
SOFTWARE
REQUI
REMENTS
together in the same room at the same 
time for face-to-face meetings. In 
many current projects, stakeholders 
are distributed around the globe, and 

sometimes the only way to reach them 

all is by leveraging social networking 
and collaboration tools. This intro
-duces numerous challenges. How can 
we make our tools more effective so 

that meetings made up of people from 
different continents produce meaning
-ful discussions that bring forth real is
-sues and result in a deep understand
-ing of stakeholder needs?
We™re gaining a far deeper under
-standing of the synergies between re
-quirements and architectural design. In 

fact, in many cases, new requirements 
are introduced to an existing system, 

and previous architectural, platform, 
and hardware decisions create con
-straints on the viability of new feature 
requests. Although it™s true that almost 
anything is possible, it™s also true that 

some requirements are far easier to de
-liver than others and that existing so
-lutions can facilitate or hinder future 

change. So, how does this more incre
-mental life cycle affect the way we elicit 

and manage requirements? 
Software development environments 
(not just the stakeholders) are becom
-ing increasingly global in nature. When 
the outsourcing trend began a decade 
or so ago, we had fairly clear hand-off 

points in the life cycle. That line is far 

fuzzier now. Outsourcing companies 
are now often responsible for not just 
coding and testing but also the require
-ments elicitation process. We must con
-sider how this affects project success 

and how we can ensure that project 
goals and requirements are fully ex
-plored and understood when the people 
eliciting the requirements aren™t even 

on the same continent as the primary 
stakeholders.
New Demands
There™s also a move to push up the ab
-straction level of the software devel
-opment effort by specifying software 
requirements as models and then auto
-matically generating code from those 

models. In the world of model-driven 
development (MDD), how do we en
-sure that requirements are speci˜ed 
correctly in models and verify that the 

generated code actually satis˜es stake
-holders concerns?
www.ireb.org
˜˚˛˝˚˙ˆ˛˝˙ˇ˝˘˛
So you are already a 






 




















IEEE SOFTWAR
E CALL FOR PAPERS
Green Software

Information technologies (IT) requiring vast amount of energy 
and other resources are used in almost every ˜eld and process. 

Green IT is the study and practice of using computing resources 

ef˜ciently to reduce negative impacts on the environment. Green 

IT is applicable to various high-tech domains, such as datacenters, 

mobile computing, and embedded systems. Recently, global carbon 

dioxide emissions reached 9.1 billion tons, the highest level in hu
-man historyŠ49 percent higher than in 1990 (the Kyoto reference 

year). At least 2 percent of global carbon dioxide emissions can 

be attributed to IT systems, and further increases are expected, 

with new IT systems being deployed daily. Therefore, reducing the 

energy consumption and related carbon dioxide emission of IT sys
-tems is a crucial requirement. Reducing energy consumption also 

leads to reduced maintenance expenses and costs of ownership, 

giving manufacturers a competitive advantage.
Questions?
For more information about the focus, contact the guest editors:
Ayse Basar Bener, Ryerson University: ayse.bener@ryerson.ca
Maurizio Morisio, Politecnico di Torino: 
 
maurizio.morisio@polito.it
Andriy Miranskyy, IBM Toronto Software Lab: 
 
andriy@ca.ibm.com
Full call for paper: 
www.computer.org/software/cfp1

Full author guidelines: 
www.computer.org/software/author.htm

Submission details: 
software@computer.org

Submit an article: 
https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/sw-cs
  MAY/JUNE 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 15REQUI
REMENTS
Yet another challenge comes from 
the increasing desire for systems, es
-pecially Web services, to adapt at 
runtime to changes in their environ
-ments. One of my graduate students 

recently told me that his company™s 
attempt to achieve adaptation failed 
primarily because it didn™t know how 

to clearly specify requirements for 

adaptive systems, and therefore never 
fully understood the system™s goals. 
As industry increasingly moves to
-ward building adaptive systems, we 
must find better ways to specify ad
-aptation goals. 
And what about safety-critical soft
-ware development? In critical systems, 

it™s particularly important to perform 
a rigorous risk analysis, identify haz
-ards and faults, and then specify miti
-gating requirements, which are care
-fully tracked throughout the system™s 

development. How should the require
-ments process be conducted so that the 

end result is a carefully constructed 
assurance or safety case that demon
-strates a system is safe for use? What 
requirements techniques are effective 
in these kinds of environments?
Although the IT environment has 
changed over the years, the impor
-tance of eliciting and understanding 

requirements is timeless. The end re
-sult may be represented in different 

waysŠas traditional ﬁshallﬂ state
-ments, use cases, sketches, user stories, 

acceptance tests, formal logic, goal 
models, or state charts. However, as 
long as we continue to build software 

systems and care whether those sys
-tems meet the needs of our customers 

and other stakeholders, then we must 

continue to emphasize the importance 

of understanding, analyzing, and spec
-ifying requirements.
In taking over this column from 

Neil, I realize that I have some 
metaphorically large shoes to ˜ll. 
Neil brought us eight years of wisdom, 
debate, and sometimes hilarity in the 

form of Colin Codephirst. I™m not even 
going to try to ˜ll those shoes. Instead, 
I hope we can go on a new journey that 
winds its way through new challenges 

that emerge along the way. I hope to 

discuss current issues related to re
-quirements and to take on some of the 

most controversial issues head on. 
We must continue our quest to learn 
better ways to work with stakehold
-ers to discover requirements, embrace 

change, deliver safe systems, engage 

distributed stakeholders, and support 
innovation and change. Although the 
challenges are endless, the bene˜ts are 

immense. Requirements are very much 

alive and kicking! 
If you have ideas for requirements-
related topics that you would like to see 

discussed, please email me at jhuang@

cs.depaul.edu.
JAN
E CLEL
AND
-HU
AN
G is an associate profes
-sor at DePaul University. Contact her at jhuang@
cs.depaul.edu.
IEEE SOFTWAR
E CALL FOR PAPERS

Mobile Computing

Ubiquitous, pervasive mobile computing is all around us. We use 

mobile computing not only when we interact with our smart
-phones to connect with friends and family across states and coun
-tries, but also when we use ticketing systems on a bus or train to 

work or home, purchase food from a mobile vendor at a park, 

watch videos and listen to music on our phones and portable mu
-sic playing devices. In other words, mobile computing is not only 

the interaction of smart phones with each other. Any computation 

system that is expected to move and interact with end users or 

other computational systems despite potential changes in network 

connectivityŠincluding loss of connectivity or changes in type 

of connectivity or access pointŠparticipates in mobile comput
-ing infrastructure, and the number of such systems is expected to 

grow signi˜cantly each year over the coming decades.
Questions?
For more information about the focus, contact the guest editors:
James Edmondson, Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering 

Institute: jredmondson@sei.cmu.edu
William Anderson, Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering 

Institute
Joe Loyall, BBN
Jeff Gray, University of Alabama
Jules White, Virginia Tech
Klaus Schmid, University of Hildesheim
Full call for paper: 
www.computer.org/software/cfp2

Full author guidelines: 
www.computer.org/software/author.htm

Submission details: 
software@computer.org

Submit an article: 
https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/sw-cs
Selected CS articles and columns 
 
are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
