 42IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
0740-7459/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEENevertheless, development for the Web
faces difficulties that standard development
does not. Three challenges come to the
fore. First, the Web development process

must be highly acceleratedÑÒWeb timeÓ

has become synonymous with headlong

desperation and virtually impossible dead-
lines. Second, many Web projects are

Ògreen-fieldÓ applications, which means
they have few if any standards or prece-
dents. Finally, much more so than standard

software, Web applications must focus on

the user experience. Systematic, disciplined practices mighthelp developers face these challenges, but
traditional approaches proliferate docu-

ments and deliverables and emphasize
analysis of established practicesÑa poor
match for novel applications with Web-time

delivery schedules. Furthermore, user inter-

face design and usability are generally weak
points in both the heavyweight software en-gineering processes, such as the UnifiedProcess,1and the lightweight competitors,
such as Extreme Programming.2This articledescribes a flexible, model-driven approach
for engineering Web applications that suc-

ceeds through a focus on user interface de-
sign and usability. Its simple, model-driven

techniques work well for novel applications
and integrate readily with lightweightor ag-ile development processes3under com-pressed development schedules.Web applications for use
Usability and the user experience areemerging as critical determinants of success
in Web applications. If customers canÕt find

what theyÕre looking for, they canÕt buy it; a

site that buries key information impairs
business decision making. Poorly designed
interfaces increase user errors, which can be
costly. Mistakes made entering credit card

billing information, for example, can re-focusUsage-Centered
Engineering for Web

ApplicationsLarry L. Constantine and Lucy A.D. Lockwood, 
Constantine & LockwoodThis model-drivenapproach to software

engineering, focusing
on user interface

design and usability,

proves especially
appropriate for Web
applications.Despite breathless declarations that the Web represents a new par-
adigm defined by new rules, professional developers are realizing

that lessons learned in the pre-Internet days of software develop-

ment still apply. Web pages are user interfaces, HTML program-
ming is programming, and browser-deployed applications are software sys-

tems that can benefit from basic software engineering principles. 
engineering Internet software
 quire costly manual follow-up or lead tolost sales. Web-usability guru Jakob Nielsen

estimates that billions of dollars in lost Web

sales can be traced to usability problems.Technical and customer support costs in
all areas of business are skyrocketing. Every
time usability problems on a site or applica-
tion prompt a telephone call or an email
message to customer service, an inexpensive
Web session becomes an expensive support

incident. On corporate intranets, hard-to-

use applications require extensive training
or go completely unused.Although this article focuses on Web-
based applicationsÑsystems that deploy
functional capability on the Web through a

browser instance as a thin clientÑit is diffi-
cult to draw a hard and fast line separating
Web-based applications from those Web

sites that are intended for use, that is, for
something more than entertainment,
Òbranding,Ó or the like. The common thread
is the delivery of useful services and capabil-
ities over the Web. 
In addition to usability, aesthetic design
aspects also figure in the user experience.
Unfortunately, graphic design and aesthetic

considerations are often established early
and drive the entire development process at
the expense of usability. For example, based

on an Òaesthetic briefÓ approved by a

clientÕs CEO, a prominent graphic design

house developed an innovative Web site for

a major analyst group. Although the design-
ers consulted extensively with the firmÕs cus-

tomers and conducted numerous market-
oriented focus groups, the design proved a
usability disaster, in no small part because

of the aesthetic design. Last-ditch efforts to

make improvements without modifying the
basic graphic design enabled the site to go
live but ultimately proved merely palliative
and insufficient to satisfy customers. In the

end, the firm redesigned the site completely,

this time approaching the project with us-
age-centered design.4Usage-centered designUsage-centered design uses abstract mod-els to systematically design the smallest, sim-
plest system that fully and directly supports
all the tasks users need to accomplish. De-
veloped in the early 1990s, the approach has
been applied to systems ranging from indus-
trial automation systems and consumer elec-tronics to banking and insurance applica-tions. The streamlined process, driven by
simple models, scales readily; developers
have used it on projects ranging from a few
person-months to the five-designer, 19-

developer, 23-month project that produced

Step7lite, a sophisticated integrated devel-
opment environment from Siemens AG

(see http://foruse.com/pcd). On the Web, groups

have employed usage-centered design success-
fullyfor applications in fields including e-commerce, membership support, education,
and medical informatics.5User-centered or usage-centered?
Usage-centered design evolved as a soft-ware engineering alternative to user-cen-

tered design. Table 1 summarizes some of

the salient differences. User-centered de-

sign is a loose collection of human-factors
techniques united under a philosophy of
understanding users and involving them in
design. It relies primarily on three tech-
niques: user studies to identify usersÕ de-
sires, rapid paper prototyping for user
feedback on user interface design itera-
tions, and usability testing to identify

problems in working prototypes or sys-
tems. Although helpful, none of these tech-
niques can replace good design. User stud-
ies can easily confuse what users want with
what they truly need. Rapid iterative pro-
totyping can often be a sloppy substitute
for thoughtful and systematic design. Most
importantly, usability testing is a relatively

inefficient way to find problems you can
avoid through proper design.4,6Driving models. Role, task, and contentmod-elsÑsimple, closely related abstract mod-March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
43Table 1 User-centered and usage-centered design: A comparisonUser-centered designUsage-centered design
Focus is on users: User experienceFocus is on usage: Improved tools 
and user satisfactionsupporting task accomplishment
Driven by user inputDriven by models and modeling
Substantial user involvementSelective user involvement
¥ User studies¥ Exploratory modeling
¥ Participatory design¥ Model validation
¥ User feedback¥ Usability inspections
¥ User testingDesign by iterative prototypingDesign by modeling
Highly varied, informal, or unspecified processesSystematic, fully specified process
Design by trial and error, evolutionDesign by engineering
 elsÑdrive usage-centered design. The rolemodelcaptures the salient characteristics of

the roles that users play in relation to a sys-
tem. The task model represents the structure
of the work users need to accomplish with
the system. The content model represents the
user interfaceÕs contents and organization.
A user role represents one kind of rela-tionship users could have with a system.
Among numerous possible aspects of this
relationship are the purpose and frequency
of interaction, the volume and direction of
information exchange, and the attitude to-
ward the system of users in the role.
A task model comprises a set of task casesand a map of the interrelationships amongthose task cases. Task cases are a form of use

cases,7which conventionally are models ofsystemsÑnamely, the Òsequence of actions a

system performs that yields an observable
result to a particular actor.Ó
1As commonlywritten, use cases express the concrete ac-
tions and responses taken by the system and
an actor with which it interacts. Figure 1, a
published example of a conventional use
case,1tellingly omits the userÕs single most
important step: actually taking the cash.Task casesÑalso called essential use
cases4Ñare essential models
8that are ab-stract, simplified, and technology-freeÑthat
is, they have no built-in assumptions about
the user interface. For example, the task
case of Figure 2, written in the style used in

agile usage-centered design, is shorter, sim-

pler, and closer to the essence of the user

task than that of Figure 1. The advantages
of essential use cases are widely recognized,
and a consensus is building that this style is
best for both user interface design and re-
quirements modeling in general.9The third model, the content model,
4issometimes called an abstract prototype: It
abstractly represents the user interfaceÕs

contentsÑindependent of actual appear-
ance or behaviorÑand how these are or-
ganized into the contexts within which users
interact, called interaction contexts. Ab-stract prototypes can range from a simple
inventory of a siteÕs or applicationÕs accessi-

ble contents to a highly structured abstract
model based on a canonical set of abstract
components (see http://foruse.com/articles/
canonical.pdf). Regardless of the form, ab-

stract prototypes are a bridge between task
models and realistic or representational pro-

totypes, such as conventional paper proto-
types or design sketches. By adhering to a
user perspective and leaving open the vari-
ous implementation possibilities, abstrac-
tion encourages innovative visual and inter-
action designs.4,10Process overview.Figure 3 shows a logicaloverview of usage-centered design. The

process separates system actorsÑother soft-
ware and hardware systemsÑfrom human
actors who are users. The role, task, and
content models are developed in coordina-
tion with and interlinked with other models.

These include a domain model (such as a44IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
Figure 1. Conventional use case for getting cash from an ATM.
9Withdraw Money
The use case begins when the client inserts an ATM card. The system

reads and validates the information on the card.1.  System prompts for PIN. The client enters PIN. The system vali-
dates the PIN.2.  System asks which operation the client wishes to perform. Client
selects ÒCash withdrawal.Ó3.  System requests amounts [
sic]. Client enters amount.
4.System requests type. Client selects account type (checking, sav-
ings, credit).5.The system communicates with the ATM network to validate ac-
count ID, PIN, and availability of the amount requested.6.  The system asks the client whether he or she wants a receipt.
This step is performed only if there is paper left to print the receipt.7.System asks the client to withdraw the card. Client withdraws
card. (This is a security measure to ensure that Clients do not

leave their cards in the machine.)
8.System dispenses the requested amount of cash.

9.  System prints receipt.
10. The use case ends.Figure 2. Abstract use case in essential formÑthe ÒgettingcashÓ task case. glossary or another more elaborate datamodel), a business rules model that embod-
ies the applicationÕs underlying logic and

constraints,11and an operational modelthat captures salient aspects of the working
environment or operational context.3Conceptually, a straightforward and di-
rect derivation links the final design back to
task cases supporting user roles. Each page,
form, or other interaction context corre-

sponds to an abstract prototype supporting
a cluster of interrelated task cases. The de-

signer derives the actual buttons, links, ta-
bles, displays, and other features directly

from abstract components that realize spe-

cific steps within supported task cases.
These task cases, in turn, support the roles
that users can perform.Usage-centered Web design
Over successive Web projects, usage-
centered design has evolved a lightweight
form that takes certain modeling and design

shortcuts (see http://foruse.com/articles/
agiledesign.pdf). Agile usage-centered de-
sign employs rapid-fire modeling techniques
using ordinary index cards for brainstorm-
ing, sorting, and clustering,12as in ExtremeProgramming.2When practical, collabora-tive modeling with end users, application
domain experts, and clients can save addi-
tional time. Figure 4 outlines an agile usage-
centered design process.Essential purpose and preconception.Web
projects often suffer from vague objectives
and unrealistic ambitions. Early clarifica-
tion of objectives and exploration of fan-
tasies can pay off enormously.
13We prefer
to kick off the process by involving man-agers, users, developers, and other stake-
holders in framing the applicationÕs pur-

poses as external users and from a business
perspective. The group can brainstorm onto
cards and sort them to establish priorities.

Similarly, we encourage participants to

share their fantasies about the systemÕs fea-

tures, functions, facilities, content, and ca-
pabilities, but we clearly label these ideas

preconceptions and set them aside to be

treated as negotiable fantasies rather than
requirements.Exploratory modeling.Exploratory model-ing jumpstarts the design process by iden-
tifying questions and areas of uncertainty
or ambiguity in user requirements. The

team does this by sketching out rough ver-
sions of the role and task models that it
will develop in more refined form later. In

this way, the team can identify needed, but

missing, information.User interface architecture.Many agile
processes3abjure up-front design in favor ofa more evolutionary approachÑconstruct-

ing a limited system and then elaborating it

through successive iterations. Unfortu-
nately, when code starts small and gradually

grows with expanding requir
ements, theoriginal architectureÑthe codeÕs underly-
ing organizationÑoften proves insufficient
or inappropriate to support emerging needs.
Refactoring,14in which existing code is re-organized and rewritten to fit evolving and
emerging requirements, is a key to success-
ful evolution of complex software systems

through iterative expansion.March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
451. Asdhf asdf
2. Wertw rt bzc
3. Ouiaa eroStep2Step1Behavior1. Asdhf asdf
2. Wertw rt bzc
3. Ouiaa eroStep2Step1Behavior1.  Loquom ipso
2. 3. Ouiaa eroStep2Step1Step2Step1BehaviorActorsSystem actorsUser rolesTask casesAbstract prototypesVisual andinteractiondesignFigure 3. Logical process of
usage-centered 
design. User interfaces are a different story. Late
refinement of the user interfaceÕs basic

structure is not acceptable because it
changes the system for users who have al-
ready learned or mastered an earlier ver-
sion. Whereas refactored internal software
components donÕt necessarily affect users,

a redesigned user interface architecture is
unavoidably disruptive. For highly usable
user interfaces, we design the overall or-
ganization, navigation, and look and feel
to fit the full panoply of tasks to be cov-
ered. You donÕt have to design every aspect

of the user interface in advance, however.

To avoid radical refactoring or inconsis-

tency across design increments, you need
to work out a well-conceived overall map
of the site or application in advance.15Toinsure that the basic visual style and be-havior are effective across the entire appli-cation, you must devise a comprehensive
design scheme.Navigation architecture specifies how theoverall user interface breaks down into in-
teraction contexts, collections, and groups;
how these are presented to users; and how

users navigate them. Minimally, the naviga-

tion architecture identifies all the interac-
tion contexts and their interconnections,
but having more is advantageous. For ex-
ample, the navigation architecture might or-

ganize parts of the user interface into tabbed

notebooksÑaccessed through a set of com-
mand buttons on a central dispatch dia-
logÑwith sections within notebook pages
reached through shortcuts in a menu-like

bar across the top of each page.Another crucial facet of overall user in-terface design is the visual and interaction
scheme, a sort of abstract style guide. It

briefly describes the basic visual elements
that will recur throughout the design as well

as the common layouts, visual arrange-
ments, or templates that apply to various in-
teraction contexts.16The scheme might, forexample, specify a basic layout grid with a
modified tree-view in the left-most column

for primary navigation and a set of view
controls across the top for secondary navi-
gation. At a more detailed level, it might
specify that a distinct color should identify
all editable fields, which can be edited in

place by double clicking. It might further
spell out how certain collections of controls

will be placed on slide-out tool panels that
automatically open on mouse-over and
close after use.Clearly, a sound navigation architecture
and visual and interaction scheme requires a
complete task model that includes all identi-

fied tasks, not just those to be tackled on the

first or early iterations.Card-based modeling.The initial user role
model is a simple inventory of roles users

can play in relation to the site or applica-
tion. One of the quickest ways to develop
such an inventory is to brainstorm it di-
rectly onto index cards. Once weÕve agreed
on the initial inventory, we succinctly de-

scribe roles directly on their index cards us-
ing the characteristics most relevant to the

design problem: the roleÕs context, charac-

teristic patterns of interaction within the
46IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
Figure 4. Rough outline of steps in an agile usage-centered design process.Preliminary steps1.Essential purpose and preconceptionÑClarify business and userpurposes, then fantasize and set aside preconceptions of features,
facilities, content, and capabilities.2.Exploratory modelingÑIdentify questions, ambiguities, and areasof risk and uncertainty.
First iteration3.Role modelingÑInventory and prioritize all user roles and selectinitially targeted subset.4.Task modeling
ÑInventory and prioritize all tasks and select ini-tially targeted subset.5.Task clustering
ÑGroup all tasks by affinity and draft overall navi-gation architecture.6.DesignÑDraft visual and interaction scheme; review and reviseaesthetic design.7.Abstract prototypingÑDevelop content model for interaction con-texts supporting selected subset of tasks.8.DesignÑDevelop detailed user interface design for selected interac-tion contexts.9.ConstructionÑProgram designed portions of user interface.
Successive iterations (similarly)3a.Review role model and revise as needed, select next subset.

4a.Review task model and revise as needed, select next subset.

5a.Review navigation architecture and revise as needed.

6a.Review visual and interaction scheme and revise as needed.

7a.Develop content model for interaction contexts supporting next se-
lected task subset.8a.Design user interface for selected interaction contexts.

9a.Construct newly designed portions.
 role, and special support criteria. We then
sort the completed cards to rank them by

overall importance.After reviewing the roles in order of im-portance, we brainstorm an inventory of

task cases, again onto index cards. As we re-

view and refine this inventoryÑcondensing,
combining, eliminating, or adding tasksÑ
we standardize the names to convey the ba-
sic purpose from a userÕs perspective, such

as Òfinding a replacement part for a specific
productÓ or Òadding an assessment to a les-
son plan.Ó Once weÕve established the initial
set of task cases, we sort the cards to rank

them for expected frequency and for overall
importance. Based on these two rankings,
we deal them into three piles: required (do

first), desired (do if thereÕs time), and de-

ferred (do next time).At this point, we start to fill in the de-
tails, but not for all task cases. We skip task

cases for which the interaction appears ob-
vious or routine. For task cases that are crit-
ical, complex, unclear, or interesting, we

write the interaction narrative on the index
card. Working on small cards favors good

modeling discipline. If the process narrative
doesnÕt fit on one card, either the narrative

is not sufficiently abstract and simplified, or

the card really covers multiple task cases
that we must identify.
Using all the knowledge built from creat-ing, refining, and interacting with the task
cases, we group the cards into affinity clus-

ters on the basis of how strongly they seem

to be relatedÑparticularly, how likely users

in a role will perform tasks together. Each

cluster represents a set of capabilities that
the application must offer togetherÑwithin
the same page, form, or browser window, or

at least within a set of closely connected in-
teraction contexts.Each task cluster becomes the guide fordesigning a part of the user interface. We

prefer to construct abstract prototypes but

under pressure could move directly into
sketching realistic paper prototypes. We

then evaluate the paper prototypes, aug-
mented by a description of how the various
elements behave, to identify usability prob-
lems and areas for improvement. For speed
and convenience, we prefer collaborative
usability inspections,3involving users andclients as well as designers and developers,
but recognize the effectiveness of heuristic
inspections and other techniques.In practiceThe approach we took to designing abrowser-resident classroom information

management system illustrates the ad hoc

accommodations an agile process often

needs for development in Web time. A so-

phisticated performance-support system to
empower KÐ12 classroom teachers, this sys-

tem simplified key administrative, planning,
and teaching tasks in an environment fully

integrated with existing administrative sys-
tems and software and with Web-based

learning resources. The application was de-
ployed through a Web-based technology

with the client-side user interface realized in
HTML, XML, and Java JFC/Swing.Risk factors were numerous, including a
new and unproven development team in a

new company, an outside consulting team

for user interface design, the need for tech-
nical breakthroughs in several areas, vague
and ambiguous requirements exacerbated
by frequent changes in scope, and manage-
ment obsessed with early delivery, frequent

demonstrations, and unpredictable changes
of direction.The design team collaborated with a teamof PhD-level educators with extensive class-
room experience. This education team served

as both domain experts and representa-

tive end users, while also functioning in what

amounted to an XP-style customer role.
2Collaboratively with the education team,the design team developed the initial user

role model and inventory of task cases. In
total, we identified and prioritized 14 user

roles. The initial inventory of 142 task cases

included 35 task cases related to lesson

planning, which emerged as a critical capa-
bility for the system. We wrote process nar-

ratives for only a handful of interesting task
cases.1We constructed a draft navigation
map with just over 40 interaction contexts,
based on task case clustering (see Figure 5).To resolve problems with the design and
omissions, irregularities, and ambiguities
in the requirements, we held frequent
meetings and consulted continually with
the education teamÑa pattern we now re-

fer to as JITR, just-in-time requirements.

One of the two designers concentrated on
requirements and scope issues, while the
other began working on the initial design.March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
47Each taskclusterbecomes theguide fordesigning a partof the userinterface.
 The design team devised drafts of a navi-gation architecture, navigation map, and
visual and interaction scheme, validated
them with the education team, then revised

them.Not entirely by plan, the design pro-
ceeded in two- to two-and-a-half-week cy-
cles. Once full-time design work started, we
completed an initial navigation architecture
and visual and interaction scheme within
the first cycle. We finished the first version

of the complete visual and interaction de-
sign in the next cycle, after which we in-
spected it for usability defects, and we un-
dertook a major design revision on the
second iteration. In the third iteration, we
continued to extend and refine the design,
spread over the remainder of the projectÕs

17-week usage-centered design portion.
Programming followed an agile, light-
weight process that proceeded in parallel
with visual and interaction design.We needed a design that would be im-
mediately usable by ordinary teacherswith little or no special training. It had to
be flexible enough to accommodate a

wide range of working styles and efficient
to use, given 
that teachers may typicallyhave less than 15 minutes a day to plan
an entire dayÕs lessons. Technical goals

that we identified 
based on the usabilitycriteria included
Minimize window management over-
head.Minimize modal behavior.
Allow simple and direct switching
among contexts.Maximize available screen real estate

for document and data display.
A discussion of the complete design isbeyond this articleÕs scope (for details, see

our design studies on the Web, www.

foruse.com/articles/designstudy1.pdf, 
/designstudy2.pdf, and /designstudy3.pdf).

However, the first design iterationÕs results

clearly illustrate the importance of early,
48IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
Figure 5. Web-
deployed classroom
information 
management system:
Main portion of the

navigation map. up-front consideration of the overall navi-gation architecture and the visual and in-

teraction scheme based on a full under-
standing of user roles and tasks. Neither
traditional software engineering practices
nor the newer lightweight methods make
this possible.Figure 5 shows the main portion of thenavigation map, as finalized in the second
iteration. The mock-up in Figure 6,
adapted directly from actual design docu-
ments produced in the projectÕs first cycle,

illustrates how we documented the overall
navigation and visual and interaction de-
sign scheme. Together, these design docu-

ments specified much of the user interfaceÕs

overall architecture.Understanding the various roles class-
room teachers play and thoroughly explor-
ing their tasks revealed the importance of a
fast, flexible, and easy-to-learn scheme for
navigating the applicationÕs various work-

ing contexts. Once we understood the task
structure, we organized the various groups

and interaction contexts for single-click
switching among tasks within any given ac-

tivity. Using simple visual metaphors based

on thumb tabs, hanging folders, and file
folders, we devised a three-level visible hi-
erarchy that proved far easier to learn and
use than a conventional Windows-style tree
view.
Screen real estate, always a scarce re-
source, is particularly valuable in an appli-

cation running within a browser instance
on low- to moderate-resolution displays. To

address this, the design scheme included
components that would expand and con-
tract or reveal and hide themselves auto-
matically as needed. For example, the top-
level navigation panel (containing thumb

tabs) contracts to provide more working
space once the user selects a starting point.
Figure 6 shows another example of screen
space conservation in the dynamic work-
space, which anticipated rather than mim-
icked the Apple OS-X dock. The workspace
provides a compact holding bin that lets the
user gather various documents or frag-

ments from a variety of personal and pub-

lic resources for assembly into a lesson plan
or assignment.Any product designÕs success is ulti-
mately measured by its acceptance. Class-
room teachers in a variety of settings made
immediate use of this application with only
minimal instruction. In fact, we were able

to achieve the stringent design objective of
enabling immediate, productive use of the
system based on a single-page tutorial.March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
49Figure 6. Navigationarchitecture and 
design scheme, 
classroom 
information 
management 
system. Our experiences in agile usage-cen-tered design have made clear that im-
proved usability does not comewithout cost or risk, even when the methods

are streamlined and the schedule is com-
pressed. Special training and skills are nec-
essary, and these may not be available to

every development group, especially the
lean teams typical in agile development.
Moreover, the best design is easily corrupted

by casual or even well-intentioned alter-
ations and elaborations during coding.
Close coordination between user interface
designers and programmers is essential, and
programmers must be fully committed to

the process and convinced of the benefits
even if they do not understand every design
decision.A flexible and condensed usage-centereddesign process is a good starting point for

collaboration, but for agile practices such as
Extreme Programming, which abjures any-
thing resembling BDUF (big design up
front), some of the rules and philosophy can
get in the way. Just which rules need to be
bent or rewritten and what philosophy may
need to be compromised is the subject of

much current debate and experimentation.
The outline presented here should be re-

garded more as a draft than as a definitive

model.References1.P. Kruchten, 
The Rational Unified Process: An Intro-duction.Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1999.
2.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained,Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2000.
3.M. Fowler, ÒPut Your Processes on a Diet,Ó 
SoftwareDevelopment,vol. 8, no. 12, Dec. 2000. Expanded ver-sion at www.martinfowler.com/articles/newMethodol-

ogy.html.
4.L.L. Constantine and L.A.D. Lockwood, 
Software forUse: A Practical Guide to the Models and Methods of
Usage-Centered Design,Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Mass., 1999.5.J. Anderson et al., ÒIntegrating Usability Techniques
into Software Development,Ó IEEE Software,vol. 18,no. 1, Jan./Feb. 2001, pp. 46Ð53.6.A. Parush, ÒUsability Design and Testing,Ó 
ACM Inter-actions,vol. 8, no. 5, Sept./Oct. 2001.
7.I. Jacobson et al., 
Object-Oriented Software Engineer-ing: A Use Case Driven Approach,Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Mass., 1992.8.S.M. McMenamin and J. Palmer,
Essential SystemsAnalysis,Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1984.9.L.L. Constantine and L.A.D. Lockwood, ÒStructure and
Style in Use Cases for User Interface Design.Ó M. van
Harmelan, ed., Object Modeling an User Interface De-sign,Addison Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2001.
10.D. Corlett, ÒInnovating with OVID,Ó 
ACM Interac-tions,vol. 7, no. 4, July/Aug. 2000. 11.E. Gottesdiener, ÒRules Rule: Business Rules as Re-
quirements,Ó Software Development,vol. 7, no. 12,Dec. 1999. Reprinted in L.L. Constantine, ed., BeyondChaos: The Expert Edge in Managing Software Devel-
opment,Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2001.
12.R. Jeffries, ÒCard Magic for Managers: Low-Tech Tech-
niques for Design and Decisions,Ó Software Develop-ment, vol. 8, no. 12, Dec. 2000. Reprinted in L.L. Con-stantine, ed., Beyond Chaos: The Expert Edge inManaging Software Development,Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Mass., 2001.13.L.A.D. Lockwood, ÒTaming the Wild Web: Business
Alignment in Web Development,Ó 
Software Develop-ment,vol. 7, no. 4, Apr. 1999. Reprinted in L.L. Con-
stantine, ed., Beyond Chaos: The Expert Edge in Man-aging Software Development,Addison-Wesley, Boston,
2001.14.M. Fowler, 
Refactoring: Improving the Design of Exist-ing Code,Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1999.
15.M.H. Cloyd, ÒDesigning User-Centered Web Applica-
tions in Web Time,Ó 
IEEE Software,vol. 18, no. 1,Jan./Feb. 2001, pp. 62Ð69.16.J. Pokorny, ÒStatic Pages Are Dead: How a Modular
Approach Is Changing Interaction Design,Ó ACM Inter-actions,vol. 8, no. 5, Sept./Oct. 2001.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
50IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
L. Constantine, Constantine on Peopleware, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 2001.
R. Jeffries, A. Anderson, and C. Hendrickson, 
Extreme Programming In-stalled, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2001.
J. Nielsen and R.L. Mack, eds., 
Usability Inspection Methods, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1994.
Further Reading
About the AuthorsLarry L. Constantine
is an adjunct professor of information technology, University of
Technology, Sydney, Australia, and director of research, Constantine & Lockwood, Ltd. A

methodologist who pioneered fundamental concepts and techniques underlying modern soft-
ware engineering theory and practice, he now focuses on methods for improving the usability

of software and hardware. A consultant and designer with clients around the world, he shared
the 2001 Performance-Centered Design award for his work with Siemens AG. He is a graduate
of MITÕs Sloan School of Management, a member of the IEEE Computer Society and the ACM,

and he has served on the boards of numerous professional journals, including 
IEEE Software.Contact him at lconstantine@foruse.com.Lucy A.D. Lockwoodis president of Constantine & Lockwood, Ltd., the design, train-ing, and consulting firm she cofounded. One of the developers of usage-centered design, she
is the coauthor of a Jolt Award-winning book on the subject. With a passion for teaching and

professional communication, she has chaired several professional conferences and is co-organ-
izer of forUSE 2002, the first international conference on usage-centered, performance-cen-
tered, and task-oriented design. She is a graduate of Tufts University and a member of the

IEEE and the ACM. Contact her at llockwood@foruse.com.