  Provided by the author(s) and NUI Galway in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite the publishedversion when available.Downloaded 2018-05-30T09:10:11Z Some rights reserved. For more information, please see the item record link above. TitlePeople over process: key people challenges in agiledevelopmentAuthor(s)Coyle, Sharon; Conboy, KieranPublicationDate2010-09-02PublicationInformationConboy, K., Coyle, S., Wang, X., & Pikkarainen, M. PeopleOver Process: Key People Challenges in Agile Development.Software, IEEE, PP(99), 1-1.PublisherIEEEItem recordhttp://hdl.handle.net/10379/1419  1 People Over Process: 
  Key People Challenges in Agile Development
  Kieran Conboy1, Sharon Coyle1, Xiaofeng Wang2, Minna Pikkarainen3   1National University of Ireland 
Galway,
 Newcastle Rd., Galway, Ireland.
 2 Lero Software Engineering Research Centre, 
 University of Limerick, Castletroy, 
 Limerick, Ireland
 3 VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland.
 P.O.Box 1100, FIN
-90571, Oulu, Finland.
    kieran.conboy@nuigalway.ie
 sharon.coyle@nuigalway.ie
 xiaofeng.wang@ul.ie
 minna.pikkarainen@vtt.fi
   2 There is a common perception that, while there may be some ÔteethingÕ problems experienced 
during the initial transition to agile, people are much happier, engaged and ultimately more 
productive in these environments. This study shows that this belief may 
not always hold true, 
identifying many serious ÔpeopleÕ challenges experienced by 17 large multinational 
organisations, all using agile for more than three years. The cases provide an interesting 
insight in that they involve instances where agile was imple
mented in a top
-down manner 
across the organisations or at least across business units. This is in contrast to most accounts 
of agile which involve voluntary, bottom up adoption on small co
-located teams developing 
systems deemed to be suitable for agile d
evelopment. The people issues uncovered include a 
broad range of problems from recruitment of agile staff, to training, motivation and 
performance evaluation among others. The
 paper will conclude with a set of actionable 
recommendations as to how organisat
ions can overcome these challenges, based on the better 
practices uncovered in the cases studied.
  Keywords: agile, adoption, methodologies, people factors
   Introduction While agile methods have been in use for quite a while, there are a number of reasons
 why it 
is important to examine the Ôpeople issuesÕ implications of utilising agile approaches in this 
context. Firstly,
 the growing popularity of agile methods is clearly evident and they Òare fast 
becoming the adopted methodology commerciallyÓ 
(Tan and Teo 2007, VersionOne 2009)
. Secondly, 
the boundaries of agile are now changing, no longer restricted to small co
-located 
teams and increasingly applied in environments outside of their Ôcomfort zoneÕ 
(e.g. Poole 
and Huisman 2001, Drobka et al. 2004),
 thus presenting new people and human resour
ce management challenges. Finally, in the early years, the decision to adopt agile was typically 
an insular, bottom up, voluntary one, where the project team could decide to embrace or 
rebuke the 
transition
 Ôon its own termsÕ.  Increasingly, suppliers,  co
nsultants, partners and 
customers and even public sector bodies 
(Jamieson, Vinsen et al. 2006; UXResearch 
September, 2008)
 are coercing the use of agile, either through a formal requirement to do so, 
or through necessit
y to ensure inter
-organisational process alignment. The increasing 
prevalence o
f agile approaches, the lowering of traditional agile boundaries and growing 
pressure to adopt agile, all contribute to the need for human resource departments and project 
manag
ers to address any associated skill and people challenges. An analysis of the literature 
e.g. Nerur, Mahapatra et al. 
(2005)
 and Schuh 
(2004)
, shows that agile environments are 
significantly different in context to environments where more traditional approaches are used 
(Table 1), although very often the distinction between the two is not so black and white. 
  For all of 
these reasons, there is a need to identify the problems that the agile transition may 
cause. While numerous studies document challenges in isolation, this study builds a 
comprehensive list of the most important challenges and develops a set of recommendati
ons 
for how these might be addressed.
  Project Component
 Traditional
 Agile
 Control
 Process centric
 People centric
 Management Style
 Command
-and control
 Leadership
-and
-collaboration
 Knowledge Management
 Explicit
 Tacit
 Role Assignment
 Individual 
Ð favours
 specialisation
 Self
-organising teams 
Ð encourages role interchangeability
 Communication
 Formal and only when 
necessary
 Informal and continuous
 CustomerÕs Involvement
 Important, usually only at the 
analysis phase of the project
 Critical and continuous
 Project Cycle
 Guided by tasks or activities
 Guided by product features
   3 Development Model
 Life cycle model (Waterfall, 
Spiral, or some variation)
 The evolutionary
-delivery model
 Desired Organisational 
Form/Structure
 Mechanistic (bureaucratic with 
high 
formalisation)
 Organic (flexible and participative 
encouraging cooperative social 
action)
 Technology
 No restriction
 Favours object
-oriented 
technology
 Team Location
 Predominately distributed
 Predominantly collocated
 Team Size
 Often greater than 10
 Usually less than 10
 Continuous Learning
 Not frequently encouraged
 Embraced
 Management Culture
 Command and Control
 Responsive
 Team Participation
 Not compulsory
 Necessary
 Project Planning
 Up-front
 Continuous
 Feedback Mechanisms
 Not easily obtainable
 Usually numerous available
 Documentation
 Substantial
 Minimal
 Table 1: Contrasting differences between Traditional and Agile Approaches 
 (Adapted from Nerur, Mahapatra et al. 
(2005)
 and Schuh 
(2004)
)  THE RESEARCH PROCESS A two
-phased approach was used in this study. Firstly, we conducted focus group discussions 
with software development executives, senior project managers and agility experts between 
June and September 2008. In addition to identifying an initial set of chal
lenges, this phase 
acted as a test bed to evaluate the case study protocols used for the second phase. In the 
second phase we conducted seventeen case studies (see Appendix A) using in
-depth 
interviews with senior personnel between October 2008 and January
 2009. The cases include 
organisations that have embraced agile development very effectively harvesting benefits such 
as reduced costs, higher quality systems and more satisfied software development staff and 
customers. The studies also include some organi
sations that have experienced significant 
problems and even project failures directly attributable to the agile transition. We 
intentionally selected cases with such opposing experiences, which allowed us to compare 
and contrast, thus identifying the disti
nguishing skills and challenges related to agile 
adoption. We now present the key people challenges identified across the cases, along with 
practices uncovered to address these challenges. Where possible, we also try to identify how 
prevalent each issue wa
s across the cases studied. For example, we may indicate how 5 of 17 
cases encountered a certain issue while 12 of 17 may encounter another. 
  KEY PEOPLE CHALLENGES EMERGING FROM THE STUDY #1 Developer fear caused by transparency of skill deficiencies
 Deve
loper fear caused by the transparency of skill def
iciency was noted across seventeen 
companies studied. Interviewees outlined how procedures such as stand up meetings, an on
-site customer and the use of storyboards and whiteboards made developer shortcomin
gs very 
visible to the rest of the team, since these practices require direct and constant communication 
and collaboration among team members. For example, storyboards track the status of user 
stories and make a developerÕs lack of progress very obvious. W
hiteboards (used by agile 
teams to communicate design issues), can also highlight the deficiency of technical and/or 
communication skills of any one developer since they need to present their ideas in front of 
their peers on a regular basis. In addition, c
ontinuous integration and automated testing means 
that developers cannot hide poor, low quality code. Exposing weaknesses of developers 
however can often be counter
-productive. Eight teams spoke of incidents with developers 
having low self
-esteem who even 
if performing reasonably well, were often made to feel 
inadequate in such a transparent environment. At the other end of the spectrum, full 
transparency created unhealthy environments in four companies where egotism was present 
and 
ÒexhibitionistsÓ
 (Consul
tant, P), 
Òshow
-offsÓ
 (Manager, L) and 
ÒbulliesÓ
 (Consultant, P) 
were involved. Repercussions of this included discomfort among some developers (16 of 17 
  4 cases), hostility among developers (7 of 17 cases), and developers leaving the organisation (5 
of 17 c
ases) or at least changing teams (14 of 17 cases). It is too simplistic to say that these 
involved ÔweakÕ developers. In fact, a very interesting finding was that 
Òweakness is relativeÓ
 (Manager, L), and that some highly respected and high performing devel
opers were made to 
feel inadequate by those performing at an even higher level.
  To address this challenge, developers need an environment where they feel safe to expose 
their weaknesses. In Company C, all developers completed short forms on a fortnightly 
basis 
where they could document any fears, issues or concerns they felt inappropriate for discussing 
in an open forum. In Company D, listing problems at stand up meetings was voluntary for 
new junior developers on one large project studied. In Companies B,
 D and M, junior or new 
staff had a separate, lengthier stand up meeting with dedicated mentors.  Developers also need 
to be assured that they can get help to improve their skill set. In at least nine cases, pair 
programming was used where weaker developer
s were paired with those more experienced, 
and thus joint responsibility dissolved transparency of any potential weaknesses.
  #2 The need for developers to be a Ômaster of all tradesÕ
 Across all seventeen companies, it was found that boundaries between dev
eloper roles seem 
to be less clear in an agile environment and that it was important that developers were 
competent in a broad range of skills as opposed to being an expert in one. 
  ÒTo be a successful agile [developer] you need to be a coder, a tester, an architect, a 
customer, a quality assurance expert and a multitude of other things software
-relatedÓ 
(Manager, M). 
  As one manager in Company D described, rather than being a 
Òjack 
of all trades, master of 
noneÓ
, a developer in an agile team needs to be a 
Òmaster of all tradesÓ
. This multi
-faceted 
skill set caused numerous problems. Firstly, almost all project managers found it difficult to 
find developers that displayed all of the s
kills necessary for agile, either externally or within 
their respective organisation. Training was also found to be more difficult. In four cases, 
management sent all developers on the team to all training courses, incurring high expense. In 
all four of th
ese instances, prior to the adoption of agile, developers would only have received 
training in niche areas directly related to their narrow team role. The fact that agile 
encourages blended roles, is dependent on voluntary contributions and emphasises team
 as 
opposed to individual performance, means that team members may become a Ôjack of all 
tradesÕ but lack the opportunity to hone a smaller number of key skills e.g. Java certification. 
As a result, in the cases studied, some team members felt they were be
ing disadvantaged 
when competing for promotion or jobs in the marketplace. 
  To address this challenge, a balance needs to be obtained between Òmaster of allÓ and Òmaster 
of noneÓ.  Developers need to have broad knowledge on all aspects of software develop
ment 
but also need to be specialised in certain areas and hone their skill set in these areas. As a 
manager in Company G suggested: 
Òan agile developer requires multiple skills but still needs 
to maintain some degree of specialismÓ.
 In Companies F, L and M
, however, the distinct 
roles (such as tester, Java developer, database developer) were maintained, where it was 
perceived that Òmaster of all tradesÓ may be a potential issue due to large team size or conflict 
between developers.
  #3 Increased reliance on
 social skills
 Agile practices such as co
-location, an on
-site customer, stand up meetings, retrospectives and 
pair programming were all commonly cited examples that increase social interaction, thus 
heightening the need for social, communication and prese
ntation skills. While the 
development of social skills was generally seen by all as positive, some interesting concerns 
and problems were raised through an analysis of interviewee responses. Firstly, it was evident 
  5 across the majority of cases (15 of 17) t
hat some personnel were technically very talented but 
inherently weak in terms of communication and presentation skills. While all managers saw 
the benefits of constant face
-to-face communication, the fact that it was exacerbated to such a 
degree in an agi
le environment was clearly diminishing the productivity of some key staff:
  ÒWhen your star player outperforms the rest by 5 to 1, but is not getting the work done 
because they are losing sleep and breaking into a sweat about standing in front of a 
group, 
you need to rethink your approach, and change it for themÓ (Manager, F).
  The customer
-facing aspect of agile also caused significant problems in eight companies. It 
was clear that certain people 
Òyou should never, ever put them in front of a clientÓ
 (Dire
ctor, 
M). In fact 
Òbeing a good communicator is one thing. Knowing what not to communicate is 
much more importantÓ
 (Manager, O). Managers cited examples of developers revealing to 
customers politically sensitive and confidential information regarding contr
acts, salaries and 
opinions regarding weaknesses within the development team. An intriguing finding of this 
study is that, although both technical and social skills are required in an agile team, 
developers with strong social skills might be disadvantaged 
when they are recruited in a 
global software development context. A human resource manager described:
  ÒWhen we were hiring home developers, they always presented and communicated 
really well but you wondered if they really do have the technical skills the
y claim to 
have. The developers in the offshore location presented and communicated terribly, but 
we were always left feeling their technical skills are better than what was coming 
acrossÓ (Manager, D).
  One obvious solution to this challenge is the 
provision of social skill training. In Company K, 
however, a more holistic approach was taken, and the development was built into a larger 
training program. For each new graduate, a video recording was taken of their stand up 
meeting presentations, which t
hey would then bring with them to a required course for 
graduates called ÔCommunication and Presentation in BusinessÕ. Each graduateÕs recording 
would be watched and integrated into the course material, allowing each student to see how 
their skills were im
proving as the weeks and months progressed. Another mediating solution 
to the lack of social skills is to use appropriate documentation to facilitate communication, 
even though agile methods place emphasis on minimising documentation. In Company E, a 
manag
er found it was much harder to converse with less experienced developers without 
supporting documentation. The investment in documentation may be merited where a high 
percentage of inexperienced developers are involved.
  #4 A lack of business knowledge amo
ng developers
 Agile development involves constant, high tempo interaction between customers and 
developers. The embedded nature of the customerÕs role within the team increases interaction 
with all team members, and so, according to many of those interview
ed, an absence of basic 
domain knowledge among developers becomes very obvious. A manager in Company L 
captured the potential implications of this quite well:
  ÒIf they (the developers) donÕt know the business basics, the customer loses confidence 
in their
 overall ability, and their technical strengths may be ignoredÓ. 
  Quite a few managers spoke of the potential damaging,
 Òcancerous effectÓ
 (Manager, L) of 
this problem, citing examples of customer indifference and disengagement because of the 
resulting pe
rception that 
Òthe team know nothing about our business so they wonÕt deliver 
anything of value to our businessÓ
 (Manager, M). This was regarded as a challenge by 12 of 
the 17 companies studied and seemed to particularly problematic in seven companies wher
e   6 internationally distributed teams were involved. For example, one manager in Company K 
recalled her experiences with a distributed project involving the offshore location: 
  ÒThey had the technical skills in abundance but no business acumen whatsoever...
 Getting the business angle across to the people (in the offshore location) was really 
tough. If we can break it down into 1s and 0s they are fine, but anything qualitative is 
very hard for them to work with. The transition to agile really caused problems 
with 
thisÓ.
  Training in the business domain was seen as one possible solution. 6 of 17 companies held 
training sessions on basic topics within the problem domain, such as accounting standards, 
basic management accounting and finance and marketing principl
es. Typically, such training 
went some way to addressing the issue but usually failed to consider the client
-specific 
knowledge required. Getting the customer organisation to run the training seemed to be quite 
effective in solving this problem (2 of 17). 
In addition, running these in small modules on a 
frequent, phased basis seemed to be more beneficial than instances where training was 
delivered upfront on week one of the project before the team became actively engaged on 
their project (1 of 17). Finally,
 making the sessions interactive (1 of 17) allowed the 
developers to hone in on the niche areas they were finding particularly troublesome. 
  Moreover, almost all companies were making an attempt to resolve the root cause of the 
problem by recruiting staff
 and graduates with a combination of IT and business knowledge, 
and in three companies, actually recruiting domain experts. While the latter in particular 
requires significant additional investment, all three managers believed the additional resource 
was f
ully justified and significant value was added.
  #5 The need to understand and learn values and principles of agile, not just the practices
 It was evident in at least ten cases that while Ôon paperÕ they were implementing agile 
practices, the ultimate goals of agility were not being achieved. Company O in particular 
captures this point. Two teams in Company O implemented agile at the same time
, participating in the same three day agile training session. As can be seen from Table 2 below, 
both teams implemented the stand
-up meeting and on
-site customer practices but it is clear 
that, while they technically implemented the same practices, they di
d not achieve the same 
underlying goals. According to a manager in Company O, there was no single issue that 
caused such a difference between the two projects, but rather 
Òsome intangible combination 
of staff personality, management style, cultural issues 
and other factorsÓ.
  Practice
 Project 1
 Project 2
 Stand Up 
Meetings
 ¥ Time wasted due to late arrivals
 ¥ Average 50 minutes, up to 1.5 hours
 ¥ No responsive action
 ¥ Highly critical atmosphere
 ¥ Some people (US
-based) frozen out
 ¥ Time set to include everyone
 ¥ Time 
set aside for breakthrough 
ideas
 ¥ Highly interactive
 ¥ Non
-threatening
  On-site 
Customer
 ¥ ÔHighly passiveÕ
 ¥ Not involved in spikes
 ¥ Only role was user story validation 
Ð Ômore of an editorÕ
 ¥ ÔThem and meÕ mentality
 ¥ Averaged 4.3 days to give feedback on 
user 
stories
 ¥ Attended 27 of 113 stand ups, 6 of 14 
retrospectives
  ¥ Created brainstorming sessions
 ¥ Constantly hassled other 
stakeholders (R&D, 
manufacturing, accounting etc) 
and organised meetings 
continually
 ¥ Real
-time involvement, live 
reprioritisation
 ¥ Attended
 43 of 45 stand ups
 Table 2: Contrasting Implementation of Agile Practices
    7 Although formal training is seen as a typical solution to teach agile practices, it is not 
sufficient for development teams to adequately embrace agile values and principles. Some
 procedures identified across the companies studied included the provision of training and 
attendance at agile conferences focusing on values and principles. With regard to training, 
continuous and hands
-on training was preferable to once
-off training as a
 way to help 
developers absorb and retain agile values and principles where a manager in Company L 
claimed how Ò
the real value came from continuous training
Ó. 
  In addition, coaching can complement training to assist a team along the journey of agile
-transition. Generally across at least ten of the companies studied, senior team members played 
the role of coach, whose primary goal was to drive the effort of retain
ing agile values and 
principles within the team. However, the effect of coaching can also be obtained through 
swapping developers across agile teams which ensures cross
-team observation and validation 
of agile practices, thus identifying Ò
bad habits
Ó (Comp
any D). Periodically assessing the 
agility of a team using an assessment framework based on a set of agile goals as opposed to 
practice adherence may also help. Company A had adapted and dropped several agile 
practices as a result of assessment practices.
  #6 Lack of develope
r motivation to use agile methods
 A lack of motivation to use agile methods among developers was a challenge encountered by 
five companies studied. It was more prominent in companies where agile methods were 
adopted in a top
-down manner
. A manager in Company G observed that 
Òsometimes they 
have the competence but are not convinced it (agile) will workÓ.
 In many of the cases studied, 
there was a perception that process innovations like adopting agile are often viewed as overly 
onerous, co
mplex and time consuming. 
  In some organisations, mechanisms such as strong people involvement in the adoption 
process (2 of 17), training (8 of 17) and sharing of agile development experiences (2 of 17) 
were already in place to convince and motivate deve
lopers to adopt and use agile methods. A 
manager of Company G indicated how they continuously collected information regarding 
successful agile projects, in the form of multiple experience reports and then shared them 
among different project teams. Five com
panies collected experiences from different teams 
and customers and have gained valuable insights from them. According to various 
respondents, the sharing of agile Ôsuccess storiesÕ provided encouragement and belief.
  #7 Implications of devolved decision
-making
 While devolved decision
-making is a commonly cited aspect of agile, it has caused significant 
problems among the companies studied: 
ÒPeople were picking tasks they shouldnÕt have. It 
was self
-organising gone madÓ
 (Manager, L). Devolved decision
-makin
g also means a 
change for project managers in some cases causing problems as Ò
project managers do not 
know what their role is
Ó (Manager, N). In Company L the manager cited anxiety of losing the 
traditional power as a 
Òproblem among some managersÓ
.   Severa
l agile practices contributed to devolved decision making, including pair programming, 
stand up meetings, regular retrospectives, and frequent informal communication. Sometimes 
however, team and peer pressure can be too much. A practice discovered in two c
ompanies is 
a 15
-minute meeting between individual developers and the manager every week to ensure 
that all developers have ample opportunity to communicate any views or concerns they have 
which may be difficult for them to express in an open forum. 
  For 
actual team decision making processes, effective practices across the seventeen cases 
included a democratic voting system to ensure everybody had an input into every decision. In 
the decision making processes, as found in 3 of 17 cases, a project managerÕs
 role was 
adapted to that of a facilitator in an agile team who, in the end, made the actual decisions. 
  8 Such role switching allows a project manager to act as a peer to the rest of the team 
maintaining an open
-mind, while at the same time preserving much d
ecision making 
responsibility which to a certain degree alleviates the anxiety of losing the traditional power 
associated with managers.
  #8 The need for agile
-compliant performance evaluation
 Across the seventeen cases studied, it was found that while agile methods advocate people 
interaction, collaboration, mentoring, teamwork and transferring knowledge, there are many 
issues associated with the performance evaluation of these activities. Team
 collaboration is 
not easy to implement if performance evaluation and appraisal mechanisms are based on 
individual performance. A manager in Company L tells of one of his team memberÕs 
experience: 
  ÒWe had one guy, who was the guru of the team. While he w
as happy with agile during 
the year, he really felt demotivated when he was passed over for promotion. His 
argument was he spent most of his time giving advice, pairing with weaker developers 
and helping the team in stand
-ups and retrospectives. In his eye
s none of this had been 
rewarded and as his manager I have to agreeÓ.
  In five cases the criteria for performance evaluation (particularly at junior levels) focused on 
technical skills and the ability to follow direction whereas distinguishing factors in agile 
development, such as social skills, creative thinking and self
-org
anisation, were neglected. In 
other instances, agile teams were largely evaluated according to traditional criteria and so 
according to those interviewed, results of performance evaluation were often not indicative of 
the true abilities of the team members
. Meanwhile, 
performance evaluation of the on
-site 
customer seemed particularly problematic and highly contentious. In at least four instances, 
the actual person doing the job felt aggrieved that they were not being rewarded properly:
   ÒAt the end of the 
day we can say the on
-site customer is vital. In reality though, a 
marketing person is rewarded for their marketing work, and an accountant for what 
they do with the accounts. Time spent with a development team helping some other 
department be a success do
es not help them much in their own reviewsÓ (Manager, E).
  Developing team
-based performance evaluation with indicators tuned to agile attributes, 
therefore, can foster team collaboration and use of agile practices. For example, 3 of the 17 
interviewed com
panies have developed a bonus program that is team
-based rather than 
rewarding individuals. 
To make team
-based performance evaluation more effective, team 
members can act as evaluators as well as being evaluated. Six companies have introduced 
Ò360¼ feedbac
kÓ where all team members evaluate each other, as opposed to managers 
appraising subordinates, thus ensuring that voluntary contributions and mentoring are 
captured in the appraisal. 
  #9 Lack of agile
-specific recruitment policies and suitably trained IT 
graduates
 Due to a lack of agile
-specific recruitment policies in place in most companies it can be 
difficult to find the right people that are needed for agile development. A manager in 
Company G described this challenge succinctly: 
ÒThe policies that we 
use in recruiting 
people do not really take into account agility. I do not even know how we should do it?Ó
 The 
issue can be worsened by the fact that very few third level institutions incorporate agile 
methods and skills to any significant degree. For instance a manager in Company L said: 
  ÒWe cannot seem to find any graduates who have done anything hands on o
r even gone 
beyond 1 or 2 lectures on agile methodsÓ.
    9 Furthermore, according to those interviewed, degree programmes tend to lean heavily (if not 
entirely) toward intense technical or business skills but rarely incorporate both. 
  3 of the 17 companies de
veloped agile compliant recruiting practices. For example, in 
Company L job applicants are required to refactor a piece of code and develop a set of user 
stories and acceptance tests based on an interview with a fictional customer. In Company A 
applicants 
are monitored during a 2 hour ÔiterationÕ documenting user stories, estimating, 
prioritising, developing, refactoring, testing with a stand up meeting after one hour and a 
retrospective after two. This mode of recruiting quickly exposes the lack of technic
al and 
social skills of the applicants. Instead, Company I does something similar but actually drops a 
single applicant into a live team of developers as opposed to a mock environment (where the 
whole team are applicants). All team members then evaluate th
e performance of the applicant. 
  RECOMMENDATIONS & CONCLUSIONS A key output from this study is a set of practices that effective organisations are using to 
overcome the challenges identified in this study. These are discussed throughout this article 
but a
re summarised below. While success is a hard thing to measure, all of the practices 
below were implemented effectively in at least one organisation, according to the respondents 
in each respective case. Many of these were implemented effectively in multipl
e cases.
  Challenges
 Recommendations
 Developer fear caused by 
transparency of skill 
deficiencies
 ¥ Feedback outside stand ups, allowing the documentation of any fears, issues 
or concerns inappropriate for discussion in open forum 
 ¥ Stand up meetings 
voluntary for new junior developers
 ¥ Dedicated mentor for new staff
 ¥ Weaker developers paired with those who had more experience, taking joint 
responsibility for requirements 
 The need for developers 
to be a Ômaster of all 
tradesÕ
 ¥ Use pair programming and 
pair rotation to distribute knowledge and 
facilitate learning
 ¥ Encourage task self
-assignment to allow developer work in different areas 
and learn new skills 
 ¥ Reintroduce specific roles when it is perceived beneficial to teams with e.g. 
large team size, con
flicts between developers
 Increased reliance on 
social skills
 ¥ Combine development and training program to provide customised training 
materials on social skills, using developersÕ own examples.  
 ¥ Using proper documentation to back up communication
 A lack
 of business 
knowledge among 
developers
 ¥ Customer company runs training sessions on basic topics within the 
business domain and on company specific area(s)
 ¥ Provide small training modules (on a frequent basis), making it interactive 
to allow developers acqui
re niche business knowledge required by the 
project 
 ¥ Recruit staff and graduates with a combination of IT and business 
knowledge
 The need to understand 
and learn values and 
principles of agile, not 
just the practices
 ¥ Ensure multiple members get agile 
training or attend agile conferences
 ¥ Agile coaching and championing
 ¥ Ensure cross
-team observation/validation of agile practices
 ¥ Assess agility in terms of agile values not practice adherence
 Lack of developer 
motivation to use agile 
methods
 ¥ Try to have mu
ltiple Ôbought
-inÕ developers on each team
 ¥ Collecting and sharing successful adoption stories and positive experiences 
 Implications of devolved 
decision
-making
 ¥ Build a sharing and learning environment to empower team decision
-making
 ¥ Implement a 
democratic voting system
 ¥ Project manager plays the role of facilitator
 The need for agile
-compliant performance 
evaluation
 ¥ Performance evaluation needs to consider breadth of skills, not just depth
 ¥ Performance evaluation to apply much higher weighting for
 mentoring, 
voluntary contributions etc
   10 ¥ 360¡ feedback a must
 Lack of agile
-specific 
recruitment policies and 
suitably trained IT 
graduates
 ¥ Develop specific recruiting practices tailored for agile methods to hire right 
people
 ¥ Use team recruiting to find 
right person working in the team
 ¥ Put newly recruited graduates on agile projects to get hands on experience
 Table 3: A summary of people challenges and recommendations to address them
  We believe that the findings from this study can be used for a variety of purposes. The list of 
issues can be used by organisations to assess the issues that they may be susceptible to when 
considering whether or not to implement agile, or to determine wha
t problems they may be 
encountering if agile is already in place. This can be a very insightful exercise, given many of 
the problems identified in this study exist Ôunder the radarÕ or are, as referred to by one 
manager, acting 
Òas silent killersÓ.
 The bes
t practices used to overcome the challenges (listed 
above) could be used as a starting point for developing a recruitment or training strategy. This 
would be particularly appropriate where an organisation is undertaking a transition to agile. It 
is importa
nt to note that such practices may reduce or at least surface people issues, but it is 
unlikely to remove them altogether. It was clear from the many interviews conducted that the 
management of people issues is an art more than a science, that the source o
f the problem can 
be the organisation, the project, the team, or the individual and there is no technique that can 
solve all problems. Also, it is clear that some organisations may not be in a position to 
implement all of the recommendations due to cost, c
ultural issues, organisational structure 
limitations or a variety of other reasons. Of course some of these issues may be largely 
outside their control, with the lack of university graduates being a key example. Also, the 
study was limited in that those in
terviewed were typically in managerial positions and so it 
may be interesting to conduct a similar study ascertaining the views and experiences of 
developers. Identifying contrasts and conflicting opinions between developers and managers 
and reasons for th
ose opinions may be insightful. 
  While exacerbated in an agile environment, not all of the issues raised in this study are new 
and in reality many have plagued project managers, HR staff and trainers for many years. For 
those interested in reading more ab
out previous research on the issues raised in this study, 
please refer to Appendix B.
   11 REFERENCES
 Drobka, J., D. Noftz and R. Raghu (2004). 
"Piloting XP on Four Mission
-Critical Projects.
" IEEE Software, 21(6): 70
-75. Jamieson, D., K. Vinsen, et al. 
(2006)
. "Agile Procurement and Dynamic Value for Money to 
facilitate Agile Software Projects." 32nd EUROMICRO Conference on Software 
Engineering and Advanced Applications, Cavtat, Croatia.
 Nerur, S., R. Mahapatra, et al. (2005). "Challenges of Migrating to Agile
 Methodologies." 
Communications of the ACM 48(5): 72
-78. Poole
, C. and J. Huisman (2001). 
"Using Extreme Programming in a Maintenance 
Environment.
" IEEE Software, 18(6): 42
-50. Schuh, P. (2004). Integrating Agile Development in the Real World, Charles 
River Media Inc.
 Tan, C. H. and H. H. Teo (2007). "Training Future Software Developers to Acquire Agile 
Development Skills." Communications of the ACM 50(12): 97
-98. UXResearch September (2008). "DEEWR Tender Win." From 
http://
www.uxresearch.com.au/news/deewr
-tender
-win/
 (last accessed 20 January, 
2010) VersionOne 
(2009). 
ÒState of Agile Survey, fourth an
nual survey
.Ó http://www.
versionone
.com/pdf/2009_State_
of_Agile_Development_Survey_Results
.pdf (last accessed 20 January, 2010).
  