 70IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/06/$20.00 © 2006 IEEEquality timeEditors: Nancy Eickelmann Motorola nancy.eickelmann@motorola.com
Jane Huffman Hayes University of Kentucky hayes@cs.uky.edu
Recently, software development teams
using agile processes have started
widely adopting test-driven develop-
ment. Despite its name, Òtest drivenÓ
or Òtest firstÓ development isnÕt really

a testing technique. Also known astest-driven design, TDD works like this: For
each small bit of functionality the program-mers code, they first write unit

tests. Then they write the code

that makes those unit tests
pass. This forces the program-
mer to think about many as-
pects of the feature before cod-
ing it. It also provides a safety

net of tests that the program-
mers can run with each update
to the code, ensuring that
refactored, updated, or newcode doesnÕt break existing functionality. 
TDD can also extend beyond the unit or
Òdeveloper facingÓ test. Many teams, including
my own, use Òcustomer facingÓ or ÒstoryÓ tests

to help drive coding. These tests and examples,

written in a form understandable to both busi-
ness and technical teams, illustrate requirements

and business rules. Customer-facing tests might

include functional, system, end-to-end, perfor-

mance, security, and usability tests. Program-

mers write code to make these tests pass, which

shows the product owners and stakeholders

that the delivered code meets their expectations.But does TDD really improve software
quality?Some statisticsIf you like numbers, many studies haveshown that TDD does improve quality. Accord-
ing to DavidJanzenÕs paper, ÒSoftware Architec-
ture Improvement through Test-Driven Devel-

opmentÓ (ACM Press,2005), industry studies

show that programmers using TDD produced
code that passed between 18 and 50 percent
more external test cases than code produced by
control groups not using TDD. Additionally, the

TDD programmers spent less time debugging.
Janzen also cites academic studies that demon-
strated significant improvements in external
software quality and programmer productivity. 
One such study, by Boby George and Lau-
rie Williams, found that although TDD might

initially reduce productivity among program-
mers inexperienced with writing code test-

first, the TDD developers wrote code that
passed 18 percent more functional test cases
than the control group (ÒAn Initial Investiga-
tion of Test Driven Development in Industry,Ó

SAC,2003). The study also reported that the

code TDD developers producedsurpassed in-

dustry standards in code coverage.Of course, statistics arenÕt everything.
First-hand experienceIÕve worked on three different development
teams using TDD and on several more teams
that didnÕt. I can tell you from first-hand expe-

rience that TDD produces code that has orders-
of-magnitude fewer unit-level bugs, far fewer
functional bugs, and an exponentially higher
probability of meeting stakeholder expecta-
tions when compared to code produced by con-
ventional programming techniques. In 2000, I joined a team of eight programmerswho had just adopted Extreme Programming.
TDD is a central XP concept, so I was surprised

when I, the sole tester, became overwhelmed with
Driving Software Quality: How Test-Driven Development Impacts Software QualityLisa Crispin  November/December 2006IEEE SOFTWARE
71QUALITY TIMEdefects in the delivered code. The prob-lem? TDD is hard to learn. My pro-
grammer teammates couldnÕt figure out

how to write effective unit tests, much
less unit tests ahead of the code, so they

werenÕt writing them. Either they had to

master TDD or we needed to hire two
more testers.After many brown-bag discussionsabout TDD techniques and a lot of
practice, I was testing nice clean code
where I could actually focus on func-
tional testing. Most bugs I found were
simply due to a misunderstanding of a
featureÕs requirements. I had time to au-

tomate the functional tests and do valu-
able exploratory testing to find any se-
rious problems that might be lurking.I repeated this experience with mynext XP team at a different company.

They had done TDD for about a year,

but it was the only testing they were do-
ing. They didnÕt have anyone in a tester

role, and no one was doing functional
testing. Also, the team wasnÕt colocated.

Their customer was reasonably happy
with the code; it was far more in line with
their expectations, and far less buggy,

than the code previous teams delivered
(the project failed twice before this team
took it on). Still, disconnects continued
to arise between what the customer
wanted and what the team delivered. As the tester, I helped the customer
design acceptance tests that illustrated
expectations clearly. We wrote these tests

either in advance or during the first cou-
ple days of each iteration. The program-
mers could use the tests to understand
the big picture and code the features cor-
rectly. I canÕt give you hard numbers, but

the customers were much more involved
in the development process than they
had been when the programmers were
only testing at the unit level, and they
were even happier with the results.Again, on this team, because the unit
tests caught the unit-level bugs, the team
had time to automate customer-facing

regression tests and perform effective
exploratory testing. All of these activi-
ties helped produce clean code that pro-
vided the anticipated functionality.
My current team has been producingcode test-first for two and a half years.
As with my first team, it took much time
and learning to develop TDD compe-tence. But once a team passes the painful
learning curve, writing the unit tests be-
comes much easierÑand indispensable.
All the programmers IÕve worked with
who have learned to code test-first say
they would never go back to the old way.
We also use customer-test-driven de-
velopment. During the first few days of
each iteration, we discuss the stories with
the product owners. The product owners
give us business examples, either by sim-
ply drawing diagrams and flowchartson

a whiteboard and holding discussions or

by creating spreadsheets. We ask ques-

tions to elicit requirements and flush out
hidden assumptions. We use this infor-

mation to write high-level test cases for
each story. When a developer starts cod-

ing on a story, he or she looks at these

test cases to ensure basic features are un-

derstood. As coding begins, we write a

simple executable test for the story. The

programmer writes code to make this test
pass, and then we can add more test cases
if necessary for adequate coverage. Have we seen any results? We started
practicing TDD at the beginning of
2004. The production defect rate in the

second quarter of 2005 was down 62

percent from the same quarter in 2004.
Between the second quarter of 2005 and
the second quarter of 2006, the defect
rate went down another 39 percent. 
Satisfied stakeholdersOf course, defect rate is just one smallmeasure of quality. If you could talk to

our business stakeholders, youÕd find
theyÕre satisfied, often even delighted,
that we deliver just what they asked for
each iteration. WeÕve implemented fea-

tures that competing companies thought
were too complex to automate. Many
factors come into play, including other

agile practices such as short iterations,
continuous integration, and refactoring.
However, I think our ability to under-

stand and capture business requirements,
and then code to meet them, is a critical
reason for our success.How TDD helpsWhy does driving development withdeveloper and customer tests improve
code quality? Business people and soft-ware developers speak different lan-
guages. They have to find some com-
mon ground to work together on a
project, and they develop what Brian
Marick calls a shared languageor proj-ect creole(see www.exampler.com/book/
preface.html). As he points out, 
Focusing conversation on writtenartifacts makes that joint language

more concrete, more uniform, and

makes it come together faster. In

happy cases, a teamÕs language and

shared experience becomes a power-

ful tool of thought. On the business

side, it makes it easier to envision

useful new features. On the pro-

gramming side, it helps produce the
kind of well-tailored program that

programmers find easiest to extend.
Writing tests first helps define a fea-
ture or storyÕs scope, a key component of

software development, according to Kent
Beck (see his article ÒAim, Fire,Ó IEEESoftware, Sept./Oct. 2001). Anything notcovered in a test isnÕt going to be there.

And as already stated here, test-first helps
ensure good design. As Janzen reported

in his paper, studies reveal that computa-

tional complexity is significantly lower in
test-first projects while test volume and
coverage are higher. Also, test-first not

only helps business and technical people

communicate but also helps program-
mers communicate with each other. This

occurs while theyÕre writing a piece of
code and later on when they want to
refactor it or add a feature. When you
run regression tests covering all the code
every time you check something in, you
can make changes quickly and confi-

dently. You donÕt have to worry about

forgetting or misunderstanding an ob-

scure requirement a year down the road.
The tests will remind you.As teams get better at TDD and dis-
cover new techniques for writing ef-
fective tests and capturing require-ments and examples, software quality
will only continue to improve.Lisa Crispinis coauthor of Testing Extreme Programming
(Addison-Wesley, 2002). Contact her at lisa.crispin@gmail.com;
http://lisa.crispin.home.att.net.