 70IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/04/$20.00 © 2004 IEEEXP work for us? Could developers in an es-tablished company use XP to develop complex
mission-critical systems that could be main-

tained for decades? What would be the rami-
fications for quality and maintainability? For
the purpose of this article, weÕll assume that

youÕre relatively familiar with the standard XP
process. For detailed information regarding
XPÕs roles, guidelines, and practices, read 
Ex-treme Programming Explained1and ExtremeProgramming Installed.2Why Extreme Programming?Typically, our development projects are part
of large system releases with customer-en-

forced ship dates, set well before our customers
finalize their product requirements. We also

make staffing estimatesÑand product develop-
ment teams start workÑbefore the require-
ments are final. So, teams face the prospect of
taking several months to develop an architec-
ture that, because of changing requirements, is

guaranteed to be wrong in some fashion. We

hoped that XP would help us solve our chang-

ing requirements dilemma. We also hoped to

improve productivity and decrease cycle time
while maintaining our quality level.Our processWe piloted XP with four development teams
over an 18-month period, from product re-
feature
Piloting XP on FourMission-Critical ProjectsAccording to proponents, Extreme Programming creates focused,
efficient software development that heavily emphasizes customer

involvement. As software developers for mission-critical two-way

radio systems in MotorolaÕs Commercial, Government, and In-
dustrial Solutions Sector, weÕd been hearing a lot about XPÕs benefits. WeÕd

also heard stories about Web applications and small development projects

that successfully used XP. The nagging questions remained, however. Would 
extreme programming
Software development teams constantly battle to increase
productivity while maintaining or improving quality. Four Motorola

teams piloted Extreme Programming to see if it would let them satisfy

their customersÕ constantly changing requirements while improving
productivity.
Jerry Drobka, David Noftz, and Rekha Raghu, 
Motorola quirements through product testing. In all cases,they followed object-oriented (OO) design prin-
ciples and implemented the systems using C++.Teams A, B, and C developed Windows-
based embedded systems that acted as gateways.
Team AÕs system was a gateway between a cir-

cuit-switched communications system and a
packet-switched Internet-Protocol-based com-
munication system. Team BÕs was a gateway be-

tween legacy telephone systems and a new IP-
based communication system. Team CÕs was

between legacy radio-frequency system inter-
faces and a new IP-based communication sys-
tem. Team DÕs product, part of a Unix-based

controller, was an application that provided ar-

bitration and resource allocation.Incorporating and adapting XPXP is an agile, iterative development pro-cess quite different from the waterfall pro-

cesses we were accustomed to using. We used

XPÕs four key participant rolesÑcustomer,

coach, manager, and developerÑplus these de-

velopment principles and practices:The planning gameShort development cycles (in our case, each
iteration was one calendar month long)Pair programming3Test-first programming
Collective code ownershipFrequent integrationNever solving a problem that hasnÕt occurred
Refactoring4Minimal documentation
XPÕs greatest asset is simplicity. Some purists
might argue otherwise, but we donÕt believe that

XP is a one-size-fits-all process.5A few aspectsdidnÕt work with the type of product we were

developing. So, we tailored the process slightly
to better fit our project and organization.The coachWhen we started our pilot, we had no ex-perience with XP. To ensure that we used this

new process properly, we hired an experienced

outside consultant as our coach. The coach
helped us implement the process and tailor it
for our organization and kept us from retreat-

ing to our Òcomfort zoneÓ when the going got
tough. Our coach also joined a team and pair

programmed with our engineers, which was an
effective on-the-job training method. We rec-
ommend that all teams experimenting with anagile process bring in an experienced coach. A
consultant whoÕs not a product of your organi-

zationÕs culture will bring a fresh perspective to

your team and ease the transition.The customerXP requires a paying customer to fill the
customer role, but our organizationÕs structure

made this impossible. Instead, each team used

its technical domain expert as a customer

proxy, who was responsible for gaining a com-

plete understanding of the systemÕs require-

ments. To accomplish this, these ÒcustomersÓ

used personal knowledge and experience,
worked with system-level engineers, interfaced

with engineers from other product teams, and

gained input from marketing groups. Behind

the scenes, system-level engineers and market-
ing groups worked together to determine the
overall system requirements. The customers

took these inputs, wrote requirements when

necessary, and provided the teams with use

cases; they also worked with their managers to
prioritize the features required for release. The
development teams then planned their itera-

tions on the basis of these use cases.The planning gameAt the beginning of each iteration, eachteam held a planning-game meeting. At this
meeting, the manager supplied a list of func-
tionalities (in the form of use cases) that he or
she wanted to see completed during the next it-
eration. The developers, coach, and customer
met for a four- to six-hour session to discuss

this list. During this meeting, the team broke
down each piece of functionality into small im-
plementation tasks and assigned each task an
effort estimate. The developers then totaled the
estimates to determine if they could implement
the requested functionality within a single iter-
ation. If so, they assigned an owner to each im-
plementation task. If not, they returned the list
to the manager, who made the iterationÕs scope

more realistic. The managers had the authority
to move functionality from iteration to itera-
tion. If they wished to change the projectÕs

scope, however, they had to obtain approval

using MotorolaÕs change control processes.
Architecture and documentationWhen it comes to documentation, most de-velopers fall into one of two camps: either youNovember/December 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
71Some puristsmight argueotherwise, butwe donÕt believethat XP is a one-size-fits-all process. fervently believe XPÕs creators when they say
source code is the only necessary documenta-
tion, or you break into a cold sweat at the
thought of no design artifacts. WeÕre centrists on

this issue, falling somewhere between these two
extremes. We believe that source code gives the

most accurate picture of system operation but
that it doesnÕt tell you everything. For example,

if you need to perform maintenance on an OO
software system, how do you know where in the

code to begin your investigation? Clearly, you

need some sort of roadmap to give the developer
a starting point, and then the source code takes
over as the primary documentation. We used a

high-level architecture document to provide this
roadmap; it contained class diagrams, scenarios,
and a process view of the system.5Defining baseline architectures.Before we
staffed the project, several pilot teams defined
initial architectures to give the engineers a
framework to use during the developmentÕs

first iteration. A small group of technical ex-
perts created these baseline architectures in a

four-hour blitz session. They designed and doc-

umented scenarios with the most customer im-
pact and high architectural significance. These
architectures also introduced key abstractions
in the code and helped identify and define the
system boundaries. We found that when the

programming pairs had no architectural guid-
ance during the projectÕs first iteration, they

created their own visions of what the overall
architecture should be. These visions often dif-
fered considerably, resulting in disorganization

and significant refactoring work.Standardizing documentation.The softwarecomponents our XP teams developed were part
of a larger system that other teams were creat-
ing in sites across the country. Because each

system componentÕs requirements and scenar-

ios had to be accessible to all the teams, we
needed a common documentation format that
everyone could understand. To facilitate com-

munication with the other teams, we wrote use
cases6rather than user stories. This provided acommon language and minimized our pilotÕs

impact on other engineers and teams.On all teams, the customers were responsi-
ble for writing and validating the use cases.
They created a list of all possible use cases (pri-

oritized by customer impact and architectural

significance), elaborated the highest-priorityuse cases, and delivered them to the develop-
ment team. The customers wrote use cases in
parallel with the development and delivered

them in a just-in-time manner to the imple-

menters. Because the customers wrote the use
cases independently from the XP teams, we re-

quired that the use cases go through MotorolaÕs

formal technical-review process. This ensured

that they were consistent with the overall sys-

tem requirements and functionally correct for

their respective software components.Formal reviewsThe products we develop have about a 30-year life span, during which engineers contin-
uously upgrade and improve them. These en-
gineers are almost never the ones who worked
on the product originally, so maintainabilityÕs

a big issue for us. We were concerned that

XPÕs minimal documentation would make

such work difficult. To mitigate this issue, we

used design reviews to ensure maintainability.
At the end of each iteration, we updated ourhigh-level architecture document to reflect the
systemÕs current state. We then scheduled a de-

sign review to evaluate the updated document.
During the review, independent OO experts

evaluated the design and pointed out ineffi-
ciencies or mistakes. People outside the team
also verified the productÕs maintainability by

evaluating the design and code using only the
supplied documentation. These reviews helped
us avoid overdocumenting our design.
XP requires the customer to write accept-
ance tests for the system at the story level,

which the developers run periodically to verify
the designÕs correctness. This wasnÕt feasible

for us during implementation. Running the
tests would have required a complete two-way
radio system, and we only had our single sys-
tem component. So, to ensure that the system

met the customerÕs requirements, we held re-

quirements verification reviews in which the

customer was the key reviewer. The meetings

also ensured that the existing unit and appli-
cation-level test cases were sufficient to verify

our software componentÕs operation.
Our resultsEven though our four teams followed slightlydifferent processes because of their individual sit-
uations, they showed relatively consistent results.
The teams collected data on qualitative and
quantitative aspects of the process. We measured
We had todemonstrate to our seniormanagementthat XP offeredtangiblebenefits overour existingprocesses.72IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
 the qualitative results with a survey that we dis-
tributed to the pilotÕs 29 participants.
MoraleXP is unique because it provides constantfeedback to the developers. At the end of each
day, our teams had a working product, which

created a surge in morale. This constant feed-
back also helped the engineers gain a sense of
accomplishment from their daily work; they
could immediately see the positive impact their
efforts had on the project. This is significant
because when morale is high, people are ex-
cited about their work, leading to a more ef-
fective, efficient development team. Overall, 85

percent of the developers enjoyed using XP, 68

percent stated that using XP increased their job
enjoyment, and 79 percent stated that, given a
choice, they would definitely use XP again.LearningXP also reduced the learning curve for new
team members. Having new team members sit

in on pair-programming sessions for a few

weeks was helpful. Once they actually began
working in pairs, they learned the architecture
quickly with help from the more experienced

engineers with whom they were paired. This

method also proved successful with new hires,
who became productive after approximately
one month of XP experience. In total, 55 per-

cent of the developers believed that using XP
shortened their initial project-learning curve.ProductivityOur teams also experienced a significant in-crease in engineer productivity. We measured

productivity using the formula (total KAELOC) /(total staff effort). KAELOCrepresents thousandsof assembler-equivalent lines of code. Our total

KAELOCvalue didnÕt include unit test code, and
the total staff effort value included our refactor-

ing effort. Using a productivity formula that in-
cludes lines of code can cause some problems, es-
pecially when extensive refactoring takes place.Business needs drove our decision to usethis formula. To justify the risk and expense of

piloting a new software development process,

we had to demonstrate to our senior manage-
ment that XP offered tangible benefits over

our existing processes. We satisfied this re-

quirement by establishing a common denomi-
nator that would let us compare our results

with previous projectsÕ results. This productiv-ity calculation was available for all our histor-ical projects. Figure 1 shows the percent im-

provement in our XP projectsÕ productivity,

compared to similar Motorola teams using

different processes. Our teams showed high
productivity levels according to this metric.
Test coverage
We also achieved excellent test coverage as
an ancillary benefit of using XP. Figure 2 shows

our teamsÕ statement test coverage data. All fourNovember/December 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
73450400
350
300
250
200
150
100500IncrementalprojectXP Team A
Development projectXP Team BXP Team CXP Team D
Productivity vs. waterfall model (%)162%265%283%352%385%Figure 1. Productivitymeasurements.10090
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
100Unit test coverageApplication test coverageXP Team D
Pilot teamsXP Team AXP Team BXP Team C
Statement test coverage (%)73%78%88%79%86%95%Figure 2. Test coveragemeasurements. teams had unit test coverage data available,but only B and C measured application-level
test coverage. Our teamsÕ unit test coverage
varied mainly because of how strictly they ad-

hered to the test-first programming concept.
Because Team C used test-first programming

consistently, they obtained 95 percent unit test

coverage and 85 percent application-level test
coverage.Quality and maintainabilityFigure 3 shows Team AÕs and Team DÕs fi-
nal quality results. These two projects have
shipped; the others havenÕt gone through sys-

tem testing, so no data is available. This chart
shows the percent improvement in quality ver-
sus our divisionÕs average. We measured qual-

ity results using defect density, defined as (to-

tal number of defects found during system

testing) / (total KAELOC). For our teams, K
AE-LOCdidnÕt include unit test code. Both teamsÕ
defect densities were significantly better than

the division average. The XP teams in Figure 3
show quality levels similar to the non-XP
teamÕs, suggesting that XP projects can have

quality levels comparable to those of projects
created using other processes. As we men-

tioned before, our tailored XP process also
had custom formal technical reviews built in

to ensure the teams produced a maintainable

design.Eighty-two percent of the developers be-lieved that the design and code they generated
using XP were understandable, maintainable,
and extensible. Eighty-eight percent believedthat the deliverables they produced were ade-quate for future development and mainte-
nance. Finally, 80 percent were more confident

in the design and code they generated while
pair programming than when they work alone.Sticking to the processTo get a feel for how well the teams were
adhering to the process, we performed audits
and held discussion sessions with the develop-
ers monthly. We found that the developers fol-

lowed our modified XP process as specified

approximately 80 percent of the time. Occa-
sionally, both pair programmers werenÕt avail-

able at the same time. When this happened,

the developer wrote unit test cases and then

wrote the code when the other developer was
available. One team didnÕt create a baseline

architecture, which forced them to hold sev-

eral extensive refactoring sessions. Another
team didnÕt allocate a dedicated customer, so

they rotated the teamÕs senior members

through the role. Another didnÕt consistently

follow the test-first strategy, which resulted in

us catching several defects during the accept-
ance test.Bottom line: the teams tried their best to ad-
here to the process, but sometimes it wasnÕt

possible. When this occurred, they tried to

adapt the process to suit their needs, which

sometimes worked and sometimes didnÕt.
ChallengesAlthough we view our XP pilot as a posi-tive experience, the process presented some
challenges. For example, pair programming
requires large blocks of time. Experienced de-
velopers have busy schedules and often spend
much of their day rushing from one meeting
to another. They have a lot of trouble finding

three to four hours of uninterrupted time
each day to participate in pair programming.
We found that the best way to alleviate this

problem was to use Òbrute forceÓÑwe used
a scheduling tool to block out time in their
schedules.Pair programming presents another prob-lem. Managers must choose the pairs on their
team carefully. Pair programming could be in-

effective with shy or overbearing personalities,
or with two relatively inexperienced develop-
ers. If a manager pairs a shy person with
someone whoÕs a bit overbearing, the shy per-

son will have limited participation in the pairÕs
74IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
8070
60
50
40
30
20
100XP Team D
ProjectsRecent non-XPteamXP Team A
Improvement in quality vs. average (%)51%64%74%Figure 3. Quality measurements. tasks. Also, pairing up inexperienced develop-ers isnÕt desirable because they might not un-

derstand the development practices and how
their task fits into the big picture.
We also noticed on several occasions that
XP teams had difficulty interfacing with teams

using traditional development processes. For
instance, the XP team wanted just one or two

pieces of the interface to work with at a time,

but the traditional team wanted to develop

and review the entire interface before provid-

ing it to the XP team. We found that defining

common skeleton interfaces up front was an

effective way to mitigate this issue.
XP team managers also face several chal-lenges. Because so many tasks are performed
collectively, managers have difficulty identify-

ing high-performing and low-performing em-
ployees and must therefore pay closer atten-
tion than usual to developersÕ activities. In
addition, because XP is so agile, managers
might have difficulty determining how sched-

ule changes will affect the projectÕs anticipated

end date.Our pilot programÕs success has con-

vinced us that you can use an agile
process such as XP to develop com-plex mission-critical systems with long life cy-

cles. An XP projectÕs structure lets the team

make rapid progress, even when facing vol-
atile requirements. The productivity gains that
XP provides also make it an attractive devel-

opment process for most OO projects. We feel obligated to warn first-time XP
users, however, that integrating an agile pro-

cess into a company with a culture favoring
more traditional development processes isnÕt

easy. YouÕll need to tailor the process to your

circumstances. Some managers and developers
will reject XP immediately because itÕs so dif-

ferent from the development processes theyÕre

accustomed to. All prospective XP users must
undergo thorough training to obtain buy-in.
Strong coaching is also necessary to ensure
that the team adheres to the process and tai-

lors it properly. Finally, periodic audits and

code spot-checks by the system architect and
coach help ensure that the team is using the

process correctly. If youÕre willing to work

hard and carefully introduce an agile process

into your organization, your efforts should

yield positive results.References1.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
2.R. Jeffries, A. Andersen, and C. Hendrickson, 
ExtremeProgramming Installed, Addison-Wesley, 2000.
3.L. Williams and R. Kessler, 
Pair Programming Illumi-nated, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
4.M. Fowler et al., 
Refactoring: Improving the Design ofExisting Code, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
5.B. Boehm and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and Disci-pline: A Guide for the Perplexed
, Addison-Wesley,
2003.6.A. Cockburn, ed., 
Writing Effective Use Cases
, Addi-son-Wesley, 2000.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib. 
November/December 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
75About the AuthorsJerry Drobka
is a Distinguished Member of the Technical Staff at Motorola, where heÕs
working on a next-generation two-way radio system. His research interests include require-
ments management in a projectÕs initial stages. He earned his MS in electrical engineering

from the Illinois Institute of Technology. Contact him at Motorola, 1301 E. Algonquin Rd.,

IL02/1923, Schaumburg, IL 60196; jerry.drobka@motorola.com.
David Noftzis an engineering group leader at Motorola, where heÕs a project manager
developing a next-generation two-way radio system. His research interests include increasing
productivity and reducing costs through software process improvement. He holds an MBA from
DePaul University and an MS in computer science from the University of Illinois at Chicago.
Contact him at Motorola, 1301 E. Algonquin Rd., IL02/1923, Schaumburg, IL 60196;
david.noftz@motorola.com.Rekha Raghuis a technical lead at Motorola, where sheÕs working on the performance
and capacity of a next-generation two-way radio dispatch system. Her research interests include
agile processes and software process improvement. She received her MS in computer science
from the University of Illinois at Chicago. She is a signatory and member of the Agile Alliance

(http://AgileAlliance.org). Contact her at Motorola, 1301 E. Algonquin Rd., IL02/1923,
Schaumburg, IL 60196; rekha.raghu@motorola.com.Visit  
on theWeb
Log on to our Web site,where you can¥ Search our vast archives
¥ Preview upcoming topics
¥Browse our calls for papers
¥ Submit your article for 
publication¥ Subscribe or renew
www.computer.org/software
