 6 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/09/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
voice of evidence
Editor: Forrest Shull 
 Fraunhofer Center for Experimental Software Engineering,
 Maryland 
 fshull@fc-md.umd.edu
Agile software development has had a huge 
impact on how software is developed 
worldwide. A 2005 survey of the US and 
Europe, for example, revealed that 14 per
-cent of companies were using agile meth
-ods, and 49 percent of the companies aware 
of agile methods were interested in adopting them.
1We can view agile methods such as Extreme Pro
-gramming (XP) and Scrum as a reaction to plan-
based or traditional methods, which emphasize a 
ﬁrationalized, engineering-based approach,ﬂ
2 incor
-porating extensive planning, codi˜ed processes, and 
rigorous reuse.
3 In contrast, agile methods address 
the challenge of an unpredictable world, emphasiz
-ing the value competent people and their relation
-ships bring to software development.
4 Table 1 sum
-marizes these differences.
To clarify the effectiveness of agile methods, we 
reviewed the agile development literature and con
-ducted a systematic study of what we know empiri
-cally about its bene˜ts and limitations.
Agile Methods Overview
Three overviews from the ˜rst half of this decade 
describe the state of the art and practice of agile 
development in terms of lessons learned from ap
-plying various agile methods in industry.
The ˜rst is a literature review from a 2002 
VTT Electronics technical report.
5 The report 
discussed the agile development concept in gen
-eral, then presented experiences with 10 agile 
methods, and compared them with respect to the 

development phases they support and developer 

competence levels they require. The authors con
-cluded that only the Dynamic Systems Develop
-ment Method and the Rational Uni˜ed Process 

cover all development phases fully, while Scrum 

mainly covers aspects related to project manage
-ment. They reported anecdotal evidence that ag
-ile methods are ﬁeffective and suitable for many 

situations and environments,ﬂ but stated that 
few empirically validated studies support these 
claims. A follow-up analysis in 2003 stated that 

empirical support for the suggested methods re
-mains scarce.
6In 2004, a review emphasizing agile develop
-ment™s history showed some of its roots in other 
disciplines.
7 In particular, it discussed relations 
between agile development and the Capability 
Maturity Model. The authors suggested that ag
-ile methods will eventually consolidate, just as ob
-ject-oriented methods did. Furthermore, they be
-lieved that agile and traditional methods will have 
a symbiotic relationship, in which factors such as 
Tore Dybå and Torgeir Dingsøyr,
 SINTEF
What Do We Know 
about Agile Software 

Development?
  September/October 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 7VOICE 
OF EV
IDENCE
the number of people working on a proj
-ect and the application domain, criticality, 
and innovativeness will determine which 
process to select.
In 2005, a study looked at the state of 
research on XP, agile software develop
-ment, and agile modeling.
8 With respect 
to XP, the authors reported a small num
-ber of case studies and experience reports 

promoting XP™s success. A more well-
 established stream of research supports 

pair programming, and some studies also 
support iterative development. The au
-thors recommended the separate study of 
other core XP practices to identify which 

ones work. Furthermore, they saw chal
-lenges in matching agile software develop
-ment methods with standards such as ISO, 

and they argued that this area also needs 
further research.
What We Know on the Basis 
of 
Empirical Studies
In 2008, we undertook a review of ag
-ile software development, the ˜rstŠand 
so far the onlyŠreview to systemati
-cally evaluate, synthesize, and present the 
available empirical ˜ndings.
9 We aimed to 
determine what™s known about agile de
-velopment™s bene˜ts and limitations, the 

strength of the evidence supporting these 
˜ndings, and the implications for the soft
-ware industry and research community.
Our review identi˜ed 1,996 studies 
from literature searches, 36 of which we 

found to be research studies of acceptable 

rigor, credibility, and relevance to include 

in the review. Of the 36, 33 were primary 
studies and three were secondary stud
-ies. Most of the studies were published in 
2004 and 2005 (see Figure 1). The studies 

investigated XP almost exclusively (25 out 
of 36), and only a few of the XP studies 
addressed mature development teams. A 

clear ˜nding of the review is that we need 

to increase both the number and quality 
of agile studies. In particular, agile proj
-ect management methods such as Scrum, 
which are popular in industry, warrant 
further attention.
More detail on the studies we selected 
is available in a Web appendix to this 
 article at www.computer.org/software/
 webextra.html.
The studies fell into four thematic 
groups: introduction and adoption, hu
-man and social factors, perceptions of ag
-ile methods, and comparative studies. We 
identi˜ed several reported bene˜ts and 

limitations of agile development in each 
of these themes and summarize the results 
here.
Introduction and 
Adoption
These studies didn™t provide a uni˜ed view 

of current practice. Instead, they offered a 
broad picture of experience and some con
-tradictory ˜ndings. 
XP seemed dif˜cult to introduce in large, 
complex organizations but easier in other 

organization types. Most studies reported 
that agile development practices are easy to 

adopt and work well. The bene˜ts appeared 

in customer collaboration, work processes 
for handling defects, learning among de
-velopers, thinking ahead for management, 
focusing on current work for engineers, and 
software estimation.
Lean development didn™t work well for 
one team that tried it. Some studies saw 
pair programming as inef˜cient, and some 
studies
 claimed that XP works best with 
experienced development teams. One study 
reported the further limitation, which the 

literature repeatedly mentions, of lack of at
-tention to design and architectural issues.
Human and Social 
Factors
A recurring study theme was human and 

social factors and how they affect, and 
are affected by, agile development meth
-ods. XP thrived in radically different en
-vironmentsŠfrom organizations having 
a hierarchical structure to those having 
Table 1
Traditional and agile perspectives on software development
4Traditional view
Agile perspective
Design process
Deliberate and formal, linear sequence 
 of steps, separate formulation and 
implementation, rule-driven
Emergent, iterative and exploratory, knowing and action 
 inseparable, beyond formal rules
Goal
Optimization
Adaptation, flexibility, responsiveness
Problem-solving process
Selection of the best means to accom
-plish a given end through well-planned, 

formalized activities
Learning through experimentation and introspection, constantly 

reframing the problem and its solution
View of the environment
Stable, predictable
Turbulent, difficult to predict
Type of learning
Single-loop/adaptive
Double-loop/generative
Key characteristics
Control and direction
 
Avoids conflict

Formalizes innovation
 
Manager is controller

Design precedes implementation
Collaboration and communication; integrates different worldviews

Embraces conflict and dialectics

Encourages exploration and creativity; opportunistic

Manager is facilitator

Design and implementation are inseparable and evolve iteratively
Rationality
Technical/functional
Substantial
Theoretical and/or 
 philosophical roots
Logical positivism, scientific method
Action learning, John Dewey™s pragmatism, phenomenology
 8 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   www.computer.org/software
VOICE 
OF EV
IDENCE
little or no central control. It seems pos
-sible to adopt XP in various organizational 
settings.
Furthermore, researchers have studied 
conversation, standardization, and prog
-ress tracking and described them as mech
-anisms for creating awareness in teams 
and organizations. Good interpersonal 

skills and trust were important character
-istics for a successful XP team.
Perceptions of 
Agile Methods
Many studies sought to identify how dif
-ferent groups perceive agile methods. 
Studies of customer perceptions re
-ported customer satisfaction with oppor
-tunities to get and give feedback.
 However, 
the on-site customer™s role can be stressful 
and unsustainable for long periods. 
Developers were mostly satis˜ed with 
agile methods. Companies that use XP 
have reported that employees are more 
satis˜ed with their jobs and with the 
product. The ˜ndings regarding pair pro
-gramming™s effectiveness were mixed. 
Several developers regarded it as an ex
-hausting practice because it requires heavy 
concentration. 
University students perceived agile 
methods as an opportunity for relevant 

training for future work and believe that 

these methods improve team productiv
-ity. However, they reported that pair pro
-gramming was dif˜cult when the skill dif
-ferences between the pair members were 

large. In addition, many students reported 

that test-˜rst development was dif˜cult.
Comparative Studies
These studies compared variations of tra
-ditional development to variations of agile 
development. They showed that traditional 
and agile development methods use differ
-ent project management practices. 
Some studies suggested that agile proj
-ects can incorporate changes more eas
-ily and demonstrate business value more 

ef˜ciently than traditional projects. In 

addition, it seems that agile project man
-agement can be combined with overall tra
-ditional principles, such as the stage-gate 

project management model. One limita
-tion that came up was that team members 

are less interchangeable in agile teams, 

which has consequences for how projects 

are managed. 
With respect to the productivity of ag
-ile and traditional teams, three of the four 

comparative studies that addressed this is
-sue found that using XP increases produc
-tivity in terms of lines of code per hour. 

However, none of these studies had an ap
-propriate recruitment strategy to ensure 

an unbiased comparison. Findings from 
several of the noncomparative studies in
-dicated that the subjects themselves believe 
agile methods increase productivity.
Practical 
Implications
Our review shows that there have been 

many promising studies of the use of ag
-ile methods. Although the studies identi
-˜ed serious limitations, such as the un
-sustainability of the on-site customer™s 

role for long periods and the dif˜culty of 
introducing agile methods into large and 

complex projects, the review results sug
-gest that agile methods can improve job 

satisfaction, productivity, and customer 

satisfaction.
The strongest, and probably most rel
-evant, evidence for practice is from the 

studies of mature agile teams, which sug
-gests that focusing on human and social 
factors is necessary to succeed. Speci˜cally, 
it seems that a high level of individual au
-tonomy must be balanced with a high level 

of team autonomy and corporate responsi
-bility. It also seems important to staff agile 
teams with people who have faith in their 

own abilities combined with good inter
-personal skills and trust.
Evidence also suggests that instead of 
abandoning traditional project manage
-ment principles, organizations should ex
-ploit these principles, such as stage-gate 

project management models, and combine 

them with agile project management. The 

evidence also suggests that agile meth
-ods aren™t necessarily the best choice for 

large projects. So, we recommend that 

practitioners carefully study their proj
-ects™ characteristics and compare them 

with the relevant agile methods™ required 

characteristics. 
Our review clearly shows the need for 

more and better research to determine 
the situations in which practitioner 
advice on agile development can be suit
-ably applied. We urge companies to par
-ticipate in research projects that target 

goals relevant for the software industry.
10 Action research tries to provide practical 

value to client organizations while simul
-taneously contributing to new theoretical 
knowledge.
11 It offers one way to orga
-nize collaboration between industry and 
researchers that would be highly relevant 
for a nascent ˜eld such as agile software 

development.
References
 1.
 ﬁSoftware and Services in Large Enterprises,ﬂ 
Business Technographics
, Forrester Research, 
2005; www.forrester.com/Research/
 
Document/Excerpt/0,7211,38659,00.html.
 2.
 T. Dybå, ﬁImprovisation in Small Software 

Organizations,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 17, no. 5, 
2000, pp. 82Œ87.
199720021998199920002001200320042005200180
160
14012010080
6040200Agile papers
Empirical papersResearch papersNo. of papersFigure 1. The number of papers identi˜ed in the systematic review of 
agile development studies by year. The ˜gure separates the papers into 
three groups: all agile papers, the proportion of the agile papers that were 

empirical, and the proportion of the empirical papers that were research 

papers.
  September/October 2009   
IEEE SOFTWARE
 9VOICE OF EVIDENCE
 3. B. Boehm, ﬁGet Ready for Agile Methods, 
with Care,ﬂ 
Computer
, vol. 35, no. 1, 2002, 
pp. 64Œ69.
 4. S. Nerur and V. Balijepally, ﬁTheoretical Re -
˚ ections on Agile Development Methodolo-
gies,ﬂ 
Comm. ACM
, vol. 50, no. 3, 2007, pp. 
79Œ83.
 5. P. Abrahamsson et al., 
Agile Software Devel-
opment Methods: Review and Analysis
, tech. 
report, VTT Electronics, 2002.
 6. P. Abrahamsson et al., ﬁNew Directions on 
Agile Methods: A Comparative Analysis,ﬂ 

Proc. 25th Int™l Conf. Software Eng.
 (ICSE 
03), IEEE CS Press, 2003, pp. 244Œ254.
 7. D. Cohen, M. Lindvall, and P. Costa, ﬁAn 
Introduction to Agile Methods,ﬂ 
Advances in 
Computers, Vol. 62: Advances in Software 

Engineering
, M.V. Zelkowitz, ed., Elsevier, 
2004, pp. 1Œ66.
 8. J. Erickson, K. Lyytinen, and K. Siau, ﬁAgile 
Modeling, Agile Software Development, 
and Extr
eme Programming: The State of 
Research,ﬂ 
J. Database Management
, vol. 16, 
no. 4, 2005, pp. 88Œ100.
 9. T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, ﬁEmpirical Studies 
of Agile Softwar
e Development: A Systematic 
Review,ﬂ 
Information and Software Technol-
ogy
, vol. 50, nos. 9Œ10, 2008, pp. 833Œ859. 
 10. T. Dybå, B. Kitchenham, and M. Jørgensen, 
ﬁEvidence-Based Software Engineering for 
Practitioners,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 22, no.1, 
2005, pp. 58Œ65.
 11. D. Avison et al., ﬁAction Research,ﬂ 
Comm. 
ACM
, vol. 42, no. 1, 1999, pp. 94Œ97.
Tore Dybå 
is chief scientist and a research manager at 
SINTEF Information and Communication Technology. Contact 
him at tored@sintef.no. 
Torgeir Dingsøyr 
is a senior scientist at SINTEF 
Information and Communication Technology and an adjunct 

associate professor in the Department of Computer and 

Information Science, Norwegian University of Science and 

Technology. Contact him at torgeird@sintef.no.
STAFF
Senior Lead Editor 
Dale C. Strok
dstrok@computer.org
Content Editor 
Brian Brannon
Magazine Editorial Manager
Jenny Stout
Staff Editors
Dennis Taylor and Linda World
Publications Coordinator
software@computer.org
Production Editor/Webmaster
Jennie Zhu
Contributors
Molly Gamborg, Rita Scanlan, 
Joan Taylor, and Alex Torres
Director, Products & Services
Evan Butter˜ eld
Senior Editorial Services Manager
Crystal R. Shif
Senior Business Development Manager
Sandra Brown
Digital Library Marketing Manager
Georgann Carter
Senior Advertising Coordinator
Marian Anderson
manderson@computer.org
CS PUBLICATIONS BOARD
Sorel Reisman (chair), Alain April, 
Angela Burgess, Frank E. Ferrante, 
David A. Grier, Audrey Kremer, 
Phillip A. Laplante, Paolo Montuschi, 
Jon Rokne, R. Sampath, Steve Seidman, 
Linda I. Shafer, Roy Sterritt, 
Steven L. Tanimoto
MAGAZINE OPERATIONS COMMITTEE
David A. Grier (chair), David Albonesi, 
Isabel Beichl, Arnold (Jay) Bragg, 
Carl Chang, Kwang-Ting (Tim) Cheng, 
Fred Douglis, Hakan Erdogmus, 
Carl E. Landwehr, Dejan Milojicic, 
Sethuraman (Panch) Panchanathan, 
Crystal R. Shif, Maureen Stone, 
Fei-Yue Wang, Roy Want, Jeffrey R. Yost
Editorial: 
Unless otherwise stated, bylined articles, 
as well as product and service descriptions, reflect 

the author™s or firm™s opinion. Inclusion in 
IEEE 

Software 
does not necessarily constitute endorse-
ment by the IEEE or the IEEE Computer Society. All 
submissions are subject to editing for style, clarity, 
and length.
To Submit: 
Access the IEEE Computer Society™s 
Web-based system, Manuscript Central, at http://
cs-ieee.manuscriptcentral.com/index.html. Be sure 
to select the right manuscript type when submit-
ting. Articles must be original and not exceed 5,400 
words including figures and tables, which count for 

200 words each.
TAKE CONTROL.
Nov. 10-11, 2009
Pre-conference Tutorials Nov. 9
Hilton Northbrook, Northbrook (Chicago), Illinois
CONTROLLING SOFTWARE
BEFORE SOFTWARE CONTROLS YOU!
2009
˜e ASQ So˚ware Division
presents:
For information and registration
visit www.asq-icsq.org
