 22
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | PUBL
IS
HED BY TH
E IEEE COMPUT
ER SOC
IE
TY
 0740-7459/12/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
FOCUS:
 GUEST 
EDITORS™ 
INTRODUCTION
LEAN DEVE
LOPMENT IS 
a product 
development paradigm with an end-
to-end focus on creating value for the 
customer, eliminating waste, optimiz
-ing value streams, empowering people, 

and continuously improving (see Fig
-ure 1
1). Lean thinking has penetrated 
many industries. It was ˜rst used in 

manufacturing, with clear goals to em
-power teams, reduce waste, optimize 

work streams, and above all keep mar
-ket and customer needs as the primary 
decision driver.
2This 
IEEE Software
 special issue 
addresses lean software development 

as opposed to management or manu
-facturing theories. In that context, we 
sought to address some key questions: 
What design principles deliver value, 
and how are they introduced to best 

manage change?
Steady 
Evolution
Famous author Antoine de Saint-
 Exupery once remarked that perfection 
is not about whether there™s nothing left 
to be added, but if there™s nothing left 

to be cut out. It™s an old wisdom from 
software development that most fea
-tures in any product don™t add value, 

but rather create unnecessary cost and 

complexity, thus gradually deteriorating 
the product. There are two notable ex
-amples of this type of development. The 
initial Netscape browser had grown its 

complexity so fast that it couldn™t be 
maintained anymore, thus the company 
lost a huge market share and technol
-ogy lead within a few years. More re
-cently Nokia™s Symbian 60 smartphone 

platform was abandoned due to its hav
-ing grown beyond control, making it 
Lean Software Development
Christof Ebert, 
Vector Consulting Services
Pekka Abrahamsson, 
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano
Nilay Oza, 
University of Helsinki
  SEPT
EMB
ER/
OCTOB
ER 2012
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 23harder for new innovations to be imple
-mented. Across industries and indepen
-dent of whether it™s general-purpose, IT, 
or embedded software, between 30 and 

50 percent of all features are unneces
-sary and add overhead.
1 The demand for cost savings in re
-cent years has forced the software in
-dustry to look at lean methods with the 

ambition of applying them to ﬁsoftware 

production.ﬂ
3 Although some claim 
that principles from other ˜elds can™t 
apply to a creative and design-oriented 
discipline such as software develop
-ment, many studies have proven the 

simple wisdom that we all bene˜t from 
empowered and motivated teams, we 
build our products faster and with bet
-ter quality if market strategy is under
-stood and requirements changes man
-aged, we learn from previous defects, 

we can emphasize repeatable processes, 

and we should build from high-quality 
components. The software industry is 
now poised to transform to customer-

centric development, which translates 

into both reducing the total life-cycle 
cost and increasing ef˜ciency and effec
-tiveness by eliminating waste and add
-ing value. 
With the onset of 2009™s world
-wide economic crisis, many companies 
started looking for lean principles to 

make their software development ef
-forts more ef˜cient. Entire business 
processes can be based on lean princi
-ples, with eBay serving as a prominent 
example. eBay continuously improves 
and reinvents its business model, antici
-pating and creating market needsŠit 
started as an auctioning platform, then 

moved to a marketplace with indepen
-dent stores, and now provides the lead
-ing payment services, while always pro
-moting what adds value to its users. 
Today, companies ˜nd themselves 
looking to lean development also to 

compensate for an increasing shortage 

of talented engineers. In a 2010 survey 
by Forrester, 35 percent of organiza
-tions polled described their primary 

development method as based on agile 

and lean principles.
4 Forrester inter
-viewed the development managers of 
companies such as HP, IBM, and Mi
-crosoft and found they had all adopted 
practices to be more ˚exible and closer 

to their customer and the market needs. 
Yet only 39 percent of organizations 
surveyed consider their respective im
-plementations to be mature.
4From the software perspective, the 
path to lean started with agile meth
-ods in coding. Over the past decade, 

most companies introduced agile de
-velopment to address ef˜ciency and 

effectiveness. Although it helped tre
-mendously with user-centric and itera
-tive development, its enterprise-level 

applicability remains stagnant. Too of
-ten, agile practices are limited to teams 
or projects, focusing too much on the 
short term, such as reducing documen
-tation and unnecessary features, only 
to ˜nd later that overall life-cycle cost 
were negatively impacted. Lean devel
-opment attempts to bridge this gap. In 
fact, when Mary and Tom Poppendi
-eck wrote their ˜rst book on lean soft
-ware development 10 years ago,
3 it was 
tightly connected to agile software de
-velopment. Recently, much more di
-versity has been introduced, from user 

needs and work˚ow analysis to overall 

performance measurement.
But there™s a dark side in this fast 
move toward lean software develop
-ment, as we™ve faced in our own expe
-rience. Too often, the expectations sur
-rounding the hype are exaggerated, and 

lean principles are only super˜cially 

introduced, such as a speci˜c method 
without exactly knowing what to expect 
from it or considering its limits. Con
-sequently, results of such unmanaged 
LeandevelopmentContinuously improveCreate value for the customerEmpower peopleEliminate wasteOptimize value streamsFI
GURE 1. 
Lean product development cycle with the ˜ve elements of lean development, 
starting with value orientation (upper right), then reducing overheads, improving interfaces, 
 and ˜nally empowering developers in order to achieve continuous improvement. 
 24
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFOCUS:
 GUEST 
EDITORS™ 
INTRODUCTION
change to lean are meager and unsat
-isfactory, and engineers feel frustrated. 
Super˜cial introduction of a method is 
a much wider phenomenon than you 

might think. Unfortunately, a major
-ity of method-deployment programs 
in software industry today are trapped 
in this fallacy of thinking that opera
-tional tools are suf˜cient for improving 

development. Looking to industry, we 
see that about half of all culture- and 
method-change programs fail.
1 Sustain
-able change needs professional change 
management beyond simply selecting a 
method and trying to practice it. Fig
-ure 2 highlights the necessary compo
-nents for successful, company-speci˜c 
method development and deployment.
5 Obviously, some lean principles just 
don™t ˜t into software development. 
Flow and queuing theory, for instance, 

aren™t at all practical for normal busi
-ness, so we should be careful not to 
overemphasize mathematical analyses in 
development processes. Such challenges 

offer  more than enough reason for 

IEEE Software
 to examine the usage of 
lean principles in software development. 

The intangible nature of software, de
-velopers as knowledge workers, and 
the dif˜culty in de˜ning ˚ow in soft
-ware development make the application 
of lean principles and practices chal
-lenging. Thus, although lean practices 
such as eliminating waste or improving 
interfaces and work˚ows are sometimes 

adopted in addition to or in combina
-tion with agile methods, we™re still in 
the early phases of truly understanding 

how ﬁlean methodsﬂ impact software 
development. Nevertheless, the need is 
there across IT and software industries: 

lean conferences are born, lean software 
books are selling, and organizations are 
keenly adopting lean principles. 
In This 
Issue
For this special issue, we received 23 sub
-missions from all over the world. Based 
on the feedback of our expert reviewers, 
we ultimately selected ˜ve articles from 

industry and academia that we thought 

could best address lean development with 
its many facets and yet provide hands-on 
perspectives. A key selection criterion 

was to facilitate technology transfer to 

the environments of our readers.
The ˜rst article by Mary Poppendi
-eck and Michael Cusumano, entitled 

ﬁLean Software Development: A Tuto
-rial,ﬂ provides thorough insights into 

lean software developmentŠwhere it 

comes from, what it means, how it re
-lates to agile development methods, 
and its outlook in the future. If you in
-tend to embark on a lean journey, this 
tutorial is an excellent starting point.
ﬁMaking Architecture Visible to 
Improve Flow Management in Lean 

Software Development,ﬂ by Robert L. 
Nord, Ipek Ozkaya, and Raghvinder 

Sangwan, shows how lean principles 

are used in architecture development. 
The authors highlight the role of archi
-tecture and how it can help improve the 
˚ow in lean software development. This 

article will help you better examine and 
improve ˚ows in your own lean setting 
through the focal point of architecture. 
In ﬁLean Solutions to Software 
Product Management Problems,ﬂ An
-drey Maglyas, Uolevi Nikula, and Kari 

Smolander focus on the path from de
-velopment to product strategy. Their 
article, based on a systematic study in 
several companies, presents ˜ve prob
-lems that could be avoided or solved by 

adopting speci˜c lean approach to soft
-ware product management. It brings 

concrete problems to the surface along 

with speci˜c solutions for them.
Dag Sjøberg, Anders Johnsen, and 
Jørgen Solberg take an empirical ap
-proach in their article, ﬁQuantifying 

the Effect of Using Kanban vs. Scrum: 
A Case Study.ﬂ Using more than 12,000 
work items collected over the years 

2009Œ2011, the authors demonstrate 

how the effect of processes or methods 
emphasizing scrum versus Kanban can 
be evaluated and compared on the basis 

of objective data.
Finally, in ﬁA Business Case for 
Feature-Oriented Requirements Engi
-neering,ﬂ Arnold Rudorfer, Tobias 
Concepts, targets,philosophy1. Conceptual toolsLife-cycle model, framework,rhythm, methods, tools,techniques, practices3. Operational toolsForming high-performanceculture and prosperingbusinessThinking tools,principles, patterns2. Mental toolsFI
GURE 2. 
A framework for method adoption, starting with initial concepts such as ﬁwe will reduce waste,ﬂ to understanding how this is 
approached such as prioritizing requirements, on the way up to making it operationally feasible, such as clarifying how priorities are set. 
  SEPT
EMB
ER/
OCTOB
ER 2012
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 25Stenzel, and Gerold Herold outline the 
journey of a business unit in the Imag
-ing and Therapy Division of Siemens 

while introducing feature-oriented re
-quirements engineering and developing 

a business case to understand the ben
-e˜ts for the development organization. 

Their article emphasizes the relevance 

of a good business case as a success fac
-tor for successful change in industry.
The ˜ve core principles of lean 

product development (that is 
customer focus, waste reduc
-tion, team empowerment, work stream 
ef˜ciency, and continuous improve
-ment) were coined years ago, but we 
still lack a coherent set of features ap
-plicable to lean software development. 
For example, while some people re
-duce ﬁleanﬂ to results (less waste), oth
-ers look primarily to a single method 

(value stream analysis versus team em
-powerment). This doesn™t help in prac
-tice, as it creates method ˜ghts similar 

to the early days of object orientation 

or agile software development. If ev
-erything is called ﬁlean,ﬂ and different 
methods from agile to project manage
-ment are mixed ad hoc, confusion re
-sults both in science and practice, but 
this creates no sustainable improve
-ments in software development.
With this special issue, it™s our 
goal to build a foundation and facili
-tate alignment on what ﬁleanﬂ means 
within our community. Essentially, to 
advance lean development, empirical 

studies must be conducted across in
-dustries and value must be measured. 

Or in the words of before-cited Antoine 

de Saint-Exupery, ﬁGrown-ups like 

numbers.ﬂ The selected articles merge 
the mutual interest of practitioners 
and academic researchers to be more 

successful in the market by applying 

lean thinking. In bringing state-of-the-
practice knowledge on lean principles 
to software development, we hope this 

special issue improves your day-to-day 
development and stimulates new ap
-proaches to adding more value with 

less effort.
References
 1.
 C. Ebert and R. Dumke, 
Software Measure
-ment
, Springer, 2007.
 2.
 J. Womack, D. Jones, and D. Roos, 
The Ma
-chine That Changed the World: The Story of 
Lean Production
, Simon & Schuster, 2007
 3.
 M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, 
Lean 

Software Development: An Agile Toolkit
, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2003.
 4.
 D. West and J.S. Hammond, 
The Forrester 
Wave: Agile Development Management 
Tools
, 2010. 
 5.
 J.-P. Tolvanen, 
Incremental Method Engineer
-ing with Modeling Tools: Theoretical Princi
-ples and Empirical Evidence
, Univ. Jyväskylä, 
1998; http://users.jyu.˜/~jpt/Tolvanen_
 dissertation.pdf. 
CH
RISTOF 
EBE
RT is managing director at Vector Consulting Ser
-vices. He supports clients around the world to improve product strategy 
and product development and to manage organizational changes. 
Contact him at christof.ebert@vector.com.
PEKKA 
ABRAHAMSSON 
is a vice dean and a full professor at the 
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano. His research interests are in lean 
and agile development, software innovation and empirical software 

engineering. Contact him at pekka.abrahamsson@ieee.org.
NILAY 
OZA 
is a project director at the University of Helsinki. Previ
-ously, he was with VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland. His 

research experience is at the crossroads of enterprise transformation, 

Internet technologies, and business of software. Contact him at nilay.

oza@cs.helsinki.˜.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
FIND US ON FACEBOOK 
 & TWITTER!facebook.com/
ieeesoftware
twitter.com/
 ieeesoftware
Selected CS articles and columns 
 
are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
 Copyright of IEEE Software is the property of IEEE Computer Society and its content may not be copied oremailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.