 1  Risks of Agile Software Development: Learning from Adopters  
 Amany Elbanna, Royal Holloway University of London, UK, email: amany.elbanna@rhul.ac.uk 
 
Suprateek Sarker, University of Virginia, USA & Royal Holloway University of London, UK, email: sarkers@virginia.edu  Abstract: 
Agile software development (ASD) emerged as a result of widespread professional discontent 

with traditional approaches, the high failure rates associated with software development projects, 
and most importantly, the need for speedy responsive delivery of software particularly for 
Internet businesses.  Today, ASD approaches are embraced by many practitioners, and often 

extolled by commentators as being ‚faster, better, cheaper™ approach to software development.   

However, a recent high profile failure of an ASD project and the discontinuance of the use of 

ASD practices in a software company have drawn attention to possible risks associated with 
ASD. Before we can manage such risks, an important first step is to identify the risks and 
understand why these risks arise
 in the ASD context.  In this paper, we offer insights derived 
from the examination of ASD practices in 28 organizations.  Based on 112 interviews conducted 

in these organizations and further 25 interviews conducted with agile software development 
contractors (developers and project managers) and consultants, we unearthed key risk factors 
related to ASD practice that need to be carefully managed to achieve desired project outcomes.  
 
Keywords: Agile software development, Agile risks, software development risks, software risk management 1. INTRODUCTION  Agile software development (ASD) approaches continue to grow in popularity as organizations 
increasingly seek speed in developing software and the capability to cope with changes in the 

current fast moving business environment. ASD is an umbrella term that encompasses a variety 
Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 2  of approaches and methods that have been developed by software practitioners, including 
Extreme Programming (XP), Scrum, the Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM), 

Crystal, Agile Project Management (APM), Feature Driven Development (FDD), and Lean 
Software Development (LSD).  These approaches may differ in specific terminology and 
practices; however, they share many of the core values presented in the Agile Manifesto
1 [1].  In 
general, they focus on providing a software development approach that is responsive to both 

customers™ needs and the needs of developers. They also share a general orientation towards 
short ﬁtime-boxedﬂ iterative development cycles, frequent communication with customers, and constant adaptation, and accommodation of change.   
Recent failures of projects adopting agile approaches to software development and 
project management, and reported challenges associated with agile approaches [2, 3] have drawn attention to the possible existence of risks associated with agile development and project 

management, and the importance of identifying, assessing, and mitigating these risks.  For 

example, in the UK, the Department for Work and Pensions has, in 2013, ceased all software 
development on its originally planned £2.2bn Universal Credit program after the cost escalated 
to nearly £12.8bn, six times the originally planned figures and the project failed to deliver
 [4].  Universal Credit is one of the largest agile software development projects in the UK, and hence 

one might dismiss the unacceptable outcome as an exception. One might also dismiss the 
outcome on suspicion that agile could have been used as a scapegoat for other project 
management™s problems. However, the project continues to draw attention to the possibility of 

having agile-related risks and the need to identify them. The recently reported withdrawal of 
agile practices (Scrum) from a software development company [5] is yet another case that 
highlights the existence of risks that need to be managed.
   ASD approaches change how the software organization works (in terms of processes and 
teams organization) and the nature of its relationship with the business organization.  Such 
change has produced desirable effects and has positively resolved many of previously identified 
software development risks.  However, as was experienced with the introduction of many other 
                                                
1 Manifesto, A., http://agilemanifesto.org, 2001 Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 3  process innovations such as business process reengineering in organizations, the introduction of agile approaches in software development teams can lead to both desirable and undesirable 

effects.  Interestingly, a study on ASD critical success factors showed that of 12 typical IT 
critical success factors, only half were supported by ASD approaches with different degrees of 
strength. [6]. This suggests that risk factors (and success factors) relevant to ASD projects are 

different than those applicable to traditional software development environments. Identifying and 
managing risks is one of the important areas of research and good practice in software 
development, wherein risk identification and analysis is seen as the first step in reducing  the 
chance of project failures  [7].   Given the differences between traditional and ASD approaches, 

we believe the identification of ASD-related risks needs a fresh view, that is not overly reliant  

on our previous knowledge of (traditional) software development risks 
alone. Past research has 
identified a number of risk factors. Alter and Sherer (2004) note that many of the risk factors that 
apply to operations of IS also apply to IS projects [8].  Studies of IS risk have examined project 

and operational risk in general.  The highlighted risks are typically related to users such as poor 

communication with users and stakeholders, lack of user involvement, failure to manage end-
user expectations, misunderstanding of user requirements and failure to accommodate change in 
requirements and scope; these issues are found to be effectively managed through the adoption of  
ASD approaches.  For example, the short iteration cycles allow for accommodating change and 

clarifying users™ requirements while the face-to-face interaction and constant communication with users and business stakeholders improves communication and develops common understanding of requirements [9]. However, the 
specific risks related to ASD remain 
unexplored.    
 As a first step, this study seeks to identify these risks and the different practices of dealing with 
them2.  Due to relative paucity of research in this area and in order to provide a fresh view, away 
from typical software development risks, we turn to the people and organizations involved in 
                                                
2 This paper is a significantly enhanced version of a paper 











 Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 4  ASD, to learn from their practices and experiences.  It is worth emphasizing that the study does 
not provide statistical testing or a comparison between the theory of ASD and the actual 

practices in organizations.  It aims to provide insight based on participants™ views of practice.
 Future research should take these findings and subject them to empirical testing using large, well-designed samples as previous research in software development risks did decades ago.  
However, this paper offers an important foundation for such follow-up research. 
  Our study is 
guided by the following research questions:  Ł What are the key risks related to agile software development (ASD) approaches that 
are faced by adopters of the approaches?  Ł Why do these risks arise and what are their consequences? Ł Finally, how do different organizations deal with these risks? How the study was conducted This study adopts a qualitative, interpretive approach which is particularly useful when 
researchers seek to understand people™s experience.  In this case, we seek to gain insight from the experiences of the different stakeholders of projects using agile approaches that is difficult to 
capture using experience-far approaches such as simulation, modeling, or surveys. The study, 
initiated in 2008, is part of an ongoing funded research effort on the adoption of agile software 
development (ASD). Data collection was primarily done through interviews, a well-established 
research method. Like any method, interviews have been associated with many strengths (e.g., in-depth, holistic coverage, being close to practice, opportunity to discover patterns not previously known) and weaknesses (e.g., bias introduced due to selection of interviewees, faulty 
recall, social desirability of responses, and political agenda of different respondents). We used 
established guidelines to minimize these limitations. The results described in this article are 
based on an investigation of the adoption of agile software approaches in 
28 different organizations, of which 4 were examined longitudinally over multiple years.  Members of 
software development teams, project managers, IT directors, business managers and users were 
interviewed.  The total number of corporate interviews was 
112 interviews. 39 interviewees agreed to have their conversations audio recorded, and these interviews could be transcribed verbatim. As per common practice, in cases where interviewees refused to have their interviews recorded, the researchers took notes during the interviews, and when feasible, at the end of the 
interview, presented a summary of the conversation and key points to the interviewee for 
Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 5  validation/ clarification. Data was analyzed over different cycles3 . The first cycle coding 
resulted in the identification of key risks experienced by participants in the projects.  In the 
second cycle, the identified risks were grouped according to their nature and origin. These were then refined through cross-case comparisons.  The risks reported here are those found to be 
prominent in at least four different cases; those found to be present in three cases or less are not 
reported in this paper due to the nature of the article and space constraints. Table 1 exhibits the 
number of companies in each sector and the purpose of the software development efforts. In 
addition to stakeholders within the companies, 17 freelance developers and 8 consultants 
working on or leading 8 different consulting firms on ASD approaches were also interviewed.  
Also, the first author has attended 9 business-oriented conferences and workshops focusing on 
ASD from 2007-2013, 3 of which as a speaker. In these meetings, she presented parts of the 
findings of this study and had conversations with other participants.  Interviews with participants 
with different perspectives on the projects and triangulating the interviews helped assess reliability and enhance the validity of the findings. In addition, the conversations with and 
feedback from workshop participants, who were not themselves involved with the studied 
organizations, helped ensure the face validity as well as the external validity of the findings.    Table 1: An overview of the studied organizations  Sector Total no. 
of companies 
Internal use External customer 
Commercial 
Internal & 
Commercial 
Utility 
2 1  1  
Transportation 3 3    
Telecommunication 
3   2 1 
Media 
2 2    
Financial services 7 7    
Software company 
9  7  2 
Local 
administration 
1 1    
Travel and Leisure 1 1    
Total 
28 15 7 3 3 
                                                 
3 Miles, M., A. Huberman, and J. Saldana, 
Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods Sourcebook. 3rd ed. 2014: Sage publications.  Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 6  2. THE FINDINGS Previous research has shown that ASD approaches can speed the delivery of software, and 
increase business satisfaction.  In our research, we find evidence for the same, and, thus, we 
recognize the many significant benefits that ASD adoption can lead to.  However, our research 
also highlights some of the potential risks involved in the adoption of ASD, some of which have 

not been highlighted sufficiently in the literature.  Being aware of these possible risks is an 

important first step towards their effective management.  Below, we discuss the key software and management-related ASD risks identified.  Table 2 presents a summary of these risks. It also 
shows the number of organizations where these risks were evident in our study, and the ways 

different organizations are dealing with these risks.  
 Table 2: Key agile software development (ASD) risks in the studied organizations4   Key risks Number of organizations experiencing these risks (out of 28 organizations studied) Typical organizational approaches of dealing with risks, with different levels of effectiveness Development and deployment risks Technical debt 23 - make lists of outstanding technical issues and convince the business to invest in allocating one or more iteration cycle(s) for addressing them. - address only the most  important technical issues that are short-term and could immediately impact users, and ignore others. - under business pressure, ignore accumulated technical debt and continue development till issues surface and require attention.                                                  
4 Descriptions of the risks such as technical debt are provided in the text following the table. Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 7  Fractured development and operation 21 - one member of the ASD team has to be from operations. - invite operation teams to ASD planning sessions and end of iteration demonstrations. - allocate an extra week (in fact, in a highly sensitive systems in a large financial services firm, two weeks were allocated to a typical two-weeks iteration cycle) in each iteration cycle to address operational issues5. Increased defects in newly 

formed teams
 13 - allocate experienced senior developers to agile teams  
- allocate at least one experienced software developer to each agile team  
- provide on-the-job training and s
upport to deal with software developers™ uneasiness with ASD particularly those who lack previous ASD  experience.    
Project Management Risks 
Fragmentation 
of project 
management 
tools  17 - audit all existing agile development teams for project 
management and software testing tools in use and discuss 
standardization. 
- negotiate limiting the number of to
ols in use while continue to 
accept some variations. 
- not seen as a problem as long ASD teams delivers on target.  
- Specify standard tools and request all teams to comply. 
However, this approach is resisted by ASD teams who value 
autonomy. 
Knowledge Retention
 20 - Use wikis to document project
 progress and explain key decisions. 
- Create and use software code libraries and encourage code re-use. - Document important technical sp
ecifications and key technical decisions. 
- Encourage the use of social media among ASD team members 
and across teams. 
 Development and deployment risks Various risks that could influence the quality and operations of the developed software were 
identified.  The most prominent risks that require mitigation are as follows.                                                   
5 Vidgen and Wang (2009) analysis and findings also show that e
ach team needs to find its own pace in each 
specific context. Secondly, a team n
eeds to understand what pace can be sust
ained over time. A suitable pace strikes 
a balance such that the iteration cycle is long enough to get some meaningful work done but short enough not to lose momentum and responsiveness to change [15]. Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 8  Technical debt: This is defined as the visible and invisible results of past decisions and short-
term compromises about a software that creates complexities and could negatively affects its 
future [10]. This concept was originally used in reference to coding practices and has now been extended to include architectural, testing, or documentation debt.  While technical debt was 
initially discussed in the context of traditional software development [11], in ASD, technical debt 
concerns can be intensified. In ASD, the debt can quickly accumulate due to the need to: 
significantly reduce development time, adhere to strict time-boxing, and deliver functional requirements for business use constantly. Incurring and accumulating technical debt could lead 
to unexpected project delays6, lower software quality in the long run as the software becomes more complex and less understandable and thus more difficult to maintain. Risks of security 

breaches and data corruption are also enhanced, if security debts are being accumulated
7.  The 
technical teams we studied showed understanding of the dangers of letting technical debt 
accumulates; however, they also explained that the pressure of delivering in short time-boxed 

iteration cycles made them take ﬁshortcutsﬂ to speed up delivery8. Furthermore, they highlighted the difficulties faced in logging in non-functional requirements as users™ stories in iteration 
cycles, and how the business-oriented stakeholders often deprioritized these requirements
9.  This 
could be attributed to the lack of comfort of business participants with ﬁtechnical jargonﬂ and 

also to their single-minded focus to push on with the implementation of functional requirements. 
                                                
6 




















 9 











Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 9  In summary, the respondents felt that while the close involvement of business stakeholders as 
part of ASD was helping to mitigate some of the risks identified with traditional software 

development (e.g., poor communication with users and stakeholders, lack of user involvement, 
failure to manage end users expectations), it was also significantly contributing to their projects™ technical debt in many instances10.   
Fractured development and operation: 
This refers to
 the separation between the software 
development teams and the IT operations teams.  As business and software development teams 
are brought close together in the ASD environment, the work of the software development teams 

becomes tightly coupled with business needs, requirements, and timeline. However, the 

development work becomes increasingly separated from IT operations teams. IT operations 
teams include systems administrators, network engineers, and infrastructure specialists who 
ensure the stability and reliability of the software in its operational environment.  This separation 

between the software development and operation teams is amplified in ASD due to the difference 
of the work practices and pace of each side.  The impact of this separation is further described 
below. 1) Tension in the relationship between development and operations. This tension between the 
development and operations teams typically surfaces as ASD teams find operations™ response to 

be ﬁtoo slowﬂ while operations teams find ASD teams™ push for continuous delivery to be too 
ﬁstressfulﬂ as they (i.e., operations teams) try to cope with their provisioning of applications and 
infrastructure tasks.  The reason behind this conflict is that the pace of ASD approaches 

challenges the work rhythm and priorities of the operations teams. For example, ASD teams 

work and deliver within short iteration cycles, demanding much parallelism in work and roles, which is inconsistent with the work of operations teams which function in a rather linear way, 
based on logging of requests in queues and responding to them in a systematic order.  Hence, 

ASD teams™ operations requests are typically met in different iteration cycles than required.     
2) Agile software development (ASD) teams not fully aware of the operations environment.
 The 
lack of communication with and close involvement of operations in ASD environment means 
                                                
10 




Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 10  that software development and testing are conducted in environments that could be different from the actual operating or production environment. For example, in one of the studied 

organizations, the software development was done using a version of a particular database 
technology, and it was later discovered that a different version was being used in the production environment. As a consequence, the application could not be implemented as per schedule, and 
considerable re-work had to be undertaken to prepare the application for the current version of 

the operating environment.  ASD environment lacks the mechanisms to deal with deployment and operability issues.  The 
inability of ASD teams to involve operation teams can cause delay in deployment and 

production.  One of the organizations we studied attempted to solve this problem by dedicating a 

sprint to operation issues and planned it as a major user story in the project backlog early in the project.  Another organization made it a requirement for teams to involve at least one team 
member from operations in each ASD project for the entire project duration.  
3) Lack of knowledge of deployment and operability
.  As technology advances, software 
developers do not necessarily have the required operational knowledge and experience.  The 
increasing use of off-the-shelf components, particularly in web development, requires specialists 
to operate them. Web development includes components such as web servers, application 
containers, networking, and databases that are not integrated into the software; yet the need to be 
configured and maintained which required considerable effort. These tasks are usually beyond 
many software developers™ capabilities and hence need to be carefully overseen by ASD team 
management. While this is the case in most software development environments, the ASD 
environment accentuates  this risk by  narrowing the development teams™ focus on the delivering 

of working software with desired business functionality. Testing, especially unit testing, test-
driven delivery, and User Acceptance Testing, is geared to ensure the standard of functional 
requirements and general performance of the software.   4) Increased firefighting: Operations teams expressed the view that the way ASD teams 
conducted work necessitated much ﬁfirefightingﬂ on the operations side in order to stabilize the systems, and make them available for use. ASD teams struggle to balance the development of 
new features and handling the project backlog, i.e., dealing with re-work requested either in 

defects reports or enhancements requests.  In fact, it was reported that ASD teams, more often 

than not, tend to focus on developing new features at the expense of attending to re-work 
Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 11  requests.  This can lead to emergency patches and significantly more work downstream for ASD 
as well as operations teams.   
 5) Business push for new features. Infrastructure and networking operational issues are necessary 
for the system to operate in its live environment.  However, with the focus on the business need 

and meeting of user stories and business-led priorities, these important technical issues such as 

servers or network upgrade are not given sufficient priority by the business; hence, they do not 
get included in the iteration cycles until the end, when ASD teams start thinking of the going live 
phase Œ this can cause unanticipated delays in the overall project.  A team member expressed his 

disappointment as follows ﬁI am afraid that the time we save in development is actually wasted 

in operationsﬂ.  Increased defects in newly formed agile software development (ASD) teams. 
In smaller organizations and especially in early adoption projects, it was highlighted that the number of 

defects had risen beyond the organizational average; the good news, however, was that the defect rates approached acceptable levels as the team matured.  The experience and quality of 
developers were identified as more important in the ASD environment than in traditional 

environment. According to thirteen of the studied organizations, the quality of the product 

depends largely on the quality of developers and their experience in the ASD environment.   
Developers who lack previous ASD experience tend to perform poorly in their first ASD 
projects.  Reflecting on her early days with ASD, a developer recalled her frustration: ﬁWhen I 

came here, they were doing agile, I found myself spending my time talking and not actually 

doing it [development]... now I can see it worksﬂ.  Another member of a team that was using 
Scrum for the first project, reflected that ﬁthinking of the project I™m on at the moment – we 
had to put in complete defect management around it– as an after-thoughtﬂ. 
 Project management risks Various risks that could affect the management of teams and projects were identified.  Some of 
the prominent risks requiring careful mitigation are as follows.    Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 12  Fragmentation of project management tools.  ASD approaches advocate self-organized teams. 
This offers ASD teams considerable freedom and autonomy, and can be motivating for many 

team-members. However, in their attempts to develop and organize their own work routines, 
ASD teams tend to select and use project management and testing tools based on their own 
preferences.  From the organizational perspective, this carries the risk of fragmenting the used 

tools across the enterprise, losing the economies of scale related to licensing of tools, and also 

increasing the complexities of integrating work across domains and teams.   For example, in nineteen of the organizations we studied, ASD teams had moved away from the 

traditional whiteboard and sticky-notes that agile software practices have been associated with in 

the past. Many developers reported that they found whiteboards and sticky-notes rather 
inconvenient as notes tended to fall down and lose their order. Others found it cumbersome to keep moving the sticky notes across the whiteboard. Moving away from the past concern of 

‚which sticky note is the stickiest™ [12], they use agile project management software to organize 
their effort.  The choice of such software largely depended on the developers™ knowledge and 
preferences.  In many organizations, the lack of standardization regarding agile project 
management software led to the use of different software products, causing much confusion. 

Indeed, IT managers reported that merging teams and managing workloads became rather 

challenging in such conditions.     Another example pertains to the use of version control systems and to User Acceptance Testing.  

In one of the studied organizations ASD teams used 8 different version control systems and 4 

User Acceptance Testing protocols.  Being autonomous, ASD teams held the view that ﬁI use 
what I am comfortable with, and they can use whatever they want and are happy withﬂ.   Apart 
from resulting in the loss of negotiation power of the company with tool vendors and the 

potential economies of scale in licensing, such fragmentation in tool use negatively impacted 

knowledge sharing across projects and teams, and was disorienting for the operations team-members, who found it difficult to find systems-related data.  
Knowledge Retention. ASD often privileges face-to-face communication over written 
documentation.  This implicitly assumes that members of the same team are retained until the 
Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 13  end of the project, and members of the development team of a particular system remain with the 
organization to oversee the development of the following versions of the application.  In practice, 
these assumptions do not necessarily hold. Indeed, we found that in a multi-project environments, the shuffling and re-assignment of team members is common practice.   Our study also revealed that the team velocity and quality tended to drop noticeably with the 
joining of a new team member.   In addition, the high turnover in IT personnel means that it is 

unlikely that all the development team would still be involved with subsequent versions of the 
application. Owing to the light documentation in most agile projects, and not having the same team that developed the application throughout its lifecycle, the subsequent versions of the 

application take longer to develop, with the new team trying to unravel the logic behind the code 
and to understand why certain development decisions were made in a past iteration.    3. Conclusion The findings of this study
11 suggest that there are unique potential risks associated with the 
practices of ASD.  While the practices of ASD can tackle some of the traditional risk factors 
such as lack of user involvement, misunderstanding of requirement, failure to gain users 
commitment, and change of scope, it also introduces new risks.  The study identified and 

elaborated on some of the key risks that ASD adopters face and how they may be addressed (see 

Table 2). We submit that many of these risks are not self-evident, and thus should be consciously 

assessed and carefully managed throughout the life of ASD projects.  It is worth noting that the 
development and operation silo has been recognized by the DevOps movement as members of this community try to find techniques to consistently address this problem [13].  The tension 

between ASD and other organizational functions such as quality assurance and strategic 

alignment has also been alluded to in some recent studies [14].  This research offers a critical look at ASD with a discussion of potential pitfalls. While previous 
studies have examined the benefits and the adoption of ASD, our study attempts to unearth  

notable risks, and their consequences, In doing so, this paper offers a word of caution and 
                                                
11




 Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 14  highlights some issues to think about for organizations as they decide whether or not to, and how to, embrace agile approaches.  References 1. Conboy, K., 
Agility from first principles: reconstructing the concept of agility in information systems development. Information Systems Research, 2009. 
20(3): p. 329-354. 2. Tessem, B., 
Experiences in learning xp practices: A qualitative study, in Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering. 2003, Springer. p. 131-137. 3. Rosenberg, D. and M. Stephens, 
Extreme programming refactored: the case against XP. 2003, Berkeley, CA: Apress. 4. Ballard, M., 
Why agile development failed for Universal Credit. Computer Weekly, 2013. 4 July 2013: p. http://www.computerweekly.com/news/2240187478/Why-agile-development-failed-for-Universal-Credit. 5. Ralph, P. and P. Shportun, 
Scrum Abandonment in Distributed Teams: A Revelatory Case, in PACIS 2013 Proceedings. Paper 42. http://aisel.aisnet.org/pacis2013/42. 2013. 6. Chow, T. and D.-B. Cao, 
A survey study of critical success factors in agile software 
projects. Journal of Systems and Software, 2008. 81(6): p. 961-971. 7. Schmidt, R., et al., 
Identifying software project risks: an international Delphi study. Journal of management information systems, 2001. 17(4): p. 5-36. 8. Sherer, S.A. and S. Alter, 
Information system risks and risk factors: are they mostly about information systems. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
2004. 14(2): p. 29-64. 9. Baskerville, R. and H. Pries-Heje, 
Short Cycle Time Systems Development. Information 
Systems Journal, 2004. 14: p. 237-264. 10. Kruchten, P., R.L. Nord, and I. Ozkaya, 
Technical debt: from metaphor to theory and 
practice. IEEE Software, 2012. 29(6): p. 18-21. 11. Lim, E., N. Taksande, and C. seaman, 
A Balancing Act: What software practitioners have to say about technical debt. IEEE Software, 2012. November/December: p. 22-27. 12. Project Management Stack Exchange. 
Which sticky note is the stickiest? 2011  [cited 
http://pm.stackexchange.com/questions/3219/which-sticky-note-is-the-stickiest. 13. Spinellis, Diomidis. "Don't Install Software by Hand." Software, IEEE 29.4 (2012): 86-
87. 14. Fitzgerald, B., et al. 
Scaling agile methods to regulated environments: An industry case study. in Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Software Engineering. 2013. IEEE Press. 15. Vidgen, R. and X. Wang, 
Coevolving systems and the organization of agile software development. Information Systems Research, 2009. 20(3): p. 355-376.  Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication. 15  
Dr Amany Elbanna is a senior lecturer at Royal Holloway University of London.  She holds a MSc and PhD in information systems from The London School of Economics and 

Political Science.  She is a member of the Association of Information Systems, UK Academy of 

Information Systems and IFIP WG 8.6 on adoption and diffusion of information systems.  IT 
project and operation management is one of Amany™s main research streams.  The research on 
Agile software development is ongoing since 2007 and has been supported by a grant from the 

British Academy (SG-4835) and another from Loughborough University. Contact her at: 
amany.elbanna@rhul.ac.uk  Dr. Suprateek Sarker is a Professor at the McIntire School of Commerce, University 
of Virginia, and a part-time University of London Chair of Technology & Information 
management at Royal Holloway, UK.  He also holds a Visiting Distinguished Professorship at 

Aalto University School of Business, Helsinki, Finland. Suprateek is currently serving as the 

Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of the AIS, a Senior Editor of Decision Sciences Journal, a Senior 
Editor (Emeritus) of MIS Quarterly, a member of the Board of Editors of Journal of the MIS, and an editorial board member of IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management and IT & People. 

He is a past recipient of the Stafford Beer Medal (with Prof. S. Sahay) awarded by the OR 

Society, UK. Digital Object Indentifier 10.1109/MS.2015.150             0740-7459/$26.00 2015 IEEEThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Software but has not yet been fully edited.Some content may change prior to final publication.