 30 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY 0740-7459/16/$33.00 © 2016 IEEETHE PRAGMATIC 
ARCHITECT
Editor: 
Eoin Woods
Endava
eoin.woods@endava.com
THE DELIVERY SPEED 
expected from 
enterprise IT groups is signi˜ cantly in-
creasing. Simultaneously, technology™s 
overwhelming expansion into daily life 

is driving end users™ expectations of ac-

cessibility and 24/7 availability.
As a result, the software architecture 
pendulum is swinging away from tradi-

tional practicesŠparticularly enterprise 

architectureŠand toward agile and 
continuous practices. The gap between 
a commercial enterprise™s agile delivery 

and architecture practices is wider than 
ever. Our book 
Continuous Architec-
ture: Sustainable Architecture in an Ag-

ile and Cloud-Centric World
 discussed 
how to address this gap.
1 Speci˜ cally, 
we, as practicing architects, used our 
marketplace observations and industry 
research to describe the software archi-

tect™s evolving role. This article summa-

rizes our insights.
The Architect in Industry
The architect™s role in the world of tech-

nology, while widely accepted, isn™t 
clearly de˜ ned. Let™s look at some tradi-
tional views and how architects function 

in agile environments.
Traditional Practice
In general, the term ﬁarchitectﬂ exem-

pli˜ es the individuals who make key de-
cisions about a system™s structure and 
behavior, be it software or another tech-
nology area. Although ﬁsoftware archi-

tectﬂ is the most common term, there 

are also network architects, storage ar-
chitects, and information and security 
architects. Any technology area likely 

has people who consider themselves 
architects.
Architects share these characteristics:
Ł They have a deep knowledge in the 

domain of interest.
Ł They deal with higher levels of ab-
straction than the executable code 

by de˜ ning a system™s structure in 
the domain of interest.
Ł They have explicit or implicit au-
thority to make decisions in the 

domain of interest.
In 
The Mythical Man-Month: Essays 
on Software Engineering
, Fred Brooks 
offered a good starting point for de˜ n-

ing the architect™s role: architects are ac-

countable for the conceptual integrity of 

the entity being architected.
2Architects deal with a higher level of 
abstraction than do implementers, devel-
opers, or engineers. They are concerned 
with the main system components as 

well as the component interfaces and in-

teractions. They must be able to traverse 
across concepts, models, and implemen-
tation details.
What™s the Architect™s 
Role in an Agile, 

Cloud-Centric World?
Murat Erder and Pierre Pureur
  SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 31Agile Practice
The architect™s role in agile develop
-ment is hotly debated. Some agile 
practitioners believe that an overall 
architecture isn™t necessary because 

the architecture ﬁemergesﬂ through 

the implementation of stories and 
refactoring. We believe that this ap
-plies only to simple, self-contained 
projects. If you™re architecting a 

product or operating at a large scale, 
you must consider the architecture. 
Although you don™t necessarily need 

to involve a separate architect, the 
architect™s role is still crucial to your 
project™s success.
Figure 1 compares the architect™s 
responsibilities and accountabilities 
in pre-agile and agile approaches, 
on the basis of Dean Lef˜ngwell™s 

work.
1,3
De˜ning the Architect™s Role
On the basis of our observations and 

research, we now turn to a few as
-pects that will help us de˜ne the ar
-chitect™s role.
Unit of Work
One way to evaluate architects is 

by their key unit of work. Rather 
than fancy diagrams, logical mod
-els, or running prototypes, we be
-lieve that an architect™s basic unit 
of work is the 
architectural deci
-sion
. Any architectural activity™s 
most important output is the set of 

decisions made along the software 

development journey. Surprisingly, 
most organizations expend little 
effort on making and document
-ing architectural decisions consis
-tently and clearly. So, we propose 

that an architect™s key responsibil
-ity is to drive architectural deci
-sions to a conclusion.
We purposely use the phrase 
ﬁdrive to a conclusionﬂ because it 

implies that architects engage with 

stakeholders and work through the 
options to arrive at a decision. Ar
-chitects don™t make architectural 
decisions independently but facili
-tate decision making and ensure 
timely decisions.
Product Focus
Architects should focus on architect
-ing products, not just solutions for 

stand-alone projects. This means that 
architects must take the long view, 

because products and software vastly 

outlive projects. A product-oriented 
approach also lets architects focus on 
stakeholder needs, as opposed to the 

schedule and budget. So, it follows 

that architects should operate as part 
of a product team; consequently, 
their communication and collabora
-tion skills become highly relevant.
In the context of a single prod
-uct, architects are key product 

team members. Their main re
-sponsibility is to balance the cli
-ent™s demands as represented by the 

product manager, with the delivery 

focus provided by the product de
-livery manager (see Figure 2). Ar
-chitects must ensure a coherent, 

sustainable product architecture. 

Especially in the product life cycle™s 

initial phases, negotiation often oc
-curs between product management 
Pre-agile practices
Agile
 practices
 ŁAnalyze and define requirements.
 ŁDesign the system.
 ŁServe as the interface to key business stakeholders and 
customers.
 ŁBid on work for teams.
 ŁUnderstand how the entire system works.
 ŁAnalyze architecture epics.
 ŁCollaborate with business stakeholders and develop
-ment teams.
 ŁGet implementation feedback and development esti
-mates from teams.
 ŁPrevent teams from being side-tracked by changing 

business priorities.
 ŁFilter potential changes through an analysis funnel.
 ŁMaintain system models, and model future states on the 

basis of new epics.
FIGURE 1. 
The architect™s responsibilities and accountabilities in pre-agile versus agile contexts.
3 An architecture epic is a large 
technology initiative to improve technology platforms that deliver business functionality (www.scaledagileframework.com/enablers).
 32 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
and the ﬁart of the possible.ﬂ This 
might lead architects to proac
-tively feed possibilities to product 

management. Managing this con
-
versation is an essential architect 

responsibility.
Realized Architecture
Architects also must continuously 

incorporate feedback into new ver
-sions of the architecture. This ar
-chitecture is represented by the code 

running on the physical infrastruc
-tureŠwhat we call the 
realized ar
-chitecture
. We believe that the days 
of architecture as represented by a 

set of documents are over. The ar
-chitect™s role is to understand, in
-˜uence, improve, and communicate 

this realized architecture.
So, architects need to not only 
understand the code running on the 

physical architecture but also be 

able to write code when necessary. 

Executing code is often the best 
way to settle an argument between 
two architects!
Final De˜nition
We summarize our perspective with 

the following de˚nition of the archi
-tect™s role:
The architect enables a software 
product™s implementation by 
driving architectural decisions in a 
manner that protects the product™s 

conceptual integrity.
Making the Role Successful
Besides having the right technical 
skills, architects must display skills 
in the following critical areas.
Decision Making
Architects must think in terms of a 
minimum viable architecture. This 
architecture starts with a small num
-ber of decisions based on facts, not 
guesses, and expands only when 

absolutely necessary. When a deci
-sion is required, architects must act 

quickly to facilitate decision making. 

Organizations value architects for 

being able to make the correct deci
-sions in ambiguous contexts. That 

ability stems from architects™ ex
-perience (most are senior technolo
-gists with signi˚cant experience) and 

knowledge of applying the relevant 

tools at the appropriate time.
Communication and Collaboration
Architects can™t overcommunicate. 

More than 50 percent of architects™ 
time must focus on effective commu
-nication and collaboration.
Specialized architects (business, 
information, application, infrastruc
-ture, solution, and enterprise archi
-tects) tend to work in silosŠhence 

the ﬁivory towerﬂ label often used 

to describe architecture groups. Ar
-chitects must share their knowl
-edge rather than keep it within their 

group. In addition, getting outside-in 

views (including views from other 
industries) is important. Architects 
are encouraged to look outside their 

respective competency domain for 

new ideas they can leverage for vari
-ous enterprise projects.
Delivery Team Participation
In a continuous-delivery project, the 

architects™ overall goal is to clear 
roadblocks and give the delivery 
teams the resources they need to get 

things done. This includes proving 

that new technologies will actually 
work by creating executable proto
-types, perhaps as part of an 
architec
-tural runway
.4Test and Deployment
In this age of continuous delivery 
and DevOps, it™s no longer suf˚cient 
for architects to focus only on soft
-ware architecture. Architects should 
also design systems that can be in
-crementally tested (including system, 
quality assurance, and performance 
tests). This will require architects 

to fully understand the testing pro
-cesses. In addition, architects must 
design systems that can be easily and 
quickly deployed to the various en
-vironments (development, test, and 
production) and, potentially, on in
-ternal and external clouds. This will 
require architects to have a good 

grasp of the deployment processes.
The architect™s role will likely 
evolve from that of a specialist in the 
Product managerDelivery managerArchitectCoherent visionCustomer demandDelivery demandFIGURE 2. 
As product team members, architects must balance client demands as 
represented by the product manager, with the delivery focus provided by the product 

delivery manager.
 THE PRAGMATIC ARCHITECT
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
33traditional architecture domains to 
that of a generalist, not unlike a so-
lution architect™s role in a project.
What about enterprise archi-
tects? There™s de˜ nitely a need for 
roles operating at this scale. How-
ever, the focus shouldn™t be on creat-
ing artifacts with no immediate rel-

evance for the realized architecture. 

Instead, enterprise architects should 
focus on creating a product-centric 
architecture that leverages enterprise 

services and on engaging more ef-
fectively with delivery teams. Tradi-
tional architects tend to produce a 

lot of e-paper. We recommend that 

they emphasize implementable code 
to avoid BARF (Big Architecture Up 
Front) syndrome.
Finally, architects should cycle 
through different delivery teams over 
time. The more experience architects 
have, the better they can facilitate ar-

chitectural decisions. A key way to 

help them gain this experience is to 
expose them to different problem and 
technology domains. Deliberately cy-

cling architects through different de-
velopment teams bene˜ ts both the in-
dividuals and the enterprise. We also 

encourage architects to minimize 

multitasking across simultaneous 
projects, which is counterproductive.
The architect™s role has 
changed signi˜ cantly. To be 
successful in this new world, 
architects must move away from 
their traditional role. They must em-

phasize products, drive decisions, 
focus on the entire software delivery 
life cycle, understand the code pro-

duced by the team, and operate in a 

more decentralized fashion. In ad-
dition, nontechnical skills such as 
communication and the ability to 

operate in ambiguous contexts are 
increasingly critical.
References
1. 
M. Erder and P. Pureur, 
Continuous 
Architecture: Sustainable Architec-

ture in an Agile and Cloud-Centric 

World
, Morgan Kaufman, 2015.
2. 
F.P. Brooks Jr., 
The Mythical Man-

Month: Essays on Software Engi-

neering
, Addison-Wesley, 1975.
3. 
D. Lef˜ ngwell, 
Agile Software Re-

quirements: Lean Requirements 

Practices for Teams, Programs, and 

the Enterprise
, Addison-Wesley, 
2011.
4. 
ﬁArchitectural Runway Abstract,ﬂ 

Scaled Agile Inc., 21 Apr. 2016; 

www.scaledagileframework.com

/architectural-runway.
MURAT ERDER 
is the director of IT architecture 
and engineering for a leading ˜ nancial-services or-

ganization. Contact him at m_erder@yahoo.com.
PIERRE PUREUR 
is an enterprise architect at 
a Fortune 500 Company. Contact him at pierre

.pureur@gmail.com.
Selected CS articles and columns 
are also available for free at 

http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
2017 B. Ramakrishna Rau Award
Call for Nominations

New Deadline: 1 May 2017
Established in memory of Dr. B. (Bob) Ramakrishna Rau, the award 
recognizes his distinguished career in promoting and expanding the 

use of innovative computer microarchitecture techniques, including 
his innovation in complier technology, his leadership in academic 
and industrial computer architecture, and his extremely high personal 

and ethical standards.
WHO IS ELIGIBLE?: The candidate will have made an outstanding 
innovative contribution or contributions to microarchitecture, use of novel 
microarchitectural techniques or compiler/architecture interfacing. It is hoped, but not 

required, that the winner will have also contributed to the computer microarchitecture 
community through teaching, mentoring, or community service.
AWARD:


PRESENTATION:
 Annually presented at the ACM/IEEE International Symposium on 
Microarchitecture
NOMINATION SUBMISSION:
 This award requires 3 endorsements. Nominations are 
being accepted electronically: www.computer.org/web/awards/rau
CONTACT US:
 Send any award-related questions to awards@computer.org
www.computer.org/awards
