 2IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/07/$25.00 © 2007 IEEEfrom the editor
Editor in Chief: Hakan Erdogmus National Research Council Canada
hakan.erdogmus@computer.org
Nearly 1,200 people attended the Agile2007 conference in Washington, D.C.

in August. The conference was sold
out months in advance, so evidently
the upward trend in demand is contin-
uing. Meanwhile, the agile softwaredevelopment movement is displaying signs of
maturity with sobering, reconciliatory, and re-
flective undertones. If these un-

dertones become more pro-
nounced, they will represent a
noteworthy departure from the
euphoric, dogmatic, and un-
questioning attitudes that, ac-
cording to critics, dominated
the agile community in its
early years.IndicatorsThe traditional software engineering com-munity has evolved in how it perceives the ag-
ile movement. Many respectable agilist folks
nowadays admit that theyÕve learned and
evolved, too. While not turning their backs to
the Agile Manifesto, some display a mildly
critical view of their beloved paradigm, timidly
acknowledging its limitations and disapprov-
ing the religious aura that still sometimes sur-
rounds it. The message is that agility is just
part of a bigger puzzle; like all things, itÕs nei-

ther complete nor definitive. If youÕre an agile

zealot, this coming to terms with reality might

sound outrageous, but it doesnÕt surprise many
other loyal, sensible agile supporters. And thatreality is that hoards of industrial adopters
have been taking a moderate, commonsense
approach. The wholesale, uncompromising
vanilla approach has proven hard to sell.Another subtle indicator is the growingrecognition of early software pioneers who ad-
vocated similar concepts long before the Agile
Manifesto existed. Such people are now more
regularly featured in agile software develop-
ment events.While not widespread, an open attitude to-ward approaches that were once dismissed as
unagile or ÒwaterfallishÓ is also in the air. At

the front end, requirements engineering, archi-
tecting, and interaction designÑand at the
back end, traditional quality assurance and
testing approachesÑare notable examples that
attract interest. A minority can now envision

cross-pollination among approaches that pre-
viously represented sharply opposing postures.
This is progress, even if it doesnÕt signal an im-

minent end to the agile mentalityÕs apparent

sectarian isolation.Self-perceptionsTo gauge the agile software development
communityÕs perception of how far it has

come, I ran a casual survey in the conference
hotelÕs hallways in D.C. Armed with a tablet

PC, I intercepted unsuspecting delegates, flash-
ing the touch-sensitive screen that displayed a
few binary questions. 
AgileÕs Coming of Age Éor Not 
Hakan ErdogmusMission Statement: To be the best source of reliable, useful, peer-reviewed information for leading software practitionersÑ
the developers and managers who want to keep up with rapid technology change. November/December 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
3FROM THE EDITORÒWould you take a 10-second sur-
vey on perceptions of agile? I swear, it

wonÕt take more than 10 seconds. Just

answer these five questions by hitting
ÔYesÕ or ÔNoÕ with your fingertip. You

can skip any question.Ó ÒIsnÕt there a ÔMaybeÕ option?Ó

ÒSorry, just ÔYesÕ or ÔNoÕ!Ó (There
go seven seconds.)While a few walked away with suspi-
cious, disapproving looks that made me
feel like a sleazy telemarketer, more than

enough gentle people actually humored
me. I thank those who took the time to
respond. After my 150th victim, I de-
cided to stop and enjoy the conference.
However, before Forrest Shull, our
Empirical Results editor, lectures me for

my poor study design, let me come clean.
My improvised survey is flawed and un-
scientific. I conceived the whole thing
during a session that couldnÕt sustain my

interest. My subject population was

more than mildly biased. My sampling
wasnÕt quite random, either: besides ask-

ing complete strangers, I coerced a few
people I know into participating: ÒHi Hakan, good to see you!Ó
ÒYes, me too, now please take my
survey.Ó 
When somebody IÕd randomly pickedlooked too serious, I got scared and tried
to spot a friendlier face. I didnÕt ap-

proach mean-looking people at all, sothe results canÕt be generalized to mean-
looking people. Finally, I didnÕt have ap-

proval from some ethics board. There.To compensate for the surveyÕs defi-
ciencies, I present the results as a mean-

ingfully colored bar chart in figure 1.

Because a bar chart canÕt be sufficiently

informative without interpretation, I
insist on elaborating.Everybody knows something
about agileOnly a minority of respondents (23percent) identified themselves as new-

comers to agile (meaning new to the

concept, not the conference). This was

important for me to know because I

wondered whether newcomers would
have different perceptions. It appears
that the results are representative only
of non-newcomers. Oh well.
Despite my nonrandom sampling, thelow representation of newcomers per-

plexed me a bit because it doesnÕt quite

account for the tremendous growth the
conference has been enjoying (unless
most newbies are mean-looking).Maturity and penetrationOf the respondents, 65 percent saidthat agile had come of age. Subjec-
tively, many didnÕt seem particularly

confident about their answer, or were

confused. When they asked for clarifi-No. of respondents020
406080100120140
160I am new toagileAgile hascome of ageAgile has becomeSurvey answers
mainstreamAgile has becomea buzzwordAgile hashad impactYes
NoFigure 1. Survey results relating to perceptions of agile development.
EDITOR IN CHIEF
Hakan Erdogmushakan.erdogmus@computer.org
EDITOR IN CHIEF EMERITUS:Warren Harrison, Portland State University
ASSOCIATE EDITORS IN CHIEF
Design: Philippe Kruchten, University of British Columbia; kruchten@ieee.orgDevelopment Infrastructures: Martin Robillard,McGill University; martin@cs.mcgill.caEmpirical Results: Forrest Shull, Fraunhofer Centerfor Experimental Software Engineering, Maryland;
fshull@fc-md.umd.eduHuman and Social Aspects: Helen Sharp, CityUniversity, London; h.c.sharp@open.ac.uk
Management: Stan Rifkin, Master Systems; sr@master-systems.com
Processes and Practices:Frank Maurer, University
of Calgary; maurer@cpsc.ucalgary.ca
Programming Languages and Paradigms: Sophia Drossopoulou, Imperial College London; s.drossopoulou@imperial.ac.ukQuality:Annie Combelles, DNV/Q-Labs;annie.combelles@dnv.com
Requirements: Roel Wieringa, University of Twente; roelw@cs.utwente.nl
DEPARTMENT EDITORS
On Architecture: Grady Booch, IBM;grady@booch.comBookshelf: Art Sedighi, SoftModule;sediga@alum.rpi.eduDesign: Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock, Wirfs-Brock
Associates; rebecca@wirfs-brock.com
Loyal Opposition: Robert Glass, Computing Trends; rlglass@acm.org
Not Just Coding: J.B. Rainsberger, Diaspar 
Software Services; me@jbrains.info
Requirements: Neil Maiden, City University,
London; n.a.m.maiden@city.ac.uk
Software Technology
: Christof Ebert, Vector
Consulting; christof.ebert@vector-consulting.de
Tools of the Trade:
Diomidis Spinellis, AthensUniv. of Economics and Business; dds@aueb.gr
User Centric: Jeff Patton, ThoughtWorks;
jpatton@acm.orgVoice of Evidence
: Forrest Shull, Fraunhofer Centerfor Experimental Software Engineering, Maryland;
fshull@fc-md.umd.eduADVISORY BOARD
Stephen Mellor, consultant (chair) 
Jennitta Andrea, ClearStream ConsultingElisa Baniassad, Chinese University of Hong KongJ. David Blaine, independent consultantWard Cunningham, AboutUs
David Dorenbos, consultantKaoru Hayashi, SRASimon Helsen, SAPJuliana Herbert, ESICenter UNISINOSGargi Keeni, Tata Consultancy Services
Karen Mackey, Cisco Systems
Steve McConnell, Construx SoftwareErik Meijer, Microsoft
Bret Michael, Naval Postgraduate SchoolAnn Miller, University of Missouri,Rolla
Deependra Moitra, Infosys Technologies, India
Frances Paulisch, SiemensLinda Rising, independent consultantWolfgang Strigel, independent 
consultantDave Thomas, Bedarra Research Labs
Rob Thomsett, The Thomsett CompanyLaurence Tratt, Bournemouth University
Jeffrey Voas, SAIC
Markus Vılter, independent consultant
John Vu, The Boeing Company
 4IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
FROM THE EDITORcation, I replied ÒI mean, has it ma-
tured?Ó and left it at that. If I could put

on my overeager-researcher hat, IÕd ex-

claim, ÒThe agile movementÕs maturity

is now official!Ó But IÕll use my discre-

tion and hold back, wisely ignoring
this strong statistic.
A weak majority, 56 percent, said
that agile had become mainstream. Be-

cause the remaining 44 percent of the
agile folks think they might still be
lurking in the fringes, IÕll also refrain
from declaring victory of massive pen-
etrationÑunfortunately. IÕm hearing,

ÒWeÕre not there yet.Ó
A bittersweet consensusAn overwhelming majority, 92 per-
cent, said that ÒagileÓ has become a
buzzword. An unverifiable nuance was
that this affirmation came with a sigh

or a head shake. An even greater ma-
jority, a whopping 95 percent, thought

that agile has had impact. The ones
who hit the Yes button did it with an

expression of great convictionÑbut
again, I have no way of proving this
observation either. You can either be-

lieve me or not.
Even though the survey was light-hearted, I felt that the respondents
were serious and sincere. Humor aside,
I share their collective opinion regard-
ing the agile movementÕs impact and

exploitation. On one hand, the trend

has had more than minor positive in-
fluence. But no doubt, ÒagileÓ is now a

glaring buzzword. For independent confirmation of ag-ileÕs rising megapopularity, look no fur-
ther than CNNMoneyÕs ÒThe 50 Who
Matter NowÓ list. (The Web site de-

scribes itself as Òan unabashedly subjec-
tive list of people, products, trends, and
ideas that are transforming the world of
business.Ó) Agile software development
(albeit with an uninformed characteriza-
tion) ranks at number 18 (see http://
money.cnn.com/galleries/2007/biz2/070

6/gallery.50whomatter.biz2/33.html),

curiously alongside the likes of Jeff Be-

zos, Steve Jobs, and Larry Page. What-
ever else such a confused ranking might
imply, it does point to some sort of im-

pact and widespread commercial ex-
ploitation. There could be other reasons
that the trend attracted the CNNMoneyeditorsÕ a
ttention, but they escape me. 
Self-threatsSo, why do its most ardent advo-cates think that ÒagileÓ has become a
buzzword? Could it have something to
do with its lingoÕs all-too-often-diluted

overuse? Or its principlesÕ indiscrimi-

nate overapplication in infinite regress
in arbitrary and sometimes completely
inappropriate contexts? Philippe
KruchtenÕs recent satire ÒVoyage in the

Agile MemeplexÓ (ACM Queue, July/Aug. 2007, pp. 38Ð44) takes a stab at
this kind of bizarre decontextualiza-
tion. At times, the tendency to overuse

and overapply borders on the ridicu-
lous. A suicidal example that I recently
came across is the suggestion to boot-
strap the Agile Manifesto by continu-
ously revising it.For many critics, a second issuethreatening the trendÕs maturity is the
New Column!IÕm pleased to announce the first edition of Jeff PattonÕs new column, User
Centric. Some of you might know Jeff as an expert on software usability and in-

teraction design. Others might have heard of his good name in the context of
agile software development: heÕs a corecipient of the Agile AllianceÕs 2007 Gor-

don Pask Award. You might even have attended one of his famed hands-on

workshops. Jeff is one of those rare connectors who straddle the normally sepa-

rate worlds of developers and end users, and he does it well. His writings will

convince you that users deserve a central voice in software development. I hope

youÕll enjoy them.Editorial:All submissions are subject to editing for clarity,
style, and space. Unless otherwise stated, bylined articles

and departments, as well as product and service descrip-

tions, reflect the authorÕs or firmÕs opinion. Inclusion in
IEEE Softwaredoes not necessarily constitute endorsementby the IEEE or the IEEE Computer Society.
To Submit:
Access the IEEE Computer SocietyÕs 
Web-based system, Manuscript Central, at http://cs-ieee.

manuscriptcentral.com/index.html. Be sure to select the
right manuscript type when submitting. Articles must be
original and not exceed 5,400 words including figures
and tables, which count for 200 words each. STAFF
Senior Lead Editor Dale C. Strokdstrok@computer.org
Group Managing EditorCrystal Shif
Senior EditorsShani Murray, Dennis Taylor, Linda World
Assistant EditorsMolly Gamborg and Brooke MinerPublications AdministratorHilda Carmansoftware@computer.org
Production EditorJennie ZhuTechnical Illustrator
Alex Torres
Associate PublisherDick Pricedprice@computer.org
Membership/Circulation Marketing Manager
Georgann CarterBusiness Development ManagerSandra BrownSenior Production CoordinatorMarian AndersonCONTRIBUTING EDITORSRobert Glass, Keri Schreiner, 
Joan Taylor
CS PUBLICATIONS BOARD
Jon Rokne (chair), Mike Blaha,Doris Carver, Mark Christensen, David Ebert,
Frank Ferrante, Phil Laplante, Dick Price,Don Shafer, Linda Shafer,
Steve Tanimoto, Wenping Wang
MAGAZINE OPERATIONS COMMITTEE
Robert E. Filman (chair), David Albonesi, Jean Bacon,Arnold (Jay) Bragg, Carl Chang, Kwang-Ting (Tim)
Cheng, Norman Chonacky, Fred Douglis, 
Hakan Erdogmus, David A. Grier, James Hendler, 
Carl Landwehr, Sethuraman (Panch) Panchanathan, 
Maureen Stone, Roy Want
 November/December 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
5FROM THE EDITORlack of genuine debate at the grassrootslevel. The openness seen in some niche

circles doesnÕt appear to percolate to

that level. A reflective panel that I at-
tended demonstrated this reluctance.
The panel started on good footing with

calls to open-mindedness, moderation,

and inclusiveness, but gradually degen-
erated into the typical us-versus-them

love-in, thus defeating its own purpose.
If such attitudes donÕt subside, the agile

movement risks losing the cautious,
qualified endorsement and interest it

has begun receiving from the traditional
software engineering and research com-
munities. Whether this matters or not is
of course another question.
Evolution through devolutionItÕs counterproductive to equate ab-
stract shades of agility with degrees of
good and noble. The Agile Manifesto
might be timeless, but the adjective

ÒagileÓ as an umbrella term will ulti-
mately outlive its usefulness, if it al-

ready hasnÕt. The explosion in indus-

trial adoption of agile processes, Scrum
in particular, and individual practices

such as test-driven development will
keep the term afloat for the near fu-
ture. But how should the community

respond to its central vocabularyÕs con-

tinuing dilution? Once the main messages havereached the masses, it will be time to
deconstruct agility by moving awayfrom labels and refocusing on what ul-
timately matters: its essence. That
essence consists of the articulated val-
ues and principles, as well as the con-
crete practices, techniques, and meth-
ods that the movement has spun off.
These are the real intellectual tools that

deserve permanence. Each such tool
has varying degrees of merit in differ-
ent contexts, depending on whether it
is applied independently, synergisti-

cally, or in combination with comple-

mentary approaches.WhatÕs your take? Write me at hakan.

erdogmus@computer.org.
Developing Scientific SoftwareTOPICS OF INTEREST:
¥Case studies of scientific software development¥Analyses, grounded in practice, of theparticular characteristics of and problems

facing scientists as professional end-user
developers, scientific software development,
and multidisciplinary development teams

comprising software engineers and scientists¥Discussions of tools, techniques, and strategiesdesigned to support scientific software

development¥Discussion of how tools, techniques, and
strategies software engineers commonly deploy
might be usefully deployed, perhaps with some
modification, by professional end-user
developers¥Particular interest in submissions grounded in
practiceFor author guidelinesand submission details, contact the publications administrator at software@computer.org
or go to www.computer.org/software/author.htm. A 
detailed callis at www.computer.org/software/cfp.htm.
CALL FOR ARTICLES
WWW.COMPUTER
.ORG/SOFTWARE
Many recent advances in science have been dependenton software. Much scientific software is written by sci-
entists themselves or by multidisciplinary teams of soft-

ware engineers and scientists. In the former case, sci-

entists face the challenges of knowing little SE beyond
coding and of working in a culture that often devalues
the skills required to develop software. In the latter
case, teams must overcome different cultures and com-

munication difficulties. This issue aims to explore these

challenges and present possible solutions.PUBLICATION
:July/August 2008SUBMISSION DEADLINE:9 January 2008
GUESTEDITORS:
¥Judith Segal, The Open University,
j.a.segal@open.ac.uk¥Chris Morris, Daresbury Lab, c.morris@dl.ac.uk
Developing Scientific Software