 76IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEEsignificant salvage value when it fails to meetuser needs.Arguments abound regarding the sourcesof this apparent crisis. Subjective preferences

for one development process over another of-
ten underlie the reasons given for failure.

However, the case for a particular approach to

software development must rest on more than

just process dogma. Plain old economics is a
good place to start.This article argues for an economic basisfor rationalizing process selection decisions. It

demonstrates how, under conditions of uncer-

tainty, learning (an undertakingÕs capacity to

resolve uncertainty) and flexibility (the ability

to exploit the learning outcomes) affect such

decisions. Uncertainty is a critical driver in
process selection because itÕs ubiquitous in

software development and it determines the

degree of flexibility and learning needed to

maximize economic value. A process flexibility continuum To illustrate the impact of flexibility and
learning, I compare two stereotypes represent-
ing the opposite halves of the process flexibil-
ity continuum shown in figure 1. This contin-

uum is similar to Barry BoehmÕs spectrum,
2but it focuses on process granularity rather

than planning effort. The flexibility contin-

uum represents, from left to right, an increase

in the frequency of incremental delivery points

with a simultaneous decrease in increment
size. Methods that rely on a single or few iter-

ations (WinstonRoyceÕs waterfall model
3andsome military standards4) are located towardthe extreme left. Methods that rely on fre-

quent, small iterations (agile methods such as
Extreme Programming and Scrum5) are lo-cated toward the right. BoehmÕs spiral model
6would be somewhere right of the midpoint.

Although process frameworks such as the Ra-
tional Unified Process and the Capability Ma-
feature
The Economic Impactof Learning and Flexibility

on Process DecisionsThe perception that software projects have unusually high failure
rates has fueled the debate on software process. In the 1990s, the

Standish Group estimated that the total economic toll of can-

celled or overrun software projects could reach several tens ofbillions of dollars in terms of wasted effort and opportunity costs.
1Worse
yet, even when delivered on time and on budget, software rarely has any 
Hakan Erdogmus, National Research Council Canada Learning andflexibility have
much to do 
with whether 
a development
process makes
economic sense.software economics
 turity Model4are commonly associated withthe rigid side, they can actually cover a wide
range but increasingly favor the left half as the
level of ceremony and maturity grows. 
The stereotypical sequentialprocesses rep-resent the rigid (left) half of the flexibility con-
tinuum. It involves a single, large commitment
of resources in the beginning, sequential execu-

tion of distinct phases in the middle, delivery of
a complete product in the end, and delayed
benefits. The stereotypical iterativeprocessesrepresent the flexible (right) half of the contin-
uum. ItÕs characterized by several small invest-

ments associated with multiple iterations of es-
sentially the same process, an evolving product
delivered incrementally through these itera-
tions, and end-of-iteration decisions. Using these stereotypes and simple models,I show that high-uncertainty environments
economically favor processes near the flexible
end. The value perspective taken here is that
of the delivered systemÕs customer, with the as-

sumption that the development teamÕs com-

pensation is proportional to the benefits the

customer reaps from the project. 
What really countsFundamental assumptions regarding the
nature of software and the goal of software

process are partly responsible for the apparent
division between opposite process camps. The view that software is essentially a 
hardartifact, and therefore that it canÕt easily be

changed, dominates the traditional school of
thought. If software is a hard artifact, it makes
sense to engineer it using a carefully planned
and tightly controlled process.Another common assumption is that soft-ware process aims to achieve repeatability and
predictability. Repeatability implies that simi-

lar inputs produce similar outputs: if require-
ments and constraints are well articulated, you
should be able to build a system that satisfies
them by rigorously executing the usual phases
in a single pass. Predictability refers to the
much sought-after property that inputs deter-
mine cost and schedule. Consequences of proj-
ect overruns frequently drive the quest for re-
peatability and predictability. However, being

on time and on budget, although a popular
management motto, is neither the absolute nor
the most important measure of success. It does
not attack a paramount consideration head-
on: value creation. Others, including agile approach propo-nents,5think of software as a softartifact, in-trinsically amenable to change and subject to

inevitable pressures to change it. Such charac-
terizations of software arenÕt novel. In his influ-

ential essay, ÒNo Silver Bullet,Ó Frederick

Brooks discusses four essential difficulties asso-
ciated with developing software systems.7Among these, changeability and conformity in

particular underlie the soft characterization.
Software obeys no natural physical laws, which
produces constant pressures to bend it to new,

previously unanticipated needs. Ignoring these

fundamental characteristics, Brooks argues,
would be ignoring softwareÕs full potential. 
Supporters of the soft characterization rec-ognize that when software developmentÕs ulti-

mate goal is to create economic value,8,9fac-tors other than repeatability and predictability
come into play. Value creation has several di-

mensions. Increasing software developmentÕs

efficiency through quality and productivity im-
provements is the most obvious way that soft-
ware process can contribute to value creation.
Under conditions of uncertainty, flexibility and

learning constitute another. I exploit this latter,

less well-known dimension. Brooks advocated
rapid prototyping and incremental develop-
ment as promising directions. Indeed, both are
examples of practices that support flexibility
and learning to cope with uncertainty. 
But why and how do flexibility and learn-ing increase economic value? I address the
question on an intuitive level first, through a

qualitative typification of projects that follow
the two stereotypical process styles.The typi-fication leads to caricaturized models that al-
low a concrete, quantitative demonstration.
Sequential vs. iterative projectsFigure 2a illustrates the sequential stereo-type. Because benefits arrive some time after

product delivery, the return on investment re-

lies on cost savings or income generated in theNovember/December 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
77More sequentialMore rigidMore iterativeMore flexibleMilitary
standardsPurewaterfallExtremeProgrammingSpiralmodelProcess frameworks (RUP, CMM, ...)
Figure 1. The flexibilitycontinuum. long term. Delayed benefits translate intolower current worth, so to break even in pres-

ent-value terms, such projects require larger

overall benefits spread over longer postdeliv-
ery periods. In low-uncertainty settings, late benefits
arenÕt as dramatically penalized because a

lower return compensates for the risk borne.
Low-uncertainty projects have clear goals,
well-understood requirements, and straight-
forward benefits. Because theyÕre typically
driven by internal needs, such as automation
and productivity, rather than market forces or

an external user baseÕs ambiguous needs, their

uncertainties tend to be internal and technical.

Neither process flexibility nor learning abilityis particularly beneficial under these condi-tions: development can proceed predictably

from one milestone to another without requir-

ing multiple passes. Rigorous upfront plan-

ning is justified when flexibility is unnecessary
and the odds of adhering to a well-mapped-
out plan are high. In this way, avoiding re-

work maximizes economic value.In contrast, an iterative project resembles astage-gate process with increasing cumulative

stakes. Figure 2b depicts this stereotype. As

the project moves up the staircase, uncertainty

decreases. Keeping the iterations small keeps
the stakes low at each stage. The stages are
guarded by gates where different actions are
possible. 78IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Large commitmentPlanRequirementsCodeDesignFunction testSystem testIntegrateDeployBenefitsMuch laterTime
(a)CommitmentsBenefits
Exit optionTime
ExpansionoptionsSystem functionality(b)Figure 2. Depictions of (a) sequential and 
(b) iterative projects.
The width of the arrows

indicates the size of 
the commitment or 
the amount of derived 
benefits. Iterations enable incremental delivery. Each
iteration normally results in a functioning sys-

tem, but with a limited feature set. This is pos-
sible because an iteration incorporates all the
usual development activitiesÑfrom planning
through testing and deploymentÑon a small
scale. When the project delivers high-priority
features in early iterations, it can start gener-
ating significant business value relatively

quickly. 
However, incremental delivery makes eco-
nomic sense only when the customer can get
value from an incomplete product. Some sys-

tems, such as enterprise software, often provide

business value with partial functionality deliv-

ered in small increments, but others, such as

command-and-control systems, can be nearly

all-or-nothing propositions. 
Iterative and incremental development sup-ports learning and flexibility. Each iteration pro-

vides a learning opportunity, and each step in

the processinvolves a decision point at which

the project team can put the learning outcomes
to good use. Many options exist at these points.
If the projectÕs yield falls short of expectations,

the project stakeholders can abort it, avoiding
further losses. This choice constitutes an exit op-tion. Or, the stakeholders can increase, change, or

decrease the projectÕs scope, giving rise to 
expan-sion,switching, 
and contractionoptions. Suchoptions add economic value by reducing risk and
improving the projectÕs prospects. TheyÕre not of

much value when uncertainty is low but can be
worth a lot when uncertainty is high. Conse-
quently, high-uncertainty settings economically

favor iterative projects when incremental delivery
is feasible. 
An iterative projectÕs value
Consider a multi-iteration project that al-lows delivery of business value in functional
increments of arbitrary size. Each iteration tisof a fixed duration, or period. Thus the proj-
ect delivers a functioning system with an ex-
tended set of features at the end of each pe-

riod. I make three additional assumptions

regarding the project characteristics.First, the projectÕs total cost is fixed at
US$900K, with every iteration costing the same

amountÑthat is, an iterationÕs cost equals the

total cost divided by n,where nis the totalnumber of iterations.A second assumption is that the projectstarts accruing benefits after the first iteration.
Benefits are cumulative: when an iteration
ends, the features implemented during that it-

eration continue to generate the same amount
of benefit in each subsequent period. 
The third assumption concerns uncertaintyand learning. The projectÕs benefits are uncer-

tain, subject to three factors:
Outcomes. Iterations result in optimisticorpessimisticoutcomes. The optimistic esti-mate of the next iterationÕs per-period ben-

efit equals the actual outcome of the cur-

rent iteration. The pessimistic estimate of
the next iterationÕs benefit equals half its

optimistic estimate. Initially, optimistic and

pessimistic outcomes are equally likely.
Learning power. Uncertainty decreasesgradually with each iteration, so the projectÕs

future prospects depend on its past per-
formance. If an iteration yields an optimistic
outcome, the likelihood of a pessimistic
outcome in the next iteration decreases by
k 100 percent (where 0 k1). Con-versely, if an iteration yields a pessimistic

outcome, the likelihood of an optimistic

outcome in the next iteration decreases by
k 100 percent. The factor 
krepresentsan iterationÕs 
relativelearning power
, orthe ability of a single iteration to resolve
project uncertainty. 
Embedded flexibility.
An exit option sepa-rates consecutive iterations. After each it-
eration, stakeholders reevaluate the pro-
jectÕs prospects. If its prospects are poor,

they exercise the exit option, aborting the

project. Note that individual outcomes

donÕt determine the projectÕs ultimate suc-

cess or failure. A pessimistic outcome can

generate sufficient future benefits to out-
weigh the future costs.  The exit decisions

are dynamically based on future costs and
outcomes alone.Table 1 shows the calculation of total pe-
riod and lifetime benefits for a four-period,

three-iteration project, conditional on succes-

sive optimistic and pessimistic outcomes. In

this example, the first iterationÕs optimistic

and pessimistic benefit estimates are $200K
and $100K per period, respectively. 
Suppose each iterationÕs relative learning
power is estimated to be 50 percent (
k= 0.5).Figure 3a depicts a decision tree correspon-
ding to this project. The treeÕs upper and
November/December 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
79High-uncertaintysettingseconomicallyfavor iterativeprojects whenincrementaldeliveryis feasible. lower branches correspond to optimistic and
pessimistic outcomes, respectively. For each 

iteration,the figures in brackets indicate the cost to

be incurred if the iteration is undertaken; 
the figures under the Probability columns
indicate the changing probabilities of iter-

ation outcomes according to the uncer-

tainty model; 
the figures under the Outcome/Pntotalcolumns indicate the period benefits con-

ditional on the associated iterationÕs out-

come. For each node, the top number is

the per-period benefit for iteration 
n 1,and the lower, blue number is the total

benefit for period n.We compute the projectÕs expected net
value by folding the decision tree back, start-
ing with the leaf nodes and moving toward the
root. The nodes under the Cost/Net value

columns involve exit options. These nodes
mark the decision points. The lower, green

number gives the residual expected net value
for each decision point. The decision to con-

tinue or exit depends on the projectÕs future

outlook, represented by the subtree rooted at

the associated node. If the decision is negative,
the exit option is exercised and the project
aborted. The expected net value correspon-

ding to a decision node equals zero when the
optimal decision is to exit. 
Consider a positive decision first by calcu-lating the expected net value at node A. This

node corresponds to the exit option directly

after iteration 2, following two prior opti-

mistic outcomes. The probability of another

optimistic outcome for iteration 3 is relatively

high, at 87.5 percent. According to table 1, the

total estimated benefit for this state is $600K.
The probability of a pessimistic outcome is 
1 0.875 = 12.5 percent, with a total esti-
mated benefit of $500K ($100K from iteration

3, plus $200K each from iterations 1 and 2). So,
the total expected benefit is $600K 0.875+
$500K 0.125 = $587.5K. If we undertake iteration 3, the project in-curs a cost of $300K, resulting in a net benefit
of $587.5K $300K = $287.5K. Because thenet benefit is positive in this case, we forego the
exit option, undertake iteration 3, and set the
expected net value corresponding to node A to
$287.5K. This amount represents the projectÕs

residual value after two optimistic outcomes.Now consider a negative decision at node B.In this case, not only are the outcomesÕ proba-
bilities reversed, but the total benefit estimates
for iteration 3 are relatively low. This is because

iteration 1 and 2 outcomes were pessimistic,
halving the benefit estimate twice. At node B,
the optimistic estimate for iteration 3 is $50K,
whereas the pessimistic estimate is a mere $25K.
The expected total benefit after iteration 3 is
consequently $200K 0.125 + $175K 0.875$178K, not enough to offset the $300K itwould cost to execute it. (Table 1 shows a total

period benefit of $175K corresponding to the
bottommost branch.) We therefore exercise the

exit option, setting the expected net value corre-
sponding to node B to zero.Folding the decision tree back in the same
manner ultimately yields a value of approxi-
mately $4K at the decision treeÕs root (node

C). This is the overall projectÕs expected net

value. The iterative project is therefore ex-
pected to barely break even.
In the iterative stereotype, a future itera-
tionÕs execution depends on the outcome of

past iterations. The just-completed iterationÕs

outcome determines the next iterationÕs esti-

mate. So, project stakeholders decide to exit
80IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Table 1Period and lifetime benefits (US$, thousands) with successive optimistic and pessimistic outcomesPeriod 1Period 2Period 3Period 4Lifetime total
IterationOptimisticPessimisticOptimisticPessimisticOptimisticPessimisticOptimisticPessimisticOptimisticPessimistic
10 0200 100200 100200 100600 300
20000200 50200 50400 100
30 00000200 25200 25
Period total00200100
400 150600 1751200 425
 or continue based on a ÒyesterdayÕs weatherÓ
principle. When the next iterationÕs cost (the

commitment immediately required to continue

the project) exceeds the estimated net value of

the remainder of the project, the stakeholders

cancel the project, avoiding future losses.
A sequential projectÕs value
To contrast this strategy with a more tradi-
tional one, consider an equivalent sequential
project. To avoid bias, we assign the sequen-

tial project the same expected total cost and

total benefits under similar outlooks, but un-

like the iterative project, we carry out the proj-

ect in a single increment with no intermediate

decisions. The sequential projectÕs total cost is

set to $900K as before. Its eight possible out-

comes correspond to the decision treeÕs eight

final branches for the three-iteration project.

Figure 3b specifies these outcomes along with
their associated probabilities. To maintain the

equivalence, the probability of each outcome
of the sequential project equals the product of
the probabilities along the corresponding path
in the iterative projectÕs decision tree. The out-

comeÕs benefit equals the cumulative benefit

along this path (the sum of the lower, blue fig-

ures under the Outcome/Pntotal columns in
figure 3a), as table 1 illustrates.The sequential projectÕs net value is its total
expected benefit of $787K less the total cost

($900K), yielding a negative result of $113K.The total expected benefit is the sum, over all

outcomes, of the weighted benefits (last col-

umn of figure 3a), where the weighted benefit

is simply the product of an outcomeÕs total

benefit with the associated probability. The se-

quential projectÕs negative net value makes it

unattractive. Although its iterative counter-
part is expected to break even, the sequential

project will likely incur a comparatively sig-
nificant loss even though the projectsÕ uncer-
tainty, costs, and benefits are similar.
Then what precisely is responsible for the
November/December 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
81(a)(b)CostProbabilityOutcomeCostProbabilityOutcomeCostProbabilityOutcome
ProbabilityOutcomeWeightedbenefitNet valueP2 totalNet valueP3 totalNet value P4 total0.8752000.331200394
6000.75200(300)
4000.1251000.05110052
5000.5200(300)
2003080.3751000.0590042
4000.25100(300)
300690.625500.0885066
350(300)40.6251000.0860047
3000.25100(300)
20000.375500.0555026
2500.5100(300)
10000.125500.0545021
200Pn: Period n0.7550(300)
Green numbers: Net value15000.875250.33425139
Blue numbers: Period totalUpper branches: OptimisticLower branches: Pessimistic175Total estimated benefit787
Total cost(900)
Net value(113)
Iterative projectSequential project
Iteration 1Iteration 2Iteration 3ContinueContinueContinueExit288ExitExitContinueExitContinueExitContinueExitCABFigure 3. Valuation 
of (a) a three-iteration
project and (b) an
equivalent sequential
project. Amounts are in 
thousands of US dollars. difference in net values? The short answer is,of course, learning and flexibility. The exit op-

tions give the iterative project a flexibility
thatÕs lacking in the sequential project. Itera-

tions enable learning, and the ÒyesterdayÕs

weatherÓ approach allows optimal exit deci-

sions based on the learning outcomes. The re-

sult is the pruning of the decision treeÕs un-

profitable lower branches (figure 3a), which in

turn increases the iterative projectÕs net value.
The effect of learning power and
process granularityIn the iterative projectÕs uncertainty model,
the parameter k(where  0 k1 ) represents asingle iterationÕs relative learning power within

the project. For k= 0, iterations have no learn-
ing powerÑthat is, the underlying stochastic
process is memoryless. However, this boundary

value is hypothetical. In reality, 
krarely equals0 because some learning almost always takes
place. For k= 1, iterations have maximum
learning power. A single iteration resolves all

uncertainty, and the outcomes of all future iter-

ations are known once the first iterationÕs out-

come has been revealed. 
Note that learning here is cumulative. If k=0.5, a single iteration reduces uncertainty by 50

percent. Then, cumulative learning power over

two iterations equals 0.5 + (0.5)(0.5) = 0.75Ñ

that is, two successive iterations reduce 
uncer-tainty by 75 percent. Cumulative learning power
approaches its upper limit of 1 when the num-
ber of iterations approaches infinity.
As relative learning power increases, flexibil-
ity becomes easier to leverage. Consequently,

the iterative projectÕs net value increases lin-

early relative to the net value of the comparable

sequential project, as figure 4a shows. The dif-

ference between the iterative projectÕs net

value and its sequential counterpartÕs net value

is close to $100K when 
k= 0, but it increases
by about 40 percent (to almost $140K) when 
k= 1. The higher the learning power, the better
an iterationÕs ability to resolve uncertainty and

the better the relative economics of iterative and
incremental development. This insight is fun-

damental, and independent of the uncertainty

modelÕs specifics. It stresses the importance of

learning in high-uncertainty environments.Under uncertainty, net value also tends to in-
crease as process granularity increases. Process

granularity increases decision-making opportu-
nities (in the current example, the number of
exit options), which in turn increases flexibility.

Figure 4b demonstrates this effect for 
k= 0.5.The figure compares the net values for equiva-
lent projects, from one to four iterations. The
projects are equivalent in that they all have the

same total cost and total expected benefit, with

iteration costs and outcomes adjusted accord-
ingly. For example, I adjusted the iteration cost

of the four-iteration project to one-fourth of the

three-iteration projectÕs total cost. 
The net value curve in figure 4b exhibits di-
82IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Several resources discuss present worth and time value concepts (which I
excluded from the article) in the software development context. John Favaro

and colleaguesÕ article in the 
Annals of Software Engineeringgives an over-view,
1and parts 1Ð6 of Steve TockeyÕs book, 
Return on Software
,gives a
more detailed treatment.2TockeyÕs text describes relevant economic techniques,
including decision trees, in a way that is accessible to software professionals.Jim HighsmithÕs 
Agile Project Management is a high-level account of thephilosophy and principles of agile software development.3Chapters 2 through4 stress the role of early benefits, learning, and risk management. The 2003
Computerarticle by Craig Larman and Vic Basili provides a comprehensive
history of iterative and incremental development models.
4Barry Boehm and
Richard TurnerÕs 
Balancing Agility and Discipline explains the many trade-offs
involved in choosing the right process flavor for a software project.5The Real Options theory addresses the value of flexibility and learning
under uncertainty. A chapter I co-authored with John Favaro in 
ExtremeProgramming Perspectivesincludes a conceptual overview, examples per-
taining to agile software development, and a reading list.6For the ad-vanced reader, my 
Engineering Economistarticle illustrates a valuation tech-
nique capable of handling multiple sources of uncertainty in commercial

software development.7The May/June 2004 issue of 
IEEE Softwarecontains a focus section onreturn on investment
.8The articles by Todd Little and by MarkDenne and
Jane Cleland-Huang tackle value capture with incremental development.
Also included in the focus section is a guest editorsÕ reading list with addi-
tional resources on software economics.
References1.J.M. Favaro, K.R. Favaro, and P.F. Favaro, ÒValue-Based Software Reuse Investment,Ó 
Annalsof Software Eng.
, vol. 5, Sept. 1998, pp. 5Ð52.
2.S. Tockey, 
Return on Software: Maximizing the Return on Your Software Investment
, Addison-Wesley, 2004.
3.J. Highsmith, 
Agile Project Management, Addison-Wesley, 2004.
4.C. Larman and V.R. Basili, ÒIterative and Incremental Development: A Brief History,Ó 
Computer,June 2003, pp. 47Ð56.5.B. Boehm and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed
, Addison-Wesley, 2003.
6.H. Erdogmus and J. Favaro, ÒKeep Your Options Open: Extreme Programming and the
Economics of Flexibility,Ó 
Extreme Programming Perspectives, L. Williams et al., eds., Addi-
son-Wesley, 2002, pp. 503Ð552.
7.H. Erdogmus, ÒValuation of Learning Options in Software Development under Private and
Market Risk,Ó The Engineering Economist,  vol. 47, no. 13, 2002, pp. 304Ð353.
8.IEEE Software, special issue on return on investment, May/June 2004, pp. 18Ð75.
Further Reading
 minishing returns. It isnÕt possible to indefi-
nitely add significant value by shortening the
iteration size and increasing its frequency. This

behavior is consistent with the intuition that

projects have an optimum iteration size. It re-

sults partially from the dampening effect of

uncertainty reduction: uncertainty decreases

from one iteration to another by a certain per-

centage, but cumulative reduction never quite

reaches 100 percent. The latter analysis ignores the effect oftransaction costs, however. An iterationÕs cost

normally includes two components: a fixed

overhead thatÕs independent of the iterationÕs

size (which I donÕt model) and a variable com-

ponent that is proportional to its size (which I

do model). The fixed overheadÑthe transac-
tion costÑwould cause the net value curve in

figure4b to exhibit a negative returns behav-

ior after reaching a maximum, strengthening
the argument for the existence of an optimum

iteration size. Iperformed these comparisons on an equal
expected cost-benefit basis to abstract
away variations in planning and reworkoverhead incurred; I didnÕt assume any cost or

benefit advantage for one stereotype over the
other to avoid bias. For highly certain projects,
such variations and present worth effects can in-
deed ultimately determine economic outcomes. Real-world projects are characterized inmany more dimensions than can be modeled
with caricaturized representations. The models
used here nevertheless account for two funda-mental sources of economic value under uncer-tainty: learning power, which captures gradual

resolution of uncertainty, and process granu-

larity, which captures embedded flexibility.
AcknowledgmentsI thank the reviewers for their invaluable suggestions.References1.The CHAOS Reports, Standish Group, 1994Ð1998;www.standishgroup.com/chaos_resources/index.php. 
2.B. Boehm, ÒGet Ready for Agile Methods, with Care,Ó
Computer, Jan. 2002, pp. 64Ð69.3.W. Royce, ÒManaging the Development of Large Soft-
ware Systems,Ó Proc. 9th IntÕl Conf. Software Eng.
,IEEE CS Press,1987, pp. 328Ð338 (reprinted from

Proc. WESCON, 1970). 4.C. Larman and V.R. Basili, ÒIterative and Incremental
Development: A Brief History,Ó 
Computer, June 2003,pp. 47Ð56.5.C. Larman, 
Agile and Iterative Development: A Man-agerÕs Guide
, Addison-Wesley, 2004.
6.B. Boehm, ÒA Spiral Model for Software Development
and Enhancement,Ó Computer, May 1988, pp. 61Ð72.7.F.P. Brooks, ÒNo Silver Bullet: Essences and Accidents
of Software Engineering,Ó 
Computer, Apr. 1987, pp.
10Ð19.8.B. Boehm, ÒValue-Based Software Engineering,Ó 
Soft-ware Eng. Notes
, vol. 28, no. 2, Mar. 2003.
9.J.M. Favaro, K.R. Favaro, and P.F. Favaro, ÒValue-
Based Software Reuse Investment,Ó Annals of SoftwareEng., vol. 5, Sept./Oct. 1998, pp. 5Ð52.November/December 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
83(a)(b)
Value added by iterative development ($K)809010011012013014015000.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
Relative learning power (k)Net valueŒ150Œ100Œ500501234No. of iterationsFigure 4. Effect of 
(a) learning power and
(b) number of iterations
on economic value 
created.About the AuthorHakan Erdogmusis a senior research officer with the Software Engineering Group atthe National Research CouncilÕs Institute for Information Technology in Ottawa, Canada. His

current research interests center on agile software development and software engineering eco-
nomics. He received his doctoral degree in telecommunications from the Institut National de 
la Recherche Scientifique, Universit” du Qu”bec,and a masterÕs degree in computer science

from McGill University, Montr”al. He is a member of the ACM and the IEEE Computer Society.

Contact him at the National Research Council of Canada, 1200 Montreal Rd., Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada K1AOR6; hakan.erdogmus@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.