 0740-7459/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEEMarch/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
15Managing requirements for busi-ness value? WhatÕs there to man-

age? ArenÕt they just...there?Ó

Such perplexity was perfectly un-
derstandable in the good old
days, when all you had to do wasget the requirements from your
customer, design your system,

and produce one of those awful
conformance matrices that
demonstrated that you had im-
plemented each and every one of
the requirements in your system.
Against this dreary backdrop of
conformance matrices and the
like, it is indeed hard to imagine

a role for requirements in the de-

velopment and execution of busi-ness strategy. But, as the song says, the

times, they are a changinÕ. We are now look-

ing outside the traditional boundaries and
developing ways of getting maximum busi-
ness value from our investment in require-

ments. This column discusses three ways of

realizing this value: managed requirements
process, requirements agility, and contrac-

tual innovation.Toward requirements reuseThe first important change in recent yearshas been the emergence of a true, actively
managed requirements process, which re-
places the passive approach of the pastwhere requirements simply arrived, if youwere lucky, on a one-way street from the

customer. An analyst who masters the re-

quirements process can become an active
participant in the strategic conception of a

system or product. He or she can elicit and

formulate requirements in such a way that
the path from requirement to implemented
system feature is illuminated in all of its con-

sequences, both technical and economic. Of
course, we already know that a robust re-

quirements process is a key factor in resolv-
ing problems early in the life cycle, with all

the familiar economic benefits. But an ac-

tively managed requirements process gives
you much more than that. Requirements an-
alysts and customers alike can discover a
new flexibility. Although there are always a

few nonnegotiable requirements (such as no

loss of human life), the vast majority are
suitable for examination, reformulation, ne-

gotiation, or adaptation. As unexpected
consequences are uncovered (for example,
the projected high cost of implementation),

the analyst can cooperate with the customer
to search for other, equally satisfactory re-

quirements formulations. The economic
tools of costÐbenefit analysis for this process
have been well understood for years.A full costÐbenefit analysis of a require-ment (or group of requirements) needs an

investment in time and resources. Further-

more, assessing the costÐbenefit of require-requirements
Managing Requirementsfor Business Value
John FavaroEditor: Suzanne Robertson The Atlantic Systems Guild suzanne@systemsguild.comRequirements engineers are often asked the question, ÒWhat will the investment in require-
ments give to our business?Ó John Favaro uses his experience in financial engineering to help
us answer this question by providing some tools for quantifying the value of requirements.ÑSuzanne Robertson 16IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
DEPT TITLEments is more difficult than design or
implementation, because require-
ments are the furthest upstream in

the development process. Conse-
quently there are more unknown fac-
tors; it can take a full development
cycle before the complete economic
impact of a requirement is known. 
Perhaps you can now understandwhy requirements researchers are
studying techniquesfor creating re-

usable requirements.1The first time
you conceive a system based on a re-
quirement, estimating the costs and
benefits might be difficult. But, after
carrying through the system to imple-
mentation, you will have a much bet-
ter idea of the costs and benefits trig-
gered by that requirement. A well-
formulated, measurable, reusable re-
quirementÑincluding a full costÐ
benefit analysis as part of its descrip-
tionÑis every bit as valuable as a
reusable software module.Agile requirementsThe second important change hasbeen the emergence of strategies for
confronting the b’te noireof the re-quirementspr
ocess: vague and chang-ing requirements. These strategies are
best reflected in a new generation of

software life cycles known as agileprocesses (see www.agilealliance.org).

Some prominent examples of agile

processes include Alistair CockburnÕs

CrystalMethods, Bob CharetteÕs Lean
Development, and Jim HighsmithÕs

Adaptive Software Development.
The common denominator of these
agile processes is the iterative devel-
opment paradigm, which breaksup

the tradition of upfront requirements
elicitation and analysis. No longer do
you fire and forget requirements and
then move on to the next phase. Re-
quirements may be introduced, mod-
ified, or removed in successive itera-
tions. As Kent Beck (chief evangelist

of Extreme Programming, the most
visible of the agile processes) exhorts
us, requirements management should
Òembrace change.Ó2Business condi-tions change, giving rise to new re-
quirements; requirements thought to

be critical turn out not to be as the

customer sees the first versions of the
system. Requirements that once werevague become crystal clear as uncer-
tainty is resolved; a requirement once
thought to be rigid could be negoti-
ated and reformulated to permit sev-

eral alternative features that could
satisfy it.Such changing conditions provideopportunities for the strategist to in-
crease the value of his process. How-
ever, the traditional tools of costÐben-

efit analysis that apply so well to the
noniterative requirements process
have proven less adequate to help the
requirements analyst examine the eco-
nomic value of his or her newfound
strategic flexibilityÑand this brings
me to the third important change in re-

cent years. IÕd like to draw now on my
interaction with Kent Beck over the

past few years to discuss some cutting-

edge ideas about the relationship be-

tween strategy and finance and their
effect on requirements management.Contractual innovationEvaluating the financial impact ofstrategic decisions has been the sub-
ject of great debate since the dawn of
economics as a discipline. In a list of

the Top 10 Unsolved Problems in Cor-

porate Finance first compiled by the

legendary financial authors Richard
Brealey and Stewart Myers in 1981
and unchanged in last yearÕs sixth edi-

tion of their classic textbook Princi-ples of Corporate Finance, the finan-cial impact was ranked Number 1.3Inrecent years, people have placed hope
in a new branch of financial theory

known as contingent claims analysisÑ
or more popularly, real optionsÑ

made possible by the breakthroughs
in the 1970s in option pricing theory.

In this approach, the opportunities

created by strategic flexibility are eval-

uated with the financial tools of op-

tion pricing theory.
LetÕs take an example from XP.
Suppose the customer requires your
application to provide access to an
enterprise-wide knowledge manage-
ment system that he or she is con-

templating introducing in a few
months. A simple costÐbenefit analy-
sis on the system features that would

satisfy this requirement is positive,
say, $10 implementation cost versus
$15 in benefits. But, an enormously
uncertain environment undermines the
costÐbenefit analysis. The customer
admits that the uncertainty (Òvolatil-
ityÓ)of 
his estimate is as much as 100percent. If the knowledge manage-
ment system is never introduced,

then it will have been a waste of time

to provide the access capability.

However, if it is introduced, the ac-

cess capability could become far
more valuable than originally envi-
sioned. The customer says that the
uncertainty will be resolved in a year.

The XP process permits the strategy

of waiting until a future iteration to

take up the requirement. Is there any
way to calculate the economics of
this alternative strategy? The tools of
option pricing theory can in fact cal-
culate the value of waiting to be
slightly less than $8Ñmore than the
$5 of benefit accrued by immediate

development.4The option to delay implementinga requirement is an example of the

way that contingent claims analysis
is making a profound impact on the

requirements process in the form of

contractual innovation, a result ofthe new discipline of financial engi-

neering born with the advent of op-

tion pricing theory. Beck likes to say

that unlike fixed-scope traditional
contracts, XP contracts have op-

tional scope: every iteration provides
a formal decision point in which the

customer can change direction, aban-
doning requirements, introducing
new requirements, or selecting be-

tween alternative requirements.For example, you sign such con-tracts not for a fixed set of functional-

ity, but for a teamÕs best effort for a

fixed period at a fixed price. The pre-

cise scope to be implemented will be
negotiated periodically over the life of

the contract, much as professional ser-

vices contracts are run today. Changes

in the teamÕs actual velocity and the

relative estimates attached to each fea-

ture are factored into these scope ne-

gotiations, as are changes in the per-
ceived relative value of these features.
Option pricing theory yields somesurprising insights to the economicREQUIREMENTS DEPT TITLEREQUIREMENTSvalue of such contracts. For instance,there is an exotic type of option known
as a best-of or rainbow option. The
owner possesses two options, of which
only one can be exercised. The rain-
bow option has the most value when
the alternatives are negatively corre-
latedÑthat is, when the same condi-
tions that increase one alternativeÕs

value will decrease the otherÕs. This

implies that a contractÕs value is en-

hanced by contradictory requirements.
For example, two requirements each
specifying the application to run on a
different platform is a rainbow option.
If the choice can be delayed to some
later time, it adds value for the cus-
tomer, letting him hedge the ultimate

platform choice in the contract.Similarly, a requirement whose util-
ity is uncertain (estimated cost and
value are close) gains value by inclusion
in an optional scope clause, because the
option to delay implementation has
demonstrable economic value. Wherecontractual flexibility ex
ists to selectamong alternative requirements, add
requirements, or even to abandon re-
quirements, economic value is added.Adding valueWhat does all this mean for you as arequirements analyst? As the require-
ments process evolves to embrace in-
creased strategic flexibility, and the new

financial tools of contingent claims
analysis mature, requirements become
an important currency in system char-
acteristic negotiation. By learning to
create reusable requirements with a
companion costÐbenefit analysis, you
bring valuable material to the table
from the very beginning. By studying
the new generation of agile develop-
ment processes, you become fluent in
the strategic possibilities to add value to
the requirements process over the entire
product life cycle. By learning some-

thing about the new tools of financial
analysis IÕve introduced, you can better
understand how strategic flexibility in
the requirements process adds value.For that is what the requirementsprocess should be about. If you remem-

ber nothing else from this column, re-
member thisÑstamp it on your forehead
if necessary: the purposeof the require-

ments process shouldnot be to Òcoverall eventualities,Ó or to Òlimit the dam-age,Ó or to Òminimize risk,Ó or even to
Òsatisfy the customer.Ó The purpose of

the requirements process is to add busi-
ness value. It is a subtle shift in perspec-
tive for the requirements analyst, but it
makes all the difference because it puts
you in the position of managing re-
quirements to make the most of your
strategic opportunities.References1.S. Robertson and J. Robertson, ÒChapter 12:
Reusing Requirements,Ó Mastering the Re-quirements Process, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Mass., 1999, pp. 218Ð234.2.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained:Embrace Change, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Mass., 1999.3.R. Brealey and S.C. Myers, 
Principles of Cor-porate Finance, McGraw-Hill, New York,
2000.4.M. Amram and N. Kulatilaka, 
Real Options:Managing Strategic Investment in an Uncer-tain World
, Harvard Business School Press,Cambridge, Mass., 1999.John Favarois an independent consultant based in Pisa,Italy. He is European co-chair of the IEEE Technical Subcommittee
on Software Reuse and a founding member of the steering com-
mittee of the Society for Software Education. He has degrees in
computer science from Berkeley and Yale. Contact him at Via

Gamerra 21, 56123 Pisa, Italy; jfavaro@tin.it. Doing Software Right¥Demonstrate your level of ability in 
relation to your peers
¥Measure your professional knowledge

and competenceThe CSDP Program differentiates between 
you and others in a field that has every kind of 

credential, but only one that was developed by, 
for, and with software engineering professionals.
Register TodayVisit the CSDP web site at 
http://computer.org/certificationor contact certification@computer.orgGet CSDP CertifiedAnnouncing IEEE Computer Society's new Certified Software DevelopmentProfessional Program"The exam is valuable to me for two reasons:One,it validates my knowledge in various areas of exper-
tise within the software field,without regard to specific

knowledge of tools or commercial products...
Two,my participation,along with others,in the exam and
in continuing education sends a message that software de-
velopment is a professional pursuit requiring advanced ed-
ucation and/or experience,and all the other requirements

the IEEE Computer Society has established.I also believe

in living by the Software Engineering code of ethics en-

dorsed by the Computer Society.All of this will help to im-

prove the overall quality of the products and services we

provide to our customers..."
Ñ Karen Thurston,Base Two Solutions
