 20 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY 0740-7459/15/$31.00 © 2015 IEEEEditor: 
Rafael Prikladnicki
Pontifica Universidade Catolica 
do Rio Grande do Sul

rafael.prikladnicki@pucrs.br
RESEARCHERS HAVE PROPOSED 
many agile software- development ma-
turity models to provide guidelines for 
work process improvements.
1 Most of 
them describe various maturity lev-

els and the processes that teams should 
adopt to achieve each one.
2 A team then 
uses the model to assess its current level 
and identify the practices that would 
guide them to maturity.
Agile software- development methods 
present a challenge to using maturity 
models because their practices have been 
highly customized for speci˜ c contexts.
3 If agile teams don™t usually rely on stan-
dard processes, how could they use a 
maturity model to identify where they 

are and how to move forward?
To answer this question, we researched 
how agile software-  development teams 

naturally evolve (see the sidebar ﬁOur 

Research Approachﬂ). We analyzed nine 

teams™ evolution of practices and found 
that the process was, as we expected, 
idiosyncratic. Each team adopted prac-

tices based on its circumstances and im-
proved the practices based on the chal-
lenges it faced. 
Using this research, we designed the 
Agile Compass, a check list (see the 
Web extra at https://s3.amazonaws.com
/ieeecs.cdn.csdl.public/mags/so/2015/06

/extras/mso201506_AnAgile_s1.pdf) 

that lets agile- development teams iden-
tify where they are on the road to agile 
maturity without prescribing practices 

or adoption levels.
The Road to Maturity
We found that teams accomplished agile 
maturity via a dynamic evolution based 
on the pursuit of speci˜ c outcomes. We 
identi˜ ed the various types of outcomes 

and organized them in a framework (see 

Figure 1).
Identifying the outcomes a team has 
and hasn™t accomplished doesn™t pro-

vide an exact roadmap for the future, as 

prescribed processes or maturity levels 
do. Instead, this process gives a general 
direction as to which further improve-

ments should occur, leaving room for 
context- speci˜ c endeavors.
We identi˜ ed seven outcome cat  -
egories:
Ł Practices learning
 includes the 
learning- related outcomes teams 
pursue when they decide to change 

how they work.
Ł Team conduct
 describes how the 
teamŠthe central role in agile 

maturityŠevolves.
Ł Pace of deliveries
 describes the 
delivery- related outcomes the team 
progressively accomplishes while 

evolving.
Ł Features disclosure
 shows how the 
dynamics of the de˜ nition of soft-

ware requirements change over time.
Agile Compass: 
A Tool for Identifying Maturity 
in Agile Software- Development Teams
Rafaela Mantovani Fontana, Sheila Reinehr, and Andreia Malucelli
VOICE OF EVIDENCE 
 VOICE OF EVIDENCE
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2015 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
21OUR RESEARCH APPROACH
We interviewed nine agile software-development teams (see 
Table A). We analyzed each transcribed interview
1 to iden-
tify how agile practices evolved and are expected to evolve 
for each team. We then identi˜ ed evidence that led to the 
outcomes described in our progressive-outcomes frame-

work (see Figure 1 in the main article). For a more detailed 
description of the research process, see the ﬁAgile Compass 
Research Approachﬂ Web extra at https://s3.amazonaws

.com/ieeecs.cdn.csdl.public/mags/so/2015/06/extras
/mso201506_AnAgile_s2.png
.We developed our Agile Compass checklist based on our 
outcomes framework. For example, we interviewed teams 

and received these responses that indicated they used these 
approaches to develop high- level source code:
Ł Company A performed pair programming, refactored 

code, and cared about the code.
Ł Company B, team 2, integrated code daily.
Ł Company D performed pair programming, cleaned 

code, and refactored code.
Ł Company E, team 1, conducted code reviews, provided 
support from an architecture team, performed pair 
programming, defined a best- practices checklist, gave 

people time to study coding techniques, and encour-
aged them to study coding techniques.
Ł Company E, team 2, didn™t automate deployment, 
refactored code with regular builds, and performed pair 
programming.
Ł Company F performed pair programming, used test- 
driven development, and conducted informal code 
reviews.
Analyzing this information and taking into account the 
context of each team™s project and our observation of each 

team, we created the part of the Agile Compass (see the Web 
extra at https://s3.amazonaws.com/ieeecs.cdn.csdl.public
/mags/so/2015/06/extras/mso201506_AnAgile_s1.pdf) per-

taining to the development of high- level source code. We de-
scribed this outcome by saying, ﬁCoding is an important activ-
ity, and there are initiatives to guarantee the code is clear and 

robust, using best practices available.ﬂ We then summed up 
those practices in the form of two statements to which com-
panies could agree, if applicable: ﬁWe care about our codeﬂ 

and ﬁWe endeavor initiatives to guarantee our code is ˜ ne, 
such as reviews, refactoring, pair programming, or others.ﬂ
All information we gathered that supported each out-
come is in our ﬁMap of Evidenceﬂ Web extra at https://

s3.amazonaws.com/ieeecs.cdn.csdl.public/mags/so
/2015/06/extras/mso201506_AnAgile_s3.png.
Reference
 1. R.M. Fontana et al., ﬁProgressive Outcomes: A Framework for Maturing 
in Agile Software Development,ﬂ 
J. Systems and Software
, vol. 102, 
2015, pp. 88- 108.
TABLE A
Pro˜ les of interviewed development teams
Team 
size
Company 
size (no. of 
employees)
Years since 
adopting agile 
development
Purpose for developing software
Company A
8150
1.3
Software for the company™s own use and for external 
customers
Company B, team 1
5200
5Software built on demand for external customers
Company B, team 2
7200
6Software packages and embedded systems
Company C
2015,000
3Customization or adaptation of existing software
Company D 

(distributed)
517
6Software for the company™s own use or built on demand
Company E, team 1
12905Customization or adaptation of existing software
Company E, team 2 
(second site)
6150
5Software for the company™s own use or built on demand
Company F
8150
4Software for the company™s own use or built on demand
Company G 
(government 

organization)
1110,000
0.4
Customization or adaptation of existing software
 22
 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
Ł Software product
 shows how the 
quality of the team™s software 
evolves.
Ł Customer relationship
 describes 
the team™s changing relationship 
with the customer.
Ł Organizational support
 rep
-resents how organizational 

support for agile development 

changes during the maturity 
process.
We lack evidence that teams ei
-ther pursue all outcomes or follow 
a prede˜ned sequence of outcomes 

in the maturing process. However, 

we have clear evidence of the out
-comes that mature teams have 

achieved, which appear as the blue 

boxes in Figure 1. The other boxes 

are outcomes that teams naturally 
pursue during their agile evolution 
but that don™t always characterize 

maturity.
Where Are We?
In the cases we studied, we identi˜ed 

dozens of practices that contribute to 
the accomplishment of outcomes (see 
Table 1) and used this information to 

develop the Agile Compass.
The Agile Compass brie˚y de
-scribes each outcome in an agile-
 development process and offers 

several ways to identify whether it 

was accomplished. Development 
teams can use the tool to discuss 
and determine which outcomes 

they™ve accomplished and which 
still need work, and where they 
must invest additional effort to im
-prove the process. 
Using the Agile Compass 

doesn™t necessarily give a 
˜nal, de˜nitive picture of 
a team™s progress toward maturity 
because the situation can change 
TABLE 1
Agile Compass research pro˜le.*
Outcome category
No. of pieces of information from interviews showing 
development teams pursuing each outcome
Practices learning
65Team conduct
79Pace of deliveries
38Features disclosure
48
Software product
83Customer relationship
35Organizational support
25* The study involved nine teams (with 25 practitioners) and 27 identi˜ed outcomes.
Beginning toto try agileLearningabout agileMaking senseof workprocessesComprehendingthe situationResponsiveteamCon˜dentteamAssertiveteamCode ˜nished at end of sprintFunctionality ˜nished at end of sprintDeliveriesusually lateRequirementsgatheringRequirementsqualityRequirementsdiscoveryAwarenessof failuresHigh-levelsource codeEf˜cientcodingHigh-levelsoftwareTeamawarenessof customerCustomerawarenessof teamPartnercustomerCon˜dentcustomerA few teamsusing agileAgilecommitmentAgilebusinessAgilepriorityTeam leads continuous improvementDeliveries done by deadlineOrganizationalsupportFeaturesdisclosurePace ofdeliveriesPracticeslearningTeamconductSoftwareproductCustomerrelationshipFIGURE 1. 
The progressive-outcomes framework. The circles represent outcome 
categories; the boxes are various development outcomes. The blue boxes are outcomes 

that indicate team maturity.
 VOICE OF EVIDENCE
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2015 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
23over time. For example, when a vari-
ableŠsuch as a team member or a 
technology used to build the soft-
wareŠchanges, the team might have 

to start pursuing its outcomes again. 

In addition, once developers in a 
team accomplish mature outcomes, 
their challenge is to continuously 

improve work processes to sustain 

these outcomes in a changing busi-
ness environment. 
As the business environment 
changes, management must observe 

its development teams, use some 
simple metrics to evaluate them, and 

make the necessary adjustments as 

quickly as possible to enable continu-
ous improvement.
4 The improvement 
is based not on prescribed processes 

but on the pursuit of outcomes. This 
approach places the agile team in a 

central role and supports the con-
stant learning of emerging practices 
for speci˜ c development contexts.
References
 1. M. Leppänen, ﬁA Comparative Analysis 
of Agile Maturity Models,ﬂ 
Information 
Systems Development: Re˜ ections, Chal-
lenges and New Directions
, R. Pooley et 
al., eds., Springer, 2013, pp. 329Œ343.
 2. R.M. Fontana et al., ﬁProgressive Out-
comes: A Framework for Maturing in 

Agile Software Development,ﬂ 
J. Systems 
and Software
, vol. 102, 2015, pp. 88Œ108.
 3. D. Bustard, G. Wilkie, and D. Greer, ﬁThe 
Maturation of Agile Software Develop-
ment Principles and Practice: Observations 

on Successive Industrial Studies in 2010 
and 2012,ﬂ 
Proc. 20th Ann. IEEE Int™l 
Conf. and Workshops Eng. Computer- 
Based Systems
 (ECBS 13), 2013, pp. 
139Œ146.
 4. M. Walter et al., ﬁFrom Sprints to Lean 
Flow: Management Strategies for Agile 

Improvement,ﬂ 
Agile Processes in Software 
Engineering and Extreme Programming
, C. Lassenius, T. Dingsøyr, and M. Paasi-
vaara, eds., Springer, 2015, pp. 310Œ318.
RAFAELA MANTOVANI FONTANA
 is a 
doctoral student in software engineering at the 
Ponti˜ cal Catholic University of Paraná and a 

professor of software engineering at the Federal 

University of Paraná. Contact her at rafaela

.fontana@ufpr.br.
SHEILA REINEHR 
is a doctoral supervisor and 
professor of software engineering at the Ponti˜ -
cal Catholic University of Paraná. Contact her at 
sheila.reinehr@pucpr.br.
ANDREIA MALUCELLI 
heads the post-
graduate program in informatics at the Ponti˜ cal 
Catholic University of Paraná. Contact her at 

malu@ppgia.pucpr.br.
handles the details so you don™t have to!Professional management and production of your publication
Inclusion into the IEEE Xplore and CSDL Digital Libraries

Access to CPS Online: Our Online Collaborative Publishing System

Choose the product media type that works for your conference:

Books, CDs/DVDs, USB Flash Drives, SD Cards, and Web-only delivery!
www.computer.org/cps or cps@computer.org
Contact CPS for a Quote Today!
See 
www.computer.org/
software-multimedia
 for multimedia content 

related to this article.
software-multimedia
for multimedia content 
related to this article.
