 88 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | PUBL
IS
HED BY THE I
EEE
 COMPUTER 
SO
CIETY
 0740-7459/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
AL
THOUGH 
THE 
AG
ILE 
MANIF
EST
O was 
considered controversial when released in 
2001, agile is an accepted practice today, 
taking its place among disciplined and plan-

and-document processes such as spiral and 

the Rational Uni˜ed Process. A recent sur
-vey of 66 large software projects in industry 

found that the majority used agile.
1 The lat
-est editions of two popular software engi
-neering textbooks now introduce agile early, 

with one author summarizing the conven
-tional wisdom that the decision of whether 

to use agile depends on the circumstances, as 
Figure 1 shows.
2,3
As the last standardization effort was 
done in 2004, the software engineering cur
-riculum is currently being revised. Haven™t 
we reached the point where agile develop
-ment should be part of all software engineer
-ing curricula? And if so, shouldn™t new cur
-riculum standards ensure that it is?
Confusingly, there are two such efforts 
underway today. The ˜rst is for computer 

science departments and includes courses on 
software engineering.
4 The second, which 
isn™t as far along, is for software engineering 

departments.
5 This article is about the for
-mer, but we™ll comment on the latter as well.
Student Projects 
Match Agile
For student projects in a software engineer
-ing courseŠassuming the project doesn™t 

consist of building a safety-critical app and 
that students use high-quality open source 

toolsŠvirtually all the answers to the ques
-tions in Figure 1 point to using agile in the 
classroom. Indeed, our experience con˜rms 

agile™s bene˜ts.
6 We developed a new soft
-ware engineering course at the University of 
California, Berkeley, in which students work 
with customers from local nonpro˜t orga
-nizations to build a software-as-a-service 

app using the tools that come with Ruby on 
Rails. In particular, students perform four 
agile iterations in a single semester, which 

gives them enough experience both to learn 

and to appreciate the bene˜ts of the ap
-proach. The course™s success inspired us to 

write a new software engineering textbook
7 and to create a massive open online course 
(www.saas-class.org). Others have reported 
similar results,
8,9
 reporting that agile par
-ticularly bene˜ts women because it addresses 
factors that limit their participation in com
-puter science.
10,11
 Agile™s synergy with student projects is 
noteworthy because the 2013 computer sci
-ence curriculum standard, in which ACM 
and the IEEE Computer Society have joined 

forces, starts with a call for students to learn 
software engineering by working in teams on 
projects:
4In general, students learn best at the ap
-plication level much of the material de˜ned 
in the [software engineering knowledge 
area] by participating in a project. Such 

projects should require students to work on 
continued on p. 85
Is the New Software 
Engineering 

Curriculum Agile?
Armando Fox and David Patterson
  SEPTEMBER/OCT
OBER 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 85a team to develop a software system 
through as much of its lifecycle as is 
possible. Much of software engineer
-ing is devoted to effective commu
-nication among team members and 

stakeholders. Utilizing project teams, 
projects can be suf˜ciently challenging 

to require the use of effective soft
-ware engineering techniques and that 

students develop and practice their 

communication skills. While organiz
-ing and running effective projects 

within the academic framework can 

be challenging, the best way to learn 
to apply software engineering theory 
and knowledge is in the practical envi
-ronment of a project. 
Although the standard is agnostic on 
whether to use plan-and-document or 
agile processes on these student projects, 
in practice, it™s written from a plan-and-

document-centric viewpointŠhence our 

keen interest in the following question: 
If faculty follow the conventional wis
-dom to the answers to the questions in 
Figure 1
 and use agile in classroom proj
-ects, can their courses ful˜ll the new 
curriculum standard™s requirements?
Digging Deeper 
 into the Standard
To ˜nd the answer, we delved deep into 

the standard. Table 1 shows its 10 sec
-tions, which cover classic software en
-gineering topics. Each section starts 

with a bulleted list of topics, followed 

by a list of learning outcomes that 
make the topics clearer. The standard 
divides these 116 learning outcomes 

into three sections: 
 13 are Core Tier 1Šcourses fol
-lowing the standard must deliver 

on 100 percent of these learning 
outcomes.
 50 are Core Tier 2Šcourses fol
-lowing the standard must deliver 
continued from p. 88
1. Is a specification required?
2.
 Are customers unavailable?
3.
 Is the system to be built large?
4.
 Is the system to be built complex (for 
example, real time)?
5.
 Will it have a long product lifetime?
6.
 Are you using poor software tools?
7. Is the project team geographically 

distributed?
8.
 Is the team part of a documentation-

oriented culture?
9.
 Does the team have poor programming 

skills?
10.
 Is the system to be built subject to 

regulation?
FIGURE 1. 
Sommerville™s 10 questions 
about whether to use agile. A ﬁnoﬂ answer 

suggests agile; a ﬁyesﬂ suggests plan and 

document. For student projects, at least 7 of 

the 10 questions clearly point to agile.
3 TABLE 1
The ten sections of the latest draft of the new standard.* 
Section title
Core Tier 1
Core Tier 2
Electives
Total
No.
% covered
No.
% covered
No.
% covered
Software processes
5100
2100
74314Software project management
0--9100
169425Tools and environments
0--4100
0--4Requirements engineering
3100
3100
58011Software design
5100
978
66720Software construction
0--78634310Software veri˜cation validation
0--7867--14Software evolution
0--6100
0606Formal methods
0--0--5255Software reliability
0--36747Overall
13100
50
945368116
* The three middle columns have the number of learning outcomes divided by tier. The percentage covered column lists the percent of the learning outcomes in this tier that would be covered by following the approach in this ar
-ticle. Our plan at UCB covers 100, 94, and 68 percent for the three levels (see http://beta.saasbook.info/acm-ieee-curriculum-compliance). To pass the standard, courses must cover 100 percent of the Core Tier 1 and at least 80 
percent of Core Tier 2 outcomes. Electives are elective.  
 86 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | WWW.C
OMPUTER.
ORG/
SOFTWARE
on at least 80 percent of these out
-comes, although ideally achieve 90 
to 100 percent.
 53 are electivesŠcourses covering 
only core topics will not have suf
-˜cient breadth. These electives are 
intended to be a useful guide for 
additional material, but none are 

required.
We can further classify the learn
-ing outcomes according to depth of 

coverage: 
 Familiarity
Šthe student under
-stands what a concept is or what 

it means. Familiarity answers the 
question, ﬁWhat do you know 
about this?ﬂ (53 of the 116 out
-comes have this goal.)
 Usage
Šthe student is able to use or 
apply a concept in a concrete way. 
Usage answers the question, ﬁWhat 
do you know how to do?ﬂ (58 of 

the 116 outcomes have this goal.)
 Assessment
Šthe student is able 
to consider a concept from mul
-tiple viewpoints and/or justify the 

selection of a particular approach 

to solve a problem. Assessment 
answers the question, ﬁWhy would 
you do that?ﬂ (5 of the 116 out
-comes have this goal.) 
Figure 2 shows examples of the 
depth of coverage for all three tiers 

from one section of the standard. 
Speaking as instructors and authors, 
one upside of the standard is that it led 

us to expand the material in the course 
and our book to be more balanced in 

presenting plan-and-documents along 

with agile development.
The Committee Forgot Agile
At ˜rst blush, the answer to whether 

agile projects ful˜ll the standard™s out
-comes appears to be no. Virtually all the 

terms come from plan-and-
 document 
processes. Here are examples:
 Compare several process im
-provement models such as CMM, 
CMMI, CQI, Plan-Do-Check-Act, 

or ISO9000. [Familiarity]
 Conduct a cost/bene˜t analysis for 

a risk mitigation approach. [Usage]
 Create appropriate models for the 
structure and behavior of software 
products from their requirements 

speci˜cations. [Usage]
None of the 116 outcomes use ex
-plicit agile terms. Of the 50,000+ 

words in the standard, the word ﬁagileﬂ 

only appears twice, and there are only 
three uses of agile terms in the top
-ics. It™s easyŠin fact, as the standard 
is written, it™s even naturalŠto ful˜ll 

the 2013 standard with a software en
-gineering course that doesn™t mention 

agile or any of the concepts associated 

with it: user stories, behavior-
 driven 
design, test-driven development, scrum 
team management, and so on. While 

plausibly excusable for the prior 2004 

standard, it™s indefensible for 2013. 
If the new standard doesn™t include 
agile, then faculty members face a hard 

decision: 
 follow the outcomes, but ignore the 

standard™s missive and don™t offer 

student projects;
 follow the outcomes and offer a 

student project as the standard sug
-gests, but ignore the implications of 

Figure 1 to use agile; or
 ignore the standard™s outcomes and 

offer a student project as the stan
-[Core-Tier1]
1. List the key components of a use case or similar description of some behavior that is 

required for a system and discuss their role in the requirements engineering process. 

[Familiarity] 
2.
 Interpret a given requirements model for a simple software system. [Familiarity] 
3.
 Conduct a review of a set of software requirements to determine the quality of the 

requirements with respect to the characteristics of good requirements. [Usage]
[Core-Tier2]

4.
 Describe the fundamental challenges of and common techniques used for requirements 

elicitation. [Familiarity] 
5.
 List the key components of a class diagram or similar description of the data that a system is 

required to handle. [Familiarity] 
6.
 Identify both functional and nonfunctional requirements in a given requirements 

specification for a software system. [Usage]
[Elective]

7. Apply key elements and common methods for elicitation and analysis to produce a set of 

software requirements for a medium-sized software system. [Usage] 
8.
 Use a common, nonformal method to model and specify (in the form of a requirements 

specification document) the requirements for a medium-size software system [Usage]
9.
 Translate into natural language a software requirements specification (such as a software 

component contract) written in a formal specification language. [Usage] 
10.
 Create a prototype of a software system to mitigate risk in requirements. [Usage] 
11.
 Differentiate between forward and backward tracing and explain their roles in the 

requirements validation process. [Familiarity]
FIGURE 2. 
An example of three types of learning outcomes for requirements engineering 
(section 4 in Table 1). Note that none of the outcomes use agile terms or concepts directly, but 

with creativity, you can map some of them onto the traditional plan-and-document terms and 

concepts in these outcomes.
  SEPTEMBER/OCT
OBER 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 87dard recommends, using an agile 
process as the answers to the ques
-tions in Figure 1 suggest.
As the standard document isn™t in 
its ˜nal draft, there™s still opportunity 
for change. Given that agile is obvi
-ously an accepted practice today and 
widely used, we strongly recommend a 

more even balance between plan-and
 --document and agile processes in the 
outcomes, particularly for the electives.
As the curriculum committee for 
software engineering departments 

formed more recently, we certainly 

hope that it will learn from the omis
-sions of the other committee and em
-brace agile as a valid part of the cur
-riculum from the start. 
If the computer science standards 

committee is unyielding, creative 
individuals can, after studying 
outcomes in more depth, use agile for 
projects and meet the minimum out
-comes. The standard doesn™t require an 
instructor to cover 100 percent of Core 
Tier 2 or any of the electives, which 

makes it easier for projects to follow 

agile and still meet the standard. We 
combed through all 13 Core Tier 1 out
-comes and 54 Core Tier 2 outcomes, 
and Table 1 shows the percentage that 

can be covered if you follow this strat
-egy: 100 percent of Core Tier 1, 94 per
-cent of Core Tier 2, and even 68 percent 
of the electives. Our instructor™s man
-ual on the Web details how we revised 

the course and the textbook to meet 

the standard by including sections that 

contrast agile and plan-and-document 
methodologies for each of the 10 sec
-tions in Table 1 (http://beta.saasbook.
info/acm-ieee-curriculum-compliance).
Thus, the answer to the question in 
the title of this article can be af˜rmative 

even if the computer science standards 

committee is absent-minded. Instruc
-tors can follow the initial call of the 

standard for projects by student teams 

while using an agile process, which 

is the most natural match. As long as 
you review both plan-and-document 
and agile processes in lecture, students 

can become familiar with both sets of 
terms and concepts. The more demand
-ing outcomes can be met by the project 
as well, provided you look to the deeper 

meaning behind the plan-and-docu
-ment terms to see where agile can ˜t.
References
 1.
 H.-C. Estler et al., ﬁAgile vs. Structured 
Distributed Software Development: A Case 
Study,ﬂ 
Proc. 7th Int™l Conf. Global Software 
Eng.
, IEEE, 2012, pp. 11Œ20.
 2.
 R. Pressman, 
Software Engineering: A Prac
-titioner™s Approach
, 7th ed., McGraw-Hill, 
2010.
 3.
 I. Sommerville, 
Software Engineering
, 9th ed., 
Addison-Wesley, 2010.
 4.
 Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula, 
ﬁComputer Science Curricula 2013, Ironman 
Draft (version 1.0),ﬂ ACM/IEEE CS, Feb. 

2013; http://ai.stanford.edu/users/sahami/
CS2013.
 5.
 G. Hislop et al., ﬁRevision of the SE 2004 

Curriculum Model,ﬂ 
Proc. 44th ACM Tech. 
Symp. Computer Science Education
, ACM, 
2013, pp. 383Œ384.
 6.
 A. Fox and D. Patterson, ﬁCrossing the Soft
-ware Education Chasm,ﬂ 
Comm. ACM
, vol. 
55, no. 5, 2012, pp. 44Œ49.
 7.
 A. Fox and D. Patterson, 
Engineering 

Software as a Service
, beta ed., Strawberry 
Canyon, 2013.
 8.
 V. Mahnic, ﬁA Capstone Course on Agile 
Software Development Using Scrum,ﬂ 
IEEE 
Trans. Software Eng
, vol. 55, no. 1, 2012, pp. 
99Œ106.
 9.
 T. Reichlmayr, ﬁThe Agile Approach in an 

Undergraduate Software Engineering Course 
Project,ﬂ 
Proc. 33rd Annual Frontiers in Edu
-cation
, vol. 3, IEEE, 2003, pp. S2C-13Œ18.
 10.
 S. Berenson et al., ﬁVoices of Women in a 
Software Engineering Course: Re˚ections on 
Collaboration,ﬂ 
J. Educational Resources in 
Computing
, vol. 4, no. 1, 2004, pp. 3.1Œ3.14.
 11.
 L. Werner, B. Hanks, and C. McDowell, 

ﬁPair-Programming Helps Female Computer 
Science Students,ﬂ 
J. Educational Resources in 
Computing
, vol. 4, no. 1, 2004, pp. 4.1Œ4.8.
ARMANDO FOX 
is a professor at the University of 
California, Berkeley. Contact him at fox@cs.berkeley.
edu.
DAVID
 PATT
ERS
ON 
is professor at the University 
of California, Berkeley. Contact him at pattrsn@

cs.berkeley.edu
IEEE Software
 (ISSN 0740-7459) is published bimonthly by the IEEE Computer 
Society. IEEE headquarters: Three Park Ave., 17th Floor, New York, NY 10016-
5997. IEEE Computer Society Publications Of˜ce: 10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., Los 
Alamitos, CA 90720; +1 714 821 8380; fax +1 714 821 4010. IEEE Computer 

Society headquarters: 2001 L St., Ste. 700, Washington, DC 20036. Subscription 

rates: IEEE Computer Society members get the lowest rate of US$56 per year, 
which includes printed issues plus online access to all issues published since 1984. 
Go to www.computer.org/subscribe to order and for more information on other 

subscription prices. Back issues: $20 for members, $209.17 for nonmembers (plus 
shipping and handling).
Postmaster: 
Send undelivered copies and address changes to 
IEEE Software
, Membership Processing Dept., IEEE Service Center, 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, 
NJ 08854-4141. Periodicals Postage Paid at New York, NY, and at additional 
mailing of˜ces. Canadian GST #125634188. Canada Post Publications Mail 
Agreement Number 40013885. Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to PO 

Box 122, Niagara Falls, ON L2E 6S8, Canada. Printed in the USA.
Reuse Rights and Reprint Permissions: 
Educational or personal use of 
this material is permitted without fee, provided such use: 1) is not made 

for pro˜t; 2) includes this notice and a full citation to the original work 
on the ˜rst page of the copy; and 3) does not imply IEEE endorsement of 

any third-party products or services. Authors and their companies are per
-mitted to post the accepted version of IEEE-copyrighted material on their 

own webservers without permission, provided that the IEEE copyright no
-tice and a full citation to the original work appear on the ˜rst screen of the 

posted copy. An accepted manuscript is a version which has been revised by 
the author to incorporate review suggestions, but not the published version 
with copyediting, proofreading, and formatting added by IEEE. For more 

information, please go to: http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/
 publications/rights/paperversionpolicy.html. Permission to reprint/republish 

this material for commercial, advertising, or promotional purposes or for cre
-ating new collective works for resale or redistribution must be obtained from 

IEEE by writing to the IEEE Intellectual Property Rights Of˜ce, 445 Hoes 
Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854-4141 or pubs-permissions@ieee.org. Copyright 
© 2013 IEEE. All rights reserved.
Abstracting and Library Use: 
Abstracting is permitted with credit to the source. 
Libraries are permitted to photocopy for private use of patrons, provided the per-
copy fee indicated in the code at the bottom of the ˜rst page is paid through the 

Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923.
