 112 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY 0740-7459/18/$33.00 © 2018 IEEESupporting 
Requirements-

Engineering Research 

That Industry Needs
The NaPiRE Initiative
Daniel Méndez Fernández
FORTY YEARS AFTER 
requirements 
 engineering (RE) was ˜rst acknowl
-edged as an independent discipline, 
a strong and (more or less) self-

con˜dent research community has 

emerged and contributed a variety 
of tools, methods, and approaches. 
Today, the common view is that 

ﬁRE as a discipline is stable and re
-spected,ﬂ as Sarah Gregory pointed 
out in the previous instalment of this 
department.
1However, it™s also evident that 
after 40 years, conducting the re
-search that industry needs is still a 

challenge. ﬁResearch that industry 

needsﬂ means research that solves 

industrial problems practitioners 
face. But do we really understand 
those problems? Here, I elaborate on 

this research challenge and outline 

the NaPiRE (Naming the Pain in Re
-quirements Engineering) initiative, 

which aims to tackle it. But ˜rst, let™s 

examine the actual state of RE re
-search and practice.
RE Is ChallengingŠin Practice 
and Research
Nobody can refute RE™s importance 
and its challenges. As an intercon
-nected discipline, much depends on 

its success because many decisionsŠ

and problemsŠin software develop
-ment projects are rooted in it. Given 
RE™s critical and challenging nature, 
it shouldn™t be surprising that project 

failures are still too often caused by 

insuf˜cient RE.
So why are we still struggling 
with RE after 40 years? Do we lack 

proper scienti˜c contributions that 
aim to solve practitioners™ problems, 
or do we lack proper knowledge 

and technology transfer between re
-search and practice? Probably both.
For practitioners, it™s often (made) 
dif˜cult to share insights into their 

RE, given its criticality to their com
-pany™s competitive environment. For 
 researchers, it™s generally very dif
-˜cult to obtain clear pictures of 

RE in practice. The discipline is 
characterized largely by uncertainty 
and human factors such as experi
-ences, expertise, fears, beliefs, and 
even politics.
2 These factors affect 
the choice of methods, approaches, 
and tools in individual practical con
-texts. What might work well for one 
project might be completely alien to 

the next project™s needs and culture.
3 This renders it dif˜cult to empiri
-cally investigate the discipline. In the 

end, RE is a highly individual means 

to an endŠas individual as the peo
-ple working on problems and the 
problems they work on.
The State of RE Research
It™s not surprising that the biggest 
challenge in RE research is to pro
-vide proper empirical ˜gures that 

demonstrate particular success fac
-tors. However, those factors are 

critical determinants of what works 
in practice and what doesn™t.
4 Con
-sequences are that the state of em
-pirical evidence in RE is particularly 
  JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 113
weak and that much of everyday 
industrial practices is governed by 
conventional wisdom rather than 
empirical evidence.
Other symptoms of the discon
-nect between research and practice
5 are that we researchers keep propos
-ing solutions to problems we barely 

understand and that these solutions 

either remain unknown in practice 

orŠworseŠare blindly adopted 
without a proper understanding of 
their potential bene˜ts and short
-comings. The rather low practical 

impact of many of our contribu
-tions reinforces this disconnect. The 

dominant presence of goal-oriented 

RE approaches in research and their 
absence in practice could well be one 
example of the disconnect.
6Although the practical relevance 
of research certainly shouldn™t be 
the sole measure of success, we still 
need to break this vicious cycle and 

foster more problem-driven RE re
-search. To this end, RE research
-ers need to close the knowledge 

gap regarding the plethora of situa
-tions practitioners face in their proj
-ects, to eventually pave the road 
for the industrial adoption of our 
contributions.
We Need Proper RE Theories
Motivated by the overall situation 

and the need for a stronger body of 
RE knowledge, Stefan Wagner (Uni
-versity of Stuttgart) and I proposed 
the NaPiRE initiative in 2012 in a 

workshop at the annual meeting of 
the International Software Engineer
-ing Research Network (isern.iese.de
 /Portal). Our overall objective was 

to establish a holistic theory of RE 
practices and problems in industry 
to help guide research along speci˜c 

industrial contexts and needs.
To that end, we proposed run
-ning NaPiRE as a biennial replicated 
family of internationally distributed 

surveys in which each run helps ex
-tend an initial theory and make it 
more robust over time. We further 
proposed disclosing all data and re
-sulting publications to the public to 

make our results transparent and 
reproducible and to help other re
-searchers ground their work in em
-pirical data.
At ˜rst, our idea received a luke
-warm reception, but now we number 
58 researchers worldwide, conducting 

the third replication in 25 countries. 
NaPiRE™s success has strengthened 
our con˜dence in a shared vision, and 

the initiative has become an effort by 

the community, for the community.
NaPiRE: Problems Are 
Everywhere!
Here, I present selected results from 
the second survey replication, con
-ducted in 2014 and 2015, with re
-sponses from 228 companies in 10 

countries. I concentrate on a speci˜c 

set of problems our respondents are 
experiencing; for further details, see 
ﬁNaming the Pain in Requirements 

Engineering: Contemporary Problems, 

Causes, and Effects in Practice.ﬂ
7 My 
goal is to give you an overview of the 
diverse problems and the importance 
of better understanding them.
Figure 1 summarizes the survey 
respondents™ top 21 RE problems 
and those problems™ frequency. The 
chart further shows the problems™ 

criticality by indicating the number 

of projects in which they led to proj
-ect failure. The most frequent prob
-lem was incomplete requirements, 

followed by communication ˚aws 
between the project team and cus
-tomer, underspeci˜ed requirements, 
and moving targets.
At the same time, moving tar
-gets, although ranked as the fourth-
 
most-frequent problem, become the 
top-priority problem when we con
-sider only the project failure ratios. 

Furthermore, when considering all 
the problems, someone might argue 
that many of them could be elimi
-nated by clear RE process models 
or artifact templatesŠthat is, blue
-prints for how to specify require
-ments or which terminology to rely 
on. Interestingly, many of the re
-spondents did use such templates. To 

better understand the reasons for the 

problems and propose fruitful solu
-tions, we need a deeper understand
-ing of the problems.
A Closer Look at the Problems
The NaPiRE data captures not only 

practices and problems but also the 
problems™ root causes and conse
-quences, going beyond the simple 
case of project failure. Figure 2 vi
-sualizes an example of such analysis 
of communication ˚aws between the 
project team and customer. The ˜g
-ure is a probabilistic cause-and-effect 

diagram
8 (also called an Ishikawa 
diagram) in which the percentages 
represent the share of given answers. 
The closer phenomena are to the cen
-tral horizontal line, the higher their 

probability of occurrence in projects.
The left side of Figure 2 shows 
the problem™s root causes. The right 

side shows the problem™s effects, in
-cluding, for instance, poor product 
quality caused by missing or incor
-rect features. In particular, the dia
-gram shows that the top ˜ve root 

causes don™t indicate a lack of guid
-ance from templates; rather, they 
indicate organizational and social 

factors (for example, language bar
-riers, missing direct communication 

with customer, or missing customer 

engagement). One natural follow-up 

question is whether projects apply
-ing agile practices avoid these issues 

given that agile practices aim to 
 114
 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
support communication between all 
the involved parties.
By blocking the data according to 
the software process models used, 

we can select all the responses from 

the practitioners who applied agile 
practices. Table 1 summarizes the 
outcome; it lists the top ˜ve problems 

and groups them by company size. 

Interestingly, those companies still 
experienced communication ˚aws 
 between the project team and cus
-tomer. Even more surprisingly, they 

encountered additional problems that 
 agile practices aim to solve.
As you can see, many of the 
challenging project situa
-tions that agile practices 
claim to address, such as moving 

targets, still manifest themselves as 

severe problems. Space limitations 
prevent us from further reasoning 
about the particularities of the re
-spondents™ contexts, but the key 

takeaway of this small example is 
already evident. The claims we of
-ten associate with speci˜c solutions, 
such as agile practices, and our ex
-pectations when they™re applied uni
-versally, aren™t in tune with today™s 
industrial reality. We all would ben
-e˜t from a better understanding of 
the industrial reality to align our re
-search with the problems in practice.
As we mentioned before, we™re 
running the third replication of Na
-PiRE to further explore the state of 
the RE practice, focusing on knowl
-edge gaps such as those I illustrated 

in this article. We hope this improves 
the community™s understanding of 
what™s really going on out there, and 

it will help us steer our research in 
a problem-driven manner. I cor
-dially invite researchers to join this 
Insuf˜cient support for project leadTechnically unfeasible requirements
Weak relationship with customer
Volatile domain
Terminological problems
Unmeasurable nonfunctional requirements
High degree of innovation
Weak domain knowledge
Gold-platingMissing traceability
Unclear responsibilities
Weak access to customer needs
Inconsistent requirements
Insuf˜cient support for customerSeparation of requirements and solutions
Communication ˚aws within the teamTime boxing
Moving targets
Underspeci˜ed requirements
Communication ˚aws with the customerIncomplete or hidden requirements
200406080100No. of projects
5641453044354419262225302719242424141393434528392425102415161467127536736107374222341213212111Unknown
Project failedProject completedFIGURE 1. 
Key requirements-engineering problems and their criticality, indicated by the number of projects in which they led to 
project failure.
7  JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 115
or similar initiatives, and I invite 
practitioners to support us with their 
answers to do their part to produce 
the research that industry needs. For 

details on NaPiRE and how to con
-tribute, visit www.re-survey.org. 
References
1. S. Gregory, ﬁRE@40: Midlife Cri
-sis or Graceful Maturity?,ﬂ 
IEEE 
Software
, vol. 34, no. 6, 2017, pp. 
14Œ17.
2.
 A. Milne and N. Maiden, ﬁPower and 
Politics in Requirements Engineering: 

A Proposed Research Agenda,ﬂ 
Proc. 

19th IEEE Int™l Requirements Eng. 

Conf.
 (RE 11), 2011, pp. 187Œ196.
3.
 D. Méndez Fernández and R. Wieringa, 

ﬁImproving Requirements Engi
-neering by Artefact Orientation,ﬂ 
Product-Focused Software Process 

Improvement
, LNCS 7983, Springer, 
2013, pp. 108Œ122.
4.
 B.H.C. Cheng and J.M. Atlee, ﬁRe
-search Directions in Requirements 

Engineering,ﬂ 
Proc. 2007 Future of 

Software Eng.
 (FOSE 07), 2007, pp. 
285Œ303.
5. L. Briand et al., ﬁThe Case for Context-
 Driven Software Engineering 
Input (33%)Weak quali˜cation of
stakehoders
Missing solution
approach
Requirements too
abstract
Complexity of RE
Unclear terminology
Missing completeness check of
requirements
Communication ˚aws betweenteam and customerCustomerdissatisfactionDecreased business
value
Poor product qualityTime overrun
Misunderstanding
(overall)
Decreased ef˜ciency

(overall)
Increased dif˜culty of

requirements elicitation
Increased number of

change requests
Increased complexity in
REBudget overrun
Effort overrun
Information gets

lostIncreased

communicationOverall
demotivation
Wrong estimatesLate decisionIncompleterequirements
Decreased user

acceptanceIncreased number of

requirements changes
Poor (system) designqualityValidation of

requirements
becomes def˜cultImplementation ofirrelevant requirements
Need for post
implementationPoor project managementInsuf˜cient agilityMissing involvement ofdevelopmentLack of a well-de˜ned
RE processMissing direct communication
to customerWeak management at
customer side(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.10%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(6.41%)(8.97%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(1.28%)(2.56%)(2.56%)(2.56%)(2.56%)(2.56%)(2.56%)(2.56%)(11.54%)(16.18%)(8.82%)(2.94%)(2.94%)(1.47%)(1.47%)(2.94%)(1.47%)(1.47%)(1.47%)(1.47%)(2.94%)(2.94%)(2.94%)(2.94%)(2.94%)(2.94%)(2.94%)(2.94%)(10.29%)(13.24%)(4.41%)(5.88%)(2.56%)(10.26%)(3.85%)(6.41%)(6.41%)Missing RE awareness at
customer sideMissing customerinvolvementCon˚icting stakeholder
viewpointsLack of time
Too high team
distributionManycustomersLanguage barriersLack of experience of RE

team membersMissing requirements
speci˜cation templateMissing toolsupportWeak quali˜cation of RE

team membersSubjective
interpretations
Not following the
communication planInsuf˜cientresources
Stakeholders lack business
vision and understandingCustomer does not know

what he or she wants
Unclear roles and responsibilities at
customer sideMissing IT project experience
on customer sidePolicy restrictions
Complexity of domain
Strict time schedule by 

customerMissing engagement by
customerMethod (38%)Customer (19%)Design orimplementation (19%)Validation or
veri˜cation (3%)Project ororganization (47%)
Product (22%)Tools (3%)
People (17%)Organization (9%)
Communication˜aws between
the project teamand customerFIGURE 2. 
Causes and effects of communication ˜aws between the project team and customer. The left side shows the causes; 
the right side shows the effects. The closer phenomena are to the central horizontal line, the higher their probability of occurrence in 

projects. The percentages represent the share of the survey respondents™ answers.
Table 1. The top ˜ve problems of the companies applying agile practices.
7*Ranking
Company size (no. of people)
Small (1Œ50)
Medium (51Œ250)
Large (
˜251)
1Incomplete or hidden requirements
Communication ˜aws between the 
project team and customer
Incomplete or hidden requirements
2Communication ˜aws between the 

project team and customer
Incomplete or hidden requirements
Moving targets
3Underspeci˜ed requirements
Communication ˜aws within the 

project team
Communication ˜aws between the 

project team and customer
4Communication ˜aws within the 

project team
Separation of requirements from solutions
Time boxing
5Time boxing
Weak access to customer needs
Underspeci˜ed requirements
* The problems in bold are within the scope of agile practices.
 116
 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
Research: Generalizability Is Over
-rated,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 34, no. 5, 
 2017, pp. 72Œ75.
6.
 A. Mavin et al., ﬁDoes Goal-Oriented 
 Requirements Engineering Achieve 
Its Goal?,ﬂ 
Proc. IEEE 25th Int™l Re
-quirements Eng. Conf.
 (RE 17), 2017, 

pp. 174Œ183.
7.
 D. Méndez Fernández et al., ﬁNam
-ing the Pain in Requirements Engi
-neering: Contemporary Problems, 

Causes, and Effects in Practice,ﬂ 

Empirical Software Eng. J.,
 vol. 22, 

no. 5, 2016, pp. 2298Œ2338.
8.
 M. Kalinowski, E. Mendes, and 

G.H. Travassos, ﬁAutomating and 
Evaluating the Use of Probabilistic 

Cause-Effect Diagrams to Improve 

Defect Causal Analysis,ﬂ 
Product-

Focused Software Process Improve
-ment
, LNCS 6759, Springer, 2011, 
pp. 232Œ246.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
DANIEL MÉNDEZ FERNÁNDEZ
 is a senior research fellow at the Tech
-nical University of Munich and the director of the interdisciplinary research 

groups at the Centre Digitisation.Bavaria. Contact him at daniel.mendez@

tum.de; www.mendezfe.org.
Read your subscriptions 
through the myCS 
publications portal at
 http://mycs.computer.org
Stay connected with the IEEE Computer Society transactions by signing up 
for our Transactions Connection newsletter. It‚s free and contains valuable 

information like:Not a subscriber? Don™t worry. You can still sign up to receive news about the transactions.
Visit 
www.computer.org/newsletters
 to sign up today!Ł news about your favorite transactions,Ł contributions from the Editorial Board,Ł information about related conferences,Ł multimedia,Ł and much more.TRANSACTIONS NEWSLETTER!