 0740-7459/16/$33.00 © 2016 IEEE NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2016  |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 41How Software 
Architects Drive 

Connected 

Vehicles
Sören Frey,
 Lambros Charissis, and Jens Nahm,
 Daimler TSS
// There are two reasons why successful 
connected-vehicle projects often assign 
architecture-related responsibilities to individual 
experts acting as software architects. First, the 
experts help effectively manage complexity; 
second, they act as knowledge multipliers 
when development must scale up. 
//CONNECTING VEHICLES 
to the 
Internet of Things is a fascinating 
˜eld of activity for software archi
-tects. Introducing connectivity into 
vehicles pushes the door wide open 

for a broad spectrum of potential 
use cases.
1,2
 For example, consider 
receiving immediate warnings from 

other vehicles about traf˜c jams and 
black ice on the road ahead.
Or, you might want to remotely 
unlock your car doors with a smart
-phone to allow temporary access for 
family members. Figure 1 depicts the 
high-level process ˚ow for control
-ling the door lock state via mobile 
devices. A mobile application lets the 

user issue control commands over 
a mobile Internet connection to a 
cloud-based connected-vehicle back-

end system. For example, the back-
end system might receive an ﬁunlock 
doorsﬂ command and forward it to 

the connected car. After the car has 

received and executed the command, 
it reports the new door lock state 
back to the mobile device via the 
same communication path.
However, designing a viable solu
-tion isn™t as straightforward as this 
process ˚ow might suggest. The de
-sign must take into account a pleth
-ora of additional concerns, such as a 

car manufacturer™s various models, 
certain regional markets™ technologi
-cal and legal peculiarities, and secu
-rity aspects across all the involved 
systems. For example, the design 
must often consider secure commu
-nication channels and identity and 

access management. Owing to the 
large number and variety of those 
concerns, the architecture design 

process has an inherent complexity 
that requires management.
To get started, project teams of
-ten deliberately limit the scope. For 
example, they might restrict the 
door lock functionality to a speci˜c 
vehicle model in a pilot phase, us
-ing our platform for prototyping 

telematics services.
3 If such pilots 
prove successful, the need often ex
-ists to quickly scale to full produc
-tion while expanding to new re
-gional markets and covering more 

of the manufacturer™s vehicles. For 
example, a pilot that started for a 
speci˜c car model in Germany might 

have to be scaled to additional mod
-els and standard operation in the 
overall European market. To en
-able rapid scaling to multiple proj
-ect teams, a way is needed to ef˜
-ciently transfer gained experience 
among project teams. Managing the 

connected-
 vehicle solution space™s 
complexity and ef˜ciently support
-ing cross-
 project communication 
and knowledge exchange require a 
corresponding expert role.
We believe that the software 
architect role is a perfect ˜t for 

that expert role, despite the vivid 

arguments over what software 
 42 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
FOCUS:
 THE ROLE OF THE SOFTWARE ARCHITECT
architecture actually is, the blurred 
pro˜ le of the software architect 
role,
4 and even the absence of a 
dedicated software architect role in 

popular process frameworks such as 
Scrum. Here, we offer our consoli-

dated observations from ˜ ve years™ 

experience in the connected-vehicle 
domain, which covered seven large-
scale projects with tens of thousands 

of customers. In successful projects, 

the responsibilities regarding soft-
ware architecture were concentrated 
in individual experts. These experts, 

acting as software architects, were 
crucial to designing complex soft-
ware systems and scaling the cor-

responding development. However, 

these experts™ business cards often 
didn™t overtly disclose their software 
architecture activities.
Architects Manage 
Complexity
Designing a production-ready solu-
tion for the remote door lock func-
tion involves several dimensions of 
complexity and many architectural 

challenges. Figure 2 gives an over-

view. A basic remote vehicle func-
tion such as door locking should be 
reusable by many potential users in a 

variety of applications and use cases, 
such as in-car delivery, car sharing, 

or a concierge service.
Figure 2 depicts examples of the 
potential users, such as vehicle own-
ers, other drivers, and call centers 
that need the ability to perform ve-

hicle commands on a vehicle owner™s 

behalf. Whereas a call center agent 
might use a proprietary application, 
vehicle drivers use the functionality 

on devices such as smartphones, tab-

lets, or smart watches. An exposed 
Web API integrates both the call 
center case management software 

and the mobile applications. This 
context involves architectural con-
siderations such as Web API design, 

message data formats, and Web se-

curity technologies.
Moreover, the remote-door-lock 
solution must support a variety of 

vehicles that entail different control-

ler area network
5 (CAN) signals and 
network architectures and different 
telematics control unit (TCU) hard-
ware types and software versions. 

(CAN is a widespread bus standard 

for in-vehicle communication; TCU 
is an embedded system providing a 
mobile communication interface for 

vehicles.) One of the most dif˜ cult 

architectural challenges is to provide 
an abstraction of the many vehicle 
idiosyncrasies and offer a single in-
terface to other components relying 

on remote vehicle functions. This is 
similar to an anticorruption layer.
6In Figure 2, the Virtual Vehicle com-
ponent accomplishes this task.
The design of an architectural 
concept for remote vehicle commu-

nication can employ two fundamen-

tally different approaches: putting 
the application logic inside or out-
side the vehicle. This decision has 

an enormous architectural impact. 
When the Virtual Vehicle component 
sends a remote door lock command 
to the vehicle, the built-in TCU for-

wards the command to the CAN, 
from where the command reaches its 
target electronic control unit (ECU, 

an embedded system for controlling 

a vehicle subsystem).
7However, when the application 
logic is inside the vehicle, the TCU 
doesn™t necessarily send feedback 
to the Virtual Vehicle component 

about whether the subsequent door 

status is what the function call in-
tended. The message might never 
have reached the vehicle because of a 

lost connection between the Virtual 

Vehicle component and the TCU. 
Alternatively, the TCU might have 
failed when processing the request, 

or the door might simply be open 
and therefore can™t be locked. In all 
cases, the logic of checking the door 

status after the command has been 

sent, and retrying the command 
where required, might be passed 
through to the user.
This example indicates the need 
for a technical role that understands 
the overall system chain, all the way 
from the user front end to the ve-

hicle™s control units. A TCU might 

have to be updated over the air to not 
only ˜ x bugs but also add features. If 
we consider the TCU as a key part of 

the overall system chain that™s under 
DriverMobile-deviceapplication1. Issue command(for example,ﬁunlock doorsﬂ)2. Send command6. Forward newvehicle statusConnected carCloud-basedconnected-vehicleback end5. Send new vehiclestatus (for example,ﬁdoors unlockedﬂ)3. Forwardcommand4. ExecutecommandFIGURE 1. 
The high-level process ˜ ow for a remote door lock function. Designing a 
viable solution isn™t as straightforward as this process ˜ ow might suggest.
 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
43an architect™s control, then this role 
also requires understanding topics 
that abut the automotive-engineering 
domain, such as CAN signal encod-

ing and distribution or TCU memory 

and performance restrictions.
Between the Web API and Virtual 
Vehicle component is a large system 

landscape that provides common plat-

form services. Together, these systems 
constitute the connected- vehicle back 
end in Figure 2. On one hand, this 

landscape contains dozens of systems 
that were developed a long time ago. 
On the other hand, it includes new 

back-end systems being developed to 
enable vehicle-connectivity use cases, 

such as the Service Context compo-
nent in Figure 2.
For building end-to-end solu-
tions, a technical role is needed that 
also understands the systems and de-
pendencies in the connected-vehicle 
back end. For example, the back end 

includes these components:
Ł The Identity & Access compo-

nent handles user authentication 

and authorization.
Ł The Customer Context and Ser-

vice Context components hold 

the information about which 
user owns which vehicle and has 

bought which services.
Ł The Vehicle Master Data com-

ponent determines which vehicle 

can provide which services (for 

example, remote door locking).
Performing this capability check 
requires leveraging the vehicle mas-

ter data. Typically, the system hold-
ing this data was in place long before 
the connected-vehicle features came 

onto the market and wasn™t built to 
be accessed for thousands of vehi-
cles simultaneously. This is also of-

ten the case for other vehicle systems 
Secure channel (for example,  VPN)Secure Web protocol (for example,HTTPS)iOS, Android,Windows, ... Drivers orvehicle ownersCall centersBus systems(CAN)TCUECUECUECUScrum modelV-modelConnected-vehicleback endAutomotive-engineering domainSoftware development domainProduct series: 574TCU type: ATCU version: 1.4Product series: 574TCU type: ATCU version: 2.0Product series: 345TCU type: CTCU version: 1.0VirtualVehicleCustomerContextApplicationLogicWeb APIIdentity& AccessVehicleMaster DataServiceContextLegacySystemsFIGURE 2. 
The dimensions of complexity in designing a production-ready solution for the remote door lock function. VPN stands for 
virtual private network, CAN stands for controller area network, TCU stands for telematics control unit, and ECU stands for electronic 

control unit.
 44 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
scattered over several organizational 
units. So, another architectural chal
-lenge we™ve come across consistently 

is how to scale and integrate legacy 

systems from various organizational 

units that weren™t built to be inte
-grated with the connected-
 vehicle 
back end. Similar architectural chal
-lenges of integrating legacy systems 
in new environments occur in many 
other industrial sectors.
8Further challenges arise from the 
various process models that differ
-ent organizational units and engi
-neering domains use. Typically, the 
highly safety-sensitive automotive-

engineering discipline employs se
-quential development processes such 

as the V-model
9Šfor example, 
by following the widespread ISO 
26262:2011 standard.
10 Often, the 
time between the speci˜cation phase 

and ˜nal product™s completion can 
be months or years. In contrast, new 

connected-vehicle back-end services 

and front ends are often built accord
-ing to agile, iterative software devel
-opment methods, such as Scrum or 

Extreme Programming. Designing a 

system whose components are built 
according to completely different 
process models, release cycles, and 

engineering mentalities is a major 
architectural challenge.
From our experience in an enter
-prise context, it takes a lot of time to
Ł align with many component rep
-resentatives regarding overarch
-ing technical-integration details,
Ł request interface extensions ac
-cording to formal change man
-agement processes, or
Ł reach consensus regarding the 
deployment details for different 
staging environments.
We found that concentrating these 

activities in individual experts who 
therefore acted in the software ar
-chitect role reduced friction. (These 
experts performed this role formally 

or informally and sometimes with a 
varying scope; see the sidebar ﬁThe 
Many Faces of a Software Archi
-tect.ﬂ) It™s also an ef˜cient way to 

manage the end-to-end design of 
connected-vehicle functionalities and 
adequately cope with multiple levels 

of complexity.
Architects Facilitate 
Team Scalability
Another aspect of the architect™s 
role deals with knowledge propaga
-tion and sharing, which is especially 

important in a fast-paced domain 

such as connected-vehicle software. 

Factors such as the widespread 
availability of built-in and retro˜t
-ted TCUs that let vehicles connect 
to the Internet, steadily accelerat
-ing mobile connection speeds, and 
users™ increasing familiarity with 
near-ubiquitous connectivity have 

sparked the automotive industry. 
Everybody is striving to ˜nd well-
suited use cases. Some people claim 

the next big thing is infotainment 

for drivers and passengers, some 
claim it™s in increasing vehicle uti
-lization through sharing concepts 
such as car2go (www.car2go.com), 

and others are following different 
routes in this vibrant environment.
These product ideas start as a 
small proof of concept (POC) to at
-tract early as many users as possible. 

As soon as a POC emits positive sig
-nals, companies run a pilot with more 
users. They then run a scaled pilot 
with many users before rapidly tran
-sitioning to series production. The 
reference for speed of implementa
-tion is often successful Internet com
-panies such as Apple, Google, and 

Facebook. New agile development 

teamsŠsay, Scrum teamsŠmust be 
created rapidly to enable quick time 

to market. In this process, ensuring 
adequate knowledge transfer among 
the teams is important.
Figure 3 sketches a possible 
growth path. The two software en
-gineers involved in the POC have 

a comprehensive overview of the 

overall architecture and technolo
-gies. They act as knowledge multipli
-ers when the new connected-vehicle 

service becomes a pilot and a Scrum 

team is staffed for the implemen
-tation. The pilot Scrum team (la
-beled 1 in Figure 3) is in charge 

of building a more complex solu
-tion with deeper integration in the 

automotive-
 enterprise-application 
landscape. For the scaled pilot, new 

software engineers are added, and 
a second Scrum team (labeled 2 in 
Figure 3) is created to handle addi
-tional work. Series production (for 

example, involving additional vehi
-cle models) requires even more de
-velopment teams (labeled 3, 4, and 

5 in Figure 3). The development 
teams must cooperate and align 
when implementing an integrated 

product together.
How should knowledge transfer 
and alignment among teams be orga
-nized? If all the teams use Scrum, a 

method for scaled Scrum development, 

such as the Nexus framework, 
11
 is ap
-propriate.
 The Nexus framework de
-˜nes a Nexus Integration Team con
-sisting of a dedicated product owner, 

a Scrum master, and one or more 

members who might also be in sev
-eral Scrum teams. The framework 
matches well with the staged scaling 
approach in Figure 3. The experts 

acting as a development team™s soft
-ware architect are a perfect ˜t for 
the Nexus Integration Team.
The Nexus Integration Team must 
manage integration of a connected-
 vehicle function built from separate 
  NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 45subproducts. To do this, it ensures 
that each sprint produces an inte
-grated increment. The team members 

should be software professionals ex
-perienced in systems engineering.
11
The Nexus Integration Team must 
also propagate architectural knowl
-edge among Scrum teams on both 

the interstage level (for example, 

pilot to scaled pilot) and intrastage 
level (for example, scaled pilot to 

scaled pilot). To do this, it coaches 
and guides the Scrum teams to ac
-quire, implement, and learn systems-
engineering practices and tools.
11
 It 
THE MANY FACES OF
 A SOFTWARE ARCHITECT
In the domain of connected-vehicle software, software experts in an enterprise context act within a wide spectrum of respon
-sibilities and con˜gurations of the software architect role. The following ˜ve dimensions broadly characterize how individuals 
formally and informally carry out this role.
THE JOB TITLE™S RELATION TO THE SOFTWARE ARCHITECT ROLE
The job title adorning an individual™s business card might or might not indicate that person™s relation to software architecture 
activities. Besides the straightforward job title of software architect, a wealth of job titles cover a similar scope and include the 
term ﬁarchitect,ﬂ such as solution architect, IT architect, enterprise architect, and system architect. However, the relation to 
software architecture becomes blurrier when you consider titles that don™t include ﬁarchitect,ﬂ such as IT consultant, software 

engineer, and solution developer.
THE AMOUNT OF SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE ACTIVITIES PERFORMED
From day to day, architects might have to perform software architecture activities that are more or less typical. For example, 

in our context, solution architects are concerned almost entirely with software-architecture-related activities, such as system 
decomposition, modeling, and interface de˜nition. In contrast, agile software development frameworks such as Scrum often 
transfer these activities to whole software development teams. So, individual developers might be involved in such activities in 

varying degrees.
THE NUMBER AND GRANULARITY OF COMPONENTS IN SCOPE
The software architect role also differs regarding the number and granularity of components with which an architect is con
-cerned. For example, enterprise architects usually design and govern large IT landscapes consisting of many applications. In 
contrast, some architects might be concerned with only a subset of those applications and their exposed interfaces, to design 
speci˜c functionalities. The door lock scenario described in the main article falls in this category. On a lower level of abstraction, 

application architects are typically concerned with designing one or a few applications.
THE PROXIMITY TO PROGRAMMING ACTIVITIES
Software architects perform different amounts of programming. For example, enterprise architects hardly ever program. Further
-more, differences exist among architects with identical job titles. For example, some IT architects might rarely program; instead, 
they design technical solutions for speci˜c business processes. In contrast, other IT architects might daily contribute source 
code for one or more applications.
SPECIALIZATION
Software architects frequently specialize. Specializations often occur in speci˜c industrial sectors (such as the automotive in
-dustry) and functional domains (such as vehicle connectivity, powertrain optimization, and fabrication). Moreover, specializations 
frequently focus on speci˜c technologies. This often becomes apparent from the corresponding job titles, such as automotive 
software architect, Java EE (Java Platform, Enterprise Edition) architect, and cloud architect.
 46 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
FOCUS:
 THE ROLE OF THE SOFTWARE ARCHITECT
also coaches them on the organiza-
tions™ development, infrastructural, 
or architectural standards.
These tasks can be handled well 
by individual experts with a strong 
software architecture background 
(that might possibly be blended with 
knowledge from different architec-

tural ˜ avors such as system or solu-

tion architecture). These tasks match 
seamlessly with the tasks software 
architects typically perform.
So, how should a project split 
the work among the Scrum teams 

when it scales up? The most obvi-

ous approach would be to build a 
front-end team, a back-end team, 

an embedded- vehicle team, and so 
forth. This satis˚ es the specializa-
tion found in the labor market and 

often in organizational structures. 

However, the teams would lose 
their independence. We often ob-
served deadlocks and waiting pe-

riods when there were more than 

three or four teams.
Another approach is to build fea-
ture teams such that each team de-

velops a speci˚ c feature from end to 
end.
12 Each team must possess the 
necessary skills, which can be quite 

challenging. In our experience, each 
team must have at least one person 

with a functional and technical over-
view and thorough conceptual skills: 

the software architect. If a team had 
no architect role, we observed dete-
riorated code quality and a blurred 

component structure.
In software development proj-

ects, the need still exists for 
someone with strong concep-
tual skills, a deep knowledge of the 
problem domain, and good commu-

nications skillsŠthat is, a software 
architect. Whether we™re talking 
54Proof ofconceptPilotScaledpilot12113SeriesproductionTime2FIGURE 3. 
Quickly scaling development teams from a few software engineers for a proof of concept to many tens or even hundreds 
of software engineers is common when companies implement connected-vehicle services. To enable adequate knowledge transfer, 

software architects (circled in the ˜ gure) act as knowledge multipliers and nuclei for new teams. The numbers in the ˜ gure indicate the 

various development teams.
 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2016 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
47about a Scrum team member who 
focuses on prioritizing technical sto-
ries in the backlog, a product owner 
advisor, an external coach, or many 

other possible roles with in˜ uence, 

the tasks of an architect remain.
Digitalization as a megatrend re-
inforces IT™s importance. For the au-

tomotive sector, the next big trends 

are autonomous driving and cars as 
part of the Internet of Things. These 
trends further increase the under-

lying IT systems™ scope, reach, and 
complexity. That™s why we expect 
the software architect role to remain 

a major cornerstone of most com-

plex automotive IT projects in the 
coming years.
Acknowledgments
We thank Olaf Zimmermann and the 
anonymous reviewers for their valuable 

suggestions and comments on an earlier 

version of this article.
References
1. 
M. Alam, ﬁThe Top Five Trends for 

the Connected Car in 2016,ﬂ 
Tech-

Crunch
, 2 Jan. 2016; http://tech
crunch.com/2016/01/02/the-top

-˚ ve-trends-for-the-connected-car

-in-2016.
2. 
D. Hardawar, ﬁBuckle Up: The 

Connected-Car Revolution Is Almost 

Here,ﬂ 
Engadget
, 13 Jan. 2015; 
www.engadget.com/2015/01/13

/connected-car-revolution.
3. 
T. Haberle et al., ﬁThe Connected 

Car in the Cloud: A Platform for 

Prototyping Telematics Services,ﬂ 

IEEE Software
, vol. 32, no. 6, 2015, 
pp. 11Œ17.
4. 
M. Fowler, ﬁDesignŠWho Needs an 

Architect?,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 20, 
no. 5, 2003, pp. 11Œ13.
5. 
ISO 11898, Road VehiclesŠ 

Controller Area Network (CAN)
, Int™l Org. for Standardization, 2015.
6. 
E. Evans, 
Domain-Driven Design: 
Tackling Complexity in the Heart of 

Software
, Addison-Wesley Profes-
sional, 2004.
7. 
C. Ebert and C. Jones, ﬁEmbed-

ded Software: Facts, Figures, and 

Future,ﬂ 
Computer
, vol. 42, no. 4, 
2009, pp. 42Œ52.
8. 
W. Hasselbring, ﬁInformation System 

Integration,ﬂ 
Comm. ACM
, vol. 43, 
no. 6, 2000, pp. 32Œ38.
9. 
J. Weber, ﬁVehicle Development 

ProjectsŠan Overview,ﬂ 
Automotive 

Development Processes: Processes 

for Successful Customer Oriented 

Vehicle Development
, Springer, 
2009, pp. 1Œ15.
10. 
ISO 26262:2011, Road VehiclesŠ

Functional Safety
, Int™l Org. for Stan-
dardization, 2011.
11. 
K. Schwaber, 
Nexus Guide v1.1
; www.scrum.org/Resources/The

-Nexus-Guide.
12. 
C. Larman and B. Vodde, 
Scaling 

Lean & Agile Development: Think-

ing and Organizational Tools for 

Large-Scale Scrum
, Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 2008.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
SÖREN FREY 
is a senior IT architect of connected-vehicle 
software at Daimler TSS. His research interests are connected 
vehicles, cloud computing, software architectures, and machine 
learning. Frey received a PhD in computer science from Kiel 
University. He™s a member of the IEEE Computer Society, ACM, 
and the German Informatics Society. Contact him at soeren 
.frey@daimler.com.
LAMBROS CHARISSIS 
is an IT architect of connected-vehicle 
software at Daimler TSS. His research interests are connected 
vehicles, software architectures, and cloud computing. Charis-
sis received a master™s in computer science from the University 
of Stuttgart. Contact him at lambros.charissis@daimler.com.
JENS NAHM 
is the manager of the Enterprise Architecture 
Team at Daimler TSS. His research interests are connected 
vehicles, software architectures, and cloud computing. Nahm 
received a Dipl. Inform. in computer science from the University 
of Stuttgart. Contact him at jens.nahm@daimler.com.
Selected CS articles and columns 
are also available for free at 

http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
