 96IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/07/$25.00 © 2007 IEEEfeature
of discussions with Tom Gilb, the company se-
lected Evo,1an evolutionary project manage-ment method that Gilb first detailed in 1981.
2Evo develops the final product iteratively as
new requirements are discovered, constructed
into the code, and subsequently tested.3Stake-holders give feedback to each product itera-
tion to guide the development of the next iter-

ation. Integration test suites are performed
before the final system test. Evo is a rigorous process encompassingconscious risk management, similar to the
later-developed Spiral model.
4However, each
iteration is ultimately driven by the highest
possible stakeholder value. Despite rigidity in
process control, Evo builds on commonly
known agile principles: continuous customercollaboration, direct feedback to frequent re-
leases of working software, and change re-
sponsiveness. Here, we detail the companyÕs

experiences with adopting, refining, and ma-
turing Evo. Our aims are to share our insights
regarding the organizational impacts of evolu-
tionary development and to fill in some gaps
in current knowledge about agile methods and

effects.3,5The ÒStudy MethodÓ sidebar de-scribes how we collected and analyzed data.BackgroundCompNN (a pseudonym) is a Norwegian
software company that provides a packaged
software product, ProdNN, for marketing and

customer surveys. The company was founded
in 1996 and has since grown steadily to about
Collaboration, ProcessControl, and Fragility 
in Evolutionary Product

DevelopmentEvolutionary development is an agile software engineering approachthat embraces continuous customer collaboration to assist the con-
struction of a gradually evolving product. Its benefits and chal-
lenges are revealed in a longitudinal study we performed of amedium-sized companyÕs transition from a traditional plan-based software

process to an evolutionary process. The transition occurred in four consecu-
tive product releases during a two-year period in 2004Ð2005. On the basissoftware development
Tor Erlend F¾gri and Geir Kjetil Hanssen, SINTEFInformation and Communication Technology
A softwarecompanyÕs

transition from 
a plan-based
development
process to an agile,
evolutionary

process reveals both
the benefits and
demands it places
on an organization. 80 employees with offices in Norway, Vietnam,
the UK, and the US. The company shifted grad-

ually from building custom applications to a

packaged product. Today, ProdNN licenses

constitute most of the companyÕs revenue.
CompNN used a noniterative variant of the
plan-based waterfall process to manage prod-
uct development.6When the company intro-duced the process, it provided the structure
necessary to maintain a core product, which
the shift from custom development to pack-

aged product required. The process empha-

sized thorough requirements engineering up
front. Analysis, specification, design, code,
module test, system integration, acceptance

testing, and delivery were performed sequen-

tially and diligently, although with only mod-

est reflection on intermediate results. Initially,

the process seemed to address the companyÕs

problems by establishing control and quality
management, but it eventually exposed new
challenges. For example, its inflexibility in-
curred high costs in the face of unclear or
changing requirements.CompNN also saw a potential for improv-
ing its dialogue with customers. Packaged-
product customers asked for closer collabora-
tion with CompNN. As one customer said,

ÒInput to the development plans was very in-

formal. We only saw the products released by

CompNN.Ó Product planning involved mainly
a collaboration between R&D and manage-
ment. A CompNN representative explained:
ÒDevelopment was mainly driven by casual dis-
cussions between R&D and management.
Gradually, the need to structure the work better

and allocate responsibilities for the research
ahead of product planning materialized.Ó The

somewhat ad hoc product planning failed to

address many existing business requirements
from end users. Another CompNN representa-
tive said, ÒWe were really only focusing on fea-

tures. Other qualities were added last, and only
in very vague terms.Ó And another representa-

tive commented, ÒBy focusing primarily on fea-

tures, we somehow forgot to think about how

these features should be used and [about] the

user-perceived quality of these features.Ó
Because the first feedback to the productcame lateÑduring acceptance testingÑlittle
time was available to improve the software be-

fore delivery. Also, project effort estimates were

frequently too optimistic, forcing developers to
cope with intense amounts of overtime near the
release date. In the pressure to deliver function-ality, testing would often give way to develop-

ment. As a result, the delivered product had
many errors. Furthermore, company manage-
ment saw a trend of declining R&D motiva-

tion. They feared that these problems would

limit the productÕs competitiveness.
In November 2003, CompNNÕs quality as-
surance (QA) manager and the chief technol-
ogy officer (CTO) met Tom Gilb at a software

engineering research forum, where he gave a

presentation on Evo. The company represen-
tatives found the ideas appealing, and within a
month CompNN decided to apply some key
Evo practices to the next product version, due
for release in May 2004.Evo practices at CompNNSeveral engineering domains have used theEvo project management method, and Gilb
discusses its applicability to systems engineer-
ing in his latest book.1Evo includes manypractices, but here we discuss only those
adopted and shaped by CompNN.May/June 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
97CompNN had no defined software process improvement goals prior tointroducing Evo. Therefore, we used an open, qualitative, longitudinal case
study to investigate potential costs, gains, and risk factors. We covered four

product releases produced during 2004Ð2005.Data collectionThe main data source was interviews with several persons filling EvoÕs
three most central roles: developers (six persons randomly selected), collab-

orating customers (one person from each of the three customers), and all
project management teammembers (five persons). We interviewed the first

group after the ProdNN version 10.0 release, using a postmortem tech-

nique. We followed an interview guide to conduct semistructured interviews

with the two latter groups at various times during the study. Altogether, we

conducted nine interviews, taping them all.
Additionally, weÕve had numerous discussions with the companyÕs quality
assurance manager and chief technology officer.
Data analysisWe transcribed the interviews for detailed textual analysis. We analyzed
the results by interview group, using constant comparison.
1The softwaretool NVivo supported our analysis by carefully tagging the data and group-

ing analytical fragments into larger constructs.Reference1.C.B. Seaman, ÒQualitative Methods in Empirical Studies in Software Engineering,Ó 
IEEETrans. Software Eng
., vol. 25, no. 4, 1999, pp. 557Ð572.
Study Method Requirements engineering and project management
Arguably, EvoÕs most important attribute is
project management guided by impact-based
effort prioritization and formalized require-

ments engineering. In Evo, impactquantifiesthe software qualities that give customers the
greatest value, and goalsdenote measurablerequirements. In Evo jargon, a goal isnÕt sim-

ply a statement of functionality, such as ÒThe

system should É,Ó but a statement of the per-

formance the software system must or should

have. This approach explicitly helps distin-
guish requirements from designs.
1To keep track of the goals and monitor
progress, each project uses 
impact estimationtables. An IET is a spreadsheet that lists the
projectÕs planned iterations horizontally and

the current goals vertically. The goals are sup-

plemented by a tolerablemetric, which is a nu-
meric Òworst-acceptable caseÓ constraint level
for the quality requirement and helps make
the goalÕs sensitivity explicit. For example, in

figure 1, Usability.Productivity is a goal meas-

ured as Òthe time in minutes for the system to

generate a survey.Ó The goal is 25 minutes, but

the tolerable metric is 35 minutes. In Evo, 
de-sign ideasare proposed solutions to reach the
goals. In the figure, the design ideafor itera-

tion 9 is ÒRecoding.ÓCompNN produces two product releaseseach year. Each release is broken down into

two to five parallel time-boxed projects with

an R&D team of two to five developers each,

including one appointed project manager
(PM). Each project focuses on specificProdNN modules or types of functionality.
The product management team (PMT), com-

posed of five senior employees,is responsiblefor creating and maintaining product develop-
ment plans in close cooperation with cus-
tomers. Input from the CTO, executive man-

agement, and customers (for example, from
yearly surveys) is important in this work.
Product development plans can span multi-ple releases, and the PMT together with the
CTO are responsible for ensuring that the
IETs conform to them. Before release initia-

tion, selected customers are invited to supple-

ment the plans with additional requirements.
During the initiation phase, which spans
roughly two weeks, the PMT together with
the respective PMs capture the most promising
design ideas to address the initial goals and en-
ters them in the IET for future iterations. As
CompNNÕs CTO explained, ÒThis plan helps

us ensure adherence to an overall technical
strategy for product development.ÓProcess schedulingEvo is a highly scheduled process. Figure 2presents the Evo week, a schedule thatCompNN iterateseach week to define tasks for

the projectÕs defined roles. Most planning and

coordination work occurs on Friday, preparing

the development team for a quick start on

Monday morning. In each iteration, the project

teams implement the planned design idea, make

a new version of the software system available

to selected stakeholders, and compare the ef-

fortÕs results to the goal. In weekly project lead-

ersÕ meetings, QA collaborates with the PMs
Figure 1. Impact estimation table from
ProdNN 8.5. Current

goals are listed 
vertically, and their 

impacts in planned 
iterations appear 
horizontally.
98IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
 and CTO to review the stakeholdersÕ feedback
and decide whether the work meets the require-
ments (to either the tolerable or the goal level).
When the work meets specified goal levels, the

IET is updated with new goal and tolerable re-

quirement levels, according to stakeholdersÕ

feedback. This concludes an iteration.
At the start of a new iteration, the PM re-
views each requirement according to how the

iterationÕs design idea impacts it. The IET sim-

plifies the consideration of a design ideaÕs side

effects on the range of current goals. Occa-
sionally, the project team might suggest revi-

sions to design ideas at this point. IETs func-

tion both as the overall development plan and
a progress record. Using metrics for each goal
ensures that any person within the company
can easily determine the developmentÕs status.

The QA manager and CTO jointly fill the role
of manager for the release.CompNN established a technical frame-work for continuous integrationto supportmore frequent builds and tests. CI integrates a
toolset that almost fully automates the soft-
ware build process and the execution of par-
tial tests of the software several times a day. At

present, CI includes Starteam (from Borland)

for source control, NUnit for unit testing
(open source), FxCop for code analysis (open
source), NAnt for build management (open
source), and CruiseControl.Net for coordina-tion and reporting (open source). CI is config-
ured to automatically upload the product to
test servers each Friday.
Adhering to the Evo week requires disci-
plined teamwork. The PMT appoints a stake-
holder to represent important project goals. A

three-person QA group is responsible for de-
ploying testable product versions to the stake-
holders. The QA group also ensures follow-up

on any reported discrepancies from CI. Its ac-
tivities run in parallel with the unit testing per-
formed by R&D. QA is responsible for re-

viewing the test plans and results from the
tests run by R&D. Thus, QAÕs role is to ensure

that all issues detected during unit testing are
eventually resolved.The transition experiencesThe Evo implementation for each of the
four product releases involved a different con-
figuration and yielded different lessons.The Evo pilot: ProdNN release 8.5CompNN established the PMT a few weeksbefore initiating the 8.5 release of ProdNN.
Collaborating with customers, PMT created a
list of important improvements. The 8.5 re-
lease plan was divided into four parallel proj-
ects focusing on distinct product modules. This
resulted in small, easily manageable R&D
teams. Each project followed the Evo week,R&D teamStakeholderPM: Attend project mgmt meeting:12:00-15:00PM: Send version N detail plan toCTO + prior to project mgmt meetingR&D team: Focus on generalmaintenance work, documentationCTOQA† Approve/reject design & step N† System architect to 
review code and test 
code† Run final build and createsetup for version N-1† Install setup on test servers 
(external and internal)† Perform initial crash test and then release version N-1† Attend project mgmt meeting: 12:00-15:00R&D team: Develop test code and code 
for version N† Use version N-1† Follow up Cl† Review test plans, tests† Review test plans and tests† Follow up Cl† Review test plans and tests† Follow up Cl† Review test plans and tests† Follow up ClR&D team: Develop test code for version NR&D team and PM: Meet with
stakeholders to
discuss action
taken† Meet R&D team to give feedback and dis-
cuss action taken from 
previous actionsR&D team: Develop test code 
and code for 
version NR&D team: Com-plete test code and 
code for version NFridayMondayTuesdayWednesdayThursday
Figure 2. The Evoweek. Planning and 
coordination of work,
according to project
roles, occurs on Friday
to jumpstart work on

Monday morning.May/June 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
99 100IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
For R&D, the change to Evosignificantlyimproved the comfortlevel andmotivation.employed IETs, and used the CI framework.
Additionally, each project included one PMT

member who gave feedback to the iterations,
simulating customers. Although the change to Evo might appeardramatic, many interviewees commented that

they had expected a change from management
for some time (Òsomething had to happenÓ).
A PMT member went so far as to say, ÒWhat-

ever changes we implemented, it would prob-

ably be a good thing.Ó Because CompNN was
experiencing a difficult period, the organiza-

tion was generally enthusiastic about the pilot
project, which got off to a flying start.
CompNN observed many positive effects asit adopted the new, highly structured develop-

ment approach. One benefit, applying primarily
to R&D, was a reduction in the intense over-
time work at a projectÕs end. Reviewing sug-

gested improvements iteratively resulted occa-
sionally in postponements to a later release. For
R&D, the change to Evo significantly improved
the comfort level and motivation. Through
nightly builds, supported by the CI framework,
the company always had a running version
ready for testing and feedback, leaving R&D
more time and quiet to develop code.Maintaining CI, a premise for Evo collabo-ration and control, required substantially
more effort than anticipated. This related pri-
marily to maintaining the tests. Furthermore,
establishing quality metrics in cooperation
with PMT succeeded only partially. We

learned that some developers continued their
old Òfeature countingÓ practice. We werenÕt

overly surprised by these findingsÑestablish-
ing good requirements and associated metrics
is inherently hard.7For the goals that did in-clude quality metrics and effective measure-
ments, developers appreciated the added cer-
tainty. They expressed this in the context of

Òinterest in what we do on a weekly basisÑ
not in a four-monthly basis as before.Ó
The general experience with the Evo pilotwas positive. It ran for five months, required
only modest preparations, and gave the CTO,
R&D, QA, and PMT confidence with the new

process.Inviting the customers: ProdNN 9.0CompNN decided to expand the use of Evopractices in the following 9.0 release, com-
mencing May 2004. PMT carefully selected

three customers to participate as collaboratingstakeholders on the basis of three criteria: eco-nomic value, experience with the product, and
complementary interests in ProdNN. The cus-

tomers received no compensation for partici-
pation, so PMT felt certain that their collabo-

ration was based on interest and willingness to
shape the product. One of the customers said,

ÒSince 2001 we had discussed the possibility
of closer collaboration with development.
When CompNN turned to Evo, it became a
reality.Ó This customer reported having spent

two person-weeks on preparing product plan
input and two person-weeks on evaluation
and feedback.The three customers were assigned to indi-
vidual projects. PMTÕs role changed corre-

spondinglyÑfrom surrogate customers to fa-

cilitators of the collaboration between the
customers and R&D. Stakeholders gave feed-
back in project meetings via telephone confer-
encing. Because the project teams were located

in Norway and two stakeholders were located
abroad (US and Canada), establishing the
technical infrastructure for software sharing
posed a technical challenge. CompNN decided

to make the software versions available for the

stakeholders through an application service
provider (ASP). CompNN supplemented the
meetings with screen sharing and occasional

technically focused meetings to discuss com-
plex issues. R&D soon accepted the customer
dialogue as the most significant mechanism
for refining goals and doing functional testing.
This interaction generated valuable knowl-
edge used to update the IETs and subsequently

to dynamically control the R&D efforts.Collaborating directly with the customersincreased the developersÕ confidence compared
to collaborating with PMT. One developer

said, ÒItÕs the feedback that works much better.

Now we get feedback very fast.Ó Another PMT
member commented on the explicit focus on
software qualities: ÒÉ because we now focus
on qualities as opposed to features we now are
capable of giving the customers what they
need, not necessarily what they want.Ó The
tighter relationship with customers enabled
CompNN to better understand the underlying
business problems. A developer stated: ÒIt was
a very satisfying situation because we managed
to define measurable goals that we knew were
important to the stakeholder.Ó The collabora-

tion provided a fruitful environment in which
valuable knowledge w
as externalized and transformed into the evolving product. APMT representative with additional documen-
tation and training-materials responsibilities
commented: ÒOur job got easier because we
knew what was coming at an early point in the
release. For the first time, we were finished

one week before the release date.Ó As a result,
the sensation of being in control improved the
comfort for both R&D and PMT and further
increased their motivation.The rapid iterations in Evo made some re-quested quality goals unrealistic. One customer
had business requirements related to the per-
formance of certain administrative tasks in the
product, such as installation of new databases
and other system configuration duties. The
project couldnÕt include these goals for practi-

cal reasons. Giving feedback on such goals
would have required the customer to test on a
local installation as well as longer iterations.As the release progressed, cracks started to
appear. The weekly schedule became too fast-

paced and R&D complained that too little
time was left for testing, resulting in increased
errors and discomfort in R&D. This exposed

a fragilityin the process, primarily its depend-
ence on timely deliveries and effective collabo-
ration. We define fragility as the level of a

processÕs sophistication as given by the num-

ber of preconditions and dependencies that

must be met. This problem was intolerable,

and roughly midway through the release,
CompNN decided to try a suggestion from

GilbÑnamely, the 
green week. Rather thanspending each Friday for corrective mainte-
nance, R&D now dedicated a full week to this

task. The project could add no new function-

ality during this green week. The PMsad-

justed schedules so that stakeholders didnÕt do

anything at this time.The experiences from introducing the green
week were mixed. First, it helped address the
problem of too little time for testing. The in-
terviewed developers agreed that the green

week enabled them to catch up with the test-

ing and increased their confidence in the code.
However, they also felt the cost was too high.

We were puzzled and asked why. One devel-

oper said reluctantly, ÒOur testing tool (FX-

Cop) is very cumbersome. It is not integrated
with our other development tools. So the
process is slow and appears as a diversion.Ó
This illustrates the importance of efficient
tools. We believe that the near-perfect vision
of a fully integrated development environ-ment, created by CI, was severely broken by
the testing tool and that this gave R&D a very
negative attitude towards testing. This, in

turn, explains the increasing number of errors.Picking up some broken pieces: ProdNN 9.1Release 9.0Ñand EvoÑwas at this pointconsidered a success with respect to customer

collaboration. However, the extreme focus on

responding rapidly to feedback led to many
new code errors. The green week helped, but

not enough. Many of the reported problems
werenÕt malfunctioning features but poorly

performing features that hadnÕt been tested

properly because of lack of time. In an effort
to counter this problem, CompNN decided to

run an interim release: ÒThe objective was to

enhance performance, handle change requests,
reduce number of bugs, document code and
improve the tests.Ó The release was divided

into four parallel projects. PMs were told to

follow the Evo practices, but only one project,
called Òsystem configuration,Ó was allocated
an external stakeholder. The other three proj-

ects simulated stakeholders in the project
group meetings with respect to the interim re-

leaseÕs quality goals.
The system configuration project was com-
pleted successfully with disciplined adherence
to the Evo-week and a fruitful collaboration
with the appointed stakeholder (CompNNÕs

ASP). Results for the other projects were
mixed, primarily because of PMT and other
managementÕs lack of engagement. This, in

turn, created a sense of vacuum among the de-
velopers. A developer stated: ÒDriving the
process alone is very demanding. You sit there

wondering what is happening.Ó Confidence
suffered accordingly. What they so easily had

become accustomed to during the two previ-
ous releases was now taken away. Conse-

quently, the Evo process appeared as a burden.

They missed valuable feedback and interac-
tion with a clearly defined stakeholder. Some

developers also reported that motivation suf-

fered in this release. The PMsdidnÕt explicitly

decide to drop the Evo measurement and feed-

back practicesÑit Òjust happenedÓ because
following Evo in detail seemed irrelevant with
no external stakeholders. However, without

the direct, instructive collaboration with
stakeholders, developers eventually moved
away from the practice of performing weekly
May/June 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
101 measurements, and these projects partly fellback on past practices.Experiencing the fragility: ProdNN 10.0In release 10.0, CompNNÕs management
again set a stronger focus on employing the
Evo principles throughout all projects. The
commitment to recreate the spirit of the 9.0 re-
lease was strong. The 10.0 release was divided
into three projects, each to be run according to
Evo principles and to include the green week.
Again, it started well. R&D quickly regained
their motivation through stimulating collabo-
rations with customers. PMT also did a good
job in ensuring active stakeholder engagement.
Occasionally, some customers couldnÕt partici-

pate in the feedback meetings. For the most
part, PMT was prepared for this event and had
gathered enough customer input beforehand to
give the developers good information. Thus,
PMT functioned as the buffer for unpre-
dictable customer availability.
But problems started to arise during thesummer holidays, roughly halfway through
the development period. One customer with-
drew from its allocated project because the

goals had been reached successfully. Other

customers left and reappeared arbitrarily,

causing an unpredictable supply of feedback
to steer the projects. The company took little

action to correct the situation, and the sum-

mer holidays also reduced the availability of
key people. Lacking steering and able decision
makers, the 10.0 projects experienced growing
uncertainty and mistrust.5EvoÕs dependency on frequent feedback
and fluent decision making contributes to its
fragility. Release 10.0 exposed this fragility.

Without managementÕs attention to keep the

process components going, Evo showed signs
of collapse. We werenÕt surprised to find a

combination of reasons behind this. First,
EvoÕs key mentors in CompNN had become

overloaded with other tasks and thus failed to
notice the processÕs gradual decay. Addition-

ally, as this problem became evident, manage-

ment failed to take corrective action. Instead

of protesting loudly, R&D quietly took this re-

sponsibility themselves and ended up as
process owners. Lacking other directions, they
focused on adding functionality that they be-
lieved would be useful to customers. Paradox-
ically, the 10.0 release impressed customers

with the introduction of a large number of fea-tures. But R&D failed to understand theirown limitations. They were too ambitious.

The result was an inevitable all-out effort as
the release date approached, pushing many of
the R&D team members to exhaustion.
DiscussionEvolutionary software development pro-motes a collaborative environment where sup-
plier and consumer can generate the knowl-
edge to gradually create the optimal product.

This knowledge also supports control of the
software development process. CompNN
reaped such benefits from adopting Evo. In
addition, participants reported increasing con-
fidence and comfort with the development
process.Companies can only exist in relationshipswith customers. Evo has made these relation-
ships more collaborative for CompNN. Fur-

thermore, constantly focusing on delivering
customer value increases the synergetic value
of these relationships. This becomes a signifi-
cant competitive advantage, enabling more ef-
ficient innovation transfer between CompNN
and the collaborating customers. Ideally, all

collaborating customers should represent
strategically, technically, and economically op-

timal product requirements, but this isÑof

courseÑimpossible to achieve. The cost of in-
cluding an unresponsive stakeholder is moder-
ate in a responsive organization, which can ac-
knowledge the problem in a few iterations and

then begin steps to correct it. Furthermore,
during the time it takes to replace the stake-

holder, vigilant PMT and project teams can

still reap benefits for the organization. In the

friendly, collaborative environment fostered

by Evo, CompNN extracted useful knowledge
about how customers used the product. The

company also used this time to try out new
ideas with the customers. 
And here lies a key lesson from this study:
maintaining a watchful, vigorous stakeholder
management capability is paramount for EvoÕs

success.Evo increased the productÕs exposure and
resource usage compared to the original
process. One PMT member, working abroad,

noted that ÒEvo makes ProdNN and the de-
velopment process more visible throughout

the company and also among our key stake-
holders.Ó More people can observe or criticize
prioritizations. This can help maintain focus102IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
EvoÕsdependency on frequentfeedback and fluentdecision makingcontributes to its fragility.
 May/June 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
103on generating value, but it also influences the
nature of the demands on the product. A
CompNN representative said, ÒI think we have
improved our ability to think in terms of the

real business problem of the stakeholders.Ó

This follows implicitly from the increase in di-

rect stakeholder feedback. However, R&D saw

Òa lack of attention to software engineering
principles.Ó Finding the balance in this dynamic
environment is a well-known challenge.
5There-fore, companies should select stakeholders with

a particular interest in the product as an engi-
neering artifact (called Òinternal stakeholdersÓ
in Evo) at intervals to counter architectural ero-
sion and subsequent excessive costs of imple-

menting improved quality.
We also learned that short cycles of specifi-
cation, design, development, and testing re-
duce tolerance toward inefficient tools. Poten-
tial adopters should keep this in mind.The continuous stream of knowledge from
the collaboration with stakeholders is a main

factor guiding the development process. We be-

lieve these rapid, direct feedback loops explain

most of the increase in employee motivation

and enthusiasm, particularly in R&D. In this

respect, the IETs functioned as lightweight yet

effective decision-making tools. Rapid feedback

on developed code, appropriate metrics, and ef-
fective decision making help reduce uncertainty
and thus increase developer motivation.
CompNN has embraced user involvement, as-
suming itÕs 
akey source of innovation.
8The positive experiences reported by stake-
holders stemmed mainly from a feeling of being

listened to and able to affect the development.
Evo is a sophisticated process, highly de-pendent on diligent fulfillment of the specified

roles and activities. This sophistication is also
EvoÕs AchillesÕ heel. Evo is very vulnerable to

irregularities. This process fragility increases
with the frequency of iterations, which put
higher demands on the timeliness of role ful-
fillment and activities. Unresponsive stake-
holders expose this fragility. Our observations

from the ProdNN 10.0 release demonstrate

this. CompNNÕs experiences with weekly iter-

ations showed this schedule to be too de-
manding. An adopting organization must take
multiple factors into account when determin-

ing the frequency. Evo strongly recommends

iterations consuming less than 5 percent of the
total project funding.1CompNNÕs projects
used between 10 and 20 iterations, each con-suming 5Ð10 percent of the total project fund-ing. Even this is too frequent, as the experi-
ence from the 9.0 and 10.0 releases showed.

CompNN plans to experiment with iterations
spanning two weeks instead of one in the com-
ing release, hoping to contain fragility and
leave more time for development by reducing

the coordination overhead. Potential adopters of this process must alsoconsider their available resources for managing
stakeholder involvement when determining the
iteration frequency. Additionally, if the risk of

missing stakeholdersÕ real concerns is consid-
ered low or moderate, companies might want to
start with longer iterations and then shorten
them to train the organization for Evo. If the
risk is considered high, they can use more fre-

quent iterations but then with a strong attention
to effective stakeholder management. Success is
important not least because the consequences of
abandoning this highly motivating way of
working can be devastating.Evo certainly isnÕt a process for the

faint of heart. As weÕve seen, imple-

menting and maintaining the organi-zational and technical capability to support
weekly iterations is expensive and requires a
high degree of discipline at many organiza-
tional levels. Roles other than those weÕve
studied might have been affected, thus consti-
tuting additional costs to adopting Evo. Orga-
nizational changes take time and effort. Dur-
ing the two years of our study, CompNN

implemented and matured a new developmentAbout the AuthorsTor Erlend F¾griis a researcher on software process improvement and software archi-tecture at S
INTEFICT, a research division of NorwayÕs largest independent research institution.
He has an MSc in computing science from the University of Glasgow. Contact him at S
INTEFICT,
No-7465 Trondheim, Norway; tor.e.fegri@sintef.no.
Geir Kjetil Hanssenis a researcher on software process improvement and methodolo-gies at SINTEFICT, a research division of NorwayÕs largest independent research institution. He
has an MSc in informatics from the University of Trondheim. Contact him at S
INTEFICT, No-7465
Trondheim, Norway; geir.k.hanssen@sintef.no.
 104IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
process. However, a company should con-
sciously and regularly consider whether itÕs

necessary to adapt their development pro-
cesses. CompNN has done this by introducing
the green week in the 9.0 release and by ex-
tending the iterations to two weeks in the com-
ing release. Other adaptations are likely in fu-
ture releases. 
As Frederick Brooks so eloquently put it,there are no silver bullets in software engineer-
ing.7Nevertheless, improvement through evo-lution is undeniably a powerful practice.AcknowledgmentsThe Research Council of Norway sponsored thisstudy through the SPIKEresearch program under grant156701/220. We thank CompNN for their kind co-

operation.References1.T. Gilb, 
Competitive Engineering: A Handbook for Sys-tems Engineering, Requirements Engineering, and Soft-ware Engineering using Planguage, Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, 2005.2.T.Gilb, ÒEvolutionary Development,Ó 
ACM SoftwareEng. Notes, Apr. 1981, p. 17.
3.P. Abrahamsson et al., ÒAgile Software Development
MethodsÑReview and Analysis,Ó VTT Publications,no. 478, VTT Electronics, 2002.4.B.W. Boehm, ÒA Spiral Model of Software Develop-
ment and Enhancement,Ó Computer, vol. 21, no. 5,1988, pp. 61Ð72.5.B. Boehm, ÒGet Ready for Agile Methods, with Care,Ó
Computer, vol. 35, no. 1, 2002, pp. 64Ð69.6W.W. Royce, ÒManaging the Development of Large
Software Systems,Ó Proc. IEEE Westcon
, 1970;reprinted in Proc. 9th IntÕl Conf. Software Eng. (ICSE87), IEEE Press, 1987, pp. 328Ð338.7.F.P. Brooks, ÒNo Silver Bullet: Essence and Accidents of
Software Engineering,Ó Computer, vol. 20, no. 4, 1987,pp. 10Ð19.8.E. Carmel and S. Becker, ÒA Process Model for Pack-
aged Software Development,Ó IEEE Trans. Eng. Man-
agement, vol. 42, no. 1, 1995, pp. 50Ð61.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
TOPICS OF INTEREST:
¥Practical tools and methods for detecting or preventing security-relevant defects¥Practical approaches to incorporating security
as part of the software development process
¥Attacks and vulnerabilitiesÑcommon ways that
security fails in modern industrial software
¥The economic motivation for creating secure
softwareFor author guidelinesand submission details, contact the magazine assistant at software@computer.org 
or go to www.computer.org/software/author.htm. Specify that you are submitting for the ÒSecurity for the

Rest of UsÓ special issue. A detailed callis at www.computer.org/software/cfp.htm.
CALL FOR ARTICLES
Security for the Rest of Us:
An Industry Perspective on the Challenge of Secure SoftwareGUESTEDITORS:
¥Konstantin Beznosov,
University of BritishColumbia; beznosov@ece.ubc.ca¥Brian Chess,Fortify Software; brian@
fortifysoftware.com
IEEEWWW.COMPUTER
.ORG/SOFTWARE
The public need for good software security becomes
more acute every day. Typical activities such as pur-

chasing products and services, conducting business,

and holding elections increasingly depend on secure
software. While security was once a specialty of interest
to only a small number of developers, itÕs now critical for

almost all software developers, project managers, and
decision makers. The worldwide software industry in-

cludes thousands of vendors, from massive enterprises

to one-person shops, and the industry as a whole has to

face the software security challenge.PUBLICATION
: January/February 2008
SUBMISSION DEADLINE: 1 July 2007Security for the Rest of Us:
An Industry Perspective on the Challenge of Secure Software