 120IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEIrecently reviewed yet another book in the
somehow burgeoning series on Extreme

Programming. (Why does a lean and mean
methodology call for so many books to
describe it?) But this one was completely
different.The book is Pete McBreenÕs
Questioning Extreme Program-
ming(Addison-Wesley, 2003). And
question he does. This is not just
another me-too, oh-how-great-it-is
book; it genuinely questions the
wisdom of using XP on any of
your software projects.What a great concept! IÕd likethat concept to broaden into a

software engineering way of life. It
is high time that we in the software
field questioned some of its old wivesÕ and
husbandsÕ tales. That we question the hype
spewing from the hype purveyors, especially

vendors. That we question the advocacy spew-
ing from all too many computer science re-

searchers, who seem to feel that research pa-

pers should Òconceive of a concept, advocate
the concept, and scold practitioners who re-
fuse to use the concept.Ó
Imagine the outcome of such questioning.We could have books with titles such as
Questioning Structured ProgrammingQuestioning CASE Tools
Questioning Object OrientationQuestioning Web Services
Questioning Formal MethodsAnd we could engage in honest-to-goodness,objective debates about the merits of all those
new concepts that keeping flowing down the

software engineering pipeline. The result could
be something like what IÕm trying to achieve in

this department. No new concept could be se-

riously entertained without passing through a
ÒquestioningÓ sieve.One size does not fit allJust to flesh out this idea, let me describe
how McBreen instantiates it in his book. He
begins with a 55-page chapter that defines XP
and talks in general about his outlook on
methodologies. (I donÕt intend to replicate that

definition here. If you donÕt know what XP is

about, read the first and best book on the sub-
ject, Kent BeckÕs 
Extreme Programming Ex-plained[Addison-Wesley, 1999]).
It is worth spending a minute on howMcBreen sees methodologies, because that col-
ors his whole view of XP. He believes that Òall

processes are situational,Ó that seeking one-
size-fits-all methodologies is doomed to failure,loyal oppositionQuestioning the SoftwareEngineering 
UnquestionablesRobert L. Glass
Editor: Robert L. Glass Computing Trends 
rglass@indiana.eduÉ in which I oppose the software fieldÕs tendency to look at all new concepts uncritically
Continued on p. 119 May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
119LOYAL OPPOSITION
and that Òsoftware is not a mechanicalprocess and ... you will never be able to
adopt a process without doing some
adapting to fit ... your circumstances
and team.Ó Given that position, of

course, no methodologyÑincluding
XPÑwill completely pass his appropri-
ateness test.Furthermore, he points out that noone has performed comparative studies
of XP use on reasonable-sized projects.
He then notes wryly that no other

methodologies have been subjected to
such evaluative research, either. (Com-

puting researchers, are you listening?)
Given all that, until researchers change
their ways, all we have to judge your
typical methodologyÑincluding XPÑ
is the hopefully objective views of
those who do that questioning I men-
tioned earlier.
So, given that the field of questioning
methodologies in general and XP in par-

ticular is dismal, what 
canbe said aboutXP? McBreen uses a nice approach. He

talks about each element of XP (I 
like tocall that ÒdisaggregatingÓ the method-ology), explains why XP advocates laud
that element, and then presents a collec-
tion of Òopen questionsÓ about those

advocacy claims. For example, regard-
ing the XP requirement for on-site cus-
tomer presence during project develop-
ment, one open question is, ÒIs it easy to

find a customer who speaks for all the

voices of the customer/user organiza-

tion?Ó Another is, ÒCan such a cus-
tomer really work at a sustainable pace
during an XP project?Ó (That is, will
such a customer separated from his or
her peers have enough to do during
project development?)More than just criticismBut this is not just an anti-XP book.In each chapter, McBreen answers the

question ÒWhat can other approaches
learn from XP?Ó He might be ques-

tioning XPÕs value, but he is also ques-

tioning the alternativesÕ value and
looking for ways to meld the best of all
approaches.Later, McBreen gets even more spe-
cific. For each XP concept, he also poses
such questions as ÒWhy now?Ó (that is,
why did this concept arise at this point

in the history of software engineering?)
and ÒWhat does this mean for XP?Ó
(how does this concept blend with the
other parts of the methodology?).The bottom line
Given all of that, you might be in-terested in the bottom line McBreen

gives in his questioning of XP. He sees

the approach as having only a Òvery
narrow applicability.Ó Specifically, he

sees XP as best suited for projects with

a narrow range of team sizes, from

four to 12 programmers. It is totally
unsuited forLife- or safety-critical embedded
systemsLarger team sizes
Tiny teams (with one to two pro-

grammers on a month-long project)McBreen also poses a set of ques-tions to ask if you are thinking of using
XP in your organization: Is my current approach broken?
Is my organization ready for XP?
Do my developers want to use it?
Are our projects suitable (given the
earlier discussion)?Only a set of ÒyesÓ answers, he says,should cause you to consider XP.
Iwould love to see a similar analysis
of some of the other new software
engineering ideas that come along.For example, I would love to know for
which projects object orientation works
best and for which it is inappropriate. (I
refuse to believe that OO, or any other
methodology, is truly universal. And if

so, then precisely when should we use
OOÑor the structured approaches, or
formal methods, or Web ServicesÑand

when shouldnÕt we?)
We still donÕt understand many
things about the software engineering
fieldÑthings that we cannot under-
stand until we take a more questioning

look at what we are doing. I laud Pete
McBreen for questioning the unques-
tionables about XP. I hope his is only

the first in a long succession of ÒQues-
tioningÓ books. After all, that would
seem a more appropriate series to pur-

sue than another IdiotÕs or Dummies

collection!Robert L. Glass
is editor emeritus of ElsevierÕs 
Journalof Systems and Software
, the publisher and editor of the Soft-ware Practitionernewsletter, and a certified Òpremier curmud-
geon of software practice.Ó Contact him at rglass@indiana.edu;
heÕd be pleased to hear from you.Copyright and reprint permission:Copyright © 2003 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics En-gineers, Inc. All rights reserved. Abstracting is permitted with credit to the source. Libraries are permitted
to photocopy beyond the limits of US copyright law for private use of patrons those post-1977 articles
that carry a code at the bottom of the first page, provided the per-copy fee indicated in the code is paid

through the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Dr., Danvers, MA 01923. For copying, reprint,

or republication permission, write to Copyright and Permissions Dept., IEEEPublications Admin., 445

Hoes Ln., Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331.
Circulation:IEEE Software(ISSN 0740-7459) is published bimonthly by the IEEE Computer Society. IEEE
headquarters: Three Park Ave., 17th Floor, New York, NY 10016-5997. IEEE Computer Society Publica-

tions Office: 10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., PO Box 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314; (714) 821-8380; fax

(714) 821-4010. IEEE Computer Society headquarters: 1730 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC

20036-1903. Subscription rates: IEEE Computer Society members get the lowest rates and choice of media

optionÑ$43/34/56 US print/electronic/combination; go to http://computer.org/subscribe to order and for

more information on other subscription prices. Back issues: $10 for members, $20 for nonmembers (plus

shipping and handling). This magazine is available on microfiche.Postmaster:Send undelivered copies and address changes to Circulation Dept., IEEE Software, POBox 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314. Periodicals Postage Paid at New York, NY, and at addi-

tional mailing offices. Canadian GST #125634188. Canada Post Publications Mail Product (Cana-
dian Distribution) Sales Agreement Number 0487805. Printed in the USA.Continued from p. 120
 Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
