 loyal opposition
Editor: Robert L. Glass 
˜ Computing Trends 
˜ rlglass@acm.org
96
 IEEE SOFTWARE   
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/09/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
It™s time for me to say goodbye to the readers 
of this column.
I™ve been pleased and proud to have writ
-ten the Loyal Opposition column in 
IEEE 
Software
 for the last 11 years, but the time 
has come for me to park my word processor 
and make way for younger blood!
My Legacy
There are some things I™d like you to remember 
me by, things that are about my essence and the 
lingering essence of this column.
I™m both an academic and a 
practitioner. I believe that™s an 
important, balanced viewpoint 
that™s all too rare in our ˜eld. I 
like to tell people, ﬁMy head is 
in the academic world of com
-puting and software, but my 
heart is in its practice.ﬂ I spent a 
lot of happy years building soft
-ware (applications and tools) 
for several American aerospace companies, and 
I have a deep-seated belief in practitioners and 
their ability to build good software. I also spent 
some years in academeŠas a professor in the pi
-oneering software engineering graduate program 
at Seattle University, in the Software Engineer
-ing Institute™s education program, and in my cur
-rent position as an honorary visiting professor at 
Grif˜th University in Brisbane, Australia. I think 
I understand both academe and practice.
I™m a contrarian. I feel strongly that our ˜eld 
hasn™t been as successful as it should in pursu
-ing promising directions. That goes for both aca
-demic research (the failure of researchers to eval
-uate their ˜ndings in a practical setting before 
advocating them is scandalous) and practitioners 
(there™s no valid excuse for not holding retrospec
-tives in which project successes and failures are 
identi˜ed and posted as lessons learned for the 
future). And I haven™t hesitated to speak out with 
my contrarian, sometimes-outrageous opinions. 
I don™t believe in the software crisis. There 
are project failures, of course, but they are far 
fewer than those who write about them tend to 
imply. This is the Computing Era, an era that 
wouldn™t be possible were it not for the success
-ful software that enables it. Most software proj
-ects, I deeply believe, are mostly successful. Data 
from such companies as the Standish Group that 
suggests otherwise should be seriously examined 
(and has been, as many academic researchers are 
beginning to question its validity).
I do believe in a software estimation crisis. I 
think it™s vital to separate software projects that 
fail to meet estimation targets from those that 
fail to meet functionality targets. Estimation is a 
deeply ˚awed activity in the software ˜eld:
 ˜Estimates are typically provided by the 
wrong people
. Several research studies have 
shown that most estimates are provided by 
upper management or marketing, the last 
people who have insight into what it will 
take to build a software product.
 ˜Estimates are typically provided at the 
wrong time
. The software life cycle dictates 
that estimates should be provided at the be
-ginning of the life cycle, before the require
-ments analysis processŠthat is, before the 
problem is clearly understood! Furthermore, 
there™s usually no provision later in the life 
cycle for correcting such obviously ˚awed 
estimates.
 ˜There™s little agreement on how estimates 
Robert L. Glass
Goodbye!
Continued on p. 95
  November/December 2009   
IEEE SOFTWARE
 95
should be provided
. Approaches 
range from algorithmic (based on 
data from past projects) to intui-
tive (based on educated, experienced 

analysis). Most estimation tutorials 

suggest using both approaches.
I™m grateful to the researchers and 
practitioners who continue to pursue 

practical solutions to this software esti-
mation crisis.
Choosing Sides
We engage in too many battles involving 
what I call ﬁlocal loyalties.ﬂ We choose 
up sides between Microsoft and open 
source, between IBM and the old ﬁSeven 

Dwarfsﬂ (you won™t understand that one 

unless you™re nearly as old as I am!), be-
tween agile and disciplined approaches, 
between object and functional (and per-

haps even structured) approaches, be-

tween favorite operating systems and 
text editors and other tools of the trade, 
between contemporary wisdom and 

older wisdom. I believe there™s no need 
for choosing sides. There™s wisdom to 
be gained from agile, open, contempo-

rary believers as well as from disciplined, 

closed, and traditional believers. And it 
would be a shame to try to rely on only 
one side of these loyalties without under-

standing the other (I like to think of this 

as my ﬁmake love, not warﬂ belief set).
I think we understand too little about 
computing research, even after we™ve 
been doing it for a half-dozen decades 

now. I mentioned that researchers, espe-

cially those in computer science and soft-
ware engineering, do too little evaluation 
of the concepts they advocate. There™s 

been virtually no effort to match method-
ologies to applications, with the assump-
tion resurfacing regularly that each new 

methodology addresses all the problems 

(I like to think of this as the extremely
naïve ﬁone size ˜ ts allﬂ belief set).
What will I do after my Loyal Oppo-
sition ends? Continue to publish and 
edit my newsletter, the 
Software
 Practitioner
, which is built on this same es-
sence. I™ll enjoy being a visiting professor 
Down Under. And I hope to keep hearing 

from you as a result of these columns and 
my other writings, at rlglass@acm.org.
Robert L. Glass
 is the publisher/editor of the 
Software 
Practitioner
 newsletter and a visiting professor at Grif˜ th Uni-
versity. He™s been in the software ˜ eld since its inception in the 

1950s, spending most of his time in the American aerospace 

industry but also as an academic. He has grey hair, but hopes 

you™ve found his viewpoints interesting in spite of that! Contact 

him at rlglass@acm.org.
LOYAL OPPOSITION
Continued from p. 96
IEEE Software
 (ISSN 0740-7459) is published bimonthly by the IEEE 
Computer Society. IEEE headquarters: Three Park Ave., 17th Floor, 
New York, NY 10016-5997. IEEE Computer Society Publications Of-

˜ ce: 10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., PO Box 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-

1314; +1 714 821 8380; fax +1 714 821 4010. IEEE Computer Society 

headquarters: 2001 L St., Ste. 700, Washington, DC 20036. Subscrip-

tion rates: IEEE Computer Society members get the lowest rate of 

US$52 per year, which includes printed issues plus online access to all 

issues published since 1988. Go to www.computer.org/subscribe to or-

der and for more information on other subscription prices. Back issues: 

$20 for members, $163 for nonmembers (plus shipping and handling). 
Postmaster: 
Send undelivered copies and address changes to 
IEEE 
Software
, Membership Processing Dept., IEEE Service Center, 445 
Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854-4141. Periodicals Postage Paid 
at New York, NY, and at additional mailing of˜ ces. Canadian GST 

#125634188. Canada Post Publications Mail Agreement Number 

40013885. Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to PO Box 122, 

Niagara Falls, ON L2E 6S8, Canada. Printed in the USA.
Reuse Rights and Reprint Permissions:
 Educational or personal use of 
this material is permitted without fee, provided such use: 1) is not made 
for pro˜ t; 2) includes this notice and a full citation to the original work 

on the ˜ rst page of the copy; and 3) does not imply IEEE endorsement of 

any third-party products or services. Authors and their companies are 

permitted to post their IEEE-copyrighted material on their own Web 

servers without permission, provided that the IEEE copyright notice 

and a full citation to the original work appear on the ˜ rst screen of the 

posted copy.
Permission to reprint/republish this material for commercial, advertis-
ing, or promotional purposes or for creating new collective works for 

resale or redistribution must be obtained from IEEE by writing to the 

IEEE Intellectual Property Rights Of˜ ce, 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, 

NJ 08854-4141 or pubs-permissions@ieee.org. Copyright © 2009 

IEEE. All rights reserved.
Abstracting and Library Use: 
Abstracting is permitted with credit to the 
source. Libraries are permitted to photocopy for private use of patrons, 
provided the per-copy fee indicated in the code at the bottom of the ˜ rst 

page is paid through the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood 

Drive, Danvers, MA 01923.
Learn about computing history 
and the people who shaped it.COMPUTING THENhttp://computingnow.
computer.org/
ct