 112IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 20010740-7459/01/$10.00 © 2001 IEEEAh, Extreme Programming!It began as a kind of software coun-
terculture collection of ideas. The sub-
title of Kent BeckÕs innovative book

Extreme Programming ExplainedisEmbrace Change, and Erich GammaÕs
foreword to the book says Òthere
is no doubt XP challenges some

traditional big M [methodologi-
cal] approaches.ÓBut now, at least in some cir-
cles, XP is becoming the ÒinÓ
way to develop software. It has
evolved into a near religion, com-
plete with advocates and even
zealots, and with its own kind of
(at least little) M approaches.It makes you wonder what theLoyal Opposition side of this issue should
be. Is it pro-XP, because Beck essentially saw

it as a radical new approach? Or is it anti-

XP, because its advocates are pushing it into

(their view of) the software mainstream?IÕll do here what I think is the right thing
to do with any methodologyÑdisaggregate it
and examine its constituent elements in isola-
tion. (Undoubtedly, XP should be considered

a methodologyÑBeck, in the second sentence
of his bookÕs preface, calls it a Òlightweight

methodology.Ó) That approach also eases its

way around the dilemma of what the proper

Loyal Opposition position should be. There
might or might not be an appropriate posi-
tion on XP as a whole, but there certainly are

appropriate positions to take on its elements.
On the basis on my reading of BeckÕs
book, XP consists of
pair programming (ongoing shared code

reviews),unit testing (all the time),refactoring (ongoing design),relying on metaphors (with ongoing ar-
chitectural refinement),continuous integration (perhaps even sev-
eral times a day),short bursts of planning (measured in
minutes and hours), andan emphasis on simplicity.
(How did these elements get chosen? Beck
says he took all the best practices he knew
and Òturned the knob up to 10 to see what
happened.Ó)I see good news and bad news in that col-lection. First, letÕs look at É
The bad newsPair programming: It takes a certain kindof programmer to want to work in harness
with another. Many of us prefer to work for

bursts of creative time in isolation, getting

back together with our team when we have

pieces of information to share and decisions

to make. I cannot imagine holding ongoing
conversations with a pairmate when I am
operating in creative mode. I cannot imagine
that many programmers I know would want
to operate that way, either.
loyal oppositionExtreme Programming:The Good, the Bad, and
the Bottom LineRobert L. Glass
Editor: Robert L. Glass Computing Trends 
rglass@indiana.eduContinued on p. 111 November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
111LOYAL OPPOSITION
Refactoring: This practice is good,at least as Martin Fowler presents it

in his groundbreaking book Refac-toring: Improving the Design of Ex-
isting Code. But when refactoring
comes to mean ongoing design at de-
velopment time, as I interpret Beck to

define it, something has gone wrong
with the idea. Suddenly it has be-
come an excuse for putting off design
until the last minute, until coding
time. That might be okay for tiny
projects (Beck says XP is for small to

medium-sized projects), but itÕs a dis-

aster in the making for larger ones.Short bursts of planning: Thisgoes hand-in-hand with BeckÕs use of

refactoring. Clearly, he views plan-

ning as something you can do on the
fly. That, too, is a recipe for disaster

on projects of any significance.
BeckÕs software experience and mine

must be very different. I, too, am
troubled by the Òanalysis paralysisÓ
that sometimes develops on software
projects. But a certain amount of that

analysisÑplanningÑis necessary on
any project I have worked on since
computer memory grew beyond 4K
words (allowing the tackling of truly
significant real-world problems)!On the other hand, thereÕs É
The good newsUnit testing: Few, other than for-
mal-method and fault tolerance
zealots, will argue against unit test-
ing. It might well be the most agreed-

upon software best practice of all

time. Unit testing Òall the timeÓ
might be a bit extreme, but this

might well be one of those Òif a little

is good, then a lot is betterÓ ideas.Relying on metaphors: Onceagain, itÕs hard to argue with this

concept. We humans tend to think

best when we can relate a problem at

hand to one weÕve solved in the past.
Beck ties the idea into Òongoing ar-
chitectural refinement.Ó Architecture

and refinement are good. The only
troubling aspect of this element is the

notion of making that an ongoing ac-
tivity. If that means encouraging ar-

chitectural improvement as a projectevolves, thatÕs a good thing. To the
extent it means deferring architecture

in the same ways that we are to defer

design and planning, itÕs bad.
Continuous integration: I see thiselement as being based on Mi-
crosoftÕs (and othersÕ) Òdaily build.Ó

Although traditional software engi-
neering has not completely embraced
this idea, continuous integration is
certainly an excellent way to ward
off Òbig bangÓ catastrophes.An emphasis on simplicity: Every-one supports this. Who was it who
said a problemÕs solution should be

as simple as possible, but never sim-
pler? Was it OccamÕs Razor that im-

plied the simplest solution was the

best? Too much software means fat-

ware; too much software means
clumsy design and coding; too much
software means a tangled web.More good newsWith all those goods and bads on
the table, I have some other things I
want to say about Extreme Program-
ming. It is extremely human-focused,
in ways the rest of the software field
would do well to emulate.
It is programmer focused:The 40-hour workweek is an ex-
pected practice, and overtime is
discouraged as being counterpro-
ductive.The programmer may choose one
of the prime factors of project

planningÑcost, time, quality, and

scopeÑafter the customer has
chosen the other three. (This is by

far my favorite part of Extreme
Programming!)It is customer focused:
The customer is expected to be on
the software team.Listening to the customer is one of

the Òfour basic activitiesÓ (the others
are coding, testing, and designing).The customer gets to pick three of

the four prime factors.
So whatÕs my bottom line? Ex-

treme Programming is a fascinat-
ing collection of elements, some
good and some bad. Many elements
are inappropriate for all but the tini-

est projects, so there is little excuse

for seeing this as a mainstream
methodology (zealots on almost any
subject are usually wrong, in my
view). But some elements could scale

up in truly important ways.
IÕm curious about your bottom
line on the matter. 
Robert L. Glass
is the editor of ElsevierÕs 
Journal ofSystems and Software
and the publisher and editor of theSoft-ware Practitionernewsletter. Contact him at rglass@indiana.edu;
heÕd be pleased to hear from you.Continued from p. 112
Copyright and reprint permission:Copyright © 2001 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-neers, Inc. All rights reserved. Abstracting is permitted with credit to the source. Libraries are permitted to
photocopy beyond the limits of US copyright law for private use of patrons those post-1977 articles that
carry a code at the bottom of the first page, provided the per-copy fee indicated in the code is paid through

the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Dr., Danvers, MA 01923. For copying, reprint, or repub-

lication permission, write to Copyright and Permissions Dept., IEEEPublications Admin., 445 Hoes Ln.,

Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331.
Circulation:IEEE Software(ISSN 0740-7459) is published bimonthly by the IEEE Computer Society. IEEE
headquarters: Three Park Ave., 17th Floor, New York, NY 10016-5997. IEEE Computer Society Publications

Office: 10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., PO Box 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314; (714) 821-8380; fax (714)

821-4010. IEEE Computer Society headquarters: 1730 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20036-

1903. Subscription rates: IEEE Computer Society members get the lowest rates and choice of media optionÑ

$42/34/55 US print/electronic/combination; go to http://computer.org/subscribe to order and for more infor-

mation on other subscription prices. Back issues: $10 for members, $20 for nonmembers. This magazine is
available on microfiche.Postmaster:Send undelivered copies and address changes to Circulation Dept., IEEE Software, POBox 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314. Periodicals Postage Paid at New York, NY, and at addi-

tional mailing offices. Canadian GST #125634188. Canada Post Publications Mail Product (Cana-
dian Distribution) Sales Agreement Number 0487805. Printed in the USA. Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
