 92 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY
 0740-7459/11/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE
Editor: 
Neil Maiden
City University London
n.a.m.maiden@city.ac.uk
REQUIREMENTS
WHAT DO YOU 
see when you look at Fig-
ure 1? Our guess is that you see a spectacu-
lar rose window, one common to many me-
dieval cathedrals. You know that the whole 

stained glass window is comprised of many 

pieces of colored glass, each grouped within 
much smaller constructs often called leaded 
lights. Daylight passes through each of these 

lights to form its own small pattern, some-

times ˜ gurative, sometimes abstract. What is 
seldom immediately appreciated is the trac-
ery of stone that holds each of these sources 

of lightŠsub-elements of the whole window 
designŠin place and in a particular posi-
tion. It™s this supporting tracery that facili-

tates the complex overall design and imag-

ery. The tracery is an integral part of the 
complete window and is perforce the ˜ rst 
part of the window that architects design 

and put in place.
Requirements resemble these individual 
glass lights. While they might have some sig-
ni˜ cance in isolation, it™s through their in-

terrelated combinations of meaning that we 
gain a comprehensive picture of what a soft-
ware system should do. Not only do we pay 

little attention to crafting any essential sup-

porting structure in software engineering, 
we don™t even bother to name it.
Tracery and Traceability
Tracery is a standard architectural term de-
scribing the stonework structure that sup-
ports the glass lights in a Gothic window.
1 Used metaphorically, the term is associated 

with something delicate, dif˜ cult to con-
struct, and easily broken. Requirements ˜ t 

this description quite nicely, as they can be 

challenging to determine, open to multiple 
interpretations, and subject to changes once 
speci˜ ed. Yet, requirements are often woven 

together without thought to any supporting 

tracery. This omission is particularly relevant 
in the context of software engineering be-
cause these requirements should inform the 

development of all the consequent artifacts 
that will eventually realize the requirements 
in a working system. Therefore, to provide 

for ongoing support as requirements become 

implemented and evolve, the associated trac-
ery must interweave myriad additional arti-
fact types.
Traceability
, a term common in software 
engineering, isn™t tracery. Traceability ex-
presses the potential to create and follow 
Requirements Tracery
Olly Gotel and Stephen Morris
FIGURE 1. 
Looking up in the south transept of 
the Cathédrale Notre-Dame de Laon, France. The 

tracery of stone holds together individual leaded 

lights of colored glass to form the overall design 

of a Gothic rose window. (Photo courtesy of John 

Ferro Sims.)
  SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2011
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 93links between pairs of development 
artifacts to support analytical or de
-velopment tasks. While a traceabil
-ity information model or some similar 
speci˜cation of permissible links be
-tween artifact types can prede˜ne the 
intended types of trace to establish 
and use, the overall tracery obtained 
in practice is rarely designed or scru
-tinized. The sum total of the actual 
traces created within a project provides 
the scaffolding for supporting many 
diverse engineering activities. They de
-serve far more attention.
Beyond the Matrix
A widely used method to examine 
traces in practice is to construct a trace
-ability matrix that shows how artifacts 
of one type link to artifacts of another 
type, with the semantics of this link of
-ten quali˜ed in some way. For instance, 
the matrix in Figure 2a reveals which 
requirements depend upon which oth
-ers, while the matrix in Figure 2b re
-veals which requirements are satis˜ed 
by which elements of the design. While 
they play a valuable role in software en
-gineering, such matrices only provide 
for very overt and somewhat partial 
views of tracery.
The view of the tracery in Figure 2a 
is overt because it™s problematic to rec
-ognize the overall requirements struc
-ture; it™s like looking at a rose window 
and seeing little more than stone ribs. 
The tracery of Figure 2b is partial be
-cause such matrices must be placed 
in series to examine the full trace of 
any one requirement through all life-
 cycle phases of a software system™s de
-velopment. Moreover, as the number 
of artifacts and links increases, indi
-vidual matrices become unwieldy to 
create, maintain, and use, let alone to 
aggregate.
The traceability community has 
long recognized the need for improved 
visualizations to render traces visible 
and support traceability-enabled tasks. 
However, a cursory look at any re
-quirements management tool will show 
the continued dominance of the matrix, 
perhaps augmented by a graphic or hi
-erarchical listing of salient dependen
-cies between artifacts. We suggest that 
a major barrier to advancement with 
visualization in this area has been the 
uncertainty surrounding the nature of 
the hidden tracery structure that we™ve 
been striving to render visible in new 
ways. This limitation is compounded 
by an equally poor understanding of 
the intended end uses for such visual 
representations.
Tracery: A Pattern of Traces
When practitioners engineer require
-ments and their resulting software sys
-tems, they™re creatingŠalongside and 
within all other important development 
artifactsŠa web of interconnections 
that we wish to call requirements trac
-ery. Revealing and understanding the 
pattern of this tracery has proven criti
-cal in many other ˜elds where tracing 
is fundamental (for example, ichnology 
and epidemiology), while some even ex
-plicitly design the pattern (for example, 
metrology). We™ve written about the 
practices of other tracing disciplines 
elsewhere.
2Some kind of semantic building 
blocks make up this requirements trac
-ery but their exact and full arrange
-ment is completely unknown. It™s also 
unknown whether common patterns 
occur in such arrangements, something 
equivalent to the con˜gurations of 
stonework in rose windows. Our best 
guess at the moment is that the pat
-tern is composed of the multiple tracks 
that individual requirements leave as 
they become implemented. Some re
-quirements split, some combine, some 
halt prematurely, and some suddenly 
appear or reappear for no discernable 
reason.
Our appeal through this column 
consists of four ideas. First, if we™re 
 REQUIREMENTS
(a)(b)Req ID1Req ID2Req ID3Req ID4Req ID5DE ID1DE ID2DE ID3DE ID 4Req ID1Req ID1Req ID2Req ID2Req ID3Req ID3Req ID4Req ID4Req ID5Req ID5XXXXXXXXXFIGURE 2. 
Simple example of traceability matrices: (a) shows which requirements depend 
upon which othersŠthat is, Req ID3 depends upon Req ID1Šand (b) shows which design 
elements satisfy which requirementsŠthat is, Req ID3 is satis˜ed by DE ID2.
 94 IEEE SOFTWARE
 // WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
REQUIREMENTS
going to start paying attention to im
-proving and exploiting the structure 
that supports our requirements and 
other development artifacts in software 
engineering, let™s start by naming this 
structure. 
Requirements tracery 
is our 
proposal.
Second, let™s begin to render re
-quirements tracery visible and exam
-ine its pattern across different types 
of projects and contexts. As an artistic 
by-product of these efforts, the trace
-ability community could even curate a 
gallery of our discipline™s unique ﬁrose 
windows.ﬂ
Third, let™s learn about the impact of 
various tracery patterns on the volatil
-ity and viability of managing require
-ments and on the support of other im
-portant traceability-enabled tasks.
Ultimately, let™s use the insight 
gained to either inform the design of a 
requisite requirements tracery as an in
-tegral part of the software engineering 
process or help guide the recovery of 
the traces on demand later.
If our requirements tracery is cre
-ated well, it will be an engineered 
structure, purposefully crafted 
and exposable as needed. Its presence 
in end products will be as impercep
-tible to end users as the stonework to 
viewers of rose windowsŠin the pro
-cess, perhaps our software systems will 
acquire some of the windows™ splendor 
and longevity.
References
 1.
 H. Chisholm, 
The Encyclopaedia Britannica: 
A Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, Literature and 
General Information
, 11th ed., vol. 27, 1911, 
pp. 115Œ116.
 2.
 O.C.Z. Gotel and S.J. Morris, ﬁOut of the 
Labyrinth: Leveraging Other Disciplines for 
Requirements Traceability,ﬂ to be published 
in 
Proc. 19th IEEE Int™l Conf. Requirements 
Eng. 
(RE 11), IEEE CS Press, 2011.
OLLY GOTEL 
is an independent researcher working 
in New York City. Contact her at olly@gotel.net.
STEPHEN MORRIS 
is an honorary senior visiting 
research fellow in the Department of Computing at 
City University London. Contact him at sjm@soi.city.
ac.uk.
Selected CS articles and columns 
 are also available for free at 
 http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
IEEE Software
 (ISSN 0740-7459) is published bimonthly by the 
IEEE Computer Society. IEEE headquarters: Three Park Ave., 17th 
Floor, New York, NY 10016-5997. IEEE Computer Society Publi
-cations Of˜ce: 10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., Los Alamitos, CA 90720-
1314; +1 714 821 8380; fax +1 714 821 4010. IEEE Computer So
-ciety headquarters: 2001 L St., Ste. 700, Washington, DC 20036. 
Subscription rates: IEEE Computer Society members get the lowest 
rate of US$54 per year, which includes printed issues plus online 
access to all issues published since 1984. Go to www.computer.org/
subscribe to order and for more information on other subscription 
prices. Back issues: $20 for members, $173.33 for nonmembers 
(plus shipping and handling).
Postmaster: 
Send undelivered copies and address changes to 
IEEE 
Software
, Membership Processing Dept., IEEE Service Center, 445 
Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854-4141. Periodicals Postage Paid 
at New York, NY, and at additional mailing of˜ces. Canadian GST 
#125634188. Canada Post Publications Mail Agreement Number 
40013885. Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to PO Box 
122, Niagara Falls, ON L2E 6S8, Canada. Printed in the USA.
Reuse Rights and Reprint Permissions: 
Educational or personal use 
of this material is permitted without fee, provided such use: 1) is 
not made for pro˜t; 2) includes this notice and a full citation to the 
original work on the ˜rst page of the copy; and 3) does not imply 
IEEE endorsement of any third-party products or services. Authors 
and their companies are permitted to post the accepted version of 
IEEE-copyrighted material on their own webservers without per
-mission, provided that the IEEE copyright notice and a full citation 
to the original work appear on the ˜rst screen of the posted copy. 
An accepted manuscript is a version which has been revised by the 
author to incorporate review suggestions, but not the published 
version with copy-editing, proofreading and formatting added by 
IEEE. For more information, please go to: http://www.ieee.org/
publications_standards/publications/rights/paperversionpolicy.
html. Permission to reprint/republish this material for commercial, 
advertising, or promotional purposes or for creating new collective 
works for resale or redistribution must be obtained from IEEE by 
writing to the IEEE Intellectual Property Rights Of˜ce, 445 Hoes 
Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854-4141 or pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 
Copyright © 2011 IEEE. All rights reserved.
Abstracting and Library Use: 
Abstracting is permitted with credit 
to the source. Libraries are permitted to photocopy for private use 
of patrons, provided the per-copy fee indicated in the code at the 
bottom of the ˜rst page is paid through the Copyright Clearance 
Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923.
