 88IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/07/$20.00 © 2007 IEEEin the newsFeatures Editor: Dale Strok dstrok@computer.org
During mid-2006, the open source proj-ect PyPy (http://codespeak.net/pypy/
dist/pypy/doc/news.html) was garnering
quite a bit of attention at developersÕ
conferences. The project, which aims at
developing a fast, flexible implementa-tion of the Python language in Python, uses
sprint-driven development. In sprints, a group of
developers meet at one location and pair off for

short periods (for example, two or three days) to
develop part of a software project.she was impressed by how many people wanted

to talk to her about PyPy after her Agile 2006
and XP 2006 presentations. She says her hus-
band jokingly told her that the attention was

Òbecause youÕre a woman!ÓÒI said, ÔNo, itÕs because itÕs a really sexy
s really interesting,

because it has so many layers. ItÕs interesting

because of the global contextual view.Ó
That contextual view might be of great in-
terest to a wide range of developers and re-
searchers. PyPyÕs hybrid development approach

combines the distributed paradigm prevalent in

free and open source software (F/OSS) develop-

ment with sprints, which are usually associated
with agile development and Extreme Program-

ming. However, broader acceptance of such a

hybrid approach might also mean that the com-

munity at large will need to reconsider siloed

definitions of development methodologies.ÒI know thereÕs a formal definition of agile,
but both agile and XP are terms that have be-

come so morphedÑbecause different people
interpret them differentlyÑthat I hesitate to
call what we do anything specific like that,Ó
says Allen Gunn. Gunn is the executive direc-tor of Aspiration Tech (www.aspirationtech.

org), a San Francisco-based nonprofit agency
promoting the use of open source software in

the nonprofit community through developersÕ
sprints and ÒconvergencesÓ of wider appeal.
(Convergences are similar to conferences, but

without panels or keynote addresses.) ÒBut

our events are definitely informed by the same
set of values.ÓAgile values, nimble definitions?Others have also noted the connection be-tween agile and F/OSS methods. In the 2004
paper ÒWhen Is Free/Open Source Software

Development Faster, Better, and Cheaper

ThanSoftware Engineering?Ó (www.ics.uci.edu/
~wscacchi/Papers/New/Scacchi-BookChapter.

pdf), Walt Scacchi succinctly explained the

Òsweet spotÓ in which practitioners might best
examine the hybrid approach PyPy is taking, and

from which other F/OSS projects might benefit:F/OSSD projects are iteratively developed,incrementally released, reviewed and re-
fined by software development peers in 
an ongoing agile manner. É These meth-

ods ensure adaptation to shifting user/
developer requirements that are conveyed
through informalisms. They also ensure
acceptable levels of quality, coherence, and

security of system-wide software via con-
tinuous distributed testing and profiling.
É Agile software development practices
are therefore closely aligned to F/OSSD
practices, though it may be fairer to ob-

serve that agile software developmentSprinting toward Open Source DevelopmentGreg Gothcurrents 
Features Editor: Dale Strok dstrok@computer.org
trends, people, projects[ January/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
89CURRENTSmethods stand somewhere in themiddle ground between SE and
F/OSSD practices.reaction to her conference presentations,
perhaps the PyPy projectÕs methodology

itself shouldnÕt be the crux of the discus-

sion. In fact, she says, even members of
the PyPy team have disagreed on whether

to call the projectÕs methodology agile,

which could alarm those with more struc-

tured definitions of the term. Also, the ag-
ile community might perceive the F/OSS
community as claiming to be working ag-
ile while going against some of its core
principles such as colocated development,
, she says, the time

might have come to widen developersÕ
perceptions about methodological compat-ibilities and stumbling blocks as develop-
ment grows more global and distributed:ÒIn some sense, by its nature, [sprint-driven development is] not very agile.
When the agile community talks about 
a sprint they know exactly what they
mean, so there could be a double territo-
rial problem. Not only that weÕre using
one of their established terminologies
from one of their established processes
[for instance, scrum projects hold a 

series of monthlong iterations called
sprints], but also that more and more
companies are looking at F/OSS and the
way F/OSS is being developed. There are
great learning opportunities, but also
confusion.ÓSprints nothing new in open sourceThe PyPy teamÕs efforts to dissemi-
nate information about the project

might help alleviate the confusion

documentation the team has assembled

for its periodic EU milestone reports can
offer concrete evidence of the efficacy of
the sprint-driven approach within the
F/OSS development model. In less quan-

tifiable ways, higher visibility for the

project might also engender broader dis-

cussion of how periodic onsite sprint

sessions will evolve in a global 
economyever more accepting ofF/OSS pr
oducts.The sprint methodology in the F/OSSmodel isnÕt new with PyPy. It actually de-
rives from a similar technique done bythe Zope Corporation, which develops

an open source content management sys-
tem also based on Python. Zope chief
technology officer Jim Fulton, writing in
the February 2005 
ZopeMag(www.
zopemag.com/Issue010/Section_Articles/
article_WhyZope3.html), says that the
initial Zope XP sessions took place late in
2001 as the company began work on
Zope 3. Zope staff member Tres Seaver

had been advocating using XP methods

at Zope, and Fulton named the first short
development session a Òsprint.ÓÒIn December 2001, we announcedthe Zope 3 project to the Zope Commu-
nity as we were in the process of opening
the Zope repository to contributors out-
side of Zope Corporation,Ó Fulton
writes. ÒZope 3 provided a major op-
portunity for people to get involved in
the Zope development process. We pro-

moted the idea of sprints and held 3
Python sprints in Fredericksburg (Vir-

ginia), in January and February of 2002.
To date, there have been 28 community

Zope 3 sprints. Sprinting has turned out
to be great forinvolving people in the Zope 3 de-
velopment process,building the community, and
completing important work.The most important benefit of sprints
is allowing people to meet, get to know

each other, and collaborate in person.

This makes it much easier subsequently
to work remotely.Ó
Consultant James Shore is consid-ered a leading practitioner of agile
methodology. In fact, he won the Ag-

ile AllianceÕs 2005 Gordon Pask

Award for his contributions to the ag-

ile community. Shore, who has also

led two open source projects, concurs
with FultonÕs sentiments that, rather

than being mutually exclusive, face-
to-face development gatherings within
open source projects are incredibly
beneficial.ÒThere is just something that hap-pens when people get together in a
room that doesnÕt happen when they

work long distance,Ó Shore says. ÒOne
of the big challenges with F/OSS proj-Writers
For detailed information on submitting 
articles, write for our Editorial Guidelines 
(software@computer.org) or access 

www.computer.org/software/author.htm.
Letters to the EditorSend letters toEditor, 
IEEE Software10662 Los Vaqueros Circle
Los Alamitos, CA 90720
software@computer.org
Please provide an email address or daytimephone number with your letter.
On the Web
Access www.computer.org/software 

for information about IEEE Software.SubscribeVisit www.computer.org/subscribe. 
Subscription Change of AddressSend change-of-address requests for magazine
subscriptions to address.change@ieee.org.
Be sure to specify IEEESoftware
.Membership Change of AddressSend change-of-address requests for IEEE
and Computer Society membership to 
member.services@ieee.org.
Missing or Damaged CopiesIf you are missing an issue or you received a
damaged copy, contact help@computer.org.
Reprints of ArticlesFor price information or to order reprints,
send email to software@computer.org or

fax +1 714 821 4010.Reprint PermissionTo obtain permission to reprint an article,

contact the Intellectual Property Rights
Officeat 
copyrights@ieee.org.How to Reach UsHow to Reach Us 90IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
CURRENTSects is not the fact theyÕre F/OSSÑ
what is relevant is most F/OSS projects
have people working at long distance
and not necessarily able to give it their
full attention. ThatÕs a big challenge for

keeping everybody on the same page,
and I think sprints are a fantastic inno-
vation for making that happen.ÓHowever, Shore contends that the
PyPy project veers far enough away from
the four-point agile manifesto (http://

agilemanifesto.org) that it shouldnÕt be

called agile per se.ÒI think it would be a mistake to saythis is a combination of agile and open
source development,Ó he says. ÒI think it
has applied one of the ideas of agile de-
velopment to the very difficult problem
of distributed software development.ÓHowever, trying to divine what is or
isnÕt agile development for an F/OSS

sprint-driven project might be a matter
of several variables (such as frequency of
sprints), and applying formulaic produc-
tivity measurement might be difficult to
impossible. Part of the PyPy teamÕs phi-

losophy holds that the method they have
chosen works for them; they also
strongly caution that other project teams
should carefully consider their techno-
logical and procedural goals before be-

ginning a similar approach.PyPy success factorsThe PyPy teamÕs most recent milestone
report for the EU (http://codespeak.net/
pypy/extradoc/eu-report/D14.3_
Report_about_Milestone_Phase_2-final-
2006-08-03.pdf) mentions several success
factors that could serve as guidelines for
similar projectsÕ success. Some of these
factors are technical and some method-
ological or procedural.Technologically, for example, the
number of lines of code in PyPy has
grown consistently from about 40,000

when the project began monitoring in

2004, concurrent with EU funding, to
250,000 in July 2006. Test code has in-

creased at a corresponding rate, now to-

taling about 60,000 lines of code. Also,

the 0.9 PyPy release in June 2006
achieved a 20-fold performance im-
provement over the preceding release

through a series of static and core trans-
lation optimizations.Procedurally, the PyPy groupÕs dis-
semination strategy has melded its
steady technical progress with sprints
held in diverse areas of the world. Ac-

cording to the milestone report, both
commercial and academic groups either

participated in PyPy sprints or hosted

them. Among the pioneering collabora-
tions was a sprint hosted by the Ad-

vanced Institute of Science and Technol-

ogy in Japan, which was Òpiloting their
interest in hosting F/OSS events,Ó ac-

cording to the milestone report. The
PyPy group was also hosted by the com-
puter science department and local
F/OSS group at Palma University in
Mallorca, Spain. Commercially, compa-

nies including IBM, Hewlett-Packard,

Iona Technologies, and Canonical have

expressed interest in PyPy. Some com-

mercial entities have participated in

sprints, while others have expressed in-
terest in holding more general PyPy

workshops. The number of developers
actively following PyPy changes has also
steadily increased since the EU funding

began. As of June 2006, 50 developers
were actively following changes to the

code base, while the developer mailing

list has doubled, from 150 to 300.

plan to simplify access to PyPyÕs core

data for those interested in researching
its methodology. Such detailed empirical

data might indeed be useful for public-

sector funding organizations or com-
mercial entities laden with due-diligencemandates from shareholders or regula-
tors. However, sprints are being increas-

ingly used in far less quantifiable con-
texts, and their organizers show no sign

of slowing their sprint rollouts.
Other sprints look for the x factorÒAt our sprints, we think much
more about how to build team collab-

oration instead of how to build a spe-
cific feature,Ó Aspiration TechÕs Gunn

says. ÒTo the extent the Internet has

isolated us by enabling us to collabo-
rate via email or cell phone, the role of
the event is in some sense becoming
more central. There is less face-to-face

meeting in an email-driven world.
Conferences are becoming more ritual-

istic. It used to be you went to a trade

show to see what everybody was do-
ing. With the Internet, you already

know what everybody is doing, and
now the emphasis has shifted to the im-

portance of conversations in the hall-
way, talking about families and grab-

bing a beer. That human element is a

critical x factor in building successful
collaborations.ÓGunn says that traditional productiv-ity metrics have trouble capturing that x
factor. AspirationÕs mission isnÕt to

demonstrate to a corporation or consor-
tium that a given project is worth fund-

ing. Instead, its mission is to show non-

profit agencies how OSS can help them

advance their cause and to help the proj-
ectsÕ developers hone their technology
for a niche market that fits with the
F/OSS ethos.ÒWe donÕt apply concrete metrics
very often to our events, because for

what we do, it would be kind of arbi-

trary,Ó he says. ÒHaving been a software

engineer as long as I have, I am not at all

enamored of things like lines of code or

module counts. É We measure things in

terms of testimonials, things like devel-

opers talking about the impact our
events have had on their project.ÓGunn says AspirationÕs sprints have
included hybrid sprints such as usabil-
ity sprints that bring F/OSS developers
and human-computer interface experts
together to work on iterative design
improvements.Developers and projectmanagers interested in sprintsÕ suitabilityneed to look at manyprojects using them, to develop a sounddevelopment scaffold. January/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
91CURRENTSÒAt the usability sprints, the empha-sis is on teaching developers processes to
enhance their projectsÕ usability, and the

coding piece is almost like the punch-
line,Ó Gunn says. ÒThey focus on the
process of identifying a usability goal,
defining a test process, applying analysis
to their tool, and then get to coding.ÓThe usability sprintsÕ goal, he says, isto spend the two days addressing one
usability issue per tool, Òdriving a
process to get resolution on that one is-

sue. I would say a third to a half of those
relationships [between OSS developers
and the nonprofit customers they meet
at the sprints] prosper. The other half, I

think, [fail owing to] a combination of
things, the main mitigating factor being

everybody goes home to a very busy
world.ÓAspiration also holds strictly devel-opment-focused sprints such as a voice-
over-IP application sprint. That, Gunn

says, was Òthree days of nonstop 24/7
coding, and that was much more in the
agile model where we had target users
telling developers what they needed, we
had coders coding, and people testing
more or less in real time.ÓGunnÕs assertion that developers can
spread the word of sprintsÕ success via
testimonials is borne out by Mimi Yin,

an Open Source Applications Founda-
tion designer, in her blog postings

(http://wp.osafoundation.org/author/
mimi). After the August 2005 usability
sprint, Yin wrote,
I felt like we accomplished an
amazing amount of work in a very
short period of time and gained 
a lot of visibility into a workflow
that was foggy at best at the begin-
ning of the three days. É The

FLOSS usability sprint opened my
eyes very wide as to quite how ex-

tremely rapidly you can iterate on
design.Last lessons from PyPyOver the projectÕs life, Michael
Hudson, one of the PyPy teamÕs core

developers, has gained perspective re-
garding the benefits and challenges of
sprint-driven development within PyPy.
ÒWithout that very first sprint, itÕs
quite possible [the PyPy project] could
have been just one of those ideas that
emerged for a week on a mailing list
and then disappeared without achiev-
ing anything,Ó Hudson, a scientific col-
laborator at Heinrich Heine Univer-
sit−t, says. ÒItÕs a big, complex project,

and without sitting down in the same
room, we might never have been able
to communicate what we needed to.Ó
While Hudson asserts that sprint-driven development such as PyPyÕs is a

growing trend among F/OSS projects,
he adds that external economic factors
can play a huge role in determining
whether sprints will work. For example,

he says that PyPy probably would have
withered away without factors such as
cheap airfare and affordablelaptop
computers in the projectÕs early days,

when it was entirely self-funded.At the same time, given the size,
complexity, and financial underpin-

nings of PyPyÕs development, Hudson

mentions project aspects that present
real challenges to maintaining both the
agile paradigm and the coherence of vi-

sion surrounding a successful F/OSS
project.ÒItÕs just hard work,Ó he says. ÒIf
youÕre going to sprints every six weeks,
it does take time and attention from

other aspects of life. From time to time,

there are also differing goals among de-

velopers from different companies, and
periodic changes in priorities. There is
an EU process that allows for changing
the development plan, but itÕs pretty

heavy handed.ÓThose issues aside, Hudson says heÕs
quite happy with the PyPy experience
and would try a similar approach if he
got the chance to work on another such
project.ÒThe amount of technical progress in
PyPy has been quite amazing,Ó he says.
ÒI love to be paid to work full time on

an open source project.Ómanagers interested in sprintsÕ suitabil-
ity need to look at many projects using
them, to develop a sound development
scaffold.ÒThe uniqueness of PyPy is, weÕrebudgeted for 14 sprints every two years,Óshe says. ÒEverything is designed to in-clude the process around sprints. But
donÕt forget to look at existing examples

of sprint-driven development such as
Plone [http://plone.org] and Canonical
[www.canonical.com], which 
typicallyhold sprints two to three times a year.

There are different contexts organiza-

tion-wise, geographically, etc.
ÒWhen you look at the agile com-munity, one big subject of papers is

how to cram agile practices into
global-development logistics, and a big
question is, can you even call sprints
agile, because [they go] against some of
the core principles.ÒBut distributed development is afact, and itÕs shaping the world of soft-

ware development in terms of tools

and how we handle version control,
and itÕs growing. Look at some of the

more interesting techniques out there.
Look at contexts.Ówww.computer.org/software
Visit us onthe WebVisit us onthe Web