 88 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE
currents
Features Editor: Dale Strok 
 dstrok@computer.org
[trends,people,projectsAgile Tool Market Growing 
with the Philosophy
Greg Goth
The market for 
application life-cycle man
-agement
 (ALM) tools for agile development 
is booming. However, tool vendors and an
-alysts are far too busy jockeying for position 
to spend too long appreciating the irony of 

the matter.
The ˜rst principle of the Agile Manifesto, af
-ter all, is ﬁIndividuals and interactions over pro
-cesses and toolsﬂ (http://agilemanifesto.org). But
 Pete Behrens, owner of agile consulting ˜rm 
Trail Ridge Consulting, says he™s seen contin
-ued growth of both agile methodologies and tool 
sets since he released a seminal 2006 survey on 
the subject (www.trailridgeconsulting.com/˜les/
2006AgileToolingSurveyResults.pdf).
ﬁI think we™re a self-ful˜lling type of industry,ﬂ 
Behrens says. ﬁWe like to create things to help our
-selves be more ef˜cient. Adoption of tools is in
-creasing, the number of options has increased, and 

all the tools continue to grow in their capabilities.ﬂ
Fast Growth for Top Tools
The industry™s best-known dedicated agile-tool ven
-dors are reaching decidedly enterprise levels of ˜
-nancing and employee growth. For instance, Rally 

Software employed about 40 people in early 2007, 

according to Richard Leavitt, Rally™s vice president 

of product marketing. Currently, Rally employs 
120 people; Leavitt says the number should increase 
to 220 in the next year. The company also just re
-ceived US$17 million in venture-capital funding.
VersionOne, another of the best-known agile-
 tool vendors, is growing 25 to 30 percent per quar
-ter, according to chief executive of˜cer Robert Hol
-ler. So, although industry analysts and even some 
vendor executives themselves believe the market 
will soon enter a consolidation period, Leavitt and 
Holler both say they™re hardly waiting for one of 

the technology industry™s giants to come calling 
with checkbook in hand.
ﬁIt™s kind of tough to expect a check when 
you™re going to double or triple in sales in another 
year,ﬂ Holler says. ﬁWe see it as one heck of an op
-portunity over the next ˜ve years.ﬂ
If the Agile Manifesto places individuals over 
processes and tools, why would so much sweat 

and treasure end up in that particular spot? And 
how should the development community assess 
this new trend in trying to decide how or whether 

to adopt agile tools?
Embracing the Rebellion, Sort Of
Gartner Group analyst Matt Light says the lat
-est agile-development trends are a continuation of 
rapid-application-development (RAD) methods ˜rst 
employed in the early ™90s.
ﬁThe agile guys aren™t that fond of it when I say 
this,ﬂ Light says. ﬁThey™ll focus on the differences 
from the previous RAD approaches to develop
-ment, but what teenager ever likes being compared 
to their parent? I think it™s the next generation of 

RAD. Look at the key principles, and I think it™s 
pretty self-evident.ﬂ
Erik Gottesman, director of delivery capa
-bilities at consulting services ˜rm Sapient, says 

nomenclature differences aren™t relevant now. 
ﬁWhether you call it agile or RAD or lean, it™s 

all the same language. – Everything in the social 

technological fabric is driving people in that di
-rection. The focus now is not on ‚Is agile a good 

idea?™ but ‚How best to do it with the constraints 

we™re dealing with?™ And as that question is being 

asked more regularly, there is a recognition that 
not one size ˜ts all.ﬂ
  March/April 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 89
CU
RRE
NTS
What does seem to be affecting the en
-tire software industry, however, is the rise of 
 Web-driven architectures demanding much 
quicker release cycles. These architectures 

provide far more feedback from people far 

removed from the core development pro
-cess, whether they™re senior managers re
-sponsible for overall deadlines and budgets 

or end users who want a new feature in an 

application. These overriding trends and 
agile development go hand in glove. The 
burgeoning agile-ALM-tool landscape re
-˚ects the software market™s need to scale 
agile from small applications and teams to 
cross-enterprise architectures and back.
This process is still in ˚ux, Behrens says. 
In addition to the new dedicated agile-ALM 
tools, developers and project managers are 
using legacy ALM tools not originally mar
-keted to agile teams, old-school manual 

methods such as whiteboards and sticky 
notes, and nondedicated ALM technology 
such as Excel spreadsheets and wikis.
Productivity-suite-based tools were the 
most popular among the companies that re
-sponded to Trail Ridge™s 2006 survey. More 

than 60 percent of large development orga
-nizations (with more than 100 employed 
developers) and 50 percent of smaller orga
-nizations that use agile methodologies re
-ported using of˜ce-application-based tools 
for ALM purposes.
However, management and distributed-
development-coordination concerns are 
 exposing the weaknesses in home-brewed 

of˜ce-based solutions. Organizations us
-ing a distributed-development model are 

discovering they need something that 

scales beyond one team or even a handful 
of teams. In some cases, those companies 
are replacing existing tools with integrated 

ALM solutions such as Rally™s. Other ven
-dors are banking on customers looking for 
a project management tool that can serve 
as an overlay to their ALM tool set. In 

September 2008, for example, Borland un
-veiled its Borland Management Solutions 
(BMS) package, a three-product manage
-ment suite intended to work with agile as 
well as other iterative and even waterfall 
development models. 
ﬁThe enterprise doesn™t want to throw 
everything away and start from square 
one with no tools, nothing except the Ag
-ile Manifesto, and build from there,ﬂ says 

Matt Klassen, BMS director of product 

marketing. ﬁFor CIOs and VPs of appli
-cation development, including those at or
-ganizations that have gone agileŠsuch as 
BT, which now says it has 11,000 agilists 
in its organization of 30,000 engineersŠ

throwing everything away just doesn™t 

make sense.ﬂ
What Tool Fits?
There are more ironies in the agile-ALM 

market than the seeming discrepancy with 
the Agile Manifesto. For instance, the self-
contained ethos of small agile teams might 

seem incompatible with enterprise-level 

management requirements. However, more 
than one vendor used the same wordŠ
 visibilityŠwhen describing one of the un
-derlying drivers for their product.
ﬁWhat Rally really has done, and what 
our vision has been from the very ˜rst, 
has been to tool the entire life cycle to op
-erate at this new pace,ﬂ Leavitt says. ﬁSo 
things are different. It™s not lots of docu
-ments and sign-off. It™s lots of visibility and 
communication.ﬂ
ﬁIf you look at BMS, it™s not all agile, but 
it brings visibility to a heterogeneous set of 

tools and methodologies,ﬂ Borland™s Klas
-sen says. ﬁFor companies that are in some 

kind of transformation, this gives them the 
visibility to measure, independent of meth
-odology, across ALMs.ﬂ
How to incorporate that added visibil
-ity into development is proving to be one 

of the fault lines in the agile-ALM mar
-ket. Most organizations just beginning the 
transformation to agile will require some 
sort of management-accessible application 
that helps them measure how new develop
-ment methodologies measure up to estab
-lished practices. And some organizations, 

notably those in industries such as ˜nan
-cial services that require extensive auditing 

redundancy, will be looking for tools that 

allow extensive code traceability.
ﬁManagement concerns play a big role,ﬂ 
Sapient™s Gottesman says. ﬁIf you™re using 

agile practices on back-of˜ce systems with 

˜nancial data, a plain-Jane wiki will prob
-ably not give you the level of auditability 

required.ﬂ
Currently, there are clear delineations in 
what vendors offer and the market segment 
to which they appeal. Here are a few exam
-ples of the tools.
Full Life-Cycle Management
Exempli˜ed by industry leaders Rally and 
VersionOne, this category comprises fully 
integrated ALM tools that give develop
-ers, project managers, senior executives, 
and users visibility into the development 

process.
Leavitt says the full Rally Enter
-prise platform includes several products 

(www.rallydev.com/products/lifecycle_
 management). Rally Quality Manager han
-dles test management. Rally Product Man
-ager provides data to help plan a project™s 

business case and priorities, and it reports 
release and feature status to nondevelopers 
on the project team. The Rally Enterprise 

ALM application manages all iteration 

planning and release planning and status, 
and Rally Support Manager opens up cus
-tomer feature requests similarly to a ship
-ping company™s tracking system. Leavitt 
says this eliminates the black-box para
-digm and support-desk nightmare of not 

knowing the progress of a customer™s re
-quested modi˜cations.
VersionOne CEO Holler says the com
-pany is ﬁbuilding concentric circlesﬂ around 

the core components of agile development 

on its V1 platform (www.versionone.com/
V1Platform.asp), ˜rst tracking features 
and tasks, then evolving and capturing is
-sues and defects, then helping solve how to 

align all that activity with a development 
organization™s goals. One re˚ection of the 
company™s philosophy was its decision to 

provide its integration APIs as open source 

code so that customers can freely integrate 
popular development tools such as Bug
-zilla, Eclipse, and Visual Studio in their V1 
implementations.
The burgeoning agile-ALM-
tool landscape re˜ects 
the software market™s 
need to scale agile from 
small applications and 
teams to cross-enterprise 
architectures and back.
 90 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   www.computer.org/software
CU
RRE
NTS
VersionOne also places a premium on 
improved customer-developer feedback. 
ﬁOne thing we capture and manage is 
customer requests, and from that you can 

generate features and stories,ﬂ Holler says. 

He adds that automating that loop will 
be part of the industry™s strategic transi
-tion to ever-quicker release cycles of code 
that™s signi˜cantly affected by customer 

requests.
ﬁWe™re not in a situation where you 
wait three years for delivery anymore,ﬂ he 

says. ﬁWe want to wait a quarter for deliv
-ery and then a quarter to get the ˜xes we 

want completed. An automated solution 

provides an aggregated point of reference 

and then allows a much greater degree of 
nuance in feedback than ‚this one guy said 
this one thing.™ And it allows crowd-based 

or aggregated input into your product de
-velopment lifecycle.ﬂ
However, Behrens says the drive to make 
agile-ALM tools comprehensive enough to 

serve both developers and managers has 

hit a slight speed bump. ﬁI think every tool 
has the trap of the innovator™s dilemma, the 
sentiment that ‚We™re going to satisfy our 

largest client,™ﬂ he says. ﬁEvery product has 
that tendency towards supporting scale and 
distribution, which is also why we™re seeing 

a group of smaller ones come out.
Targeted Planning 
Applications
Exempli˜ed by the ProjectCards tool 

(www.projectcards.com), this category 
tar
 gets the agile team or project that has 
neither the time nor expertise to create an 
Excel- or wiki-based tool but that doesn™t 

want a comprehensive integrated ALM 
platform.
ﬁYou don™t want to have all your proj
-ect management team working in their 
planning software all day,ﬂ says Project
-Cards CEO Benoit Ouellet. ﬁYou want 

them to be effective, to coach the team 

into moving forward with the project. You 
want to have the planning tool be as sim
-ple as possible, to do that task as quickly 
as possible, and get it over with.
ﬁWe have a lot of customers who tell 
us they appreciate ProjectCards due to this 

simplicity. They don™t want to get bogged 

down in going to classes and learning 

curves. They don™t want to use a product 
that is too far ahead of them in their pro
-cess. Then they would have to adapt their 
process to the tool instead of making the 
tool ˚exible enough to adapt it to their 

process.ﬂ
ProjectCards™ tagline is ﬁDo you RE
-ALLY Need More?ﬂ and Ouellet says the 

four-person company is sticking with its 

minimalist approach. Although the ap
-plication also allows visibility into project 

status for developers, managers, testers, 

and customers, Ouellet says the company 
has no plans to integrate it with a wide 
range of development tools. There™s an ex
-isting plug-in for Eclipse, through which 

developers can run ProjectCards right in 
the IDE. Ouellet says the most common 
customer request for additional integra
-tion capabilities centers on test applica
-tions, and the ProjectCards team is con
-sidering those requests.
Agile 
ALM as a Consulting Component
Services ˜rm Sapient released its agile-ALM 

product, ResultSpace (www.resultspace.
 com), in December 2007 but isn™t empha
-sizing it as a discrete piece of software, 

according to Gottesman.
ﬁAs of now, we™re not really going full 
throttle with ResultSpace as a standalone 

product,ﬂ he says. ﬁIt™s a solution accelera
-tor for clients when they are engaging with 

us on projects. Maybe that will change, 
maybe not. But in terms of adoption, with 
a very few exceptions, like where we have 

a set methodology and connected tools, 
ResultSpace is used across the company. It 
comes as part of the engagement.
ﬁI think our approach is distinguish
-able from VersionOne or Rally. They have 
capable products and there is a user seg
-ment where those are the right products; 
they are product companies. They are not 

a consulting ˜rm. We™re coming at it a little 

differently. What I believe will distinguish 
ResultSpace going forward is two things. 
The ˜rst is that it is not just about the tool 

but how to apply the tool, weaving it into 

the fabric of how you do business. The 
other key differentiator is usability, and 
that™s a huge issue for the ALM market.ﬂ
Gottesman says other consulting/soft
-ware packages, such as Danube Technol
-ogies™ Scrumworks and Thoughtworks 

Mingle, will vie for position. ﬁThe market 

is still in its infancy,ﬂ he says. ﬁIt™s not a 
small pond, but not a big oneŠyet. But 
it is going to get bigger. There is a lot of 

opportunity.ﬂ
Gartner analyst Light says those ven
-dors who are the best at smoothing soft
-ware vendor and consultant relationships 

might emerge strongest in the future land
-scape of agile-ALM tools. ﬁIf you™re a ven
-dor, and you have very strong consulting 

around it, and the tool is part of it, that™s an 

important dimension,ﬂ Light says. ﬁEven if 
you are focusing on trying to be a software 
provider, customers are inexperienced with 

agile in a lot of cases. They™re still in RAD 

mode, and the next-gen stuff has not really 
been internalized.ﬂ
ALM Plug-ins
This category spans a wide range, from 
small open source charting helpers to the 
commercial fruits of veteran agilists™ ex
-periences in developing and training. One 
example of the latter is Pyxis Technolo
-gies (www.pyxis-tech.com/fr/index2.php 
[in French]). Pyxis started as a services 
company, emphasizing agile training and 

consulting. However, company founder 

and president Francois Beauregard says 
the Pyxis team saw an opening for light
-weight agile tools about two years ago 
and decided to develop some solutions. 
GreenHopper, the company™s agile proj
-ect management tool, is a plug-in for At
-lassian™s popular Jira issue-tracking soft
-ware and Microsoft™s Team Foundation 

Server (TFS).
ﬁWe know Microsoft is betting hard on 
agile, and they™re going to sell a lot of these 
Team Foundation Servers,ﬂ Beauregard 
says. ﬁAnd people will not want to buy a 
big tool that synchronizes with TFS, which 

is different. We™re not synchronizing; we™re 
Those vendors who are 
the best at smoothing 
software vendor and 
consultant relationships 
might emerge strongest 
in the future landscape 
of agile-ALM tools. 
  March/April 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 91CU
RRE
NTS
storing our data in TFS, which makes the 
user experience much better.ﬂ
Pyxis isn™t alone in targeting the Jira 
community. Adaptavist (www.adaptavist.
 com) offers plug-ins for Atlassian™s enterprise 

wiki application Con˚uence. The company 
says on its Web site, ﬁWe™re also big fans of 
Jira and Crowd and have recently started 

developing plug-ins, customisations and in
-tegrations for those products.ﬂ
Delivery Models, Other 
Players, and Market Trends
Although software as a service (SaaS) 
might be a major driver of agile develop
-ment industry-wide, agile-ALM vendors™ 

delivery models are mixed. Rally em
-phasizes its SaaS deployment, although 

it does offer an on-premise version of its 
platform.
VersionOne™s Holler says the company™s 
deployment of its platform is typically one-
third SaaS and two-thirds electronic distri
-bution and local installations. His reasons 

why customers opt for one or the other 

seem to resonate with other vendors, too.
ﬁSmall teams look at that data as part 
of their intellectual property and are kind 
of uncomfortable with that outside the 
˜rewall,ﬂ he says. ﬁOr, there might be, in 
larger organizations, either IP [intellectual 

property] issues or corporate policy against 
outside-the-˜rewall activity. On the other 
hand, where we see signi˜cant SaaS inroads 

are midmarket IT departments, which are 

becoming much more comfortable with the 
SaaS model.ﬂ
ProjectCards™ Ouellet says the com
-pany seriously weighed whether to provide 
SaaS or on-premise versions of the prod
-uct. They opted for the on-premise version 

because customers wanted their data to 

remain con˜dential and accessible to their 
teams at all times.
A plethora of tools is emerging for agile 
project management, but several vendors 
and Behrens say that consolidation and 
acquisition of top-performing agile-ALM 
technology by industry giants is highly 

likely. IBM Rational™s Jazz platform is still 

in its nascent stages; Behrens and Sapient™s 
Gottesman say Microsoft™s Visual Studio 
Team System and Team Foundation Server 

have experienced growing pains that have 
affected market acceptance. On the other 
end of the scale, Behrens says use of the 
open source tool XPlanner seems to have 
stagnated.
ﬁI see consolidation of the market,ﬂ Beh
-rens says. ﬁThe big companies are strug
-gling to develop these tools internally, so 
acquisitions are likely, and I think the best 

players for them to soak up would be a 

VersionOne or Rally. But there will always 
be a place for a small tool vendor in the ag
-ile world.ﬂ
VersionOne™s Holler compares the indus
-try transformation to agile to the boom of 

customer-relationship-management (CRM) 
applications in the ™90s. However, he says 

this transformation will last longer and de
-mand more re˚ection on how to best adopt 

the practices and tools of the new era.
ﬁCRM matured over a ˜ve- or six-year 
period, where the transformation was fun
-damentally more of an automation ques
-tion,ﬂ Holler says. ﬁThe slight difference 

with our environment is that this is not 

only an automation challenge but a process 
challenge, a fundamentally different way 
of doing business, and I see it as a 10- to 

15-year evolution, and we™re only in year 
˜ve or six. So we have another ˜ve to 10 
years ahead of us.ﬂ
The Certified Software Development Associate (CSDA) certification, the IEEE CS™s entry-level certifi
-cation, recently picked up the endorsement of two prestigious software colleges; Rose-Hulman Institute 
of Technology in Terra Haute, Indiana, and Vellore Institute of Technology in Tamil Nadu, India. Both 
schools have endorsed and are supporting the CSDA as a tool for their software engineering graduates. 
Attaining the CSDA gives entry-level software practitioners an internationally accepted credential as 
they begin their careers as software development practitioners and offers a growth path to the Certified 
Software Development (CSDP) credential.
To read more about this development, please visit: 
www.computer.org/getcertified
.CSDA Certification Endorsed 
 By Two Prestigious Universities
