 focus0740-7459/01/$10.00 © 2001 IEEENovember/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
27Through a systems engineering effort, DPSdivided the system into subsystems, each of

which was later designed by a development
team. I was brought in to help one of the

teams start its part of the project using iter-

ative development, use cases, and object-
oriented design techniques.Shortly after starting this project, I spenta week in XP Immersion I, a one-week in-

tensive training class in the techniques and
philosophy of Extreme Programming.1En-thused by XP, I talked to the DPS team

about applying some XP practices to our
work. The company had already decided to
try iterative development and OO tech-
niques, departing from the divisionÕs stan-

dard process. They were game for some-

thing different, but how different? We

decided to take the idea of incorporating
XP practices to the director of engineering.
What we were facingThe standard practice in the division wascreated in response to past and current

problems. Most of the developers had one
to three yearsÕ experience. The more senior

developers had the role of reviewing and
approving the work of the less experienced
developers. To their credit, the review team

took the formal review process very seri-

ously. They were good at it: they captured

issues and defects on the Web, prepared re-

viewers, and held crisp review meetings.
In the world of Big Design Up Front and
phase containment, these guys were good. I
could end this article right now except for

one problem: all this process added over-
head to the development of software. To de-

sign something, they needed to figure out
the design, document it in Rose, schedule a
review meeting, and distribute materials to
Launching ExtremeProgramming at a Process-
Intensive Company James Grenning, Object MentorA company thathas traditional
formal
processes
launched a
project using
many Extreme
Programming
practices. The
author covers
how XP was
proposed to
management,
how the project
seed began and
grew, and some

of the issues 
the team faced
during its first
six months.This is a story about starting a project using an adaptation of XP ina company with a large formal software development process. De-

fined Process Systems is a big company (the name is fictitious). The

division I worked with was developing safety-critical systems andwas building a new system to replace an existing legacy product. The project
was an embedded-systems application running on Windows NT and was part

of a network of machines that had to collaborate to provide services. 
reports from the field
 review. Then reviewers had to review the
materials and enter issues on the Web, have

a review meeting, document the meeting

outcome, repair the defects and then close

them on the Web, fix documents, and have

the changes reviewed again.However, all this process work was not
keeping bugs out of the product. Unrealistic
deadlines and surprises late in the project
were taking their toll. Products were deliv-

ered late. Engineers were just getting their

skills to a decent technical depth, but they

were also burning out and heading for sys-
tems engineering or management.The team struggled with how to begin thenew project. Its requirements were in prose
format and fully understood only by the per-
son who wrote them. To summarize: the existing process had a
lot of overhead, deadlines were tight, engi-

neers were running away, requirements were

partially defined, and they had to get a project
started. With all these issues, something had to

change. Did they need something extreme like
XP? I believed and hoped XP would help.Choosing your battlesThe DPS culture values up-front require-ments documents, up-front designs, reviews,
and approvals. Writing the product features

on note cards, not doing any up-front de-
sign, and jumping into coding were not go-
ing to be popular ideas. To people unfamil-

iar with XP, this sounded a lot like hacking.

How did we get by these objections?Having been introduced to XP, the group
understood what the main objections would
be as we tried to sell XP to the management
team. Like good lawyers, we prepared an-
ticipated questions along with their answers
for our presentation. We expected that the

decision makers would consider some of the
practices dangerous and unworkable at

DPS. The need for documentation was in-
grained in the culture, so we expected con-

cern over XPÕs lack of formal documenta-

tion. Can the code bethe design? Can wereally build a product without up-front de-

sign? What if there is thrashing while refac-
toring? What about design reviews? To paraphrase Kent Beck, one of XPÕs
originators, Òdo all of XP before trying to
customize it.Ó I think that is great advice,

but for this environment we would never

have gotten the okay to mark up the first in-dex card. We decided to choose our battles.
We needed to get some of the beneficial

practices into the project and not get hurt
by leaving other practices behind. We did

not omit practices that we didnÕt feel like

doing; we tried to do as many as we could.

We used the practices and their interactions

as ways to sell around the objections.We started by identifying the projectÕs
goalsÑto build a working product with re-
liable operation and timely delivery, with

enough documentation to enable effective
maintenance (no more, no less), and with
understandable source code. This was as
objectionable as motherhood and apple pie.
The standard process would identify the
same objectives.We all agreed that a reliable working
product was a critical output of the project.
This was particularly important, as this was
a safety-critical system. A tougher question
was, what was enough documentation? This
was where it got interesting. This applica-
tion was not your typical XP target applica-
tionÑit was part of a larger system that mul-
tiple groups were developing at multiple
sites. These other groups were using the
standard, waterfall-style DPS process, not
XP or short-iteration development. We had

a potential impedance mismatch between
the XP team and the rest of the project. How much documentation?Proposing no documentation would endthe conversation. We decided to keep the

conversation going and answer a question
with a question. What did we want from

our documentation? We needed
enough documentation to define the
product requirements, sustain technical

reviews, and support the systemÕs main-

tainers;clean and understandable source code;
andsome form of interface documentation,

due to the impedance mismatch be-

tween groups. 
These answers did not all align with XP out ofthe book, but they kept the conversation go-
ing. XP is not antidocumentation; it recog-
nizes that documentation has a cost and that
not creating it might be more cost-effective.
This, of course, violates conventional wisdom.28IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001The need fordocumentationwas ingrainedin the culture,so we expectedconcern overXPÕs lack of formaldocumentation. After acknowledging and addressing theprojectÕs objectives, I led the team through

the cost-of-change pitch from BeckÕs 
Ex-treme Programming Explained.1The direc-tor, the manager, and some senior technol-

ogists agreed that XP addressed many of
their current development problems. They
also thought XP right out of the book
would not work for them. What did we
want to do differently?Documentation and reviews were going
to be the big roadblocks. We heard, ÒRe-

quirements on note cards!?!Ó ÒI canÕt give a

stack of note cards to the test team.Ó ÒBob

in firmware needs the cards too.Ó ÒSomeone

will lose the cards.Ó I noticed that the com-

panyÕs ÒstandardÓ process allowed use cases

in the form described by Alistair Cock-
burn.2This is a text-based method, similarto user stories but with more details. Other

DPS groups needed to look at the use cases,
so we decided not to fight that battleÑwe

had enough lined up already. We decided to

use use cases.Another objection was ÒWe need docu-
mentation for the future generations of en-

gineers that will maintain the product we
are building. We need our senior people to

look at the design to make sure your design
will work.Ó Our answer was that a good
way to protect future software maintainers
is to provide them with clean and simple

source code, not binders full of out-of-date

paper. Maintainers always go to the source

code; it cannot lie, as documents can. XP re-

lies on the source code being simple and ex-
pressive and uses refactoring to keep it that

way.
3The source code is the most importantpart of the design. At some point, the main-

tainers will need a high-level document to
navigate the system.A follow-on objection was that what oneperson thinks is readable source code is not

to another. XP addresses this through pair

programming. If a pair works hard at mak-
ing the source readable, there is a really
good chance that a third programmer who
sees the code will find it readable, too. Plus,

with collective code ownership, anyone can
change the source code if need be.Another expected objection was that codewas not enoughÑwe needed a documenta-
tion or transition strategy for whenever a
project is put on the shelf or transferred to
another team. Ideally, the documentation
given to the maintainers describes the stateof the software at the time it was shelved or
transferred. This document can and should
be written in a way that avoids needing fre-
quent modification. As maintenance pro-
ceeds, the document will likely be neglected.
Make the document high-level enough so
that the usual maintenance changes and bug
fixes do not affect it. Let the documentation
guide the future developers to the right part
of the codeÑthen they can use the high-
quality, readable, simple source code to

work out the details. Following this strategy will not result in ahuge document. Remember, you have some

of the best detailed documentation available
in the form of automated unit testsÑwork-
ing code examples of exactly how to use
each object in the system. XP does not pro-
hibit documentation; just realize it has a cost
and make sure it is worth it. You can plan

documentation tasks into any iteration. The
advice here is to document what you have
built, not what you anticipate building.The next follow-on objection was that
weÕd never do the document at the end of

the project. My reply: So, you would rather

do a little bit at a time, and have to keep

changing and rewriting it? DoesnÕt that

sound like it would take a lot of time? It

does! So the management team must stick to

its guns and do the high-level documenta-
tion task at the end of the project. Pay for it
with less time wasted during development. ReviewsThe director did not completely buy into
documenting only at the end of the project

and hence made a final objection: ÒI still

have my concerns. What if the design is no
good? Do I have to wait until the end of the

project to find out?Ó Pair programming was

not reason enough for the management team
to give up its review process. The big prob-

lem with DPSÕs development process was that

it guaranteed that development would go
slowly. The process went something like this:

create a design, document it in Rose, sched-
ule a review meeting, distribute the materials,

have everyone review the materials, have the

review meeting, collect the issues, fix the is-
sues, maybe do another review, then finally

write some code to see if the design works.

This made sure the cost of change was high.
Because of the safety-critical nature of the 
November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
29Documentationand reviewswere going tobe the bigroadblocks. application, the management team was not
willing to give up on reviews.I proposed a more efficient way to do the
reviews: the ask-for-forgiveness (rather than

ask-for-permission) design process. We let

the development team work for a month at

a time on the system. At the end of the

month, they assembled and reviewed a de-
sign-as-built review package. This took the

review off the critical path, so the review

process did not slow down the team. We

agreed to document the significant designs
within the iteration and review them with
the review team. We gave the remaining is-

sues that the reviewers found to the next it-

eration as stories. The idea here was to

spend a small amount of time in the itera-

tion documenting the design decisions that
month. As it turned out, we really did not

have to ask for forgiveness at all.ItÕs not about XPItÕs about building better software pre-
dictably and faster. We compromised on a

number of issues, but we did have agreement
to use most of the XP practices: test-first pro-

gramming, pair programming, short itera-
tions, continuous integration, refactoring,
planning, and team membership for the cus-
tomer. Table 1 describes the XP practices we

used and how we modified them to suit our
needs. We added some process and formality:

use cases, monthly design reviews, and some
documentation. This adaptation of XP was a
significant change in how DPS developed
software, and we hoped to prove it was an
improvement. The director thought XP of-
fered a lot of promise for a better way to
work that could lead to improved quality,

faster development, better predictability, and

more on-the-job satisfaction (Òsmiles per
hourÓ). He said we were Òmaking footprints
in the sand.Ó If we could improve one devel-
opment factorÑquality, job satisfaction, pro-

ductivity, or predictabilityÑthe director

thought it might be worth doing XP. If we

could improve any two of those factors, he
thought there would be a big payoff.The problems of poor quality, delivery de-
lays, long delivery cycles, and burned-out en-

gineers plague the software industry. XP

struck a cord with our team leaders.The tech-

niques appeared to address some of the prob-

lems the team was facing, and the focus on
testing and pair programming could help itbuild a high-quality product. XPÕs iterative na-
ture could help the team determine how fast it
could go and give management the feedback it
needed. So, itÕs about getting the job done. XP

is a set of techniques that seemed promising.Projects can get stalled in the fuzzy front
end.4This is a problem, especially in water-fall projects, where you must define all the
requirements prior to starting the design
process. In XP, as soon as you have defined

a couple weeksÕ worth of user stories, devel-
opment can start. Think of how hard it is to

shave a month off the end of a project. Now

think of how easy it would be to save that

month just by starting development as soon
as you have identified a monthÕs worth of

stories. Throughout the rest of the project,
story development occurs concurrently with
story implementation. The first iterationThe team had three peopleÑa customerand two developers, including me. We started

by getting the unit test tool CppUnit set up

and integrated with our development envi-
ronment, VC++. This did not take longÑthe
tools are relatively easy to use.The projectÕs customer (our systems engi-
neer) gave us a requirements document. As
we identified a functional requirement, we

wrote it on a card. Each card named a use
case. We did not bother to elaborate the use

cases, just name them; in a few days, we had
identified 125 use cases. Picking the most im-
portant ones was relatively easy using this list.In XP, the customer chooses the most
valuable user stories and discusses them
with the programmers. We were using use

cases, a similar idea; our customer chose the
most valuable use cases and elaborated
them. For the early iterations, we decided to

ignore use case extensions (which hold the
special cases or variations) and keep the
product definition simple.
2We just assumed
there were no special cases or error cases;
because we were using XP, we believed we

could ignore the details and not be penal-
ized later. We also did not bother using use

case diagrams, because they did not add any
value to the development team. Our main
goal in the first iteration was to build a lit-

tle bit of the product, get some experience,
and build some skill and confidence.At the beginning of a project, you need tobelieve that the design can and will evolve.30IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001At the beginning
of a project, you need tobelieve that thedesign can andwill evolve. Otherwise, the desire to do up-front specifica-tion work will put the team into analysis
paralysis. Knowing that the design can evolve
sets the team free to start building the system

as soon as some functionality is identified.
Simplifying assumptions keep complexity out
of the code, at least temporarily. John Gall

wrote, ÒA complex system that works is in-
variably found to have evolved from a simple

systems that works.Ó5Thus, it really helps tomake these simplifying and scope-limiting de-
cisions in eachiteration. This lets the core fea-tures drive the design.We had a planning meeting and discussed
the features that were to be included in the
first iteration. My partner and I had OOD
experience but no real XP experience (except
for the week I spent in class). We wanted a

guide to our first iteration, so we spentabout half a day with a whiteboard lookingat design ideas. Because we were unsure of
XP, we were not sure if we could really start

coding without doing some design. We did a

little bit of design, or as we called it a Little
Design Up Front (LDUF). Ron Jeffries calls
this a Quick design session.6In our LDUF session, we found a groupof collaborating objects we thought would
meet the needs of our first stories. We

worked from hand-drawn copies, not both-

ering with a diagramming or CASE tool. We

knew things would change, and we did not
want to spend our time making it look
pretty. It gave us confidence and a vision of

where we were going.
During the iteration planning meetingand our LDUF session, we identified some of
the interfaces we needed to support the iter-November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
31Table 1Summary of XP practices used
XP practiceAdoption statusOur experience
Planning game Partially adoptedThe team practiced scope limiting, task breakdown, and task sign-up techniques. We 
used use cases rather than user stories. We wrote the use cases from an existing 
requirements document and stored them in a database. Small releases AdoptedIterations were one month long each.

Metaphor Not adoptedA metaphor had not yet evolved, and we didnÕt develop one. Instead, a high-level 
design evolved and was recorded in a small set of UML diagrams and explanatory 
text. It played the role of our metaphor.
Simple design AdoptedThe design did not have anticipatory elements. A monthly design-as-built review
let the senior people monitoring the project see the teamÕs design decisions.
Functional testingAdoptedWe developed functional tests in a custom scripting language. The tests demonstrated 
that the application logic met the customerÕs need. However, the team got behind on 
automated acceptance tests. This is not recommended.Test-first design AdoptedWe wrote the first line of production code using test-first design. We wrote the program in 
C++ and used CppUnit 1.5 as our unit test tool.Refactoring AdoptedWe refactored regularly, and the design evolved smoothly.

Pair programming AdoptedWe could develop tests, interfaces, and simulations on our own but used pair programming 
to create production code.Collective ownership AdoptedWe collectively owned the code. On one occasion, new code that required special 
knowledge resulted in a module owned by one programmer. Development slowed on 
that part of the system.Continuous integration AdoptedDuring our first iteration, continuous integration was no problem. As soon as we added a 
second pair to the project, the team had integration problems. We quickly learned how 
to avoid collisions and do merges.40-hour week (also known asAdoptedThe team worked at a sustainable pace. A couple times, we put in overtime to meet the 
sustainable pace)iteration goals.

On-site customer Partially adoptedA systems engineer acted as the on-site customer. We derived our acceptance tests from the
use cases. The customer was not directly responsible for these tests. The team scared the
customer a couple times by delivering his use cases in less time than it took him to definethem.Coding standards AdoptedThe main coding standard was Òmake the code look like the code that is already there.Ó 
The team used header and C++ file source templates to provide the company-required 
comment blocks. The comment blocks were mainly noise that hid the code.Open workspaceNot adoptedThere was no open workspace. Workstations were in the corners, making pair 
programming awkward. The roadblocks to building a team workspace were political. ation 1 features. These acted as placeholdersfor the real hardware. We then added a sim-

ulation of the interface by creating a Mock
Object (see Figure 1).7This facilitated devel-opment and also kept volatile entities such
as the database schema, GUI, hardware de-
pendencies, and protocol from creeping into

the application logic. We witnessed an ex-

ample of designing for testability leading to
reduced coupling in the application.So we sat down to write our first line of
code. We picked a candidate class from our

hand-drawn LDUF diagram and followed
the test-first design process. Figure 2 repre-

sents the test-first design process, XPÕs in-

nermost feedback loop. Our first line of

code was a test. The test did not compile.

We fixed the compile. We ran the test. It

failed. We fixed the test. We were finally in

maintenance!We also established pair-programming
guidelines. We could develop test cases, sim-

ulators, and interface classes on our own
but had to do all other production code in
pairs. The first iteration had significant
downtime, considering only one pair wasworking on the project. Meetings were a
real productivity killer. Pair programming

was fun and intense; we were able to stay on

task. If one partner lost track of where we

were going, the other partner quickly re-
synched their efforts. We taught each other

about the tools and learned new skills.The coding standard is a team agreementto make the code look the sameÑit is the
teamÕs code, so it should all look the same. It

turned out that my partner and I had a com-
patible coding style. As more people joined
the team, we established a self-documenting
coding standard: ÒMake the new or modified
code look like the code that is already there.Ó
Cool, a one-line coding standard! However,

there was pressure to use the divisionÕs coding

standard. From a Òchoosing your battlesÓ
point of view, we gave into using the standard

comment blocks in front of each function. Later iterationsWe planted a seed of functionality at the
center of this subsystem application and

simulated its interactions with its environ-

ment. We brought in new stories that made

the seed grow, incrementally adding new

functionality and complexity. From its sim-

ple beginning of a half dozen classes and a
few simulations, the clean, loosely coupled

design evolved to about 100 classes.Unit test volume grew. The unit tests saved
us numerous times from unexpected side-ef-
fect defects. We could fix the defects immedi-

ately because we just added the code that

broke the tests. We created our own acceptance test script-
ing language to drive transactions into the sys-

tem and used text file comparisons of simula-
tion output to confirm system operation. We

were able to design simulations that stressed
the system beyond the limits expected in the
field. Unfortunately, the team got behind in ac-

ceptance testing. I do not recommend this.Evolutionary design
Evolutionary design relieved a lot ofpressure from the team. We didnÕt have to

create the best design of all time for things

we were not quite sure aboutÑonly the best

design for what we knew about at that mo-

ment. We made good design decisions one

at a time. Our automated tests and refactor-
ing gave us the confidence that we could
continue to evolve the system. 32IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001ApplicationlogicService Interface
classService
implementationSimulated (mock)service
implementationHardwareAPI<<extends>>Figure 1. Simulatingthe interface by 

creating a Mock 
Object, shown in 
Unified Modeling 
Language.Write atest for newfeatureCompileFixcompileerrorsWritethecodeRun thetest andsee it failRun thetest andsee it passRefactoras neededFigure 2. The 
test-first design
process.  Object-oriented design is an importantsupporting practice of XP. OO program-

ming languages let you build software in
small independent pieces, a practice that
test-first programming promotes.8Project manager surprisesNot only were the programmers happywith their creation, but the project manager

was as well. After the fourth iteration, he said,
ÒIÕd only have three documents by now! In-

stead I have a piece of the system that works!ÓThe manager discovered another benefit.Usually a project manager coordinating a
teamÕs work with other teams spends a lot of

time juggling priorities and figuring out task
dependencies. On the XP team, dependencies

between features were almost nonexistent.

We built features in the order of customer

priority, not internal software framework or-

der dictated by a BDUF (Big Design Up Front).
The team was agile and able to adapt to the

other subsystemsÕ changing needs.Building the teamWe built the team slowly, while we were
developing skills. We felt we could absorb one

or two people per iteration. We did not let

newcomers take tasks right away, but used

them mainly as pair partners during their first
iteration. Then, as they got to know the sys-
tem and our practices, they started to take on
tasks at the iteration planning meetings. We

didnÕt assume that team velocity would in-

crease when we added a new person to the
teamÑwe measure velocity, not predict it.
The DPS way of developing softwaremade up for programmer inexperienceby

having senior engineers review the less ex-

perienced engineersÕ work. In XP projects,

you must still address the spread of exper-

tise; for instance, it is critical to have at least

one senior engineer on the team. We donÕt

give senior people a big title or special role,
but we need them. They help spread the

wealth of knowledge, and both they and
their pair partners learn.The end of the story
Unfortunately, I cannot present the story
of how the project completed, because it was
mothballed due to changing market needs.
This is in the spirit of one of XPÕs mantras:

Work on the most important thing first. Nev-

ertheless, the team and the managers were
impressed with our results in terms of pro-
ductivity and quality. Because of this project,

two other pilot projects were started.In my experience, when the engineers

want XP, the management doesnÕt, and

if management wants XP, the engineers
donÕt. Where is the trust between manage-

ment and engineering?To managers: Try XP on a team with
open-minded leaders. Make it okay to try
new things. Encourage the XP practices. Pro-

vide good coaching. Challenge your team to
go against the status quo. Recruit a team that
wants to try XP rather than force a team to

use XP. Make sure the organization sees that

no one will be punished for trying something
different. When hand-picking XP practices,

you might compromise the self-supporting
nature of XP. Try as much of XP as you can.

Iterations are short. Feedback comes often.
To engineers: Develop a sales pitch. Iden-
tify problems that you might solve. Identify
the benefits, identify the risks. Do a pilot

project. Iterations are short. Feedback
comes often.AcknowledgmentsI thank the real client that provided the experienceto write this article (who wished to remain anony-
mous). I also want to thank Chris Biegay and Jennifer
Kohnke for a job well done in helping me prepare this
article. I presented a earlier version of this article at XP
Universe in July 2001.References1.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1999.
2.A. Cockburn, 
Writing Effective Use Cases
, the CrystalCollection for Software Professionals, Addison-Wesley,

Reading, Mass., 2000.3.M. Fowler et al., 
Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.,
1999.4.S. McConnell, 
Rapid Development, Microsoft Press, Red-mond, Wash., 1996.
5.J. Gall, 
Systemantics: How Systems Really Work and
How They Fail, 2nd ed., General Systemantics Press,Ann Arbor, Mich., 1986.
6.R.E. Jeffries, 
Extreme Programming Installed, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2001.
7.T. Mackinnon, S. Freeman, and P. Craig, 
Endo-Testing:
Unit Testing with Mock Objects, XP Examined
, Addi-son-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2001.
8.R. Martin, ÒDesign Principles and Design Patterns,Ó
www.objectmentor.com/publications/

Principles%20and%20Patterns.PDF (current 12 Oct.
2001).For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
33About the AuthorJamesGrenningis the directorof consulting
at Object 
Mentor and 
is currently 
practicing 
and coaching Extreme Programming.  Areas of interest

are organizational change, software proc-
ess improvement, and the business impact
of agile software development. He helped
create the Manifesto for Agile SoftwareDevelopment(http://AgileAlliance.org)and is a signatory. He is also a member of

the ACM. He earned a BS in electrical en-
gineering and computer science from the
University of Illinois, Chicago. Contact 
him at Object Mentor, 565 Lakeview Park-

way, Ste. 135, Vernon Hills, IL 60061; 

grenning@objectmentor.com.
