 0740-7459/17/$33.00 © 2017 IEEE
 MAY/JUNE 2017
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
73VALUE FOR THE 
customerﬂ is the 
mantra in agile management and de-
velopment. The product owner is in-
volved along the way, and backlogs 

are prioritized, with the best of inten-

tions to maximize business value early 
and eliminate waste. Yet in many IT 
development projects, bewilderment 

remains regarding how to express the 

business value in process decisions 
and the delivered system. Also, proj-
ects continue to implement function-

ality that™s off the mark or never used. 
This is because there isn™t suf˜ cient 
methodological support to determine 

and monitor business value or to link 

business value decisions to the devel-
opment project™s mechanics.
You probably estimate costs sys-
tematically. In fact, cost estimates 

and productivity outlooks are rou-
tinely updated and monitored, and 

burn-down charts can tell you when 

to start narrowing the scope. But 
chances are you don™t treat business 
value with the same rigor as you 

treat costs. This seems contradictory, 

given that agile development assigns 
a central role to business value.
The absence of an explicit treat-
ment of business value means you™re 

likely to make decisions that con-
found business value with cost, such 

as using your burn-down chart to 

cut functionality on the basis of cost 
rather than cutting or promoting 
functionality on the grounds of busi-
ness value. As in other areas in life, 

you™re in danger of perceiving (un-

consciously) that what™s expensive 
also represents a lot of value. Policy 
makers who are eager to show their 

capability to improve regularly make 
proclamations such as, ﬁWe™re put-
ting an extra $
x million in this pro-
gram (more than the previous policy 

makers),ﬂ with no account of what 
value the investment will produce.
Past and recent disasters in de-
velopment projects should make you 
painfully aware that spending more 
money doesn™t necessarily return 
more value. But, unless you have a 

sensible measure of business value 

for your backlog, you won™t be able 
to manage production with respect 
to that value. So, your proclama-

tion of delivering valuable software 
to your customer won™t contain as 
much business value as it should.
To help you overcome this situ-
ation, we™ve developed a bundle 
of easy-to-use core practices with 
which you can systematize your 

project™s evolving knowledge. These 

practices are based on 
bene˜ t points
, which hold your estimates of the 

business value a project will deliver. 

Although these practices are simple, 
they provide powerful support for 
monitoring project progress on both 

the realized business value and the 

incurred costs.
The Project 
and Its Product Elements
Agile development is about produc-
tion for the customer. Actually, and 
more generally in today™s projects, 
agile development is about produc-

tion for a range of stakeholders, 

from enterprise managers; system 
developers, deployers, and maintain-
ers; to users, the general public, and 

society in many cases. If you™ve done 
Bene˜ t Points
The Best Part of the Story
Jo Erskine Hannay,
 Simula Research Laboratory
Hans Christian Benestad,
 Expertware
Kjetil Strand,
 PROMIS
// Development projects often lack means 
to take business value into account. Bene˜ t 
points can help projects estimate that 
value. Their proper use provides powerful 
support for monitoring progress. 
//FEATURE:
 AGILE DEVELOPMENT
 74 IEEE SOFTWARE 
| WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
 | @IEEESOFTWARE
FEATURE:
 AGILE DEVELOPMENT
requirements elicitation accordingly, 
your set of requirements should take 
into account the salient stakeholders™ 
perspectives. Such requirements are 

often formulated as user stories in 

some format or another.
In agile projects, user stories are 
often called 
epics
 and 
stories
. Re-
quirements speci˜ cations should 

re˚ ect the project™s current, always 
limited, but evolving perception and 
knowledge of needs for the system 

under development. Epics are high-
level requirements perceived at the 
project™s early stages, typically at 

project inception. In contrast, sto-

ries are more re˜ ned and elaborated 
user stories re˚ ecting the project™s 
understanding at more advanced 

stages. Stories can be further re-

˜ ned and elaborated into code. 
To avoid ill-founded requirements 
speci˜ cations, you should defer re-

quirements re˜ nement and elabora-

tion until the project has acquired 
suf˜ cient knowledge. Hierarchi-
cally, stories fall under epics (see 

Figure 1).
Stakeholder-centricity means that 
user stories should partition func-

tionality into parts meaningful to 
those stakeholders at a given stage. 
So, epics should partition function-

ality into parts meaningful for busi-

ness processes with an eye on the 
business case, whereas stories should 
partition functionality into parts 

closer to speci˜ c user functionality. 

In the end, low-level stories and iter-
ation or sprint tasks partition func-
tionality into viable pieces for code 

production.
For large agile projects, the agile- 
fractal diagram in Figure 2 illus-

trates that agile management might 

occur at all levels of understanding.
1At the project level (the red rows in 

Figure 2), the epics backlog is dis-
tributed into releases according to 
the project vision™s priorities and de-

pendencies. The stories in epics are 

distributed to sprints according to 
the priorities and dependencies un-
covered in release plans. At the tech-

nical level (the gray rows in Figure 

2), sprint tasks are organized into 
daily work according to sprint plans, 
which result in code.
The difference in stakeholder 
focus between epics and stories is 
important for the techniques we in-
troduce later in this article. This dif-

ference is also a substantial architec-

tural challenge because developers 
start with describing functionality 
according to the enterprise architec-

ture and would like to end up with 

functionality organized in a sensi-
ble systems architecture. To handle 
these challenges,
2 you can use vari-
ous architecture and requirements- 
handling frameworksŠfor exam-
ple, capability-based development
3and service-oriented architecture.
4However, that™s an important story 

to be told elsewhere. In any case, ep-
ics and stories are the project™s driv-
ing artifacts. They™re the 
product 
elements
 that are chosen for produc-
tion at any given time and on which 
you measure the project™s productiv-
ity and progress.
The Project 
and Its Business Case
 We extend the agile fractal to the 
enterprise level. In the darker-blue 
row in Figure 2, iterative business 
cases following the business vision 

drive initiatives or projects. Busi-

ness cases hold the project objec-
tives. These objectives are linked to 
return or revenue in strategic peri-

ods in line with the enterprise™s stra-

tegic policies (the light-blue row in 
Figure 2).
Here™s how this process works. 
The enterprise, in a certain strategic 

period, ˜ nds that to meet its goals it 
must start an initiative, perhaps in 

the form of an IT development proj-

ect. Before launching the project, 
the enterprise develops a business 
case to mandate the project. The 

business case holds the objectives 

the project must meet in order to be 
of value.
˜˚˛˝˚FIGURE 1. 
Epics (high-level requirements perceived at the project™s early stages) are 
elaborated into stories, which separate concerns. Stories are elaborated and re˜ ned 

(developed) into code.
 MAY/JUNE 2017 
| IEEE SOFTWARE
75Bene˜ t Points
Both epics and stories are usually 
assigned cost estimatesŠfor ex-
ample, in the form of 
story points
. You should also assign business 
value estimatesŠ 
bene˜ t points
Što epics and stories. As you™ll see, 
this idea is simple but needs some 
consideration.
Bene˜ t Points for Epics:
The Link to the Business Case
You must estimate an epic™s cost 
and business value in relation to the 
project™s business case. If your proj-
ect hasn™t got an elaborate business 

case, it will suf˜ ce that the case has 

project objectives (also called impact 
goals or effect goals).
For example, an initiative to 
modernize a public-service orga-
nization™s IT portfolio could have 
these objectives:
Ł Objective 1. Reduce the aver-

age case-processing time by 30 
percent.
Ł Objective 2. Reduce the number 

of wrong case decisions by 90 
percent.
Ł Objective 3. Reduce the average 
interaction time between the ap-

plicant and application proces-
sor by 70 percent.
In other words, project objec-
tives express the organization™s rea-

sons for initiating the development 
project. The key point is that you 

estimate an epic™s business value ac-
cording to how much you think it 
contributes to the objectives. Be-

cause there are several objectives, 

this exercise is more complex than 
estimating costs.
You can do this in two ways:
Ł Estimate an epic™s contribution 

to all the objectives as a whole.
Ł Estimate an epic™s contribution 
to each objective.
The ﬁHow to Assign Bene˜ t Pointsﬂ 

sidebar illustrates these two methods 
and gives a rationale for estimating an 
epic™s contribution to each objective.
If you do this, you should end 
up with a table with your estimates 
such as the one in Figure 3a. For ex-
ample, using the Fibonacci sequence 

familiar from planning poker, your 

stakeholder group might estimate 
that Epic 1 will contribute 13 bene˜ t 
points to Objective 1, 5 bene˜ t points 
to Objective 2, and 8 bene˜ t points 
to Objective 3, for 26 total points. 

For all the epics, this example shows 

a total of 211 bene˜ t points.
Objectives and Returns:
The Link to the Business Strategy
Having explicit and preferably mea-
surable objectives for your project is 
one of many signs of organizational 
maturity. To assign bene˜ t points to 

your product elements in terms of 

those objectives is a ˜ rst step toward 
Strategic periodBusiness visionProject visionReleaseplanningSprint planningDaily stand-upReleaseReleaseReleaseProjectretrospectiveReleaseretrospectiveSprintretrospectiveProgress updateBusiness caseBusiness caseBusiness caseBusinessevaluationObjectiveObjectiveObjectiveEpicDaily workSprintSprintTaskTaskCodeTaskCodeTaskCodeDaily workTaskDaily workTaskStorySprintStoryStoryEpicEpicReturnStrategic periodStrategic periodPolicyevaluationPolicySocietal goalsEnterprise goalsFIGURE 2. 
The agile fractal (with the product elements). The blue rows are the 
enterprise level, the red rows are the project level, and the gray rows are the technical level.
 76 IEEE SOFTWARE 
| WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
 | @IEEESOFTWARE
handling your project™s generation of 
business value.
However, project objectives are 
the estimated effects of the project 
and therefore live together with, and 

live as long as, the project. To link 
HOW TO ASSIGN BENEFIT POINTS
The key to assigning bene˜t points is to assess how much 
you think each epic (a high-level requirement perceived 
at the project™s early stages) contributes to a project™s 
objectives. To help you think in terms of objectives when 

writing epics, you can use a syntax that explicitly states 
objectivesŠ
 for example,
Epic: 
As
 <stakeholder A> 
I can
 <perform actions d> 
by using 
<System S>
 to <perform actions s in S>
 in order to
 <contribute to objectives O>
We recommend estimating an epic™s bene˜t according to 
its contribution to each objective. This generates a matrix of 
estimates (see Table A).
To follow best practices, use relative sizes. Also, use 
a size scheme that the project is familiar with. Our exam
-ples assume that the project already uses planning poker 

to assign story points (which hold cost estimates) in the 
form of Fibonacci numbers.
Instead of considering each objective individually, you 
could estimate an epic™s bene˜t according to all objectives in 

one go (see Table B).
Ostensibly, both approaches have pros and cons. Consid
-ering each objective lets you think in more detail. However, 

it substantially increases the bene˜t estimation™s complexity 
because you must perform not just one estimate per epic (as 

suf˜ces for cost estimates) but one estimate for each objec
-tive. In addition, the relation between estimates should make 

sense regardless of whether you read the matrix horizontally 

or vertically.
Feedback from practitioners using this technique indi
-cates that some people prefer to think horizontally (how a 
TABLE A
An example matrix of bene˜t point estimates.
Epic
Objectives
Reduce the average 
case processing time 
by 30 percent
Reduce the number 
of wrong case deci
-sions by 90 percent
Reduce the average inter
-action time between the 
applicant and application 
processor by 70 percent
As the applicant 
I can
 secure my identity in 
the application process 
by using 
the system 
to 
authenticate myself 
in order to
 ...1358As the applicant 
I can
 start with a pre˜lled 
application form 
by using 
the system 
to 

retrieve and auto˜ll all available and relevant 

information 
in order to
 ...21
21
3As the case processor 
I can
 ˜nd all the 
relevant information for a case 
by using 
the 

system 
to 
retrieve applicant information from 
all relevant and permissible data sources in a 

single search 
in order to
 ...21
25As the division manager 
I can
 manage my 
division™s productivity 
by using 
the system 

to 
view statistics to monitor the time and 
quality of case processing 
in order to
 ...882  MAY/JUNE 2017 
| IEEE SOFTWARE
 77the project with the organization™s 
long-term goals, project objectives 
should be linked to the business re
-turn as planned for in strategic goals. 
For example, our public-service-
 organization example could have this 
speci˜c epic contributes to each objective), whereas others 
prefer to think vertically (how all the epics contribute to a 
given objective). We have yet to investigate whether one way 
is better than the other.
On the other hand, considering all objectives as one 
single, perhaps fuzzy, entity might mean that you as a stake
-holder aren™t really able to use your expertise and knowledge 

of the domain properly, even though the estimation process 
is substantially simpler.
So which should you choose? Theoretical grounds exist 
for choosing the ˜rst, more complex approach. Theories of 

judgment and decision making predict that a host of uncon
-scious biases will likely affect people™s judgment in ways they 
can™t predict or control.
1,2
 These biases add considerable 
noise to judgments. However, if you can use task-speci˜c 
knowledge at key points in your judgment process, you should 
be able to boost the conscious elements in that process such 

that your decisions rely more on knowledge.
3 This is a case 
for strengthening the signal of a conscious knowledge-based 
process over the noise of unconscious biases. Considering 
each objective in turn stimulates that signal.
In a controlled experiment we conducted, the ˜rst ap
-proach generated estimates with less inter-rater variance 

than the second approach. This phenomenon might have 

been the manifestation of less noise. Also, less variance be
-tween job performers indicates that a task has been de˜ned 
such that expertise is applicable and can be built.
4,5
Your stakeholder team will likely need a bit of time to get 
calibrated on the scale you™re using (perhaps starting with 
a reference epic). But our experience is that once you™re at 
cruising altitude, it takes a couple of hours to assess 10 to 

20 epics on four to six objectives.
References
1. D. Kahneman and G. Klein, ﬁConditions for Intuitive ExpertiseŠ
a Failure to Disagree,ﬂ 
Am. Psychologist
, vol. 64, no. 6, 2009, 
pp. 515Œ526.
2.
 T. Halkjelsvik and M. Jørgensen, ﬁFrom Origami to Software De
-velopment: A Review of Studies on Judgment-Based Predictions 

of Performance Time,ﬂ 
Psychological Bull.
, vol. 138, no. 2, 2012, 
pp. 238Œ271.
3.
 T. Mussweiler, ﬁComparison Processes in Social Judgment: 

Mechanisms and Consequences,ﬂ 
Psychological Rev.
, vol. 110, no. 
3, 2003, pp. 472Œ489.
4.
 C.T. Keil and J.M. Cortina, ﬁDegradation of Validity over Time: A 

Test and Extension of Ackerman™s Model,ﬂ 
Psychological Bull.
, vol. 
127, no. 5, 1987, pp. 673Œ697.
5.
 K.A. Ericsson, ﬁAn Introduction to 
The Cambridge Handbook of 

Expertise and Expert Performance
: Its Development, Organization, 
and Content,ﬂ 
The Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert 

Performance
, K.A. Ericsson et al., eds., Cambridge Univ. Press, 
2006, pp. 3Œ20.
TABLE B
Estimating bene˜t according to all objectives at once,
 seen as a single objective.*
Epic
Bene˜t points
As the applicant 
I can
 secure my identity in the application process 
by using 
the system 
to 
authenticate myself 
in order to
 ...8As the applicant 
I can
 start with a pre˜lled application form 
by using 
the system 
to 
retrieve and 
auto˜ll all available and relevant information 
in order to
 ...13As the case processor 
I can
 ˜nd all the relevant information for a case 
by using 
the system 
to 
retrieve 
applicant information from all relevant and permissible data sources in a single search 
in order to
 ...8As the division manager 
I can
 manage my division™s productivity 
by using 
the system 
to 
view 
statistics to monitor the time and quality of case processing 
in order to
 ...5* For the list of the objectives, see Table A.
 78 IEEE SOFTWARE 
| WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
 | @IEEESOFTWARE
FEATURE:
 AGILE DEVELOPMENT
planned return in a strategic period:
Ł Return 1. Reduced number of 
person-hoursŠworth 50 million 

Norwegian kroner (US$1 = 8.5 kr).
Ł Return 2. Reduced monetary 
compensationŠworth 20 mil-
lion kr.
Ł Return 3. The organization™s 

improved public imageŠworth 
30 million kr.
The project™s objectives, once ful-
˜ lled, are estimated to contribute to 
the return to various degrees. For 
example, Objective 3 might be con-
sidered the main contributor to Re-
turn 1Šsay, 20 million krŠwhereas 

Objectives 2 and 3 might be ex-

pected to contribute relatively lessŠ
say, 10 million kr each. Together, 
the project™s objectives, if ful˜ lled, 

are estimated to contribute 40 mil-

lion kr to the strategically planned 
50 million kr of Return 1. The re-
maining 10 million are expected to 

come from other initiatives.
Figure 3b illustrates this example. 
The total strategically planned re-

turn in Returns 1, 2, and 3 is 100 

million kr. Objectives 1, 2, and 3 

should contribute 21.5 million kr, 
25 million kr, and 30 million kr, re-
spectively, for a total of 76.5 million. 

So, the project™s objectives, once ful-

˜ lled, will contribute unevenly to-
ward the project™s return and only 
partly to the enterprise™s strategically 

planned return.
The table in Figure 3b is the re-
sponsibility of the enterprise, not the 

project. It represents the interface 

between the project and the business 
in terms of the business™s goals as an 
enterprise. It™s the link between the 

enterprise™s strategic level and the 

project™s business objectives. That 
link should be generated by strategic 
management together with the proj-

ect™s management.
If your project is linked this way 
to wider enterprise goals, then the 

fact that some project objectives are 

worth more than others must be re-
˚ ected in how the project generates 
business value.
Balanced Bene˜ t Points for Epics
To re˚ ect that objectives aren™t equally 

important, the bene˜ t point distribu-
tion should be balanced accordingly.
The rightmost two columns in Fig-
ure 3b show the objectives™ weights 
according to how much they con-
tribute to the return. The ﬁprojectﬂ 
column shows each objective™s pro-

portion relative to the project™s to-

tal return. The ﬁenterpriseﬂ column 
shows each objective™s proportion rel-
ative to the enterprise™s strategically 

planned return. You choose which 
to use. Here, we use the former be-
cause it gives greater differentiation 

in relative value judgments. However, 

the enterprise perspective of the lat-
ter more explicitly links the project to 
the totality of enterprise goals.
(b)(a)(c)ObjectiveReturnTotalWeight  3 (30)ProjectEnterprise10.200.200.2521.500.280.2220.200.300.3025.000.330.2530.400.200.2030.000.390.30Total0.800.700.7576.501.000.771 (50) 2 (20) EpicObjectiveTotal 23BPsBPsBPs19.1815.759.8824.80214.83 24.136.1845.13314.832.306.1823.3045.659.192.4717.3150.713.4525.9430.0963.535.756.1815.4579.189.199.8828.2581.419.1916.0626.66Total59.3068.9582.75211.00EpicObjectiveTotalBPs 123BPsBPsBPs11358262212154732125284 88218513212565551571388298281323Total846067211FIGURE 3. 
Assigning bene˜ t points (BPs) for epics. (a) The epics™ contribution to 
objectives. (b) The objectives™ contribution to returns. The numbers in parentheses 

indicate the expected overall returns in millions of Norwegian kroner (US$1 = 8.5 kr). 

For each objective, we obtained the sum in the ﬁtotalﬂ column to the right of the ﬁreturnﬂ 

columns by multiplying those returns by that objective™s expected contributions and 

summing the results. For example, for objective 1, (50 
× 0.20) + (50 
× 0.20) + (50 
× 
0.25) = 21.50. (c) The resulting balanced bene˜ t points. Your project stakeholders must 

produce the estimates in the white background, while those in the shaded background 

should be automatically generated by your tool.
 MAY/JUNE 2017 
| IEEE SOFTWARE
79When objectives contribute un-
evenly to return, a bene˜ t point 
given with respect to one objective 
will represent a different unit of 

business value than a bene˜ t point 

given with respect to another ob-
jective. To keep things manage-
able, balance the number of bene˜ t 

points for each epic so that a bene˜ t 

point holds the same business value 
regardless of which objective it was 
given for. Also, keep the total num-

ber of bene˜ t points assigned con-
stant so that it™s the redistribution 
of points over epics that represents 

the balancing.
This should all be done automati-
cally in your spreadsheet or project 

management tool. For each epic and 

objective, do the following. First, 

to re˚ ect that objectives contribute 
unevenly to return, multiply the epic™s 

bene˜ t points for that objective by the 
objective™s weight (for Epic 1, 13 × 0.28). 
Second, divide the resulting amount 

by that objective™s total number of 

bene˜ t points (13 × 0.28/84), so that 
the bene˜ t points assigned under each 
objective represent that objective™s ex-

pected contribution to returns. Third, 

multiply the resulting amount by the 
total number of bene˜ t points (13 × 
0.28 × 211/84 = 9.18) to scale up so 

that the total number of bene˜ t points 
remains constant. (If you calculate 
13 × 0.28 × 211/84, you get 9.14. We 

performed all the calculations in Ex-

cel at its built-in large precision but 
present them at two-decimal preci-
sion for legibility. So, 0.28 is the ra-

tio of 21.50/76.50 = 0.28104575– 

at two-decimal precision, and 13 × 
0.28104575– × 211/84 = 9.17748–, 

which is 9.18 at two-decimal preci-
sion.) Figure 3c, which should be 
automatically generated in your 

spreadsheet or tool, shows the re-

sulting balanced bene˜ t points for 
our example. You™ll see that the pro-
portion of the bene˜ t points for an 

objective to the total number of as-

signed bene˜ t points corresponds 
to that objective™s proportion of the 
expected return (for Objective 1, 

59.30/211 = 0.28).
The general balancing formula 
for an epic 
Ei and objective 
Obj
j isbalanced
 BP(Ei; Obj
j)=  BP(Ei; Obj
j) × weight
(Obj
j) × 
total
(BP)/total
(BP; Obj
j),where 
BP is the bene˜ t points.
For more information on paper submission, featured articles, calls for papers, 
 and subscription links visit: www.computer.org/tsusc
SUBSCRIBE AND SUBMIT
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
SUBMIT
TODAY
 80 IEEE SOFTWARE 
| WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
 | @IEEESOFTWARE
There are reasons you might not 
want to apply the second step. The 
fact that the number of bene˜t points 
for an objective deviates from the ex
-pected return might re˚ect that your 

stakeholder team thinks the epics 
don™t have that potential to ful˜l the 
objective. The second step assumes 
that the project should deliver fully 
on its objectives and that differences 
in the number of bene˜t points as
-signed under each objective are due 

to our coarse-grained but ﬁgood 
enoughﬂ approach to estimating 
business value. So, the second step 
neutralizes these differences by ad
-justing the results to the total ful˜l
-ment of objectives. You might omit 
the second step if these differences 
are large and you think they signify 

unequal or partial ful˜lment of the 
objectives.
This is particularly relevant if 
the objectives aren™t project-speci˜c 
but represent objectives across mul
-tiple initiatives. In this discussion, 

though, the returns, rather than 

the objectives, are global, and it™s 

on returns that partial ful˜lment 
is expressed. But if you do omit the 
second step, your third step is dif
-ferent. See if you can ˜gure out how 
to do it!
Soft Returns
Now what about soft (qualitative) 
returns? It™s common to have ex
-pected returns such as Return 3 

(the organization™s improved public 

image) or, say, Return 4 (increased 

information infrastructure capabil
-ity in society). Such returns might 

be more important than quantita
-tive ˜nancial onesŠfor example, in 

terms of political justi˜cation for ini
-tiating a development project or in 

terms of environmental and ethical 

sustainability.
Quantifying soft returns might be 
dif˜cult. Sometimes, explicit quan
-ti˜cation of soft returns™ monetary 

value is legally required. One such 
example is government-funded de
-velopment projects that must follow 
socioeconomic models for the anal
-ysis of societal bene˜ts. However, 
insisting on hard quanti˜cation of 
qualitative values might be perceived 

as practically impossible and lead to 

such returns being omitted.
In line with satis˜cing rather 
than optimizing
5 and simplicity, 
we propose a method for implicitly 
MISHRIŠMODEL FOR 
INTEGRATING SOFT 

AND HARD RETURN ON 

INVESTMENT
Because soft (qualitative) returns (which have no direct reference to quanti˜able 
measures) might be an essential part of business value, our approach needs to 
be able to include them. To enable this, we use MISHRI (Model for Integrating 
Soft and Hard Return on Investment).
Consider these returns related to an initiative to modernize a public-service 
organization™s IT portfolio:
 ŁReturn 1. Reduced number of person-hoursŠworth 50 million Norwegian 
kroner (kr).
 ŁReturn 2. Reduced monetary compensationŠworth 20 million kr.
 ŁReturn 3. The organization™s improved public imageŠworth 
X.Returns 1 and 2 are hard (quanti˜able) returns; Return 3 is a soft return.
MISHRI employs simple techniques that human cognitive resources can 
handle. Virtually all the required expert estimation in our approach (see the main 
article) is based on relative comparisons. To quantify soft returns, you need at 

least one hard return. For example, ask yourself how important Return 3 is rela
-tive to Return 1. If it™s equally important, set its monetary value as 50 million kr. 

If it™s less important, ask the same question relative to Return 2. Perhaps you 

determine that Return 3 is more important than Return 2 but is closer to Return 
2 than Return 1Šsay a third of the way between the two, which implies a mon
-etary value of 30 million kr.
The relevant stakeholders should be involved in this process, and you can use 
techniques similar to those we use for the other expert estimates in our approach 
(see the main article).
Including soft returns in this way means that you can take into account their in
-˚uence on project objectives. This, in turn, will in˚uence the backlog order. However, 

you can later choose whether you want the actual calculations of returns to include 

soft returns. This might not always be appropriate because soft returns might not 
generate cash ˚ow. We leave that discussion for later. By the way, it™s easy to include 
and exclude soft returns (and compare their effect). For example, for Return 3, sim
-ply set its value to 0 and see how your tool™s automatic calculations change.
  MAY/JUNE 2017 
| IEEE SOFTWARE
 81quantifying soft returns. The un
-derlying idea is the same one Mark 
Denne and Jane Cleland-Huang 
presented in a slightly different con
-text.
6,7
 The sidebar ﬁMISHRIŠ
Model for Integrating Soft and Hard 
Return on Investmentﬂ sketches our 
method.
Applying Our Approach
Now that you can estimate your 

product elements™ costs and bene
-˜ts, you™re equipped to monitor and 

learn from your project so that you 

can work toward generating as much 

bene˜t as possible, besides control
-ling costs.
A key feature of this new core 
practice is a loosely coupled ap
-proach that lets you focus on one re
-lationship at a time. You can focus 
on the relation between epics and 
objectives, disregarding the rela
-tion between objectives and returns. 
And, you can focus on the relation 

between objectives and returns, 
without having to think about prod
-uct elements. The combined assess
-ment of the two relations is automat
-ically generated, as in Figure 3c.
In workshops on PRINCE2 
(Projects in Controlled Environ
-ments) and agile management, 

we™ve presented this approach to 
more than 240 project or prod
-uct owners and managers. Partici
-pants are generally unfamiliar with 
this approach and sometimes get 
stranded when inadvertently try
-ing to combine the two steps in 

one go. Assessing an epic™s contri
-bution to an objective while taking 
into account that objective™s con
-tribution to various returns, and 

re˚ecting all this in the number 

of bene˜t points for the epic, is 

hard. Doing all that for several ob
-jectives is nearly impossible. For 

similar reasons, it™s important to 

clearly delineate costs and bene˜ts 

as separate concerns when provid
-ing estimates. See the ﬁExperiences 

with Our Approach and Other Ap
-proachesﬂ sidebar for more on ex
-periences using this core practice.
In Figure 3, the estimates your 
stakeholder group must provide 

(ﬁexpert estimatesﬂ) are on a white 
background, and the estimates that 
were automatically calculated by a 

tool are on a shaded background. As 

you can see, only a modest number 
of expert estimates are necessary, 
Now there™s 
even more to
love
 about your 
membership...
LEARN MORE AT:
 mycs.computer.org
Introducing 
myCS
, the digital magazineportal from IEEE Computer Society.
Go beyond static, hard-to-read PDFs

with an easily accessible, customizable, 

and adaptive experience. 
Read all your IEEE magazines and journals yourWAY onThere™s No Additional Cost! 
IEEE myCS half Page Space Ad 2016_4-26-16.indd   14/28/16   3:03 PM 82 IEEE SOFTWARE 
| WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
 | @IEEESOFTWARE
EXPERIENCES WITH OUR APPROACH 
 AND OTHER APPROACHES
In Norway, agile development is more or less the state of the 
practice in the public sector and large corporate enterprises. 
Even if the concepts we present in the main article are rela
-tively new, they™ve started appearing in systems develop
-ment projects.
For example, in a large telecom company, several proj
-ects used bene˜t points to estimate epics™ contribution to 
business objectives. (An epic is a high-level requirement 
perceived at the project™s early stages.) Those projects 
subsequently used the estimates for backlog prioritiza
-tion; one project (that restructured system architecture) 
also used MISHRI (Model for Integrating Soft and Hard Re
-turn on Investment). (For more on MISHRI, see the related 
sidebar.) Project members reported that bene˜t estimation 
yielded vast process improvements. In particular, it provided 
a better understanding of project objectives and a clearer 

perception of the project deliverables™ expected value. It 
also contributed to aligning project and business resources 
regarding what impacts to expect from project deliverables.
In a large public-sector project, the product owner 
asked the project to incorporate seven epics in the proj
-ect™s ˜nal stages. The epics were perceived to have a high 

bene˜t, and after a cost analysis, they were incorporated 
into the backlog at the appropriate place. The new epics 
better covered some of the functionality in the existing 

backlog. So, owing to the conducted costŒbene˜t analysis, 
the product owner cancelled the remainder of the backlog 
that had a low bene˜t
Œcost ratio, saving approximately 5 
million euros. That project didn™t use our methods directly 
but employed a tactic in line with what we™re present
-ing. Our approach based on bene˜t points aims to facili
-tate, systematize, and prepare for these kinds of wise 

decisions.
The IT Project Professional certi˜cation program devotes 
e-learning and a workshop to our approach™s core practice 

and applications of it. Since the program started in 2013, 
more than 240 candidates have passed the certi˜cation 

exam. We believe our approach™s use will increase in the 
years to come when certi˜ed project managers, product 
owners, and others start applying their new skills.
Agile-at-scale frameworks such as Large Scale Scrum 
(LeSS) and the Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe) pre
 sent 
alternative models for prioritizing product backlog items 
(PBIs). LeSS employs relative value points (RVPs) as a light
-weight proxy for value, and developers should use planning 

poker to experiment with RVPs and their estimation.
1 How
-ever, this approach doesn™t go into detail, and its propo
-nents argue that value isn™t a simple attribute or number. 

Developers are advised to move beyond the simplistic notion 

of value toward multiple weighted factors, such as stake
-holder preferences, strategic alignment, relative points for 

value and effort, and risk.
SAFe posits that PBI prioritization should be based on 
several parameters. Building on the concept of cost of de
-lay,
2 SAFE employs an algorithm to compute a PBI imple
-mentation sequence.
3 This approach is called Weighted 
Shortest Job First (WSJF):
WSJF = (User-Business Value + Time Criticality + Risk 
Reduction Œ Opportunity Enablement Value) / Job Size
The WSJF parameters are estimated with relative sizes using 
the Fibonacci sequence.
These measures are far more complex than what we ad
-vocate. Combining bene˜t, cost, risk, and duration parame
-ters isn™t easy to grasp, and mixing parameters might inhibit 
measuring, reporting, and project learning. We designed our 
approach to be intuitive and straightforward to maintain; 

key to this is the clear separation of the cost and bene˜t 
parameters. Our approach aims to support the stakehold
-ers™ conscious processes (see the ﬁSatis˜cing, Fast and 
Frugalﬂ sidebar). Its advantages are even more salient when 
it™s applied to progress reporting, which will be the topic of 
a later article.
References
1. C. Larman and B. Vodde, 
Practices for Scaling Lean & Agile Devel
-opment: Large, Multisite, and Offshore Product Development with 
Large-Scale Scrum
, Addison-Wesley, 2010.
2.
 D. Reinertsen, 
Principles of Product Development Flow: Second 

Generation Lean Product Development
, Celeritas, 2009.
3.
 D. Lef˜ngwell, 
Agile Software Requirements: Lean Requirements 

Practices for Teams, Programs, and the Enterprise
, Addison-
Wesley, 2011.
  MAY/JUNE 2017 
| IEEE SOFTWARE
 83and they aren™t complicated mea
-sures but aim to capture the cur
-rently available project knowledge. 
For more on our approach™s under
-lying principles, see the ﬁSatis˜cing, 

Fast and Frugalﬂ sidebar.
Figure 4 shows the core 

practices of assigning ben
-e˜t points (bene˜t point es
-timation) and assigning story points 

(story point estimation) as the basis 

for better project management ac
-tivities and further core practices. 
These will put you in a position to 

challenge ingrained project manage
-ment activities, including those that 
are counter to agile development.
An article in an upcoming issue 
of 
IEEE Software
 will address some 
of the possibilities. On that jour
-ney, the next waypoint will be ac
-tivities that integrate bene˜t points 
in backlog organization so that you 
can produce more business value 
relative to costs and reduce waste. 

We™ll also look at additional core 

practices and activities that let you 
plug bene˜t and cost uncertainty 
estimation and periodization into 
the scheme.
Acknowledgments
We™re grateful to our collaborators at 
PROM
 IS, the Metier Academy, the partici
-pants in the IT Project Professional certi˜
-cation program, and practitioners applying 
the methods in this article for giving valu
-able feedback, comments, and insights.
References
1. M. Sliger and S. Broderick, 
The 

Software Project Manager™s Bridge to 

Agility
, Addison-Wesley, 2008.
SATISFICING, FAST AND FRUGAL
Bene˜t and cost estimation falls under judgment and deci
-sion tasks. Such tasks are dif˜cult and often inconsistent 
(different people develop differing successful strategies)
1,2
 or ill-structured (de˜ning successful strategies is hard).
3 Practitioners performing inconsistent, ill-structured tasks 

might spend half their careers apparently not learning and 
not improving performance beyond, perhaps, a narrow sub
-set of (consistent) tasks.
Judgment and decision making follow two types of cog
-nitive processes (see Figure A):
 Łconscious processes that are sensitive to domain 

knowledge
4,5
 and learning
6 and
 Łunconscious processes that are driven by general 
psychological traits and are domain unspecific and hard 
to unlearn, even when you™re aware of them.
7,8
To improve on this situation, you must target the conscious 

processes by increasing the use of domain knowledge (the 
signal) while decreasing the effects of the offsetting uncon
-scious processes (the noise). But because judgment and 
decision making are inconsistent, they™re initially challenged 
by a weak signal-to-noise ratio because it might be unclear 
how to access and use domain knowledge.
So, our methods aim to help stakeholders use relevant 
knowledge systematically. Stakeholders must provide a 
modest number of relatively simple expert estimates and 
assessments. From these, various measures are calcu
-lated automatically and transparently. We advocate methods, 
such as relative and pairwise comparison, that help stake
-holders tap into domain knowledge and use it in assess
-ments. Pairwise comparison is a core element of judgment-

conscious cognitive processes,
4 so it makes sense to use 
methods that directly support this. To strengthen conscious 

comparison, it might also be bene˜cial to use methods 
that focus on differences, such as the repertory grid tech
-nique.
9 We also advocate structured group methods that 
reduce noise.
10Our methods™ underlying principle is in line with the 
fast-and-frugal-heuristics approach to judgment and deci
-sion making,
11 with naturalistic decision making,
5 and with 
satis˜cing rather than optimizing.
12 All these approaches ac
-knowledge the almost impossible task of supplying suf˜cient 
reliable information for predicting accurately how to proceed 
in complex situations. Both human decision makers and 

tools fail to yield good results in uncertain circumstances 
when trying to gather and analyze all relevant data correctly. 
Instead, human cognitive judgment appears to be geared 

toward processing unreliable partial information rapidly 
and with suf˜cient accuracy for the purpose at hand. Tools 
should be designed to support such decision making rather 

than to analyze the totality of the situation.
If you implemented our methods in a decision sup
-port system, it would be a passive, communication- and 
cont. on p. 84
 84 IEEE SOFTWARE 
| WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
 | @IEEESOFTWARE
FEATURE:
 AGILE DEVELOPMENT
2. 
J.E. Hannay, K. Brathen, and O.M. 
Mevassvik, ﬁAgile Requirements Han-

dling in a Service-Oriented Taxonomy 

of Capabilities,ﬂ 
Requirements Eng.
, 30 Jan. 2016; dx.doi.org/10.1007

/s00766-016-0244-8.
3. 
M.H. Danesh and E. Yu, ﬁAnalyz-

ing IT Flexibility to Enable Dynamic 
Capabilities,ﬂ 
Advanced Information 

Systems Engineering Workshops
, Springer, 2015, pp. 53Œ65.
4. 
SOA Reference Architecture 
data-driven system
13
 rather than one that runs advanced 
rules, procedures, or simulations intended to generate solu-
tions that replace parts of the decision process.
References
1. 
P.L. Ackerman, ﬁIndividual Differences in Skill Learning: An Inte-
gration of Psychometric and Information Processing Perspectives,ﬂ 

Psychological Bull.
, vol. 102, no. 1, 1987, pp. 3Œ27.
2. 
J.P. Campbell et al., ﬁA Theory of Performance,ﬂ 
Personnel Selec-

tion in Organizations
, N. Schmitt and W.C. Borman, eds., Josey-
Bass, 1993, pp. 35Œ70.
3. 
E.J. Johnson, ﬁExpertise and Decision under Uncertainty: Per-

formance and Process,ﬂ 
The Nature of Expertise
, M.T.H. Chi, R. 
Glaser, and M.J. Farr, eds., Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988, 

pp. 209Œ228.
4. 
T. Mussweiler, ﬁComparison Processes in Social Judgment: 

Mechanisms and Consequences,ﬂ 
Psychological Rev.
, vol. 110, no. 
3, 2003, pp. 472Œ489.
5. 
G. Klein, ﬁDeveloping Expertise in Decision Making,ﬂ 
Thinking & 

Reasoning
, vol. 3, no. 4, 1997, pp. 337Œ352.
6. 
K.A. Ericsson, R.T. Krampe, and C. Tesch-Romer, ﬁThe Role of 

Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance,ﬂ 

Psychological Rev.
, vol. 100, no. 3, 1993, pp. 363Œ406.
7. 
D. Kahneman and S. Frederick, ﬁA Model of Heuristic Judg-

ment,ﬂ 
The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning
, K.J. 
Holyoak and R.G. Morrison, eds., Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004, 

pp. 267Œ294.
8. 
G. Gigerenzer, 
Gut Feelings: The Intelligence of the Unconscious
, Viking, 2007.
9. 
F. Fransella, R. Bell, and D. Bannister, 
A Manual for Repertory Grid 

Technique
, John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
10. 
T.R. Stewart, ﬁImproving Reliability of Judgmental Forecasts,ﬂ 

Principles of Forecasting: A Handbook for Researchers and Practi-

tioners
, J.S. Armstrong, ed., Kluwer Academic, 2001, pp. 81Œ106.
11. 
G. Gigerenzer and P.M. Todd, eds., 
Simple Heuristics That Make Us 

Smart
, Oxford Univ. Press, 1999.
12. 
H.A. Simon, ﬁRational Choice and the Structure of the Environ-

ment,ﬂ 
Psychological Rev.
, vol. 63, no. 2, 1956, pp. 129Œ138.
13. 
D.J. Power, 
Decision Support Systems: Concepts and Resources 

for Managers
, Greenwood, 2002.
cont. from p. 83
CuesJudgment or decisionSignalNoiseDomain and task-speci˜c processes that are accessible to learningRobust, general psychological processesConscious processesŁ Comparison
Ł Knowledge base
Ł˚Selective accessibilityUnconsious processes
Ł AccessibilityŁ AvailabilityŁ RepresentabilityŁ Affect heuristicsŁ AnchoringFIGURE A. 
Judgment and decision making involve conscious and unconscious processes. To improve these tasks, you 
must target the conscious processes by increasing the use of domain knowledge (the signal) while decreasing the effects 

of the offsetting unconscious processes (the noise).
 MAY/JUNE 2017 
| IEEE SOFTWARE
85Technical Standard
, document C119, 
Open Group, 2011.
5. 
H.A. Simon, 
The Sciences of the Ar-
ti˜ cial
, 3rd ed., MIT Press, 1996.
6. 
M. Denne and J. Cleland-Huang, 

Software by Numbers: Low-Risk, 

High-Return Development
, Prentice 
Hall, 2003.
7. 
M. Denne and J. Cleland-Huang, 

ﬁThe Incremental Funding Method: 

Data-Driven Software Development,ﬂ 

IEEE Software
, vol. 21, no. 3, 2004, 
pp. 39Œ47.
Activity: Periodize planned returnActivity: Periodize projected returnActivity: Adjust values according to project experienceActivity: Set the project™s ˜nancial boundariesCore practiceUncertainty assessmentCore practice
Periodization of estimatesActivity: Order epic backlog
Activity: Order story backlogActivity: Monitor earned business valueCore practice
Bene˜t point estimation for epics Core practice
Story point estimation for epicsFIGURE 4. 
The core practices of bene˜ t point estimation and story point estimation 
give rise to project monitoring and learning activities and additional core practices.
Read your subscriptions 
through the myCS 
publications portal at
 http://mycs.computer.org
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
JO ERSKINE HANNAY
 is a principal scientist at the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment and an adjunct 
researcher at the Simula Research Laboratory. His main research interests are bene˜ t and cost estimation, empiri-
cal studies in software and systems engineering, and simulations in leadership training. Hannay received a PhD in 
computer science from the University of Edinburgh™s Laboratory for Foundations of Computer Science. He™s a certi˜ ed 
Scrum Product Owner. Contact him at johannay@simula.no.
HANS CHRISTIAN BENESTAD
 is the founder of Expertware, a spinoff of the Simula Research Laboratory that 
provides project management services and tool support for user story prioritization. His research interests are 

bene˜ t estimation, software release planning, and agile-development methodology. Benestad received a PhD in em-

pirical software engineering from the University of Oslo. He™s also a certi˜ ed Scrum Master and Project Management 
Professional. Contact him at benestad@expertware.no.
KJETIL STRAND 
works for PROMIS, a consulting ˜ rm offering project management expertise. His research inter-
ests are bene˜ ts management, how to obtain ˚ ow in software development initiatives, and agile contracting. Strand 
received a master™s in computational linguistics from the University of Oslo. He is a certi˜ ed IT Project Professional, 
Project Management Professional, and Scrum Product Owner and is an Agile Certi˜ ed Practitioner. He™s also certi-
˜ ed in PRINCE2 (Projects in Controlled Environments) and MSP (Managing Successful Programmes). Contact him at 
kjetil.strand@promis.no.
