 60IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
0740-7459/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEEit, the market changes, or the money runsout. Despite developersÕ hard work, the re-
sulting code is often precisely the opposite of
what is desired: unstable and fragile, pro-
foundly slowing development. Furthermore,
adapting to new requirements is difficult be-
cause existing functionality must be manu-
ally retested whenever a change is made. We

know that testing is the answer, but is there

a way to adhere to doing it while still devel-
oping at a fast pace?We have found that a radical approach 
cen-teredon testing proves highly effective inachieving rapid development. We have spent

the last two years using the Extreme Program-
ming methodology to develop e-commerce
software at Evant, a Web-based ASP company.

Focusing on testing and testability results in a
code base that can be built on quickly and that
is malleable to the extent that it can easily be
changed to accommodate new customer re-quirements and the latest Internet technologies.
We describe how testing helped and how we

established it as the development centerpiece.Testing firstFirst, let us briefly describe what we mean byÒtest-firstÓ programming.  To test-first means

to write a unit test for a new piece of function-
ality before the new code is written.  For exam-

ple, if one were writing a Òshoot-Õem-upÓ com-
puter game, one might write a test asserting that
the player initially has three lives before the
code is implemented to make that the case.Using unit testing to drive developmentrather than relying solely on a quality assur-
ance team profoundly changes several aspects
of software engineering. Designs often differ

from what they might have otherwise been,
technology choices are influenced, and the way
in which the application code is integrated with
third-party frameworks is significantly altered.focusGoing Faster: Testing TheWeb Application
Edward Hieatt and Robert Mee,
EvantThis articledocuments test-first
design and the
creation of testable
code for Web
applications. The

authors explain how
testing has been
critical to building
EvantÕs application 
at speed while
maintaining a high
degree of quality.
Testing is a fundamental aspect of software engineering, but it is apractice that too often falls by the wayside in todayÕs fast-paced

Web application development culture. Often, valuable software

engineering principles are discarded, simply because they are per-ceived as being too time-consuming and lacking a significant payoff, and
testing is a common casualty. Testing is often last in developersÕ minds when

pressured to deliver something, anything, before the competition jumps on
engineering Internet software
 Though it might seem a tautology, prac-
ticing test-first programming leads to a per-
vasive quality of testability throughout the
code base. By having tests in place, the over-
all code design is positively affected. More
tests, and more features, can easily be added
to designs and beneficial characteristics arise
as a natural consequence of its testability.
One such beneficial characteristic is re-usable code. Code that is developed for a sin-
gle purpose usually services a single client
(meaning client code); a test provides a second
client for the interface. Thus we force reuse by

testing. This secondary interface exercise, and
its resultant refactoring, tends to flush out de-
sign flaws that might exist in single-use code.
For instance, a class B written to support class
A might make inappropriate assumptions.
Writing unit tests specifically for B, independ-

ent of its relationship with A, removes these as-
sumptions, which leaves classes A and B more
loosely coupled and therefore more reusable.Testable code tends to have a cleaner inter-
face, and classes tend to be defined at a more
appropriate granularity than they might other-
wise be. Writing tests simply makes it more ap-

parent when a single classÕs scope is too ambi-

tious or too reliant on the workings of another.
Testing the servlet
Unit testing has beneficial effects on re-moving dependence on a particular technol-
ogy. Often software teams are directed to

minimize their reliance on a single tool, tech-
nology, or vendor in an effort to maintain

long-term flexibility. This is easier said than

done. Take the ubiquitous Java servlet as an

example. The instructions are simple: over-
ride the ÒÓ method and have it dowhat you want. Several outcomes are possible
as the complexity of request processing grows
or the types of different requests increase. The
ÒÓ method might become long orbreak up into several methods in the class,
there might be many utility methods added to
the servlet subclass, or a whole hierarchy of
different subclasses might arise in an attempt
to specialize and still reuse code. The problem
is that servlets are extremely awkward to test,
primarily because they are used as a compo-
nent in a specific environmentÑthe servlet
container. Creating instances of servlets and

testing individual methods is quite difficult.The test-first approach leads to a differentimplementation. When it comes to servlets, it
is quite apparent that the easiest way to testthe code that handles requests is to remove it

from the servlet entirely, and put it into its

own class. In fact, not only is that the easiest

thing to do with respect to the tests, but the

resulting design itself is then more flexible

and quite independent of the servlet technol-

ogy. Our code in Ò
Ó is three lineslong. It has just one responsibility: create an-

other object that will do the work and then

hand control to it. In our case, we call this

object a dispatcher. Its job is to decide whatkind of request is being submitted and create

yet another object (an instance of a com-

mand pattern) to handle the request. The dis-

patcher and each command object have their
own unit tests, in which creating the needed

fixture is trivial. Now we not only have a

testable design, we have one with a more ap-

propriate division of labor and one that is
more technology-independent.Aggressive refactoring: Swapping technologiesWith the support of extensive unit tests it
is possible to radically change code without
breaking existing functionality.  This gives the

developer the ability to make major changes,
even in integral frameworks, very quickly.

For example, it allowed us to refactor our
persistence code just weeks before we went
live with our first client. We used Enterprise JavaBeans, specifically
Entity beans, to manage our database persist-

ence. We wanted to remove the entire EJB

layer because of poor performance and diffi-

culties in testing the internals of the Beans,
among other reasons. Without tests, we would

not have attempted to remove the Beans, but
given that our unit test suite included extensive
coverage for testing persistence, and that we
had experience in performing this kind of ma-
jor change, none of us was too concerned. In

fact, we would be getting a performance im-
provement, more testable code, and the re-
moval of an expensive technology.
We executed the refactoring in less than a
week, and performance did increase markedly.

We saved money by removing the EJB tech-

nology and ended up with more testable code

because we had removed a part of our system

that was essentially a black box.
BugsTesting has radically changed the way we
March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
61Though it might
seem atautology,
practicing test-firstprogrammingleads to apervasivequality oftestabilitythroughout thecode base. deal with controlling bugs. We think of bugs
differently from the traditional viewÑwe

use our bug count to help pinpoint areas
that need more testing. That is, we consider

bugs as feedback about how we are doing
with our testing.
When a bug is found, we write a test thatÒcatchesÓ the bugÑa test in the area where the
bug was found that asserts what should be the
case and fails. We then change the code until

the test runs successfully, thus fixing the bug. In

this way, we fill in holes in our suite of tests.
We do not stop there, though. We look for
the case where several bugs in a related area en-
tered our bug tracking system during a short
time period. This information tells us that

something more seriously wrong exists with
our testsÑperhaps the testing framework in
that area needs some work. For example, per-
haps three bugs are found one day all in the
area of logging out of the application. Rather
than trying to Òpinpoint fixÓ each bugÑthat
is, assign each bug to a different developer,

thinking of each as an independent problemÑ
we assign the group of bugs to a single pair of
programmers. This pair looks at existing tests
for that area, which clearly did not do their job
well. The existing tests might not be extensive
enough, in which case the programmers would
add more tests. Or they might refactor the test-

ing framework in that area to allow better,

more accurate support for the kinds of tests

that we can then proceed to write.
The result is a suite of tests that constantly
grows and changes to cover as much of the
application as possible. The tests are run

whenever code is changed, catching prob-
lems before the changes are even deemed
worthy of being added to the main code base.
Armed with such a weapon, as little time as

possible is spent maintaining existing func-
tionality. In short, development occurs faster.
Tests as documentation
Our methodology does not encouragewriting documentation for code or even
writing comments in the code. Instead, we

rely on tests to document the system. This

might seem strange, but because tests are

written first, they completely define what
the code should do. (In fact, the definition

of the code being in working order is that
the tests all run.) We write our tests with

readability in mind. The best way to learn
what the code is supposed to do is to readthe tests. New developers, or developerswho are inexperienced in a particular area,
can get up to speed far quicker this way
than by trying to wade through requirement
and design documents. It is more effective to

learn by reading a short, simple test than to
try and decipher code that might contain
problems or is very complex.This method of learning through readingtests is especially important in our company as

the development team grows. As new devel-
opers come on, they are paired with existing

developers to gain knowledge, but a large part

of their learning comes from reading tests.
New team members come up to speed quickly
because of well-factored, readable tests.Acceptance tests and their extensionsIn addition to writing unit tests, our
process has a mechanism called acceptanceteststhat allow product managers to ex-
press tests at the scenario level. 
We began by writing a testing tool that ex-
pressed operations in the system and the ex-
pected results as XML. Product managers,
with the assistance of programmers and qual-
ity assurance team members, wrote extensive
acceptance tests that, along with our suite of
unit tests, are run at every integration.The acceptance tests provided a clearvalue, but it was soon apparent that the
supporting frameworks for the XML had

several other benefits. As we neared deploy-
ment for our first customer, the need arose

to integrate with other e-commerce systems

and with the clientÕs legacy mainframes. We

employed an industry-standard EAI (Enter-
prise Application Integration) tool config-
ured to generate XML as an adaptor to
transform data from these external systems
to our own. The XML test framework re-

quired little modification to act as the inter-

face to this integration tool. We even used

the framework assertion capabilities to ver-
ify incoming transactions.As our need for acceptance tests grew,
writing them more quickly and making them

easily maintainable became important. XML,
though workable, is awkward for a human to
write, especially for nontechnical staff. To

solve this, we implemented a domain-specific
language, called Evant Script Programming
(ESP), which is more compact and readable

than XML. Once ESP was available, we rec-
ognized uses beyond acceptance tests andThe existingtests might notbe extensiveenough, inwhich case theprogrammerswould add more tests.62IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
 data loading, including an easy way to con-figure system parameters, and that we could
use a suite of ESP scripts to create a tailored
demo environment.  Testing challenges and solutionsIn the Web environment, the client and
the server are very different beasts. The
userÕs machine runs a Web browser, which

understands HTML and JavaScript (we will
not discuss the extra complications of ap-
plets, plug-ins, or other client-side technolo-
gies here). The only ability this browser has
is to send information through a map of
strings over a stateless protocol to a Web

server, which deals with the submission by

passing it off to an engine running applica-
tion code (for example a servlet container
running Java code or a Perl program). We

would typically like to test the client and the
application server part of this set up, but it

would be difficult to come up with a testing
framework that could do both at onceÑto
test JavaScript and DHTML on the client
and Java on the application server. However,

splitting tests into two distinct parts is not a
good idea because we need to test how the
two sides interact.This is the classic Web application testing
problem. We recommend the following remedy.
First, test those parts of the server-side
code that are not directly concerned with

being part of a Web application, without in-

volving the Web peculiarities. For example,

if one were testing the manipulation of a
tree object, one would test manipulating the
object directly, ignoring the fact that the vi-

sual representation of the tree is collapsed

and expanded by the user through the UI.
Test the business logic with such low-granu-

larity unit tests. That is, of course, the goal
no matter what the UI, but it becomes par-

ticularly important to be strict about it

when working with a Web application.
Second, test those parts of the client-sidecode that have no server interaction.  This is

typically code that contains little or no busi-
ness logic.  Examples of such code, typically

written in JavaScript, might include func-
tions to pop up error messages, perform
simple field validations, and so on.  The im-
mediate problem we faced in writing tests

for this sort of code was that no testing

framework existed for JavaScript inside the
browser. In fact, we had already heard from
other developers that testing JavaScript wastoo hard, and that JavaScript itself should
therefore be avoided entirely.  Undeterred,

we wrote a testing framework for JavaScript
called JsUnit, now a member of the XUnit

family of unit testing frameworks (www.

jsunit.net). JavaScript is notoriously diffi-
cult to write and debug, but using JsUnit
has greatly helped our rapid development of
client-side code.Third, write functional tests of a low grainin the server-side language (for example, Java

or C++) that simulate the request/response
Web environment. We wrote a framework for

such tests that extends our usual unit-testing
framework to allow the test author to think of
himself or herself as being in the Web browser

position, putting keys and values into a Map

object (which corresponds to in an
HTML document).  The framework simulates

a submission of the Map to the server by in-

voking the server code, passing in the Map as

a parameter.  This invocation is coded in such

a way as to follow as closely as possible the

path a request would take were it submitted
through the true UI.  (We take advantage here

of the refactoring of our servlet discussed
above: We cannot ÒinvokeÓ the servlet from a

test, but we can easily talk to the objects that
the servlet spins off.) The serverÕs response can

then be inspected and verified by the test (see
the next section for more on this). Because the
test code explicitly invokes the server-side

code, the test can inspect the state of the code,
rather than just the HTML output resulting
from the submission.  It is for this reason es-

pecially that this method of testing is more
useful than a framework such as HTTPUnit,

which views the situation purely from the
clientÕs viewpoint.
March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
63BooksExtreme Programming Explained,Kent Beck, especially Chapter 18(ÓThe introduction to Extreme ProgrammingÒ); a good place to start.
Extreme Programming Installed, Ron Jeffries et al., Chapters 13, 14,
29, and 34; contains a lot of information addressing common problems

and questions about unit testing.Web sites
Testing frameworks:

www.xprogramming.com/software.htm 

www.junit.org
Extreme Programming sites:www.xprogramming.com

www.extremeprogramming.org
For More Information Using this framework, you can write walk-through tests that simulate the user moving
through the UI. For example, we have meth-
ods available in the test framework with
names such as Ò.Ó A test
case might call that method and then perform
assertions about the domain object that

should have been persisted as a result of the

call. Thus, we have the ability to perform an
action that the user might execute and then to
test specifics about the domain. Walkthrough

tests are particularly useful when writing tests
to reproduce bugs that manual testing has ex-
posed. In fact, there has not yet been a case
when we could not write a walkthrough test
that catches a bug found by a member of the
quality assurance team.Testing server output
How to test output from the server is an-other classic problem because of the nature of
Web applications. How do you test HTML?

Certainly we donÕt want tests that assert that

the output is some long string of HTML. The
test would be almost unreadable. Imagine
tracking down a mistake in such a test, or
changing it when new functionality is re-
quired. Testing the Web page look is not usu-

ally the goal; testing the data in the output is.
Any slight change to the outputÑfor example,
a cosmetic change such as making a word ap-

pear in redÑshould not break an output test.

We came to understand these issues as we pro-

gressed through several technologies used to

generate our HTML output. In fact, this pro-
gression and the choice on which we finally
settled were influenced in large part by what

was most easily testable.At the outset we worked with JavaServerPages (JSPs). We found that although we got

up and running quickly using them, testing
them was hard. They are another Web tech-

nology that runs in a container environment
that is difficult to reproduce in a test. In addi-
tion, it was challenging for our UI designers
to work with JSPs because of the amount of
Java code interspersed among the HTML.
Soon we were spinning off testable objects to
which the JSPs delegated that did the HTML
generation. When we arrived at the point
where the JSPs were literally one line long, we
dispensed with them altogether and produced
our HTML purely using Java. With that

arrangement we could easily test the state of
objects that produced the HTMLÑfor exam-ple, that the object knew to make a buttondisabled. We could also test the process of

producing pieces of HTMLÑfor example,
the production of an HTML ele-ment. However, we were still not testing the

output. The same question dogged us: How
do you test the data in the HTML without
getting confused with the cosmetics? Further-
more, our designers were even less interested
in delving into Java code to change text color
than they had been with JSPs.A further change of technology solvedboth these problems. We generated our UI

by outputting XMLÑpure dataÑfrom our

domain objects. Then we transformed the

XML into HTML for the client using Ex-

tensible Stylesheet Language Transforma-

tion (XSLT) pages, written and maintained

by our developers and UI designers.XML is easily testable. In our walkthroughtests, we can ask for the current XML out-
put at any time and then make assertions
about its structure and contents using the
standard XPath syntax. The XML consists
strictly of data from the domain; there is no
knowledge even that it will be used in the UI.
Our XSLT contains only information about

how the UI should look and how to use the
data in the XML.Thus we achieved an extremely clean sep-
aration of testable business data from HTML

generation that helped us develop the UI
much faster than the other methods we tried.
We could test that part of the output that

contained data without getting it confused

with the HTML.  Conversely, our UI design-

ers were happier because their work was not
confused by Java among the HTML. Again
we found a way to separate the untestable

Web technology, in this case HTML, from

the data.A first testA question we are often asked is how westarted promoting testing and testability at the
beginning of our development. The first step
in making our Web application testable was to

establish a culture of testing among the devel-
opers. Following the methodology of writing
tests first, our first task as a team was to write
the first test. Most team members were new to
the concept of test-first programming, so it

was not obvious to them how to go about this. It seems almost comical thinking back onit, but it was appropriate at the time: We pro-
64IEEE SOFTWARE
March/April 2002
How to testoutput from 
the server isanother classicproblembecause of thenature of Webapplications. grammed in a group for the first couple ofdays. Having the entire team of eight huddled
around a monitor, achieving consensus on

every line of code, let us iron out right from the
start what a typical test looked like, how we
write a little bit of test code and then some
code to make the test run, when to go back
and add another test case, and so on. We also

quickly settled other issues that often plague
development teams: we agreed on coding stan-
dards, established a way to perform integra-
tions, and settled on a standard workstation
configuration.Thus testing has been an integral part of
our development process since the first
day, and remains so now.   Of course,
our testing frameworks and practices change
and grow daily, and we are by no means fin-

ished with their evolution. For example, we
feel that we have a long way to go in finding
more appropriate ways to expose testing toour business users. We would also like to ex-
tend our walkthrough test framework to simu-
late even more closely what happens in real sit-
uations. Our company supports us when we
ask for time to develop such abilities because
they have seen the benefits of testing. They
agree that our focus on tests and testability has
helped us go faster than any project they have
worked on in the past.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
March/April 2002
IEEE SOFTWARE
65About the AuthorsEdward Hieattis a lead developer at Evant, a software vendor in San Francisco thatobserves a strict practice of XP. He became involved with Extreme Programming in 1999. His

research interests include the rapid development and testing of Web-enabled software. He is

also the author of JsUnit (www.jsunit.net), a unit-testing framework for JavaScript, which is

one of the XUnit testing frameworks. Contact him at edward@edwardh.com.Robert Mee
is a software programming and process consultant in a variety of indus-tries, helping companies apply the practices of Extreme Programming. He regularly gives
lectures on XP for corporations, their investors, and others. During 2000 and 2001, he was
director of engineering at Evant, where he helped introduce XP. His research interests include

human and computer languages, and the application of domain-specific languages to the au-
tomated testing of software. He has a BA in oriental languages from the University of Cali-
fornia at Berkeley. Contact him at robmee@

hotmail.com.What do software engineering professionals need to know, ac-
cording to those who hire and manage them? They must be able to
produce secure and high-quality systems in a timely, predictable,

and cost-effective manner.
This special issue will focus on the methods and techniques forenhancing software education programs worldwideÑacademic,
re-education, alternativeÑto give graduates the knowledge and
skills they need for an industrial software career.
Potential topics include¥balancing theory, technology, and practice

¥experience reports with professional education

¥software processes in the curriculum

¥teaching software engineering practices (project management,
requirements, design, construction, É)¥quality and security practices

¥team building

¥software engineering in beginning courses

¥computer science education vs. SE education

¥undergraduate vs. graduate SE education

¥nontraditional education (distance education, asynchronous
learning, laboratory teaching, É)
¥innovative SE courses or curricula

¥training for the workplace
For more information about the focus, contact the guest editors; for author guidelines and submission details, contact the
magazine assistant at software@computer.org or go to http://

computer.org/software/author.htm.
Submissions are due at software@computer.org on or before 
1 April 2002. If you would like advance editorial comment on a
proposed topic, send the guest editors an extended abstract by 
1 February; they will return comments by 15 February.
Manuscripts must not exceed 5,400 words including figures and tables, which count for 200 words each. Submissions in excess of these
limits may be rejected without refereeing. The articles we deem within
the theme's scope will be peer-reviewed and are subject to editing for

magazine style, clarity, organization, and space. We reserve the right to

edit the title of all submissions. Be sure to include the name of the
theme for which you are submitting an article.Guest Editors:Watts S. Humphrey
, Software Engineering InstituteCarnegie Mellon University, watts@sei.cmu.edu

Thomas B. Hilburn, Dept. of Computing and MathematicsEmbry-Riddle Aeronautical University hilburn@db.erau.edu
