 92 IEEE SOFTW
ARE
 | PUB
LISHE
D BY T
HE
 IEEE 
COMP
UT
ER
 SOCIE
TY
 0740-7459/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
Editor: 
Neil Maiden
City University London,
n.a.m.maiden@city.ac.uk
Editor: 
Philippe Kruchten
University of British Columbia 

pbk@ece.ubc.ca
SOUNDING BOARD
TH
E PERI
OD B
ET
WEE
N 2011 and 2012 em
-phatically showcased the power of the peo
-ple. From political upheavals in the Middle 
East to protests against the economic crisis 

in Europe to the Occupy Wall Street move
-ment in the US to the anticorruption pro
-tests across India, the world witnessed sev
-eral revolutions against multiple aspects of 

mis
 government and the undeniable desire of 
people to take matters into their own hands. 
Does management in the software indus
-try await a similar future? We can translate 
two major themes learned from the upheav
-als in 2011 and 2012 to the software de
-velopment world: the burgeoning desire of 

teams to participate in the management of 

their own affairs and the inability of manag
-ers to adapt their style in this new age. The 

fundamental problem is a widening gap be
-tween these two groups. 
The ˜rst step to avoiding (or reconciling) 
this gap in the software development world 

is for senior management to acknowledge 

that teams no longer liveŠor want to liveŠ

in a world of command and control. More 
importantly, they want to be self-organizing 
and have adaptive, supportive, and collabor
-ative leadership guiding them. 
Building a Culture of Trust
With the rise of agile practices, self-
 
organizing teams are fast becoming the way 
in which software teams want to work. Such 
teams are characterized by self-assignment 

of tasks and collaborative estimation, plan
-ning, and decision making; they also display 
a greater sense of ownership and responsibil
-ity. But self-organizing teams can™t be leader
-less or uncontrolledŠinstead, they require 
a hands-free yet still watchful management 
style. Embracing this new age of manage
-ment requires a balancing act between what 
ﬁhands freeﬂ should yield and what ﬁwatch
-fulnessﬂ must monitor.
Self-organizing teams demand informal 
organizational structures, where the bound
-aries of hierarchy don™t prohibit the free ˚ow 
of information and feedback. In other words, 

while it™s ˜ne to have organizational titles 
such as CEO, product manager, or architect, 
the organizational structure itself should be 

informal in practice. At a minimum, senior 

management should make itself directly ac
-cessible to all employees (maintaining an 

open-door policy) and accept both positive 

and negative feedback.
Simply put, starting with an informal 
structure has a cascading effect. It leads to 

openness (marked through constant commu
-nication and feedback), which in turn leads 
to a culture of trust. In such organizations, 
senior management gives workers the free
-dom to voice opinions, raise concerns, seek 

support in resolving those concerns, and 
make collaborative decisions. Several mecha
-nisms enable openness, such as user groups 
and mailing lists within the organization to 

encourage everyone to share and discuss ex
-periences, challenges, and solution strategies. 

Other options include holding regular, one-

on-one meetings to gain an understanding 
of the primary concerns and giving regular 
feedback on performance (instead of annual 

ﬁgotchaﬂ appraisals with little opportunity 

for self-improvement).
Power to the People
Rashina Hoda
continued on p. 91
  MARCH/APRIL 2013
 | IEEE SOFTW
ARE
 91SOUNDING BOARD
Encouraging Participation
A key failing of management today is 
the belief that teams can organize their 
own affairs at the team level, but their 
input in the managerial decisions at 

higherŠproject or organizationalŠ

levels isn™t required. As such, although 
many managers are happy to trust their 
teams with technological decisions, 

such as picking the best programming 

platform or hardware, they™re hesitant 
to involve them in managerial decisions 
such as negotiating project contracts. 
What does a software development 
team have to do with how their man
-agers negotiate business contracts? A 

common practice in contract negotia
-tion has been for senior managementŠ
through the sales teamsŠto negotiate 
˜xed-bid contracts for IT projects with
-out up-front team consultations. A con
-sequence is that teams become severely 
restricted in their ability to respond 
to inevitable changes in customer re
-quirements during the project and fail 

to manage scope changes effectively, 
which ultimately increases costs and 
drives down pro˜t margins.
Software teams usually ˜nd it ﬁde
-motivating to be given ridiculous 

deadlinesﬂ by managers who ﬁdon™t 

actually have a clue about the techni
-cal challenges associated with them.ﬂ
1 Fixing this requires management to 
be aware of such sentiments among 
the software practitioners they man
-age and to encourage participation in 

providing estimates for projects based 
on their technical expertise and expe
-rience. After all, your team actually 
implements the projectŠwho better to 

provide estimates of the time and ef
-fort involved? 
Sponsoring Innovation
Teams look up to senior management 

for the project™s overall guiding vision, 
but they™re capable of the implemen
-tation themselves. After all, if you™ve 
hired the top talent for your company, 

why undermine their ability to come up 
with truly innovative solutions by giv
-ing them templates? A common senti
-ment echoed by software developers to
-day is that ﬁwe aren™t code monkeys–

tell us the what, not the how!ﬂ 
Facing new challenges and design
-ing innovative solutions is what makes 

work interesting for self-organizing 
teams and drives them to excellence. 

Coming up with business solutions and 

details of the technical implementation 
fosters a strong sense of ownership and 
responsibility among team members. 

Teams are much more likely to take 

ownership of something they came up 
with than a solution that was forced on 
them by management.
In this age of social media, tools such 
as Facebook, Twitter, and Google+ 
give their users opportunities to 
network without boundaries, express 
opinions, make an impact, and give 

and receive feedback with global reach. 
However, this empowerment might be 
in direct con˚ict with a more conserva
-tive, hierarchical, and old-fashioned or
-ganizational culture, giving rise to dis
-content. A revolution in this sense could 

comprise of a loss of the best talent, 

which will often gladly move on to freer, 
more open environments.
Reference
 1.
 R. Hoda et al., ﬁSelf-Organizing Roles on 
Agile Software Development Teams,ﬂ 
IEEE 
Trans. Software Eng
., to be published in 2013.
RA
SHINA HODA 
leads the Software Engineering 
Processes Tools and Applications (SEPTA) research 
group at the University of Auckland. Her research 

interests include self-organizing teams, agile soft
-ware development, and software project manage
-ment. Hoda received her PhD in computer science 

from Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand. 

Contact her at r.hoda@auckland.ac.nz.
IEEE Software
 (ISSN 0740-7459) is published bimonthly by the IEEE Computer So
-ciety. IEEE headquarters: Three Park Ave., 17th Floor, New York, NY 10016-5997. 
IEEE Computer Society Publications Of˜ce: 10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., Los Alamitos, 
CA 90720; +1 714 821 8380; fax +1 714 821 4010. IEEE Computer Society head
-quarters: 2001 L St., Ste. 700, Washington, DC 20036. Subscription rates: IEEE 

Computer Society members get the lowest rate of US$56 per year, which includes 
printed issues plus online access to all issues published since 1984. Go to www.com
-puter.org/subscribe to order and for more information on other subscription prices. 
Back issues: $20 for members, $209.17 for nonmembers (plus shipping and handling).
Postmaster: 
Send undelivered copies and address changes to 
IEEE Software
, Mem
-bership Processing Dept., IEEE Service Center, 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 
08854-4141. Periodicals Postage Paid at New York, NY, and at additional mail
-ing of˜ces. Canadian GST #125634188. Canada Post Publications Mail Agreement 

Number 40013885. Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to PO Box 122, Ni
-agara Falls, ON L2E 6S8, Canada. Printed in the USA.
Reuse Rights and Reprint Permissions: 
Educational or personal use of this ma
-terial is permitted without fee, provided such use: 1) is not made for pro˜t; 2) 
includes this notice and a full citation to the original work on the ˜rst page of 
the copy; and 3) does not imply IEEE endorsement of any third-party products or 
services. Authors and their companies are permitted to post the accepted version 
of IEEE-copyrighted material on their own webservers without permission, pro
-vided that the IEEE copyright notice and a full citation to the original work appear 

on the ˜rst screen of the posted copy. An accepted manuscript is a version which 

has been revised by the author to incorporate review suggestions, but not the pub
-lished version with copyediting, proofreading, and formatting added by IEEE. 

For more information, please go to: http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/
 publications/rights/paperversionpolicy.html. Permission to reprint/republish this 

material for commercial, advertising, or promotional purposes or for creating 
new collective works for resale or redistribution must be obtained from IEEE by 
writing to the IEEE Intellectual Property Rights Of˜ce, 445 Hoes Lane, Pisca
-taway, NJ 08854-4141 or pubs-permissions@ieee.org. Copyright © 2013 IEEE. 
All rights reserved.
Abstracting and Library Use: 
Abstracting is permitted with credit to the source. Li
-braries are permitted to photocopy for private use of patrons, provided the per-copy 
fee indicated in the code at the bottom of the ˜rst page is paid through the Copyright 
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923.
continued from p. 92
Selected CS articles and columns 
 are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
