 106IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEsoftware construction
Editors: Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas The Pragmatic Programmersandy@pragmaticprogrammer.com 
dave@pragmaticprogrammer.com
Aguiding principle behind agile soft-ware development is the idea of keep-
ing things simple. The Agile Manifesto
defines it this way: ÒSimplicityÑthe
art of maximizing the amount of work

not doneÑis essential.ÓWe want to actively increase the Òamount of
work not done.Ó We do this by only implement-

ing essential features or framework functionalityand by taking steps (such as constant refactoringand avoiding Òbroken windowsÓ1) to avoid fu-ture problems that might require extra work.Making life simpler is an admirable goal, butunfortunately many developers have a knack for
making one of two errors:Oversimplifying something that really is
complex Overcomplicating something that should be
easyThe first problem is usually readily noticeable
as long as a customer or sponsor is involved in

the project, as the corresponding lack of func-
tionality soon becomes apparent. Even if the
problem isnÕt noticeable at the user level, you
might see warning signs in the code: the number
of Òspecial casesÓ needed to handle a particular

piece of application functionality starts to grow
suddenly. You start to see code that just isnÕt

tractable; pushing on it ÒhereÓ causes another

problem to pop up over Òthere.Ó Developers
might begin to exhibit that sudden stricken look
(like a deer caught in the headlights of a rapidlyapproaching car) as they proceed further into the

requirements, and so on. WeÕll talk more about

this ÒWhack-a-MoleÓ style of development in a

later column; for now, onto the second problem.
Extreme Programming attacks overembellish-ment with the YAGNI(you arenÕt gonna need it)

principle.2This pithy maxim admonishes us tobuild today only those features that we truly need

today. The notion that Òwe might need thisÓ later

turns out to be false so often thatÕs it better to err

on the conservative side and never build anything
unless you absolutely, positively need it right now.
But is that notion true? Does it really workthat way?Some have criticized XP on this issue, sayingthat YAGNIlimits intelligent foresight. Taken at

face value, it might seem that way, but as Kent Beck

has remarked, ÒYAGNIis not a license to be stu-

pid.Ó So perhaps we need to look at this issue more

pragmatically: how do we decide whether to build

something that isnÕt strictly necessary today but

could be cheaper in the long run to build (or start)

now and could save us from larger pains later on?Deciding what to packOne way to look at this issue is to considerhow you would pack a suitcase or overnight bag
for a short trip. You wouldnÕt want to head into
The Trip-Packing Dilemma 
Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
107CONSTRUCTIONthe jungle or other hostile area unpre-pared, but then again you have to travel
light. The carrying cost of small items in a
bag (the extra weight and volume used) is
pretty much negligible until it exceeds
some threshold. All of sudden, the bag

seems too heavy to lift comfortably. Now

youÕve got some decisions to make: What
do you absolutely need? What mightyouneed? WhatÕs the cost of taking it and of

not taking it?Experienced backpackers might welllaugh at the novice who brings along the

proverbial kitchen sink. But at the same
time, omitting even something as small as
a first aid kit might prove fatal. As with
most decision-making processes, itÕs an

exercise in risk management. HereÕs

where it gets interesting: unlike the over-
night bag, repacking code is itself another
expense. And the costs of even a little bit
of extra weight are far more significant.
The carrying cost of something as minor
as an extra unused method in a class is

often much more than we realize. All
codeÑeven unused codeÑmust be writ-

ten, understood, documented to some de-
gree, tested, and maintained as the sys-
tem evolves. Systemic overbuilding can
quickly lead to the software equivalent of
a bag you canÕt lift.
Overbuilding can also indicatedeeper misunderstandings. One fellow

on a previous clientÕs team (weÕll call

him Dick) took great careÑand copious
amounts of codeÑto build a class to
handle an interval of time. He included

appropriate conversion operators to
convert this integer value to every imag-
inable basic data type: short, long, dou-

ble, float, maybe even a char (donÕt ask).
None of this was ever used becausethe business definition of the quantity
meant it had to be treated as a native in-
teger anyway. Worse yet, because of the

many interesting business rules that gov-
erned the handling of this quantity, it

should never have been exposed as a na-
tive type in the first place.But DickÕs approach is exactly the
kind of thing YAGNItries to prevent:

he was taught the canonical dogma that
an abstract data type should provide
operators for type conversion to all
possible native data typesÑjust in caseyou might need them. That sort ofwasteful practice leads to geometric
code bloat and correspondingly in-
creased costs.The other side of the coin is just asdangerous, even though it doesnÕt have a

catchy slogan associated with it yet. To-

ward that end, we humbly suggest the
new acronym DOGBITE: do it, or getbitten in the end. HereÕs how it works.
DickÕs coworker Jane read about XP
once and is a strong advocate of YAGNI.

Jane is working on support code to save
and restore the state of serialized ob-
jects. For the moment, no requirement
exists to support transactions, although
that will be coming. ItÕs hard to envi-

sion how that would work for now, so

Jane puts off thinking about it. After
all, itÕs not needed right now.
Several months later, the time comes
when a user-visible feature now requires

transaction support. Unfortunately, be-

cause the earlier design did not allow for
transactions, what might have been a

simple matter of adding functionality be-
comes a large, messy endeavor that fi-
nally costs the team a complete rewrite of
this part of the code base. A small arith-
metic cost incurred earlier could have
spared us a larger geometric cost now.  
Social aspects Beyond the pure technical issues, youcan also have reasons to invest beyond

todayÕs requirements brought on by

ÒsofterÓ considerations. Suppose that
prior to implementing a feature, you
know that the customer has changed her
mindÑdrasticallyÑseveral times among
several possibilities. Does it sound pru-
dent to go ahead and code the feature ac-
cording to the last way the wind blew?
Or, might this be an occasion to invest in

a more flexible approach, using meta-

data, for instance? ThereÕs no strict re-

quirement for metadata, but your intu-
ition tells you that this area is volatile and

could change yet again.As with any investment, itÕs a gam-
ble you could lose. The last decision
could remain the last decision, and
youÕd lose the extra effort invested.
Then again, the added flexibility might
save you several days or even weeks ofrework down the line if youÕre right.But thereÕs a funny nonlinearity about
this decision. Looking back at the last sev-
eral projects weÕve dealt with, a consistent
trend seems to emerge. The portions of
systems that went beyond the require-
ments of the dayÑthose that heavily used
metadata, configurable options, and the
likeÑenjoyed a longer and more robust
life than those that didnÕt. In a recent case,

the only portion of a large system that

survived past the first year was the one we
built. It was driven by its own custom, do-
main-specific language, which was imple-
mented using yaccand lex. Inherentlyflexible beyond the immediate require-
ments, it alone survived.These techniques donÕt suit every pro-
ject, of course. The only way to find out
whether they do or donÕt is to use your

own judgment, regardless of any current
pithy maxims. Limitations of pith The pragmatic approach always
takes advantage of experience. Your ex-

perience, after all, is where your value
lies. ItÕs how you keep your job, or get

the next one. Taking a pithy maxim

such as YAGNIto extremes dehuman-

izes the development process and cuts
off your foresight born of experience.Pithy maxims just remind us of deeperissues; a world of gray matter exists behind
every black-and-white rule. ThatÕs why

thereÕs no substitute for experience, judg-

ment, and common sense. Without these,

and despite the best practices and latest
methodologies, project teams will fail.DonÕt shortchange yourself or your

team: listen to your intuition, learn

from your experience. ThatÕs the
pragmatic thing to do. References1.A. Hunt and D. Thomas, 
The Pragmatic Pro-grammer: From Journeyman to Master, Addi-son-Wesley, 2000.
2.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained,Addison-Wesley, 1999.
Andy Huntand Dave Thomasare partners in ThePragmatic Programmers. They feel that software consultants
who canÕt program shouldnÕt be consulting, so they keep current
by developing complex software systems for their clients. Con-
tact them via www.pragmaticprogrammer.com.
