 96IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/04/$20.00 © 2004 IEEEsoftware construction
Editors:Dave Thomas and Andy Hunt 
The Pragmatic Programmersdave@pragmaticprogrammer.com 
andy@pragmaticprogrammer.com
We receive email from our readers
every day. Much of it relates their

experiences in the field and how

our writings apply. Every now and

then we get a letter that really

makes us stop and think.I had posted a story on my blog about myyoung sonÕs invention of the word 
imaginate:imaginate: (v) to instantiate into reality
by pure will of imagination
A few weeks after I posted that, I received a
letter from a fellow named Pete (IÕll leave off

his last name to give him a shred of privacy).
Pete told me about a system heÕd written that

helped him rapidly create and deploy code for
his clients and how it hinged on that word,
Òimaginate.ÓIt seems he had this one client that had al-
ready suffered two failed attempts at this par-

ticular project. Each attempt was bid at over

US$300,000 and estimated to take anywhere
from three to four months. Between them, thecompany spent over $200,000 on services,$100,000 on legal fees because of the poor
quality of those services, and more than a
quarter-million on penalties because they still

didnÕt have the software completed.
Pete looked at the projectÕs requirements
and thought they were pretty straightfor-

ward. So, he asked if could have a go at it.

The client was necessarily skeptical, but she

agreed to sit down with him and give it a try.

Pete describes what happened next, using his
home-brew application development system:
I Òplugged inÓ one of the data structuresthat had been outlined in the RFP,

pressed the ÒGoÓ button, and let the

system do its work. A few seconds later,

the client was entering some test data

into the scheduling screen. Her com-

ments: ÒThis is simply amazing. Do you

mean that I can imaginatelike this

whenever I think of something I want to
try?Ó We both had a good laugh at her

reaction. She went out and brought the
whole department in to see the ÒsystemÓ

she was designing Òcome to lifeÓ before
her very eyes. The end result was that I
got the assignment, it was completed in

about three weeks, and they saved quite
a bit of money.
By now Pete had my attention. What a
wonderful example of agile development! He
had the ability to sit down with the user and
create the software in real time. This is some-
thing weÕve always aimed for and looked to-ImaginateAndy Hunt and Dave Thomas September/October 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
97SOFTWARE CONSTRUCTION
ward frameworks such as Naked Ob-jects, new IDEs (integrated develop-
ment environments), or new languages
such as Ruby to help get us there. So, I asked Pete about this mar-velous technology heÕd developed.
What was it written in? Would he con-

sider making it available as an open
source project?Imagine my surprise when Pete toldme it was written in Cobol.
Worse yet, Pete chose Cobol for a
very pragmatic reason: Ònot because of

any particular bias for the language but
for the additional features that come

with the version IÕve used.Ó He went on

to say heÕd written this system in vari-

ous languages, dating all the way back
to 1973!Apparently, it doesnÕt require the lat-
est technologies to make users happy. 
It canÕt be done But not all of his clients were as ap-preciative. In fact, a typical reaction
he gets from IT departments to his

rapid-development approach is Òit
canÕt be done.Ó For 30 years, PeteÕs

been in there pitching. The users and

sponsors love it, but occasionally the
IT folks say Òit canÕt be doneÓ and

squash the project, throwing Pete out
the door (hopefully thatÕs just a figure

of speech).
And of course theyÕre right, arenÕt
they? We, as an industry, love to build

the grand frameworks that can solve
all the worldÕs problems in one unified

package. With that in hand, you could

in fact just sit down with the user and

bang out a solid, robust application
complete with security, navigation,

user scripting, and so on, coupled with
a repository of proven, debugged ob-

ject prototypes that are customized as
required.But with all our resources, wehavenÕt managed to do that very well

yet. Applications that are thrown to-

gether quickly usually exact a steep

price in the long run, leaving behind a

quicksand-like pile of Visual Basic,

Foxpro, or Perl code that isnÕt main-

tainable or extendable at all. And yet

hereÕs this guy who claims to be able
to build software that lasts and deliv-
ers value, for as long as itÕs needed,

and is simple and straightforward to
understand, maintain, enhance, and

extend.How is that possible?
It can be doneMany of us get into the business ofprogramming because we love the tech-
nology. We love listening to the crisp

hum of the compiler as it builds a

world according to our own whims.

ThatÕs great motivation to get into the

business, and itÕs probably a good an-

gle if youÕre pursuing a research topic,

but it doesnÕt cut it when it comes to

programming in a corporate environ-
ment for business users.Users donÕt care whether you use
J2EE, Cobol, or a pair of magic rocks.
They want their credit card authoriza-

tion to process correctly and their in-
ventory reports to print. You help them

discover what they really need and
jointly imagine a system. Instead of getting carried awaywith the difficult race up the cutting
edge of the latest technology, Pete

concentrated on building a system
that works for him and his clients. ItÕs

simple, perhaps almost primitive by

our lofty standards. But itÕs easy to

use, easy to understand, and fast to
deploy. PeteÕs framework uses a mix-

ture of technologies: some modeling,
some code generation, some reusable
components, and so on. He applies
the fundamental pragmatic principle
and uses what works, not whatÕs
merely new or fashionable.We fail (as an industry) when we try
to come up with the all-singing, all-
dancing applications framework to
end all applications frameworks.
Maybe thatÕs because there is no

grand, unified theory waiting to

emerge. One of the hallmarks of post-
modernism (which some think is a dis-
tinguishing feature of our times) is that
thereÕs no Ògrand narrative,Ó no over-

arching story to guide us. Instead,
there are lots of little stories.PeteÕs not trying to fix all the
worldÕs problems, just his.
Lessons learnedSo what can we take away from all
this? I think there are a few, very old-

fashioned, very agile ideas in this story:Users like results. They donÕt care
about the technology. Do you re-ally care about the polycarbonate
resins used to make your car en-
gine? Or just that you get 80 miles
to the gallon? What fab process
was used to make the chip inside
your cell phone?Users like to be involved. 
WhatÕs it
like to be held hostage to a critical

system that you depend on but into
which you have no input? Try call-

ing up your credit card company
or long-distance provider and nav-

igating their voice mail. Fun, isnÕt

it? What would that have looked

like if youÕd been involved in its
design?Reuse is great, but use is better. 
Petesolved recurring problems that pre-

sented themselvesnot problemsthat might come up, but the ones

that did come up. You donÕt need to

solve all the worldÕs problems; at

least not at first.
Tools should support rapid develop-
ment with feedback.
Our compilers,
IDEs, and development tools need

to support our ability to imaginate:
to create what we want almost as

fast as we can think it.Unfortunately, our development envi-
ronments are getting larger and larger,

which makes development timeÑto
say nothing of the learning curveÑ
longer and longer.
If your tools donÕt support interactive

design and rapid development with
the end user or sponsor as an activeparticipant, then you might as well

scrap them and use Cobol.Pete did.Dave Thomas and Andy Hunt are partners inThe Pragmatic Programmers and authors of the Jolt Productivity
Award-winning 
The Pragmatic Starter Kitbook series. Contactthem via www.PragmaticProgrammer.com.
