 0740-7459/06/$20.00 © 2006 IEEEJuly/August 2006IEEE SOFTWARE
19focusSoftware Testing Practices in Industry
Constructing quality products continues to be one of software de-
velopmentÕs greatest challenges. Testing, one of the most crucial

tasks along the software development life cycle, can easily exceed

half of a projectÕs total effort. A successful testing approach can
guest editorsÕ introduction
Natalia Juristo and Ana M. Moreno, Universidad Polit”cnica de MadridWolfgang Strigel,
QA Labs save significant effort and increase product qual-ity, thereby increasing customer satisfaction and

lowering maintenance costs.Despite these obvious benefits, the state ofsoftware testing practice isnÕt as advanced as

software development techniques overall. In
fact, testing practices in industry generally arenÕt

very sophisticated or effective. This might be
due partly to the perceived higher satisfaction
from developing something new as opposed to
testing something that already exists.Also, many software engineers considertesters second-class citizens. They see testing as
a junior or entry position and use it merely as a
springboard into development jobs. However,

this perception might be changing with the in-

troduction of agile development techniques, in

which testers become fully integrated members

of the development team. The articles in this
special issue demonstrate that testing is as much

a professional discipline as development and

can present interesting challenges and solutions.Academia spends significant effort in re-
searching new testing approaches. Promising ap-
proaches have started to find acceptance in in-
dustry, but the technology transfer between

testing research and industry is still insufficient.

Academics sometimes say that industry is imma-
ture and practitioners are clueless, whereas prac-
titionersm
ight argue that researchers squander
their timedeveloping cool but useless testingtechnologies. As often happens, the truth lies
somewhere in between.
The challenges of unit testingIEEE SoftwarehasnÕt published a special is-
sue on testing since 1991,so itÕs well worth re-

visiting this topic. We want to show how practi-

tioners approach the challenges of testingÑand
particularly unit testingÑand how such experi-
ences can be useful to other organizations.The IEEE defines unit testingas Òthe testingof individual software or hardware units or
groups of related units.Ó Other definitions re-

fer to testing software components as opposed

to a complete build or system test. The articles

we chose all observe that developers rather
than testers typically implement unit tests. 
This issueSoftware testing is a huge field; covering itfully in a special issue of four articles is impos-
sible. We couldnÕt include many of the excel-

lent papers that were submitted on the topic.The articles we chose address a cross sectionof industrial testing techniques. The first, ÒA
Survey of Unit Testing Practices,Ó presents the

results of a survey conducted in 19 Swedish
companies to explore their unit-testing process.
Per Runeson investigates what these companies
consider a unit test, how these tests are per-
formed, who executes these tests, when they are
complete, and why companies perform such test-

ing. The article identifies commonly observed
problems in unit testing such as a lack of suit-
able documentation, lack of metrics, and the ab-
sence of clear criteria to indicate when you can
stop testing. You might find this benchmark of

interest for your own unit-testing process.ÒAgile Software Testing in a Large-Scale
ProjectÓ describes a radical departure from tra-
ditional testing approaches in the context of an
agile development process. David Talby and
his colleagues from the Israel Institute of Tech-

nology and Israeli Air Force describe their ex-
perience in applying agile testing in a large-
scale, enterprise-critical software project. Their
quantitative and qualitative data show how ag-

ile testing succeeded. Their field-tested tactics
achieved promising results.The last two articles deal with automating
software testing. ÒUnit Tests Reloaded: Para-

meterized Unit Testing with Symbolic Execu-

tionÓ deals with how to use symbolic execu-

tion to increase code coverage by generating

new unit tests and finding relevant variations.
Nikolai Tillmann and Wolfram Schulte discuss

how Microsoft adapted such techniques in de-
veloping commercial testing tools. The final

article, ÒIndustrial Deployment of the New

TTCN-3 Testing Technology,Ó analyzes the ef-

fective adoption of a relatively new scripting

language in a large organization. Thomas
Dei§ and his colleagues discuss the various
technical and management issues you must ad-
dress when you introduce a new technology in
an organization. They also touch on the devel-
opment of new competencies and knowledge

transfer and the other considerable benefits
from adopting this new technology. 
Finally, our roundtable discussion with sev-
eral prominent researchers and industry con-
sultants addresses the gap between testing re-
search and industry practices. In particular, we

asked them, Is the practice of software testing in

industry effective? Not unexpectedly, this ques-

tion raised some conflicting opinions. However,

the experts all agreed that testing does not re-
20IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Many software
engineerssee testing as a junior orentry positionand use itmerely as a springboardintodevelopmentjobs. July/August 2006IEEE SOFTWARE
21ceive the same attention as development andthat current industry testing practices leave a

lot to be desired.
We hope that the industry experiences
described here will help improve
testing in other organizations. Aslong as industry does not increase its em-
phasis on testing practices, research into
testing methods will remain limited. Sim-
ilarly, the current underrepresentation of

testing in software engineering curricula
will continue.On the other hand, we believe that theimportance placed on testing will increase
as softwareÕs pervasiveness in everyday

life increases. Our dependence on soft-

ware, from driving cars to shopping on
the Internet, will decrease usersÕ toler-ance of defective software. Although testing isnÕt
the only software engineering practice to en-
sure quality software, it will remain an essential

component of the development life cycle.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
About the AuthorsNatalia Juristois a professorof computer science at Universidad
Polit”cnica de Madrid, where she co-
ordinates the Software Engineering
Group and directs masterÕs courses in

software engineering and knowledge
engineering. She is a senior member
of the IEEE Computer Society and
member of the ACM, AAAS, and NYAS.
Contact her at Facultad de Inform⁄tica, Universidad Polit”cnica
de Madrid, Campus de Montegancedo s/n, E-28660 Boadilla del
Monte, Madrid, Spain; natalia@fi.upm.es.Ana M. Morenois an assistantprofessor of computer science at Uni-
versidad Polit”cnica de Madrid. Con-
tact her at Facultad de Inform⁄tica,
Universidad Polit”cnica de Madrid,
Campus de Montegancedo s/n, E-
28660 Boadilla del Monte, Madrid,
Spain;ammoreno@fi.upm.es.
Wolfgang Strigel
is presidentof QA Labs. His special area of inter-
est is software engineering process
and, more recently, software testing

in the context of pragmatic business
needs. Contact him at QA Labs, #470-
1122 Mainland St., Vancouver, BC

V6B 5L1, Canada; strigel@qalabs.com.