 0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEEMay/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
43focusall the new features we needed. I feel as thoughIÕm no longer in control here.Ó
This fictitious dialogue captures the culturalchanges and different management and engi-
neering viewpoints we encountered in a study
of three large software development organiza-

tions that started using agile methods. 
We undertook the study in response to
questions raised at an industrial seminar on
Extreme Programming (XP)1,2and agile devel-opment methods held in 2003. The Software

Engineering and Research Group at Lund Uni-
versity sponsored the seminar, which included

representatives from more than 20 different
software companies. The representatives were

extremely interested in agile development, but

they werenÕt sure whether or how it might co-

exist with their existing project management

models. Their interest prompted us to study the fea-
sibility of applying agile methods in the con-text of large software development projects

using stage-gate project management models

(see the related sidebar). The results showed

not only the feasibility but also the benefits of

this approach as well as issues that must be
addressed to ensure its success.Case studiesÕ scopeThe software engineering community has
generally viewed agile methods favorably. The

focus on simplicity, programmers, and prod-

ucts empowers the technical staff and gives a

back-to-basics sense to their work. This con-
trasts starkly with process-oriented and matu-
rity-oriented approaches, such as CMM,
which empower management and quality de-
partments by adding procedures and stan-
dards to improve products. All the engineering

teams in the software development companies
focus 1Combining Agile Methodswith Stage-Gate Project
ManagementThe project manager enters the room where the pilot agile develop-
ment team sits. ÒWe have to add a new feature to our next re-

lease,Ó he says. ÒCan you please put it on the list?Ó
ÒYes, of course,Ó a team member replies. ÒJust let us know which
feature you want us to postpone in its place.Ó
The manager gets confused and a little annoyed. ÒWhatÕs happening? When
we used our traditional development methodology, you could squeeze in 
Daniel Karlstrım and Per Runeson, Lund UniversityCase studies atthree large,
software product
companies show the
benefits and pitfalls
of integrating agile
methods with stage-
gate management
models.adapting agility we studied were enthusiastic for makingprocess changes to introduce agile methods.
The company management in all cases wasconvinced of the need for change; the question
was what to change to and how to implement

change in the face of higher-priority delivery

deadlines. As a first step in our study, we reviewed the
literature and found a mismatch between the

companiesÕ concerns and the available infor-

mation. The companies run in global, prod-

uct-driven markets, using stage-gate models to
manage development projects. By contrast, ag-ile methods are derived from small-scale, con-
tract-driven software development projects.

Much of the agile literature focuses on a con-
tract situation over a product situation. More-

over, excepting some preliminary research by

Christina Wallin, Fredrik Ekdahl, and Stig Lars-

son,3little research is available on integratingagile into stage-gate models, and the authors of

a second, more recent study note that data col-

lection for the research was less than ideal.4Our research objective therefore focused on in-
vestigating the integration of agile teams into

stage-gate software product development, ad-
hering to a strict qualitative research process.
Managing single-iteration contracts differsconsiderably from managing for software prod-
ucts or product lines, which a company main-

tains continuously. Traditional projects plan and

allocate resources completely before work be-
gins. The development stagesÑrequirements,high-level design, detailed design, testing, and
ÒproductizingÓÑare either sequential or iter-

ated in long cycles. The process tries to mini-

mize requirements changes so that the product
is completed on time. Functionality is the

fixed variable in traditional projects. In contrast, agile methods try to minimize
the effects of changes at any time in the prod-
uct life cycle. Time is the fixed variable in ag-

ile projects.Two of the companies we studiedÑABB
Automation and Ericsson Microwave Sys-
temsÑwere trying to use XP in limited parts

of a software development project that was

governed by their respective stage-gate man-
agement models. In both cases, the companies

changed the software engineering methodol-
ogy without changing the stage-gate model.
However, the companies had quite different

introduction strategies and politics. Our stud-
ies aimed primarily to gather experience data
for use in improving the stage-gate and techni-

cal engineering models. At Vodafone, we studied the stage-gate
model itself from a program and product man-

agement perspective. Our goal was to identify

issues that might benefit from including agile
influences in the stage-gate model at this level.
Companies and productsTable 1 summarizes some key characteris-
tics of the three organizations we studied: ABB
Automation, Ericsson Microwave Systems,
and Vodafone Group global product develop-
44IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
A stage-gate model describes a work process from idea to delivered
product. The model presents the stages of product development in a generic,
abstract project life cycle suitable for high-level management.Figure A shows the five stages of the classic Cooper stage-gate model.
1Othermodels have other labels but the same principles.2Two stages are connected
through a gate. At each gate, top management and the project sponsor decide
on whether to continue funding the project and move to the next stage.At a more detailed level, a stage-gate model is connected to a technicalengineering process model, such as a waterfall development process or an

iterative software development process. Milestones in the engineering process

are connected to gates in the stage-gate model.References1.R.G. Cooper, 
Winning at New Products, 3rd ed., Perseus Publishing, 2001.
2.L. Mulder, ÒThe Importance of a Common Project Management Method in the Corporate En-
vironment,Ó R&D Management, vol. 27, no. 3, 1997, pp. 189Ð196.
Stage-Gate Project Management ModelsDiscovery
Stage 1Post-launch
reviewGate 1Stage 2Gate 2Gate 3Gate 4Gate 5Stage 3Stage 4Stage 5ScopingBuild
businesscaseDevelopmentTesting &
validationLaunchFigure A. Cooper stage-gate project management model.  ment. These organizations have some key char-acteristics in common: they are all branches of
large global companies with several thousand
employees and worldwide markets, and they
all use corporate stage-gate project manage-
ment models for product development.However, their application domains, prod-
ucts, and markets differ substantially. ABB op-

erates in the industrial automation domain,
providing automation systems to the industry
market. Ericsson Microwave operates in the
defense domain, constructing radar surveil-

lance and target tracking systems on a con-
tract basis with military customers. Vodafone

Group provides telecom services and products
to a global mass market of approximately 140
million customers in 26 countries.
ABB AutomationA pilot XP project at ABB originated in adeveloper groupÕs interest. The group was in-

fluenced by the general hype surrounding XP
in software media. The organization didnÕt

tailor its stage-gate models specifically for the
agile projects, but management supported the
initiative by providing resources for coaching
software engineers. They authorized training
expenses from the staff training budget and

obtained financial support from the corporate
research division as well. The XP team delivered its product releases
ahead of schedule and under budget. One or
two team members were at first doubtful but

soon turned around, and the team functioned

together for about three years. ItÕs currently

dispersed to help other projects that are not

using agile methods but are past their delivery
deadline.Ericsson Microwave SystemsThe Ericsson initiative also came from a
small engineering group that had become in-
terested in agile methods from the media hype.

In this case, however, the engineers started an

internal study group on their own, approach-
ing management later about introducing XP in
their own software development work. Man-
agementÕs initial response was indifferent; the

group could try it as long as it didnÕt interfere

with the work to be performed.
The XP team received no support from theirown management or the rest of the organiza-

tion during the introduction of the methodol-
ogy or the projectÕs execution. The team devel-

oped the assigned functionality successfully, but

were disbanded after a two-year pilot project.
One reason is that management came to con-

sider the methodology a threat during the proj-

ect. However, it has since become very inter-

ested in the methods, because the XP-developed

partsÕ quality is significantly higher than the

quality of other parts of the project.
Vodafone Group
The Vodafone study perspective was differ-
ent. The focus was on product management in
the stage-gate model. Management had heard
about agile product development from engi-

neering and wanted to see which ideas could
apply at a higher level in the company. The

company is working on improving its product
stage-gate process and is interested in agile
methods as one source of inspiration. 
The Vodafone product development envi-
ronment is the fastest paced and most volatile

of all three companies, owing to the large

number of operators and countries involved asMay/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
45Table 1Overview of the cases involved in the study
Software engineering CompanyProduct typeCustomer typeBusiness modelmethodologySEPM* modelGoal
ABBReal-time industrial control  Industrial MarketNormally traditional; pilotStage-gateAgile software team
and automation systemcustomersteam using XPintegration into gate 
modelEricssonEmbedded radar control  MilitaryProduct line withNormally traditional withStage-gate,Agile software team
and target trackingcontractssome iteration, pilot team iterativeintegration into gate
using XPmodel
VodafoneComplex hardware-softwareConsumer massMarketTraditionalStage-gateAgile influences 
system of systemsmarket
in gate model*Software Engineering Project Management well as the intense competition in the telecom
market. Despite significant enthusiasm for

change from both software engineering and
marketing, change is proving difficult to pri-
oritize over day-to-day deadlines. Other issues
complicating the Vodafone case include the

large number of people involved in a change
made at higher organizational levels and the
geographic distances involved in distributed
development teams. As a result, the change

initiative is moving slower than expected.Research findingsWe adopted a qualitative approach for this
research, based on semistructured interviews

and archival analyses in the three companies
(see the ÒResearch MethodologyÓ sidebar).
The analysis procedure resulted in findings in

four areas, summarized in Table 2, where a

Ò+Ó indicates positive effects and a Ò!Ó indi-
cates effects that might require attention.
Planning and prioritizationIn both the ABB and Ericsson cases, the ag-ile development style implies that the engi-
neering team is working on the most impor-

tant features at any given time and completing
them first. This establishes earlier feedback

loops on the most important features and

keeps the project deadline from affecting their

scope. Only less important features might be

scaled back or dropped. Agile methods also eliminate the Òrequire-
ments crammingÓ problem. In stage-gate de-
velopment, management might ask engineer-
ing to squeeze in extra features now and then.
Uncertainty about overall progress as well as
how much work each plan increment required
made it relatively easy to add such features
without excluding something else. The work

to be done would gradually increase, along
with uncertainty about the projectÕs progress. 
XP microplanning lets developers set theserequests up as trade-offs: ÒSure, we can do

that, but what do you want to take out?Ó In

the beginning, this frustrated management in
the Ericsson case, but later, it was considered

a benefit. 46IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Table 2Findings summary for the effects of agile methods in three industry cases
AreaAgile featureEffect*
Planning and prioritizationMost important feature first+ Early feedback on features
+ No delays of important featuresMicro planning+ Avoidance of requirementsÕ cramming
+ Fixed plans avoided! Little support for long-term plansCommunication and follow-upCoherent teams+ Good internal communication
! Potential isolation of agile teamAutomatic testing+ Means for communication of change
+ Higher qualitySmall, manageable tasks+ Feeling of being in control

Continuous integration+ Higher quality
+ Progress measure for managementProcess model and rolesCustomer involvement+ Continuous feedback
+ Relevant features + Technical product manager is a good candidate as customer representative
Documentation as tasks+ Priorities resolved between documentation and code 
! Conflicts visible between different amounts of documentationProject managementEngineering-level empowerment+ Engineers feel motivated
! Managers afraid initially! Management training neededFocus+ 
Engineers focus on past and current release, managers on current and future release+ (!) Technical issues raised (too) early for management
Engineering-level initiative+ Little resistance to change
*+ Indicates positive effect, and !indicates effects that might need attention. The higher iteration frequency in agile de-
velopment also provides more opportunities for

product feedback. Replanning with Gantt

charts and requirements specifications takes a

lot of management time. This becomes more
apparent as the business environment becomes

more volatile and fast-paced. Planning a fixed

schedule is difficult in these environments. In
the Vodafone case, managers would sometimes

hardly have time to complete change planning,

let alone implementation. A strategy that facili-

tates change would be more effective.
Communication and follow-upBoth the ABB and Ericsson XP teams experi-enced improved communication among their
members, but other teams perceived them as
more isolated. ItÕs positive for the team to get on

with their work undisturbed, but negative if
theyÕre cut off completely from the larger or-
ganization. For example, resolving dependencies
requires formal communication of some kind.Any company attempting to combine agilewith stage-gate methods must resolve commu-
nication issues. ABB often resolved dependen-

cies through automatic testing of dependent
functionality. Failed test cases indicated the

occurrence of a change that had an impact on
other features. Direct person-to-person com-

munication proved more effective than docu-
ment-based communication in resolving these

matters, but management especially found this
difficult to accept.Because agile teams deliver actual function-
ality in running software, rather than docu-

mentation and partially developed functional-

ity, they can easily demonstrate project status to

customers. The demonstration also constitutes

a tangible progress report in the stage-gate

model. Management and developers perceived
the project status much more clearly than with

the traditional process, and the projects spent

less time estimating progress overall. The agile practice of splitting tasks into
small, easily managed packages made it easy to
focus. Teams experienced less confusion and

expressed a sense of having their work Òunder
control.Ó This practice also all but eliminated

the problem that requirements changes pose

under traditional engineering processes, which
require system replanning, redesign, and recod-

ing. The teams also reported better understand-

ing of the systemÕs technical inner workings. 
The quality of delivered product parts in-
creased markedly. The teams themselves saw
this improvement, as did other teams relying

on the parts. Figure 1 shows the drop in de-

fects reported for the ABB development team.

(Note that the data for 2000 and 2004 is only
for the part of the year during which the proj-
ect was activeÑnamely, fall 2000 and spring

2004.) Management attributes some of the
quality improvement to the agile practice of
May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
47We are convinced of quantitative researchÕs effectiveness in software engi-
neering process research,1 but such methods are extremely difficult to apply
to some problems. For example, qualitative methods are often more effective

for investigating broad research questions.2The integration of agile teamsinto software-producing organizations is such a question, unlikely to yield to
a laboratory setup or a purely quantitative approach in the actual context.
Figure B presents an overview of our methodology, though it simplifies
the qualitative analysis, which occurs in several steps.We conducted a total of 18 semistructured interviews at the three compa-
nies, approximately one hour each, with employees in different positions,

including engineering, management, product management, and project
management. The researchers recorded, transcribed, and analyzed the in-
terviews. We used several techniques to increase the studyÕs validityÑfor ex-

ample, researchers performed certain steps of the analysis independently.

The conclusions are fully traceable to individual interviewee statements. 
Our research group is working closely with two of the companies in co-operative, long-term research, which implies tacit knowledge about the com-

pany operations and products.References1.C. Wohlin et al., 
Introduction to Experimentation in Software Engineering, Kluwer AcademicPublishers, 1999.
2.C. Robson, 
Real World Research
, Blackwell Publishers, 2002.Research MethodologyOfficial documentsRecordedinterviewsTranscribed
interviews
IndividualperceptionsQualitativeanalysisConclusionsContextFigure B. Research methodology overview. The qualitative analysis
actually occurs in several steps before drawing conclusions from
the overall process. continuous integration, which eliminates the
Òbig bangÓ integration period that character-
izes meeting delivery milestones in traditional

processes. Process model and roles
The agile requirement to identify a cus-
tomer representative worked well with the

stage-gate model. This was particularly true in
the ABB case. Identifying a customer represen-

tative increased the amount andÑequally im-
portantÑthe rate of feedback on the per-

formed work. The technical product manager

was the most natural person to assume this re-
sponsibility on a day-to-day basis, providing a
single point of contact for both the team and

senior management. Quick feedback elimi-
nated erroneous functionality at an early de-
velopment stage. The customer representative

also kept the team conscious of someone di-
rectly in need of their work products. 
The Ericsson team had more difficultyidentifying a clear customer representative.
Without this role in place, team members felt

more as if they were developing software for

the shelf.The customer role is complex on these largeprojects, and it became apparent that the process
required different customer representation at
varying intervalsÑfor example, customer repre-
sentation for marketing product management,
program management, usability testers, end
users, and other software teams. At the project

management level, it was important to have botha clear customer acting as a link to the develop-
ers as well as a clear overall leader and decision

maker, coordinating marketing with technical

and program management within the common

stage-gate framework.The development teams planned documen-
tation work as tasks like any others. This
proved very successful by clarifying that code
development and documentation use the same
resources. This made it easy to prioritize the

tasks effectively. However, it also exposed the

conflict between the large amount of docu-

mentation the stage-gate model requires and

the lesser amount the engineers request.Project management
In all three study cases, management ac-knowledged a need to change the traditional
way the companies developed software prod-
ucts. The problem was that neither they northe development teams really knew what
changes to make. After the pilot studies, all the
companies decided that the agile approach is a
serious alternative and are considering ways it
can influence future corporate methodologies
and processes. Both management and develop-
ers agree that actual development doesnÕt ad-

here strictly to current models anyway. Espe-

cially under deadline pressures, development
proceeds in an ad hoc, short-sighted way.
That the process change initiative came di-
rectly from engineering, instead of manage-

ment, appears to be a success factor. The devel-

opment team is highly motivated to accept the

new methodology. The Ericsson team, however,

encountered the problem of not having initial

acceptance at the management level. Compa-

nies must take steps to increase support and un-

derstanding throughout the organization. They

can do this by offering appropriate training at
each company level and function. They might

also establish forums where individuals can ex-

press their ideas.At the product management level, the com-pany has to maintain focus on the current
product development and on its future direc-
tion. The development team is naturally fo-

cused on developing the current product. They
must also fix the faults in recently developed

products, but they are less concerned about
future releases. Developers can easily perceive
this difference in focus as a lack of interest in
their work. Integrating agile methods with the

stage-gate model keeps the development48IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
20002001200220032004
Total submitted
Closed
Remaining open800700
600
500
400
300
200
1000Introduction of XPNumber of defectsYear
Figure 1. Defect report
statistics from the 
ABB Automation 
development team. teamÕs detailed work on track without having
to consider long-term strategy. Such strategies

are left to management, which is exactly what

the managers want. On the other hand, this approach forcesmanagement to take early stands on technical is-
sues related to the final product, since parts of
the functionality are completed quite early in the
project. Management sometimes found this de-
cision processunsatisfactory.
In the ABB and Vodafone cases, the devel-
opment was distributed over different loca-
tions. This clearly affected the chances of suc-

cess. The greater the distance, the harder it

was to coordinate the work to be completed

and communicate how to do it.
Agile methods give the stage-gate
model powerful tools for microplan-

ning, day-to-day work control, andprogress reporting. The functioning product

and face-to-face meetings, for example, sup-
port much more powerful communications
than written documents. The stage-gate model,
in turn, gives agile methods a means to coordi-
nate with other development teams and com-
municate with functions such as marketing and
senior management.On the basis of our observations, using XPteams in a stage-gate context is entirely feasi-

ble. We can suggest some adjustments both to

engineering and project management that ease
the integration. The agile team must be prepared to inter-
face with the gate model. This requires some

overhead not usually associated with agile
methods. However, as long as the need for this

overhead is made clear and the overall effec-
tiveness is demonstrated, our study indicates
that this will work. In some instances, docu-

mentation can be eliminated; in others, it can

be automatically generated. It should other-
wise be treated as a development task. Includ-
ing documentation in the time-boxed planning

style makes it easy to prioritize the resources

allocated to it.
While the technical staff generally appreci-ates agile methods, management sometimes
fears them. Organizations must meet this man-
agement attitude up front for agile methods to
serve them well. If engineering does not actually initiate thechange, they must at least be well anchoredwithin the development teams. Universal ac-
ceptance is important for success. One way to

achieve this is by making changes in small
steps over a longer time.All three studied cases showed the feasibil-ity of integrating agile software development
with stage-gate project management, thereby
improving cost control, product functionality,

and on-time delivery. The problems identified

were primarily those that arise when introduc-
ing any new method. Although each of these
projects involved just one XP team, we could
not identify any issues indicating that integrat-
ing multiple XP teams into a stage-gate context
would be more difficult.References1.K. Beck, ÒEmbracing Change with Extreme Program-
ming,Ó Computer, Oct. 1999, pp. 70Ð77.2.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
3.C. Wallin, F. Ekdahl, and S. Larsson, ÒIntegrating Busi-
ness and Software Development Models,Ó IEEE Soft-ware, Nov./Dec. 2002, pp. 28Ð33.
4.M. Lindvall et al., ÒAgile Software Development in
Large Organizations,Ó Computer, Dec. 2004, pp.
26Ð34.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
49About the AuthorsDaniel Karlstrım is an associate researcher in the Software Engineering ResearchGroup at Lund University, currently on sabbatical in Cambodia. His research interests address

developer involvement in software process improvement, agile methods, maturity frameworks
for software development, software quality, and project management. He received his PhD in

software engineering from the Department of Communication Systems, Lund University. Con-

tact him at the Dept. of Communication Systems, Lund Univ., Box 118, SE-221 00 Lund, Swe-

den; daniel.karlstrom@telecom.lth.se.Per Runesonis a professor of software engineering at the Department of CommunicationSystems, Lund University, Sweden, and the leader of the Software Engineering Research Group.

His research interests concern software development methods and processes, with focus on effi-
cient and effective ways to facilitate software quality. He received his PhD in software engineer-

ing from Lund University. HeÕs a senior member of the IEEE. Contact him at the Dept. of Commu-

nication Systems, Lund Univ., Box 118, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden; per.runeson@telecom.lth.se.
