 46 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY 0740-7459/17/$33.00 © 2017 IEEESoftware Testing
The State of the Practice
Mohamad Kassab,
 Joanna F. DeFranco, and Phillip A. Laplante,
  Penn State Great Valley
// A web-based survey examined how software 
professionals used testing. The results offer 
opportunities for further interpretation and 
comparison to software testers, project 
managers, and researchers. The data 
includes characteristics of practitioners, 
organizations, projects, and practices. 
//RECENT SOFTWARE-TESTING 
re-search
 has focused largely on design
-ing new techniques and validating 
their effectiveness in real development 
contexts.
1 Throughout software de
-velopment™s history, however, testing 
techniques have struggled to keep up 
with the ever-changing trends in soft
-ware development paradigms.
1 To 
trigger any improvement in this state 
of the practice will require serious ef
-fort in predicting the trends, learning 
stakeholder mind-sets, and pinpoint
-ing software-testing problem areas.
Software quality will likely be
-come increasingly important in soft
-ware marketing. As this situation 
evolves, testing strategies will be
-come progressively more important. 

Unfortunately, little data exists on 
software professionals™ software-
 testing and quality assurance (QA) 
practices.
To discover these practices, we 
conducted a comprehensive survey of 

software professionals. We felt that 

such a survey could identify software-
testing trends. The survey responses 
could also help others understand the 

relationship between areas such as 

software testing and quality.
2 In par
-ticular, we aimed to alleviate the lack 
of data and identify best practices, 
which could then be disseminated.
Survey Design 
 and Implementation
We created a web-based survey using 
the QuestionPro survey tool (www
 .QuestionPro.com). We formulated 
the 40 survey questions after carefully 

reviewing similar surveys.
1Œ5
 (For a 
brief look at other surveys related to 
testing, see the sidebar.) Designing 
the survey took approximately 120 

person-hours over approximately one 

month. To allow a valid comparison 
with the other surveys, our survey in
-cluded selected questions from those 
surveys. A summary of our questions 

is at goo.gl/kGBLhq.
The survey had six sections:
Ł the participants™ professional 
information,
Ł the characteristics of the partici
-pants™ organizations,
Ł project characteristics,
Ł integrating testing activities into 
the development lifecycle,
Ł methods and practices, and
Ł metrics and defect management.
We asked the participants to base 

their responses on only one software 

project that they either were cur
-rently involved with or had taken 

part in during the past ˜ve years.
The participants came mostly 
from a database of former software 

engineering graduate students from 

Penn State Great Valley, which caters 

primarily to working professionals. 
We sent an email invitation (and sub
-sequent reminder) to them. We also 
posted an invitation to LinkedIn pro
-fessional testing and quality groups 
to which one or more of us belonged.
We collected data from January 
to June 2015. Of the 199 people who 

viewed the survey, 167 started tak
-ing it. Of those survey takers, 67 
(40 percent) completed the survey. 

The average time to complete it was 
 FOCUS:
 SOFTWARE TESTING
  SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2017 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 4717 minutes. We also included the re
-sults of the incomplete surveys. We 
treated all responses anonymously 
and used only aggregate data, not 

the individual responses.
The Participants
 and Organizations
The participants represented 18 in
-dustries. They had an average of 
7.8 years™ professional experience. 
Sixty-eight percent of them had suc
-cessfully completed a bachelor de
-gree or equivalent, and 32 percent 

had a master™s or doctorate.
Almost 44 percent of the par
-ticipants worked in small companies 
(1 to 100 full-time employees); 30 
percent worked at very large com
-panies (more than 1,000 full-time 
employees). The companies of 65 per
-cent of the participants had an inde
-pendent QA departmentŠ79 percent 
of the very large companies and 44 
percent of the small companies. The 

companies were in nine countries.
The participants held diverse posi
-tions in the reported projects. Charts 

depicting the participant characteris
-tics are at goo.gl/xWHEhO.
OTHER SURVEYS ON TESTING
Not much research has surveyed software professionals 
regarding testing. Jussi Kasurinen and his colleagues found 
that software professionals often considerably underes
-timated testing costs.
1 In addition, Kasurinen and his col
-leagues de
 termined that more-effective testing might re
-duce testing time, which was also often underestimated.
Dudekula Ra˜ and his colleagues reported that automat
-ing testing could help improve test reusability, repeatability, 
and testing effort.
2 However, survey results have indicated 
a low percentage of projects that use automated testing.
2Œ4
 Other studies have indicated that tool adoption is also low.
5,6
 These results support our survey ˜ndings (see the main arti
-cle). This might be due to the tools™ high cost, the training re
-quired, and the test case design effort.
2 So, tool adoption can 
be a major barrier in testing.
5,6
 Clearly, organizations don™t 
use testing tools effectively.
7 These barriers might be why 
Kasurinen and his colleagues™ survey indicated that testing 
constituted only an average of 25 percent of the total devel
-opment effort.
1 On the bright side, even with these barriers, 
Vahid Garousi and Tan Varma found that the use of automated 

testing had increased between 2004 and 2009.
6Adnan Causevic and his colleagues™ survey indicated that 
the participants used open source testing tools mostly for unit 

testing and used proprietary testing tools mostly for higher-
level system testing.
3 This corresponds with our survey re
-sults. Causevic and his colleagues also found that the survey 
participants didn™t consider writing test cases before writing 
code to be a current practice. However, our survey showed 

that this approach is becoming established in practice.
A related research area is how to build effective testing 
teams. Tanjila Kanij and her colleagues surveyed practitio
-ners to determine various factors™ importance in building 
testing teams.
8 The results suggested that software-testing 
experience was more important than interpersonal skills. The 
results also suggested the desire for testing-team members 
to have diverse work experience.
References
1. J. Kasurinen, O. Taipale, and K. Smolander, ﬁSoftware Test Automa
-tion in Practice: Empirical Observations,ﬂ 
Advances in Software Eng.
, vol. 2010, 2010, article 4.
2.
 D. Ra˜, K. Moses, and K. Petersen, ﬁBene˜ts and Limitations of Au
-tomated Software Testing: Systematic Literature Review and Practi
-tioner Survey,ﬂ 
Proc. 7th Int™l Workshop Automated Software Testing 
Conf.
, 2012, pp. 36Œ42.
3.
 A. Causevic, D. Sundmark, and S. Punnekkat, ﬁAn Industrial Survey 

on Contemporary Aspects of Software Testing,ﬂ 
Proc. 3rd Int™l Conf. 

Software Testing
, 2010, pp. 393Œ401.
4.
 J. Lee, S. Kang, and D. Lee, ﬁSurvey on Software Testing Practices,ﬂ 

IET Software
, vol. 6, no. 3, 2012, pp. 275Œ282.
5.
 S.P. Ng et al., ﬁA Preliminary Survey on Software Testing Practices 

in Australia,ﬂ 
Proc. 2004 Australian Software Eng. Conf.
, 2004, pp. 
116Œ125.
6.
 V. Garousi and T. Varma, ﬁA Replicated Survey of Software Testing 

Practices in the Canadian Province of Alberta: What Has Changed 

from 2004 to 2009?,ﬂ 
J. Systems and Software
, vol. 83, no. 11, 
2010, pp. 2251Œ2262.
7. M. Grindal, J. Offutt, and J. Mellin, ﬁOn the Testing Maturity of Soft
-ware Producing Organizations,ﬂ 
Proc. Testing: Academic & Industrial 

Conf.ŠPractice and Research Techniques
 (TAIC-PART 06), 2006, 
pp. 171Œ180.
8.
 T. Kanij, R. Merkel, and J. Grundy, ﬁA Preliminary Study on Factors 

Affecting Software Testing Team Performance,ﬂ 
Proc. 2011 Int™l Symp. 
Empirical Software Eng. and Measurement
, 2011, pp. 359Œ362.
 48 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
Project Characteristics
The projects were distributed across 
a range of application domains, 
with a mild bias toward informa
-tion technology (15 percent of the 
projects). The projects were also 

distributed across various catego
-ries, with a bias toward database 

projects (22 percent).
Sixty-˜ve percent of the projects 
involved new development, 15 percent 
involved legacy system evolution, and 
14 percent involved enhancement.
We also classi˜ed how safety-
critical the projects were. The par
-ticipants speci˜ed the maximum loss 

or damage if the software being de
-veloped failed (that is, the delivered 
service no longer complied with the 
speci˜cations). Approximately 16 

percent reported a highly critical 

system in which serious failure in
-volved loss of life. Most participants 

reported the loss would be limited to 

essential funds, discretionary funds, 

or comfort.
Regarding the projects™ dura
-tion from inception to delivery, 
48˚percent took up to one year, 

21˚percent took between 12 and 

24˚months, and 31 percent took 
more than 24 months. An average 
of 20 full-time staff (IT) were in
-volved. In terms of LOC, the proj
-ects were predominantly of medium 
size (from 5,000 to 50,000 LOC); 
36 percent contained 50,000 or 

fewer LOC.
Charts depicting the project 
characteristics are also at goo.gl
 /xWHEhO.
Integrating Testing
 into the Development 
 
Life Cycle
As software development has evolved 
into an engineering discipline, of
-ten involving distributed teams, the 

techniques and frameworks used 

have evolved accordingly. The need 

for cost-effective software produc
-tion has also reached software test
-ing. But how do organizations imple
-ment testing?
To answer this, we asked the 
participants which development 
methodology best described their 

project. Agile methodologies (for 

example, Scrum, Extreme Program
-ming, or feature-driven develop
-ment) were the most popular, consti
-tuting approximately 50 percent of 

the projects (see Figure 1).
Forty-one percent of the partici
-pants who used agile development 

and 13 percent of those who used the 

waterfall model didn™t have an in
-dependent QA team or department. 

However, this response must be seen 

in relation to company size; agile pro
-cesses are popular mainly in small 

companies that usually don™t have a 

separate QA team or department.
Most projects performed QA late 
during development, which is consis
-tent with what Peter Haberl and his 

colleagues reported.
1 Only 19 per
-cent of the participants performed 
QA in the study-and-concept phase, 
whereas 47 percent performed it 

during requirements speci˜cation 

and 49 percent performed it during 
system design. From implementation 
onward, QA practices increased sig
-ni˜cantly (see Figure 2). Projects us
-ing the waterfall model performed 
QA earlier than did projects using 
agile development.
Seventy-one percent of the par
-ticipants agreed or strongly agreed 

that testing was a de˜ned phase in 

their project. Eighty-four percent 

also preferred to have testing as a 
de˜ned phase. Forty-four percent 
of the participants (47 percent of 

the agile projects and 30 percent 

of the waterfall projects) agreed 
or strongly agreed that testing and 
code development weren™t separate 

phases in their projects, and 50 per
-cent preferred not to have testing 
and code development as separate 
phases. If we consider dissatisfac
-tion in a response as the difference 
between the current and preferred 
Other: 7.14%Uni˜ed Process: 1.19%V-model: 2.38%Lean software development: 2.38%Prototyping: 5.95%Feature-driven development: 4.76%Spiral model: 7.14%Extreme Programming: 3.57%None: 7.14%Unknown: 7.14%Waterfall model: 11.90%Scrum: 39.29%FIGURE 1. 
Participant responses regarding the development methodology that best 
described their project. Agile methodologies (for example, Scrum, Extreme Programming, 

or feature-driven development) were the most popular
  SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2017 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 49practice, these numbers indicate a 
good level of satisfaction with how 
software testing is distinct from the 
other project activities.
Approximately 17 percent of the 
participants didn™t explicitly esti
-mate the size or effort for QA or 

testing activities (see Figure 3), com
-pared to the 7.3 percent Haberl and 

his colleagues reported for a similar 
question.
1 When such estimation did 
happen, it occurred mostly together 

with the other development activities 
as a whole (37 percent of the par
-ticipants). Only 29 percent reported 

that their team didn™t do a good job 
of estimating testing activities™ size 
or effort. Surprisingly, 43 percent 

said they didn™t have enough time to 

test the software before deploying it.
Methods and Practices
The participants who had con
-ducted testing activities answered 
questions about the techniques and 
tools they used.
Organizations often have de˜ned 
levels of testing,
3 including unit, in
-tegration, system, acceptance, and 
regression testing. Figure 4a shows 
that system-level testing was the 

most common (occurring in 81 per
-cent of the projects). Approximately 
90 percent of the projects per
-formed system testing to test more 
than one system characteristic, 

with a clear focus on testing func
-tionality (see Figure 4b). The survey 

presented a list of characteristics 

derived from Kshirasagar Naik and 
 Priyadarshi Tripathy™s system-testing 

taxonomy;
6 participants could se
-lect all that applied. Performance 
was the most tested quality attri
-bute. Seventy-eight percent of the 
participants primarily used black-

box testing techniques; 42 percent 
used structure-
 based (white-box) 
techniques.
Regression testing seeks to un
-cover new bugs, or regressions, in a 
system™s functional and nonfunc
-tional areas after revisions such as 
enhancements, patches, or con˜gura
-tion changes. Only 12 percent of the 
participants reported that their proj
-ects outsourced regression testing; 
this result was close to the 11 percent 
who preferred to outsource regression 
testing. This indicates a level of sat
-isfaction with the current practice of 

regression-testing outsourcing. The 

most outsourcing occurred in the 
telecommunications and gaming in
-dustries (50 percent), compared to 33 
percent for the IT industry.
The systematic design of test cases 
and de˜nition of test data were wide
-spread. Systematic test case design 
FIGURE 2. 
The development phases in which the projects performed quality 
assurance (QA). Most projects performed QA late during development.
AcceptanceIntegrationSystem designRequirements speci˜cationStudy and concept01020304050Percentage of projects607080ImplementationFIGURE 3. 
Participant responses as to whether and how the projects estimated the 

size or effort for QA or testing activities. Surprisingly, 43 percent reported they didn™t 

have enough time to test the software before deploying it.
Not performed: 17.11%In another way: 6.58%For each document separately: 1.32%For individual QA measures: 5.26% For performing QA as a whole: 15.79%Together with other activities in the total package: 36.84%Don™t know: 17.11%01020304050Percentage of projects60708010090 50 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
identi˜es test cases to reduce the 
number of needed test cases without 
reducing test ef˜cacyŠfor example, 
by using orthogonal tests or some 

form of data˛ow testing. Systematic 

test data de˜nition identi˜es inputs 
to individual test cases through some 
process that isn™t purely random.
Although 66 percent of the par
-ticipants preferred to write test cases 
before writing code, only 26 per
-cent actually did this. Surprisingly, 
the current practice of writing test 
cases before writing code was more 
popular for the participants in
-volved with non-safety-critical sys
-tems than for those involved with 
safety-
 critical systems. However, 
although the former group seemed 
willing to improve the situation even 
more, the latter showed no inter
-est in changing toward a more test-
driven development. This is consis
-tent with Haberl and his colleagues™ 
results. This is noteworthy, consid
-ering that empirical studies seem 
to ascribe high external quality to 
test-driven-
 developed code.
1An interesting corollary to test 
case writing is the test case rep
-resentation™s degree of formality. 
Approximately 38 percent of the 

participants expressed test cases 

freely in verbal or text-based forms. 
Thirty-seven percent used formal 
languages, showing that this ap
-proach is becoming established. The 

participants used both open source 
and proprietary tools to write test 
cases. They used open source tools 

(for example, Junit) mostly for unit 
testing and proprietary tools (for 
example, Jira and HP Quality Cen
-ter) mostly for higher-level testing. 

This is consistent with Haberl and 
his colleagues™ results.
1Almost 47 percent of the partici
-pants reported highly effective test 

casesŠthat is, the test cases dis
-covered most or all defects. Thirty-
seven percent reported medium ef
-fectiveness, and 11 percent reported 
low effectiveness.
Sixty-nine percent of the par
-ticipants af˜rmed that the expected 
test results were available in the test 
cases before test execution. This 
survey result is a positive surprise. 

However, approximately 66 percent 
manually compared the expected 

and actual results. Only 34 percent 

stated that such comparison was 

normally automated and was per
-formed with tools.
Because organizations must take 
data protection seriously, it was dis
-appointing that only 22 percent of 
the participants tested with original 
data from production (see Figure 

5a). Twenty-eight percent used an 

(anonymized) copy of the production 
data, and only 22 percent compre
-hensively documented the test data. 
In addition, 62 percent didn™t ex
-plicitly distinguish between test case 

generation and generation of the as
-sociated test data.
Regression testingAcceptance testingIntegration testingUnit testing01020304050Percentage of projects60708090System testing(a)RegulatoryDocumentationReliabilityScalabilityFunctionality01020304050Percentage of projects60708090100InteroperabilityLoad and stabilityStressPerformance(b)FIGURE 4. 
Participant responses regarding the (a) levels of testing and (b) types of 
system tests for their projects (122 responses total). The participants primarily used 

black-box techniques.
  SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2017 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 51Most participants used more 
than one testing environment. Ap
-proximately 76 percent used the de
-velopment system as a testing envi
-ronment; 39 percent even used the 
production system as a testing en
-vironment (see Figure 5b). Only 45 

percent used a separate test system.
Metrics and 
 Defect Management
The most-used metric for test con
-trol was requirements coverage (66 
percent), followed by test case execu
-tion rate (60 percent). Although you 
could infer a high level of test pro
-cess maturity from this, 39 percent 
of the participants ended their test 
activities when they reached the de
-livery deadline, and 9 percent ended 

test activities when the test budget 
was exhausted (see Figure 6).
Seventy-two percent of the par
-ticipants reported that the discov
-ered defects were related to require
-ments problems such as omissions, 
changes, and errors (see Figure 

7). The next-most-reported cause 
was design problems (66 percent). 
Jira was the most popular defect-
 reporting tool (25 percent of all 

tool use).
We hope our survey and 

results stimulate re
-search into the pre
-vailing software practices. More
-over, we intend these results to 

highlight the areas of software test
-ing that need the attention of both 

the research community and indus
-try professionals.
References
1. P. Haberl et al., 
Survey 2011: Soft
-ware Test in Practice
, German Test
-ing Board, May 2011; www.istqb
 .org/documents/Survey_GTB.pdf.
(a)01020304050Percentage of projects60708001020304050Percentage of projects607080YesNoYesNo(b)Comprehensively documentedGathered with standardized formsAn (anonymized) copyof the production dataThe original production dataBundled in a test data librarySeparate test systemDevelopment systemIntegration systemPre-live-systemProduction systemFIGURE 5. 
Participant responses regarding (a) test data usage (113 responses) 

and (b) testing environments (112 responses). Disappointingly, only 22 percent of the 

participants tested with original data from production. Most participants used more than 

one testing environment.
ˇ‡ˇFIGURE 6. 
Participant responses regarding the exit criteria for test completion (103 

responses). The most common criterion was to test each requirement at least once.
 52 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
2.
 S.P. Ng et al., ﬁA Preliminary Survey 
on Software Testing Practices in Aus
-tralia,ﬂ 
Proc. 2004 Australian Soft
-ware Eng. Conf.
, 2004, pp. 116Œ125.
3.
 A. Causevic, D. Sundmark, and S. 

Punnekkat, ﬁAn Industrial Survey on 

Contemporary Aspects of Software 

Testing,ﬂ 
Proc. 3rd Int™l Conf. Soft
-ware Testing
, 2010, pp. 393Œ401.
4.
 Turkey Software Quality Report 

2014Œ2015
, Turkish Testing Board, 
2014; www.istqb.org/documents
 /TurkeySoftwareQualityReport_2014
 _2015.pdf.
5. ISTQB Effectiveness Survey 2013Œ

14, Int™l Software Testing Quali˜ca
-tions Board, 2014; www.istqb.org
 
/documents/ISTQB_Effectiveness
 _Survey_2013_14.pdf.
6.
 K. Naik and P. Tripathy, 
Software 

Testing and Quality Assurance: 

Theory and Practice
, 1st ed., John 
Wiley & Sons, 2008.
Documentation errorsBad ˜xes or regressionsStress or performance problemsTest case errorsTesting omissions and poor coverageMemory allocation problemsLogic, branching, and structural problemsInterface problems between modulesDesign problems (omissions, changes, or errors)Requirements problems(omissions, changes, or errors)01020304050Percentage of projects60708090YesNoFIGURE 7. 
Participant responses regarding the causes of discovered defects (98 

responses). The most reported cause was requirements problems.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
MOHAMAD KASSAB 
is an assistant professor of software 
engineering at Penn State Great Valley. His research interests 
include developing formal, integrated, and quantitative ap
-proaches; architectural frameworks; and tools for modeling and 
assessing software quality requirements. Kassab received a 
PhD in computer science from Concordia University, Montreal. 
Contact him at muk36@psu.edu.
JOANNA F. DEFRANCO
 is an assistant professor of software 
engineering at Penn State Great Valley. Her research interests 
include software engineering teams, project management, and 
effective collaboration. DeFranco earned a PhD in computer and 
information science from the New Jersey Institute of Technol
-ogy. Contact her at jfd104@psu.edu.
PHILLIP A. LAPLANTE
 is a professor of software and sys
-tems engineering at Penn State Great Valley. His research in
-terests include real-time systems, real-time image processing, 
safety-critical software systems, and software quality. Laplante 
received a PhD in computer science from the Stevens Institute 
of Technology. Contact him at plaplante@psu.edu.
Read your subscriptions 
through the myCS 
publications portal at
 http://mycs.computer.org
