 0740-7459/15/$31.00 © 2015 IEEE MAY/JUNE 2015
  |  IEEE SOFTWARE
35THE PRAGMATIC 
ARCHITECT
Editor: 
Eoin Woods
Endava
eoin.woods@artechra.com
Architecture Haiku
A Case Study in Lean Documentation
Michael Keeling
THE PRAGMATIC 
ARCHITECT
SOFTWARE ARCHITECTS ARE 
taught 
to create comprehensive, complete docu-
mentation. We™re taught to stamp out all 
assumptions and explicitly articulate our 

designs. Without restraint, however, ar-

chitecture descriptions can become long-
winded treatises on a system™s design. In 
the course of being thorough, we often 

inadvertently obfuscate the architectural 

vision in documents that consequently 
aren™t read.
An architecture haiku is a ﬁquick- 
to- build, uber- terse design descriptionﬂ 

that lets you distill a software- intensive 
system™s architecture to a single piece of 

paper.
1 Creating an architecture haiku is 
more than just an exercise in terse docu-
mentation. To write an effective haiku, 
you must focus on only essential design 

decisions and rationale. Much like its 

poetic cousin, an architecture haiku fol-
lows strict conventions and can express 
a mountain of information with a tiny 

footprint.
What Is an Architecture Haiku?
An architecture haiku aims to capture 

the architecture™s most important de-
tails on a single piece of paper. Placing 
extreme constraints on the architecture 

description forces architects to focus 

on the design™s most important aspects. 
With only one page to work with, there 
simply isn™t space to waste on extrane-

ous details.
For an architecture haiku to be com-
prehensive, Fairbanks recommended 

that it include
1,2
Ł a brief summary of the overall 

solution,
Ł a list of important technical 

constraints,
Ł a high- level summary of key func-

tional requirements,
Ł a prioritized list of quality 

attributes,
Ł a brief explanation of design deci-

sions, including a rationale and 
tradeoffs,
Ł a list of architectural styles and pat-
terns used, and
Ł only those diagrams that add mean-

ing beyond the information already 

on the page.
An important key to success is to fo-
cus on the most essential ideas for each 

item on this list. If something isn™t im-

portant, don™t include it. If an idea re-
quires more detail, don™t skimpŠbut 
don™t overdo it. The point isn™t to omit 

or reduce critical information but to 

highlight it. Removing noise that might 
otherwise drown out the most important 
ideas helps shine a spotlight on them.
Architecture haiku creates a 
cogni-
tive trigger
 that facilitates the recall of 

essential contextual information about 

a design decision. Rather than fully de-

scribing a decision using comprehensive 
prose and diagrams, assume the reader 
already has much of the required knowl-

edge, and focus on the critical details.
2Two of the most common examples 
of a cognitive trigger are architectural 
styles and patterns. With a single word 
 THE PRAGMATIC ARCHITECT
36 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
or phraseŠfor example, ﬁlayerﬂ or 
ﬁpipe and ˜ lterﬂŠyou can reference 
a wealth of knowledge that doesn™t 
need to be repeated in your docu-

mentation. Less formally, architects 

often use homegrown metaphors
3 or even refer to systems the team has 
previously built, to the same effect. 
Any common reference pointŠsuch 

as a whiteboard discussion, a frame-

work, an argument, or even other 
published materialŠcan be a cogni-
tive trigger that connects an essential 
decision to the context and back-
ground supporting it.
2For example, an architecture 
haiku might provide a ﬁtake- away 
lessonﬂ from a collaborative white-
board discussion, the details of 

which might be stored as raw notes 

and whiteboard photos. In many 
cases, a couple of sentences or a 
few bullet points will get the point 

across. From a team perspective, an 

architecture haiku should compre-
hensively describe the whole system 
for small or routine designs. For 

large or extremely complex systems, 
an architecture haiku might describe 
only a subcomponent for which a 

team is responsible. Or, it might 

provide an overview at the highest 
level to help create a common vision 
among distributed teams. You might 

even try creating a haiku of haikus, 

opting to use single- page descrip-
tions for each viewpoint that comes 
together to create a comprehensive 
description. In any case, the objec-

tive is the same: record suf˜ cient 
information so that team members 
can recall essential design decisions 

based on previous collaborations or 

on knowledge from other sources.
Effectively Using 
Architecture Haiku
While using architecture haiku, my 
project teams at IBM discovered 
how to consistently create useful 
one- page architecture descriptions. 
My teams were experienced but 
smallŠtypically, three to ˜ ve engi-
neers with an average of at least ˜ ve 
years™ software industry experience. 

The teams always worked directly 

with customers, so the customer™s 
architectural experience and docu-
mentation requirements often in˚ u-

enced how a team approached design 

and documentation.
Although architecture haiku was 
extremely effective, it wasn™t the 

right tool for every project or situ-
ation. Using it effectively requires 
some thought and practice. Here, I 

describe our best advice for creating 

effective architecture haikus.
Start with a Shared Understanding
When we ˜ rst learned about archi-

tecture haiku, we thought it was 
a great ideaŠbut there were some 
problems. Although we were well 

versed in enterprise search concepts, 

not everyone spoke the same soft-
ware architecture dialect, and some 
engineers weren™t familiar with cer-
tain concepts. For example, some 

engineers were familiar with the 

4+1 view model, whereas others pre-
ferred Software Engineering Insti-
tute viewpoints, and still others used 

IEEE terminology. Some engineers 
talked about nonfunctional require-
ments, and others discussed quality 

attributes. We quickly resolved these 

differences, but not before creating 
some confusion that was occasion-
ally ampli˜ ed by the sparse language 
of a haiku.
Architecture haiku relies heav-
ily on domain- speci˜ c vocabulary 

and cultural norms within a team to 

build cognitive triggers. So, readers 
must be educated in basic software 
architecture concepts to understand 

implied assumptions in the haiku. 

This includes a basic understanding 
of architectural drivers; quality attri-
bute scenarios; the use of structures, 
architectural styles, and patterns; 

and how to identify and evaluate de-
sign tradeoffs. The team must also 
agree on a vocabulary.
Explore First, Then Record Decisions
Creating an architecture haiku 

doesn™t replace design exploration, 
nor does it magically transfer knowl-
edge from one teammate to another. 

A good haiku will act as a medium 

for recalling essential information 
about design decisions such as pre-
vious discussions and collaborative 

whiteboard sessions. Without this 

context, an architecture haiku is just 
a terse document.
You can create context by collab-
oratively exploring the design space 

with stakeholders. Collaborative 
exploration lets multiple stakehold-

ers walk through the design process 

and arrive at a shared understanding 
of the design. Then, the haiku be-
An architecture haiku aims to capture
the architecture™s most important details 

on a single piece of paper.
  MAY/JUNE 2015 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 37comes a lightweight monument 
to those creative insights, a re
-minder of what you decided to 

build and why.
In our experience, an ar
-chitecture haiku is excellent 
for communication and recall 
but terrible for exploration. 

The biggest problem we ex
-perienced was deadlock. Ar
-ti˜cially constraining design 

activities to a single page too 

early constricted creativity and 
didn™t leave breathing room to 
explore alternatives. We found 

that the best strategy is to ex
-plore ˜rstŠcollaboratively 
when possibleŠthen record 
decisions in the haiku, updat
-ing it as you learn more about 

the architecture.
Treat the Haiku 
 as a Living Document
One bene˜t of constraining 

an architecture haiku to a 
single page is that it can pro
-vide guidance in a way that 
can easily evolve as the team 

learns more about the system 
being built. Figure 1 shows 
the haiku we used to describe 

the Velocity Monitor, a soft
-ware tool that monitors the 
crawling and indexing status 
of search collections. This 

tool™s scope was relatively 
small but included several in
-teresting integration points 
with other systems.
We recorded design decisions 
in this haiku as brief prose, in
-cluding rejected choices. It included 

a diagram of the most informative 

view of the architecture because the 
design didn™t exploit any architec
-tural patterns.
Note the annotations on the page. 
As construction began, we learned 
that some decisions could be im
-proved, so we altered the design ac
-cordingly. Updating the haiku was 

simply a matter of scribbling notes 
and scratching out elements on the 

page. Such changes are expected and 

should be embraced.
Use the Haiku as an Outline 
 for Future Documentation
Using an architecture haiku as a re
-call mechanism for established ratio
-nale, context, and decisions requires 

that the readers remember informa
-tion. Although this is 
 usually easy 
FIGURE 1. 
An architecture haiku that we printed out and then annotated as we learned more 
about the system and re˜ned the architecture.
2 38 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
for project teams, there are risks to 
consider, such as long-
 term recall 
of information, turnover, and proj
-ect transition.
Refreshing teams owing to turn
-over or project transition is fairly 
common. In the former case, en
-gineers might simply no longer be 
available to consult on a project be
-cause they™ve moved on to new roles 
or organizations. In the latter case, 
a project might be transitioned to a 

new team for maintenance or future 
work. Over months or years, mem
-ories decay, people forget speci˜cs, 
and the effectiveness of the cognitive 

triggers captured in an architecture 
haiku decreases.
The simplest way to mitigate 
these risks is to write a more tradi
-tional architecture description be
-fore the team disbands. This docu
-mentation aims to capture ideas 
referenced in the haiku that might 

exist only as an oral history within 
the team.
Once you™ve created an ar
-chitecture haiku, writing a tight, 
 well-
 organized architecture descrip
-tion becomes much easier. By creating 
the haiku ˜rst, the team has already 

identi˜ed the essential information, 
much like an outline. Furthermore, 
the haiku can serve as an executive 

summary or be included in the ap
-pendix of a longer document. Using 
the haiku in this way can help achieve 
balance among agility, delivery speed, 

and the need for documentation.
Create a Template
This tip might seem obvious, but it™s 

important. To promote communi
-cation within the team, our haikus 

follow the same basic template. This 

template promotes basic graphic de
-sign practices, including the use of 
white space and alignment. We also 
don™t allow fonts smaller than 10 
points. Small fonts are too dif˜cult 

to read and defeat the purpose by 

allowing for too much text.
Following a template makes it eas
-ier to quickly discern the documenta
-tion™s salient points and helps provide 
guidance to the haiku writers. We™ve 
distributed our template as two Pow
-erPoint slides: one with the MegaVista 

example (see the sidebar ﬁArchitecture 
Haiku for the MegaVista Projectﬂ) and 
the other with the tips shared in this 

article. You can access the template 

at www.neverletdown.net/2015/03
 /architecture-
 haiku.html. 
It™s easy to shrink the font and 
cram words onto a page. Producing 
a highly valuable, information-
 dense 
resource that people actually want 
to read is more dif˜cult and much 

more rewarding.
When I was in high school, 

my calculus teacher let 
us bring a single page 
of notes to the ˜nal examŠan of
-˜cially sanctioned ﬁcheat sheet.ﬂ I 
spent weeks preparing it, carefully 
selecting concepts I thought would 
be on the exam, including complex 

equations, proofs, and examples. On 

exam day, much to my surprise (but 
not to my teacher™s), I hardly used my 
cheat sheet at all. Creating it was the 

best study guide I could have used. In 
many ways, architecture haiku is a 
cheat sheet for your architecture.
Philippe Kruchten said, ﬁIf, in
-stead of a fully robust process, I 
were permitted to develop only one 
document, model, or other artifact 

in support of a software project, a 

short, well-
 crafted Vision document 
would be my choice.ﬂ
4 The intent of 
architecture haiku is very much in 
this spirit.
Architecture haiku helps your 
team focus on the most essential in
-formation relevant to the architec
-ture, provides clear guidance for 

construction, and encourages col
-laboration. Combining architecture 
haiku with traditional documenta
-tion is a clear winner. Although archi
-tecture haiku in its most literal form 

is a useful tool, it also offers a chance 

for general re˚ection on architecture 
documentation practices. The num
-ber of pages used is less important 
than designing documentation that™s 

right for your team and situation. 
Whether you use architecture haiku 
as the only documentation or simply 

as a litmus test for how well the ar
-chitecture is understood, the goal is 
always to create high-
 value documen
-tation that maximizes awareness and 
understanding across the team.
In conclusion,
Design for your team
Less is more when describing
Your architecture.
References
 1.
 G. Fairbanks, ﬁArchitecture Haiku,ﬂ blog, 
2011; http://georgefairbanks.com/architecture
 - haiku.
 2.
 M. Keeling, ﬁCreating an Architecture 
Oral History: Minimalist Techniques for 
Describing Systems,ﬂ presentation at the 
8th Software Eng. Inst. Architecture Tech
-nology User Network Conf. (SATURN 

12), 2012; http://resources.sei.cmu.edu
 /library/asset-
 view.cfm?assetid=20330.
 3.
 M. Keeling and M. Velichansky, ﬁMaking 
Metaphors That Matter,ﬂ 
Proc. 2011 Agile 

Conf.
 (AGILE 11), 2011, pp. 256Œ262.
 4.
 D. Lef˜ngwell and D. Widrig, 
Manag
-ing Software Requirements: A Uni˜ed 
Approach,
 Addison-
 Wesley Professional, 
1999, p. 169.
MICHAEL KEELING 
is a software engineer at 
IBM. Contact him at mkeeling@neverletdown.net.
Selected CS articles and columns 
are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
 THE PRAGMATIC ARCHITECT`
MAY/JUNE 2015 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
39ARCHITECTURE HAIKU FOR THE MEGAVISTA PROJECT
Clearly listing the tradeoffs in the design helped us with decision making during implementation. Because the team was expe-
rienced in building search applications, it was suf˜ cient to list the key architectural patterns used in the design. Diagramming 
was essential when we collaborated around whiteboards before creating the haiku. However, it added little value to the haiku 
itself, so we didn™t include it.
1MEGAVISTA GUIDES SEARCH
A publicly consumed search solution based on the Veloc-

ity Search platform that will help users ˜ nd companies of 
interest. 
Business Drivers
Ł Better search encourages listed companies to pur-
chase advertising, metadata supplements, and paid 
listings. 
Ł Faster results for users and advanced search options 
(such as refinement and spelling suggest) bring more 
users to the site.
Key Tradeoffs
Ł Crawlability over MaintainabilityŠNeed to split the 

data source across multiple search collections, dis-
tributed across several servers. Incidentally promotes 

Scalability.
Ł Crawlability and Queryability over ConfigurabilityŠ

Highly configurable system reduces speed of crawl 

and query. 
Ł Flexibility/Development Speed over CostŠStakehold-

ers are not 100 percent on all features and have a 

strong desire to go live as soon as possible. 
Ł Modifiability over MaintainabilityŠIT will maintain the 

system and know databases, not Engine, so when they 

make a change it should be detected and reflected.  
Architecture Styles and Patterns Used

3- tier (data, crawl, query)
Source- SelectorŠpromotes reliability
Query RedundancyŠpromotes availability

Virtual DocumentsŠall data crawled
Document EnqueueŠfor website data
Collection ShardingŠpromotes crawlability

Crawler CloneŠpromotes availability

Geolocation LookupŠpromotes maintainability/modi˜ ability
Top Quality Attributes
Crawlability > Queryability > Scalability
Ł CrawlabilityŠA batch of up to 900 metadata updates 
are published to the database and reflected in search 

within 3 minutes.
Ł QueryabilityŠAn average- sized result set can be cal-

culated within 2 seconds of Engine receiving the query.
Ł ScalabilityŠThe size of the data source increases 
beyond current capacity, and the system can be easily 
expanded to deal with this. 
Design Decisions with Rationale
Ł Database must be crawled as multiple views (vice-

JOINed) to avoid stressing it too much. Currently 1.6 

million companies, each with dozens of metadata 
fields. Metadata joined via Virtual Document (company 
ID = vse- key).
Ł Company website must be crawled and website con-

tent made searchable under the company (i.e. return a 

single results with all content searchable as the same 
document). Website data joined with metadata via 
Virtual Document (company ID = vse- key). 
Ł Full recrawl / week, DB refresh / 30 sec. if no crawl 
running. Full recrawl will pick up changes made to 
company websites (external data). 30- sec. refresh 

enables catchup for metadata crawls on DB updated 
every 60 seconds at most. 
Ł Collections divided by company ID. Dividing allows 
maximum crawl throughput, using company ID 
(e.g. collection A has IDs 1Œ10) allows us to control 
partitioning. 
Ł Paid listings and keyword weighting factors used for 
relevancy calculation will come from the database (not 
Engine configuration). This will allow the business unit 

to make changes quickly using their existing tools.
Reference
 1. M. Keeling, ﬁCreating an Architecture Oral History: Minimalist Tech-
niques for Describing Systems,ﬂ presentation at the 8th Software Eng. 
Inst. Architecture Technology User Network Conf. (SATURN 12), 2012; 
http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset- view.cfm?assetid=20330.
