 24IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/06/$20.00 © 2006 IEEEinto one object, but touches several objects, itÕs
a crosscutting concern. To implement this con-

cern without aspects, a development team
would need to modify each sensitive operation

so that it first checks the userÕs access rights.

This solution is difficult to modify, understand,

and change. With AOP, a programmer could

write an aspect to define a set of sensitive oper-
ations and that says in essence: Òbefore each
such sensitive operation, check the userÕs access

level.Ó This captures the entire security policy

in a reusable module. (For more information on

AOP, see my introductory article, ÒImprove

Modularity with Aspect-Oriented Program-
ming,Ó1The AspectJ Programming Guide,2orthe sidebar.)
In January 2004, Video Monitoring Ser-
vices of America (VMS) began to investigate

the adoption of AOP into the development
of Adbase, their Java 2 Enterprise Edition-

based application. Adbase supplies a Web-

based search and e-commerce interface on
VMSÕs library of advertising data. In many

ways, itÕs typical of J2EE application devel-
opment. It uses a wide range of J2EE tech-nologies, both commercial and open source.
The Adbase team varied from four to seven

full-time developers during the time frame
covered by this article. We followed a modi-

fied version of Extreme Programming with a
focus on emergent design and adherence to
XP practices such as programmer testing and

pair programming.The Adbase team was interested in AOP
because we were familiar with its benefits. As

the projectÕs principal engineer and coauthor

of Mastering AspectJ,3I championed the in-
vestigation and subsequent adoption of the
technology. Crosscutting concerns exist in a

wide variety of problem domains and, based
on my experience with aspects, I could iden-

tify a number of areas in Adbase where I
thought aspects would improve the codeÕs

modularity, flexibility, and clarity. We were

encouraged in our investigation by reports of
aspects being used successfully to improve sep-
aration of concern and component reuse in
large commercial codebases.
4focusApplying AspectJ to J2EE
Application DevelopmentAspect-oriented programming (AOP) is a technique that allows
programmers to modularize crosscutting concerns (behavior that
cuts across the typical divisions of responsibility, such as concur-

rency or security). For example, a typical application might havea security policy that prevents a user from executing a number of operations
unless the user has the correct privileges. Often, these sensitive operations
would live on different objects. Because the security policy doesnÕt fit neatly 
aspect-oriented programming
Nicholas Lesiecki, Video Monitoring Services of America 
Aspect-orientedprogramming and
the AspectJ
language can
reduce code size
and defects while
increasing
understandability.
 January/February 2006
IEEE SOFTWARE
25We selected AspectJ as our aspect implemen-
tation because itÕs a general-purpose aspect-ori-

ented extension to the Java language. As a lan-
guage extension, it allowed for incremental
experimentation with aspects. Most of the proj-
ect could remain implemented with object-ori-
ented code, with select crosscutting concerns im-
plemented in aspects. Several competing aspect
implementations for Java existed at the time of
our adoption, but we deemed them too imma-
ture for our consideration.ApplicationsWe began our adoption process with two
significant experiments: an error-logging as-

pect and an application-specific aspect. The
experiments exposed the team to the technol-

ogy in a low-risk way, and thus increased fa-

miliarity and confidence. Having gained sig-
nificant experience with AspectJ, the team

next felt ready to approach a more ambitious
problem: relationship-management aspects. Error loggingOur investigation of AspectJ began with atypical first use. Our application had been
plagued by poor exception handling in a third-
party library. Our problem was pseudocode of

the formpublic void evaluate(String arg){
try{useReflectionToCallInto–Application(arg);}catch(Exception e){throw new JspException( e.getMessage() );}}This type of handler block discards thestack trace from the original exception, leav-

ing application developers mystified about the
underlying cause of the problem.The Adbase team decided to use AspectJÕs
bytecode-weaving capabilities to advise han-
dler blocks of this type. Because the offending
library was open source, we could have
patched the libraryÕs source code to correct the

offending handlers. However, we would have

then had to either submit the patch and ensure
that our code was general enough to serve all
library clients or maintain our modifications
for new versions of the library.
To improve the error behavior, we crafted a
pointcut (see the ÒGlossaryÓ sidebar)to iden-

tify handler blocks in an area of the code that

we knew from experience was troublesome.
Aspect-oriented programming, like any new programming technique, in-troduces its own set of concepts and terms to refer to them. Here are expla-

nations for some of the terms used in this article. My definitions are in-

formed by my focus on AspectJ; other AOP implementations may have their

own terms or construe some meanings differently.
AdviceÑdeclaration of code to execute at each join point picked out by apointcut. You can think of a pointcut as the definition of an interesting

set of events in a program and advice as the reaction to those events.
Advice has access to context exposed by the pointcut. Advice comes in
three flavors depending on how it executes with respect to the join
point. Before advice runs before the join point it operates over. 
Afteradvice runs after a join point completes (the most commonly used type
of after advice is 
after returning
advice, which only executes if the joinpoint completes normally). 
Aroundadvice replaces the join point it op-erates over. In around advice, the computation of the original join point

can be executed with the special proceed( … )syntax.AspectÑa special type (much like a class in Java) that encapsulates point-cuts, advice, intertype declarations, and other crosscutting features.
Control flowÑsome pointcuts and aspects are defined in terms of the con-
trol flow of a join point. For example, the control flow of a method exe-

cution join point consists of all the other join points that occur between
the start and end of that methodÕs execution. If the method 
foo()callsbar()and baz(), the executions of 
bar()and baz()are said to
be in the control flow of foo().Intertype declarations
Ñdeclarations in an aspect that affect a programÕs
static type structure. An example is extending a class with a new mem-
ber variable or method.
Join pointÑa well-defined point in a programÕs execution. A method execu-
tion is a join point, as are field access and modification, among others.Percflow() aspectÑan aspect whose life cycle is bound to a given controlflow. The AspectJ runtime creates the aspect at the beginning of the

control flow and releases it at the end of the control flow. Among other

things, this allows the aspect to maintain state for the duration of the
control flow.
PointcutÑa selector for join points. For example, you could write a pointcut 
that matches all of the method executions on the class Foo with the following

pointcut: execution(* Foo.*(..)). As you can see, pointcuts can
take advantage of wildcards in their definition. They can also be composed
with operators such as 
||, &&, and !. For example, execution(*Foo.*(..)) || execution(* Bar.*(..)) selects all method ex-ecutions on Bar or Baz. AspectJ lets you define your own pointcuts com-

posed of combinations of primitive pointcuts (such as execution())sup-plied by the language. Pointcuts can also expose context (such as argument
values to a method call) that can be used in advice.Glossary of AOP Terminology
 Then we added before advice to log the ex-ception argument to the handler block.Our first aspectÕs net effect was positive.
Once we saw stack trace information in the

application log, it took us only moments to
solve errors that formerly required a trip to

the debugger or careful source code analysis.
The exposure to AspectJ in this limited con-

text encouraged further exploration.Application-specific aspectsNext, the Adbase team experimented with
other auxiliary aspects (such as aspects for
gathering quick-and-dirty performance statis-
tics). Finally, educating itself about AOP and
AspectJ, the team decided to add AspectJ to
the development process with a pilot project.
We deliberately limited the proposed aspectÕs

scope so we could reincorporate a traditional
implementation of the feature should the ex-

periment prove unsuccessful. The aspect man-

aged administrator workflow for new meta-
data added to the system. Although we encountered some challenges,the pilot was successful and the aspect became
the first of many limited-scope, application-

specific aspects that we wrote in the subse-

quent months.
A good example of an application-specificaspect is the one we wrote to handle the dy-

namic repricing of an online shopping basket in
response to content or delivery-option changes.
Basket pricing in Adbase is complex. Different

charges apply to items, groups of items, and the

order as a whole. Some charges depend on the

presence of other charges. A change to a setting

in one part of the basket can require the recal-

culation of the price of items in another part.

Because so many operations and objects can
impact the basketÕs chargeable state, repricing

was a clear crosscutting concern.Our basket-repricing aspect tracks statechanges with a simple Boolean flag. Any oper-
ation that can affect the basketÕs price sets the

flag to true. Before client code reads pricing

information from the basket, the aspect re-

prices the basket and sets the flag to false.The aspect selects dirtying operations withpointcuts such as that in figure 1a. It then uses

an intertype field and advice to mark the basket

dirty after each state change, as figure 1b

shows. Next, the aspect selects operations rep-

resenting reads of the basketÕs pricing state as

shown in figure 1c. Finally, using before advice,
the aspect reacts to each read operation by

repricing the basket as illustrated in figure 1d.
Each cart component that can receive charges
implements the Chargeable interface. This inter-
face facilitates picking out reads across three dif-
ferent classes. The chargeableReads() point-cut uses the cflow()primitve pointcut toexclude reads occurring as a result of any
method on the Pricer object. This prevents a re-
cursive call to the advice during repricing. The basket-repricing aspect is one of Ad-baseÕs most successful application-specific as-

pects. Because of this aspect (and another

closely related aspect), 
ShoppingBasketandits associated items contain almost no pricing-
26IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Figure 1. Basket-repricing aspect 
operations: (a) pointcut
for selecting a dirtying

operation, (b) intertype

field and advice for
marking a basket dirty,

(c) pointcut that 
selects reads of the
basketÕs pricing state,
and (d) advice for
repricing the basket.pointcut basketChange(ShoppingBasket basket):(execution(public void addItem(Item, ..))

|| execution(public void remove*(..))
)
&& this(basket);(a)private boolean ShoppingBasket.isDirty = false;
after(ShoppingBasket basket) returning :

basketChange(basket)
{basket.isDirty = true;}(b)pointcut chargeableReads() :(execution(public * Chargeable+.getCharges(..))

|| execution(public * Chargeable+.getTotal(..))
||execution(public * Chargeable+.hasCharges(..))
) 
&& !cflow(execution(public * Pricer.*(..)));(c)before(ShoppingBasket basket) :
chargeableReads() && this(basket){if(basket.isDirty){pricer.price(basket);
basket.isDirty = false;}}(d) related code. This lets them better representtheir primary role (a structured collection of
items for purchase). It also lets developers rea-

son about and evolve the pricing and repricing
behavior in isolation, without having to inspect
or modify the various price-triggering events.By encapsulating the pricing logic, the as-pect solution added extensibility and compos-
ability to the basket package. (We could em-

ploy alternative pricing strategies with fewer
changes to the code.) It also increased the code
baseÕs agility. Because we could easily imple-

ment reprice strategies touching a dozen or
more operations in a single location, we felt

free to experiment with alternative designs.
Relationship managementThe Adbase team developed its most ad-vanced set of aspects in response to a new per-
sistence solution. We were abandoning Enter-

prise JavaBeansÕ (EJB) Container Managed

Persistencein 
favor of the lighter-weight Hi-
bernate. Unfortunately, during the changeover,

we discovered that Hibernate lacked the con-
tainer-managed relationships that we had be-

gun to take for granted with CMP. We termed

the missing feature bidirectional relationshippropagation. Figure 2 shows a model of twopersistent objects in a typical relationship.If we implemented the model in figure 2 in
pure Java code, calling child.setParent(someParent)on the child wouldnÕt affect
someParentÕs children collection. However, if
an EJB container had managed that relation-
ship, calling child.setParent(somePar-ent)would result in the equivalent of a call tosomeParent.getChildren().add(child).The container would propagate the link to the
other side of the relationship, making the rela-

tionship navigable in both directions. Al-
though Hibernate does this as it reads objects
from or writes them to the database, it doesnÕt

propagate the relationship during the objectÕs

general use by an application.Using aspects to address a weakness in orto extend an existing application or frame-
work raises questions. For example: Can we
use the framework another way and get the
same result? Would it be a better to modify the

framework directly? According to HibernateÕs own documenta-
tion, the preferred solution to our problem is to

write code in each relationship setter to traverse

and propagate the relationship. This is exactly
what we hoped to avoid. Also, extending or
patching Hibernate presented problems. It was
our persistent objects whose behavior needed
modification (Hibernate already Òdid the right
thingÓ when loading the objects). We decided

that if we could test and deploy the aspect so-

lution in less than two weeks, weÕd stick with it.We began our implementation with one-
half of the desired behavior. To automatically

add a child object to a parentÕs collection after

a call to setParent(), we first had to iden-
tify the setParentjoin points. To do so, we
wrote the pointcut in figure 3, which explicitly

assumes that a method call signifies the start
of a relationship if it meets three criteria: 
It begins with the letters s-e-t. The method callÕs target implements an in-

terface we created called Persistent.The sole argument is also a Persistent. The pointcut exposes both the target andthe argument object for use within the advice.
Because the pointcut relies on an identifier

pattern, we accepted the risk that the pointcut

might match join points incorrectly (such asJanuary/February 2006
IEEE SOFTWARE
27Figure 3. A pointcut andadvice that implement
part of the bidirectional 

relationship behavior.
public aspectRelationshipManagement {
//...
pointcut setToOne(Persistent self, Persistent other) :call(void set*(Persistent+)) && target(self) &&args(other);before(Persistent self, Persistent other) : setToOne(self, other) {String methodName = //…obtain using AspectJ reflectionBidirectionalRelationHelper.reciprocateToOne(methodName, self, other);}}*Parent+getChildren():SetChild
+setParent(Parent)+getParent():ParentFigure 2. Model of persistent objects in a relationship. Account.settle(Account)). We judged
this risk to be acceptably low because of the
other join point criteriaÕs limiting effect. When

making judgments like this, we relied both on
our own experience and on design techniques
emerging from the AOP community. For ex-

ample, Adrian ColyerÕs blog entry, ÒI DonÕt

Want to Know That ... (Writing Robust Point-

cut Expressions),Ó covers just this sort of de-

sign decision (see www.aspectprogrammer.org/

blogs/adrian/2004/08/i_dont_want_to.html).The advice in figure 3 extracts the settermethodÕs name using reflective information

provided by AspectJ. The advice then delegates
to a helper class to navigate the metadata pro-
vided by Hibernate. The helper class retrieves
the children collection and adds the child ob-
ject (referenced in figure 3 by self) to that col-lection. We localized the logic in a helper class

to keep the definition of the crosscutting struc-
ture in one module (the aspect) while letting

the details of Hibernate metadata traversal re-
side in another. This allowed for easier testing

of the corner cases of metadata traversal be-
cause we could easily feed the appropriate ar-
guments to the helper class. This decision also
reduced compilation time. Because changing
an aspect requires a full build, splitting the im-plementation let us change the traversal logicwithout losing incremental compilation.At this point we had only solved half of our
problem. We still needed to propagate changes

to a parentÕs children collection to the child side

of the relationship. Here we faced a problem.

The parent object could pass its children collec-

tion to another part of the application, which
might then modify the collection. We needed a

way of marking the collection so that we could

identify future modifications to it. We did this

by using an aspect to wrap these collections in

a special marker collection that we wrote.
To accomplish this, we again select rela-
tionship getters with a pointcut based on a com-
bination of name and type information. The

aspect then uses around adviceto modify the

affected join pointsÕ return value (we obtain

the return value through a call to proceed())as shown in figure 4a.After we had marked children collections,
we could affect them using advice. The after-

returning advice shown in figure 4b inspects
the return value of add()on aRelationship-AwareSet. If the addition was successful, theadviceuses the helper class to propagate the re-

lationship.After implementing these two aspects, we28IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Figure 4. Propagatingchanges to a ParentÕs
children collection: 
(a) around advice
wraps the returned 
collection in a special
marker collection 
(b) after-returning 
advice propagates
changes made to the
marked collection.pointcut persistentSetAccess(Persistent self) :call(java.util.Set Persistent+.get*())
&& target(self) && managedRelationshipAccess();java.util.Set around(Persistent self) : persistentSetAccess(self) {
String methodName = //…obtain using AspectJ reflectionreturn new RelationshipAwareSet(methodName, self, proceed(self));}(a)//pointcut relationshipAdd() not shownafter(RelationshipAwareSet set, Object o) returning(boolean added):
relationshipAdd(set, o) {

//’source’isareferencetotheoriginatingobject(stored by the set)

if(added){BidirectionalRelationshipHelper.reciprocateToMany(set.propertyName,set.source,(Persistent)o, true);
}}(b) encountered a set of test failures. If the applica-tion deleted a child object, Hibernate expected
the application to remove the object from the
parentÕs collection. So we added another di-

mension to our solution. To detect deletion

events, we wrote a pointcut that used a Hiber-

nate marker interface. By writing the pointcut

in terms of the Lifecycle.onDelete()method, we leveraged HibernateÕs definition

of a deletion event. After each such event, our
aspect used a helper class to iterate over all of
the doomed objectÕs relationships and re-

moved the dying object from them. This solution hit a snag, however. Hiber-
nate, like other persistence frameworks, man-
ages cascade deletions. If our severing aspect
affected a relationship in the middle of a cas-
cade deletion, Hibernate would detect the con-
dition and throw an exception. To exclude

cascade deletions, we used a percflow aspect.
Percflow aspects only exist during the control

flow of specified join points. This feature al-

lowed the aspect to maintain a set of all the

objects that had already been deleted during a
given cascade. The aspect passed this set of al-
ready dead objects to the helper class, which
could then decline to sever a relationship to a
deleted object. Figure 5 shows the code for

this aspect. Notice that the percflow pointcut

in the aspect declaration specifies that the as-
pect should be instantiated once for each call
to one of HibernateÕs 
Session.delete()methods. Most object deletions in Hibernate
originate from such a call.
In our project, Hibernate persists 63 classescontaining 42 methods of the form child.setParent()and 39 of the form parent.getChildren(). Another 11 relationships aremodified through another mechanism, which
our solution also addressed (but is not covered
here). These metrics give a sense of the aspectsÕ
impact. Implementing the solution by manu-
ally inserting a call to the relationship helper
would have involved modifying 92 disparate
sites. ItÕs not hard to imagine our team missing

five or 10 sites and stumbling across a bug later
on. Furthermore, without the tangled calls to
the bidirectional relationship helper, the per-

sistent objects are easier to read, write, and un-
derstand. A developer can program Hibernate-
enabled objects that participate in bidirectional
relationships with no special effort. So, we
could say that the aspects improve the systemÕs

maintainability and understandability.
Team reactions to AOPAs a whole, the teamÕs reaction to AOP and
AspectJ was positive. Even programmers inex-
perienced with object-oriented programming

grasped the basic concepts easily, and pro-

grammers moved quickly from being passive
observers to participants in or initiators of
pairing sessions involving AspectJ. About six
months elapsed between the VMSÕs initial in-

vestigation of AOP and the development of
the Hibernate aspects described in this report.
This was calendar time, not effort time, as the
team spent (and still spends) only about 5 to

10 percent of its development effort on AOP. 
As the teamÕs familiarity with the technology
has grown, team members have become more

excited about the potential for further applica-
tions. ItÕs not uncommon to hear, Òwe could use

an aspect to do that,Ó floating through the de-
January/February 2006
IEEE SOFTWARE
29Figure 5. Code for severing relationships
on object deletion.public aspect RelationshipSevering percflow(call(* Session+.delete(..))) {private Set alreadyDeleted = new HashSet();
pointcut onDelete(Persistent objectBeingDeleted) :
execution(public boolean Lifecycle+.onDelete(Session+) && 
this(objectBeingDeleted);after(Persistent objectBeingDeleted) : onDelete(objectBeingDeleted) {BidirectionalRelationHelper.severRelationships(alreadyDeleted, objectBeingDeleted);alreadyDeleted.add(objectBeingDeleted);}} velopment area. Some members have becomechampions of the technology. One programmer

is investigating adding AspectJ to another Java
project, and our manager acquired a custom li-
cense plate reading ÒAspectJ.ÓFor programmers less invested in AOP, its
noninvasive nature has been a blessing. Devel-
opers can craft components that participate in
aspect-oriented behavior without making nu-
merous design concessions. ItÕs possible to work

on the Adbase project without significant As-
pectJ experience; indeed, some programmers
have yet to write a single pointcut. Compared to
invasive frameworks such as EJB or Java Server
Pages, AspectJ has weighed lightly on the pro-
jectÕs design and development.
Despite the generally positive reaction, AOP
has had some challenges at VMS. Because AOP
demands a new way of thinking about software

construction and a new language in which to

express that thinking, it meets a fair amount of

resistance. My team has been no exception.

During initial presentations, the audience
clearly saw the technologyÕs potential, but was

apprehensive about the learning required to
leverage it. As time passed, some of the appre-

hension dissipated. However, new team mem-

bers approaching the technology for the first
time experienced similar apprehension.Although our familiarity with AspectJ andAOP has grown, weÕre still in the process of

altering our mental models to accommodate
aspect orientation. Scott Segal, the Adbase
team manager, put it like this: 
The most difficult part of adopting AOP wasmaking the mental shift from thinking of AOP
as a technique to solve a narrow set of problems
to embracing AOP as part of our standard ap-

proach to solving all problems. When looking
at a problem now we try to see how the prob-
lem naturally separates into concerns and im-
plement the crosscutting concerns with aspects.Although programmers can remain mostlyoblivious to aspects (especially orthogonal
ones), to work effectively on an aspect-ori-

ented project, they must know when an aspect

could be advising code theyÕre working on.
Without this awareness (and general knowl-

edge of how AspectJ works), aspectual effects

might confuse or surprise programmers. The
less orthogonal the aspect, the more program-

mers must be aware of it.I call one flavor of this problem Òaspects asa red herring.Ó This problem arises when pro-grammers uninvolved with an aspectÕs devel-

opment encounter a problem in that aspectÕs

domain. Suspicious that the aspect might be
involved, but not knowing its details, they feel
overwhelmed by having to understand the as-
pect before solving the problem. The aspect

might not actually be involved, but its possible
presence can be a confounding factor.
Adoption processBy limiting the scope of our initial aspects,we were able to learn concepts, best practices,
places where aspects made sense, and places
where they didnÕt. For example, weÕve replaced

several aspects with nonaspect solutions after
reviewing the resulting design. Our early ex-
periments gave us the confidence and experi-
ence to approach the relationship management
aspectsÑthe most challenging and general set
of aspects developed yet. The incremental ap-
proach both diffused adoption cost over sev-
eral months and let concepts and ideas soak
into the team consciousness.Unit and integration testsThe XP practice of automated testingeasedour adoption of AspectJ. At the time we began

adoption, we had amassed a suite of several
hundred unit and integration tests. Automated
testing helped us byletting us verify an aspectÕs implementa-

tion during its development,letting us quickly detect side effects or no-

tice when a refactoring had broken an as-
pect, and forcing us to learn about robust AOP.
Pair programmingPair programming proved invaluable fortransferring knowledge about AOP and AspectJ.
A typical early pair session placed me with a

less-experienced developer as we tried to write

an aspect to address a specific concern. When

we came to new language features or a new as-

pect-oriented concept, I explained the concept
and we continued with the implementation. As team experience grew, aspect-oriented
pairing sessions began between other team
members. We used our shared workspace to ex-

ploit the Òexpert in earshotÓ effect (see Alistair
CockburnÕs Wiki entry at http://c2.com/cgi/

wiki?ExpertInEarshot). Team members strug-
30IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
The combinationof testing andpairing gave usthe confidenceto use ourapplication as a learningenvironment.  gling with a pointcutÕs nuances could easily get
my attention for a quick resolution.The combination of testing and pairinggave us the confidence to use our application
as a learning environment. We were able to try

out different ideas and easily realize them
within a familiar context. This helped us learn
AOP more rapidly and confidently than we

otherwise might have.RefactoringIn our XP environment, we refactor often,and aspects are no exception. Just as object-

oriented code can vary in its readability and

expressiveness, aspect-oriented code can be
clear or confusing. Accordingly, we often re-

visited our aspects (for example, when we
modify them to add a new feature) and at-

tempted to express their intent more clearly.

Many of the habits, practices, and guidelines
for refactoring object-oriented code translate
well to aspect-oriented code. In addition to

refactoring aspects, we also refactor our code
to add aspects where warranted, and to re-
move aspects when the programÕs intent is bet-

ter expressed without them. Tool support
Over the last five years, automated tools have
become central to development in the main-
stream programming community. An increasing

number of programmers (the VMS team in-

cluded) use an integrated development environ-
ment for day-to-day coding. As time passes, it

becomes increasingly difficult to disentangle a
programming language from its supporting
toolset. This contention applies especially to

AspectJ. We primarily used the fast-evolving

AspectJ DeveloperÕs Toolkit (AJDT) Eclipse

plug-in available at www.eclipse.org/ajdt. 
Crosscutting viewsWhen working on a module, a programmermust be somewhat aware of crosscutting as-
pects (or at least be able to transition quickly
from oblivious to aware), especially when the
aspect is tied closely to the moduleÕs core func-

tionality (for example, repricing a basket).
Similarly, in the Òaspects as a red herringÓ sit-

uation, a programmer must be able to confi-
dently rule out (or find) potentially trouble-

some aspects.AJDT provides two tools that help make aprogramÕs crosscutting structure understandable:
The cross-references view lets developersview all of the join points affected by a

given piece of advice (it provides similar fa-

cilities for intertype declarations). This lets

them easily analyze an aspectÕs potential ef-

fect. When writing a new pointcut, for in-

stance, the cross-references view alerts you

if an error prevents a pointcut from match-
ing any join points. Similarly, a quick scan

tells you if the pointcut matches unintended
points.When a programmer views a class (or an as-
pect) in EclipseÕs editor, 
gutter annotationsindicate if advice applies to the current pro-
gram element. By providing a clear indica-
tion of aspect impact and an easy means to
navigate back to the aspect, AJDTÕs gutter

annotations have helped us diagnose aspect-
related problems. They also serve as unob-
trusive reminders that aspects contribute to
the codeÕs total behavior.
Debugging supportAlthough the debugging support in AspectJexhibits a few problemsÑsuch as the occa-

sional inability to set breakpoints without a
rebuild and some confusing stack frames to
step throughÑthe current implementation op-
erates largely as desired. In other words, you

can set breakpoints in classes and step into ad-
vice that applies to them. You can also set

breakpoints in advice. As we developed the re-
lationship-management aspects, we frequently

used the debugger to help us understand the
codeÕs dynamic behavior. 
Compilation speedThe biggest challenge to VMSÕs further
adoption of AspectJ is the significant increase
in incremental compilation times when using

it. AspectJ places two important restrictions
on incremental compiles: 
Incremental compilations using AJDT (in
the Adbase project) invariably take a cou-
ple of seconds longer than the near-instant

times of pure Java builds. Changes to an aspect require a full rebuild
(performed automatically by AJDT even
in incremental mode). 
These two types of slowdown noticeably af-fect development velocity. Our XP-based de-

velopment process relies on unit tests and in-January/February 2006
IEEE SOFTWARE
31The biggestchallenge toVMSÕs furtheradoption ofAspectJ is thesignificantincrease inincrementalcompilationtimes. cremental development. Ideally, weÕd modify
code, compile it, and execute the relevant unit
tests several times per minute. Adding even a
few seconds of delay to the cycle slows devel-
opment on two fronts. First, the compilation
takes time. Second, human attention can wan-
der during the wait interval, and it can take
time to recontextualize after the compilation.

This problem is particularly pronounced for
the full builds, which tempt the programmer to
switch to another task entirely (such as email
or Slashdot headlines). One of VMSÕs most tal-

ented programmers, despite having positive ex-
periences on the Adbase project and having de-
signed an aspect-oriented testing framework,
resists using AspectJ in his other projects be-
cause of these delays. According to him, ÒThe
benefits realized by AOP over pure object-ori-
ented approaches do not outweigh the draw-
backs of productivity loss and impediments to
a test-driven development approach, at least in
a fairly small application.ÓThe good news is that improving perform-ance is a priority for the AspectJ developers.Refactoring and Java editingAlthough AJDT brings most of the func-tionality of a good Java editor to AspectJ
(code completion and syntax highlighting, for
example), important areas are missing. These
feature holes have tripped up developers used
to EclipseÕs rich functionality. Code comple-

tion works only in certain contexts, for exam-
ple, and the Òopen typeÓ shortcut doesnÕt ap-

ply to aspects. More importantly, refactorings initiated
from Java donÕt affect aspects, making wide-

ranging refactoring a more delicate and man-
ual process. VMS considers its adoption of AOP

successful. The key barriers to further

adoption within the company are inthe area of tool support rather than training orconceptual understanding. In particular, com-
pilation times incur a productivity penalty that
offsets aspect-oriented developmentÕs general

benefits. The AJDT environmentÕs capabilities

also lag behind those of EclipseÕs general Java

capabilities. Luckily, AspectJÕs developers are

giving these areas significant attention.Despite these barriers, aspects have notice-ably improved the Adbase applicationÕs Òili-

ties.Ó The application exhibits improved re-
silience to change and ease of understanding
in areas where weÕve successfully applied as-
pects. AOP has also reduced the amount of
needless duplication and busy work neces-
sary when adding functionality to key ar-
easÑfor example, adding a new persistent 
relationship.The Adbase team learned that its agile de-velopment approach handles aspect-oriented
developmentÕs challenges well. Our methodol-

ogy limited risk, encouraged beneficial skepti-
cism, and maximized knowledge transfer.
AcknowledgmentsMy thanks to Scott Segal, Angus McIntyre, ChadWoolley, and the other members of the Adbase team

for their reviews and advice.References1.N. Lesiecki, ÒImprove Modularity with Aspect-Oriented
Programming,Ó IBM DeveloperWorks
2002, www-128.ibm.com/developerworks/java/library/j-aspectj.2.The AspectJ Team, 
The AspectJ Programming Guide,Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, 2004, http://eclipse.org/

aspectj/doc/released/progguide/index.html.3.J. Gradecki and N. Lesiecki, 
Mastering AspectJ: Aspect-Oriented Programming in Java, John Wiley & Sons,
2003.4.A. Colyer et al., ÒUsing AspectJ for Component Inte-
gration in Middleware,Ó Proc. Object-Oriented Pro-gramming, Systems, Language, and Applications (OOP-SLA 03), ACM Press,2003, pp 339Ð344.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
32IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
About the AuthorNicholas Lesiecki is a programming instructor and software engineer at Google. Hisresearch interests include agile methods, aspect-oriented programming, and test-driven devel-
opment. In addition to coauthoring Mastering AspectJ (Wiley, 2003), he is a member of As-
pectMentor. He has a BA in English literature from Amherst College. He is a member of the

ACM. Contact him at 100 N. Whisman Rd. #215, Mountain View, CA 94043; ndlesiecki@

apache.org.