 28IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEEAt Landmark Graphics, weÕve worked with
various software practices and processes and
over the last several years have begun to better
comprehend some of the guidelines that define

Òbarely sufficientÓ for our software projects.
One thing has become quite apparent: whatÕs

barely sufficient for one project can be insuffi-

cient for another yet overly bureaucratic for an-

other. As we looked at our project history, we

found that two primary attributes influenced
the type of process we used: complexity and un-

certainty. To better quantify these attributes, we

devised a scoring model and plotted each pro-

jectÕs results on a four-quadrant graph. Similar

to the Boston Consulting GroupÕs Boston Ma-

trix (see the related sidebar on page 32), we

used names to represent the four quadrants:
Dogsare simple projects with low uncer-
tainty.
Coltsare simple projects with high uncer-
tainty.
Cowsare complex projects with low un-
certainty.
Bullsare complex projects with high un-
certainty.
Using this matrix, weÕve developed an ap-proach to help determine what process practices
are Òbarely sufficientÓ for any given project.
We start with a core set of common practices.

Then, depending on complexity and uncer-

tainty, we can recommend additional practices.

We found that most of our projects had already

taken on this emergent behavior naturallyÑal-

though in several cases they didnÕt start out that

way. By identifying these project drivers, we can

provide earlier guidance to project teams so
that they can start with a process thatÕs close to

appropriate.focus 1Context-Adaptive Agility:Managing Complexity and
Uncertainty
Agile software development has become increasingly popularamong development teams looking to shed unnecessary process
overhead to maximize the velocity of business value delivery. 

Alistair Cockburn talks about a Òbarely sufficientÓ process,
1and Jim Highsmith suggests something Òa little bit less than just

enough.Ó2However, understanding just whatÕs sufficient for any given
project is a challenge.adapting agilityTodd Little, Landmark GraphicsOnce you categorizeyour projects as
dogs, colts, cows, or
bulls according to 
their complexity
and uncertainty,

you can adapt your
process by adding
practices according
to each projectÕs

profile. Company backgroundLandmark Graphics (www.lgc.com) is the
leading supplier of software and services for oil

and gas exploration and production. Our soft-
ware portfolio, which ranges from exploration

and drilling to data management and decision

analysis, includes more than 60 products con-
sisting of over 50 million lines of source code. We

release products regularly, with release cycles

varying between three and 18 months. Landmark
has about 200 software developers and an R&D
staff of about 400 geographically dispersed
through primary development centers in Hous-
ton, Austin, and Denver in the US; Calgary,

Canada; and Stavanger, Norway. More details on

Landmark and our development process history
are available in an earlier report on this work.3Development process overview 
We started by investigating Alistair Cock-
burnÕs Crystal methods
1and Barry BoehmÕs
risk-based approach4to blending agile and plan-driven software development. Although we
liked the Crystal framework of categorizing

projects by size and criticality, we felt there

were more project attributes that influence how
to best manage a project. We enumerated all

the critical attributes weÕd experienced that
had influenced how our successful projects had
been run. Once we had this list of attributes,
we looked for commonality and found, as I
said earlier, two primary concerns: complexity

and uncertainty. Using these attributes, we gen-

erated a quick survey that project teams could
use to assess their projects.At the time we were doing this assessment,
Boehm and Richard Turner hadnÕt yet pub-

lished their work on balancing agility and dis-
cipline.5In that work, they categorized proj-ects on the basis of five attributes: size,
criticality, dynamism, personnel capacity, and

organizational culture. Our approach both ex-
tends and simplifies their ideas. We use more

attributes in our evaluation but then simplify
by grouping them into two categoriesÑcom-
plexity and uncertainty.
Complexity driversA projectÕs structure determines its com-
plexity. We developed a system (see Table 1) to

score project complexity on the basis of
team size,
mission criticality,
team location,team maturity,
domain knowledge gaps, anddependencies.Team size
CockburnÕs Crystal methods use team size
to determine Crystal Òcolor,Ó with darker col-

ors requiring additional practices and develop-ment rigor
. Similarly, we see team size as a ma-
jor contributor to project complexity.
Mission and safety criticalityAlso as in the Crystal methods, our ap-proach treats mission criticality or project im-
portance as a major influence on developmentMay/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
29Table 1Complexity attributes and their scores*Complexity scoreAttribute135710
Team size151540100
Mission criticalitySpeculativeSmall user baseEstablished marketMission-critical with largeSafety-critical with
user basesignificant exposure
Team locationSame roomSame buildingWithin driving distanceSame time zone +/Ð 2 hrs.Multisite, worldwide

Team capacityEstablishedNew team of expertsMixed team of expertsTeam with limited experienceNew team of mostly 
team of expertsand novicesand a few expertsnovices
Domain knowledge Developers knowDevelopers know the Developers require someDevelopers have exposureDevelopers have no

gapsthe domain as well domain fairly welldomain assistanceto the domainidea about the
as expert usersdomainDependenciesNoneLimited, well insulatedModerateSignificantTight integration with 
several projects* Minimally complex = 1, highly complex = 10. 30IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
methodology. If the project puts lives or busi-
ness-critical functions at risk, we must treat it

differently than if the only cost of failure is the

project investment.Team location
Having everyone in the same room enableshigh-bandwidth communication among the
project team members. A widely distributed
team or one in which a significant portion of the

team is located several time zones apart can in-
crease project complexity. This can be a difficult

attribute to assess, because a team that has one
or a few dispersed members might not drasti-
cally increase its complexity. WeÕve advised

teams to use their judgment on this assessment.Team capacity
An established team of experts that havebeen working together for years on product
line enhancements can almost anticipate what
other team members are likely to need and do.

This contrasts with a brand-new team of rela-
tive novices. In many ways, this attribute is
similar to the Cockburn Shu-Ha-Ri personnel
capacity that Boehm and Turner use.
5Domain knowledge gapsLandmarkÕs products include leading-edge
technologies used by specialists in oil and gas

exploration and production. ItÕs critical that

the product team have full-time access to the
domain specialists to resolve ambiguities and
produce the desired product. WeÕve found
that this is greatly simplified when the devel-opers are domain specialists themselves and
much more complex when access to domain
knowledge is limited.DependenciesThis attribute measures the degree to whichthe project team depends on third parties or

on other projects within the company. In gen-

eral, the more dependencies there are, the
more complex the project will be. You can

give reduced weight to established third-party
dependencies if the team has a consistent track
record of working with a stable version. Uncertainty drivers
A projectÕs uncertainty depends on market
conditions and project constraints. The primary

indicators of project uncertainty (see Table 2) are
market uncertainty,
technical uncertainty,
project duration, andother projectsÕ dependencies on that proj-

ect, and scope flexibility.
Market uncertaintyIf the market needs are well known, the proj-ect probably wonÕt need much steering. Con-

versely, if they arenÕt well understood, the abil-

ity to steer the project to the desired goal rather
than to the initially stated objective will be crit-
ical. This attribute resembles the requirements
change attribute that Boehm and Turner use.
Table 2Uncertainty attributes and their scores*
Uncertainty scoreAttribute135710
Market uncertaintyKnown deliverable,Minor changes inInitial guess of marketSignificant market New, unknown, and
possibly defined market target target likely to requireuncertaintyuntested market
contractual obligationexpectedsteering
Technical uncertaintyEnhancements to We think we knowWeÕre not quite sure if weSome incremental New technology, 
existing architecturehow to build itknow how to build itresearch involvednew architecture;   
might be some  exploratory research
Project duration1Ð4 weeks6 months12 months18 months24 months

Dependencies,Well-defined  Several interfacesScope has some Some publishedNo published 

scope flexibilitycontractual obligations or Scope isnÕt very flexibilityinterfacesinterfaces
infrastructure with  flexibleScope is highly 
published interfacesflexible
* Minimally complex = 1, highly complex = 10. WeÕve found that one primary amplifier of
market uncertainty relates to the number of

customers. A single customer or single cus-
tomer voice typically has less uncertainty than
when there are multiple customers with multi-
ple voices.Technical uncertainty
Mature products using proven technologydonÕt encounter much technical uncertainty,

although sometimes weÕve experienced uncer-
tainty with new domain technologies added to
an existing product. On the other hand, proj-

ect teams building new products often want to

use the latest technology, so these projects will

have a high degree of technical uncertainty.
Project durationThe longer the project takes from start to
product release, the more chance there is for
technical or market uncertainty to affect it. 
Dependencies and scope flexibilityThe degree to which other projects depend
on this project can limit the amount of steer-

ing that the other projects can tolerate. Con-

tinually modifying interfaces isnÕt acceptable

when those changes affect other projects.Quadrant assessmentThe projectÕs overall complexity and uncer-
tainty score is calculated on the basis of the ag-
gregation of the individual complexity and un-
certainty attribute scores:where iand jare the complexity and uncer-tainty attributes, respectively, for a given proj-

ect, and xiand yjare the individual complex-
ity and uncertainty attribute scores from
Tables 1 and 2. In effect, the log 
xterms arescaled information measures.6The equation is equivalent to rescaling eachattribute between 1 and 2 and then computing
the product. We chose this approach because

it made sense and seemed to give good results
when we cross-plotted the complexity and un-
certainty values for our portfolio (see Figure

1). We found that the projects in a given quad-

rant were quite similar, as were the successful

approaches used for managing those projects.
Figure 2 summarizes each quadrantÕs proper-
ties, and the following sections describe them.Putting these ideas together, we borrowed from

the concepts of the Boston Consulting Group
(see ÒThe Boston MatrixÓ sidebar) to create
our own Houston Matrix.Dogs: Simple projects with low uncertaintyDogs are typically mature products beingdeveloped by small teams. With this type of

project, which isnÕt particularly complex or

uncertain, the best thing to do is to let the de-

velopment team do its job to ship the product.

Some projects in this quadrant have some un-
certainty, but we can keep their duration short

to limit the uncertaintyÕs impact. Prototype or

skunk works (R&D) projects, or skunks, oftenfit in this category. For both dogs and skunks,

additional process ceremony and documenta-
tion are unnecessary and inefficient, so we run

them using only the minimal core set of prac-

tices that we use for all projects in all quad-

rants. This approach is similar to CockburnÕs
Complexity
Uncertainty
xyij==221010log
log
May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
31Project uncertainty024681012051015202530
Project complexityFigure 1. Project complexity versus 
project uncertainty for

projects from three 
divisions. The symbols
represent different 

divisions in the 
company.
024681012Project uncertainty051015202530
Project complexitySimple, young projectsNeed agility
Tight teams SkunksComplex, mature market
Need defined interfacesAgility to handleuncertaintyProcess definition tocope with complexity Laissez faireDogsCowsBullsColtsFigure 2. Houston Matrix quadrant 
assessment. Crystal Clear.
7Approximately 60 percent ofour projects fall into the dog quadrant.Colts: Simple projects with high uncertaintyNew products will usually have both market
and technical uncertainty. If we keep our teams

small, they can react quickly to adapt to those

uncertainties. The metaphor of the young colt

aptly describes these projects. Colt projects are

just getting started and have a lot of energy and

freedom. Most of our project teams that have

had success with Extreme Programming
8fit inthis quadrant. WeÕve also found that short daily

stand-up meetings such as those advocated by
Scrum9are effective in this quadrant. Approxi-
mately 20 percent of our projects are colts.Cows: Complex projects with low uncertaintyThe mature products and product suitesthat continue to have large project teams are

usually the organizationÕs cash cows. In addi-

tion to the obvious connection, the cow is a

good metaphor for these projects: cows are

quite large but donÕt move particularly fast.

Cow projects have less need for agile steering;
in fact,they might need disciplined change

control to reduce their impact when many

projects or customers depend on them. Pro-

jects in this quadrant might still be agile, but
they need defined and published interfaces tothe projects that depend on them. They also

require more direct project and program man-
agement, including looking at issues such as
cross-team communication and critical path.
Many of our cows are integration projects in-
volving a number of projects, typically dogs.
WeÕve used a team of team leaders, something

quite similar to a ÒScrum of Scrums,Ó
9tomanage many of these projects. Cows consti-

tute about 10 percent of our projects.
Bulls: Complex projects with high uncertaintyProjects that are highly complex and have
high uncertainty create problems on all fronts.

They need to be quite agile to steer through

the uncertainty, yet they require some process

ceremony to manage complexity. 
The bull metaphor is quite appropriate.Bull projects are large and can get out of con-
trol quickly if the team isnÕt careful. They have

high visibility throughout the organization, as
theyÕre often about emerging products that

have strong investment. In our case, many
have been next-generation products that man-

agement intended to supplant existing cash
cows. Expectations are high, yet uncertainty

and complexity are equally high. Approxi-
mately 10 percent of our projects are bulls.
32IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
The Boston Consulting GroupÕs Boston
Matrix (see Figure A) is a common tool for

product portfolio management. Products are

plotted on the chart according to market

growth and market share. Question marks, also known as problemchildren, show potential to gain market buthave not yet established a strong market posi-
tion. The objective is to convert them into
Stars.Starshave established a strong marketshare and continue to show market growth.
Because theyÕre in growth mode, they still re-quire significant investment to generate mar-
ket growth.Cash cowsare prior stars that have started to
lose market share. They donÕt require much investment and as a

result are highly profitable.Dogs, or pets, are established products that either havenÕt
penetrated the market or are former cash cows that have lost
market share. These products should be killed, divested, or

made profitable by reducing expenses.The Boston MatrixCowsLowHighMarket growthLowHigh
Market shareDogs???Question marksProblem childrenStarsFigure A. The Boston Consulting GroupÕs Boston Matrix. (figure courtesy of the Boston Consulting Group)
 Core process practicesThe quadrant assessment is a key early workproduct of our development process. First, we

incorporate into our overall process framework
the core practices that all projects must follow.

Then we determine, on the basis of the project

assessment, which other process activities we

should use. The core practices include
an aggregate product plan,an A/B/C list,a quality agreement,continuous integration,expert-user involvement, and
a project dashboard.Aggregate product plan
The product manager produces this con-
cise statement of the project objectives. For

each release, it contains
the target date,a one-sentence product vision,a high-level list of priority features that arecommitted (IÕll discuss this in a moment),a short description of the strategic fit,
a list of the target markets that will be

pursued, andthe supported platforms.
A/B/C listWe categorize all the desired features into
three priority levels:Priority A features mustbe completed toship the product.Priority B features shouldbe completed toship the product. Priority C features mightbe completed be-fore shipping the product if time allows.The team estimates effort requirements and
works with the product managerÕs estimate of

value to maximize return on investment. We

communicate only the Priority A features to
customers.Because we contract to deliver all the Aitems, we allow for uncertainty by planning

the schedule so that A features consume no

more than 50 percent of the overall planned
effort. As we complete Priority A items over

the course of the project, we use any remain-

ing schedule time to complete the Priority B or

C items. We often reprioritize during the proj-
ect, particularly at iterations, although weusually donÕt drop A items unless weÕve set

proper customer expectations. (Another arti-
cle describes this approach and how we use it
to maximize value delivery.)
10Quality agreementThe team works with the product man-
ager to reach agreement on quality targets
for the release. WeÕve modified Rob Thom-

settÕs quality agreement approach
11to use
A/B/C prioritization. We feel that this gives

us consistency in our discussions and pro-
vides a bit more granularity than ThomsettÕs

on-off approach.Continuous integrationFor all our projects, we use configurationmanagement and build at least nightly. A num-

ber of projects have started using a continuous-
build process. Most projects using continuous
builds started as colts, but some of these are
now bulls or cows and still find continuous
builds beneficial.Expert user involvementWeÕve always found it critical to have ex-
pert users involved in development. Most of
our complex projects have a dedicated expert
user, usually a former customer. Nearly all our

testers are also expert users, as are many of the

developers.Project dashboardWe developed a Web-based interface for re-
porting typical information about project sta-
tus. This portfolio dashboard is an excellent

way to view project health. Available informa-

tion includes the aggregate product plan, qual-
ity metrics, top active risks, and any revisions
to the release estimate, among other things.
Project managers record this information at
least weekly.
Context-adaptive process practicesWe can add additional processes and prac-
tices to the core set on the basis of the project
attributes. The project quadrant provides guid-
ance for the types of processes and practices to
be added.Dogs and skunksAs I previously mentioned, these projects are
generally sufficient with just the core practices.May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
33ItÕs unwise for
an organizationto have morebull projectsthan bullprojectmanagers. ColtsThese high-uncertainty projects benefitfrom three additional practices that help them

cope with uncertainty: short iterations, daily

stand-up meetings, and automated unit tests.
CowsAlthough these projects donÕt have much
uncertainty, they require additional processes

to deal with complexity. Such activities might

include more rigorous requirements manage-

ment (we use a requirements tool), functional

specifications for interface definitions, rela-
tively detailed project plans with critical-path

identification, and projects broken down into

subprojects and coordinated by a team of
leaders or a Scrum of Scrums.
BullsThese projects are quite difficult to control:they can be large and complex and require
steering to cope with uncertainty. To run suc-

cessfully, they require much of the same process

ceremony we use with cows and much of the

agile steering we do with colts. Iterations must

be more frequent than with cows but longer

than for colts, and communication channels for
these projects must be efficient. Most impor-
tant, they require the best and most seasoned
project managers, who can understand how to

work with agility and cut through complexity,

balancing the dichotomy. We expect that most

organizations have only a few project managers

with the requisite capacity to manage these

projects. As such, itÕs unwise for an organiza-

tion to have more bull projects than bull proj-

ect managers. (See Marjorie FarmerÕs experi-

ence report for more on the trials and
tribulations of managing a bull project.)12Adjusting project constraints Your teams might discover during the
quadrant assessment that their project is ei-
ther more complex or uncertain than theyÕd

thought. Sometimes, you can adjust a project
to reduce either complexity or uncertainty. In

particular, weÕve often found that decompos-

ing larger projects into subprojects has helped

reduce complexity.
Product life cycleProducts in our portfolio tend to have a lifecycle that moves through the various quad-
rants in Figure 3, again similar to the Boston
Matrix. Our most successful products followpath 1 and start with low complexity and mod-
erate uncertainty as skunks, move to greater
uncertainty and complexity as colts, and then
become successful and turn into highly uncer-
tain and highly complex bulls. Over time the
complexity dies down and the product be-
comes a cow, eventually becoming a dog. 
Many products follow path 2 and neverneed to get particularly complex. ThereÕs noth-

ing wrong with this, as a high percentage of
these products end up being profitable. While weÕve had numerous attempts to startproducts on path 3 directly in the bull quad-
rant, we havenÕt yet seen success with this ap-

proach. Our only successful bull projects are
those that have first begun as colts or dogs.At Landmark we strive to deliver soft-
ware that maximizes business value.

We believe that agile development ap-
proaches are aligned with this philosophy and
have helped us improve our value delivery. 
One particular metric that has shown im-
provement is our Estimation Quality Factor.
13EQF measures project estimation accuracy, es-

sentially the reciprocal of the estimation error.

An EQF of 5.0 represents an aggregate esti-

mation error of 20 percent. As Figure 4 shows,

our median EQF has improved steadily from
4.8 to 8.4 since we introduced this approach.

It was already respectable compared to the in-
dustry median EQF of 3.8 reported by Tom

DeMarco.13Any organization will have a distributionof project types, people, and opinions about
the right way to do things. No single software
development process is the best approach for

every project.34IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
LowHighUncertaintyLowHigh
Complexity132SkunksDogsCowsBullsColtsFigure 3. The life cycleof most products in 
our portfolio moves

through many of the
quadrants in our 
Houston Matrix. The scoring model in our assessment toolisnÕt intended to be rigorous. However, itÕs

proven useful to the project teams and to sen-

ior management. We donÕt recommend using

it blindly; identifying your projectÕs complex-

ity and uncertainty attributes is intended to

stimulate thought, not eliminate it.
The assessment has also provided insightinto our project portfolio management. Our
overall portfolio of projects is distributed
across the four quadrants. Bull projects are dif-
ficult to run, and an organization with a high
percentage of bulls is taking on significant risk.
Most of our projects turn out to be in the dog
quadrant. Dogs can be loyal and rewarding.
Provide them reasonable care and feeding, and
theyÕll provide good results in return.AcknowledgmentsThe experience of the many Landmark develop-ment teams provided fodder for this analysis. The
coauthors of the original experience report3(ForrestGreene, Tessy Phillips, Rex Pilger, and Robert Polder-

vaart) along with Karl Zachry helped to formulate the
development process and have provided valuable con-
tributions to this work.References1.A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley, 2001.
2.J. Highsmith, 
Adaptive Software Development: A Col-laborative Approach to Managing Complex Systems,Dorset House, 2000.3.T. Little et al., ÒAdaptive AgilityÑManaging Complex-
ity and Uncertainty,Ó 
Proc. 2004 Agile DevelopmentConf., IEEE Press, 2004.4.B. Boehm, ÒGet Ready for Agile Methods with Care,Ó
Computer, Jan. 2002, pp. 64Ð69.5.B. Boehm and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and Disci-pline: A Guide for the Perplexed
, Addison-Wesley,
2003.6.C.E. Shannon, ÒA Mathematical Theory of Communi-
cation,Ó Bell System Tech. J.
, vol. 27, July and Oct.1948, pp. 379Ð423, 623Ð656.7.A. Cockburn, 
Crystal Clear, Addison-Wesley, 2004.
8.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
9.K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, 
Agile Software Develop-ment with SCRUM, Prentice Hall, 2001.10.T. Little, ÒValue Creation and Capture: A Model of the
Software Development Process,Ó 
IEEE Software, vol.21, no. 3, 2004, pp. 48Ð53.11.R. Thomsett, 
Radical Project Management, PrenticeHall, 2002.12.M. Farmer, ÒDecisionSpace Infrastructure: Agile Devel-
opment in a Large, Distributed Team,Ó 
Proc. 2004 Ag-ile Development Conf., IEEE Press, 2004, pp. 95Ð99.13.T. DeMarco, 
Controlling Software Projects, PrenticeHall, 1982.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
35Industry
median2000200120022003109
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0Year of project start
Estimation Quality Factor3.84.87.07.68.4Figure 4. Improvementin our companyÕs 
median Estimation
Quality Factor.
About the AuthorTodd Littleis a senior development manager for Landmark Graphics. His current inter-ests include generating business value through agile software development. HeÕs a member of

the AgileAllianceÕs board of directors, the program director for the Agile 2005 Conference, a

member of the IEEE Computer Society and the Society of Petroleum Engineers, and a regis-
tered Professional Engineer in Texas. He received his MS in petroleum engineering from the

University of Houston. Contact him at Landmark Graphics, PO Box 42806, Houston, TX 77242;
tlittle@lgc.com.WeÕd like tohear from

youSENDUS EMAIL AT
@computer.org
