 8 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY
 0740-7459/12/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
Editor: 
Neil Maiden
City University London,
n.a.m.maiden@city.ac.uk
REQUIREMENTS
Framing Requirements 
Work as Learning
Neil Maiden
WHY IS REQUIREMENTS 
work not 
more perceived as learning? Rarely at 
conferences, seminars, or even informal 
get-togethers do requirements people 

frame their work to involve learning. 

I can think of some reasons for thisŠ
we are, after all, an engineering disci-
plineŠbut still. Which is why it was 

refreshing to see a requirements person 

stand up and do just that at a recent 
conference: Hermann Kaindl, from the 
Vienna University of Technology.
Well, to be honest, Hermann didn™t 
actually say that we should frame re-

quirements work as a learning process, 

but from my seat in the back, he might 

as well have. He actually argued for 
framing requirements work as knowl-
edge management.
1 He and his coau-
thor Lukas Pilat cast requirements en-
gineering as a knowledge management 
process to adopt the spiral of knowl-

edge and transform it from tacit to ex-

plicit. Some of the requirements people 
in the audience looked a little vexed. 

After all, making the tacit explicit was 
something that we™ve been doing since 
the dawn of our discipline. Not every-

one saw this new angleŠtheir loss.
But my concern was different: Why 
didn™t Hermann follow his argument 

through to its logical conclusion? 

Why not, if you view requirements 
work through the lens of knowl-
edge management, view it as a learn-

ing process, in that analysts need to 

learn about the domain, its problems, 
stakeholders, and their motives? And 
if organizational learning, whatever 

that is, is taking place, is individual 

learning by the analysts not likewise 
taking place?
Re˜ ections
At this point, some of you might be 
checking the strap line at the top of 
this page and wondering if this is the 
Requirements columnŠor if it™s even 

IEEE Software
. Organizational and 
individual learningŠhas Maiden lost 

the plot?
Most de˜ nitely notŠI™m being 
serious.
Our community™s perceptions of 
the social processes in requirements 
work have evolved considerably over 
the past 20 years. Our earliest, sim-

plistic view in which an analyst elic-

its fully formed requirements from 
willing stakeholders has given way 
to the realization that we need to ac-

quire requirements from stakeholders 

through dialogue, observation, and 
better understanding based on im-
mersion and contextual inquiry. More 

recently, some of us have argued that 

requirements also need to be created, 
invented, or just made up.
All of these social processes in-
volve some degree of learningŠabout 

stakeholders, their processes, and their 
workplace. Learning has become a 

very big elephant in our requirements 

room.
I believe that framing requirements 
work as learning opens up new op-

portunities. One such opportunity is 

to apply existing theories and models 
of learning to our work. Of course, 
learning has been well researched, and 

the discerning requirements analyst is 
spoiled for choice.
Consider re˚ ective learning. It™s ac-
tually part of re˚ ective practice, which 
If organizational learning, whatever that 
is, is taking place, is individual learning by 

the analysts not likewise taking place?
  MAY/JUNE 2012
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 9REQUIREMENTS
is continuous learning from re˚ect
-ing on past actions. Some argue that 
it is a de˜ning characteristic of profes
-sional practice, hence we requirements 
folks should be aware of it. Re˚ective 
learning from past actions describes 
ﬁthose intellectual and affective ac
-tivities in which individuals engage to 
explore their experiences in order to 
lead to new understandings and appre
-ciations.ﬂ
2 A learner reevaluates a past 
experience by attending to its various 
aspects, thereby producing outcomes.
Figure 1 shows the re˚ective learn
-ing process developed by David Boud 
and his colleagues.
2 Experiences refer 
both to single experiences (of speci˜c 
events or situations) and general expe
-rience in the form of knowledge/skills/
attitudes collected and developed over 
time. It can be seen as a continuous 
ﬁ˚owﬂ of which people can be more or 
less conscious. 
Reality Check
So what might the implications of re
-˚ective learning be on requirements 
work? Well, one is that analysts should 
be encouraged to re˚ect more on the 
work undertaken, to support their 
learning. Most of us are in a rush, 
chasing another milestone or the next 
deadline. We have little if any time to 
look backward. Perhaps we need to 
encourage more re˚ective practices in 
requirements work. If we did, what 
might these practices look like?
The Boud model in Figure 1 ad
-vocates returning to experiences, at
-tending to our feelings about them, 
and reevaluating them to gain new 
perspectives and change our behavior. 
This suggests that learning about re
-quirements work can take place in two 
related dimensions. One is learning 
about our own requirements tasksŠ
how to do the work better in the fu
-ture. The other is learning about the 
application domain and requirements 
on future versions of it.
Let™s focus on that latter point: re
-˚ective learning could be applied to 
our workplace observations. Analysts 
often document the results of such ob
-servations using notes, photographs, 
and critical-incident reports. The fo
-cus is often on being objective, but 
what if we re˚ect on the observation 
experience and attend to our emo
-tions, as we might during an emo
-tional design process? Might we learn 
something more about the domain?
Likewise, during walkthroughs 
of scenarios or use cases, analysts 
generate outcomes, namely, new re
-quirements or emerging inconsisten
-cies or conflicts between require
-ments. Again, the focus tends to be 
on objective outcomes. But what if, 
later on, we return to an experience 
and replay it in our minds and do the 
walkthrough again? Might we learn 
something more general about the 
future system?
Agile requirements processes could 
also bene˜t from more re˚ective learn
-ing. The focus on the next sprint re
-duces time for learning about the 
requirements before the code is devel
-oped. Is this a good thing? I doubt itŠ
you need some space to re˚ect on the 
impact of emerging code on the deliv
-ery of important qualities required by 
the ˜nal product.
So, after reading this column, 
what are your immediate re
-˚ections (ha!)? Consider your 
emotionsŠanger, delight, frustra
-tionŠcan you reevaluate your reading 
experience?
Let me guide your learning. Re˚ec
-tion is a characteristic of good pro
-fessional practice. If, as profession
-als, we™re expected to do it, then we 
should embrace it and apply it directly 
to requirements work. We might learn 
something.
References
 1.
 L. Pilat and H. Kaindl, ﬁA Knowledge 
Management Perspective of Requirements 
Engineering,ﬂ 
Proc. 5th IEEE Int™l Conf. 
Research Challenges in Information Science
, IEEE Press, 2011, pp. 1Œ12.
 2.
 D. Boud, R. Keogh, and D. Walker, 
Promoting 
Re˜ection Experience into Learning
, Rout
-ledge Falmer, 1985, pp. 18Œ40.
NEIL MAIDEN 
is professor of software engineer
-ing and head of the Centre for HCI Design at City 
University London. Contact him at n.a.m.maiden@
city.ac.uk.
Selected CS articles and columns 
 are also available for free at 
 http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
BehaviorIdeasFeelingsReturning to experienceAttending to feelingsReevaluating experienceNew perspectiveson experienceOutcomesRe˜ective processExperiencesChange in behaviorReadiness for applicationCommitment to actionFIGURE 1. 
The process of re˜ective learning. Experience can be seen as a continuous ﬁ˜owﬂ 
of which people can be more or less conscious.
