 32IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/07/$25.00 © 2007 IEEEActually, I donÕt think any software developer
is truly content to ship code that falls below 
the bar. The truth is that most developers sim-

ply donÕt know how to reach that bar or donÕt

believe reaching it is possible. All too often 
they commit to deadlines that they later find they
canÕt meet, and so, through high-stress heroics,

they wind up compromising quality to avoid be-

ing overly late.In this article, IÕll discuss how test-driven de-velopment can help software developers achieve
a higher degree of professionalism. TDD isnÕt a

silver bullet and wonÕt suddenly transform you

into a sterling professional. It does, however,

play a significant role.The three laws of TDDTDD practitioners follow these three laws:
You may not write production code unless

youÕve first written a failing unit test.
You may not write more of a unit test than

is sufficient to fail.You may not write more production code

than is sufficient to make the failing unit

test pass.These three laws lock you into a tight loopin which you first write a portion of a unit test
that fails, and then you write just enough pro-
duction code to make that test pass. This loop
is perhaps two minutes long and almost always
ends in success.1Following these laws perfectly doesnÕt always
make sense. Sometimes youÕll write a larger test.
Sometimes youÕll write extra production code.
Sometimes youÕll write tests after youÕve written
the code to make them pass. Sometimes itÕll take
more than two minutes to go around the loop.
The goal isnÕt perfect adherence to the lawsÑitÕs

to decrease the interval between writing tests and
production code to a matter of minutes. focusProfessionalism and Test-Driven DevelopmentProfessional software developers ship clean, flexible code thatworksÑon time. It seems to me that this statement is the mini-
mum standard for professional behavior for software developers.
Yet, in my travels as a software consultant, IÕve met many soft-
ware developers who donÕt set the bar this high and instead ship late,

buggy, messy, and bloated code.
test-driven developmentRobert C. Martin, 
Object MentorTest-driven
development 
is a discipline that
helps professional
software developers
ship clean, flexible
code that works, 
on time. CounterintuitionIn my frequent lectures and courses, IÕve foundthat many developers consider TDD to be coun-
terintuitive. The extremely short cycles between

writing a test and making it pass go against their
practice of writing whole modules and testing
them manually afterward. They also argue that
all that test writing would be too much work.However, intuition isnÕt always the best guide
to professional behavior. Take, for example, the

case of Ignaz Semmelweis, who in 1847 achieved

a six-fold drop in his maternity wardÕs mortality

rate by simply having doctors wash their hands

before examining pregnant women:His observations went against the currentscientific opinion of the time, which blamed

diseases (among other quite odd causes) on
an imbalance of the basic Òfour humoursÓ
in the body, a theory known as dyscrasia. It

was also ÒarguedÓ that even if his findings
were correct, washing oneÕs hands each time

before treating a pregnant woman, as Sem-
melweis advised, would be too much work.
Nor were doctors eager to admit that they
had caused so many deaths.2Certainly the implications of TDD arenÕt as
significant to software professionalism as sterile

procedure is to medical professionalism. None-

theless, parallels exist. TDD changes the way
programmers work minute by minute, and it
profoundly affects the workÕs results.
ImpedimentsOf course, not every environment is condu-cive to a strict interpretation of the three laws. If
you must do batch compiles or download your
software into an embedded device, itÕs difficult

to get around that loop every two minutes. You

might be modifying vast quantities of hard-to-
test legacy code. You might be using a third-

party software package that doesnÕt provide

easy test access, such as a COTS system or one
of the many Web frameworks. ThereÕs no end to

the reasons why TDD isnÕt practiced, given the

plethora of impediments.The solutions to these impediments arenÕt
within this articleÕs scope. I daresay youÕll find

some of them in other articles in this issue. Oth-
ers youÕll find on the Web or in books. Still oth-

ers you might need to invent for yourself. YouÕll

always find plenty of impediments to convince

you not to write tests, but TDD is an attitude as
well as a discipline. The TDD attitude doesnÕt
yield to the impediments; rather, it finds a way
to deal with them and write the tests anyway.
This might seem too extreme, and of course,some tests canÕt or shouldnÕt be written. But

the attitude still holds. Those of us who follow
the discipline of TDD donÕt yield lightly.
BenefitsIf you follow the TDD discipline and atti-tude, youÕll write dozens of tests per day, hun-

dreds of tests per month, and thousands of tests
per year. Experience shows that these tests will

cover more than 90 percent of the production
code. They should be kept in one place and
should be easy to run. Executing them shouldnÕt

take more than a few minutes.Over the last few years, Micah Martin and
IÕve been working on an application named Fit-
Nesse (www.fitnesse.org). FitNesse is a Web-

based application using a Front Controller that

defers to servlets that direct views. Downloaded
tens of thousands of times, FitNesse consists of
45,000 lines of Java code in nearly 600 files. Al-
most 20,000 of those lines and 200 of those

files are unit tests. Over 1,100 specific test cases
contain many thousands of assertions, giving
FitNesse test coverage of over 90 percent (as

measured by Clover, http://cenqua.com/clover).

These tests execute at the touch of an IDE (in-
tegrated development environment) button in

approximately 30 seconds.These tests, along with the convenience ofeasily executing them, have benefits that far
exceed simple software verification. FlexibilityWhy donÕt developers clean up code? TheyÕre
afraid that theyÕll break it. The old maxim, ÒIf it
ainÕt broke, donÕt fix it!Ó is a common attitude

among software developers.TDD alleviates this fear because you cancheck any change to the software almost in-
stantly. If the tests all pass, itÕs unlikely that the

change broke something unexpected. The tests
make small changes virtually risk free. We found

with FitNesse that even large, sweeping changes
were low risk. This was likely because we im-
plemented large changes as a sequence of small
changes with test-runs in between.So, TDD lets us clean up messy code without
the fear that weÕll break something. Using TDD

also means that we can change the behavior of

one part of the system without risking side ef-
fects in other parts. In short, having a quick andMay/June 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
33Why donÕtdevelopersclean up code?TheyÕre afraid
that theyÕll
break it.  convenient high-coverage test suite enhancesour ability to create flexible designs. 
In our experience with FitNesse, weÕve madesweeping architectural and requirements changes
with little impact on the rest of the system. By
breaking changes into a sequence of tiny steps

and keeping tests passing between each step,
weÕve added and changed major features, and al-

tered existing architectural structures with virtu-
ally no backlash from the user community due to

hidden defects or side effects. The tests have
made us fearless about cleaning up and improv-

ing our code.DocumentationHow do you learn a third-party frameworksuch as Spring or Hibernate? The manuals cer-
tainly help, but the real learning comes by study-
ing (and using) the code examples and sample
projects that are typically in the back of those
manuals.The unit tests that TDD causes us to writeare much like the material in the back of a man-

ual. Each unit test is an isolated snippet of code
that explains how some part of the overall sys-

tem works. If you want to know how to create

a certain object, thereÕs a unit test that creates it.

If you want to know how to call a certain API

function, thereÕs a unit test that calls it. You de-

scribe anything you want to do with the system
in a test.These tests are unambiguous documents, writ-ten in a language that programmers understand.
TheyÕre so formal that they execute, and because
theyÕre executed all the time, they canÕt get out of

sync with the application. TheyÕre low-level de-
sign documents that describe the systemÕs struc-

ture and interactions so completely that if you
lost the production code, you could recreate it by
examining the unit tests and writing the code
that makes them pass.Our experience with FitNesse has justifiedthis view, although not without some issues.

We do find that reading the unit tests is a good

way to understand a module. The tests are gen-
erally short, easy-to-understand, and descrip-
tive snippets of code.Unfortunately, some FitNesse tests suffer
from nonlocal-isms. They derive from base
classes that derive from other base classes, each
containing utility functions that the tests find
useful. Although this is generally good design
and reduces redundancy, it makes the tests

harder to read.Some FitNesse tests suffer from huge setupfunctions that try to be all things to all test

cases. These setups make individual tests harder
to understand because keeping track of every-
thing that a setup function did is difficult.
Some FitNesse tests are downright bloated.
They try to test too much in a single function

or to move the system through too many state

changes in one session. These tests are tough
to read and understand. Their documentation
ability is limited.
In short, FitNesse taught us that you need todesign tests to be good documents. You need to

expend effort to keep them local and readable.
You canÕt treat tests as second-class code. They

must be kept to the same level of code quality
as the production code.Minimal debugging
If youÕre following the three laws within
reason and youÕre operating in a cycle thatÕs

just a few minutes long, then youÕre never

more than a few minutes from seeing all the

tests run. This means that youÕll detect almost
any bug that creeps into the system within

minutes. You donÕt need a debugger to find

the bug. You donÕt really need to do much de-

bugging at all. You know where the bug is be-

cause you just added it!Of course, itÕs not really that easy. Some tests
take longer to run than others, forcing a parti-
tioning strategy for running the tests. For exam-
ple, even the 30 seconds it takes to run FitNesse
tests is too long to wait during the normal TDD
cycle, so I usually restrict the tests I run to the
package IÕm modifying. This shrinks the test time
to 1 or 2 seconds but means that I only run the
whole suite every half-hour or so. So, some bugs

could wait 30 minutes before theyÕre discovered.Even so, in the last three years, Micah and I
havenÕt used a debugger with FitNesse more

than a few dozen times. When we do, itÕs al-

most always in the context of a failing unit test,

making the cause of the problem localized and

repeatable, so the session ends quickly. I canÕt

remember a single instance of casting a net of

break points or blindly single-stepping through

the code in the hope that weÕd get a clue to
what was going on.Indeed, in FitNesseÕs entire history there hasnÕt
been a release that was delayed for quality is-

sues. ItÕs never had the kind of haunting bug

that thwarts delivery schedules and makes hash
out of project plans. In 45,000 lines of 
code,34IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Tests must be
kept to the samelevel of codequality as theproductioncode. weÕve never released a fatal, or even a very sig-nificant, bug. Other companies have had similar results.Both Sabre and Workshare have reported a 10
reduction in defects to the field and signifi-
cantly increased productivity.
3,4Joel Spolsky once said that debugging ishard to estimate and can take 100 to 200 per-

cent of the coding time.5Whether or not his fig-
ures are accurate, we can all agree that debug-

ging is a huge unknown in any software
schedule. TDD reduces that unknown by mak-
ing sure that we discover defects early and that

the causes are localized. In short, TDD makes

our schedules more predictable by reducing de-

buggingÕs variability.
Better designIf we follow the three laws within reason,weÕll write most of our code in response to a
failing unit test. This means that most of our
code will be, by definition, testable. But you
canÕt test a function if that function calls others

that have unknown or deleterious effects. So,
you must decouple the function youÕre calling
and test it independently of the other functions
it calls.This might sound hard to do, but itÕs really
just good object-oriented design. OOD lets you
decouple functions from each other, and TDD

enforces that decoupling. This results in a highly
modular and deeply decoupled software struc-

tureÑin other words, a good design.Good designs arenÕt free, and TDD doesnÕt
guarantee good designs. However, TDD pro-

vides powerful impetus to decouple, forcing de-
velopers to think through their designs in ways

that they otherwise might not.Early in FitNesseÕs development, we were cer-
tain weÕd need a back-end database. We didnÕt

know if it would be MySQL or something else,
and we didnÕt want to decide too early. So, we

avoided the issue by creating simple mock data-
access functions. Our unit tests used these mocks
by passing them to the core FitNesse modules.
We hid the mocks behind an interface so that Fit-

Nesse wouldnÕt know that the data-accessors

were mocked. Later we needed to test things that

simple mocks couldnÕt support. So, we created a

simple in-memory database that hid behind the
same interface. FitNesse was and is able to use
this without knowing it. (FitNesse still uses an in-
memory database for most of its test cases, which
is a reason why the unit tests run in 30 seconds.)Still later, we 
needed true persistence, so we createda simple flat-file database and hid it behind the
same interface.It turned out that the flat-file system sufficed,
delivering high performance and good reliabil-
ity. It was also convenient having flat files to in-

spect and manage. So in the end, we didnÕt im-

plement the back-end MySQL database.A year or so later, a FitNesse user needed to
put his FitNesse pages into a MySQL database.

FitNesseÕs highly decoupled design, necessitated

by the mocks, made it easy for him to implement
the data access interfaces with a back-end data-
base. He got FitNesse up and running with My-

SQL in less than a day! So much for the notion
that you need to decide on databases up front

and that theyÕre hard to put in later. FitNesse still

ships with a plug-in for MySQL based on that
userÕs work.
Make no mistake; FitNesse has design issuesthat I think need improvement. TDD didnÕt

turn FitNesse into a design utopia. On the other

hand, the deep commitment we made to TDD
at the projectÕs start has resulted in highly de-

coupled code. Peter Kriens blogged, ÒWhen I
inspected the code, my hands itchedÉ . The

code looked so clean and so easy to bundlefy
that I could not resist. Turning it into a bundle

was indeed trivial; the makers of FitNesse pro-

vided a very clean configuration and start/stop
interfaceÓ (see the full text of PeterÕs blog to see

some of his complaints about the design).
6TDD and professionalismLetÕs think back on my definition of a soft-
ware professional: professional software de-
velopers ship clean, flexible code that worksÑ
on time.Clean codeTDD canÕt force you to write clean code, but
it can help eliminate the fear that cleaning your

code will break it. The ability to quickly run a

full suite of tests means that you can feel safe
cleaning up any messes that you findÑor make.
One quick test will tell you if your improve-
ments are doing more harm than good. Follow-

ing TDD means that youÕre freer to follow an-
other professional discipline: ÒAlways leave the
code in a better state than when you found it.Ó
Flexible codeNothing, in my experience, makes code moreflexible than the sure knowledge that when youMay/June 2007IEEE SOFTWARE
35 modify it, it wonÕt break. TDD provides that
sure knowledge. That surety is certainly not

complete. Bugs can still slip through the net of
tests. Indeed, you often hear that you canÕt prove

code correct by testing it. Although this argu-
ment is correct, it misses the point that surety is
a continuum. When you run a suite of tests that

covers 90+ percent of the code and you see all
those tests pass, youÕre very sure that the code

works. ItÕs that level of surety, far more than any

design or architectural structure, that makes the
code flexible.Code that worksOf all the statements in the definition of pro-
fessionalism, this is the most important. Again,
you canÕt be completely sure it works, but a pro-

fessional will perform due diligence to the best
of his or her ability. Later changes can inadver-

tently break code that worked once, but TDD
significantly mitigates this problem without

greatly increasing the due diligence.When I run unit tests (and acceptance tests)on FitNesse, I know it works. Indeed, passing

these tests is the only criterion for release. We

donÕt have a quality-assurance cycle after Òcode

complete.Ó We continuously run the unit and

acceptance tests during development. So long as
they keep passing, we know we can make a re-

lease at any time.
Not all systems can depend solely on auto-mated tests the way FitNesse does. Some man-

ual, exploratory, system, and live-data testing is

generally necessary. Even so, programmers

should expect QA to find zero defects. No pro-
fessional programmer should ever release code

to QA and expect a list of bugs back.
On timeTDD canÕt guarantee that youÕll make all
your dates. What it can do is eliminate vari-
ables. ItÕs much easier to accurately estimate a

task when you know you wonÕt be spending

much time debugging. ItÕs much easier to know
and communicate a taskÕs status when you can
see a fraction of the tests passing. ItÕs much eas-

ier to know when you can release if you keep all

your tests passing at all times. In short, TDD
can give you the surety and the information to
make being on time a realistic goal.
Iwear a green band on my wrist that says
ÒTest FirstÓ (see http://butunclebob.com/

ArticleS.UncleBob.GreenWristBand). ItÕs
there to remind me that I have obligations to

my customers and my coworkers: A professional doesnÕt ship code he or she

is uncertain of.A professional writes clean, flexible code
that works.A professional is on time.
My green band reminds me that TDDÕs dis-
ciplines are a huge help in meeting professional-
ismÕs requirements and that it would therefore

be unprofessional of me not to follow them.References1.R. Martin, ÒThe Bowling Game Kata,Ó June 2005;
www.butunclebob.com/files/downloads/Bowling%

20Game%20Kata.ppt.2.ÒIgnaz Semmelwiess,Ó Wikipedia entry, Mar. 2007;
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ignaz_Semmelweis.3.G. Anthes, ÒSabre Takes Extreme Measures,Ó 
Computer-world, 29 Mar. 2004; www.computerworld.com/
developmenttopics/development/story/0,10801,91646,00.
html.4.D. Putman, ÒWorkshare Technology and eXtreme 
Programming (XP),Ó 2000; www.objectmentor.com/

resources/articles/workshare.zip.6.J. Spolsky, ÒPainless Software Schedules,Ó 
Joel on Soft-
ware, Mar. 2000; www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/
fog0000000245.html.7.P. Kriens, ÒWhy is Software So Brittle?Ó OSGi Alliance
blog,Aug. 2006; www.osgi.org/blog/2006/08/why-is-

software-so-brittle.html.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
36IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
About the AuthorsRobert C. Martin
(Uncle Bob) is founder and president of Object Mentor in Gurnee, Illi-nois. His research interests include process improvement and object-oriented software design.
HeÕs published more than 100 articles and is a regular speaker at international conferences

and trade shows. He served three years as editor in chief of the 
C++ Report, and he was thefirst chairman of the Agile Alliance. Contact him at unclebob@objectmentor.com.
