 46IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/07/$20.00 © 2007 IEEEsmall settings provides a good introductionto these issues, statistics, and relevant lessons
learned.1Over the past eight years, Kitware has grownfrom having two developers to having more
than 30. We produce a mixture of commercial

closed-source and open source products. Some
products are internal to Kitware, but others
have collaborators located around the world.
Likewise, some projects are small, with only one
or two developers, but others have 30 or more.
So, any development approach we use must
have low enough overhead that we can use it
with smaller projects but also be able to handle
larger projects consisting of thousands of source
files. Given all these requirements, plus the need
to cross-develop on Windows, Linux, and Mac

OSX, itÕs clear that any viable solution must be

very flexible.Our software development approach ad-dresses some of these concerns. WeÕve been re-
fining our approach while working on projects

such as the Visualization Toolkit
2and the InsightSegmentation and Registration Toolkit (ITK),
3widely used open source toolkits with thousands
of source files and many distributed developers.
WeÕve also applied these techniques to ParaView,

a scientific visualization application thatÕs open

source but has a smaller development commu-
nity, and VolView, a closed-source, internal, med-

ical volume-rendering application. This article dis-
cusses the specific tools and processes weÕve used,
the costs and benefits, and the lessons weÕve
learned.Origins of our software processIn 1999, the US National Library of Medi-cine (NLM) at the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) awarded a three-year contract
to develop an open source registration andfocusAn Open Source Approachto Developing Software 
in a Small Organization
How does a small group of software developers exploit the soft-
ware engineering practices that large software organizations typ-
ically use? Small groups certainly need all the benefits that such
practices provide but often lack the infrastructure and economiesof scale that larger groups can leverage. A small software group typically
doesnÕt have a dedicated QA team or testing farm, or possibly even a dedi-

cated system administrator. The SEI report on process improvement for 
SE challenges in small companiesKen Martin and Bill Hoffman, 
KitwareKitwareÕs 
software
development
approach borrows
techniques from
agile development
and Extreme
Programming 
and emphasizes
long-term, 
ongoing projects. segmentation toolkit, which eventually came tobe known as ITK.3The initial development teamconsisted of three commercial partners (GE Cor-
porate R&D, Kitware, and MathSoft) and three

academic partners (University of North Car-
olina, University of Tennessee, and University of

Pennsylvania). This large, geographically sepa-
rated group was tasked with a difficult software

engineering problem: to develop a reusable
cross-platform open source toolkit in C++ that
would contain the state of the art in medical im-
aging algorithms and be useful for both research

and development.At the projectÕs start, we surveyed the avail-
able tools to determine what we needed to de-
velop and what we could use. We also studied re-

cent software development trends. The emerging
Extreme Programming4and test-driven develop-ment5methodologies provided many good ideasand helped us to develop our process. XPÕs testa-

bility requirement was of particular interest. ITK
would have many developers and many plat-
forms to support. For development to move for-
ward at the correct pace, the developers would

have to rely on the system working almost con-

tinuously. XP principles also encouraged the use

of code standards and collective ownership. Six-

sigma quality efforts led the team to use metrics
such as daily code coverage analysis during test-
ing. In many ways, our approach resembles the

Agile Unified Process;6both are lightweight, iter-ative, incremental, and tool independent.The process in detailWe organized the process into five major
parts: communication and documentation, revi-
sion control, build management, testing, and re-
lease creation. The motivation behind this or-
ganization is looking at the software process
from a steady-state perspective, and itÕs particu-

larly suited for long-term projects. Communica-

tion, for example, is always happening with new
requirements, design discussions, and end-user
feedback, all of which occur concurrently on an
ongoing basis.We designed the process to be lightweight
and allow for rapid development, with a re-
quirement that the majority of the tools used
had to be open source. For communication and
documentation, the process initially used the
Mailman mailing list software, Doxygen for au-
tomatic documentation of source code, and ph-
pBugTracker for issue tracking (available at

http://sourceforge.net). In recent years, weÕveadded the Wiki,
7another powerful com-munication tool. For revision control, we picked
the Concurrent Versions System (CVS)
8becauseof its easy-to-use, nonlocking client-server
model. For the build process, at the start of the

ITK project, no tool existed that could build
complicated C++ projects on all of the sup-
ported platforms, so we developed a tool called
CMake.9For automatic testing of software, theITK team decided to develop another tool, even-
tually called Dart (http://svn.na-mic.org:8000/
svn/Dart/trunk/Dart.pdf). Over the past eight
years, weÕve also developed a process for using
all these tools together to generate regular re-
leases as well, and weÕve recently begun work
on creating a new tool called CPack to aid in the
release process. The process has proven to be
flexible, and it adapts well to new tools and
technologies as they appear.
Communication and documentationGood communication and documentationare arguably the most important aspects of a

software process. We use several techniques to

encourage constructive communication and doc-
umentation during software development and
maintenance.Mailing lists.Mailing lists have proven to be anindispensable form of communication between
software developers and users. The Mailman
list manager is a simple, easy-to-manage, Web-

based tool for creating and maintaining mailing

lists. Each project normally has a developersÕ

list and a usersÕ list. The developersÕ list con-
tains detailed discussions about design issues.
The usersÕ list provides a place for end users to
pose questions about how to use the software.

Users often help each other, although develop-

ers commonly subscribe to the usersÕ list as well

to counter any bad advice that might appear. In

a projectÕs early days (when the software has no

users), this list isnÕt required. When the project

reaches a certain maturity level, it makes sense

to create a separate list for users, which Mail-
man lets you do easily.
Mailing lists are also beneficial becausethey result in searchable archives, which pro-
vide a source of documentation and can con-
tain the most current information about how

to use a project. So, email lists are dynamic
communication channels that can react quickly
as systems evolve in response to changes such
as new operating system or compiler releases.January/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
47Goodcommunicationanddocumentationare arguably the mostimportantaspectsof a software
process.  Wiki. An excellent adjunct to mailing lists is theWiki, a Web page that the software community

can edit quickly. This allows for the rapid doc-

umentation of discussions on a mailing list. For
example, consider a situation in which the re-

lease of a new compiler results in a software

compile failure unless a special compiler flag is
added to the build process. The first lucky user

to run into the problem would post it to the
usersÕ mailing list. Somebody in the community
would then identify a workaround, post the fix
to the list, and ask the original user to verify the

solution. Once the user has verified the solu-

tion, somebody would update the Wiki with the

fix, which then becomes part of the software

documentation. We use MediaWiki, which is

freely available as open source software.Doxygen.As with XP, weÕve incorporated Lit-
erate Programming ideas into KitwareÕs devel-

opment process. As Wayne Sewall explains,

ÒIn general, literate programs combine source
and documentation in a single file. Literate
programming tools then parse the file to pro-
duce either readable documentation or compi-
lable source.Ó10The Doxygen tool employs a simple com-ment markup language in C++ or C source
code and generates extensive source code doc-
umentation. Because the tool automatically
generates the documentation from the source,

it can be automatically updated each night to
match the most recent copy of the code in the

revision control system. Programmers gener-
ally donÕt like to write documentation, but

they do like to write code. So, if theyÕre devel-

oping documentation while writing the code,
itÕs far more likely that the documentation will

stay current and follow the code.Issue tracker.
Another powerful tool in the soft-ware process is the bug or issue tracker. An issue

tracker lets developers and users report software
issues and provides a place to store feature re-
quests so theyÕre not forgotten. We chose the

Web-based phpBugTracker system because itÕs

easy to install, has a clean user interface, and
can easily handle multiple projects. As develop-
ers and users create issues in the system, the is-
sues are given a unique ID and can be assigned
a severity and priority. The issue trackerÕs ad-

ministrator can give developers extra privileges,
so that they can assign status and resolutions to
issues. The system also lets you attach files to is-sues, providing a way to give reproducible testcases and even source patches. The issueÕs initia-

tor and the developer assigned to it are notified
via email when the issueÕs status changes. This

allows for dialogue between the reporter and the
developer.
However, having a good issue tracker isnÕt
the end of the story. For the tool to remain use-

ful, someone must manage it, and the team
must get together periodically and ÒtriageÓ the
issuesÑthat is, adjust their priorities and reas-
sign them to the appropriate developers or cat-
egories. Triage normally occurs before a release

and involves getting the entire team together
for some form of real-time communication (ei-
ther in the same room, or via a telephone or
video conference). Without this attention, issue

trackers can quickly become a list of things
that never get done.Revision controlAll software projects, large and small, shoulduse some sort of revision control. A revision
control system lets developers track changes in
the software over time. Many tools have been
created to manage file versions. Most revision
control software works by keeping a central
repository for files under revision control. The
central repository usually stores the files as a his-
tory of changes or deltas. Each time a developer
changes a file, he or she can ÒcommitÓ the
change to the repository, making it available to

other developers. This can be problematic when
two people change a file at the same time. This
problem has two basic solutions:limit access to a single developer, allowing

changes to a file only after the developer
obtains permission to modify it from a

central server, or
allow concurrent edits of the same file and

provide a way to merge the changes auto-
matically, marking conflicting changes if

they occur.
In our software process, the concurrent editmode works best. It allows flexibility in location,
so developers can make edits while on a plane or

when working from home. The most popular
tool for this type of revision control is CVS,
which is built on a client-server architecture. The
server stores the files in the project, and the
clients can connect to the server and check out
copies of the software. The client can request any48IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
If programmersare developingdocumentationwhile writingcode, itÕs farmore likely that thedocumentationwill staycurrent. version of a file in the system. CVS can also tagand branch files. A tag is a symbolic name for a

group of files that provides a project snapshot at
a given point in time. Branches let multiple paths
of development occur concurrently and inde-
pendently. Changes committed to one branch

donÕt affect the other branches. One special

branch, which we call the Òmain treeÓ or trunk,
is the default development path checked out if
none is specified. A newer tool called Subversion
has a few advantages over CVS and can be used
in place of it. Notably, Subversion provides http/

https server mode and lets you move and rename
directories, and branching and tagging are com-

putationally cheap.
When itÕs time to create a release for a soft-
ware project, one developer is assigned to be the
release manager. He or she tells all the develop-

ers to get all final edits into the repository, which

is then locked down, with only the release man-
ager having write access. The release manager
then tests the system and, when the desired fea-
tures are present, creates a branch for the re-
lease. The release manager then applies fixes
only to the branch. CVS can be set up to block
other developers from committing changes onto
a branch. The rest of the developers can then
move back to the main tree and start developing
the next version of the software.Build management
An important but often overlooked part of
any software project is managing the build
process. The build process takes a group of
source code files and transforms them into end-

user applications and libraries. A large software
package frequently employs a suite of tools,
consisting of compilers, custom generators, link-
ers, and archiving tools, for this purpose. Coor-
dinating all of these tools consistently from
computer to computer and developer to devel-
oper can be difficult and time-consuming. These
tools and the way that theyÕre used vary signifi-
cantly from platform to platform, so managing
the build process across Windows, Unix, and

Macintoshes is difficult.Before CMake, Kitware developers used au-toconf on Unix platforms and a Visualization

Toolkit-specific nmake makefile generator on

Windows. The approach consisted of hand-

crafted makefiles including generated lists of
source files. The process was error prone and
restrictive, with only a few developers knowing

how to make changes to the build.
CMake takes as input simple script files inthe CMake language. CMake uses the input files
to perform system introspection and describe
how to construct executables, libraries, and cus-
tom targets. Unlike many cross-platform build

tools, CMake is designed to be used in conjunc-
tion with the native build environment by gen-
erating build files for native build tools. This lets
developers use the tools with which theyÕre most

proficient. This is important for small compa-
nies because training people to use standard
tools can be costly and might generate resent-
ment among developers who are forced to use a

corporate-mandated build environment. Larger
organizations might have entire teams devoted
to maintaining the build process, but by au-
tomating much of the work involved with the
build process, CMake lets smaller teams develop
portable software. It also lets developers gener-
ate an executable in just a few lines of code that
will compile on multiple platforms.CMake has been in active developmentsince 1999 and has grown into a powerful gen-
eral-purpose tool with a growing user base.
Recently, the K Desktop Environment commu-

nity selected CMake to replace autoconf and
Scons (KDE is one of the worldÕs largest open

source projects). CMake is now a mature, fully
featured build tool that allows for full cus-
tomization of the build process and can replace
the dedicated build team found in many larger
organizations. The CMake languageÕs simple

syntax lets any developer easily create the exe-
cutables and libraries required by the project
being developed.Testing
Testing is a key tool for producing and
maintaining robust, valid software.Types of tests.
The tests for a software packagecan take many forms. At the most basic level

are smoke tests, such as those that simply ver-
ify that the software compiles. Although this

might seem simple, with the wide variety of

platforms and configurations available, smoke
tests catch more problems than any other type
of test. Another form of smoke test is one that
verifies that a test runs without crashing. This

can be handy when the developer doesnÕt want

to spend time creating complex tests but is

willing to run some simple ones. These simple
tests are often small example programs. Run-
ning them verifies not only that the build was
January/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
49By automatingmuch of thework involvedwith the buildprocess, the CMake build tool letssmaller teamsdevelopportablesoftware.
 Although smoketests mightseem simple,they catch moreproblems thanany other typeof test.successful, but that any required shared li-braries can be loaded (for projects that use

them) and that at least some of the code can be
executed without crashing.Moving beyond basic smoke tests leads tomore specific tests such as regression, black-

box, and white-box testing. When a regression
test fails, a quick look at recent code changes
can usually identify the culprit. Unfortunately,

regression tests typically require more effort to
create than other tests.The final type of testing we discuss is soft-
ware standard compliance testing. Whereas
the other test types focus on determining if the
code works properly, compliance testing tries

to determine if the code adheres to the pro-

jectÕs coding standards. For example, such

testing could check to verify that all classes
have implemented some key method or that all
functions have a common prefix. The options
for this type of test are limitless, and you can

perform such testing in several ways.Our approach to testing.We provide a simple
framework in which to add tests to projects
and an easy mechanism to run those tests and
view their results. For small or short-lived proj-
ects, testing is often limited to build and smoke
tests. For larger, longer projects, we put more

effort into testing and create specific regression

tests to exercise key capabilities.We leverage numerous tools to perform test-
ing. The first is CTest, a command line program

that Kitware develops and bundles with CMake.

CTest reads in test description files typically gen-

erated by CMake and lets the user run all or

some of the tests defined for a project. A typical
development sequence is to modify the source
code, compile, run CTest to verify that existing

tests still pass, and then commit the changes to
revision control. For projects with many tests
that might take hours to run, we typically use a

subset of tests selected by pattern matching or by

using a specified stride to skip tests (for example,
execute every 10th test). The goal is to provide
some basic level of testing before committing the
code without requiring the developer to wait for
more than a few minutes. The automated testing
tools do more exhaustive testing.Our automated testing approach runs CTest
on the client but, instead of reporting results
on the command line, it submits testing results
to Dart, an open source, Web-based test re-

porting tool developed at the GE Global Re-search Center. CTest is typically run at night by
cron or the task scheduler and does a complete
checkout, build, and test cycle. Typically, a sin-

gle client tests multiple projects or revision
branches during the night and submits multiple
entries to Dart. Dart, in turn, runs on a server
and accepts results from many clients. A single
server might handle many software projects
and provides a quick way to see if any build or
testing issues exist on the test platforms. Figure
1 shows a Dart dashboard for CMake. Each
row summarizes testing results for a single test
client. Web links let developers drill down to

see the specific text of any build, including
warnings or errors, as well as the output of any
tests. Typically, clients submit coordinated

dashboard entries (generally running at night)

based on the same source code revision, so you
can compare one clientÕs results against an-

otherÕs. Dart accepts entries continuously, and

most larger projects use this feature to contin-
uously report build and test status for a subset
of testing clients as the source code changes
throughout the day. This lets you find and cor-

rect cross-platform issues, often on the same
day theyÕre introduced.In addition to reporting build and test results,Dart accepts and reports code-coverage and dy-
namic-analysis results. Code coverage provides
a quick metric of how much of the code the test-
ing process is exercising. You can set this up eas-

ily on a Linux test client by changing the com-
pile flags for one of that clientÕs nightly runs (for

example, using gcov). CTest will automatically

discover the coverage files, analyze them, and
submit them to Dart, where developers can view

them and drill down into them, line by line if
they want to. For dynamic analyses, we typically
use the free Linux tool valgrind. Again, this is
easy to set up, typically requiring some minor
changes to the compile flags and pointing CTest

to valgrindÕs installation site. Dynamic analysis

of the tests reports array-bound write errors,
uninitialized memory reads, and so on. Purify
and Bounds Checker are other options for per-
forming dynamic analysis.Using Dart, CTest, CMake, valgrind, gcc,
and gcov, configuring a mature test process is

fairly quickÑyou can typically do it in a day
once youÕre familiar with the process. The chal-
lenge then becomes access to testing platforms
(that is, a combination of hardware, operating
system, and compiler). For open source projects
that will be compiled by many people, a wide50IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
 variety of test platforms is mandatory. Even
with closed source projects, itÕs good to have ac-

cess to many platforms because, for example,
any one compiler might not identify problems
with the source code. For a small group, obtain-
ing these resources can be difficult and cost pro-
hibitive. At Kitware, we have about 30 dedi-
cated test machines and 30 developers. Although

this is expensive, you can leverage some cost-
cutting measures. On Microsoft Windows cli-

ents, you can use an MSDN subscription to pro-
vide the operating system and compilers for
your dedicated test machines at a greatly re-
duced price. Likewise, for Linux, the key soft-
ware tools that we use are all free. Some ven-
dors, such as Intel, provide discounted lease
arrangements for testing and development hard-
ware. We also use vendor-provided test machine

access from IBM and HP for testing coverage on
some AIX and HPUX platforms that we donÕt

have in house.Release processThe process for managing a release tree in-volves checking out both a main tree and a
branch version of the software on the same ma-
chine. The release manager then periodically
merges patches from the branch to the trunk
(you can use tools such as WinMerge to per-

form merging). Developers send email to the

manager when they want changes moved to the
branch. At some point, the branch is tagged
again and a new (incremental) release is made.Having a stable branch of the source code towork from is only part of the problem; we must
then package the software for release. Two types

of releases exist: source and binary. We typically

release to three major platforms: Windows,

Unix, and Mac. Each has a different way of
packaging sources and binaries. On Windows,

we use a tool called NSIS (Nullsoft Scriptable
Install System) to create Windows installers; on

Unix, we use compressed tar files; and on Mac,
we use a DMG disk installer.
This process is similar on the various plat-forms in that they all create a binary build of the
software and then package it for distribution. To

leverage this commonality, Kitware is developing

a new tool called CPack, which abstracts out the
creation of the various types of binary releases.Costs and lessons learnedHaving worked with this software develop-ment process for eight years, weÕve learned nu-
merous lessons and reckoned with many costs. It

might seem obvious, but one of our clearest find-
ings was that a project needs a quality champion
or many of these processes will break down. Al-
though we automate wherever we can, in the
end, someone must care about the state of the
software for this to work. Someone must look at
the testing dashboard and investigate or delegate
any problems that show up.WeÕve found that, even for small projects,
January/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
51Figure 1. Part of a Dart
dashboard for CMake. 52IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Although we automatewherever wecan, in the end,someone mustcare about the state of the software 
for this processto work.testing quickly pays for itself. For us, automatedtesting identifies roughly four issues for every
user-reported issue. Our automated testing has

shown that after an issue is fixed, itÕs often rein-

troduced in later code changes, and automated
testing catches this. In the area of testing, our
mantra is, ÒIf it isnÕt tested, it doesnÕt work.Ó

Even for experienced developers, this is often
true. Daily testing also reduces the cost of fixing
issues because identifying a problemÕs source is

much easier when youÕre considering only a sin-
gle dayÕs changes. On the few occasions when

we deferred testing until release, developers had

to inspect many monthsÕ worth of changes to
find an issueÕs cause.
WeÕve found that automation is key to mak-
ing processes work within a small organization.
Everyone is busy, and software engineering prac-

tices are often one of the first places developers
cut corners. Automating common coding stan-

dards through editor modes and enforcing them
by automated commit checks takes much of that
effort off the developers. The same applies to
testing. If creating, running, and examining tests

isnÕt easy for developers to do, they simply wonÕt

do it. Using Dart and CTest lets developers see

the state of the software quickly by visiting a
Web page; they can then perform a quick drill-

down to identify any problems.Acquiring and maintaining a large test farmis also challenging for small organizations. You

can use vendorsÕ test farms to some extent, al-

though sometimes the contractual agreements

to obtain access arenÕt worth it. Open source

projects can leverage external developersÕ re-
sources to expand the suite of testing platforms.
Surprisingly, weÕve found that the main costs of

testing farms are the HVAC, electricity, and la-

bor, not the price of the hardware and software.
Although weÕve developed in-house tools forour software process, this generally isnÕt an op-

tion for small groups. CMake, CTest, and CPack

represent more than six years of development,
and without supporting funding from NLM,

NIH, NSF (National Science Foundation),

NAMIC(National Alliance for Medical ImageComputing), ASCI (Accelerated Strategic Com-
puting Initiative), and DoE (Department of En-
ergy) as well as contributions and patches from
the open source community, it wouldnÕt have

been possible. For small software organizations,
typically the only viable option is to leverage

larger open source or publicly funded efforts.
However, because most of our work in the soft-
ware process area has been open source, other
small groups could certainly exploit our process
as described with modest initial costs.The Wiki has proven to be a powerful train-
ing tool for new employees. Prior to the advent
of Wikis, new employees often asked certain ex-

pert employees how to perform tasks. (For ex-
ample, one person might be an expert in creat-

ing and maintaining CVS branches.) To avoid

interruptions, those experts can put their knowl-
edge into the company Wiki for anyone to see.

Employees maintain the Wiki for selfish rea-

sons, almost guaranteeing that it will be useful.WeÕre always looking to improve and
automate our software process. Our
next plan is to create tools that canquickly configure the entire development
process for a specific project. Currently, if the

project duration is short, itÕs often not cost-

effective to set up a testing dashboard, Wiki,

and mailing list because configuring a project re-
quires setup time from the system administrator.

We plan to make the setup a Web-based, auto-

matic process that lets even the smallest project
exploit the software process from inception.Although a small organization might nothave the resources a large company has, it can
reap the benefits of many software engineering
practices. WeÕve seen a much greater degree of

cross-platform compatibility by using these
techniques. Many of the tools weÕve mentioned
can be leveraged when setting up documented
procedures for FDA compliance. For example,
issue tracking and revision control for both code
and communications are two key aspects of
policies typically put in place for FDA QSR 820
and ISO 13485 compliance. With the variety of

open source and closed-source tools available, a
small organization can build high-quality robust
software and save time in the process.References1.S. Garcia, C. Graettinger, and K. Kost, eds., 
Proc. 1stIntÕl Research Workshop for Process Improvement in

Small Settings,tech. report CMU/SEI-2006-SR-001,2006.2.W.J. Schroeder, K. Martin, and B. Lorensen, 
The Visual-
ization Toolkit: An Object Oriented Approach to Com-

puter Graphics, 4th ed., Kitware, 2006.
 January/February 2007
IEEE SOFTWARE
53About the AuthorsKen Martin
is a vice president of Kitware and a lead architect for both the VisualizationToolkit and CMake. His main research interests are visualization techniques, development man-

agement, and cross-platform tools. He received his PhD in computer vision from Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute. Contact him at Kitware, 28 Corporate Dr., Clifton Park, NY 12065; ken.

martin@kitware.com.Bill Hoffman
is a vice president of Kitware and creator of the CMake project. He workson computer vision and software process projects at Kitware. He received his masterÕs degree in

computer science from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Contact him at Kitware, 28 Corporate
Dr., Clifton Park, NY 12065; bill.hoffman@kitware.com.
3.L. Ibanez et al., 
The ITK Software Guide, Kitware, 2003.4.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange,Addison-Wesley, 1999.
5.D. Astels, 
Test Driven Development: A Practical Guide,
Prentice Hall, 2003.6.K. Aguanno, ed., 
Managing Agile Projects,Multi-MediaPublications, 2005.7.B. Leaf and W. Cunningham, 
The Wiki Way: Quick
Collaboration on the Web
, Addison-Wesley, 2001.
8.K. Fogel and M. Bar, 
Open Source Development withCVS, 3rd ed., Paraglyph Press, 2003.9.K. Martin and B. Hoffman, 
Mastering CMake: ACross-Platform Build System,3rd ed., Kitware, 2006.
10.W. Sewell, 
Weaving a Program: Literate Programming
in WEB, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1989.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
Mid Atlantic (product/recruitment)Dawn Becker
Phone:+1 732 772 0160

Fax:+1 732 772 0164

Email: db.ieeemedia@ieee.orgNew England (product)Jody Estabrook
Phone:+1 978 244 0192

Fax:+1 978 244 0103

Email: je.ieeemedia@ieee.orgNew England (recruitment)John Restchack
Phone:+1 212 419 7578

Fax:+1 212 419 7589

Email: j.restchack@ieee.orgConnecticut (product)Stan Greenfield
Phone:+1 203 938 2418

Fax:+1 203 938 3211

Email:  greenco@optonline.net
Southwest (product)Steve Loerch

Phone:   +1 847 498 4520

Fax:       +1 847 498 5911

Email: steve@didierandbroderick.comNorthwest (product)Peter D. Scott
Phone:+1 415 421-7950

Fax:+1 415 398-4156

Email:   peterd@pscottassoc.com
Southern CA (product)Marshall Rubin
Phone:+1 818 888 2407

Fax:+1 818 888 4907

Email: mr.ieeemedia@ieee.org
Northwest/Southern CA (r
ecruitment)Tim Matteson

Phone:+1 310 836 4064

Fax:+1 310 836 4067

Email: tm.ieeemedia@ieee.orgMidwest (product)Dave Jones
Phone: +1 708 442 5633

Fax:+1 708 442 7620

Email: dj.ieeemedia@ieee.org
Will Hamilton
Phone:+1 269 381 2156

Fax:+1 269 381 2556

Email: wh.ieeemedia@ieee.org
Joe DiNardo
Phone:+1 440 248 2456

Fax:+1 440 248 2594

Email: jd.ieeemedia@ieee.orgSoutheast (recruitment)Thomas M. Flynn
Phone:+1 770 645 2944

Fax:+1 770 993 4423

Email: flynntom@mindspring.comMidwest/Southwest (recruitment)
Darcy Giovingo

Phone:+1 847 498-4520

Fax:+1 847 498-5911

Email: dg.ieeemedia@ieee.orgSoutheast (product)Bill Holland
Phone:+1 770 435 6549

Fax:+1 770 435 0243

Email: hollandwfh@yahoo.comJapanTim Matteson

Phone:+1 310 836 4064

Fax:+1 310 836 4067

Email: tm.ieeemedia@ieee.orgEurope (product) Hilary Turnbull

Phone:+44 1875 825700

Fax:+44 1875 825701

Email:impress@impressmedia.com
ADVERTISER/PRODUCT INDEX JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2007
Advertising PersonnelAdvertiser/Product                 Page Number
Marion DelaneyIEEEMedia, Advertising Director

Phone:+1 415 863 4717

Email: md.ieeemedia@ieee.orgMarian AndersonAdvertising Coordinator
Phone:+1 714 821 8380

Fax:+1 714 821 4010

Email: manderson@computer.org
Sandy BrownIEEE Computer Society,

Business Development Manager
Phone:+1 714 821 8380

Fax:+1 714 821 4010

Email: sb.ieeemedia@ieee.orgAdvertising Sales RepresentativesElite Systems4
John Wiley & SonsCover 2

Microsoft Press92

MIT Press94

Morgan Kaufmann93

RE 2007Cover 3

SD West 2007Cover 4
Boldface denotes advertisements in this issue.
