 0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEEMay/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
17focusfocus 1Adapting Agile ApproachestoYourProject Needs
To kick off the millennium, Kent Beck wrote 
eXtreme Program-ming eXplained, with all the appropriate capitalization designed
to attract attention.
1This book and the practices behind it havehad, and continue to have, a significant impact on the industry, 
editorÕs introduction
Stephen J. Mellor but the book has also caused an extraordinarydegree of vitriol. (For a relatively polite discus-

sionof agile ideas with Terry Bollinger, Watts

Humphrey, and others, see www.computer.

org/software/dynabook.) The reasons appear
to include a focus on writing programs rather
than analysis or design (also known as model-
ing); a disdain for documentation as such; and
the Communist notion of working only 40
hours a week.XP is not the only ÒlightweightÓ method.
Others include Alistair CockburnÕs Crystal

family,
2now merged with Jim HighsmithÕs
Adaptive Systems Development3and Scrum4Ñboth mentioned in articles in this issue. These

methods and others are similar to XP, but suf-

ficiently different to cause confusion in the
marketplace. Accordingly, in 
late 2000, RobertMartin from Object Mentor proposed that the

various proponents of lightweight methods

meet to form a consortium that would pro-
mote their common ideas. This proposal came
to fruition in February 2001 when 16 light-

weight-method proponents and I met to form

the Agile Alliance. (The label ÒextremeÓ was

viewed as too, well, extreme, and ÒlightweightÓ

was considered too, sorry, lightweight.) During

the meeting, a manifesto was born 
and a set ofprinciples declared.I introduced myself at this first meeting as
Òa spyÓ because my own interest has always
been executable modelsÑthe notion that a
model can be precise and detailed enough to

be executed. Consequently, the idea that code

is the only product of interest and that models
are superfluous disturbs me. Certainly, we

should focus our attention on the final prod-
uct, but that product can surely be an exe-

cutable model. I hoped to derail their evil
plans.The Agile ManifestoNotwithstanding my concerns, the resultwas the Agile Manifesto (www.agilemanifesto.

org). It begins thus: ÒWe are uncovering better

ways of developing software by doing it and
helping others do it.Ó There are then four

statements of the form ÒWe value: <left> over

<right>.Ó The key point here is not that

<right> is bad but that <left> deserves more

emphasis than it often receives in plan-based
processes.LetÕs look at the four value statements in
turn.Individuals and interactions over processesand toolsProcesses and tools are not silver bullets.
You can build a system without processes and

tools, but you canÕt build a system without

people. And the better the people, the better

the result. By far. None of this is to say that

process and tools are unimportant.Working software over comprehensive 
documentationIf you intend to drive from your home to
the local hospital, you wouldnÕt write a docu-

ment that says exactly how to do it first. Cer-

tainly, you need a map that lays out the most

effective way to get there, and you should lis-

ten to the radio for up-to-the-minute informa-

tion on whether a particular route is blocked,
but ÒdocumentingÓ the route for posterity is

unlikely to stop the bleeding.Customer collaboration over contract negotiationWeÕve all heard of projects where the spec-
ification was Òfrozen,Ó often with unfortunate

results. A specification, even an informal one,
is just a framework, so we should expect to
work with our customers to ensure we build

the right product.Responding to change over following a plan
A plan tells us how to get from where we
are to where weÕre going, but it doesnÕt tell us

if where weÕre going is the right place to be.
Even if the plan is correctÑtodayÑthis doesnÕt

mean itÕs the right place tomorrow. Technol-

ogy and the market change far too quickly for
that. Achieving the plan milestones doesnÕt

necessarily equate to customer success.This value statement relies on distinguishingbetween predictive and adaptive approaches.
In the construction industry, executing a

planÑthe construction phaseÑtakes relatively
much longer than the planning and design
phases. We use the plan to predict when the

project will be complete. In software, the de-
sign and planning phase takes much longer
than the execution. Consequently, the plan

doesnÕt predict much of valueÑwe must adapt

what weÕre doing as circumstances change.5The key here is to exploit change to ensurethat the product is as close as possible to what
the customer needs. Reality provides real feed-
back.18IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
You can build 
a systemwithoutprocesses and tools, butyou canÕt builda systemwithout people. Key ideasBy now, youÕve probably considered the
Manifesto and developed your own mental list
of whatÕs key for your work. Here are a few I

think deserve highlighting.Code vs. modelsThe value statements refer to Òsoftware,Ó notÒcode.Ó As such, contrary to common wisdom,
they donÕt prohibit building models so long as

the models are executable rather than blueprints
to be filled outÑeventuallyÑwith running
code. In fact, most of the value statements, and
the ManifestoÕs principles, apply to customer

management, project management and environ-
ment, and early testingÑnot Òcode.Ó (Though
IÕll admit it was an interesting struggle to ensure
we used the word ÒsoftwareÓ instead.) Just enoughAgile methods are a welcome shake-up, but
like many reactions to an entrenched position,
itÕs possible to go too far. We must ask what is

Òjust enoughÓ process to meet the goal of, say,

making requirements traceable while finishing

the project as quickly as possible. This is espe-

cially important in long-lived or high-assurance
systems, where fast-and-loose is deadly.
Teams
Pair programming is a variation on teams,about which much has been written. Organiza-
tions often say they support teamwork and even
have inspirational posters around to reinforce the
idea, but surprisingly little effort is made to keep

successful teams together.Keeping three people

on an analysis/modeling task doesnÕt reduce pro-

ductivity by two-thirds, it increases quality.
6AdaptabilityAgile methods emphasize adaptability. Con-
sider three main areas:the market, which might demand different
features today from those youÕre building;the technology, which makes new things

possible by changing all the time but also
sets limits that we might not discover until
weÕre some way through the project; andthe process itself.Take as your mantra ÒProcess check!Ó to en-
sure youÕre doing whatÕs needed in the best pos-

sible way.
Documents and documentationI believe the agile folks are right that many
documents simply restate, poorly and impre-

cisely, whatÕs better said in Òthe real thing.Ó
My main concern is that an oral tradition
where we all sit around the fire and recount the

glory of our project days just doesnÕt cut it for

most systems. Executable models arenÕt enough

either. Rather, we need to emphasize describing

and elaborating the decisions weÕve used in the

course of development. We shouldnÕt document

the models but why we selected a particular ab-

straction andÑmost especiallyÑwhy not an-
other.
7The agile processes rely on customer interac-
tion to tell us which features (stories, use cases,
whatever you call them) to implement next. In
many systems, the user-visible requirements are

few. The customer does not supply the infra-

structure requirements directly; they are de-
rived. We need some approach to prioritize

these requirements in the absence of a customer.
The articles
Because I value all these principles, I waspleased when I was asked to write this intro-
duction. The four articles on this topic in this

issue cover four different interest areas within
the agile arena. ÒProject Management in Plan-
Based and Agile CompaniesÓ by Martina Ceschi,

Alberto Sillitti, Giancarlo Succi, and Stefano
DePanfilis discusses 
the concerns of a range ofproject managers from both the agile and plan-
based camps. The article illuminates real proj-

ect concerns and describes how agility can
help. It acts as a guideline for choosing to
move (or not) in an agile direction.The second article, ÒContext-Adaptive Agility:Managing Complexity and UncertaintyÓ by
Todd Little, 
describes an approach for catego-rizing projects according to specific profiles
that serve as a basis for adapting the agile

process. The article helps you determine how

best to adapt an agile process to suit your pro-
jectÕs needs.
The third article, ÒPrimavera Gets Agile: A
Successful Transition to Agile DevelopmentÓ

by Bob Schatz and Ibrahim Abdelshafi, is a case

study on introducing Scrum into a particular
company. It explains what really happened on

a real project when the company adopted ag-

ile practicesÑto build a project management

tool, no less. The lessons learned are especially
valuable.May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
19Agile methods
are a welcomeshake-up, butlike manyreactions to an entrenchedposition, itÕs possible to go too far.
 SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE
captures and pre-serves designersÕ intentions about system
structure and behavior, thereby providing a de-

fense against design decay as a system ages.
This issueÕs articles will emphasize techniques,

tools, and software engineering principles that
support organizations taking an architecture-

centric approach to software development.We

especially seek articles that offer practical tech-
niques and guidance to help organizations im-
prove their software architecture practice, arti-

cles that describe practitioner views of research

challenges for the next 10 years, and survey ar-

ticles by practitioners and researchers express-

ing the progress made over the last 10 years.CALLFORARTICLESState of the Practice & Future Directions for Software ArchitecturePOSSIBLE TOPICS INCLUDE BUT ARE NOT LIMITED TO¥Architecture-based development
¥Architecture governance
¥Economic and business issues¥Software quality¥Design¥Evaluation  ¥Modeling¥Documentation  ¥Recovery
¥Education¥EvolutionGuest editors:Judith A. Stafford, Tufts University, USA;

jas@cs.tufts.edu
Henk Obbink, Philips Research Laboratory,

the Netherlands; henk.obbink@philips.comFor author guidelinesandsubmission details, write to software@computer.org or go to
www.computer.org/software/author.htm. 
Tosubmit
, go to http://cs-ieee.manuscriptcentral.com/index.html.For the complete call, go to www.computer.org/software/edcal.htm.
20IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/softwareThe final article, ÒCombining Agile Methodswith Stage-Gate Project Management: LessonsLearnedÓ by Daniel Karlstrım and Per Rune-
son, examines three case studies of agile
processes in global companies. The authors list
high-importance agile practices and their effectsÑ
good and bad. These lessons learned should behelpful in your decision to implement agile prac-
tices and in successful implementation of them.Iattended that first agile meeting as a spy.

I was astonished to see how many agile
practices applied equally to executablemodeling. I came to derail their evil plans to
deprecate modeling and, with a few tweaks
(and reservations, it must be said), I was able
to become a signatory to the Manifesto.If you find these practices helpful, you mightjust kick off your own new millennium.References1.K. Beck, 
eXtreme Programming eXplained: EmbraceChange, Addison-Wesley, 2000.
2.A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
3.K. Schwaber, 
Agile Project Management with Scrum,Microsoft Academic, 2004.4.J.A. Highsmith, 
Adaptive Software Development : ACollaborative Approach to Managing Complex Systems,Dorset House, 2002.5.M. Fowler, 
The New Methodology, Apr. 2003; www.
martinfowler.com/articles/newMethodology.html.
6.L. Williams et al., ÒStrengthening the Case for Pair Pro-
gramming,Ó IEEE Software, July/Aug. 2000, pp. 19Ð25;www.cs.utah.edu/~lwilliam/Papers/ieeeSoftware.PDF.
7.L. Starr, 
Executable UML: How to Build Class Models,Prentice Hall, 2002.About the AuthorStephen J. Melloris chief scientist of the Embedded Systems Division at Mentor Graph-ics. He is active in the Object Management Group, chairing the consortium that added exe-cutable actions to the UML, and in specifying MDA. He is also a signatory to the Agile Mani-

festo and chair of IEEE SoftwareÕs Advisory Board. Contacthim at stephen_mellor@mentor.
com; www.projtech.com.
PUBLICATION DATE: March/April 2006
SUBMISSION DEADLINE: 1 Sept. 2005
