 30 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | PUBL
IS
HED BY TH
E IEEE COMPUT
ER SOC
IE
TY
 0740-7459/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
IN 
INTERV
IEWS CONDUCTED 
last 
October, this issue™s guest editors, 
Mehdi Mirakhorli and Jane Cleland-
Huang, spoke with Daniel Dvorak and 

Jan Bosch, who shared their perspec
-tives as software architects on the inter
-weaving of requirements and architec
-ture. Dvorak is the lead for the NASA 

software architecture review board and 

has worked on various technology de
-velopment projects and space missions, 

including Deep Space One and Mars 

Science Laboratory. Bosch is a software 
architect and agilest with a wealth of 
experience designing and implement
-ing software-as-a-service and Web 2.0 

solutions that typically provide services 
to hundreds of thousands, even mil
-lions, of customers. 
Daniel 
Dvorak™s 
Perspectives
Guest Editors: To provide some context 
for our readers, could you brie˜y de
-scribe the kinds of projects you work on 

at NASA and JPL?
Dan Dvorak:
 My ˜rst project was work
-ing on Deep Space One, a mission that 
demonstrated a dozen new technologies, 
including a set of software capabilities 

known as the ﬁremote agentﬂ that dem
-onstrated a more model-based approach 
to automated spacecraft monitoring and 
control. It was billed as the ˜rst AI in 

space and won a NASA Software of the 

Year Award. That was neat. I™ve also 
worked on some technology develop
-ment tasks, including one where we con
-trolled a research rover in the JPL Mars 

Yard with software written in real-time 
Java. That project was joint with Sun 

Microsystems, and I got to present a 

summary of it on stage with James Gos
-ling at the huge Java One conference. 

Biggest audience I ever addressed!
GEs: What kind of development process 
do you use? How much interplay happens 

between requirements and architecture?
Dvorak: 
There™s a lot of back and forth 
between requirements and architecture. 
In our space missions, scientists spec
-ify ambitious science objectives that 
have to be tempered by cost and risk as 
well as engineering constraints. Also, I 
want to emphasize that architecting is 

not something that™s done once early in 

a project; there™s an interplay between 
requirements and architecture at each 
level of re˜nement, from system level to 

subsystem level to component level.
Some people in the past have tried 
to follow a waterfall approach. In prac
-tice, it™s much more iterative than that, 

and sometimes you might go down a 
certain road believing you have the 
right set of requirements and you re
-alize there™s an engineering constraint 

and you can™t do something as fully as 
you would like. There™s always going 
to be some back-and-forth interplay. 

There does tend to be an iterative ap
-proach in the development of function
-ality and testing. The length of the iter
-ation cycles varies from a few weeks to 

a few months depending on the project.
GEs: One of the concepts that people are 
talking about a lot recently is the con
-cept of an architecturally signi˚cant re
-quirement. How would you de˚ne such a 

requirement?
Dvorak: 
In our software architecture re
-views, we make a distinction between 
driving requirements and key require
-ments. Driving requirements are ar
-chitecturally signi˜cant requirements 
in the sense that they tend to drive or 
shape an architecture, usually in the 
form of changes to an existing archi
-tecture from a previous project. There 

might be many other requirements that 
are just as important, but if they can 
be satis˜ed using mature, ˚ight-proven 

areas of the existing architecture, then 
they aren™t driving us into new ter
-ritory. In an architecture review, we 
FOCUS:
 TWIN PEAKS
Traversing 
 the Twin Peaks
Mehdi Mirakhorli and Jane Cleland-Huang, 
DePaul University
  MARCH/
APR
IL 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 31focus more attention on driving re
-quirements because they entail more 
risk. Key requirements, by the way, are 
the requirements that are most impor
-tant to stakeholders, so it™s an orthogo
-nal classi˜cation; a driving requirement 
may or may not be key, and vice versa.
GEs: What™s your process for eliciting and 
specifying requirements? Do you work 

closely with requirements engineers?
Dvorak: 
Let me preface my answer by 
pointing out that spacecraft are com
-plex cyber-physical systems, and there 
are systems engineers of various spe
-cialties who work together to de˜ne 

requirements from the system level on 
down to subsystem and component 
levels, and it™s the software systems 

engineers who are responsible for the 

software requirements. There are re
-quirements on both the ˚ight system 

and the ground system since these two 

elements need to work together as a 
system. I view requirements as the end 
result of an architecting process. If 

you think of architecting in the sense 

of ISO 42010, you have to identify the 
stakeholders and their concerns, and 
de˜ne viewpoints on the system that 

addresses those concerns. Architect
-ing is the process of trying to recon
-cile the many different competing con
-cerns, so there™s always some iteration 

going on. 
GEs: In a typical project, what kinds of 
iterations occur between requirements 

and architecture design activities?
Dvorak: 
Much of NASA™s work involves 
˜rst-of-a-kind or one-of-a-kind mis
-sions, so there™s a lot of uncertainty 
about what™s feasible within a given 

cost and schedule. Also, as a system ar
-chitecture takes shape, we see myriad 
physical effects that have to be man
-aged. For example, a spacecraft™s bat
-teries might not be as big as desired be
-cause larger batteries have more mass, 

making it more expensive to launch. 

That, in turn, means that power con
-sumption must be carefully managed, 
including taking time to recharge the 
batteries. It™s not too much of an exag
-geration to say that ﬁeverything affects 
everythingﬂ on our science spacecraft, 

and software is in the middle of man
-aging those interactions. That™s why 

there™s so much iteration between re
-quirements and architecture.
GEs: Can you think of any situations in 
which architecturally signi˚cant require
-ments were identi˚ed late in the project, 

after the architecture was designed?
Dvorak: 
An example surfaced in 
 the NASA study of ˚ight software 
 complexity [www.nasa.gov/of˜ces/oce/
 documents/FSWC_study.html]. In one 
mission, a scientist levied a require
-ment for ﬁ99 percent data complete
-ness,ﬂ implying that science results 

would be greatly diminished by any 

interruptions in science observations. 

The ˚ight software team took the re
-quirement seriously and designed and 

developed a system with redundant el
-ements and fast onboard fault detec
-tion and response, making for a more 

complex system. Later in the project, 

somebody questioned the value of 99 

percent, and the scientistŠrealizing 
that it was overly stringentŠquickly re
-laxed the requirement. Unfortunately, 

the damage was already done; an un
-substantiated requirement had spawned 

an unnecessary cascade of time-
 consuming analysis, design, develop
-ment, and testing, not to mention the 
dismay of the software team who had 
worked so hard. There are two lessons 
in this example. First, some require
-ments, especially performance require
-ments, should be substantiated with a 

documented rationale that is subjected 
to scrutiny. Second, recipients of a hard-

to-satisfy requirement shouldn™t suffer 

in silence; requirements are rarely ab
-solute, and they should inform project 

management about the impact of a dif
-˜cult requirement on schedule and cost 

and technical risk.
GEs: Let™s talk about the role of ref
-erence models for architecting. How 
much do you rely on reusing existing 

architectures? 
Dvorak: 
Projects commonly reuse ex
-isting architectures in an effort to save 
cost and reduce risk. For example, the 
MSL rover that recently landed on 

Mars [2012] traces its software archi
-tecture roots back to the MER rover 
[2003] and further back to the Mars
 Path˜nder
 rover [1996]. In a simi
-lar vein, NASA/GSFC developed a 

reference architecture and core soft
-ware, known as ﬁcore ˚ight executive/

core ˚ight softwareﬂ [cFE/CFS; http://
 Recipients of a hard-to-satisfy 
 requirement shouldn™t suffer in silence.
 32 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFOCUS:
 TWIN PEAKS
flightsoftware.jhuapl.edu/files/2011/
FSW11_Cudmore.pdf], speci˜cally to 
support a class of science missions. The 
Goddard team made an observation 

that bears repeating: ﬁIt was the soft
-ware architecture that lived on, even 
as hardware came and went.ﬂ In other 
words, even though each mission is dif
-ferent, there™s a level of abstraction cap
-tured in a reference architecture that 
provides useful structure that shapes 
the detailed design.
Before I leave this topic, it™s impor
-tant to note a pitfall in reusing an ex
-isting architecture, and that is that it 

may not scale or extend well to satisfy 

a new project™s driving requirements. 
For the people who are accustomed to 
working within an existing architec
-ture, it might be hard to recognize a 

looming problem and decide that a new 
approach is needed. This is the kind 
of situation where a non-advocate re
-view by a diverse team of architects can 

help. That™s why architecture reviews 
can be so helpful if performed when 
a project is in the formative stages of 
architecting. In the NASA project life 

cycle, that time is well before PDR [pre
-liminary design review].
GEs: Given that you reuse solutions from 
previous missions, do you experience sit
-uations in which new requirements for a 

mission are constrained by the architec
-ture already in place? 
Dvorak: 
This is an area where the an
-swer is changing from ﬁrarelyﬂ to 
ﬁcommonly,ﬂ so let me explain why. 
When I ˜rst arrived, JPL was in a 

mode of doing one big ˚agship mis
-sion every 10 years, so we tended to 
start from a blank sheet of paper each 
time and not feel constrained much 

by older architectures. However, to
-day, we have multiple projects in de
-velopment at the same time, and it™s 

just not cost-effective to start from 

scratch on each one and create the 
ﬁperfectﬂ architecture. That™s why 
we™re moving toward reference archi
-tectures that will accommodate cer
-tain variations readily, but not all. 
Thus, some requirements will be con
-strained by the architecture.
GEs: As we™re focusing on the interplay 
between requirements and architecture, 

we™re interested in whether you have any 

techniques in place for preserving these 

relationships. For example, do you cap
-ture design rationales?
Dvorak: 
In a lot of cases in the past, 
those trade-offs have not been cap
-tured. However, we™re moving toward 
model-based systems engineering and 

are advocating for capturing the vari
-ous analyses that lead you to decide 
one thing versus another. For example, 
I might have a couple of requirements 

at one level and need to do an analysis 

based on those requirements and maybe 
other aspects of the design to decide the 
next lower-level requirement. I want 

that analysis to be captured and pre
-served for somebody in the future who 

might join this project later in the life 

cycle, or somebody in the future who 

has a new mission and is looking at the 
old mission to understand what was de
-cided and why. This is an area in which 
we™re trying to improve.
GEs: What about traceability? Do you have 
traceability in place between require
-ments and key architectural decisions? 
Dvorak: 
There™s quite a strong emphasis 
on traceability between requirements 
and decisions. You mentioned trace
-ability among key decisionsŠthat™s 
one of the things that the software ar
-chitecture review board emphasizes in 
architectural description documents. 
We want to see the key architectural 

decisions and why they were made, 

and also to understand any underlying 
assumptions. 
GEs: Do you trace architectural decisions 
forward into the implementation, too, to 

make sure that the implemented system 
  MARCH/
APR
IL 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 33is correct with respect to the require
-ments or to help developers understand 
the underlying architectural decisions?
Dvorak: 
One lesson we™ve learned about 
programming is that having well-doc
-umented coding rules doesn™t ensure 
that they™ll be consistently followed. 

It™s important to have tools that check 

the code for compliance. By anal
-ogy, it™s important to have tools that 

check the design for compliance with 

the architecture. Otherwise, they will 

diverge, conceptual integrity will be
 lost, and the resulting system will 

be far less than what the architec
-ture promised. Also, many software-
 intensive systems will have lifetimes 

measured in decades and will be modi
-˜ed by people who never met the origi
-nal architects. It™s vitally important 
that architects clearly document the ra
-tionale for key architectural decisions 
so that future maintainers/architects 

understand the impacts of extending or 
changing the architecture.
GEs: Thank you for your candid insights. 
Do you have any closing comments you 

would like to share?
Dvorak: 
It™s useful to step back once in 
a while and look at history. In 1968, 
NATO held the ˜rst conference on soft
-ware engineering to address the ﬁsoft
-ware crisis,ﬂ and the problems that ex
-isted then are still familiar today: poor 

performance, inadequate reliability, 
schedule overruns, poor cost estima
-tion, unmet requirements, and educa
-tion of software engineers. What™s dif
-ferent, though, is that advances since 

1968 have enabled software systems 

three orders of magnitude larger while 
software cost as a fraction of total bud
-get has remained small. What was once 
considered complex became routine be
-cause we learned better ways, and the 
emergence of software architecture as a 
discipline has been key.
Jan Bosch™s Perspectives
Guest Editors: Can you tell us something 
about the kinds of systems you™ve been 

working on?
Jan Bosch:
 I™ve worked on anything 
from embedded systems and safety-
critical systems to software-as-a-service 
and Web 2.0 solutions. The common
-ality, however, is that these systems 

have large markets of customers, often 
consumers but also businesses, and the 
products are typically products and ser
-vices provided to the hundreds thou
-sands or even millions.
GEs: As you know, our interest is in the 
interplay between requirements and ar
-chitecture, which seems to hinge on the 

notion of an architecturally signi˚cant 

requirement. Perhaps we could start by 

asking you how you would de˚ne an ar
-chitecturally signi˚cant requirement?
Bosch: 
Well, if you go back to when we 
started to look at architecturally sig
-ni˜cant requirements in the 1990s, we 
were basically looking for the require
-ments in which we make architecture 
design decisions that would be really 

hard to change after the system™s initial 
development. That perspective is still 
valid, that there is a subset of require
-ments that are architecturally signi˜
-cant. We have to identify and capture 
those requirements and take them into 
the architectural design early on. That™s 

the traditional way of thinking about it.
GEs: In your projects, who™s actually re
-sponsible for eliciting and specifying 
requirements?
Bosch: 
In traditional companies, the 
product managers bring together the 
needs of all the stakeholders. How
-ever, what I now see is that architects 
and lead developers are increasingly 

being added to that mix and are also 
involved with discussions with project 
stakeholders. 
GEs: To what extent do you document 
requirements, especially in cases where 
 34 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFOCUS:
 TWIN PEAKS
they™re gathered by product manag
-ers and passed along to architects and 
developers?
Bosch: 
I™m of the opinion that it™s less 
and less about documents and docu
-ment models and things like that, and 
more and more about getting archi
-tects, engineers, and others to meet 

with customers to build an empathy 
and understanding for customer needs. 
This is a change because we tradition
-ally didn™t think of this as a responsi
-bility of architects and engineers. In 
the company I previously worked for, 
we had a practice known as ﬁfollow 

me home,ﬂ which meant that everyone 
who was active in product development 
in the company would visit a customer 

at least once a year for a day, to spend 

time with the customer to understand 
what the customer needs. I believe this 
is a much more effective approach for 

understanding the requirements than 

writing them down in documents. 
But I™m not saying there™s no value 
in documents; it has just proven in my 

case to be much more effective to have 

architects and people responsible for 
speci˜c components to have that tacit 
knowledge in their heads, and then to 

share it with people in more of a coach
-ing, mentoring style whenever the need 
arises to make changes to the existing 
architecture. So you have people who 
know the history of the system and can 

inform others. 
GEs: Under what circumstances, if any, 
would you consider it helpful to docu
-ment requirements or architectural 
knowledge, and what kind of models or 

formats would you favor for documenting 

that knowledge?
Bosch: 
It™s not that I™m against docu
-mentation, but rather that I see so lit
-tle use of it in industrial practice. The 
most useful forms of documentation 

are views of the software that can be 

automatically generated. Everything 
that™s disconnected from the assets that 
deliver the key value to customers tends 

to get outdated very quickly and conse
-quently is considered useless. For other 
types of documentation, I mostly see 
slide presentations capturing the high-

level structure and rationale. These are 
often effective as an introduction. Un
-derstanding more often requires getting 
into the code.
GEs: In traditional projects, architectur
-ally signi˚cant requirements tend to be 
dealt with up front, to manage some of 

the project risks, but can you say some
-thing about how you make require
-ments prioritization decisions in an agile 

project?
Bosch: 
Most of the companies that I™ve 
worked with tend to start from the 
traditional perspective; however, I see 
that people are switching from quality-
based architecture work to user-driven 
architecture work. This means that the 

team tries to deliver requirements with 

the highest customer value ˜rst. That™s 
also the reason that the community has 
become more accepting of the fact that 

sometimes you have an architecture 

that isn™t ideal and refactoring is just a 
cost of doing business. As a community, 

we™re starting to accept that we have to 
invest in refactoring continuously.
The whole notion of starting from a 
prede˜ned requirements speci˜cation 

that customers have given to us in some 
magical shape, way, or form is a fal
-lacy. It™s an illusion, a myth. We can de
-duce some requirements based on what 
the customer has told us, and there are 
other things that we can™t know until 

we test and experiment with them. So 

while I think there™s a place for require
-ments that we just know a system must 

support, there™s also a place for experi
-menting and trying things out and get
-ting runtime customer feedback rather 
than assuming that the customer knows 
exactly what he or she wants from us in 

the ˜rst place. For example, in the Web 
2.0 space, companies are constantly 
running experiments in their live prod
-uct to understand what™s important for 

customers. So, in this respect, the real 
requirements were learned through cus
-tomer feedback.
GEs: Have you experienced any cases in 
which architecturally signi˚cant require
-ments were identi˚ed after the architec
-ture design? 
Bosch: 
Yes. Although the traditional 
understanding is that it™s very costly 
and dif˜cult to ˜x the architecture af
-ter the fact, in the more agile develop
-ment context, this happens all the time. 
People request new features, which 
calls for refactoring, and except for the 
really, really big refactoring efforts that 

just hurt everything, people take all this 

in stride and view at it as par for the 
course. Occasionally, we have a situa
-tion where the team ˜rst built one solu
-tion that they felt was going to be really 

solid and successful, but later on when 
the system evolved and requirements 

changed, they realized that the cur
-rent architecture wasn™t suitable, and 
they basically paid the price in terms 
Many software-intensive systems 
 will have lifetimes measured in decades.
  MARCH/
APR
IL 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 35of taking a signi˜cant chunk of R&D 
effort to reengineer the architecture to 
cover the system needs. If we look at 
the domains that aren™t safety critical 

or where there is a signi˜cant embed
-ded systems component, then we of
-ten ˜nd the majority of architecturally 

signi˜cant requirements after system 

development and sometimes even after 

system maintenance has been started.
GEs: Does the existing architecture con
-strain the viability of accepting new 
requirements? 
Bosch: 
It becomes purely an eco
-nomic question, and I have to de
-cide whether I™m willing to imple
-ment a feature at a higher cost than 
I would have done normally, making 

it an expensive feature implementa
-tion. If we ask whether it™s ﬁmore or 

less dif˜cultﬂ to implement certain 

requirements because of the architec
-ture in place, the answer is absolutely 
ﬁYes!ﬂ I™ve seen several such cases in 
my consulting engagement as well as 

in the companies that I™ve worked for. 
However, saying that existing archi
-tectural constraints make it impos
-sible to introduce a new requirement 
is a bridge too far. I™ve never had a 
case where the current architecture 
prevented us from building some
-thing that we really wanted. We have 

to decide whether to build a feature 
within the constraints of the existing 
architecture or whether to invest in 

refactoring the architecture and then 

implementing the feature at a lower 
cost. I expect every requirement that 
I build to provide a certain amount 

of value to the user community, and 
if the architecture makes the cost of 
implementing the requirement so high 

that it exceeds the value that the user 

community will get from that require
-ment, then of course we™re in a situa
-tion where the architecture constrains 

the requirement because there™s no 
longer a business case for implement
-ing that requirement.
GEs: One way in which people manage 
incremental development is through the 

use of proven reference architectures. Do 

you see the use of existing solutions as a 

way to address some of the uncertainty 

that goes into the development effort?
Bosch: 
That™s a really good question. If 
we talk about reference architectures or 
standard architectures that exist within 
a community for developing a Web 

server or creating a build system, I see 

that there™s a lot of sharing and a lot of 
starting from reference architectures. 
I also have done quite a bit of work in 

software product lines, and I™m sur
-prised at how little reuse of design prin
-ciples, design ideas, and software assets 

takes place within companies. Some are 

very good at it and take a strong plat
-form approach, but I still run into com
-panies where different teams are just 

running around doing their own thing 

without learning from others in the 
same organization.
GEs: That™s interesting because we of
-ten hear that agile approaches are more 
effective when there are known archi
-tectural solutions, perhaps in the form 

of reference architectures. But are you 

saying that many of the projects you™re 

involved in develop architectures incre
-mentally, even without the use of refer
-ence architectures? 
Bosch: 
Once you realize that virtually 
all software development is concerned 
with evolving existing software and 
that starting from a green ˜eld is the 

rare exception, I think the perspective 
changes. Most professionals work with 

evolving, existing implemented archi
-tectures, and our focus should be on 
helping them do that in the best possi
-ble way. Whenever a system needs to be 
retired because of architectural erosion, 

it isn™t a natural cause of aging but the 
consequence of underinvesting in refac
-toring over the product™s life cycle. As 
long as a software system has users, it 
shouldn™t need to retire.
GEs: Let™s move on and talk about the 
relationships between requirements 

and architecture during longer-term 

maintenance efforts.  You aren™t in favor 

of documentation, but do you see any 

role for traceability in your projects, 

especially for the purpose of capturing 

relationships between requirements, 

architecture, and the implementation of 

architectural decisions in source code?
Bosch: 
Here again it™s less about doc
-umented traceability. I™m increasingly 
hesitant about using documents per se 
and increasingly focused on the role of 

the architect or architects in this con
-text. In this case, I believe it™s the job 
of the architect to understand the ar
-chitectural design decisions that have 
been taken in response to speci˜c re
-quirements and how those decisions 
in˚uence the implementations that the 
engineers do. An architect is not just 

a PowerPoint pusher; in most of the 
companies I™ve worked in, the archi
-tects spend between 30 and 70 per
-cent of their time coding, but they also 
The most useful forms of documentation 
are views of the software that can 
 be automatically generated.
 36 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFOCUS:
 TWIN PEAKS
spend part of their time on architec
-ture and thinking about architecture.
GEs: How does that work over the long 
term, though? For example, what hap
-pens if people leave the project or the 

corporate memory of the product fades 

over time?
Bosch: 
In my experience, in many com
-panies, the whole notion of product 
development has shifted from ﬁthis 
is a thing I do onceﬂ to a mode where 

the system is constantly evolving and 

there™s a team that constantly invests 
in product development. When you do 
that, you can rely a lot more on indi
-vidual knowledge, but if you have a 

situation where these things are much 
more driven in a project fashion, where 
there™s work being done and then every
-one goes away again to work on some
-thing else, then maintaining the knowl
-edge becomes much more important. 
The main point that I™m trying to 
get across is that the time in which en
-gineers and architects would get the re
-quirement speci˜cation from custom
-ers and then would build the system 

according to the speci˜cation is gone. 
Instead, architects and engineers need 
to be out there, meeting customers and 

understanding how their system will 

be used, getting an MVP [minimal vi
-able product] in the hands of these cus
-tomers and then evolving the system in 

short iterations while constantly ob
-serving and measuring use and using 

that data to steer development.
         Selected CS articles and columns 
 are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
DAN
IEL 
DVORAK 
is a principal engineer in the Systems and Software 
Division at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technol
-ogy. He also serves as division technologist, supports an initiative on 
model-centric engineering, and leads NASA™s software architecture 
review board. Dvorak™s interests include model-based systems engineer
-ing, fault management, robot control architectures, and goal-driven 

mission operations. He received a PhD in computer science from the Uni
-versity of Texas at Austin. Contact him at daniel.l.dvorak@jpl.nasa.gov.
JAN BOSCH 
is a professor of software engineering and director of 
the software research center at Chalmers University of Technology in 

Gothenburg, Sweden. Previous to this role, he worked as vice president 

of engineering process at Intuit, where he led Intuit™s open innovation 

efforts and headed the central mobile technologies team. Bosch™s 

research activities include open innovation, innovation experiment 

systems, compositional software engineering, software ecosystems, 

software architecture, software product families, and software vari
-ability management. He received a PhD in computer science from Lund University, Sweden. 

Contact him via www.janbosch.com.
ABOU
T THE 
AUTHORS
IEEE Computer Society is offering $40,000 in student scholarships, from $1,000 

and up, to recognize and reward active student volunteer leaders who show 

promise in their academic and professional efforts.Graduate students and undergraduate students in their ˜nal two years, enrolled in 
a program in electrical or computer engineering, computer science, information 

technology, or a well-de˜ned computer-related ˜eld, are eligible. IEEE Computer 

Society student membership is required.Apply now! Application deadline is 30 April 2013. For more information, 
 go to www.computer.org/scholarships, or email chuffman@computer.org.
To join IEEE Computer Society, visit www.computer.org/membership.
Richard E. Merwin
Student LeadershipScholarship