 20
 IEEE SOFTWARE   
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/09/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
focus
automatically know how to work effectively as a 
team.
A central question is thus, ﬁHow should you or
-ganize teamwork for software development?ﬂ Most 
development methods argue that teams should self-
organize or self-manage.
2,3
 Scrum, for example, is 
inspired by new product development teams in Ja
-pan,
4 in which self-management is a de˜ning char
-acteristic. Compared with traditional command-
and-control management, self-managing teams 
represent a radically new approach to planning and 
managing software projects. 
However, the notion of self-management 
isn™t new; research in this area has been around 
since Eric Trist and Ken Bamforth™s study of self-
 regulated coal miners in the 1950s.
5 Members of 
self-managed teams are responsible for managing 
and monitoring their own processes and execut
-ing tasks. They typically share decision authority 
jointly, rather than having a centralized decision 
structure where one person makes all the decisions 
or a decentralized decision structure where team 
members make independent decisions. So, whereas 
the traditional perspective of a single leader sug
-gests that leadership is a specialized role that can™t 
be shared without jeopardizing group effectiveness, 
shared leadership represents teams whose mem
-bers are empowered to share leadership tasks and 
responsibilities.
1 Such leadership is, thus, a shared 
process in which important decisions about what to 
do and how to do it are made through an interac
-tive process involving many people who in˚uence 
each other, not just a single person. 
It™s one thing to talk about self-managing teams; 
it™s quite another to enable such teams to work in 
practice. Here, we focus on the main barriers and 
challenges we™ve seen in empirical studies on the 
team and organizational level when introducing de
-velopment methods that rely on self-managed soft
-ware teams.
Bene˜ts and Challenges
Self-managing teams offer potential advantages 
over traditionally managed teams because they 
bring decision-making authority to the level of op
-erational problems and uncertainties and thus in
-crease the speed and accuracy of problem solving. 
Companies have implemented such teams to re
-duce costs and to improve productivity and qual
-ity. Some research suggests that such teams result 
in higher employee satisfaction, lower turnover, and 
lower absenteeism.
6 Furthermore, having cross-
The basic work unit in innovative software organizations is the team rather 
than the individual. Such teams consist of ﬁa small number of people with 
complementary skills who are committed to a common purpose, set of per
-formance goals, and approach for which they hold themselves mutually ac
-countable.ﬂ
1 Work teams have many advantages, such as increased productivity, innova
-tion, and employee satisfaction. However, their implementation doesn™t always result in 
organizational success. It isn™t enough to put individuals together and expect that they™ll 
Lack of redundancy 
and con˜ict between 
team and individual 
autonomy are 
key issues when 
transforming 
from traditional 
command-and-control 
management to 
collaborative self-
managing teams.
Nils Brede Moe, Torgeir Dingsøyr, and Tore Dybå, 
SINTEF
Overcoming Barriers to 
Self-Management 
 in Software Teams
cooperative and human aspects of SE
  November/December 2009   
IEEE SOFTWARE
 21
trained team members increases functional redun
-dancy and, thus, ˚exibility in dealing with person
-nel shortages. 
However, team performance is complex, and a 
self-managing team™s performance depends on not 
only the team™s competence in managing and ex
-ecuting its work but also the organizational con
-text management provides. Although most studies 
report positive effects from self-managing teams, 
some present a more mixed assessment; they can be 
dif˜cult to implement and risk failure when used in 
inappropriate situations or without suf˜cient lead
-ership and support.
7What then is required for a team to successfully 
become self-managing? Understanding how to fos
-ter self-managing software development teams re
-quires more than just examining the team™s inner 
workings. We must also understand the organiza
-tional context surrounding the team because that™s 
an important determinant of effectiveness.
7 For ex
-ample, aspects of the organizational context such 
as reward systems, supervision, training, resources, 
and organizational structure can strongly affect 
team functioning.
6 Likewise, relationships with 
key stakeholders outside a team can in˚uence task 
performance.
Study Context and Methods
For three years, we observed ˜ve teams in three 
companies (see Table 1) that introduced agile devel
-opment practices to improve their ability to deliver 
iteratively and on time, increase software quality, 
and improve teamwork and team communication. 
Company A develops customer-speci˜c software 
on a contract basis, developing systems for plan
-ning and work coordination. Company B manu
-factures receiving stations for meteorological and 
Earth observation satellite data. Company C devel
-ops both mass-market and customer-speci˜c soft
-ware for maritime, offshore, and process industries. 
All ˜ve teams received the same training in ag
-ile development: one day of general introduction to 
scrum and one day of tailoring agile practices to 
their projects. Author Nils Brede Moe participated 
in the data collection from all companies, Torgeir 
Dingsøyr participated in companies A and B, and 
Tore Dybå participated in Company C. 
Using a ˚exible research design, in which the re
-search approach might change during the conduct 
of the research, we observed daily work and meet
-ings (stand-up, planning, review, and retrospec
-tive), conducted interviews, and inspected docu
-ments. The observations lasted from 10 minutes 
to a full day. The interviews lasted from 20 to 45 
minutes and were audio-recorded and transcribed. 
We interviewed most team participants twice and 
focused on understanding changes in the devel
-opment process after introducing scrum, team 
communication, decision-making, planning, and 
coordination.
We documented our observations as ˜eld notes 
and pictures. We collected iteration and project 
plans, progress (burn-down) charts, and index 
cards used on project walls. We integrated all our 
notes to produce a detailed record of each session.
On the basis of this broad material, we used 
meta-ethnographic methods
8 to analyze and syn
-thesize data from the transcribed interviews, dia
-logues, and ˜eld notes. In the ˜rst stage of the 
synthesis, we identi˜ed the main concepts from 
the transcriptions and ˜eld notes, using the sub
-ject™s own terms. Then, we organized the key con
-cepts in tabular form to enable comparison across 
teams and translate ˜ndings into higher-order in
-terpretations. This process is analogous to the 
 constant-comparison method used in qualitative 
data analysis.
9Self-management emerged as the key higher-
order topic, which recurred across all teams and 
was challenging throughout all projects. This led 
us to focus the analysis on explaining key project 
events and how they related to the teams and or
-ganizations. We presented results to the compa
-nies in separate feedback meetings. 
Table 1
Teams and data collection sources
Number of 
developers 
When was agile 
 introduced?
Team 
 number
Team 
size
Project 
length (mos.) 
Number of 
interviews
Number of 
observations
Company A 
16
At the beginning of the 
projects
16 11
12
75 
2612
12
45
Company B 
50
In the middle of the projects
3720
13
9Company C 
150
In the middle of the projects
4830 
11
10 
5730
10
10
 22
 IEEE SOFTWARE   
www.computer.org/software
Team-Level Barriers 
On the team level, we found that barriers to self-
management are related to individual commit
-ment, failure to learn, and individual leadership 
(see Figure 1).
Individual Commitment
Self-managing teams are responsible for planning 
and scheduling their work, so team members need 
to genuinely commit to the team plan. When mov
-ing from more control and command-oriented 
management to collaborative self-management, 
many team members gave too much priority to 
individual goals over team goals. The main rea
-son for this low team-level commitment was spe
-cialization; in all the teams we studied, developers 
worked independently on particular modules ac
-cording to specialization (for example, user inter
-faces, map interfaces, and databases). Both man
-agers and developers thought this was the most 
ef˜cient way of working. One scrum-master (Com
-pany A) explained, 
Let the person that knows most about the 
task solve it! It will take too many resources 
if several persons are working on the same 
module, and there is no time for overlapping 
work in this project. The tasks are delegated 
and solved the best possible way today. 
Maybe we can do more overlapping in the 
next project.
Because developers usually worked alone on a 
module, they often created individual plans. Devel
-opers got full control over their own schedule and 
task implementation, which resulted in even more 
individual autonomy. Consequently, team mem
-bers in companies A and B had less interaction 
than needed, which made team-level commitment 
dif˜cult. 
In addition, several developers said it™s dif˜cult 
to commit to work they aren™t involved in and that 
if team-members got sick or side-tracked, part of 
the iteration plan wouldn™t get done. So committing 
to the iteration plan meant committing to doing as 
much as possible on a developer™s ﬁownﬂ module.
Another common obstacle to achieving shared 
commitment was that four teams created unrealis
-tic plans. In each iteration, the team selected more 
tasks than they could feasibly complete. The plans 
became unrealistic because the team tried to make 
their plans too ˚exible. The idea was that every
-one would ˜nd something to do even if the context 
around the team changed. One certi˜ed scrum-
master (Company A) on his second scrum project 
commented on why they added too many tasks: 
In the beginning there were so many depen
-dencies to other projects and subcontractors, 
so we did not know which tasks we could 
complete during the sprint. It is also about 
optimization. You should always have the 
possibility to work on something else if you 
are stuck. 
Another barrier found in all teams was unclear 
completion criteria. Problems with de˜ning what 
it means when a task is categorized as ﬁdoneﬂ or 
ﬁcompletedﬂ reduced the possibility of commit
-ting to the team goal. If a task was ﬁdoneﬂ but not 
tested well enough, the team started the new itera
-tion without doing the work necessary to make the 
task of the previous iteration truly complete. One 
developer on his second scrum project (Company 
A) told us,
The tasks were not tested well enough, and we 
knew there was still work to be done. These 
tasks are then not on the list of the next itera
-tion since they of˜cially are done. – Each 
iteration starts with doing things that we have 
said were ˜nished, and then you know you 
will not ˜nish the iteration. – When during 
an iteration you realized that you would not 
˜nish, you do not care if you are 70 percent or 
90 percent done.
Finally, meetings that weren™t engaging lowered 
shared commitment. Teams in companies A and B 
used a scrum tool to support planning. Typically, 
one personŠthe scrum-masterŠwas in charge of 
registering the tasks in this tool during the meetings. 
When he typed in the tool, discussions effectively 
stopped. And when the person in charge of the 
tool needed to clarify some issues, he or she usually 
started talking directly to the developer most likely 
to be assigned to the task. Because other developers 
Shared resourcesOrganizational control
Specialist cultureOrganizational-levelbarriersIndividual commitmentIndividual leadershipFailure to learnTeam-levelbarriersFigure 1. Team- and 
organizational-level 
barriers to self-
managing software 
teams. The actual 
performance of a 
self-managing team 
depends not only on 
the competence of the 
team itself in managing 
and executing its 
work, but also on 
the organizational 
context provided by 
management.
  November/December 2009   
IEEE SOFTWARE
 23
often found these discussions irrelevant, they didn™t 
listen. We even observed developers falling asleep in 
companies A and B. These meetings weren™t a good 
arena for discussion and team commitment.
Failure to Learn
Teams must be able to change the operating norms 
and rules within the team, as well as in the wider 
environment, to become and remain self-managed. 
We observed teams frequently discussing the need 
for change in daily stand-ups, planning, and retro
-spective meetings. Nevertheless, all teams had pro
-cess improvement problems. 
Why was it so dif˜cult for these teams to im
-prove? One reason was the low level of 
team au
-tonomy
. The team needs to affect managerial 
decisions that in˚uence its ability to improve its in
-ternal processes. People outside the team also need 
to respect its efforts at improvement; otherwise, it 
will only experience 
symbolic self-management
, a 
well-known obstacle to true self-management.
10
The product owner moderated team-level au
-tonomy. In one project (Company C), after visit
-ing customers, he always had some emergent is
-sues that he needed to ˜x, an urgent request for a 
new demonstration, or new goals for the project. 
He usually expected the team to solve these is
-sues during the ongoing iteration, which made it 
dif˜cult for the team to stick to their plan. It also 
interrupted collaboration. This was how he™d al
-ways worked in the past, and introducing a scrum-
 master to protect the team against disturbances 
didn™t make much of a difference. Also, when plan
-ning, the product owner usually presented features 
with many uncertainties, which made it dif˜cult 
for the team to estimate the effort required and re
-sulted in poor planning meetings. Team members 
told us their relationship with the product owner 
was their biggest challenge but that they found it 
dif˜cult to confront him about these matters. Their 
inability to improve relationships with people out
-side the team discouraged the team members from 
trying to improve in other areas and clearly limited 
the possibility of continuous learning. 
Another reason for failure to learn was 
impres
-sion management
. Some scrum-masters and team 
members gave the impression that the team was 
better than it actually was. The desire to keep the 
schedule overrode knowledge of serious problems 
with, for instance, a third-party component, test
-ing, integration, or performance. One developer 
from Company A said,
We classi˜ed tasks as ˜nished before they 
were completed, and we knew there was still 
work to be done. It seems that the scrum-
master wants to show progress, and make us 
look a little better than we really are.
Impression management is a face-saving pro
-cess where the team members seek to protect them
-selves from management.
11
 This generates shared 
norms and patterns of ﬁgroupthinkﬂ that prevent 
people from addressing key issues. We never ob
-served anyone protesting when the plans were too 
optimistic or when un˜nished tasks were reported 
as ˜nished.
One reason for the impression management 
was that four projects had to ˜ght for their re
-sources. However, when management in Company 
A understood that the team wasn™t performing as 
well as reported, they lost trust in them. 
A third barrier to learning was specialization. 
Problems related to developers™ ﬁownﬂ modules 
were often seen as personal and subsequently not 
reported to the group. A developer from Company 
A said during a retrospective,
When we discover new problems, we feel we 
own them ourselves, and that we will manage 
to solve them before the next meeting tomor
-row. But this is not the case; it always takes 
longer time.
Individual Leadership
In all the teams we studied, implementing shared 
leadership was troublesome because the team 
members didn™t change their individual, decentral
-ized decision-making process. Consequently, the 
highly specialized developers in companies A and 
B focused only on their ﬁownﬂ modules and had 
little interaction with others. This resulted in dif
-˜culties aligning decisions on the operational level 
because team members didn™t know what others 
were doing.
In Company A, one developer decided to spend 
three days implementing features for future proj
-ects without informing any other team members. 
Such 
decision hijacking
 was an important barrier 
to implementing shared decision-making. As a re
-sult, this developer lost his team™s trust. In addition, 
the scrum-master, who™d changed his behavior and 
seldom used his former decision-making authority, 
started to give him direct instructions. We observed 
the same phenomena in Company C. One scrum-
master, after working on a project for 30 months, 
explained,
We divide tasks among ourselves, and then 
people are responsible for implementing them. 
The desire 
to keep the 
schedule 
overrode 
knowledge 
of serious 
problems. 
 24
 IEEE SOFTWARE   
www.computer.org/software
This usually works ˜ne. However, in the 
last sprint one of the developers spoke with 
someone in the market about an issue. The 
developer used a couple of days changing a 
feature that was already ˜nished, because the 
developer thought this was very important. 
We had to redo what the developer had done. 
In companies A and B, the scrum-masters made 
many decisions just as they had done before self-
management was introduced. This was especially 
evident when projects had problems. In one proj
-ect (Company A) already running late, the certi˜ed 
scrum-master said,
I probably in˚uence what they do. It is dif
-˜cult to keep your mouth shut when you feel 
you have some good recommendations to 
give. It™s an old habit, dif˜cult to change. 
Another problem was for the team to identify 
who should be involved in which decisions. Not 
everyone can be involved in everything, but people 
shouldn™t be left out. However, the team seldom 
discussed who should be involved in what. One 
experienced developer newly hired in Company C 
told us,
They usually tell me what to do. I think I 
possess more knowledge than they realize and 
that I get too simple tasks. I™m also missing a 
good overview of what we are going to deliver, 
because many of the discussions regarding the 
design were done without me. It™s probably 
too expensive if everyone is to participate in 
every meeting, but for me it is dif˜cult to see 
dependencies between the modules.
As his fellow team members became aware of his 
expertise, they involved him more. 
Organizational-Level Barriers 
Implementing self-managed teams is dif˜cult, 
if not impossible, if there are critical barriers at 
the organizational level. Misalignment between 
team structure and organizational structure can 
be counterproductive, and attempts to implement 
self-managed teams can cause frustration for both 
developers and management.
12
 At the organiza
-tional level we identi˜ed shared resources, organi
-zational control, and specialist culture as the most 
important barriers (see Figure 1).
Shared Resources 
In companies A and B, developers usually worked 
on two or more projects in parallel. When differ
-ent team goals or needs were in con˚ict, it threat
-ened at least one of the self-managing teams. In 
addition, some developers had to suddenly stop 
what they were doing and support projects they™d 
worked on earlier. 
In one important project in Company A, the 
team had problems losing resources. Eight weeks 
before the ˜rst major delivery, the scrum-master 
was allowed to protect the developers against all 
kinds of external requests four days a week. The 
scrum-master collocated with the team, and even 
made team members leave their telephones un
-answered. One developer commented on this 
situation:
The isolation works how it should, but we 
[the developers] end up in a dilemma. Like 
today, it™s crazy in the other project. The 
customers are starting to use the system 
this week, and I™m the only one who can ˜x 
problems. Then I just need to help if they 
are having problems. I do not like to decide 
which project will not meet its deadlines. 
Developers in companies A and B ended up 
doing unscheduled work because parts of the or
-ganization expected developers to work even if 
no resources were provided. This was part of the 
company culture. No one could quantify this un
-scheduled work. Because a team always knew 
they™d lose resources during an iteration, it didn™t 
make sense to commit to the team plan. 
Furthermore, the companies™ highly special
-ized cultures made it dif˜cult to change how teams 
were designed and how support was provided. 
Projects usually fought to get the most skilled em
-ployees, and the organizations rarely invested in 
building redundancy. So, the projects kept losing 
resources and found self-management dif˜cult. 
Organizational Control 
In Company B, the tool for organizing project tasks 
also included information the quality department 
used. The self-managing team perceived this infor
-mation as unnecessary, representing a form of de
-tailed control from management, which required 
extra reporting from the project participants. Such 
mechanisms can be a barrier for self-management 
if the teams see them as unnecessary. In this case, 
the quality department could have chosen instead 
to follow up on the team™s actual products and not 
on reporting.
In Company A, management was primarily in
-terested in the number of hours reported, not the 
Misalignment 
between team 
structure and 
organizational 
structure can 
be counter-
productive.
  November/December 2009   
IEEE SOFTWARE
 25
actual progress on tasks. One day before a review 
meeting we overheard the scrum-master telling de
-velopers to report more hours than already reported. 
The team did this to cover up losing resources to 
other projects and support tasks. Covering up such 
problems is a type of impression management and 
subsequently a threat to self-management. 
Specialist Culture
A self-managed team needs generalistsŠmembers 
with multiple skills who can perform one another™s 
jobs and substitute as needs arise. However, we 
found that incentives in all companies often sup
-ported a culture of specialists. In Company C, one 
of the most attractive roles was ﬁchief architect.ﬂ 
In the project we studied, the chief architect partic
-ipated in important decision meetings with man
-agement; the management trusted him, and he 
had much in˚uence on their products™ future strat
-egy. He didn™t involve others in the decision-mak
-ing. This 
holdup problem
13
 threatened the self-
managing team. One developer described the 
situation:
The chief architect made most of the decisions 
himself. This was frustrating because we were 
not involved, and everything was hidden in 
the architecture.
This chief architect later quit Company C. This 
allowed the whole team to participate in important 
decisions and then to self-manage. One manager we 
spoke with in Company C disliked the new situa
-tion, although he observed that his team was more 
ef˜cient when more self-managed. He felt that no 
one was taking care of his biggest concern: building 
an architecture that would last for 10 years. 
In Company B we found developers protecting 
their knowledgeŠthat is, protecting their code by 
not letting others work on it. If the code was impor
-tant, then the developers became important to the 
company. Three years before introducing scrum, 
Company C had to let some developers go, but not 
any of the ﬁimportantﬂ specialists. So, letting oth
-ers work on your code was considered a risk that 
could result in a loss of power. But being the only 
one working on important parts of the code was 
stressful during hectic periods and delayed the team 
when the developer was occupied with other work. 
In Company A, this culture of specialization re
-sulted in developers not wanting to take responsibil
-ity for important parts of the project because taking 
such responsibility meant becoming a specialist and 
getting stuck supporting the same product forever. 
During lunch, one developer described this problem 
of supporting all her old projects as a ﬁquagmireﬂ:
You get stuck in the quagmire. And for every 
new project you are on, it gets worse. 
This resulted in a lack of shared commitment. 
Overcoming the Barriers
We™ve seen that team- and organizational-level 
barriers can challenge a team™s self-management 
ability. Fostering self-management must therefore 
involve mechanisms that affect all levels.
The individual-commitment and individual-
leadership barriers indicate that teams have dif
-˜culty balancing individual and team autonomy. 
Achieving greater redundancy can reduce this 
problem. When people work together they™re more 
likely to commit to common goals and making 
team decisions. A greater focus on redundancy 
will also reduce problems with a specialist culture 
at the organizational level. However, we observed 
that the organizational level saw redundancy as 
unnecessary and inef˜cient. So, developers could 
seldom substitute for one another. When the team 
was also sharing resources, the lack of redundancy 
led to little ˚exibility.
The organizational-control barrier indicates 
that teams have inadequate autonomy. Low team 
autonomy was a reason we observed teams failing 
to learn. Team members also didn™t see the point of 
committing to team goals because they knew that 
the organization often wouldn™t respect their deci
-sionsŠfor example, by giving resources to other 
projects. The teams experienced symbolic self-
management, which made it dif˜cult to become 
self-managed. So, adequate team autonomy is cru
-cial to reduce problems associated with barriers to 
self-management.
There™s no guaranteed how-to recipe to fos
-ter self-managing teams, and the question is thus 
how much redundancy and team-level autonomy 
should be built into the organization and how to 
do it. Like the tale of the sitar player asking Bud
-dha how best to tune his instrument, we ˜nd 
the famous answer, ﬁNot too tight, and not too 
loose,ﬂ as a good general rule on the degree of re
-dundancy and team autonomy that would meet in
-dividual, team, and organizational needs. On the 
basis of the ˜ndings in this study, we recommend 
the following:
 ˜Organize cross-training
. This is costly, but the 
alternative can be even more expensive. With 
little or no redundancy, the company becomes 
vulnerable to changes. Pair programming 
 26
 IEEE SOFTWARE   
www.computer.org/software
and job rotation address this vulnerability by 
 increasing team ˚exibility.
 ˜Collocate the team in the same room
. Colloca
-tion will make people discuss the tasks they™re 
working on and discuss problems more fre
-quently than if the team is distributed. People 
not used to talking to each other will start talk
-ing after a while if they™re collocated. However, 
it™s important to balance individual-level and 
team-level autonomy by letting team members 
work uninterrupted when needed.
 ˜Appreciate generalists
. Company culture and 
company incentives must appreciate both gen
-eralists and specialists to build redundancy 
into the organization. When recruiting, select 
people with the potential to develop redundant 
skills.
  ˜Build trust and commitment
. To build trust in 
the whole organization, management should 
avoid any control that would impair creativ
-ity and spontaneity. The teams™ need for con
-tinuous learning, not the company™s need for 
control, should motivate the need for data col
-lection. Also, the teams should beware of any 
signs of impression management. When people 
work together toward a common objective, 
trust and commitment follow. So, make sure 
both the organization and the teams know and 
respect the common objective.
 ˜Assign people to one project at a time
. If pos
-sible, let team members focus on one project 
at a time. We found this easier in the larger 
organizations we studied. Resources must be 
coordinated, and management, not the team 
members, must decide when other projects or 
support requests should get resources. If the 
team members decide which project to work 
on, they™ll yield to the one making the most 
noise. This will damage the self-managed 
team™s potential. 
We hope our study will focus atten
-tion on the organizational context of 
teams and ensure that the transition to 
self-managed teams isn™t taken lightly. Important 
changes must be identi˜ed and discussed on both 
the team and organizational level. We plan to do 
more longitudinal studies on the mechanisms of ef
-fective teamwork and coordination across teams in 
software development organizations.
References
 1.
 J.R. Katzenbach and D.K. Smith, ﬁThe Discipline of 
Teams,ﬂ 
Harvard Business Rev.
, vol. 71, no. 2, 1993, 
pp. 111Œ120.
 2.
 L. Rising and N.S. Janoff, ﬁThe Scrum Software Devel
-opment Process for Small Teams,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 
17, no. 4, 2000, pp. 26Œ32.
 3.
 B. Schatz and I. Abdelsha˜, ﬁPrimavera Gets Agile: A 
Successful Transition to Agile Development,ﬂ 
IEEE 
Software
, vol. 22, no. 3, 2005, pp. 36Œ42.
 4.
 H. Takeuchi and I. Nonaka, ﬁThe New New Product 
Development Game,ﬂ 
Harvard Business Rev.
, vol. 64, 
vol. 1, 1986, pp. 137Œ146.
 5.
 E.L. Trist and K.W. Bamforth, ﬁSome Social and 
Psychological Consequences of the Longwall Method of 
Coal Getting,ﬂ 
Human Relations
, vol. 4, no. 1, 1951, 
pp. 3Œ38.
 6.
 S.G. Cohen and D.E. Bailey, ﬁWhat Makes Teams 
Work: Group Effectiveness Research from the Shop 
Floor to the Executive Suite,ﬂ 
J. Management
, vol. 23, 
no. 3, 1997, pp. 239Œ290.
 7.
 J.R. Hackman, ﬁThe Design of Work Teams,ﬂ 
Handbook of Organizational Behavior
, J. Lorsch ed., 
Prentice-Hall, 1987, pp. 315Œ342.
 8.
 G.W. Noblit and R.D. Hare, 
Meta-ethnography: Syn
-thesizing Qualitative Studies
, Sage, 1988.
 9.
 M.B. Miles and M. Huberman, 
Qualitative Data 
Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook
, 2nd ed., Sage, 
1994.
 10.
 J. Tata and S. Prasad, ﬁTeam Self-Management, 
Organizational Structure, and Judgments of Team Ef
-fectiveness,ﬂ 
J. Managerial Issues
, vol. 16, no. 2, 2004, 
pp. 248Œ265.
 11.
 G. Morgan, 
Images of Organization
, Sage, 2006.
 12.
 M. Uhl-Bien and G.B. Graen, ﬁIndividual Self-Manage
-ment: Analysis of Professionals™ Self-Managing Activi
-ties in Functional and Cross-Functional Work Teams,ﬂ 
Academy of Management J.
, vol. 41, no. 3, 1998, pp. 
340Œ350.
 13.
 R.F. Freeland, ﬁCreating Holdup through Vertical Inte
-gration: Fisher Body Revisited,ﬂ 
J. Law & Economics
, vol. 43, no. 1, 2000, pp. 33Œ66.
About the Authors
Nils Brede Moe
 is a research scientist at SINTEF Information and Communication 
Technology. His research interests include global software development, process improve
-ment, self-management, and agile software development. Moe has a master™s of science 
degree in computer science from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. 
Contact him at nilsm@sintef.no.
Torgeir Dingsøyr 
is a senior scientist at SINTEF Information and Communication 
Technology and an adjunct associate professor at the Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology™s Department of Computer and Information Science. His research interests 
include software process improvement and agile software development. He received a 
doctoral degree on knowledge management in software engineering from the Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology. Contact him at torgeird@sintef.no.
Tore Dybå 
is chief scientist and research manager at SINTEF Information and Commu
-nication Technology. His research interests include empirical and evidence-based software 
engineering, agile development, and organizational learning. Dybå has a doctoral degree 
in computer and information science from the Norwegian University of Science and Technol
-ogy. He™s a member of the International Software Engineering Research Network and the 
IEEE Computer Society. Contact him at tored@sintef.no.
