 0740-7459/12/$21.00 © 2012 IEEE
 JULY/AUGUST 2012
 | IEEE 
SOFTW
ARE 9WHEN ONE OF 
us (Chris) accepted the 
post of project manager/lead developer 
on a scienti˜c software development 
project, he was blissfully ignorant of 
the challenges he faced. Six years later, 

he emerged bloody but unbowed with 
a software product that now has a re
-spectable and growing user base. This 
article is the story of his journey as told 
to Judith and the lessons he learned and 

shared with her along the way. 
Project Background
The project was to develop a labora
-tory information management system 
(LIMS) for biologists working on pro
-tein structures. The process by which 
they search for such structures involves 

several steps in a laboratory, with each 
step made up of multiple variables (the 
concentration of various chemicals, 

temperatures, and so on). These steps 

often aren™t well understood and fre
-quently lead to failure. Practice has 

recently changed in many labs so that 

each step is performed as a set of trials 
done in parallel, with each trial differ
-ing slightly in contextŠthat is, in vari
-able value and type. 
The ˜rst requirement for the LIMS 
was to record the context of each of 
these trials, whether they were suc
-cesses (so they could then go into a li
-brary of known procedures) or failures 
(so that scientists could be deterred 
from making the same mistake twice). 

To develop this LIMS, the chief cus
-tomersŠgenerally, the heads of the labs 
involvedŠprovided Chris with a list of 
very high-level requirements, an imple
-mented model of the science (that is, of 
the relevant biochemical objects and 
the relationships between them) along 

with an automated mechanism for gen
-erating the database and the interface, 
and a development team consisting of 
people with backgrounds in either soft
-ware engineering or structural biology. 

The development plan followed an iter
-ative incremental feedback model with 

scheduled releases spaced at every few 

months; users could provide feedback 
to inform the next release, which would 
also implement further requirements. 
Lessons Learned 
from a Scienti˜c 

Software 

Development 

Project
Chris Morris, 
Science and Technology Facilities Council, UK
Judith Segal, 
Open University, UK
In the mid-90s, I was working for a company transitioning 
to agile software development. We hadn™t considered 
that our biggest problem in this change was that 
developers would be talking directly to customers. 
After some small disasters, we realized that somehow 
we needed to transfer the expertise and experience 
of our business and marketing teams to developers. 
When I ˜rst read the current Insights article, I 
immediately recognized many patterns in the list of 
lessons learned and that what these authors have 
to say is much broader than ﬁscienti˜cﬂ softwareŠ
it™s about any kind of software, actually, any kind of 

development effort. Š
Linda Rising, Associate Editor
INS
IGHTS:
 SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
 10
 IEEE 
SOFTW
ARE | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/SOFTW
AREINS
IGHTS:
 SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
What could possibly go wrong? Chris 
soon found out.
Lesson 1: Choose Carefully 
between Soon and Good
It™s generally agreed that it™s impor
-tant that iterative incremental feedback 
development models quickly deliver 
a piece of software, which, while of 

limited functionality, offers something 

of value to the customer and the user. 
This delivery, it is hoped, will encour
-age customers and users both to trust 
the developers and to engage with the 

development. As to delivering some
-thing good, there are many different 

quality goals that might be met. Such 

goals vary with each development con
-text: Does the output have to be cor
-rect to three decimal places, or does it 

just have to follow some trend? Does 

the software have to be easy to install? 
Is software ˚exibility more important 
than absolute correctness? Is portabil
-ity more important than ef˜ciency? 
At the beginning of the development,
  Chris presented his customers with 
a list of quality goals that he wanted 
them to rank. They didn™t. Whether 
this was because they had no time or 

because they thought it was Chris™s re
-sponsibility wasn™t clear. The articu
-lation and ranking of quality goals 

emerged gradually, through a deeper 

understanding of the context of work. 
However, one quality goal immedi
-ately became apparent as being of the 
upmost importanceŠdeposited data 

shouldn™t be lost or corrupted. Fortu
-nately, Chris thinks he got that right 

from the beginning. Another funda
-mental quality goal was that scientists 
needed to ˜nd the LIMS useful and de
-posit their data in it in the ˜rst place. 

Satisfying this goal turned out to be far 

more of a problem. 
Lesson 1a: Customers Don™t
 Always Know User Needs
One impetus for delivering the ˜rst 

version of the LIMS quickly was that 
the scientists were already producing 
data that needed managing. It seemed 

clear to Chris that he should base this 

˜rst version on the implemented data 
model and its associated mechanism as 
supplied to him by the customers. This 

produced a piece of software that was 

incredibly complicated to use, with a 
user interface (UI) driven by the data 
model rather than user requirements. 

The users refused to have anything to 
do with it, so any idea of a feedback 
model of development seemed doomed. 

Chris soon realized that he needed to 

consider the software from the user 
viewpointŠthat is, the bench scien
-tists who entered the data, as well as 
from that of the customers providing 
the money.
Lesson 1b: Asking Users 
 Doesn™t Establish Requirements
The list of requirements Chris origi
-nally received proved to be at too high 
a level to guide implementation. 
His ˜rst attempt at more detailed 
requirements gathering was to ask one 
member of the development team, a 
structural biologist, to draw up a set of 
use cases in collaboration with a user 

group. This set would have suf˜ced in 

a situation such as the development of 
new software to support the adminis
-tration of insurance policiesŠthat is, 
somewhere with well-understood goals, 
practices, and software embedded in 
the practice. In this particular situation, 

however, use cases turned out to be a 
˚op. The developers didn™t fully under
-stand the variations in practice between 
labs or the possible ways to embed data 

management software within practice. 
One of the original goals of the LIMS 
as stated by the customers was to en
-able data sharing and mining across 

the whole protein structure commu
-nity. But a sizeable number of the users 

were PhD students, and their primary 

goal was to get their PhDŠas far as 
they were concerned, the wider scien
-ti˜c community could look after itself. 
More senior scientists were similarly 

ambivalent about this sharing and min
-ing goal. A very limited pot of public 

money funds their labs, and they essen
-tially compete with each other for this 

pot, so it™s easy to understand why they 
view the issue of data sharing with a 
certain degree of ambivalence. 
Presumably because of this tension 
between the goals of individuals and in
-dividual labs and the community, ask
-ing users directly about their require
-ments wasn™t always very informative. 
The development team experienced re
-peated instances of the following cycle: 
a user group said they couldn™t use the 

software because a particular feature 
wasn™t implemented. The team imple
-mented it. Then the users said they still 
couldn™t use the software because of 

the absence of some other feature. The 
team implemented whatever that was. 
The users then said they still couldn™t 

use the software because it lacked 
something else. And so on. Chris con
-cluded that users must have had some 
deep-seated reason for not using the 

software and were unwilling or unable 
to communicate it to him. 
Another reason why asking users for 
requirements doesn™t always work is 
because they™re experts in (in this case) 
protein science, not in imagining how 
Asking users directly about 
 their requirements wasn™t always 
 very informative.
  JULY/AUGUST 2012
 | IEEE 
SOFTW
ARE 11software can help them. In particular, 
they don™t know which software fea
-tures are or are not feasible. One way 

of addressing this challenge is for de
-velopers to acquire a deeper under
-standing of context, but this takes time 
and resources and is in direct con˚ict 
with the necessity of delivering value 

quickly. This brings us to lesson 1c.
Lesson 1c: Start from 
 What Users Do Now
You can still deliver software of value 

to users even when your understanding 
of the work context is incomplete.
In retrospect, Chris wishes he™d 
started by asking users how they used 
their computers and moved forward 
from there. Then he could have delivered 
as part of the LIMS a subsystem for, 

say, keeping stock of and reordering 

chemicals. While not contributing to the 
stated primary aim, Chris thinks this 
would have had the effect of gaining 

user trust and engagement while buying 
time to improve his understanding of 
the work context.
Chris was aware that one big barrier 
to uptake of early versions of the system 
was its perceived lack of usabilityŠthe 
UI, in particular, was an inconsistent 

mess. Chris initially responded to this 

by asking the developer responsible 
for the UI to write a ﬁdesign guide,ﬂ 
but this turned out to be a write-only 

document. It wasn™t used, and even had 

it been, it would have only re˚ected 
the views of the developer-writer and 
not of the users. Later, Chris realized 

that all the users were familiar with the 
concept of entering data into lab books, 
so the team redesigned the UI based on 

that metaphor. This redesign appeared 

to be very successful.
As the development team™s under
-standing of the work context improved, 

they were able to construct tools (such 

as personas) that proved helpful in pri
-oritizing implementation. This increas
-ingly deep understanding also enabled 

the developers to be creative with the 
software and introduce innovations 

(such as providing templates for proce
-dures as opposed to a static database) 
that the users found effective. 
Lesson 2: Good Communication 
between Developers
 Can™t Be Taken for Granted 
All developers, we think, are aware of 
the need for good communication be
-tween developers and users and are 
prepared to put in the resources to sup
-port this. However, many of them take 
for granted good communication and 

trust among members of the develop
-ment team. Chris couldn™t do this. His 
team members comprised nine differ
-ent people at ˜ve different sites with 
˜ve different line managers (some of 

whom headed user labs) and ˜ve dif
-ferent nationalities. Some members had 

backgrounds in software engineering, 

some in structural biologyŠfor oth
-ers, it was their ˜rst job after univer
-sity. This variety offered plenty of po
-tential for disagreement, for example, 

when line managers in user labs pri
-oritized the needs of their own insti
-tution. Communication was dif˜cult, 

and not just because of cultural norms 

(such as people from country x tending 
to be more forthright than those from 
country y)Šthere was also a lack of 

common knowledge, with some peo
-ple having no idea what ﬁblack-box 
testingﬂ means and others a bit fuzzy 
about the term ﬁgene.ﬂ (We™ve since 

discovered that there is considerable 
discussion among biologists about ex
-actly what a gene is, but we™re referring 
here to everyday use of the term). This 

mismatch of goals and common knowl
-edge together with general dif˜culties 

in communication led initially to what 

Chris perceived to be mistrust by the 
development team of him as the project 
manager. 
He took positive steps to address 
this situation by commissioning an
-nual training in soft skills such as con
-˚ict management and appreciation of 

cultural differences. Some developers 
described this training as very useful; 
others were more circumspect. Whether 
by means of this training or by dint of 
the experience of working together over 

time to overcome the various dif˜culties, 

the team succeeded in gelling approxi
-mately halfway through the project.
Lesson 3: Plan for Sustainability 
from the Beginning
Scienti˜c software developments are 
often funded by research money that™s 
only available for a certain period of 
timeŠin this case, ˜ve years. Later, as 

the technical and scienti˜c environment 

changes, the software remains use
-ful only if it™s maintained. But who is 

to pay for such maintenance? One way 

to address this question is to grow the 

user community so that you gain a crit
-ical mass of scientists eager to use the 

software after the period of research 

funding ends. Alternatively, it might be 
possible for the software to be licensed 
so that it™s free for academic use, but 

commercial users have to pay, with the 

latter subsidizing the former. 
Clearly, you need to grow a user 
community quickly. In retrospect, 

Chris wishes that he™d prioritized some 

development features in light of this 
need from the beginning. 
Deep understanding enabled 
 the developers to be creative.
 12 IEEE 
SOFTW
ARE | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/SOFTW
AREINS
IGHTS:
 SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
Lesson 4: If Adopting Software 
Changes Work Practices, Its 

Development 
Has Special 
Challenges 
Compare the use of the LIMS with, for 
example, the use of software to sup
-port the working practices of the in
-surance industry. Insurance companies 

have used software to support their 

record keeping for decades. The same 
isn™t true for lab scientists: keeping re
-cords in lab books has been engrained 
in their work culture for centuries. It™s 
only recently, with the growth of col
-laboration and data sharing in the bio
-logical sciences, that the advantages of 
electronic record keeping have become 
apparent. The implication is that de
-velopers in this context can™t use well-
established techniques without a lot of 

thought. It might also be that the itera
-tive incremental feedback development 

model, often taken as the one most suit
-able for scienti˜c software development 

because it mirrors the essential nature 
of scienti˜c discovery, should be modi
-˜ed so that it incorporates an extended 
period at the beginning of the develop
-ment to understand the work context. 
Clearly, we learned a lot in six 

years, and we would be very 
pleased to hear about expe
-riences from other scienti˜c software 
 developers.
ABOUT THE 
AUTHOR
SCHR
IS MORR
IS is a software project manager at STFC, developing data 
management software for life scientists. Morris has an MA in mathematics 
from the Queens College, Oxford. Contact him at chris.morris@stfc.ac.uk.
JU
DIT
H SE
GAL
 is a senior lecturer in computing at the Open University, UK. 
Her research interests include the impact of software engineering on scienti˜c 

software development, the practice of software development, and interaction 

design. Segal has PhD in mathematics from the University of Warwick, UK. 

Contact her at j.a.segal@open.ac.uk.
Selected CS articles and columns 
 
are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
IEEE SOFTWAR
E CALL FOR PA
PERS
Twin Peaks of Requirements and Architecture










When features must be added or modi˜ed in deployed software, the 

new requirements are constrained by previous architectural deci
-sions, and their feasibility and impact must be evaluated in light of 

the current system.  Today™s agile and lean approaches make the re
-lationships between requirements and architecture less obvious and 

more dif˜cult to establish and maintain, especially across multiple 

development iterations and throughout the maintenance phase.
IEEE Software 
seeks submissions for a special issue on the 
synergies of requirements and architecture with special focus on 

the post-release phase of a project.  Suggested topics include the 

following:
Eliciting, specifying, and managing architecturally signi˜cant 

requirements for systems with well-established architectures
Evolving requirements and architectures in parallel, perhaps in 

incremental and/or agile environments
Architecture breakers, where new requirements cannot be 

accommodated without signi˜cant refactoring at the architec
-tural level
Establishing light-weight, effective traceability techniques to 

capture relationships between requirements and architecture
Visualizing relationships between requirements and architec
-ture to communicate sensitivity points and tradeoffs
Refactoring architectural decisions to accommodate previously 

unanticipated requirements, and accommodating changes 
without degrading system quality
QUESTIONS
?For more information about the issue™s focus, contact the guest 
editors:
Jane Cleland-Huang, DePaul University, jhuang@cs.depaul.edu
Robert S. Hanmer, Alcatel-Lucent
Mehdi Mirakhorli, DePaul University
Sam Supakkul, NTT Data
For the full call for papers: 
 
http://www.computer.org/software/cfp

For author guidelines: 
 
http://www.computer.org/software/author.htm

For submission details: software@computer.org

To submit an article: https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/sw-cs
