 focus 2
68
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
requirements and agility
Managing Agile 
Project Requirements 
with Storytest-Driven 
Development 
Rick Mugridge, 
Rimu Research
In his 1997 book, 
Managing the Design Factory
, Donald Reinhertsen argues,
In general, most product failures are caused by market risk. ... Managing market risk means 
capturing the requirements of what may be a diverse group of users. ... These people may have 
trouble expressing their needs, and their needs may be changing with time. This makes market 
risk a more formidable challenge than technical risk.
1Agile software development approaches like Ex
-treme Programming attempt to meet this market 
risk head-on.
2 These approaches accept that it can be 
nearly impossible to understand all the business re
-quirements beforehand. XP principles and practices 
therefore support iterative development, with the 
whole team revising and re˜ning the solution as they 
increase their understanding of market needs. Suc
-cess depends on early and ongoing communication 
and feedback; developers ensure that their software 
is of high quality and thus amenable to change.
In XP, the 
customer 
role has domain expertise 
and assumes responsibility for directing the over
-all development from a business perspective. The 
customer uses high-level release planning to select 
the next release™s work, which developers carry out 
in time-boxed iterations. Each business-level incre
-ment is called a 
story
. Developers estimate each 
story™s effort and the customer schedules a set of 
stories for the next iteration based on cost-bene˜t 
analysis.
In storytest-driven development, customers write 
storytests
Šexecutable, business-oriented exam
-plesŠfor each scheduled story.
3 The goal is to 
encourage clear communication of essential busi
-ness needs (and ways of meeting those needs) us
-ing concrete examples. Often, writing storytests is 
a collaborative effort among team members and 
involves a range of skill sets. Because it™s an evo
-lutionary approach, it helps customers tease out 
what™s valuable and possible. Furthermore, story
-tests evolve through collaboration and thus clarify 
the domain and scope for all project participants, 
enabling conversations that build shared under
-standing among team members. Finally, execut
-ing storytests as automated tests can help develop
-ers determine when new functionality is complete 
as well as if any existing functionality has been 
broken. Ward Cunningham™s Fit framework uses 
tables to express storytests and is widely used for 
storytest development (http://˜t.c2.com). FitNesse 
is a popular wiki-based tool that supports story
-tests, using Fit to run them as tests (www.˜tnesse.
org). I developed FitLibrary (http://sourceforge.net/
projects/˜tlibrary), which extends Fit to improve 
its business-level expressiveness. Here, I describe 
 Using FitLibrary 
eases storytest-driven 
development, which 
brings together 
requirements 
and automated 
testing ideas and 
practices to support 
agile software 
development.
  January/February 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 69
storytest-driven development practices and offer 
storytest examples developed with FitLibrary to il
-lustrate the process.
Moving beyond waterfall
It™s not easy to develop nontrivial software that 
brilliantly meets the needs of an organization and 
its users. Too often, there™s a mismatch between 
what™s required and what™s delivered, owing to 
misunderstandings about what is needed, possible, 
and valuable.
1In the early days, software developers assumed 
this mismatch was due largely to poor communica
-tion about what was needed. This led to the wa
-terfall approach to software development, in which 
a project begins with business analysts gathering 
requirements from the system™s prospective users. 
This in turn led to many new ideas, from inter
-viewing techniques to systems and business analy
-sis roles, to various notationsŠsuch as the Uni˜ed 
Modeling LanguageŠto express requirements.
With the waterfall method, business analysts 
aim to understand all requirements prior to design 
and development. To achieve this, analysts pay at
-tention to the following activities: 
Analyze relevant aspects of the business
. What 
are the business objects and their associations? 
What activities are carried out? What are the 
business rules?
Synthesize a design for a system embedded in 
the business
. What capabilities will the soft
-ware system provide? How will the system sup
-port business processes, and how will that af
-fect people™s work?
Problems downstream
People have tried to answer all these questions in 
detail before starting software development using a 
mixture of written documents and notations. But 
the waterfall model has been less successful than 
anticipated due to several factors:
2,4
The requirements phase effectively freezes the 
scope, which encourages stakeholders to in
-clude lots of functionality that differs widely in 
its potential value to the business as a whole.
Assessing the business value, impact, and in
-teraction of speci˜c system functions upfront
 is dif˜cult because there are usually many 
unknowns.
Understanding the essence of business processes 
is challenging because they™re typically overlaid 
with potentially irrelevant details of how people 
did things in the past.
Knowing when to stop writing requirements is 
often hard. What level of detail is appropriate? 
What do we expect readers to know?
Translating intuitive business expertise into 
general and implementable statements about 
the business domain can be dif˜cult. Many ar
-eas are not suf˜ciently formalized, which com
-plicates automation.
External and internal forces can lead to require
-ments changes during system development.
As the project proceeds, understanding of the 
requirements and the solution evolves, and new 
opportunities can arise.
The team might miss important requirements 
when stakeholders
 fail to identify and express 
their underlying assumptions.
Programmers and testers must interpret the 
requirements documentation, and their under
-standing might be incomplete, inco
nsistent, 
 or faulty without further person-to-person 
communication.
In addition, requirements documents tend to get 
outdated as things change. Business analysts tend 
not to refactor requirements as thinking changes 
about both the business needs and how the system 
will meet them. In addition, it™s dif˜cult to verify 
that documentation is consistent with the system 
(and vice versa); at best, teams derive separate tests 
from the written documentation and use them to 
test the resulting system.
The agile solution
According to agile approaches, understanding 
all the business requirements before development 
begins can be nearly impossible. Change is inevi
-table for several reasons, including that the larger 
business context changes. Also, as development pro
-ceeds, teams better understand three essential ele
-ments of the business and the solution:
how things really work,
what™s possible, and
the business value of speci˜c functionality.
Given this, XP focuses on practices that encour
-age early and ongoing understanding of these is
-sues and that allow the system to be revised and 
re˜ned to meet that understanding. To enable this 
evolution, the requirements and the software need 
to evolve in tandem. Also, to remain pliable, code 
must be well designed. Finally, developers must be 
able to make changes with con˜dence.
 These needs 
led to the XP practice of test-driven development,
5 an innovation that sparked a host of fresh ideas, 
Writing 
storytests
  helps 
customers 
tease out 
what™s valuable 
and what™s 
possible.
 70
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
tools, and practices. In test-driven development, 
developers incrementally write programmer tests 
and use them to drive their thinking, design, devel
-opment, and testing of the code that implements 
the system details. The code evolves over time, 
changing shape as the system grows and the team™s 
understanding of it changes. Business-level tests 
support the stories developers use in iterative de
-velopment; these ﬁstorytestsﬂ led to the emergence 
of storytest-driven development.
3,4
 Storytest-driven development
Storytest-driven development is a complemen
-tary form of test-driven development (TDD) ap
-plied to overall system development (see the side
-bar ﬁApplying Storytest-Driven Developmentﬂ for 
examples).
Communicating business context 
 and functionality
In storytest-driven development, customers 
write comprehensive storytests for each scheduled 
story in a system from the perspective of business-
domain specialists, business analysts, product 
managers, and system testers. The resulting sto
-rytests help answer questions about the system in 
terms of its business context.
Storytests are an alternative to detailed require
-ments documents. They support ongoing conver
-sations in the wider agile team. Rather than writ
-ing general statements about the business domain, 
customers use a set of examples to help clarify the 
general case. Also, instead of trying to cover the 
domain™s full complexity from the start, custom
-ers evolve the storytest set over time. Finally, sto
-rytests are executable, so the team can continually 
verify their consistency with the system.
Storytests help developers drive the overall, it
-erative implementation of new functionality. They 
form one part of the ongoing communication be
-tween business- and development-oriented team 
members (who are preferably colocated). Develop
-ers take a storytest as the starting point for their 
next piece of work, using TDD when they drive 
changes into the application code. Questions that 
arise might lead customers to augment the story
-tests to cover cases they™ve missed or to clarify or 
re˜ne the terminology.
Storytests and test-driven development
Storytest-driven development and TDD share 
several similarities. Both depend on advanced au
-tomated testing techniques as well as traditional 
testing approaches, including tests for nonfunc
-tional requirements. With their common em
-phasis on evolution and emergent design, both 
approaches are ultimately more about designing 
than testing.
The two approaches differ in how they express ex
-ecutable examples. Developers usually write tests in 
the programming language they™re using for develop
-ment. In storytest-driven development, however, cus
-tomers with business expertiseŠwho are unlikely to 
know programming languagesŠwrite or review sto
-rytests. This fact has led to simpler notations for ex
-pressing storytests. The best known of these is found 
in the Fit framework tables (http://˜t.c2.com).
4Expressing storytests 
 with FitLibrary
With Fit, customers express storytests in tables 
and run them against the application software to 
check for compliance. Test results appear in the 
tables themselves, minimizing the cognitive dis
-Many teams worldwide are using storytest-driven devel
-opment to specify a wide range of application areas, from 
banking and broadcasting to embedded software in cell 
phones and automobiles.
1One team developing broadband services systems wrote 
storytests in Fit that provided extensive coverage and enabled 
the team to ﬁreach a shared understanding of the domain 
and develop the ubiquitous language of the application.ﬂ
2 In 
another case, domain experts wrote more than 300 story
-tests to support the porting of a legacy billing system.
3 Other 
developers used storytests to develop a transaction system 
for electronic data interchange. The system™s customers and 
testers wrote 7,000 storytests, often in collaboration with the 
developers. The storytests helped the team ﬁdiscover a lot of 
missing pieces or inconsistencies in a story.ﬂ Overall, the team 
found that ﬁexecutable acceptance testing is an effective tool 
for communicating, clarifying, and validating business re
-quirements on a software project.ﬂ
4References
 1.
 U. Koch and M. Boxall, ﬁTesting Mobile Handsets with FitNesse,ﬂ 2006, 
http://video.google.co.uk/videoplay?docid=582823406455567909 
(video).
 2.
 P. Gandhi et al., ﬁCreating a Living Speci˜cation Using Fit Documents,ﬂ 
Agile 2005 Conf.
 (Agile 05), IEEE CS Press, 2005, pp. 253˚258. 
 3.
 R. Bohnet and G. Meszaros, ﬁTest-Driven Porting,ﬂ 
Agile 2005 Conf.
 (Agile 05), IEEE CS Press, 2005, pp. 259˚266.
 4.
 G. Melnik and F. Maurer, ﬁMultiple Perspectives on Executable Accep
-tance Test-Driven Development,ﬂ 
Proc. 8th Int™l Conf. Agile Processes 
in Software Eng. and Extreme Programming
 (XP 07), LNCS 4536, 
Springer, 2007, pp. 245˚249.
Applying Storytest-Driven Development
  January/February 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 71
tance between tests and results. FitLibrary (http://
sourceforge.net/projects/˜tlibrary) extends Fit to 
improve storytest expressiveness, encouraging a 
domain-driven design approach in which the ex
-amples directly express the domain objects and 
business-domain language.
6 Following are a few simple FitLibrary storytests 
from the early stages of a payroll system™s develop
-ment. More examples are available in my book
4 as 
well as at www.˜tnesse.org and http://sourceforge.
net/projects/˜tlibrary.
Work˜ow storytests
A simple story from early in a payroll system™s it
-erative development is ﬁAn employee is paid a weekly 
wage based on the hours worked.ﬂ Figure 1 shows 
a simple storytest for the action of paying an em
-ployee and the related tax. This storytest introduces 
much of the ﬁsyntaxﬂ of FitLibrary storytests.
Work˚ow storytests consist of an identi˜cation 
phase followed by three speci˜cation phases:
Within
 identi˜es the target interaction context 
or domain object, which might be the overall 
application. In ˜gure 1, for example, the target 
context is 
WageProcessing
.Given
 speci˜es an assumed starting state as a 
set of property-value pairs. In ˜gure 1, the prop
-erties are an 
employee
 and a related 
contract
, and 
each has its own set of property-value pairs. For 
example, 
employee
 has 
employee id
, 
name
, and so on 
(the white cells on the right show the properties™ 
values). 
When
 speci˜es a sequence of operations (work
-˚ow) in the given state™s context. In ˜gure 1, 
there™s a single action with three arguments 
that contain employee details and weekly work 
hours. The nested table includes a collection of 
date-hours. The action™s ˜rst cellŠand every 
second one after thatŠholds a 
keyword
 (here, 
ﬁpay employee
,ﬂ ﬁ
with id
,ﬂ and ﬁ
for hours worked
ﬂ).
Then
 speci˜es the system™s expected resulting 
state. This takes the same form as the Given 
phase, with property-value pairs. In ˜gure 
1, the 
employee
 and 
contact
 information remain 
unchanged, while a 
bank transfer
 and 
tax transfer
 result.
FitLibrary
 distinguishes cells that contain edit
-able values from those containing labeling informa
-tion. Action keywords help clarify the arguments™ 
action and roles; along with the domain objects™ 
property names, they form the domain™s ubiqui
-tous language.
6FitLibrary™s conventions for de˜ning states here 
are similar to those employed in a user interfaceŠ
that is, it uses
a pair of label and text ˜elds to display or edit 
a single textual property and 
a table with a row for each item in the collec
-tion, with a header row giving each of the prop
-erties of those items.
It™s important to stress that, although the story
-tests express the team™s understanding of the 
business domain objects™ essential nature, they in 
no way commit the team to actual user interface 
details. 
When executing this storytest during testing, 
FitLibrary creates an object of the implementa
-tion class 
WageProcessing
. FitLibrary then
 injects the 
Given phase table™s data into this object to get it 
into the Given state. In testing terms, this phase 
does ﬁsetup.ﬂ In keeping with domain-driven de
-sign principles, the Given phase™s property names 
correspond directly to the underlying domain ob
-jects™ properties. FitLibrary automatically converts 
names from tables into valid identi˜ers in the un
-Figure 1. A simple 
work˜ow storytest 
describing the action 
of paying an employee, 
along with related 
taxes.
 72
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
derlying programming language. As a result, FitLi
-brary needs almost no ﬁ˜xturingﬂ code to mediate 
between the tables and underlying domain code.
FitLibrary executes the When phase as method 
calls on the object under test. It automatically maps 
each action into a 
WageProcessing
 method. In this case, 
it calls the target object™s 
payEmployeeWithIdForHours
-Worked()
 method with three arguments. Because the 
method™s declared third argument is a collection of 
HoursWorked
, FitLibrary automatically creates a collec
-tion and ˜lls it with 
HoursWorked
 objects for each row 
in the action™s inner table.
In the Then phase, FitLibrary
 checks the ac
-tual value of each of the object™s properties against 
those of
 the expected object. The report shows 
matching values in green and mismatches in red. 
FitLibrary reports any differences between the 
properties™ expected and actual values in situ in the 
storytest tables.
Business-calculation storytests
To understand ˜gure 1™s work˚ow storytest, 
we must know how the organization determines 
overtime hours, applies rates, and calculates tax. 
An obvious approachŠespecially to those forced 
to test through the user interfaceŠis to write a se
-ries of work˚ow storytests that cover all three un
-derlying business rules and show their interactions. 
Unfortunately, this is dif˜cult:
We™d have to create several similar storytests and 
try to cover all the interesting cases. All this te
-dious copying and pasting can lead to mistakes.
To understand the underlying business rule, 
we™d have to determine the differences among 
all the storytests, which obscures the rule.
If a fundamental business rule changes, we™d 
have to review all the storytests and alter them 
and add new ones as needed.
Rather than adding more work˚ow stories to 
clarify the various underlying business rules, we 
can instead add focused 
calculation
 storytests for 
each one. Figure 2 shows a storytest for one of the 
underlying rules, illustrating how the organization 
determines 
ordinary
 and 
overtime
 hours, based on the 
hours worked and the contract™s 
max ordinary
 number 
of hours.
Figure 2™s storytest is structured differently than 
the work˚ow storytest in ˜gure 1Šeach of ˜g
-ure 2™s data rows is an example in its own right, 
with the given values to the left of the column of 
empty cells and the expected values to its right. The 
˜rst row, for example, shows that there™s no over
-time when employees work nine hours each day. 
(I stripped away irrelevant data hereŠsuch as the 
particular employeeŠto keep the focus on the busi
-ness rule™s essence.) This makes it easier to identify 
missing cases or unaccounted for factors. If a team 
identi˜es two or more independent factors, they 
might further divide a calculation rule.
When FitLibrary executes a calculation storytest 
as a test, the report shows the right-hand column™s 
cells in green or red, depending on whether the sys
-tem™s actual value is as expected or not. The col
-umn headers determine the methods that are called 
for each expected result.
 Each method might call 
directly into business-rule code in the target object, 
or it might carry out the work˚ow steps from ˜gure 
1, substituting data values from the current row.
With some applications, calculation storytests 
predominate. With others, work˚ow storytests are 
more signi˜cant. Often, the need for calculation 
and business-rule storytests isn™t apparent until de
-velopers write some work˚ow storytests and con
-sider related examples. Often, such rules haven™t 
been previously formalized but rather are intui
-tively understood by business-domain experts.
Figure 2. This example 
storytest, which shows 
how the organization 
determines ordinary 
and overtime hours, 
illustrates a calculation 
rule.
Figure 3. An example of 
a rejected action. In this 
ﬁAdd a new contractﬂ 
story, the contract is 
invalid because its 
overtime rate is too low.
  January/February 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 73
Many programmers would expect to write a 
unit test at this detailed level. However, this calcu
-lation rule is clearly in the business domain™s realm 
and a domain expert must express it. Given this, 
domain-rich systems built using storytest-driven de
-velopment tend to have fewer unit tests; those that 
remain typically focus on developing the technical 
infrastructure.
Sad-path work˜ow storytests 
Figure 1™s example covers a successful action, but 
we must also be able to specify a 
sad-path
 work˚ow 
storytestŠthat is, one that accounts for an action™s 
failure, such as when a user
 violates business con
-straints. Consider a story to ﬁAdd a new contract.ﬂ 
Figure 3 shows the example storytest and what hap
-pens when a user tries to add an invalid contract. 
The customer marks the When phase™s single 
add con
-tract
 action with 
reject
 to show that it won™t succeed. 
The single argument is the new contract, which is 
invalid because the 
overtime rate
 isn™t greater than 1.0.
Reject
 is a special FitLibrary annotation. When 
the application
 runs the storytest as a test, the 
add 
contract
 action should fail, returning a false Boolean 
value or throwing an exception. Other new contract 
constraints also apply, including 
contract id 
unique
-ness. So, it™s best here to write a single storytest with 
several concise examples that focus only on the tar
-get constraintŠthat is, a single business rule.
Business-constraint storytests
Figure 4™s business-constraint storytest has ˜ve 
example rows, showing the 
message
 that™s expected 
given the existing 
contracts
 and the 
new contract
. The ˜rst 
row is for a valid 
new contract
, with no error 
message
. The second row fails a uniqueness constraint on the 
contract id
. Subsequent rows cover constraints on the 
other new contract properties.
I assume that the storytest™s table contains valid 
money amounts. I don™t include a case where the 
per 
hour
 value is ﬁlots,ﬂ for example. Instead, indepen
-dent constraint storytests de˜ne validation rules for 
money in general. Separation of concerns is just as 
important for storytests as it is for code.
In data-rich domains, constraints can involve an 
individual property value (such as ﬁit must be posi
-tiveﬂ), groups of properties (such as ﬁtogether they 
sum to 1.0ﬂ), as well as constraints over collections 
(such as ﬁdate ranges must not overlapﬂ). When in
-ternationalization is applied to user messages, the 
storytest™s expected 
message
 would be the message™s 
internal form prior to local translation.
Developing storytests
Requirements are not always ripe for gathering. 
It™s easy to imagine that concepts such as ﬁkitchen,ﬂ 
ﬁfastener,ﬂ and ﬁhingeﬂ have existed forever, but 
someone had to invent such helpful notions. It was 
only after regular use that they came to seem nat
-ural. Writing storytests often requires that we re
-conceptualize the domain, inventing new concepts 
that haven™t been previously needed. It™s not simply 
a matter of ﬁwriting it downﬂ as the requirements-
gathering notion assumes.
Practicing business experts apply their knowl
-edge and background in their daily work. However, 
they might not have formalized their knowledge 
enough to make general statements that are valid 
and concise enough to de˜ne a system. Doing this 
requires abstraction skills.
Most of us have faced the awkwardness of lis
-tening to someone explain something complex us
-ing unfamiliar jargon, seemingly oblivious to our 
inability to understand them. Experts with a deep 
understanding of their domain are likely to ˜nd that 
it™s easier to teach other people about it by starting 
simple, then gradually tackling more complexity. 
Examples can help considerably in this process. 
Figure 4. A business-
constraint storytest. 
The second row shows 
the failure: the 
contract 
id
 violates a uniqueness 
constraint.
 74
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
Getting started
Storytests draw on experts™ facility with speci˜cs 
by focusing their attention on concrete examples. 
In so doing, storytests act as a tool that can help 
experts clarify and communicate their
 knowledge. 
When writing storytests for functionality, I ˜nd it™s 
best to have experts start with a simple example. 
Some experts ˜nd it dif˜cult to remove interest
-ing detail and create that ˜rst little example. How
-ever, doing so is a key step: it begins the process 
of selecting suitable terminologyŠthe ﬁubiquitous 
languageﬂ in domain-driven designŠand selecting 
suitable example values.
Once experts are happy with their ˜rst example, 
they can either expand it to include a little more com
-plexity or create a new storytest. In this process, is
-sues will arise, such as the need to make clearŠand 
previously nonexistentŠdistinctions among different 
business objects. 
The ˜rst few steps can be far from simple, even 
for someone experienced with both storytests and 
the domain. Concise, focused, and realistic exam
-ples work best, helping to educate the developers 
in the domain™s speci˜cs. Over several iterations, 
some storytests might change considerably as the 
writer better clari˜es the business domain and 
moves beyond the simple cases.
When several experts work together to write 
storytests, creating concrete examples often high
-lights small differences of opinion that were previ
-ously unnoticed. Such teamwork works well when 
you need combined expertise to coherently assem
-ble all system requirements.
Structuring storytests
To facilitate execution, storytest structure is con
-strained and requires a different skill than writing 
free text. To create an ever-growing set of system 
storytests, you need people with a range of skills and 
knowledge, including 
business knowledge;
testing knowledge and skills (such as handling 
sad paths, boundary conditions, and odd cases 
that help clarify the domain);
usability knowledge (such as knowledge of user 
tasks and user roles, which can help you choose 
stories and work˚ow storytests);
object-oriented modeling and domain-driven 
design skills (for example, questions about a 
concrete domain object™s structure and associa
-tions are likely to be helpful);
abstraction skills and the ability to untangle and 
refactor storytests, particularly as understand
-ing evolves and new business-domain concepts 
emerge; and
the ability to ask the right questions (storytests 
often evolve in response to developers™ ques
-tions during implementation, such as when 
code duplication might be due to missing story
-test abstractions).
Storytests are a signi˜cant business resource; 
to keep them clear and concise, we must regularly 
revise and reorganize them. Processes such as de
-sign, refactoring, and design patterns also apply to 
storytests, as do design 
smells
4Šthat is, indicators 
of poor quality. For example, a smelly storytest 
might
have an unsuitable name and confusing tables 
that obscure its intent; 
use unrealistic examples that prevent the team 
from gaining a deep understanding of the do
-main;
have a textual explanation that is better ex
-pressed in table form so that developers can au
-tomatically test it; and
contain duplication, indicating the need to re
-conceptualize the domain or refactor the story
-test (for example, you might extract a calcula
-tion rule from several work˚ow storytests).
Storytest-driven development helps bridge 
the gap between what organizations re
-ally need from a system and the system 
that developers actually deliver. This bridge builds 
on several factors. First, an iterative approach solves 
(or avoids) problems that arise from the inevitable 
speculation involved in upfront speci˜cation. Sec
-ond, having storytests as executable documents 
drastically reduces the need to derive independent 
tests, reducing effort and the likelihood of transla
-tion errors. Third, storytests, as tests, help devel
-opers determine when added functionality is com
-plete, and help ensure that it remains so. Finally, 
having storytests based on examples makes them 
widely useful as a thinking aid, as a focus for dis
-cussions and clari˜cation, and as a general means 
of communication.
Storytest-driven development builds on and re
-uses ideas from previous requirements approaches, 
turning some of them ﬁinside out.ﬂ Storytests don™t 
express class diagrams and use cases directly, for 
example, but they™re likely to emerge; making such 
connections explicit is a fruitful area of future 
work. Another promising research area is to bring 
a stronger task-oriented (usability) perspective to 
storytests.
Storytests are 
a business 
resource; 
 to keep them 
clear and 
concise, we 
must regularly 
revise and 
reorganize 
them. 
  January/February 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 75
Storytest-driven development has other challenges 
as well:
managing and organizing very large suites of 
storytests to make it easier to ˜nd those that are 
relevant to a particular persona, user task, inter
-action context, use case, or domain object, for 
example;
keeping the storytests consistent with the under
-lying application code™s structure and naming, 
especially when developers use a domain-driven 
design approach;
assembling a team with all the needed skills 
to support high-quality storytest development; 
and
˜nding the right abstraction level for storytests. 
Many people fall into the trap of writing story
-tests that explicitly test through the user inter
-face. Such storytests tend to be verbose and 
fragile, are slow to run, and are unlikely to il
-luminate the domain.
Tool support is more advanced with test-driven 
development. Only now are tools becoming avail
-able that help domain experts keep track of the 
application™s ubiquitous language and that support 
storytest evolution, including powerful refactoring 
support.
References
 1.
 D.G. Reinertsen, 
Managing the Design Factory
, The 
Free Press, 1997.
 2.
 K. Beck, 
eXtreme Programming Explained
, 2nd ed., 
Addison-Wesley, 2004.
 3.
 J. Kerievsky, ﬁCoined Storytest and Storytest Driven 
Development,ﬂ 
Industrial XP
, www.industrialxp.
org/storyTdd.html.
 4.
 R. Mugridge and W. Cunningham, 
Fit for Developing 
Software
, Prentice Hall, 2005.
 5.
 K. Beck, 
Test Driven Development: By Example
, Ad
-dison-Wesley, 2002.
 6.
 E. Evans, 
Domain-Driven Design: Tackling Complex
-ity in the Heart of Software
, Addison-Wesley, 2003.
About the Author
Rick Mugridge 
runs Rimu Research, providing consulting and coaching in storytest-
driven development and agile software development as well as consulting in software re-
search and development. His research interests include agility, software tools, and general 
software development. He continues to develop FitLibrary, an open source storytesting tool, 
and is completing ZiBreve, a tool for refactoring storytests. He has a PhD in computer sci
-ence from the University of Auckland, New Zealand, and is a member of the Agile Alliance. 
Contact him at 271 Ararimu Valley Rd., RD 2 Waimauku, Auckland 0882, New Zealand; 
rick@rimuresearch.com.
PURPOSE:The IEEE Computer Society is the world™s largest
association of computing professionals and is the leading provider
of technical information in the field.
MEMBERSHIP:
Members receive the monthly magazine 
Computer
,discounts, and opportunities to serve (all activities are led by
volunteer members). Membership is open to all IEEE members,
affiliate society members, and others interested in the computer field.
COMPUTER SOCIETY WEB SITE:
www.computer.org
OMBUDSMAN:Email help@computer.org.
Next Board Meeting: 16 May 2008, Las Vegas, NV, USA
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
President:Michael R. Williams*
President-Elect:Rangachar Kasturi;* 
Past President:
Deborah M. Cooper;* 
VP,
Conferences and Tutorials:
Susan K. (Kathy) Land (1ST VP);* 
VP, Electronic
Products and Services:
Sorel Reisman (2ND VP);* 
VP, Chapters Activities:
Antonio Doria;* 
VP, Educational Activities:
Stephen B. Seidman;ƒ 
VP, Publica-
tions:Jon G. Rokne;ƒ 
VP, Standards Activities:
John Walz;ƒ 
VP, Technical
Activities:Stephanie M. White;* 
Secretary:
Christina M. Schober;* 
Treasurer:
Michel Israel;ƒ 
2006Œ2007 IEEE Division V Director:
Oscar N. Garcia;ƒ
2007Œ2008 IEEE Division VIII Director: 
Thomas W. Williams;ƒ 
2007 IEEE Divi-
sion V Director-Elect: 
Deborah M. Cooper;*
ComputerEditor in Chief:
Carl K.
Chang;ƒExecutive Director:
Angela R.Burgessƒ
*voting member of the Board of Governors
ƒnonvoting member of the Board of Governors
BOARD OF GOVERNORS
Term Expiring 2007:
Jean M. Bacon, George V. Cybenko, Antonio Doria, Richard
A. Kemmerer, Itaru Mimura, Brian M. O™Connell, Christina M. Schober
Term Expiring 2008:
Richard H. Eckhouse, James D. Isaak, James W. Moore, Gary
McGraw, Robert H. Sloan, Makoto Takizawa, Stephanie M. White
Term Expiring 2009:
Van L. Eden, Robert Dupuis, Frank E. Ferrante, Roger U.
Fujii, Ann Q. Gates, Juan E. Gilbert, Don F. Shafer
EXECUTIVE STAFF
Executive Director:
Angela R. Burgess; 
Associate Executive Director:
AnneMarie Kelly; 
Associate Publisher:
Dick Price; 
Director, Administration:
Violet
S. Doan;
Director, Finance and Accounting:
John Miller
COMPUTER SOCIETY OFFICES
Washington Office.
1730 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20036-1992
Phone: +1 202 371 0101 Ł Fax: +1 202 728 9614 ŁEmail: hq.ofc@computer.org
Los Alamitos Office.
10662 Los Vaqueros Circle, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314
Phone: +1 714 821 8380 Ł
Email: help@computer.org
Membership and Publication Orders: 
Phone: +1 800 272 6657 Ł Fax: +1 714 821 4641 Ł
Email: help@computer.org
Asia/Pacific Office.
Watanabe Building, 1-4-2 Minami-Aoyama, Minato-ku, 
Tokyo 107-0062, Japan
Phone: +81 3 3408 3118 Ł Fax: +81 3 3408 3553
Email: tokyo.ofc@computer.org
IEEE OFFICERS
President:Leah H. Jamieson; 
President-Elect:Lewis Terman; 
Past President:
Michael R. Lightner; 
Executive Director &COO:
Jeffry W. Raynes; 
Secretary:
Celia Desmond; 
Treasurer:
David Green; 
VP, Educational Activities:
MosheKam;VP, Publication Services and Products:
John Baillieul; 
VP, Regional
Activities:Pedro Ray; 
President, Standards Association:
George W. Arnold;
VP, Technical Activities:
Peter Staecker; 
IEEE Division V Director:
Oscar N.
Garcia; 
IEEE Division VIII Director:
Thomas W. Williams; 
President, IEEE-
USA:John W. Meredith, P.E.
revised 11 Oct. 2007
