 focusExtreme Programming
0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEPublished by the IEEE Computer SocietyIEEE SOFTWARE
37Fst has made large investments in Java tech-nology for Internet development. We base our

project management process on the Rational
Unified Process (RUP) and use the Rational
tools (Rose, Requisite Pro, and so on) exten-
sively. Our quality system is lean; it comprises

19 procedures and guidelines and more than
30 templates for managing the software devel-
opment process.For the past two years, we have studied Ex-treme Programming as an improvement to ourcurrent practices. We hoped XP could address
bloated documentation and low software qual-
ity. Our experience brought us to look at XP as

a way of planning and managing projects and

as a new risk management philosophy. 
Two pilot projects 
The Fst research laboratory has used XP since
February 2001 and has completed two pilot

projects. In the first project, we developed a set
of cryptographic components in C++. We used

a pared-down XP process, leaving out the ap-
proachÕs so-called planning game and coding

standards. The results confirmed the 20-80
rule that Kent Beck proposed: If you follow 80
percent of the process, you get just 20 percent
of the benefits. The first project lacked overall
process control and coordination.So, in the second project we decided to ap-
Assessing XP at a European Internet 

CompanyFstÑa small firm with approximately 160 employeesÑdesigns,builds, and outsources Internet services. Our areas of expertise
are building complex portals with multichannel access and strict
security requirements, supporting digital signatures, and handling
various kinds of financial transactions. Fst is not a software house; it aims
at building partnerships with its customers by providing solutions to spe-
cific needs.Orlando Murru, Roberto Deias, and Giampiero Mugheddu,
Fst s.r.l.
An Italian Internet services company introduced ExtremeProgramming in a couple projects. Here is an account of that
implementation, practice by practice, and assessments by
participants from three key perspectivesÑcustomer relations,
project management, and ISO 9001 quality assurance.  ply XP by the book, with two-week iterations
and half-hour tracking units. We tried to re-

lease a set of user stories every two iterations,
each time adding new functionalities that the
customer found valuable. The project objective
was to develop a demo of an e-procurement
portal that supports digital signatures and
time stamp functionality according to Italian
law. As a necessary complement, we also de-

veloped a time stamp server compliant with
RFC3161, and a few clients for requesting and
managing time stamps. Our goal was to

demonstrate the use of our legally compliant
cryptographic components in a real-world sce-
nario that our customers could understand.Each project lasted approximately threemonths and employed three people. The re-

search and development labÕs director played

the customer role. The development team did-

nÕt have much experience: five team members

had been programming for less than two years
each. The team worked in an open workspace,
sharing workstations. Table 1 summarizes the degree to which we
adopted XP practices in the two pilot projects.

But the table canÕt tell the whole story. To-

day, even when we arenÕt using XP (in projects

that last less than two months), we can apply
XPÕs principles and are happy with the results.
Differences from traditional methodologiescan be striking. Recently, on a small project,

we had XP-trained programmers working
alongside programmers with no XP experi-
ence. The first specification proved inadequate.
The XP-trained programmers concluded that
too much effort went into up-front analysis.

The programmers who were not trained in XP
thought the original specification was inade-
quate and regretted not having done better.

The two viewpoints were clearly incompatible

and reflected totally different attitudes.
Strangely enough, the non-XP users claimed
that they had Òalways doneÓ XP 
and didnÕt see
anything new in the methodology. They didnÕt

understand how XP shifts the way program-

mers think about software development. XP
is definitely not a new presentation of old
concepts.The programmersÕ perspective XP provides a detailed, workable way to
implement good but generic software engi-
neering principles. Many people have noted
the similarities between XP and other, more

entrenched methodologies. However, it takes

an experienced team to tailor the right subset

of a methodology such as RUP. XP practices

are limited in scope but well characterized. Al-
38IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
Table 1Our experience with XP practices in two projectsPracticeDegree of adoptionComments
Project 1Project 2
Planning game None Full 
Starting with the second project, we applied the planning game by the book. We allocated tasks
based on velocity, recorded progress once a day, and recorded time to finish twice per iteration.
Small releases Full Full We used two-week iterations and two-iteration releases. 
Metaphor None None We had simple metaphors for the systems but found them of limited usefulness. We 
evolved high-level diagrams of system architecture and UML diagrams on boards that the 
team used in stand-up meetings. Simple design PartialFull We added system functionalities only as needed. 

Test-driven Full Full We 
used the test-first method a lot in C++ development, but had some development problemsdevelopmentunit-testing Java Web GUIs. We used CPP-Unit and JUnit together with Rational Robot.
Refactoring Full Full We refactored regularly. Refactoring was about 5% of total time in the first iterations  
and grew to about 20% in the final iterations. Pair programmingFull Full This worked very smoothly. Pairs rotated regularly, but the C++ and Java camps tended  
to stay separate. Collective ownershipFull Full We used version control to facilitate shared code ownership. 
Continuous integrationPartialPartial We 
integrated at least once a week on a staging system. Sustainable pace Full Full Team members never worked more than nine hours per day.
On-site customer Full Full A manager played the customer role. 
Coding standards Partial PartialWe 
wrote C++ and Java coding standards (two pages) but did not retrofit existing code. though they leave unspecified much of the ma-chinery necessary for software development,
they cover many parts of the process in great
detail and in practical terms. Moreover, they

are very helpful in assigning the appropriate
priorities to the various steps in the software
development process. Planning game In the second project and in every projectthereafter, we used the planning game. We didnÕt

encounter any severe problems, but the planning
sessions often became analysis and design meet-
ings. We were able to complete stories at a satis-

factory pace, as Figure 1 indicates.
Without performing a lengthy evaluation, we
canÕt say whether the planning game works.

However, we offer the following considerations.
The XP coach must actively foster involvement
in the planning game.In our experience, people
new to XP assume a rather passive attitude
during iteration-planning sessions. Task cards

and user cards do not travel around but are
traded between the two or three most senior
programmers. Senior programmers write most

of the stories and are eager to advance estimates

and suggest possible solutions. Other team

members do not actively sign up for tasks and
are prone to accept tasks with little discussion

of the estimates. The coach must make sure
everyone feels part of the decision-making
process and ready to assume ownership of the
task description and estimates. Never compare estimates and actuals.Fstused to rank its programmers according to
their estimatesÕ precision. XP taught us that

ranking is not only meaningless but also po-
tentially harmful, because it introduces adver-

sarial relationships in the workplace. Esti-
mates are just a tool to gauge progress, signal
the need for corrective action, and guarantee

the best possible outcome. Emphasizing the
initial estimatesÕ accuracy creates obstacles to
corrective action and thus can lead to broken
deadlines, bloated costs, poor quality, or a

mixture of these factors. 
XP minimizes the need for Gantt charts. Wenow use Gantt charts only to communicate the
overall plan outside the team, not as a planning
tool. This has made life easier. Although we

tried before to apply wave planning, iterativeand incremental planning, and so on, Ganttcharts usually contained lots of unnecessary de-
tails and tasks whose start, finish, and percent-

age-complete points were meaningless. For ex-
ample, what does it mean to be at 35 percent of

a design phase? XP taught us that many de-
pendencies in a chart are artifacts that the tool
produces and that few dependencies are Òreal.ÓXP enhances programmersÕ sense of project
control.XP is all about maximizing communi-cation. Programmers that had RUP experience
said that XPÕs planning game gave them a

stronger feeling of control than traditional
planning did. They knew where their project
was going and whether it was delayed. Fur-
thermore, constant involvement with accept-
ance testing made the programmers more
aware of how well the code was meeting its

expected functionalities and keeping the proj-
ectÕs strategic goals in focus. This knowledge

improved the programmersÕ motivation. Metaphor and simple designBeck writes in Extreme Programming Ex-plainedthat XPÕs metaphor should play much
of the role that architecture plays in traditional

methodologies.1We couldnÕt make the meta-
phor concept work in any of our projects, how-

ever. 
After a few iterations, we found that welacked a clear overall vision of the system, per-
haps because of the teamÕs relative inexperience

or our misunderstanding of the metaphor con-
cept.Eventually we decided to put up posters

that showed sketches of the architecture or

checklists of important points to remember. We

also started to write the documents that we felt

could help improve our understanding of the
overall system. We decided to hold dedicated

design sessions at the end of each iteration. This

way we managed to keep iteration-planning
May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
392520
15
105
0135246IterationsNumber of storiesIncomplete storiesDiscarded stories
Completed storiesFigure 1. User storiescompletion progress. sessions focused on planning. The problemwith mixing planning and design is that this
leads to discussions too detailed to have the

whole group participate.We had to schedule

design sessions in advance because inexperi-
enced programmers are likely to be late in real-
izing that some design (not just plain condi-

tional code) is called for. We feel that XP has no

clear recipe for developing an architecture (see
ISO/IEC 122072).Pair programming Pair programming is a powerful way to dis-cipline programmers by averaging individual
idiosyncrasies. Most people in both pilot proj-
ects had trouble accepting XP practices such

as simple design, coding standards, and test-
and-code. However, pairs followed the prac-

ticesÑfollowing coding standards, practicing
test-driver development, and so onÑmore

consistently than individuals, because when
one member is more rigorous than the other,

the pair usually performs to the higher stan-

dard. Furthermore, when adopting XP by the
book, the groupsÕ focus shifted to implement-

ing the whole process. Everyone became less
critical of project aspects that they would find

objectionable when considered alone. Test-driven development
The team was able to follow XPÕs test-driven
development practice beyond our expectations
because of pair programming, which helped
discipline the development work. We found it

difficult to assess whether we were doing

enough unit testing because each pair had to de-
cide independently how much testing was
enough. Halfway through the project, to help
developers assess the degree of test coverage,

the tracker started to compute simple metrics
correlating number of unit tests with number of
lines, methods, and parameters. Refactoring Refactoring relies on an aesthetic aware-ness that programmers can only develop with
time. The group must have enough senior pro-
grammers so that most of the time each pair
has the experience to do the necessary refac-
toring. The team also must agree on software

quality. Inexperienced programmers often lack

a common culture on which to judge quality,

and the lack of consensus leads to minimally
productive open-ended discussions. The nonprogrammersÕ perspective Introducing XP in a firm affects more people
than just programmers. To evaluate the feasi-

bility of adopting XP for most of our software

development projects, we held a series of inter-

views with people from FstÕs marketing, project

management, and quality assurance areas. We informally interviewed nine people,
each with some prior knowledge about XP, al-

though none of them had participated in an XP
project. The interviewers were familiar with
the interviewees and their problems and were
able to establish good communication.We organized each interview in three sec-
tions. First we asked about the intervieweesÕ

main problems, then we recalled or explained

XP practices that could apply to those prob-
lems. Finally, we discussed the intervieweesÕ

objections and observations. The questions we
asked the interviewees depended on their roles
in the firm.The interviews revealed that the main ob-jections to using XP donÕt come from persons

actively involved in building software but rather
from marketing people and personnel man-
agers. The issues that arose reflect the particu-lar situations of an Italian firm based in Sar-
dinia and might not be representative of other
situations. Marketing representativesThe marketing people had two centralobservations.Customers do not readily accept require-
mentsÕ unpredictability.
The people who dealdirectly with customers feel strongly that they

would have a hard time getting contracts signed
without formal sign-off of requirements, fixed

time and cost provisions, and penaltiesin 
casethe supplier doesnÕt honor some of the con-

tractÕs terms. 
XP requires constant guidance from a cus-tomer or an empowered proxy to lead software
development.3The customer must work closely
with thedevelopment team for the duration of

the project to select priorities, clarify and rede-
fine the project scope, and, as a last resort,
move deadlines. If the customer requires all
these elements to be firmly established at the
projectÕs onset, the customer is implicitly re-

jecting the XP processÕs adaptive nature. 
Most of our customers want to buy softwareusing the same kind of contractual agreementsPairprogramming is a powerful
way todisciplineprogrammersby averagingindividualidiosyncrasies.40IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
 they use to buy other products. In contrast, XP
and other Agile methodologies claim that the

software development process is inherently un-

predictable, mainly because of the unpre-

dictability of requirements.1,3,4However, we
believe that the case for the latter view is weak.

Claiming that Ò
in software development re-quirement changes are the normÓ4will notmove customers who have little or no experi-

ence with software and software projects, espe-
cially if they have allocated considerable re-
sources to requirements analysis. The concept

of software requirementsÕ unpredictability is
hard to sell because people might see it as an ex-

cuse for sloppiness, lack of vision, or whining. 
Every methodology recognizes that cus-tomersÕ disinterest in risk management is a

source of problems. Our marketing people are

well aware of this, and they think that XPÕs re-

liance on the customer as an active partner in
project management is likely to exacerbate the

problems that a ÒbadÓ customer would pose.
Our marketing suggests that XP might suffer

from a catch-22: It requires a high level of trust
in the customerÐdeveloper relationship, espe-

cially in the initial project phase, but it elimi-
nates activities (requirements sign-up, architec-

ture drafting, and so on) that help increase the

trust level during startup because they are of lit-
tle use later in the project and will likely intro-
duce rigidity in the process. 
Our customers do not always own the projectÕs

requirements.Our customers are large corpo-rations and public administrations, and Fst is
often a subcontractor or a (smallish) partner in
a group of large firms that won a bid. The peo-
ple we speak to who are in charge of a project
rarely own the requirements. Often they must
play a difficult political role to gather require-
ments in the face of unclear legislation and
competing requests from their superiors.Moreover, our customers often lack emo-
tional involvement in projects. Their preoccu-
pation with avoiding mistakes for which they
might have to shoulder the blame overshad-
ows their desire to reach project goals at opti-
mal costs. Often this preoccupation couples

with an incomplete grasp of the technological
issues. These factors make our customers ap-
proach software engineering conservatively;
they are not eager to assign priorities and
donÕt like discussing Òplan BÓ and project ad-

justments. Instead, they prefer the kind ofwritten ÒpromisesÓ that Beck criticizes: re-
quirement sign-offs, detailed GANTT charts,

and contracts that heap all risk on the sup-
plier, who must deliver the ÒcompleteÓ system

on a hard deadline for a fixed cost.1Project managers The project managers made the followingobservations.XP overexposes a firmÕs inner workings.
Ourproject managers feared that opening the de-
velopment process to our customers would
drive them to shop for specific programmers

and try to build their project team themselves.

This is happening to a certain extent in our

firm. Firms sometimes oversell their ability in

certain areas, trusting that their programmers

will be able to catch up or that theyÕll be able
to find timely, competent third-party help.

Having the customer on-site would make this
more difficult or more risky. 
XP allows programmers to grow and maintain
their core abilities.FstÕs software process
makes a strong distinction between program-
mers and analysts. There is a monotonic in-
crease in prestige, salary, and visibility going

from programmer to analyst and then to man-
ager. Only programmers actually program. An-

alysts, who are usually team managers, spend
all their time coordinating, planning, coaching,
designing, supervising, reviewing, and interfac-
ing with the firmÕs other departments. These

activities make analysts some of the busiest

employees in the firm. Unfortunately, this or-

ganizational model is not sustainable in the
long run.5Software engineers canÕt improve their
competencies by only thinking, speaking, or
reading. They must compile codeand make it

run. By isolating analysts from menial pro-

gramming tasks, we guarantee that the techni-
cal competence implicit in the position rapidly
becomes obsolete. Our firm mainly uses
server-side Java programming on application

servers. Suppose that in a couple years a sig-
nificant number of our customers start requir-
ing .NET on Win64 servers. How will the pres-

ent crop of analysts adapt to change? In an
interview,a manager explained to us some

ideas for flattening the team hierarchy and in-

volving analysts more closely in the teamsÕ

workings. All the managerÕs ideas are compat-
May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
41Software
engineers canÕt improve theircompetenciesby onlythinking,speaking, orreading. Theymust compilecode and makeit run. ible with XP, which addresses these issues sys-
tematically by means of concepts such as pair
programming, collective code ownership, and
the planning game. Quality team To manage our processes, Fst has developed
a quality system compatible with ISO 9000 re-
quirements, which define requisites for quality
in production processes. We are also obtaining

ISO 9001 certification, which is often required
in Europe, especially to do business with the
public sector. In our interviews with the qual-

ity team, we discussed the XP processÕs com-

pliance with the ISO 9001 requirements.2,6The initial response was positive; we re-ceived feedback that XP can greatly improve
ISO 9001 quality systems. XP gives precise
guidelines for project management. In fact, XP
might be as much about management as it is
about software engineering. The methodology
is specific about roles and responsibilities in
customerÐdeveloper relationships. XP also de-

tails the planning gameÕs required input-artifact

characteristics (tracking data, prioritized user
stories, and exploratory prototypes). It then sug-
gests procedures to conduct the planning ses-
sions and a practical method to check progress.Moreover, XP is agile: it concentrates on a
few of the processÕs key aspects and gives pro-

grammers the freedom to customize the rest.
Therefore, the development team can adapt XP
to different needs of formal validation, config-
uration management, and so on. This helps
adapt a true XP process to an ISO 9001 frame-

work. This is a step forward from other soft-

ware development methodologies. Many meth-
odologies are clear about the artifacts that
each development phase must produce, and
provide templates for various documents.
However, they often fail to detail the steps re-

quired to produce the documentation and the

artifactsÕ quality characteristics. We are enthusiastic about XP and
have difficulty imagining a software
project in which we should not tryto use it, at least in the Internet development
domain. Currently, about 15 employees are us-

ing XP, half of them for external customers. The
main project using XP is developing the securitycomponents of the e-procurement portal of the

Italian central government. XP is a novel methodology for software de-velopment. We found that ÒcustomizingÓ XPÕs

core practices is unwise because of the 80-20

effect. However, nothing in XP prevents the

practitioner from integrating it with verifica-

tion teams, design documentation, configura-
tion management, or anything else that might
be useful for a project. In a sense, XP requires

these add-ons because it is so focused on the
core practices that it leaves some necessary

processes and tools out of the spotlight.Our experience shows that XP is not magic,but it can work well. If a development team

lacks programming experience, the results us-
ing XP will be at best marginally better than

what would result from any other methodol-

ogy. An inexperienced team will likely be poor

at applying the XP process. Furthermore, XP
relies on the team checking itself constantly

for simple design, code quality, and progress

rate, and these self-checks require experience.
However, XP is a good choice even with an in-

experienced team because it is a robust and
flexible methodology. We have staffed a cur-

rent project with five people who have one
year of XP practice and two years of program-
ming experience each.The coach has to travela good deal and is available only for iteration
planning. However, the team is functioning ef-

fectively, producing at the rate we expected. If

we had adopted the normal RUP-based life cy-
cle, the leadÕs inability to work on the start-up

documents (vision, architecture, and so on)
would have stalled the project. It would likely

have degenerated into an unstructured effort.
Even without supervision and coaching, the XP

programmers tend to stick to the rules, which
are easy to follow because they have an imme-

diate, perceptible value for the programmers. XPÕs most problematic feature is the amount
of on-site customer involvement it requires.
However, we would never worry about a proj-

ect in which the customer is in charge, knowl-
edgeable, flexible, available, and risk-conscious,
as XP requires. Assuming a fairly competent de-
velopment team, such a project would be bound
for success. We often practice a split process,

using XP to manage the development process

and having limited direct interaction with the
customer. The coach acts as a customer proxy,

relaying requirements, priorities, and deadlines,XPÕs mostproblematicfeature is the amount of on-sitecustomerinvolvementit requires.42IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
 and interacting with the customer through doc-uments and plans. We are trying to educate our

partners and customers to the values of XP, but

it looks like we have a long way to go.
References1.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange, Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
2.ISO/IEC Std. 12207, Information TechnologyÑSoft-
ware Life Cycle Processes, IntÕl Organization for Stan-dardization, 1995.3.R. Jeffries, A. Anderson, and C. Hendrickson, 
ExtremeProgramming Installed,Addison-Wesley, 2001, p. 17. 
4.M. Fowler, ÒThe New Methodology,Ó http://martinfowler.
com/articles/newMethodology.html. 
5.M. Fowler, ÒIs Design Dead?,Ó http://martinfowler.com/
articles/designDead.html. 6.ISO Std. 9000Ð3, Quality Management Guidelines forSoftware Development, IntÕl Organization for Standard-ization, 1997. For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
43About the AuthorsRoberto Deias
is a specification and application architect at Fst. His research interestsinclude PKI infrastructures, Web application development, document management, software

development methodologies, software design, and Java technology. He has worked on embed-

ded multimedia software, debuggers, and compilers. He received a full Italian University de-
gree in computer science from the University of Pisa. Contact him at Fst s.r.l., Z.I. Mac-

chiareddu, 09010 Uta (Ca), Italy; roberto.deias@fst.it.Giampiero Mughedduis a senior programmer at Fst. His principal interests are PKIinfrastructures, workflow management, and network security. He has worked on cryptography,

e-government, and Web applications for the Fst research lab. He earned his BS in computer sci-

ence from the University of Cagliari. Contact him at Fst s.r.l., Z.I. Macchiareddu, 09010 Uta

(Ca), Italy; giampiero.mugheddu@fst.it.Orlando Murru
is head of research and development at Fst. His interests are cryptogra-
phy, PKI infrastructures, e-government applications, and software engineering methodologies.

He has worked on embedded software, MPEG coding, and mathematical research tools. He
earned his PhD in mathematics from the University of Milan. Contact him at Fst s.r.l., Z.I. Mac-

chiareddu, 09010 Uta (Ca), Italy; orlando.murru@fst.it.IEEE Pervasive Computing
delivers the latest peer-reviewed
developments in pervasive, mobile, and ubiquitous computing 

and acts as a catalyst for realizing the vision of pervasive (or

ubiquitous) computing, described by Mark Weiser nearly a

decade ago.In 2003, look for articles on
¥Security & Privacy¥The Human Experience¥Building Systems that Deal withUncertainty¥Sensor and Actuator NetworksSUBSCRIBE NOW!http://computer.org/pervasive
M. SatyanarayananCarnegie Mellon Univ. and Intel Research Pittsburgh
Associate EICsIEEE PervasiveComputing
Editor in Chief
Roy Want, Intel Research; Tim Kindberg, HP Labs; 
Deborah Estrin, UCLA; Gregory Abowd, GeorgiaTech.;
Nigel Davies, Lancaster University and Arizona University