 34IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 20020740-7459/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEEcosts, and firm schedules. This incremental
product-planning method provides signifi-
cant product release flexibility crucial to both

start-up and mature software companies.
To illustrate how to use our framework, we
present a case study of a company developing

software and hardware Internet access equip-

ment. The specific features and values we cite
are representative, but, to protect proprietary

information, they are not the actual values.This article focuses principally on soft-ware product companies engaged in devel-
oping software products for commercial
sale. We believe our incremental product-

planning method would prove a critical suc-
cess factor for any software product organi-

zation, especially start-ups determining initial
and evolving product release functionality.

More mature organizations have found the

method useful in planning the evolution of
more established products. However, our
framework also has relevance for softwareprofessionals who work in corporate IT en-
vironments and are planning a series of re-
leases of their information systems, software
companies using an application service
provider (ASP) model, and systems compa-
nies whose systems contain a significant
software component. In general, our prod-
uct-planning method is relevant to anyone
involved with selecting a balance of product
features to maximize business value to the
development organization.Commercial software product-planning challengesFrom the perspective of software product
planning, we live in times of unprecedented

haste. In the mid-1990s, commercial soft-
ware enterprises typically measured product

release cycles in one- to two-year incre-
ments. Today, many factors are driving
focusBusiness-Driven ProductPlanning Using Feature
Vectors and Increments
Brian A. Nejmeh, InstepIan Thomas, Ian Thomas and AssociatesAgile developmentprocesses emphasize
prioritizing product
features, but most

donÕt tell you you how
to do it. This product-
development
framework offers 
a method of defining
release increments
and assessing
product features 
to deliver the 
highest return on
development
investment.Software product development organizations are frequently ham-pered by all-or-nothing approaches to product planning driven by

technical issues. We present a method for business-driven product

planning based on the notions of feature vectors, feature levels,and release increments. This method provides a decision framework within

which to assess the range of possible combinations of features, times, and
costs and to define release schedules with desirable content, predictable the business of software engineering
 product release cycles to months instead ofyears. Competition, for example, has be-
come a critical force in product planning.

Competition takes many forms, includingTime to market.
A study of the technol-
ogy industry found that products that
come to market six months late but

within budget earn 33 percent less profit
over a five-year period compared to
products out on time.
1The study alsofound that bringing a product to market

on time but 50 percent over budget cuts

profits by only 4 percent.Agile new entrants.
Powerful softwaredevelopment frameworks such as J2EE
(www.java.sun.com/j2ee) and .NET (www.

microsoft.com/net) and the open source
movement2have facilitated rapid devel-opment of competitive products, giving

birth to formidable competitors in most

software markets. In addition, the low-

cost, broad deployment, and product
feedback options that the Internet af-

fords enable unprecedented levels of

timely product deployment, feedback,
and revision.Many product release plans depend on asingle definition of the target releaseÕs con-

tents. This makes it difficult to reduce the

product scope to meet delivery schedules, to

respond to changes in market conditions, or
to launch new products in the case of a

start-up. Rather than defining incrementally
releasable products, most product plans
tend to focus on monolithic, large-grained

releases. However, more than ever, todayÕs

product planners must preserve flexibility as
they define productsÑboth in the productÕs

functionality and in the release calendar. In

addition, the heightened competition means
that companies must maximize the value of
their development effort for new releases.
The goal of software product planningshould be to maximize the productÕs value

within available resourcesÑthat is, to de-

liver the highest return on development in-
vestment, or ROI.Meeting the challengesThese challenges have generated severalresponses, with evolutionary and agile de-velopment methods playing leading roles
(see www.gilb.com).
3 An agile process is adevelopment approach that is adaptiverather than predictive in nature, and people-
oriented rather than process-oriented:3Ex-treme Programming is one well-known ex-
ample. This article complements some of
the fundamental premises of agile process
methods, includingIncremental and highly iterative devel-
opmentFrequent product releasesDevelopment priority and sequencing
driven by business value, as expressed
by business stakeholdersBoth agile and evolutionary process meth-ods emphasize close contact between the de-
velopment team and stakeholders. However,

these methods assume that stakeholders can
communicate business requirements effec-
tively and reorient development as increments
are released. In addition, these methods pro-

vide no guidance on several key issues:They donÕt address how the develop-

ment group should interact with the key

stakeholders and the product manager,

who determines the product definition

in most companies.They donÕt describe how the product

manager and the development group
can produce consistent business feature
requirements and priorities that will sat-
isfy multiple customers.
They donÕt suggest techniques for the

product manager to balance the often con-
flicting demands of multiple customers.They donÕt provide techniques for prod-

uct managers to assess the value of pro-
posed features.In some of the agile process approaches,effective requirements prioritization is im-
plicit. Tom Gilb and Karl Wiegers have ad-

dressed this issue explicitly (see www.gilb.

com).3,4We extend these approaches using
the concept of explicit functional levels for

each product feature. We extend the estab-

lished notion of a release incrementby re-

lating the incrementÕs definition explicitly to

the product characteristics a product man-
ager is charged with managing. Our ap-
proach also emphasizes that the product
manager performs product planning to help

the company meet its objectivesÑa goalNovember/December 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
35The goal ofsoftware
productplanning shouldbe to maximizethe productÕsvalue withinavailableresources. that might be different from maximizing a
releaseÕs value to customers.
Effective product planning cannot separatethe product managerÕs planning processes and

techniques from the development teamÕs de-

velopment approaches. The product-planning
framework we propose integrates well with

incremental development methods and is a
principal contribution of our work. Our ap-
proach builds on some of the models used at
Microsoft.5Product-planning and development
processesSolutions for effective software develop-ment inhabit the broader context of systematic
product planning. However, software product

organizations often have difficulty making de-
cisions that transcend the purely technical, es-
pecially when it comes to product planning.

Nevertheless, thinking beyond purely techni-
cal issues is critical to these organizationsÕ
business success. Thus, besides integrating with
evolutionary and agile development tech-

niques, our product-planning framework in-

corporates business and economic drivers such
as time to market and ROI for engineering ef-
fort. It also emphasizes a cross-functional pro-
cess that includes senior management, pro-
duct m
anagers, software engineers, and other
key business functions.The product managerIn a commercial-product setting, a productmanager coordinates the activities associated
with developing and commercializing a prod-
uct or product line. Product manager respon-
sibilities include product planning, partner-
ships, pricing, product rollout, and so on. In
larger companies, the product manager often
chairs a product-planning working group
consisting of domain experts and representa-
tives from sales, marketing, development,

services, and support. In many companies, the
product manager is responsible for the prod-
uct lineÕs overall well-being and vitality, in-

cluding profitability.
For product planning, the product manager
heads the process of considering all inputs and

producing a release increment plan. The com-
panyÕs business plan, strategy, and budget de-

termine the processÕs constraints. Inputs to

product planning include data and perspec-

tives from many stakeholders: prospects, cus-
tomers, win-and-loss reports, problem re-ports, enhancement requests, sales and fieldfeedback, competitive and market analysis,

new technologies, development, and customer
support. The principal output from the plan-
ning process is a rolling release plan that iden-
tifies a sequence of release increments with de-
fined functionality and target dates. Often,
trying to satisfy all the stakeholders with the
contents of a release leads to plans that are too

complex, too costly, and too late. Our ap-

proach lets the product manager obtain input

from the stakeholders so that he or she can
make decisions to define release increments
that provide real value and can be delivered on

time and within budget.Incremental product planning: Key concepts
A release objective is a high-level state-ment of a major goal for a product release.
Typically, each release has two release objec-

tives. The release objectives drive overall re-
lease contents and act as a filter for candi-
date release features. At least one release
objective should have obvious relevance to
the end-user community. Release objectives

might relate to functional areas, usability im-
provements, support for third-party products

and standards, workflow improvements,per-

formance enhancements, product stabiliza-
tion, and so on. In our case study, the prin-

cipal objectives for the initial release were to
achieve data transmission performance com-
parable with existing and competitive prod-
ucts and a consumer cost no greater than ex-
isting or competitive products.A feature category provides a groupingmechanism for related functional capabili-

ties. A feature is an individual functional ca-pability that belongs to a feature category. Ef-

fective product planning requires identifying
possible features over which planning deci-
sions are made. We begin by breaking the

productÕs behavior into feature categories. In

our case study there were seven categoriesÑ

five hardware, two software. The seven cate-

gories included a total of 35 features, 23 of
which were primarily software related. For

one of the software feature categoriesÑsoft-
ware performanceÑwe identified protocol

implementation and bandwidth management
as two features. For the software usability

feature category, we identified software

upgradability features for different compo-
nents, a bandwidth management feature, and
operations tools that managed the opera-Software
productorganizationsoften have
difficultymakingdecisions thattranscend the purelytechnical,especially when it comesto productplanning.36IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2002 tional system or simplified its installation.
A feature level is a clear functional levelthat a feature implementation can achieve.

Together, a feature and its levels define a 
fea-ture vector. Figure 1 illustrates these key con-cepts using a graphical representation of two
feature vectors from the case study, showing

the feature levels for each (weÕve omitted the
actual component names for confidentiality).
In our case study, the feature levels for
Component 1Õs remote software configura-

bility feature were 
1.None
2.Complete replacement of all software 

3.Replacement of components without
rollback to the previous configuration 4.Replacement of components with rollback

5.An extensible, configurable software in-
frastructure/architecture (see Figure 1) 
For any feature vector, each feature level
should represent a distinct business value to
customers and compare with the functional
capabilities of competitorsÕ products. In ad-
dition, the difference between two feature
levels should translate to a meaningful engi-
neering development increment and repre-
sent an increase in perceived business value. A featureÕs levels are often a monotoni-
cally increasing sequence or a partial order,

as in the Component 1 example. On the ba-
sis of intuition, the product manager orders

the levels for increasing value and levels of
complexity. Each feature in the feature vec-

tor space should have between two and six
levels defined. In our case study, the average

number of feature levels for both hardware
and software features was between four and
five. Increases in functionality between lev-
els should be modestÑthat is, implementa-
tions taking on the order of four to 10

weeks. Table 1 describes the feature levels

for the Component 1 software configurabil-
ity feature vector. In practice, we use a sin-

gle spreadsheet for all such features.A release incrementis a collection of {fea-
ture, level} pairs that define the contents of
November/December 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
37Component 2 software configurabilityNoneComplete replacementof all softwareComponent 1 software configurabilityNoneComponent replacement, no rollbackComponent replacement, with rollbackExtensible component setComplete replacement of all softwareFigure 1. Two case
study feature vectors:
feature levels 
of software 
configurability for
Component 1 and
Component 2. The
axes show how the
feature levels are 
different for each

of the features.Table 1Feature description table: Component 1 software configurability feature vectorLevelDescriptionRelated features
All levelsThis feature defines the support offered for remote replacement of  
the software in Component 1. 1. NoneComponent 1 has no capability for remote software change.
2. Complete replacement of all softwareThe application software in the component can be replaced completely. 
This solution does not support rollback.3. Component replacement, The application software is decomposed into distinct components, andOperations tools and
no rollbackeach of these can be independently replaced. This solution does not support Feature Level 2 required
rollback to restore the component being replaced if replacement fails. 4. Component replacement with rollbackAs above, but with rollback if replacement fails.
5.  Extensible component setThe set of distinct components in the application can be extended,
with the additional components loaded and replaced remotely.
 the product release. A sequence of release in-crements represents increasing levels of func-
tionality over time. In addition, by identify-

ing feature levels of increasing functionality,

such a sequence enables engineering to de-
sign the product intelligently, anticipating

the changes.6The features and levels are the lexicon
over which our framework defines release in-
crements. Our case study product included
two software configurability feature vectors,

one for each of two separate components.
Table 2 shows our definition of how incre-

ments refer to feature levels: The feature col-
umn lists the feature name. The feature levels

are distributed across the increment columns

where the feature level is first implemented.A releaseof a releasable productis a re-lease increment judged to be worthy of field
release. A release should show feature level

improvements in six to 18 feature vectors.
Typically, a product and its evolution in-

clude many more feature vectors, but many

of these are either not consistent with the re-

lease objectives or are known to be of very
limited market value. So, limiting improve-
ments to six to 18 feature vectors has not

proven difficult in practice, and the restric-

tion allows for more focused analysis on the

releaseÕs core features.
Feature vectors are not necessarily inde-pendent. It is important to capture interdepen-
dencies between features and their levels to en-
sure consistent decisions. When two features

represent direct trade-offs, sometimes the cus-
tomer makes the trade-off, on the basis of
value; in other cases the product development
team makes engineering and related trade-offsduring product development. For example,
component size versus cost is a classic trade-
off. Identifying such feature trade-offs during

the planning process lets the product manager
solicit input on the desired coexistence of fea-
tures and levels.Assessing the market ROI offeature levelsThe ROI is the business value to the com-
pany of a product development effort invest-

ment. Our approach is based on the principle

that a product managerÕs key role is to max-

imize the companyÕs ROI for the develop-

ment group. This principle is different from

the goal of maximizing business value to cus-
tomers. To estimate ROI, the product man-

ager must understand the business value and
the effort involved in developing the features.Assessing feature business valueIn our approach, business value estimates
for different features do not have to be ab-

solute; they can be relative. To calculate ROI,

we only need to know, for instance, that some

feature is twice as valuable as another accord-

ing to some units. Ultimately, we assess the

business value of a particular feature levelÑ

not the entire feature. Feature level value as-

sessment gives the product manager more con-
trol to maximize the business value received
for a feature levelÕs development effort. 
Selecting candidate features and levelsThe product manager determines the fea-
tures and levels to include in each of a prod-38IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2002Table 2Increment definition using feature levelsFeatureIncrement 1Increment 2Increment 3Increment 4Increment 5
Component 1 None
configurabilityComplete replacement of the software, no rollback
Complete replacement of the software, with rollbackComponent replacement, no rollbackComponent replacement, with rollbackComponent interrogation for software versionComponent 2 None
configurabilityComplete replacement of the software, no rollback uctÕs release increments by assessing the rel-
ative value of features and levels. The initial
decisions identify the featuresÕ relative val-
ues. A typical software product might have
hundreds of features. The objective is to re-

duce the number of features for which the

product manager must identify and evaluate
feature levels. (Later, we describe several

techniques for achieving this reduction.)Using the featuresÕ relative values, theproduct manager then selects a candidate sub-
set of features for closer investigation. At this

stage, it is unwise to exclude a feature only
because its complete implementation would
be too costlyÑa reduced functional level for
that feature could be valuable to some cus-
tomers. In our case study, the product man-

ager chose about half of the 35 features as
primary features.For each feature from the candidate set,the product manager identifies several can-
didate levels for release increments. The rel-
ative values of these feature levels guide the
release definition. Practically, the choices of

features and levels are often interdependent.Constituencies and valueSeveral stakeholder constituencies partici-pate in or influence value assessment. Current
customers require continued product mainte-
nance. They are also a constituency for en-
hancements that can be sold as add-on or
complementary products (ÒupsellÓ). Prospec-
tive customers require certainproduct fea-

tures, and selling to these prospects might re-
quire demonstration features that are of
greater value during the sales cycle than in the
productÕs day-to-day use. In addition, other

key constituencies that could influence overall
feature and level value ratings include com-
petitors with product offerings; industry and
financial analysts; and internal sales, market-
ing, engineering, professional services, and
support staff. In our case study, a key group

of investors setting goals for the business
formed one key constituency, and potential

customers formed another. The investors con-

trolled funding for the product development.The product manager identifies the valueto the company of the constituenciesÕ prod-
uct requests. Remember, we define value

here in terms of the companyÕs business

goals. This includes an understanding of
what the customers value but is primarily
focused on what is best for the company.
For example, the companyÕs goals might in-
clude increased revenue from new sales, rev-
enue at higher margin, increased market share
in a particular market, higher customer satis-
faction and customer referenceability, and a

clear functional differentiation with competi-
tive products.Without understanding the companyÕs
goals, product management cannot know
which constituencies are most important and
what to ask them. For example, prospective

and current customer constituencies might

figure differently in achieving the companyÕs

business goals. If increased revenue from new

sales is the goal, the current customer con-

stituency with enhancement requests is un-

likely to contribute much toward achieving

the goal. However, the prospective customer

constituency is very relevant to this goal in
terms of their desired features, platforms,

third-party interfaces, and so on. Ultimately,

the product manager must weigh the impor-
tance of each constituencyÕs input.
We define a feature levelÕs value as the rela-
tive likelihood that the appropriate target con-
stituencies will respond to that feature level in
a way that contributes to the companyÕs busi-

ness goals. In our case study, there was a clear

difference in value between two stakeholder
groups. One group would have accepted a

minimal software configurability feature level
at an earlier date in order to validate the prod-

uct concept, whereas another group de-
manded a higher level of configurability.
The value survey
We assess value by surveying constituen-
cies. The product manager collects value data
using survey techniques that include Web sur-

veys, targeted article surveys, key customer
and prospect interviews, industry analyst in-
terviews, win-and-loss reports in competitive
situations, and business process and value

chain modeling. The surveys evaluate relative
values of features and feature levels and trade-
offs between feature levels of different vectors.
In our case study, for example, the feature vec-

tors included one for device management and

another for a specific aspect of operations
management. We were interested in the rela-

tionship between these vectorsÕ feature levels
and, for example, the trade-offs constituencies
made between them.Several guides are available for creatinguseful surveys.7For our focus on identifyingNovember/December 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
39The productmanageridentifies thevalue to thecompany of theconstituenciesÕproductrequests. the respondentÕs relative value assignments,
we have found several basic question for-
mats useful:Quartile technique. Constituents rate andevenly distribute the relative values of fea-
tures and feature levels on a value scale.Minimum acceptable feature levels.
Re-spondent selects the minimum accept-

able level from a presented list.
Trade-off value of feature levels.
Surveydetermines relative values for two fea-
ture levels by presenting increments dif-
fering only by those feature levels.Preference rankings. Constituents rankcombinations of features, showing the
points at which the trade-off value

changes with increasing feature levels.Collecting the dataThe surveys must maximize the informa-tion yield from a small survey effort. Product
management can rarely get accurate infor-
mation from a large range of constituency
members, except for an existing product
with a large user base that can be polled
through Web surveys. Maximizing informa-

tion from a small sample requires carefully
selecting the surveyed population and adher-
ing to survey design principles.7The com-panyÕs business goals imply the relative im-

portance of constituencies, which guides the
choice of survey participants.Analyzing survey results
The survey analysis converts the valuepreferences expressed by respondents into as-
sessments of the value to the company of a
feature or feature level. Every preference ex-
pressed in a response might not have the same
value, because some constituencies carry
more weight. To arrive at values relevant for

the company, we begin by classifying the ex-

pressed value preferences. We then calculate

their contribution to the companyÕs goals.
First, we rank the features and levels. We
recommend that the features and feature levels
be split into four or five ranges of value. We

assign each response (defining a feature and a
level) to a range. (Confidentiality concerns
prevent us from providing ranking examples
from our case study here.) We then weight

each feature and level value recorded by the

importance of the constituency the responserepresents. Although this involves a numerical
calculation, the calculation is approximate. Fi-

nally, we divide the value to the company into

four or five ranges and allocate the weighted
feature and level values from the survey to the

company value ranges to achieve a featureÕs or

levelÕs value to the company.
Determining costIn general, product development manage-ment identifies the engineering effort for some
defined feature and feature level by applying
past experience along with more rigorous
software-effort or cost estimation techniques,
such as Cocomo and function point analysis.
We have successfully used a modified Delphi

technique, by which we ask each developer
on a team to independently provide effort es-
timations for each individual feature level. We

then bring the group together, compare re-

sponses, and facilitate a group consensus on
the estimates. We measure the resulting effort

estimate for feature levels in standard units
such as the person-week.For each feature, the scope of each costestimation is the incremental cost of moving
one level along the feature vectorÑthe effort
it takes to implement a level, given that the
previous level has already been imple-
mented. Making this estimate for each indi-
vidual feature level gives the product man-
ager greater control over the contents of
product increments. Because each estimate is
incremental, the estimate of what is neces-
sary to implement two or three feature levels

for a given feature will probably be inflated.
This occurs because additional engineering
might be necessary to refactor one levelÕs so-

lution to move on to the next level. (We

manage the overestimate later in the process;
it doesnÕt reduce the approachÕs value.)
Level estimates include the requiredrefactoring. Although it is often possible to
provide a simple implementation of a low

level for a feature, design and implementa-
tion complexity often increase at the higher

levels. As higher feature levels are imple-
mented, the existing implementations might

need rework. The existence of a clear state-

ment of levels in a feature vector format re-

duces the refactoring work without violat-
ing the agile processÕs focus on minimizing

the work required to achieve a level. Typi-

cally, a feature level has several possible

minimal implementations; knowing laterMaximizinginformationfrom a small
sample requirescarefullyselecting the surveyedpopulation andadhering tosurvey designprinciples.40IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2002 implementation goals can help show whichchoice will reduce future refactoring.
Examining the ROITo illustrate the use of the value and cost
analysis, Table 3 is an example feature level

value-rating table, showing costs and values
for three feature vectors: Component 1 soft-
ware configurability, operations tools, and a

hardware feature that bears directly on Com-
ponent 1Õs cost. Table 3Õs columns are

arranged from highest to lowest value; rows
are arranged in increasing cost. Each cell con-
tains the features whose value corresponds to
the column heading and whose effort corre-
sponds to the row heading. Table 3 also in-

cludes another reality of software product de-
velopmentÑcommitments the company has
made to specific customers. (To preserve con-

fidentiality, the actual contents of the cells do

not reflect the real values in the case study.)
The features and feature levels with thehighest ROI to the company are those in the
upper left-hand corner of the table, where

the highest value and lowest cost intersect.
The shading indicates the next features to
considerÑthose in cells nearest to the upper

left-hand corner.
Determining increments andschedulingTogether, a set of features and a level for
each of those features define a release incre-
ment. Each release increment is a candidate
for external release. We advocate defining

between two and six release increments be-
tween each external product release, de-

pending on the external-release calendar. At

the end of each incrementÕs internal devel-

opment and prior to any decision being
made about which increment will becomethe product release, it is important to reex-
amine the definitions of subsequent incre-
ments. Increments ensure that you have a
release candidate at any time, provided you
have completed the first increment.
Time is the principal determining factor
in how much goes into each release incre-

ment. Some Extreme Programming propo-

nents recommend two-week release incre-
ment intervals.3Richard Selby and MichaelCusumano report that Microsoft uses a tar-

get of six to eight weeks.
5The productÕs de-
ployment situation can also affect the choice
of increment interval. For example, ASP ap-
plicationsÕ rapid, regular release model al-
lows short increment intervals.The increment content itself, selected tobe consistent with the release objectives, de-
pends on several factors:Engineering ROI, shown using a table such
as Table 3
Development resource constraints im-
posed by any required staff specializationsThe need for a releasable product with
mutually consistent features and feature
levelsOther factors can also determine the in-crement size and contents. For example, in-
crements also allow the development of an

initial version of a product, which can reas-
sure investors and customers funding part
of the development. Early increments can
also serve as sales tools.Engineering must review release incrementdefinitions, as the increment might require
less effort than the sum of the feature level im-

plementation costs. This is because of the
overestimation that results from the estimates
referring to single feature levels in isolation.November/December 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
41Table 3Feature level value rating table exampleFeature values (the shading indicates the next features to consider)CostCommitmentsHighLow
LowÑone to two Component 1 software Operations tools: 
person-weeksconfigurability: replace allfeature level 2
MediumÑtwo to eightOperations tools: Component 1 softwareComponent 1 software

person-weeksfeature level 3configurability: component configurability: component
replacement with rollbackreplacement, no rollback
Medium-highÑeight toAvailability ofComponent 1 cost  

20 person-weekscritical components(maximum for minimal 
from at least twosystem) less than $
xsuppliers HighÑ20 to 50 person-weeks The short-term increment definitions are
more detailed than the definitions for the

longer-term increments; this is because the

content of future release increments is sub-
ject to revision as each release increment is
completed. Combined, the increment defini-

tions constructed for several increments
form the product development schedule.We have applied this incremental
planning approach in a variety of
commercial settings, rangingfrom start-up technology ventures to long-

lived product lines. Several key lessons

emerged during this experience.Defining product increments is only ofvalue if you preserve your ability to release
the product at any increment level, including
an increment level achieved early in the devel-
opment process. Version management tools

and practices are critical for this purpose. Once a release increment is selected as
the release candidate, tasks involving inte-
gration, final documentation, additional

testing, rollout preparedness, and release

readiness (alpha, beta, and so on) must be
completed. We advocate performing these

tasks only on the release candidateÑnot on
every single increment.A companyÕs product manager controls the
flow of information to personnel in externally
facing company roles, especially to those deal-
ing with prospective and current customers.
Thus, product management must control ex-
ternal expectations of the product and its re-
lease date. It is important to communicate
throughout the companyÑespecially with ex-

ternally facing personnelÑthe incremental
planning approach in use, including what in-

formation can and cannot be made public un-

til authorized by the product manager.
Our experience also suggests directionsfor important future work. We are investi-

gating the development of tools to supportand guide people through the underlyingproduct-planning framework. Clearly such a
product-planning toolset would have to be
well integrated with other complementary

software development tools, including proj-
ect management tools. Second, we are ex-

ploring improvements to the techniques we

have developed for feature level cost and
value analyses, as the accuracy of these
analyses affects the results of our approach.
As we expand our use of the technique, we

will incorporate additional principles for per-
forming these analyses. In addition, points of
integration between our product-planning
framework and the product development
process bear further exploration.Finally, we are exploring ways to more ef-
fectively leverage the work of the conjoint

analysis field in evaluating feature and fea-
ture level values.8Conjoint analysis is cur-rently used to analyze preferences for con-
sumer goods. For example, the technique can
illustrate the threshold where a customer will

cease to pay additional amounts for increases
in performance. We have used this technique,

and it yielded useful information on trade-

offs between levels for different features. AcknowledgmentsWe thank the 
IEEE Software reviewers and editorsand Kevin Hickey for their many helpful comments.References1.A.K. Gupta and D.L. Wilemon, ÒAccelerating the De-
velopment of Technology-Based New Products,Ó 
Calif.Management Rev.,
vol. 32, no. 2, Winter 1990, pp.
24Ð44.2.E. Raymond, 
The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musingson Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolu-
tionary,
OÕReilly Press, Sebastopol, Calif., 1999.
3.M. Fowler and J. Highsmith, ÒThe Agile Manifesto,Ó 
Soft-ware Development,vol. 9, no. 8, Aug. 2001, pp. 28Ð32.
4.K. Wiegers, ÒFirst Things First: Prioritizing Require-
ments,Ó Software Development,vol. 7, no. 9, Sept.1999, pp. 48Ð53.5.M. Cusumano and R. Selby, 
Microsoft Secrets: How theWorldÕs Most Powerful Software Company Creates

Technology, Shapes Markets and Manages People,
FreePress, New York, 1995.
6.D. Parnas and P. Clements, ÒA Rational Design Process:
How and Why to Fake It,Ó IEEE Trans. Software Eng.
,vol. SE-12, no. 2, Feb. 1986, pp. 251Ð257.7.F. Fowler, 
Improving Survey Questions: Design and Eval-uation,Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, Calif., 1995.8.A. Gustafsson, A. Herrmann, and F. Hubers, eds., 
Con-joint Measurement: Methods andApplications,
2nd ed.,Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2001. 
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
42IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2002About the AuthorsBrian A. Nejmehis the founder of Instep (www.instep.com), a product strategy firm,
and a faculty member in the School of Mathematics, Engineering, and Business at Messiah Col-
lege. InstepÕs offices are located in northern Virginia and suburban Philadelphia. His research

interests include software product strategy, product planning, process modeling, and software

engineering. He holds a BS from Allegheny College and an MS from Purdue University, both in

computer science. Contact him at nejmeh@instep.com.Ian Thomasis a consultant specializing in product planning and product management and their relationships withengineering processes and architectures. He has published in the fields of development environments and software
processes. He has a BS from the University of Wales and an MS from London University. Contact him at ithomas@

ix.netcom.com.