 26IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEBeyond mere participation, ownership
implies Direct benefit from increases in value or
generated incomePride in appearance, achievement, and
improvementResponsibility for problems, flaws, or
routine maintenanceCommitment to long-term involvementPotential for successful resale (reuse)Applying these general statements to soft-ware artifact ownership is straightforward
to describe (but difficult to achieve). Devel-

opers have specific responsibility for the
quality, improvement, and appearance of

software system or subsystem artifacts in-
cluding source code, design models, docu-
mentation, and test plans. I consider four models for software sys-tem ownershipÑthat is, models for assign-
ing software systems to their human owners:1.Product specialist: A single individualmanages all code with occasional help
from other individuals.
2.Subsystem ownership: Each subsystemhas a specific owner, and each team

member owns one or more subsystems.
3.Chief architect: A chief programmer (ar-
chitect) has primary ownership of all
code. The team takes supporting roles in

fleshing out the team leaderÕs vision.
4.Collective ownership: All code is collec-
tively owned. Schedules and responsibil-
ities are set such that every team member

has a chance to contribute to every sub-
system and is free to work across subsys-

tems as needed.Over the years, I have seen each modelpracticed without being labeled, and each
worked well under the appropriate circum-
stances. However, for medium to large proj-

ects, I propose that the right model is not one

but all four: vary the ownership model over
the lifetime of a typical project just as you di-
vide a project into phasesÑfor example, in
the Unified Process. In fact, the four owner-

ship modelsÕ strengths and weaknesses match

the needs of the four Unified Process phases.

Furthermore, dynamically assigned owner-
ship can help balance a projectÕs needs for
focusManaging Code OwnershipMartin E. Nordberg III,
Blueprint Technologies
Code ownership ismore than simply
assigning
subsystems to
individuals or
subteams.
Companies can
creatively vary code
ownership over the
life of a system to
meet a software

development
projectÕs evolving
needs. This article is about ownershipÑownership of source code andother software artifacts that contribute to a software system dur-

ing its development. To speak of code ownership is to trigger a

variety of emotions in experienced developersÑboth disgust forwhen ownership failed to happen and pride for when it did. process
 communication, productivity, and accounta-
bility against its needs for single-minded vi-

sion, maintainable product quality, and man-

ageable complexity. 
Models of code ownershipBefore I discuss the four models in detail,
let me explain non-ownership. This is when

a system and its subsystems have no own-
ersÑeveryone changes anything with mini-
mal accountability for system quality or

team communication. This is the norm for

too many software projects. Non-ownershipÕs symptoms in software
development are Poor or missing documentationSource code that is unreadable due to
mixtures of unconventional styles Inconsistencies in user interface designsLong cycles of bug fixing, where the
same bugs seem to return repeatedly
Continuously slipping schedules with no
clear causesTeams with high turnover, poor commu-

nication, and undisciplined work habitsThere is no single fix for all these problems(just as they have no single cause), but one
tool in the development managerÕs toolbox

is the concept of managed, intentional code
ownership. (By Òcode,Ó I mean not only the
source code but also all the artifacts that go
into defining, building, testing, and deploy-ing a system.)The four ownership models I present differ
in how they grant one or more developers
ownership of a system or subsystem (see Fig-
ure 1). The most common ownership model
of the four (when there is any ownership) is
subsystem ownership. Each developer takes
primary responsibility for one or more sub-
systems. The product specialist and chief ar-
chitect models grant ownership of an entire
system to a single individual. In the latter
case, several other developers contribute pe-
ripheral efforts. The last model, collective
ownership, is a cornerstone of the newly pop-
ular development methodology, Extreme Pro-

gramming.1Collective ownership maps theentire team to the entire system.
Product specialistIf a project is small enough for one indi-vidual to complete it in time to meet its busi-
ness goals, then the product specialist model
might be the best choice. The communica-
tion overhead to add even a second devel-
oper to a project can be significant. (Con-
sider, however, the XP practice of pair

programming on a truly two-person project,
especially during system design and architec-
tural definition.) Many software develop-
ment organizations produce small products
with lone developers and never suffer the
overhead of large, dispersed teams. I haveMarch/April 2003
IEEE SOFTWARE
27DeveloperSystemChiefarchitectSystemAssistant11..*DeveloperSystem1DeveloperSystem1Subsystem11..*1Subsystem11..*1..*1..*1..*(a)(b)
(c)(d)
ownsownsownsownsowns1Product specialistSubsystem ownership
Chief architectCollective ownership
111Thisrelationshipis missingin codenon-ownershipFigure 1. The fourmodels of code 
ownership: (a) 
product specialist;
(b) subsystem 
ownership; (c) chief
architect; and (d)
collective ownership. seen this approach applied most successfullyon projects with technical complexity rather
than size complexity.
The product specialist modelÕs advantages
areA single key developer might be more
effective in carrying out all tasks consis-

tently and to completion.
Low communication overhead is re-
quired. External communications occur
through a single channel.A clear and single-minded vision is easy
to achieve.Iterative, incremental development is
straightforward.This modelÕs disadvantages are
It might be necessary to trade overalldevelopment time for development 
efficiency.
The system will have a low 
truck num-berÑonly one developer need be hit bya truck to kill the project.
Rogue individuals might ÒownÓ their code
to the exclusion of organizational goals.The biggest downside to having only onedeveloper per project is fairly obvious: the
size of system that one individual can man-

age is severely limited.Subsystem ownershipMany teams grow from single-developer-
sized systems to larger systems, divided into
subsystems owned by the former product
specialists. An unfortunate detour through
code non-ownership is common. Once sub-
systems are defined well enough to assign
owners, each is given to a single developer
to implement according to interfaces negoti-

ated with the owners of other nearby sub-
systems. The result is much less chaotic than

non-ownership.Subsystem ownership has several advan-tages:It ensures a consistent philosophy, vi-

sion, and style for each subsystem.It can easily assign responsibility for
tasks and problems.The opportunity for specialization is
significant.Scalability to larger projects is easiest.Its disadvantages includeGreater effort must be spent on commu-nication to define interfaces between

subsystems.There is still a low truck number per sub-
system; the cost of turnover can be high
because concentrated knowledge is lost.The overall system might be only as
strong as its weakest subsystem and
therefore only as good as what the weak-
est team member can produce.A subsystem ownership model requiresstable subsystem interfaces. Therefore,
changes across subsystems are slowed by a

combination of meetings, negotiation, and
formal change requests. A danger of strongly
enforced subsystem ownership is ConwayÕs

Law: that a systemÕs architecture will mimic

the structure of the organization that built it
(see the ÒConwayÕs LawÓ sidebar).
Chief architectThe surgical team model Harlan Mills2and Terry Baker
3articulated and FredBrooks summarized in The Mythical Man-Month4has seen only modest use since itwas proposed three decades ago. This is a
shame because the advantages of a chief
programmer-centered team are significant.

Focus on the system as a whole leads to con-

sistency, single-minded purpose, opportuni-

ties for global rather than local optimiza-
tions, and conciseness in representing and
communicating the system to others.
Today BrooksÕ surgeon is more likely to
go by the name I have used: chief architect.
A chief architect is an experienced developer
who is competent from requirements to test-
ing and has full responsibility for an entire sys-
tem. He or she concentrates on a systemÕs ar-

chitectureÑtaking a Òbig-chunkÓ view of the
system as a wholeÑreviewing its layers, pack-
ages, components, third-party libraries, and
system services. The proper role of a hands-
on software architect is to define subsystems

and their interfaces, create proof-of-principle
evolutionary prototypes, and demonstrate
common architectural mechanisms or pat-
terns from design through sample code.
This modelÕs advantages are 
Developers follow a consistent philoso-

phy, vision, and style, and the chief ar-
28IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
A chiefarchitect is anexperienceddeveloper who iscompetent fromrequirements to testing and has fullresponsibilityfor an entiresystem. chitect introduces and directs changesover time with predictable effect.
Centralized knowledge reduces commu-
nication overheadÑcommunication is
mostly one to many rather than many to
many.
It better matches wide differences in de-

veloper skill.Opportunities for leadership and men-
toring arise naturally.
The disadvantages are thatThe system truck number remains low.
Assembling a team willing to support asingle key individual is difficult.Achieving scalability to larger projects
(more than eight people) is difficult.
BrooksÕ solution to the scalability problem isto begin a systemÕs specification with an archi-

tect-led team before divvying each piece out to

similarly organized programming teams. Collective ownershipThe basis of collective code ownership isthat any developer can modify any subsystem.
The difference between this and non-owner-
ship is that team members ensure the integrity
of the system as a whole as they make modi-
fications. They write code within a common
architecture with a common style and high

quality to achieve a common purpose. Collec-
tive ownership is a lofty goal embodying al-
truism, positive team dynamics, good com-
munication, and individual accountability.
Collective ownership is infeasible withoutseveral other XP practices related to source
code quality during system implementation: Continuous integration100 percent unit testingStrong coding style guidelines (see the
ÒHomeownersÕ AssociationsÓ sidebar)The practice of pair programming, also cen-tral to XP, might be another prerequisite.

Certainly, frequent team member interac-

tions and peer review are critical. Note that
collective ownership is not merely permis-
sion to make widespread changes so long as
they adhere to established architecture and
style. It requires such practices because team
members frequently rotate to new assign-

ments (two- to three-week iterations in XP). 
On the positive side, collective ownershipAutomatically distributes communicationoverhead over time and functionality.
Encourages greater team interaction, co-

hesiveness, and creativity.
Requires and enforces a consistent style
and philosophy across the system. Code
sharing or reuse is more likely than with

subsystem ownership.Easily handles both team growth and
shrinkage.March/April 2003
IEEE SOFTWARE
29ConwayÕs Law is what happens when a team practices subsystem owner-
ship at the beginning rather than at the end of a project. ConwayÕs Law

states that a systemÕs architecture will mimic the organization that built itÑin

other words, if you have four groups working on a compiler, youÕll get a

four-pass compiler.
1Ð3The problem with succumbing to ConwayÕs Law is that old development-
team communication patterns might not be the best choice for new software

subsystem communication patterns. ItÕs tempting to personify software and

say, Òthe view layer talks to the model layer (just like I talk to Mike down the

hall),Ó but the real reasons for separating model from view are technical.
For example, the view layer is generally more platform specific, is more

likely to change, and requires different kinds of testing. It is, however, too

easy to find user interfacespecialists and business logic specialists rather

than programmers or architects who understand how to structure a model to
purposely anticipate view layer changes or how to make best use of both
automated user interface testing and semi-automated low-level unit testing.
Another problem is that layers or subsystems are only one way to slice a
software systemÑand not usually the best way from a project management
and scheduling perspective. Schedules and business value are typically
measured in functionality, use cases, or features. These are generally or-

thogonal to subsystems, layers, classes, or other lines of modularity. Teams

with responsibilities distributed by subsystem are likely to require higher

communication overhead to complete any given user feature because each

feature crosses several layers.The reasons ConwayÕs Law is so powerful are not to be ignored. The sta-
bility of subsystems, the opportunity for specialization, and the establish-

ment of developer communication habits are all positive effects. The trick is

to get the architecture before the organization. Better yet, wait until the sec-
ond or third revision of the architecture before freezing it in the organiza-
tion. Let your team settle into one developer per subsystem by a projectÕs

end, but donÕt divide up by horizontal layers until significant vertical slices

have been completed. DonÕt stabilize organizations until subsystems really

are stable. And keep communication channels open and dispersed for as
long as you can. With luck, youÕll produce a focused team rather than
merely coordinate a group of specialists.References1. F. Brooks, 
The Mythical Man-Month, anniversary ed., Addison-Wesley, Boston, 1995.
2. M.E. Conway, ÒHow Do Committees Invent?Ó 
Datamation, vol. 14, no. 4, Apr. 1968, pp.
28Ð31. 3. J. Coplien, ÒOrganization and Architecture,Ó 1999 CHOOSE Forum on Object-Oriented
Software Architecture, 1999; www1.bell-labs.com/user/cope/Talks/Arch/CHOOSE99/.
ConwayÕs Law Rapidly and effectively responds to in-cremental or changing requirements.Its disadvantages are An unorthodox organizational andscheduling model might be difficult to
establish and manage.Responsibility for tasks or problems
might be difficult to establish.Scalability is limited to 10 to 15 devel-
opers.There is the potential for ÒBrownian mo-
tionÓ in the codeÑrepeated changes ac-cording to differing personal styles.The system might be missing an overall

skeleton or architectureÑan initial di-
rection and unity of purpose might be
difficult to achieve.
Dynamic code ownershipBecause each model has different strengths
and weaknesses, the short answer to the ques-
tion, ÒWhich should we choose?Ó is Òall of
them.Ó Consider a project in terms of phases

from the iterative Unified Process:5Inception,Elaboration, Construction, and Transition.

During Inception, the main goal is to gather
requirements and define the process for build-
ing the product. During Elaboration, goals in-
clude risk reduction, evolutionary and ex-
ploratory prototyping, and the establishment
of system patterns, metaphors, mechanisms,
and skeletal structure. Construction focuses
on programming to complete functionality,

and Transition proceeds through final testing,

deployment, and release. You can address these changing needs by
intentionally changing the system owner-
ship model over its lifetime. In the early

stages, use the product specialist model and
select an individual (often called a product
manager) to articulate the vision for a new

or revised system. The product manager de-
velops the systemÕs business case, high-level

features, and core requirements. This indi-

vidual increasingly accepts the assistance of
systems analysts to gather the requirements
but remains the projectÕs sole proprietor un-

til those requirements begin to fill in. 
As the system definition grows too big
for one individual, shift to a chief architect
model. The architect might initially help ex-
pand the requirements but should soon turn
his or her attention to whole system design.

A small and growing team around the ar-
chitect performs experiments directed at re-

ducing unknowns in the system, prototyp-
ing user interfaces, establishing the tools
and environment, and performing the plan-
ning and process engineering needed to put
the project on a fast track. Once the architecture is well defined, the
number of developers usually increases to fit
the amount of work to be done. Here is the

opportunity to practice collective ownership
to propagate the established architecture to
a growing team of programmers. The ad-
30IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
Coding style guidelines are to code ownership much as homeownersÕ as-sociations are to home ownershipÑboth a boon to neighborhood quality
and a potential detriment to individuality. A suburban homeownersÕ associa-

tion that can enforce a consistent quality of appearance and upkeep can re-
sult in a neighborhood with an improved sense of identity as a whole. The
sports car fanatic at the end of the block is prevented from rebuilding his

relic in the middle of the front yard, and the elderly lady with a green thumb
next door happily shares her divided perennials with everyone on the street.  
ItÕs the same with coding style guidelines. The C++ macro maniac is pre-
vented from littering his code with strange preprocessor tricks, while the

team-oriented engineer who designs a reusable hardware access layer is

encouraged to write a usage guide as a supplement to the organizationÕs

style guidelines. Coding guidelines are an emotional topic (just like sports cars). Develop-
ers complain about picayune syntax details (the braces are never in the

right place) and the loss of creativity. However, picture the house across the

street painted ÒcreativeÓ pink with white trim and candy red shutters. In iso-
lation, itÕs a cute little house. In a beige and brown neighborhood, itÕs at

best an amusing anachronism. Most developers who have lived in a neighborhood or two have seen
code that could be described as Òat best an amusing anachronism.Ó A

good coding style guideline is the objective measure for avoiding software
inconsistency. It takes effort to draft (and regularly redraft) a programming

guide that goes beyond brace placement and parameter naming, that en-
courages quality of both appearance and execution, and that is tailored to
a specific team and projectÕs needs. 
Here is some advice to definers of coding style: before defining the cod-
ing style, first define the organizational style. Define the individuality of the
team before surrendering the individuality of its members. If everyone in a

neighborhood likes to rebuild sports cars on the front lawn, then a home-

ownersÕ association could actually encourage them and make the neighbor-
hood a better place by building a sense of sports car community. Write

your coding style to match and sustain your team building style.DonÕt ignore the effort needed to review code against the guideline.
Whether itÕs through pair programming or formal inspections, the discussion

must go beyond naming conventions and macro usage to consider correct-

ness, adherence to the systemÕs overall architecture, suitability in compari-

son to alternatives, and long-term maintainability. The result is a neighbor-

hood with well-kept lawns (or happy sports car fans, as the case may be),

properly maintained homes, and positive relationships between neighbors.(By the way, the opening brace belongs on a new line.)
HomeownersÕ Associations vantages of collective ownership for rapidlyadding new features with minimal commu-

nication overhead directly support the Con-
struction phase goal of building a quality
system as rapidly as possible. Finally, once subsystems are deemed sta-
ble (as Construction approaches the Transi-

tion phase), assign specific owners to final-
ize them and to control their changes in a

projectÕs last stages.
Figure 2 shows the transition in codeownership over time superimposed on the
development phases and their goals. Note
that the ownership transitions do not occur
overnight. This is possible because of chang-
ing team size. For example, the transition

from lone product specialist to chief archi-
tect near the end of Inception occurs over
time. The product specialist retains owner-
ship over the requirements documents while
the newly added chief architect and a grow-
ing team of developers take ownership of

design models, prototypes, and associated
development tools. Next, as Elaboration
nears its end, newly added programmers
take collective ownership of existing subsys-
tems while the chief architect retains owner-

ship of still-to-be-added subsystems and key
interfaces. Moving into Transition, the team

ideally shrinks and remaining team mem-

bers take specific responsibility for the final
polishing of nearly completed subsystems.Figure 3 shows the variation of team sizeover a projectÕs lifetime. This diagramÕs front

half is familiar. Many projects rapidly add

developers when racing toward the deadline.
Fewer projects take advantage of the bene-
fits that the back half of the diagram implies.
A planned shrinkage of the team with a co-
incident increase in subsystem ownership re-
sults in a software system that stabilizes
prior to its release, exactly what is needed to
Òget it out the door.Ó
How can a project benefit from both theramp up and ramp down without high staff
turnover or idle developers? Figure 4 con-

tains one answer. Divide the overall team into

two parts assigned either to different prod-

ucts or different releases of the same product.

With this approach, once a chief architect has

given up a benevolent dictatorship to a col-
lective republic of programmers, it is pre-

cisely the time to take up the same role on the

next release or a new initiative. A continually

remixing pool of programmers gives up old

subsystem ownership for new system collec-

tive ownership, then repeats the cycle. 
A beneficial effect of this approach forlong-established organizations is that a team
is not reassigned en masse to a new project or
new release. Each new effort starts small with
a uniform vision and precisely crafted architec-
ture. There is no possibility of design by com-

mittee, Òsort of like we did the last project.ÓThis solution to the problem of varyingstaff size is not without its own problems.
Even partly overlapping normally sequential
releases leads to greater risk, lower feedback,
and potentially conflicting aims within the
two halves of the whole team. Another diffi-
culty is matching the duration of release cy-
cles to sustain the pattern of Figure 4 over
more than two cycles. This is even more diffi-March/April 2003
IEEE SOFTWARE
31InceptionElaborationConstructionTransition
ProductspecialistChiefarchitectCollectiveownershipSubsystemownershipVisionDevelopment phaseCode ownership modelPhase goalArchitectureFunctionality
StabilityFigure 2. Vary the
code ownership
model over the
phases of a project
to fit each phaseÕs
purpose.TimeInceptionElaborationConstructionTransition
ProductspecialistChiefarchitectCollectiveownershipSubsystemownershipNumber of team membersFigure 3. Ramp teamsize both up and
down to best match 
a projectÕs phases. cult when different products must be matchedin life cycle. It takes extra management to
shift features between releases to not only
meet deadlines but also to synchronize dead-
lines between projects or project phases.Scalable code ownershipWhat if a system grows so large that to-
dayÕs subsystem is tomorrowÕs whole sys-

tem? The developer who is assigned owner-
ship of a release 1 subsystem might well

become the lone caretaker of that subsys-
tem-turned-system in release 2. Figure 5

shows starting a whole new development

and code ownership cycle out of each sub-
system heading into a second release. With

a sufficiently skilled and growing team, this
model could be sustained for several re-
leases. Note that ÒreleasesÓ might be evolu-
tionary milestones on the way from a proof-

of-principle prototype to a large finishedsystem. In fact, the dynamic code ownershipmodel might be best suited to projects that

are not only iterative but also incremental. For a modest-sized system, Figure 4Õs re-
source-leveling scheme is easier to adjust with
shorter and smaller release increments. Small
release increments also make it easier to ad-
just the subsystem-to-system growth model to
match actual growth in team size. On the

other hand, the increments must be large
enough to justify dynamic code ownership in
the first place. There is much room for skilled
software engineering management.The evidence for this approachÕs viability,
as with too many aspects of software engi-
neering, lies in the negative examples. I have
been a secondary participant in a multimil-
lion-dollar failure that I attribute largely to a
lack of ownership. The project had a require-
ments set and an architecture that seemed suf-

ficient to make it successful, but too many32IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
ProductspecialistChiefarchitectCollectiveownershipSubsystemownershipProduct BProduct C. . FixedoverallteamsizeProductspecialistChiefarchitectCollectiveownershipSubsystemownershipNumber of team membersTimeInceptionElaborationConstructionTransition
Product AInceptionElaborationConstructionTransition
. . .. . .Figure 4. Scheduleparallel projects that
ramp up and down 
to maintain a total 
overall team size.. . ProductspecialistChiefarchitectCollectiveownershipNumber of team membersTimeInceptionElaborationConstructionTransition
System AInceptionElaborationConstructionTransition
Subsystem A1Release 1Release 2Subsystemownership. . .Figure 5. Grow alarge system by

treating each 
subsystem as a 
separate system in
subsequent release
cycles. team members took too little ownership of
realizing the design in a high-quality, incre-

mentally delivered, working system. The
team moved from non-ownership to half-

hearted subsystem ownership, never achiev-
ing a cohesive whole-system vision. Worse

still, the project ignored the implications

shown in Figure 5 and attempted to jump

from a two-person-year stopgap prototype
to a complex 50-person-year final system
without first releasing a working 10-person-
year intermediate system.You might have experienced an un-
happy project or two in your own
past. Would attention to code own-
ership, dynamically adjusted over the pro-
jectÕs life, have made a difference? There are,

of course, myriad factors that contribute to
successful software development projects.6 Ihave offered one area where there is room
for improvement. Dynamic code ownership
might well put your team on track to deliver
high-quality software systems.References1. K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2000.
2. H. Mills, ÒChief Programmer Teams, Principles, and Pro-
cedures,Ó IBM Federal Systems Division Report FSC 71-

5108, IBM, Gaithersburg, Md., 1971.3. T. Baker, ÒChief Programmer Team Management of Pro-
duction Programming,Ó IBM Systems J., vol. 11, no. 1,Jan. 1972, pp. 56Ð73. 4. F. Brooks, 
The Mythical Man-Month, anniversary ed., Ad-
dison-Wesley, Boston, 1995.
5. I. Jacobson, G. Booch, and J. Rumbaugh, 
The Unified Soft-ware Development Process, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 1999.
6. R.H. Thayer, ed., 
Software Engineering Project Manage-ment, 2nd ed., IEEE CS Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 1997.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
March/April 2003
IEEE SOFTWARE
33About the AuthorMartin E. Nordberg III
is a senior software architect working as a consultant with Blue-print Technologies. His career has steadily moved from software that is technically complex (com-

putational fluid mechanics) to software that is organizationally complex (large distributed informa-
tion systems). His interests include programming language details, object-oriented analysis and
design, design patterns, software architecture, and the ripening field of aspect-oriented program-

ming and design. He received his BS and MBA degrees from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and
his PhD in chemical engineering from the University of Massachusetts. Contact him at Blueprint
Technologies, 8618 Westwood Center Dr., Ste. 310, Vienna, VA 22182; martin.nordberg@acm.org.













