 0740-7459/06/$20.00 © 2006 IEEEMarch/April 2006
IEEE SOFTWARE
47focusemphasizing document production. But many
elements make up a successful development

approach, including process, product, technol-

ogy, people, and tools. Software architecture is

part of product quality and isnÕt tied to a par-

ticular process, technology, culture, or tool.
For the past 10 years, the Software Archi-tecture Technology Initiative at Carnegie Mel-

lon UniversityÕs Software Engineering Institute

has developed and promulgated a series of ar-
chitecture-centric methods for architecture de-
sign and analysis. These methods are now at
the point where the SEI is fitting them into

popular software development processes. This

article explores the relationship and synergies
between architecture-centric design and analy-

sis methods and the Extreme Programming
framework.1We chose to focus on XP because
itÕs one of the most mature and best-known

agile practices. (For further information on ag-
ile methods, see the ÒRelated Work on Agile

ApproachesÓ sidebar on page 48.)Software architecture and XPIn the XP development model (see figure 1a),the customer records the required system func-
tionality at the beginning of each development it-
eration in the form of user stories. During plan-
ning, the customer and developers determine
what functionality to develop for the current it-

eration. User stories also contain descriptions of

test situations. The customer and development
team derive these tests from the specifications.

The developers design the programming inter-
face to match the testsÕ needs, and they write the
code to match the tests and the interface. They
refine the design to match the codeÕs needs.
The design that emerges is a product of the
relevant user stories that have been identified.
But the architecture depends, for its shape and

quality, on the development teamÕs experience.

Architecture-centric activities (see figure 1b)
can inform and regularize the development
process by emphasizing quality attributes and
focusing early on architectural decisions.
Software Architecture-Centric Methods and Agile
DevelopmentThe agile software development paradigm and plan-driven ap-
proaches each have their strengths and shortcomings. The for-

mer emphasizes rapid, flexible development, while the latter em-
phasizes project and process infrastructure. Many practitioners,
particularly of agile methods, tend to view software architecture in light of

the plan-driven side of the spectrum. They think that architecture-centric

methods are too much work, equating them with high-ceremony processes 
software architecture
Robert L. Nord and James E. Tomayko, 
Software Engineering InstituteIncludingarchitecture-centric
design and analysis
methods in the
Extreme
Programming
framework helps
address quality
attributes in an
explicit, methodical,
engineering-
principled way.
 The Quality Attribute Workshop (QAW)
2can help the development team understand theproblem by eliciting quality attribute require-
ments in the form of scenarios. Basing the sce-
narios on business goals ensures that the de-

velopers address the right problems. The

Attribute-Driven Design (ADD) method
3de-fines a software architecture by basing the de-
sign process on the prioritized quality attri-
bute scenarios that the software must fulfill. It
helps identify the most important things to do

to ensure that the design is on track to meet-

ing key quality attribute concerns and deliver-
ing value to the customer. The Architecture

Trade-off Analysis Method (ATAM)
4andCost-Benefit Analysis Method (CBAM)3pro-vide detailed guidance on analyzing the designand getting early feedback on risks. The devel-opment team can use incremental design prac-
tices to develop a detailed design and imple-
mentation from the architecture. Architectural
conformance and reconstruction techniques
ensure consistency between the architecture
and implementation.These SEI methods can enhance XP prac-tices. Using these methods results in an archi-
tecture-centric approach: architecture connects
business goals to the implementation, quality
attributes inform the design, and architecture-
centric activities drive the software system life
cycle. These methods make developing soft-
ware easier and more consistent. Although de-

signing the architecture is integral to the ap-
proach, the level of detail can be flexible.48IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Recent work shows how you can use architecture-centric ac-tivities to balance agile and plan-driven approaches, exploiting
their strengths while compensating for their weaknesses. In s
itu-ations where requirements change rapidly and an agile approach

is warranted, architectural concepts can enhance the process of
designing a system that will meet its requirements.Students participating in studio projects in the masters of soft-
ware engineering program at Carnegie Mellon University have

been using the Architecture-Centric Development Method,1whichuses concepts from the SEIÕs architecture-centric design and

analysis methods, in this way. When developing complex, large-

scale applications, many have reported that agile methods must

be adapted to include more kinds of architectural information.

We see evidence of this in the zero-feature release, the architec-

tural spike, 
and agile practices that recognize the architect role.Steve McConnell lists the evolutionary delivery life cycle as a
best practice.2Evolutionary delivery recognizes an architecture
activity and strikes a balance between the control a staged de-
livery life cycle offers and the flexibility of evolutionary proto-

typing. The degree to which it movesin 
one direction dependson the extent to which it accommodates customer change re-

quests. An emphasis on the system features visible to the customer
moves it in the direction of evolutionary prototyping, while an em-

phasis on the systemÕs core architecture (which customer feedback

is unlikely to change) moves it in the direction of staged delivery.
Alistair Cockburn uses three indices (communication load,
criticality, and project priorities) to characterize projects and

recognizes that different project characteristics need different

methods.
3He characterizes Extreme Programming (XP) as beingsuitable for projects with four to 14 people that have a criticality

where defects wonÕt cause loss of life. For larger projects, Cock-

burn recognizes the architect role.
Barry Boehm and Richard Turner use five dimensions affect-
ing method selection (personnel, dynamism, culture, size, andcriticality). They partition the dimension space into two home

groundsÑagile and plan-driven approachesÑwithin these di-
mensions, recognizing that hybrid approaches exist at the bound-

ary.
4They demonstrate a solution for adapting XP to developcomplex, large-scale applications by introducing elements of
plan-driven methods. These elements include high-level architec-
tural plans to provide essential big-picture information and us-
ing design patterns and architectural solutions rather than sim-

ple design to handle foreseeable change. Including architecture
in this way might also delay refactoring. However, investing in

architecture means that it will take longer to get to code, be-
cause the first iteration is what some people call a zero-featurerelease. In such a release, the architecture is in place, but theorganization doesnÕt deliver any user-visible features to the

customer.
Paul McMahon offers insights into extending agile approaches
to large, distributed projects by employing an agile architecture.
5With Don Procuniar and Dennis Rushing, he demonstrates this
approachÕs success in a case study.
6References1.A.J. Lattanze, 
The Architecture Centric Development Method
, tech. report CMU-
ISRI-05-103, Inst. for Software Research IntÕl, Carnegie Mellon Univ., 2005.
2.S. McConnell, 
Rapid Development: Taming Wild Software Schedules
, Mi-crosoft Press, 1996.3.A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development
, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
4.B. Boehm and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for thePerplexed, Addison-Wesley, 2004.
5.P.E. McMahon, ÒExtending Agile Methods: A Distributed Project and Orga-
nizational Improvement Perspective,Ó CrossTalk: The J. Defense Software
Eng., vol. 18, no. 5, May 2005, pp. 16Ð19.
6.D. Procuniar, P. McMahon, and D. Rushing, ÒA
VCATT
-A: A Case Study of a
Successful Collaborative Development Project,Ó Proc. 2001 Interservice/
Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conf.
(I/ITSEC), NatÕl DefenseIndustrial Assoc., 2001, pp. 920Ð930.Related Work on Agile Approaches
 Identifying requirements: The Quality Attribute Workshop
In an XP project, system analysts elicit,
capture, document, and analyze requirements.
After examining user stories at each iterationÕs

beginning, system analysts lead and coordi-
nate requirements elicitation and modeling by
outlining the systemÕs functionality and delim-

iting the system. The result is a specification of

details for the systemÕs functionality.
The QAW, held early in the development
process during XP story production, can help

show quality attribute requirements in the
form of scenarios. The QAW is a facilitated

method that engages system stakeholders early
in the life cycle to discover a software-inten-

sive systemÕs driving quality attribute require-

ments. The QAW is system-centric, focuses on

stakeholders, and occurs before the software
architectureÕs creation.
Quality attribute scenarios are much likeuser stories. Unless otherwise directed, stake-holders tend to focus on functionality, not on

quality attributes. The QAW provides an ex-

plicit method for gathering quality attribute
information in a six-part scenario format:
stimulus, source of the stimulus, artifact, envi-
ronment, response, and response measure.A QAW would be appropriate for an XP
projectÕs first iteration, helping identify key

quality attribute requirements. During a one-

day workshop, participants brainstorm and
refine a set of scenarios. Stakeholders attend-
ing the workshop include the on-site customer
and others with an interest in the systemÑfor

example, end users, maintainers, project man-
agers, development team members, testers,

and integrators. Facilitators who arenÕt stake-

holders act as QAW analysis team members.

In subsequent iterations, the developers can
collaborate with the on-site customer to elicit

and refine additional scenarios as needed.March/April 2006
IEEE SOFTWARE
49(a)(b)DesignImplementationABB pulls information from A
ABSynthesis of B from AEvaluation of B relative to A Test
SpecificationStoriesBusinessgoalsSpecificationArchitecture
Design andimplementationQuality attributescenariosViews and beyondQualityAttributeWorkshopAttribute-DrivenDesignArchitecturalconformanceArchitecture Trade-offAnalysis Methodand Cost-BenefitAnalysis MethodFigure 1. Developmentmodels: (a) Extreme
Programming and (b)
architecture-centric. This approach gives developers guidelinesfor being more precise about quality attributes.

It also enhances the planning and story-genera-
tion processes by emphasizing business goals,
stakeholders, and quality attributesÕ role in

shaping the architectural design. Business goals

are elicited and refinedduring the QAW. The

customer can use them to organize existing user

stories, inspire additional ones, or prioritize re-

quirements according to business needs. The

scenarios can help determine whatÕs within and

whatÕs outside the systemÕs scope and can lead

to the creation or refinement of a system con-

text diagram or its equivalent. Scenario genera-
tion can also lead to the creation of use cases.
The XP practice of using an on-site cus-
tomer is sometimes criticized. The idea is that
keeping the customer on-site speeds communi-
cation and provides a more accurate account-

ing of changed requirements. Opponents figure
that anyone the customer is willing to give up
as apermanent loan to the development group

is either junior level and lacking experience or

too technical. StakeholdersÕ points of view
arenÕt always easy to obtain; although on-site,

the customer is sometimes removed from
knowing end usersÕ and other stakeholdersÕ
needs. Gathering stakeholders during the QAW

complements the on-site customer that XP pre-

scribes. To be successful, the workshop must

gather a wide group of stakeholders from the

organization. The QAW engages those stake-

holders to discover and prioritize the quality at-

tributes. The workshop setting facilitates open

communication among the stakeholders and
provides a forum where they can discuss con-
flicts or trade-offs among the requirements.
In addition to these more immediate benefits,quality attribute scenarios continue to provide
benefits during later development phases. The
development team should keep stakeholdersÕ
concerns and any other rationale information
they capture in a format they can include in the
architecture documentationÑusually on a pub-
lic whiteboard. Stories provide input for analy-
sis throughout the systemÕs life and can drive the

systemÕs development.
Scenarios can also help the customer preparethe acceptance test suite that will grow with the
product. Typically, customers develop user sto-

ries for requirements and then work on accept-

ance test cases for the end of development.

Many customers donÕt know how to build these

test cases. The quality attribute scenarios can
give them information, if not encourage them
to build the test cases. This way of using the

scenarios fits in with XPÕs Òtest firstÓ or Òbuild

for the testÓ philosophy; test cases are available
to test whether or not the code implements the
requirements, early in the development process.
Early design: The ADD methodXP developers grow systems incrementally.
When a system doesnÕt support new function-

ality, they refactor the design. The first itera-

tion plays a crucial role in defining the sys-

temÕs overall structure, whether itÕs implicit

(the architecture emerges after implementing

the first round of stories) or explicit.
The ADD method focuses on something XPdevelopers often ignoreÑthe overall system
structure that the quality attributes shape. This
focus should occur in the first iteration and re-
cur in later iterations, as substantial changes to
the software architecture need to be explored.
The development team can keep the architec-
ture, quality attributes, and constraints on a
whiteboard in the workroom where everyone
can see it.ADD differs from XPÕs core practices be-
cause it emphasizes addressing quality attri-
bute requirements explicitly using architec-
tural tactics. The quality attributes shape the
architectureÕs structure, and functionality is al-

located to that structure. The architecture

helps localize the effects of design changes that

are caused by changing the functional require-
ments; the architecture is influenced by the

quality attribute requirements and isnÕt af-

fected by changing functional requirements.
The architecture represents the most impor-

tant design choices. Because this is the first ar-
ticulation of the architecture, itÕs necessarily

coarse grained. More detailed XP design ac-
tivities begin where ADD ends.ADD follows a recursive decomposition
process where, at each decomposition stage,
the development team chooses 
architecturaltacticsand patterns to satisfy a set of qualityattribute scenarios. An architectural tactic is a

means of satisfying a quality-attribute-response

measure (such as average latency or mean time

to failure) by manipulating some aspect of a

quality attribute model (such as performance-

queuing models or reliability Markov models)
through architectural design decisions. In this

way, tactics provide a Ògenerate and testÓ ar-

chitectural design model.50IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
The ADD methodfocuses onsomething XPdevelopersoften ignoreÑ
the overallsystemstructure thatthe qualityattributesshape.  The ADD method supports both a breadth-first and a depth-first decomposition approach
to design. The order of decomposition will vary

on the basis of the business context, domain

knowledge, and changing technology. For ex-

ample, ADD supports an XP approach by al-

lowing an initial breadth-first decomposition
for the first decomposition level, followed by
depth-first decompositions to explore the risks

associated with change through prototyping.
The ADD method creates and documents asoftware architecture using views. The proj-
ectÕs nature determines the viewsÑmost com-

monly, a module decomposition view, a con-

currency view, and/or a deployment view. The

ÒViews and BeyondÓ approach to document-

ing software architectures describes these
views.5It also describes a process for choosingappropriate views on the basis of stakehold-
ersÕ needs. These views allow the developers
greater flexibility and the opportunity to defer
making more detailed decisions until the
proper time. The module view fits XPÕs itera-

tive development quite well.
Early analysis: ATAM and CBAM
By this time, still early in the process, XP
practitioners will work on stories augmented
by scenarios and the architectures they devel-
oped following the ADD method. They can do

ATAM and CBAM right after this to track

technical and business risks early in the
process and to help prioritize stories for the
next release. The ATAM and CBAM help

practitioners understand how design decisions
they make while creating a complex system ar-

chitecture will interact.The ATAMÕs purpose is to assess architec-
tural decisionsÕ consequences in light of qual-
ity attribute requirements and business goals.

It helps stakeholders ask the right questions to
discover potentially problematic architectural

decisions. Developers can then make risks the
focus of mitigation activities, such as further
design and analysis and prototyping. They can
identify and document trade-offs explicitly.
The CBAM helps make the architectural de-
cision analysis performed during the ATAM

part of a strategic roadmap for software design
and evolution by associating priorities, costs,
and benefits with each architectural decision.The ATAM adds value by defining a step-
by-step architecture-evaluation approach that
produces risk themes and shows their impacton achieving business goals. The CBAM pro-vides more details on architecture decisionsÕ
business consequences, letting the develop-
ment team make informed choices among ar-

chitectural options.
ExampleTo understand how architecture concepts
and methods complement XP and address some

of its shortcomings, consider an automated

teller machine thatÕs part of a bank automation

system. The ATMÕs feature requirements are

those the customer desires and are part of the
XP user stories. However, other system quali-

ties are important in addition to its functional-

ity. For example, modifiability properties dic-

tate that the system must be easily changeable

so that the customer can exploit new platform

capabilities, and it must be extensible to let the

customer add new functions and business rules.
In addition, performance requirements specify

that ATM users must get a response from the

system in less than 10 seconds.
Through the QAW process, we would refine
vague requirements into several six-part scenar-

ios. For example, the following modifiability

scenarios would be typical of an ATM system:
A developer wants to add a new auditing
business rule at design time in 10 person-

days without affecting other functionality.
A system administrator wants to employ a
new database in 18 person-months with-
out affecting other functionality.
A developer needs to add a Web-based

client in 90 person-days without affecting
the existing ATM clientÕs functionality.
To achieve these requirements, XP empha-
sizes incremental design and relies on the ar-
chitectÕs experience and knowledge to create

the design. The ADD method provides more

details on how weÕll need to employ one or

more architectural tactics. In the case of mod-

ifiability, relevant architectural tactics include

Localize Changes and Use an Intermediary.

The Localize Changes tactic suggests that we
should localize the business rules, database,
and client into components. The Use an Inter-

mediary tactic suggests that we should sepa-
rate these components to insulate them from

each otherÕs potential changes. A three-tier

client-server model would emerge from apply-

ing the Localize Changes tactic; this architec-March/April 2006
IEEE SOFTWARE
51The ATAM
assessesarchitecturaldecisionsÕconsequencesin light ofquality attributerequirementsand businessgoals. ture allocates the client, database, and busi-ness rules to their own tiers, localizing the ef-

fects of any changes to a single tier. The Use an

Intermediary tactic suggests that an abstract
interface (such as a data access layer that uses
open database connectivity, or ODBC, be-

tween the business rules and the database) and
a translation layer between the business rules
and the client that understands the Extensible
Markup Language (XML) should mediate

communication between the tiers. Such inter-
mediaries simplify adding new databases or
clients. For example, they enable us to add a
Web-based client and server to the architec-

ture without affecting the ATM client.
To achieve the Ò10-second latency on a
withdrawalÓ requirement, we employ a differ-

ent set of architectural tactics. Because we canÕt

control resource demand with an ATM (or,

more precisely, because doing so would be bad

for business), we must look toward managing

or arbitrating resources to meet performance
goals. By employing the Introduce Concurrency

and Increase Available Resources tactics, we

can choose to deploy additional database
servers and business rule servers or to make any
of them multithreaded so that they can execute

multiple requests in parallel. Once we have

multiple resources, we need some way of arbi-

trating among them. So, we introduce a new

componentÑa load balancerÑthat employs a
resource arbitration tactic such as Fixed-Prior-

ity Scheduling or First-In First-Out Scheduling.

This component will ensure that the processing
load is distributed among the systemÕs resources

according to a chosen scheduling policy.
This leads us to the design in figure 2. Thisexample isnÕt to show a sophisticated architec-

tureÕs development in its entirety (clearly, we

must do more work to turn this into a com-
plete design specification for development), but
rather to emphasize how we arrived at the ar-chitecture. When usi
ng ADD, tactics and a
structured set of steps provide design guidance

for each tierÕs creation. In this way, we can cre-

ate each architectural structure via an engineer-
ing process that codifies experience and best

practices.Architectural decisions are complex and in-teract. For example, we must analyze the de-

gree to which changes in the database schema
will affect the business rules, Web server, or

client software. Each abstraction layer (XML
and ODBC) will mask some class of changes
and expose others. And each layer will impose
a performance cost. Similarly, adding a load-

balancing component will create additional
computation and communication overhead
but provide the ability to distribute the load
among a larger resource pool.We need a way to understand how design
decisions made during the creation of a com-

plex system architecture will interact. XP
doesnÕt address evaluating the design explic-

itly; code is tested continuously and offers
feedback to the design. The ATAM provides

software architects with a framework for un-

derstanding the technical trade-offs and risks
they face as they make architectural design de-

cisions. Additionally, the CBAM helps archi-

tects consider the return on investment of any

architectural decision and provides guidance
on the economic trade-offs involved.Summary
Table 1 illustrates how the software architec-
ture-centric concepts and methods complement
XP activities. Architecture-centric methods pro-
vide explicit and detailed guidance on eliciting
the architectural requirements, designing the ar-
chitecture, and analyzing the resulting design.Including SEI methods addresses quality at-tributes in an explicit, methodical, engineering-
principled way. Ar
chitecture-centric methods52IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
<<ODBC>><<XML>>DatabaseserverTransactionserver(business rules)LoadbalancerATM clientWeb clientWeb server(presentation)Figure 2. A deploymentview of a candidate 
architecture using UML
notation. use common conceptsÑquality attributes, ar-chitectural tactics, and a views-based approach
to documentationÑthat lead to more efficient
and synergistic use. They also help facilitate
communication.
WeÕve found that architecture-cen-
tric methods are built on concepts

and techniques that practitionerscan tailor to an agile approach. Architecture-
centric methods can add value to agile meth-
ods by emphasizing quality attributes and
their role in shaping the architectureÕs design

and by making it possible to adapt agile meth-
ods using a hybrid approach to handle larger,

more complex systems.
6AcknowledgmentsThe Software Engineering Institute is a federallyfunded research and development center sponsored by
the US Department of Defense. We thank our SEI col-

leagues Paul Clements, Rick Kazman, Mark Klein, and
Rob Wojcik for their insights and Amanda Bejot for

help with clarity.
References1.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley, 2005.
2.M.R. Barbacci et al., 
Quality Attribute Workshops
(QAWs)
, 3rd ed., tech. report CMU/SEI-2003-TR-016,Software Eng. Inst., Carnegie Mellon Univ., 2003;

www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/03.reports/

03tr016.html.3.L. Bass, P. Clements, and R. Kazman, 
Software Archi-tecture in Practice, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley, 2003.
4.P. Clements, R. Kazman, and M. Klein, 
Evaluating Soft-ware Architectures: Methods and Case Studies, Addi-son-Wesley, 2002.
5.P. Clements et al., 
Documenting Software Architectures:Views and Beyond
, Addison-Wesley, 2003.
6.R.L. Nord, J.E. Tomayko, and R. Wojcik, 
IntegratingSoftware-Architecture-Centric Methods into Extreme

Programming (XP), tech. report CMU/SEI-2004-TN-036, Software Eng. Inst., Carnegie Mellon Univ., 2004;

www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/04.reports/

04tn036.html.March/April 2006
IEEE SOFTWARE
53About the AuthorsRobert L. Nord
is a senior member of the technical staff in the Product Line Systems Program at the Software Engi-neering Institute, where he works to develop and communicate effective methods and practices for software architecture.
He received his PhD in computer science from Carnegie Mellon University. He is coauthor of 
Applied Software Architecture(Addison-Wesley, 1999) and 
Documenting Software Architectures: Views and Beyond (Addison-Wesley, 2002).HeÕs a
member of the ACM and International Federation for Information Processing Working Group 2.10 Software Architecture.

Contact him at the Software Eng. Inst., Carnegie Mellon Univ., 4500 Fifth Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890; rn@sei.cmu.

edu; www.sei.cmu.edu/staff/rn.
James E. Tomayko,recently deceased, was a teaching professor in Carnegie MellonUniversityÕs School of Computer Science and director emeritus of its Master of Software Engi-

neering program, as well as a visiting scientist at the Software Engineering Institute. He re-
ceived his PhD from the University of Kansas. He coauthored Human Aspects of Software Engi-neering (Charles River Media, 2004). See in memoriam on page 115.Table 1Extreme Programming and architecture-centric activitiesExtreme Programming Value added through software architecture-centric activities
activitiesPlanning and storiesBusiness goals determine quality attributes (using the Quality Attribute Workshop):
User stories are supplemented by quality attribute scenarios that capture stakeholdersÕ concerns regarding quality attribute requirements.Scenarios help stakeholders communicate quality attribute requirements to developers so that they can influence design. 
Scenario prioritization and refinement give the customer and developers additional information to help them choose stories 
for each iteration.During a one-day workshop, additional stakeholders supplement the on-site customer. Cost-effective methods facilitate 
interaction among a diverse group of stakeholders.DesigningQuality attributes drive design (using the Attribute-Driven Design Method):
A step-by-step approach to defining a software architecture supplements incremental design; the level of detail is flexible. 
Architecture allows better planning so that developers can better estimate requirement changesÕ impact. They can plan for 

change that is foreseen and localize it in the design.Developers do just enough architecting to ensure that the design will produce a system that will meet its quality attribute 

requirements and to mitigate risks. They defer all other architecture decisions until the appropriate time.
Architectural tactics aid refactoring, which is driven by quality attribute needs (such as making it faster or more secure).
Analysis and testingDesign analysis provides early feedback (using the Architecture Trade-off Analysis Method and Cost-Benefit 
Analysis Method):The development team can use scenarios to evaluate the design and provide input for analysis during testing.Architecture evaluation has a notion of triage to produce just enough information as needed and prioritizes on the basis of 
business importance and architectural difficulty to focus efforts.
Architecture evaluation provides early feedback for understanding the technical trade-offs, risks, and return on investment 

of architectural decisions. Risks are related back to technical decisions and business goals, giving developers justification
for investing resources to mitigate them.
