 80 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | PUBL
IS
HED BY TH
E IEEE COMPUT
ER SOC
IE
TY
 0740-7459/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
HENRY FORD™S ASSEMBLY-LINE 
production of the Model T inspired 
changes in the automotive industry, 
and the software industry has made nu
-merous attempts to apply similar ideas 
(for example, see the chapter, ﬁWill the 
Real Henry Ford of Software Please 

Stand Upﬂ in Robert L. Glass™s book).
1 While the assembly-line philosophy is 
well known, Ford™s approach to inno
-vation and the process that preceded 
the Model T™s production is less so. Be
-tween 1892 and the formation of the 

Ford Motor Company in 1903, while 
working mostly for the Edison Illumi
-nating Company, Ford built about 25 
cars. In the ˜ve years after the compa
-ny™s formation, he built and sold eight 
modelsŠModels A, B, C, F, K, N, R, 
and SŠ before settling on the Model T. 

He tested prototypes labeled with the 
11 missing letters. Ford summed up this 
experience this way:
2I do not believe in starting to make 
until I have discovered the best pos
-sible thing. This, of course, does not 

mean that a product should never be 

changed, but I think that it will be 
found more economical in the end 
not even to try to produce an article 

until you have fully satis˜ed yourself 
that utility, design, and material are 
the best. If your researches do not 

give you that con˜dence, then keep 
right on searching until you ˜nd con
-˜dence.... I spent twelve years before 
I had a Model T that suited me. We 
did not attempt to go into real pro
-duction until we had a real product.
Today™s automotive industry has 
changed signi˜cantly since Ford™s ini
-tial success, but some of his philoso
-phy behind innovation still remains. 
For example, Toyota™s ﬁnemawashiﬂ 

principle states that decisions should be 
implemented rapidly but made slowly, 
by consensus, and after considering all 

options.
3 Bill Buxton, who studied in
-novation in the automotive industry, 
noted that a new car™s design phase 
starts with a broad exploration that 

culminates in the construction of a full-

size clay model and costs over a quarter 
of a million dollars.
4 Only after bring
-ing the new concept to a high level of 

˜delity in terms of its form, business 
plan, and engineering plan does a proj
-Software 
Sketchifying: 

Bringing 

Innovation 

into Software 
Development
˜eljko Obrenovic´ ,
 Software Improvement Group
// 
Software sketchifying is a software development 
activity that stimulates spending more time generating 
and considering alternative ideas before making a 
decision to proceed with engineering. It™s supported 
by Sketchlet, a ˜exible tool that empowers both 
engineers and nonengineers to work with emerging 
technologies and explore their possibilities. 
//FEATURE:
 SOFTWARE 
TOOLS
  MAY/JUN
E 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 81ect get a ﬁgreen light.ﬂ After that, it 
typically takes a year of engineering be
-fore the project can go into production.
Inspired by general ideas about how 
the automotive industry brings innova
-tion into manufacturing, I developed 
software sketchifying as an activity to 
stimulate and support software stake
-holders to spend more time generating 

and considering alternative ideas before 
making a decision to proceed with en
-gineering. My view on software sketch
-ifying combines general ideas of sketch
-ing
4 and creativity support tools
5 with 
several existing software engineering 

approaches. To support and explore 
this view, I developed Sketchlet (http://

sketchlet.sourceforge.net), a ˚exible, 

Java-based tool that empowers engi
-neers and nonengineers to work with 

emerging software and hardware tech
-nologies, explore their possibilities, 

and create working examplesŠcalled 
sketchlets
Šthat incorporate these 
emerging technologies. 
Product 
Innovation and 
Software 
Engineering
Contrary to the automotive industry, 
the software industry has a rich his
-tory of engineering wrong products. Ill-

de˜ned system requirements and poor 

communication with users remain top 

factors that in˚uence software project 
failures.
6 Frederick Brooks also noted 
that the hardest single part of building 

a software system is deciding precisely 
what to build.
7 He proposed rapid sys
-tem prototyping and iterative require
-ments speci˜cation as a way to solve 

this problem. Many existing software 

engineering methodologies, including 

the Rational Uni˜ed Process, Extreme 
Programming, and other agile software 
development frameworks follow itera
-tive and incremental approaches. 
However, these approaches have 
limitations when it comes to true in
-novation. Although prototyping can let 

us cheaply represent and test our ideas, 
and iterative and incremental develop
-ment can help further re˜ne our ideas 
based on frequent user feedback, nei
-ther approach directly supports the 
generation of new product ideas, nor 
do they encourage the consideration of 

alternatives. 
Buxton went further in his critique 
of the innovation capacity of iterative, 

incremental software development, see
-ing no comparison between software 
product design and the development of 
new automobiles.
4 He argued that in
-novative software projects need at least 
a distinct design phase followed by a 
clear green-light process before pro
-ceeding to product engineering. He saw 

design and engineering as different ac
-tivities that employ different processes 

and for which people suited to one are 

typically not suited for the other.
Software 
Sketchifying
I built on Buxton™s suggestion by intro
-ducing software sketchifying into soft
-ware product development as a comple
-ment to prototyping and engineering. 

The sidebar presents a sketchifying ex
-ample scenario of how it might work 
in developing software systems for an 
automobile.
Software Sketchifying Approach 
One key characteristic of this approach 

is postponing the main development ac
-tivity for the bene˜t of free exploration, 

following a main principle of creativity: 
to generate a good idea, you must gen
-erate multiple ideas and then dispose 
of the bad ones.
1,4
 Another key char
-acteristic is stimulating early involve
-ment of nonengineers. Such users often 
have expertise that™s important for un
-derstanding customers and their needs. 

More speci˜cally, the example scenario 
in the sidebar illustrates several points 
about software sketchifying: 
The designer™s main activity is ex
-ploration, learning about a problem 

and potential solutions and answer
-ing a question about what to build.
Such explorative activity is heuris
-tic, creative, and based on trial and 

error, rather than incremental and 

iterative. The designer generates 
several ideas, most of which will 
be rejected. However, this process 

yields important lessons and stim
-ulates generation of novel ideas. 
These lessons and ideas are the ac
-tivity™s main outcome.
The exploration activity is not 
accidental, but disciplined and 
systematic. 
The exploration is holistic, enabling 
designers to re˚ect on relations 
among user issues, software and 
hardware possibilities, and the over
-all dynamics of human-computer 
interaction. The ideas in the exam
-ple scenario are in˚uenced not only 

by software but also by human fac
-tors and problems related to car me
-chanics and equipment.
The exploration enables early user 
Neither prototyping nor incremental 
development directly support the 
generation of new product ideas.
 82 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFEATURE:
 SOFTWARE 
TOOLS
A SKETC
HIFYING 
SCENARIO
Consider an example scenario with Mirko, an interaction de
-signer at a company that builds software for new generations of 
cars with advanced sensing and display technologies. Mirko has 
recently joined the company to explore ideas for software appli
-cations that exploit novel opportunities, such as using data from 
a car radar, GPS sensors, and links to Web services. 
Mirko™s ˜rst task is to explore two applications: a system for 
warning about the proximity of other cars and a system for pre
-senting news in idle situations, such as waiting for a traf˜c light. 
Mirko isn™t a programmer, nor is he familiar with all the technical 

possibilities of modern cars, but he uses a design environment 
through which he can access and explore software services and 
components related to his task without serious programming. 
To understand what™s possible, Mirko ˜rst talks with several 
of his company™s engineers. They advise him to start by using 

a car simulator, which provides a realistic but safe environment 

to learn about new automotive technologies. One engineer also 
writes a small adapter that connects the car simulator logger to 
Mirko™s design tool. This adaptation gives Mirko immediate ac
-cess through a simple spreadsheet-like interface to the simula
-tor dataŠsuch as the car™s speed and its distance from the car 

in front of it.
Mirko starts a design environment on his laptop and con
-nects it to the simulator. After becoming familiar with the simu
-lator™s possibilities, he turns to his laptop to create a few 
sketch
-lets
, which are simple interactive pieces of software.
PROXIMITY WARNING SY
STEM
To explore the options for implementing a proximity warning sys
-tem, Mirko ˜rst considers three presentation modes: graphical, 
audio, and haptic (vibration). For graphical presentation, he uses 
an editor in his design environment and creates several simple 

drawings. Then he opens the properties panel and connects the 
variables from the car simulator to the graphical properties of 
drawn regions. For example, he creates a sketchlet in which an 

image™s transparency dynamically changes as a function of the 
distance from the car in front of the driver. He then experiments 
with other graphical properties, such as image size, position, or 

orientation. He returns to the simulator and tries each alterna
-tive. He also invites a few colleagues to try out and comment on 

his ideas.
After exploring graphical options, he proceeds to create audio 
sketchlets. He ˜rst tries a MIDI-generator service and connects 

data coming from the sensor to MIDI note parameters, such as 
pitch or tone duration. He also experiments with a text-to-speech 

service, generating speech based on the conditions derived from 

car data. Finally, he explores using an MP3 player with pre
-recorded sounds. He then goes back to the simulator and tries 

these alternatives.
Mirko also wants to try a vibration modality to present naviga
-tion information, which the simulator doesn™t support. He decides 

to use a simple trick, starting an application on his mobile phone 

that lets his design environment control the phone™s resources, 
including its vibrator. Using gaffer tape, he ˜xes the mobile phone 
to the steering wheel and creates several sketchlets that map the 

distance from the car in front of
 him to vibration patterns. Marko 
knows it™s not a very elegant solution, but it lets him explore 

basic opportunities of this modality with available resources and 

little work.
NEWS
 PRE
SENTATION
Mirko also plays with some other options related to the applica
-tion for presenting news. He starts a Google news service in his 
design environment and creates a simple page that presents an 
HTML output of the news service. He then creates a condition for 

the page™s visibility so that the news appears as an overlay on 
part of the windshield, but only when the car™s speed is zero and 
the automobile is not in gear. He also experiments with speech 

services that let a user set a news search query by speech.
After ˜nishing his work in the lab, Mirko decides to collect 
some real-world experiences and try some of his more promis
-ing sketchlets in a real car. With help from engineers who are 
working on testing cars, Mirko gets an extension of his design 
environment that uses a Bluetooth connection to a test car™s on-

board diagnostic (OBD) system. With this addition, Mirko creates 
a simple setting using his smartphone as a presentation device, 
positioned under a windshield. He connects the smartphone to 

his laptop, which uses a simple remote desktop client to capture 
a part of a screen from his laptop. On the laptop, Mirko is run
-ning the sketchlets that he created in the lab and that are now 
connected to the car™s OBD system. He asks a colleague to drive 
the car while he observes a situation and videorecords a whole 
session for later analysis.
During the process, Mirko constantly interacts with other 
stakeholders, regularly presents his ˜ndings, and lets clients and 

colleagues try out some of his sketchlets. In this way, Mirko is 

helping develop new products by providing realistic and tested 
ideas before and outside the main development activity.
  MAY/JUN
E 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 83involvement through simple but 
functional pieces of software in the 
form of sketchlets.
Working with real systems, such 
as the car simulator, car diagnostic 

system, and Web services, lets a de
-signer learn about the possibilities 

and limitations of software technol
-ogies and create conceptual propos
-als that are more realistic.
Designers generally aren™t engineers 
who can program and extend their design 
environments. However, they™re part of a 
broader community of people who can 

help them learn and extend the explora
-tion space on an ad hoc basis. Sketchify
-ing supports this interaction without tak
-ing too much time, thereby empowering 

nonengineers to explore emerging tech
-nologies and to test their ideas without 
additional help from developers.
Software Sketchifying Tools
To support and explore this approach, 
Sketchlet combines elements from tra
-ditional sketching, software hacking, 

opportunistic software development, 

and end-user development. Sketchlet 

builds on the results of the Sketchify 
project (http://sketchify.sourceforge.
net), which explored possibilities to im
-prove early design stages and education 

of interaction designers.
8 Sketchlet has two main roles:
to enable designers to create a num
-ber of simple pieces of softwareŠ

sketchletsŠas a way to quickly and 
cheaply explore software and hard
-ware technologies and their poten
-tial applications, and
to support involvement of software 

engineers in short, ad hoc sessions 
that give designers realistic pieces 

of technologies that might be useful 
for design exploration. 
Sketchlet lets designers interact di
-rectly with software and hardware 
technologies through a simple, intuitive 
user interface. To simplify the integra
-tion with these technologies, Sketch
-let combines ideas from opportunistic 

software development with techniques 

used by hacking and mashup commu
-nities.
9,10
 A full description of Sketchlet 
is out of scope for this article. Two ap
-pendices containing more detail about 

how Sketchlet implements the sidebar™s 
example scenario are available on
-line at http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.
org/10.1109/MS.2012.71. I also en
-courage readers to download and try 
the tool for themselves.
Initial 
Sketchlet 
Applications and 
Results
I™ve developed and applied the ideas 
about software sketchifying in three 
projects that featured collaboration 
among software engineers, interaction 

designers, and researchers. In these 

projects, interaction designers and re
-searchers were primarily responsible 

for creating and evaluating novel con
-ceptual proposals and ideas:



 (www.
tue.nl/en/university/departments/
 industrial-design/research/
 research-programs/user-centered
 -engineering/projects/explorations
 -in-interactions/connect-drive). 

Several researchers used Sketchlet 
to explore options for developing 
software systems for cooperative 

adaptive cruise control systems in 

cars, based on Wi-Fi communi
-cation between vehicles and road 

infrastructure. 









-ect
 (http://hti.ieis.tue.nl/node/3344). 
Sketchlet played a similar role as it 

did in the Connect & Drive project, 

helping researchers investigate soft
-ware products for developing per
-suasive technologies that encourage 

people to hand over control to intel
-ligent automation of cars. 


 (Resolving the 

-adox; www.repar-project.com). 

Sketchlet was one of the ˚exible 
prototyping tools in user-centered 
design processes, allowing de
-signers to create and evaluate (ill-
 de˜ned) product concepts early in 
the development.
Although Sketchlet
 is still in early 
development, the approach and tool 
showed several positive effects in these 

projects. First, it broadened the op
-portunities to constructively involve 
nonengineers, including interaction 
designers, psychologists, and students. 

Our tools empowered nonengineers 

to easily explore relevant technologies 
and to independently create and test 
their ideas. The companies involved
 bene˜ted from their nonengineering 
expertise and knowledge early in the 
design process. 
Sketchlet also promoted different 
collaboration between engineers and 
nonengineer designers. Prior to us
-ing Sketchlet, most of the companies 
followed the approach of making de
-signers responsible for creating a con
-ceptual proposal, which they gave to 

developers for implementation with 
Sketchlet combines elements from 
traditional sketching, software hacking, and 
opportunistic software development.
 84 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFEATURE:
 SOFTWARE 
TOOLS
little interaction, except to clarify their 
designs. With Sketchlet, the interaction 
between designers and engineers could 
work in two ways, with engineers giv
-ing designers simpli˜ed versions of 

software components and servicesŠ
early in the design processŠthat the 
engineers might use later in the imple
-mentation (see Figure 1). 
The connected services, although 
simpli˜ed, resemble real components, 

and sketchlets expressed in terms of 

these services come closer to the imple
-mentation platform that the engineers 

will use. This change addressed one 

problem that many companies expe
-rience when designers and engineers 
need to work togetherŠnamely, the 
engineers perceive designers™ ideas as 

unrealistic, too distant from available 

technology, and not precise enough to 
be useful. Through the exploration of 
these services, designers can develop 

more realistic expectations about the 

possibilities and limitations of technol
-ogies, and incorporate this understand
-ing into design proposals. 
Lastly, Sketchlet in˚uenced the 
mindset of companies toward more 

and broader explorations early in the 
software design. Sketchlet helped illus
-trate the potential of such exploration 
and inspire the companies to think how 

other tools could be used in a similar 
explorative way.
Sketchifying 
Bene˜ts 
and 
Relation to 
Other 
Approaches
Software sketchifying can help better 
de˜ne product requirements so that 
the subsequent engineering process has 
a clear focus and goal. It promotes di
-rect exploration of emerging technolo
-gies and creation of working examples 
of simple pieces of software with these 
technologies as a way to identify po
-tential problems and provoke reactions 

from users as early as possible. The tool 
shows the effects of design decisions on 
user experience and supports user test
-ing before actual development starts. 
Exploring the possibilities and limi
-tations of technologies early in the de
-sign helps identify a number of prob
-lems or user issues before investing in a 
signi˜cant development effort. Discov
-ering such problems later in the process 
could require changes and additional 
effort. Early discovery is particularly 

important in projects using emerging 

technologies, which have many un
-knownsŠincluding how well users will 

accept them. 
Promoting the constructive involve
-ment of nonengineers in the design 

process opens the door to help from 

experts in ˜elds such as human psy
-chology, which in turn reduces the bur
-den on developers. Moreover, as Glass 

noted,
1 users who understand the ap
-plication problem to be solved are of
-ten more likely to produce innovation 

than computer technologists, who un
-derstand only the computing problem 

to be solved. The sketchifying approach 
requires occasional involvement of de
-velopers, but it aims to incorporate 
them in short ad hoc sessions, and the 

intent is to empower nonengineers to 
explore further without developers™ 
help. Once the developer adapts some 

technology for Sketchlet, nonengineers 
can work with this technology through 
a simple end-user interface that does 

not require technical expertise or pro
-gramming knowledge.
Relation to Prototyping and Engineering
Software sketchifying complements 

existing prototyping and engineering 
approaches by its focus on free explo
-ration and a trial-and-error approach 
versus a more iterative, incremental ap
-proach of prototyping and engineering 
(see Figure 2).
Sketchifying supports users in con
-structing a novel idea and enables non
-engineers to actively contribute. This 

brings software design closer to the 
practice of other engineering disci
-plines, in which the design phase pre
-cedes the main engineering activity, 

and designers (usually nonengineers) 

are encouraged to freely explore ideas 

before consolidating a few of them for 
ﬁClassicalﬂ modelWith Sketchlet˜˚˛˝˙ˆˇ˛˘˚˛˝˙ˆˇ˛˘FIGURE 1. 
Comparing the classical design-engineering interaction with sketchifying. 
With sketchifying, supported by tools like Sketchlet, the interaction between designers 
and engineers can work in two ways, allowing engineers to give designers early access to 

simpli˜ed versions of software components and services that the engineers might use later in 

the implementation.
  MAY/JUN
E 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 85further development. For instance, it™s 
not unusual for an industrial designer 
to generate 30 or more sketches a day 
in the early stages of design, each possi
-bly exploring a different concept.
4 Software sketchifying precedes proto
-typing, which tests, compares, and fur
-ther develops aspects of selected ideas. 

With a prototype in place, the develop
-ment can take an evolutionary approach. 
Prototyping should assess whether se
-lected ideas are feasible and should help 
decide whether to proceed with engineer
-ing. Prototyping aims at making an idea 
more detailed and concrete, rather than 
coming up with radically new ideas. En
-gineering turns the winning idea into a 
robust and usable product.
Relation to Other Software Tools
In principle, tools other than Sketchlet 
could implement the sketchifying idea. 
However, many current tools can™t fully 
support it because they™re not opti
-mized for free exploration and involve
-ment of nonengineers. For example, 
we could use standard programming 
languages, such as Java, C#, C++, or 

programming tools oriented toward in
-teraction design such as Flash and Pro
-cessing to implement our example sce
-nario. However, programming requires 

signi˜cant expertise, time, and effortŠ
an investment that™s simply too high for 
the intended purpose of generating new 

ideas and exploring possibilities. 
Existing low-˜delity prototyping 
environments provide ways to quickly 

create prototypes with inputs taken 

from external services or sensors.
11,12
 These environments might be excel
-lent choices for exploring interactions 

in various domains. The problems I™m 

addressing cross these domains and re
-quire a variety of sensory inputs and 
links to diverse software services as 
well as additional components speci˜c 

to the companies I™m working with. In 

addition, such tools often require too 
much precise speci˜cation, partly be
-cause they™re primarily developed for 

advanced prototyping rather than for 
free and broad exploration.
Electronic sketching systems are an
-other promising direction for design 

tools, enabling designers to create in
-teractive systems with ease using intui
-tive and natural pen gestures.
13 From 
the viewpoint of my example scenario, 
these systems have the drawback of be
-ing specialized for speci˜c domains and 
used successfully only in inherently 

graphical domains that have a stable 
and well-known set of primitives, such 
as 2D and 3D graphics or websites.
Another alternative is to use sim
-ple freehand drawings and techniques 
such as screen prototyping. Such tech
-niques can help in exploring a solu
-tion™s graphical elements. However, 

they can describe overall system inter
-actions, such as sensing device inputs 
and user response dynamics, only in 

very abstract terms. Moreover, paper 
sketching doesn™t let users explore the 

possibilities and limitations of emerg
-ing technologies. Direct exploration of 

such technologies yields more concrete 

ideas about how to best employ them. 
Sketchlet borrows ideas from exist
-ing solutions, while trying to overcome 

some of their limitations. I also see it as 

a complement to existing tools, rather 
than a replacement. On several occa
-sions, designers have used Sketchlet in 
conjunction with other tools. For exam
-ple, some of our users employed Max 
MSP for signal processing and audio 
effects and Sketchlet for connections to 

sensor devices and visualization. 
My initial experiences with 

applying software sketch
-ifying are encouraging. 
However, an important limitation of this 

approach is that it requires signi˜cant 
 changes of current development culture 
EngineeringPrototypingSketchifyingStop furtherdevelopmentContinue withengineering
   engineeringFIGURE 2. 
An idealized representation of relationships among sketchifying, prototyping, and 
engineering. Sketchifying supports users in constructing a novel idea. It precedes prototyping, 
which tests, compares, and further develops aspects of selected ideas. Engineering turns the 

winning idea into a robust and usable product.
 86 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFEATURE:
 SOFTWARE 
TOOLS
in its emphasis on postponing the start 
of development to bene˜t free explora
-tion, more active involvement of non
-engineers and end users, and new forms 

of interaction between engineers and 

nonengineers prior to the main devel
-opment activity. Such changes, in my 

experience, aren™t easy to achieve, but 

without them, the sketchifying tools 

are less effective and tend to be used in 
a limited way. 
In future work, I plan to develop a 
more general approach toward build
-ing software services and components 
so that each service could have two 

sets of APIs: one engineering API with 

full functionality, and one sketchifying 
API that would represent a simpli˜ed, 

limited sample of the full functional
-ity. I also plan to address collaboration 

because the current implementation 

primarily supports individual use and 

is of limited value in collaborative de
-sign sessions.
References
 1.
 R.L. Glass, 



, devel
-oper.* Books, 2006.
 2.
 J. Grudin, ﬁTravel Back in Time: Design 
Methods of Two Billionaire Industrialists,ﬂ 


, vol. 15, no. 3, 2008, pp. 
30Œ33.
 3.
 J. Liker, 











-
, McGraw-Hill, 2004.
 4.
 B. Buxton, 




-







, Morgan Kaufmann, 2007.
 5.
 B. Shneiderman, ﬁCreativity Support Tools: 

Accelerating Discovery and Innovation,ﬂ 


, vol. 50, no. 12, 2007, pp. 
20Œ32.
 6 R.N. Charette, ﬁWhy Software Fails,ﬂ 


, vol. 42, no. 9, 2005, pp. 42Œ49.
 7.
 F. Brooks, ﬁNo Silver BulletŠEssence and Ac
-cidents of Software Engineering,ﬂ 

, vol. 20, no. 4, 1987, pp. 10
19.
 8.
 ˛. Obrenovic´  and J.B. Martens, ﬁSketching 
Interactive Systems with Sketchify,ﬂ 




, vol. 18, 
no. 1, 2011, article 4.
 9.
 B. Hartmann, S. Doorley, and S.R. Klemmer, 
ﬁHacking, Mashing, Gluing: Understand
-ing Opportunistic Design,ﬂ 




, vol. 7, no. 3, 2009, pp. 46Œ54.
 10.
 ˛. Obrenovic´ , D. Gaıevic, and A. Eliëns, 
ﬁStimulating Creativity through Opportunis
-tic Software Development,ﬂ 


, vol. 25, no. 6, 2008, pp. 64Œ70.
 11.
 M. Rettig, ﬁPrototyping for Tiny Fingers,ﬂ 



, vol. 37, no. 4, 1994, pp. 21Œ27.
 12.
 Y.K. Lim, E. Stolterman, and J. Tenenberg, 

ﬁThe Anatomy of Prototypes: Prototypes as 

Filters, Prototypes as Manifestations of De
-sign Ideas,ﬂ 





, vol. 15, no. 2, 2008, article 7.
 13.
 J.A. Landay and B.A. Myers, ﬁSketching 

Interfaces: Toward More Human Interface 
Design,ﬂ 

, vol. 34, no. 3, 2001, pp. 
56Œ64.
ABOUT THE 
AUTHOR
˚ELJKO 
OBRENOVIC
´  is a technical consultant at Software Improvement 
Group, Amsterdam. He did the work reported here while working as an assis
-tant professor in Eindhoven University of Technology™s Department of Industrial 
Design. His professional interests include, software engineering, design of 

interactive systems, end-user development, rapid prototyping, creativity sup
-port tools, and universal accessibility. Obrenovic´  received a PhD in computer 

sciences from the University of Belgrade. Contact him at obren@acm.org.
Advertising Personnel
Marian Anderson: Sr. Advertising Coordinator; 
Email: manderson@computer.org

Phone: +1 714 816 2139 | Fax: +1 714 821 4010
Sandy Brown: Sr. Business Development Mgr.
Email sbrown@computer.org
Phone: +1 714 816 2144 | Fax: +1 714 821 4010
Advertising Sales Representatives (display)
Central, Northwest, Far East: Eric Kincaid
Email: e.kincaid@computer.org

Phone: +1 214 673 3742; Fax: +1 888 886 8599
Northeast, Midwest, Europe, Middle East: Ann & David Schissler
Email: a.schissler@computer.org, d.schissler@computer.org

Phone: +1 508 394 4026; Fax: +1 508 394 1707
Southwest, California: Mike Hughes

Email: mikehughes@computer.org

Phone: +1 805 529 6790
Southeast: Heather Buonadies
Email: h.buonadies@computer.org
Phone: +1 973 585 7070; Fax: +1 973 585 7071
Advertising Sales Representatives 
(Classi˜ed Line and Jobs Board)
Heather Buonadies
Email: h.buonadies@computer.org
Phone: +1 973 585 7070; Fax: +1 973 585 7071





Selected CS articles and columns 
 are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
