 0740-7459/04/$20.00 © 2004IEEEPublished by the IEEE Computer SocietyIEEE SOFTWARE
71
Editor: Suzanne Robertson The Atlantic Systems Guild suzanne@systemsguild.comequirements is a favorite topic of mine,not because itÕs so difficult, but because

itÕs so often neglected. In discussions

with colleagues, IÕve discovered a con-
sensus that systems analysis and re-
quirements definition, in particular,
have fallen on hard times. Ten or 15 years ago

we taught people structured analysis, informa-tion engineering, data modeling,
and working with computer-aided

software engineering tools to turn
those requirements into running
programs. For some reason, we
quit emphasizing requirements and
decided to take another tack. Only
recently, with the increased empha-

sis on the Unified Modeling Lan-
guage (UML) and Model Driven
Architecture, does the industry
seem to be finally returning towhere it left off a decade or so ago.Back to basicsI have some guesses why requirements defin-ition has been so neglected. Mostly, I think, itÕs

because Òdoing requirementsÓ requires spend-
ing more time studying the business and appli-
cation world and less time programming. Doing

requirements takes timeÑtime that could be
spent writing codeÑand users often feel better

if they think that people are ÒworkingÓ (that is,
coding) on their problems.
Additionally, some agile development advo-
cates suggest that requirements arenÕt really
necessary in an agile environment; in the newagile world, you can code yourself into success.
Indeed, for many in the agile world, the code is
the requirements. Rather than understanding
the userÕs business and information needs,

some agile approaches attempt to give users
what they say they want as quickly as possible. But these arenÕt reasons for not doing re-
quirements, theyÕre excuses. Every system of
consequence needs good requirements. With-

out good requirements, the project risks in-
crease dramatically. The better the require-

ments, the better people understand what
theyÕre trying to build (or acquire). But re-
quirements arenÕtÑor shouldnÕt beÑmeasured

in terms of length. Bigger is not necessarily bet-
ter. Requirements should define something that

you have to build or otherwise acquire. If it
doesnÕt, itÕs not an engineering document, it is

a political one. (A couple of years ago, there
was a made-for-TV movie called ÒThe Penta-

gon WarsÓ about the development of the

Bradley Fighting Vehicle. A particularly funny

10-minute segment showed how the require-
ments grew from an unarmed, armored trans-
port for 13 soldiers to a highly armed, lightly
(aluminum) armored transport for six people
that was so dangerous that the army was afraid
to test it. With additional ÒrequirementsÓ

loaded on by one of the armed services to suit
the ego of its representative, the vehicle became
less and less suitable for its primary function.)Defining requirements shouldnÕt be difficult,
but it often is. I think this is true because thoseAgile Requirements:Opportunity or Oxymoron?
Ken Orr
Although some might argue, ÒWe donÕt need requirements because weÕre agile,Ó
can we really say that agility and requirements are mutually exclusive? Ken Orr

shows us that, in todayÕs world, requirements without agility is just as bad as

agility without requirements. ÑSuzanne Robertson
 72IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
DEPT TITLEof us who teach requirements or require-ments engineering havenÕt clarified what

Òdoing requirementsÓ really amounts
to because, I suppose, it isnÕt really clear

to us.Outcomes and constraintsSome years ago, some colleaguesand I came up with what we consid-

ered the clearest definition of what re-

quirements were (or ought to be). We

concluded that there were really only
two kinds of requirements: systems
outputs (outcomes) and constraints.
Some people call this approach output-
oriented requirements definitions, but
I prefer to call it teleological (goal-

oriented) requirements.
In this era of increasingly complex
technological solutions, this definition
seems overly simplistic, but it works.
What weÕve found is that if you donÕt

know your systemÕs primary outputs,

you simply arenÕt finished with your re-

quirements. And if you do know what
your primary outputs are (and this in-
cludes data attributes, the outputÕs

structure, and any decision or calcula-
tion rules), youÕre in a pretty good
place. Everything besides primary out-
puts are constraintsÑthings you have
to do while youÕre producing the pri-
mary outputs (for example, processing
some number of simultaneous users,
processing some number of transac-
tions per hour, providing some mini-

mal response time, and so on).
Getting the primary outputs right isultimately more important than getting
the constraints right. And you can dis-
tinguish between a primary output and
a constraint by asking a simple ques-
tion: ÒIf x went away, would we still

do the system?Ó Take a payroll system

that produces payroll checks and pay-

roll information for annual tax pur-

poses (in the US, the W2 form), for ex-

ample. Which of these do you suppose
is a primary output? The answer is, of
course, the payroll check (or some elec-
tronic form thereof). Clearly, if the

payroll check went away, the system

would stop producing the W2 forms.

On the other hand, if the system no

longer needed to produce the W2 form,
it would still need to produce payroll
checks. Simple, huh?So, my basic view is that require-ments engineers should focus first on
the business model to identify the ba-
sic results (outputs) and secondly on
constraints. Unfortunately, in most or-

ganizations it happens the other way
around. Indeed, most requirements
that go 
into a typical RFP (request forproposal) are constraints. These con-

straints might be requirements, but they
donÕt define the systemÕs core purpose.

Unfortunately, many systems, especially

large government systems, are both
overconstrained and underspecified. Simplifying the requirements downto outputs and constraints has a ma-

jor real-world advantageÑyou can
test them. (Testability, as you might

imagine, is particularly useful for big
systems.) In fact, you can reasonably
ask whether anything you canÕt test is

really a requirement at all.Making the right mapIf all this sounds too easy, it is. As it
turns out, most systems users donÕt

know what they want out of a system or
what they could get. So, before you can
identify the primary outputs, you have
to understand such things as the business
context, business process, and the infor-
mation users need to perform key activi-
ties in the business process. The require-
ments engineerÕs job is to help the users

discover what they really need. Further-
more, because in any significant system
thereÕs never just one user, coming up

with an entire systemÕs minimal outputs
involves combining subject matter ex-pertise from several experts (users). Not
surprisingly, reaching consensus with all

those users can be hard work.In my office, I have several posterswith the same theme. The archetype 

is the ÒNew YorkerÕs View of the

WorldÓÑyou know, the one where

Manhattan and the Bronx are really
big and everything else is really small.
And I have similar posters for Atlanta,
Chicago, Denver, and San Francisco. In

each one, you get a biased view; every-
thing local is important (really big) and
everything else is trivial (really small).Those posters are there to remindme of how users see the world. The re-

quirements engineerÕs job, then, is

much like that of a map maker trying
to create a good map from all those in-
dividual viewpoints. First you need to
gather all the (distorted) individual

views, and then you need to combine
them to create a coherent whole. Be-
ginning requirements engineers believe
the user is always right, but most users
are, at best, only partly right.
Some current requirements ap-proaches can help. These approaches,
while not foolproof, usually give good
requirements. Some of the current ones
are better than nothing. I donÕt think

too much of some of the UML stuff,
mostly because itÕs driven more from the

technology side than the business side.
Use case and sequence diagrams donÕt

do a great job, I find, of communicating
with end users, but theyÕre certainly bet-

ter than not doing requirements at all.
Inventing great requirementsAs IÕve mentioned, getting require-
ments isnÕt that difficult, but getting

great requirements is much harderÑ
great requirements require imagination
in working with users. James Robert-
son wrote a fantastic piece for this se-

ries last year entitled ÒEur
eka! WhyAnalysts Should Invent Requirements.Ó
In that article, he suggested that rather
than taking a passive role of just writ-
ing down what users ask for, require-

ments analysts should help Òinvent re-
quirements.Ó And, of course, heÕs right.

Not all a proposed systemÕs outputs
REQUIREMENTS




 DEPT TITLEand constraints exist in the currentusersÕ minds. In many cases, the key
users donÕt know whatÕs possible, they

donÕt know what the competition is

doing, and they donÕt know what the

state of the art is. So, someone needs to

help them think ahead.
People donÕt hire good architects to
get so-so buildings, and people shouldnÕt

hire good requirements analysts to pro-
duce so-so systems. I watched a movie re-
cently in which a fellow blurts out to the
love of his life, ÒYouÕre everything I never

knew I always wanted.Ó Great architec-
ture is like that; great products are like
that; great requirements are like that.To get great requirements, you donÕt
have to be a genius or a magician. You

just have to know your usersÕ outputs
and constraints and then document
those needs in a way they understand.Not an oxymoronIf agile developers insist on directlyinvolving users and delivering Òprod-uct versionsÓ in short increments, does
that mean thereÕs no place for require-

ments in the new agile world? The
short answer is no, but this means the
agile movement will have to look at its
prejudice against design tools. I sug-
gest using prototypes, which are a
great way to improve the definition
process. In most circumstances, proto-
types are the absolute best way to get
users engaged in defining their outputs
and constraints. Other fieldsÑfor ex-
ample, architecture, electrical engi-
neering, product engineering, and so
onÑhave combined rigorous require-
ments and design with automated
tools that produce prototypes to dra-
matically shorten the time it takes to
move from concept to finished prod-
ucts. They havenÕt abandoned the re-

quirements process, theyÕve aban-
doned the laborious process of hand
design and fabrication.tÕs both possible and necessary to com-

bine requirements and agile develop-
ment. Ours is an impatient age, but
thereÕs no reason we canÕt have agile re-

quirements, with all the powerful hard-
ware and sophisticated graphic software
available. Today we can capture busi-

ness models, workflows, activities, and
data structures quickly and in enough
detail to automatically generate data-
base designs and code that actually pro-
duce prototypes and products as rapidly

as CAD/CAM tools do in architecture

and engineering. When people realize
how close we are, the requirements pen-

dulum should move back toward under-

standing business and user needs.Ken Orris the chief scientist of the Ken Orr Institute and thedeveloper of the Warnier-Orr Methodology. Contact him at

kenorr@kenorrinst.com.REQUIREMENTSEXECUTIVECOMMITTEE
President:
CARL K.CHANG* 

Computer Science Dept.
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011-1040

Phone: +1 515 294 4377
Fax: +1 515 294 0258
c.chang@computer.org

President-Elect:
GERALD L.ENGEL*
Past President: 
STEPHEN L.DIAMOND*
VP, Educational Activities: MURALI VARANASI*
VP, Electronic Products and Services: 

LOWELL G.JOHNSON (1ST VP)*

VP, Conferences and Tutorials: 

CHRISTINA SCHOBER*
VP, Chapters Activities: 
RICHARD A.KEMMERER (2ND VP)€

VP, Publications: MICHAEL R.WILLIAMS€
VP, Standards Activities:
JAMES W.MOORE€
VP, Technical Activities: 
YERVANT ZORIAN€
Secretary: 
OSCAR N.GARCIA*
Treasurer:
RANGACHAR KASTURI€
2003Ð2004 IEEE Division V Dir
ector: GENE H.HOFFNAGLE€
2003Ð2004 IEEE Division VIII Director: 

JAMES D.ISAAK€
2004 IEEE Division VIII Director-Elect: 

STEPHEN L.DIAMOND*
Computer Editor in Chief:DORIS L.CARVER€
Executive Director: 
DAVID W.HENNAGE€
* voting member of the Board of Governors
€nonvoting member of the Board of Governors
EXECUTIVE STAFF
Executive Director:
DAVID W.HENNAGE
Assoc. Executive Director:
ANNE MARIE KELLY
Publisher:ANGELA BURGESS
Assistant Publisher:DICK PRICEDirector, Finance & Administration:

VIOLET S.DOAN

Director, Information Technology & Services: 

ROBERTCARE

Manager, Research & Planning:
JOHN C.KEATON
PURPOSE
The IEEE Computer Society is the
worldÕs largest association of computing profes-

sionals, and is the leading provider of technical

information in the field.
MEMBERSHIPMembers receive the month-ly magazine Computer, discounts, and opportu-nities to serve (all activities are led by volunteer
members). Membership is open to all IEEE
members, affiliate society members, and others

interested in the computer field.COMPUTER SOCIETY WEB SITEThe IEEE Computer SocietyÕs Web site, at

www.computer.org
, offers information and
samples from the societyÕs publications and con-
ferences, as well as a broad range of information

about technical committees, standards, student
activities, and more.     
BOARD OF GOVERNORSTerm Expiring 2004:  
Jean M. Bacon, Ricardo
Baeza-Yates, Deborah M. Cooper, George V. Cybenko,

Haruhisha Ichikawa, Thomas W. Williams, Yervant

Zorian
Term Expiring 2005:
Oscar N. Garcia, Mark A.
Grant, Michel Israel, Stephen B. Seidman, Kathleen M.
Swigger, Makoto Takizawa, Michael R. Williams

Term Expiring 2006:
Mark Christensen, AlanClements, Annie Combelles, Ann Gates, Susan Men-
gel, James W. Moore, Bill Schilit

Next Board Meeting: 
12 June 2004, Long Beach, CAIEEE OFFICERSPresident: 
ARTHUR W.WINSTON
President-Elect: 
W.CLEON ANDERSON
Past President: 
MICHAELS.ADLER
Executive Director: 
DANIEL J.SENESE
Secretary: 
MOHAMED EL-HAWARY
Treasurer: 
PEDRO A.RAY
VP, Educational Activities: 
JAMES M.TIEN
VP, Pub. Services & Products: 
MICHAEL R.LIGHTNER
VP, Regional Activities: 
MARC T.APTER
VP, Standards Association: 
JAMES T.CARLO
VP, Technical Activities: 
RALPH W.WYNDRUM JR.
IEEE Division V Director: 
GENE H.HOFFNAGLE
IEEE Division VIII Director: 
JAMES D.ISAAK
President, IEEE-USA: 
JOHN W.STEADMAN
COMPUTER SOCIETY OFFICESHeadquarters Office
1730 Massachusetts Ave. NW 
Washington, DC 20036-1992

Phone: +1 202 371 0101  
Fax: +1 202 728 9614
E-mail: hq.ofc@computer.org
Publications Office
10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., PO Box 3014

Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314
Phone:+1 714 8218380

E-mail: help@computer.org

Membership and Publication Orders:

Phone: +1 800 272 6657  

Fax: +1 714 821 4641
E-mail: help@computer.org
Asia/Pacific Office
Watanabe Building

1-4-2 Minami-Aoyama,Minato-ku

Tokyo107-0062, Japan

Phone: +81 3 3408 3118  

Fax: +81 3 3408 3553
E-mail: tokyo.ofc@computer.org
