 Implementing Accountability KATHY V. C. PARRIS, Lockheed Martin Tactical Aircraft Systems n the prime of its life, the F-16 fighter aircraft 
is undergoing a heart transplant. A willing victim 
of its own success, 
the F- 16 approaches midlife with cus- tomer demand for 
new and modified capabilities 
exceeding its already repeatedly 
expanded avionics computer capacity. Affordability and agility, 
the imperatives of the post-cold-war military, 
drove the United 
States Air Force and F-16 contractor Lockheed Martin Tactical Arcraft Systems to embrace a bold, far-sighted solu- 
tion: development 
of a modular mission computer designed to increase computing capacity by an order of magnitude and reduce the cost and schedule 
of future software changes. 
To tackle this challenging project, 
the USAF F-16 
System Program Office and 
Lockheed Martin elected to form an 
Integrated Product Development' team. 
The participants thus faced a dual challenge: 
development of state-of-the-art avionics hardware and software, 
concurrent with the development of team culture and modes 
of operation. This article presents 
a case study of the resulting management 
systems and 
underly- ing mental models, written from my partisan viewpoint 
as their chief advocate and designer. 
IEEE SOFTWARE 07.10 7459/96/505 00 0 1996 IEEE  CONTEXT The software products of the IPD effort coinprise 
more than four 
million lines of code, more than a quarter of which must meet hard real-time 
dead- lines in a flight environment. The plat- form in which the flight program will operate is also concurrently in 
develop- ment, including a new inultiprocessoi 
message-passing computer architec- ture, several custom applicaaon-specific 
integrate d - ci r cu 
1 t chips, associated 
devlce drivers, and 
real-time extensions to the 
Ada iun-time system Other hardware aiid software elements 
also developed or iinplerneiited coiicurreiit- 
ly are the software engineering work- station network, 
the Ada compiler for 
the modular mission computer, soft- ware build and 
configuration manage- 
mcnt tools, sirnulatlon software 
aiid test equipment for debug and integration, and the interfaces tor loading MMC software into thc airplane Flight software capability require- inents are 
perhaps the best understood and imx~ suble aspect of the project, since the MCMC IS to duplicate the func- tions of a mature, fainiliar avlonics sys- 
tem New requirements have been a ininor part 
of the initial development effort, although add-on capabilities 
are expected to expand the soh are devel- 
opment effort by another million or so lines of code. The well-known capabilities, 
how- ever, were 
to be implemented in 
an unfaniiliar LC ay The imperatives of affordability and agility 
called for t 1 ﬁcapability modularﬂ software,™ to be achieved by adopting the Ada language and object-oriented analysis and design 
methodology in 
place of the F-16 lega- cy of Jovial language and functional partitioning. This sn-itch of language and methodology, together 
with the transition from 
mainframe terminals 
to personal workstations, constituted an 
extensive concurrent reengineering of the software factory. 
The magnitude of the MMC under- talung, combined with the budget cut- 
backs and refocusing 
of the USAF™s mil- itary mission caused 
by the collapse of Communism, left the project creeping 
along at a severely underfunded pace for its first 
two years. In the final proposal, the very best 
we could challenge 
our- selves to do-better than ne had ever 
done-proved barely good 
enough to win a contract. Strong interest from 
the F- 16 consortium™s European partners and from other foreign customers 
ulti- mately saved the MAIC from financial starvation-but, ironically, also locked 
in rigid need dates. The resulting software 
development schedule, featuring 
three incremental flight-test releases of rough- ly equal task 
size, known as tapes, was universally viewed as high risk. The first tape was a schedule concern 
because of the methodology learning 
curve, coii- current ha r dw a r e d eve 
1 o p ni en t , and concurrent development of the software en gin e er i n g 
Many thought that the 
second tape, con- 
strained to 
a still shorter schedule that significantly overlapped development 
of the first tape, had crossed the line from high schedule risk to ﬁimpossible,ﬂ 
even before Tape 1 difficulties further com- pressed Tape 2™s schedule. Thus, the cost and schedule 
convnitments needed to keep the program alive significantly magnified the technical challenges. 
The scope and magnitude of the MiMC development effort called for a sizable team: more than 500 contribu- tors at Lockheed Martin Tactical Aircraft Systems; dozens more at com- puter subcontractor 
Texas Instruments™ e nvi r o n ni e n 
t . plant some 
60 miles away, plus roughly a dozen government 
participants. Since 
not all LMTAS contributors are full- time participants, 
the equivalent staffing 
level is around 250, with about 80 per- cent involved in software tasks. This team of seemingly unwieldy proportions 
is made manageable 
through an internal 
structure consisting of eight product 
teams plus 
a chief engineer and a 
pro- gram manager and 
their staffs. Our desire to operate as an ﬁintrapre- neurial,ﬂ self-managed team 
initially met with resistance 
from some of the depart- ments providing team members. 
A con- tractual requirement to comply with 
IPD concepts™ and 
establish IPD teams made our choice irrefutable, 
though not easy to implement. 
We came from a matrix organization 
of strong functional departments interwoven with separately 
man aged programs , with technic a 1 direction flowing primarily 
through the 
functional hierarchy. 
Participation in teams was familiar, in the 
context of each team member representing 
a func- tional department and making decisions 
through functional management™s 
authority (and often after their 
review). However, the IPD concept of a team- pulling qualified individuals 
from their 
functional homes and empowering 
them as a cohesive interdisciplinary work 
unit to conduct 
business through its own sep- arate channels 
of accountability and ele- 
vation-was a major culture change 
with coni p an yw i d e 
repercussions. Collocating 300 team members 
(240 in a 
dedicated MMC development building, 
60 in the 
systems integration laboratory) 
was an important step, without which the accountability process described herein could not have succeeded in bringing about the 
culture change. 
Although the ultimate degree 
of suc- cess of 
the MMC development pro- grain is yet to be realized, interim results exceeding 
customer and compa- 
ny ex p e c 
t a ti on s va li d a t e th e team approach and 
our still-evolving man- agemeiit systems. 
The government has recognized excellent 
team performance 
JULY 1996  with a 
special award 
in excess of $2.3 million. The high-risk first software increment (Tape 1) recovered schedule 
and was released to flight test one week early, with glowing reports from 
test pilots on its unexpected level of 
maturi- ty. The second ﬁimpossibleﬂ software 
increment, Tape 2, was released on schedule for laboratory 
testing. Tape 3, the final increment, passed critical design review 
on schedule. Not all the interim results are 
so rosy. Tape 2 is struggling through a seemingly endless 
morass of 
integration difficulties, as did Tape 1. Late discover- ies of 
chip problems 
have further con- founded hardware-software 
integration and affected hardware production schedules. Campaigns 
are underway to reduce MMC memory and throughput utilization to meet 
specified reserve requirements. These difficulties notwithstanding, experience to date indicates that the 
accountability process 
described in the following sections is playing an indispensable role in what will prove to be a successful program. ACCOUNTABILITY MODEL The accountability model described here and summarized in Figure I is more prescriptive than descriptive: it advocates how things 
shozrld be, rather than asserting how 
things are. It lives behind the scenes as an aid to the design and troubleshooting of management systems. The implementation and prac- 
tice of these management 
systems grad- ually molds reality in 
the shape of the model, as will be seen 
later. The model views accountability as a proactive co.lztinumu pF-ocess, not as a vague concept of obligation, nor as a reporting 
relationship on an organization chart. 
The participants in this process are a team and its 
stakeholders. ﬁTeamﬂ means the collection of people sharing responsibility for 
a desired result, and 
ﬁstakeholderﬂ means anyone 
affected by 
the desired result or the means of Desired results Figure 1. Our accountability model advocates how things should be, rather than issevting how things arpe. achieving it. A team™s stakeholders include its customers and suppliers, 
both internal and external; 
the functional organizations that provide people and 
other resources to the team; the mern- bers of the team; and any organizations 
of which the team is a part, such as larg- er program teams. 
The process is an ongoing exchange of accountings and consequences. An accounting is a report 
of what you 
have done, are doing, or intend to do, 
backed up on request with an explanation of why the reported action makes sense. Consequences provide feedback, 
in the form of information, help, 
resources, restrictions, rewards, or punishment. This exchange is intended to collec- tively determine what makes seme in a given situation, so that the 
team can then act accordingly. Every decision 
we make, individually or collectively, is determined by what makes sense to us at the time based on the information 
we have, the resources available to us, what we know how to do, and what 
we are motivated to do.™ Whenever a team™s 
accountings make sense 
to its stakehold- ers, the teain thereby establishes trust and ﬁbuy-in.ﬂ 
When a team™s account- ings don™t Inake sense to its stakeholders, open discussion of the information, resources, know-how, and motivators that influenced the team™s decisions can 
often yield preferable alternatives. 
An accounting may focus on end results, performance 
to plan, or plan- ning. The end-results focus is tradi- tionally the most common, yet 
the least effective, 
for if the results report- ed don™t make sense 
to stakeholders, it is too late for alternatives 
to remedy the situation. The performance-to- plan focus 
is more productive, since the opportunity remains for correction 
if needed. Accountings for planning 
are by far the most powerful, 
because the hest knowledge and resources 
of all stake h o 1 de rs and team 
members together can usually 
identi+ weakness- es in a plan that the 
originator either 
couldn™t recognize 
or didn™t know how to correct. 
Furthermore, strengthening 
a plan up front 
is much more cost- effective than the recovery required if the plan fails. Unfortunately, the plan- ning focus is also the least popular, verging on an infringement of privacy: ﬁThis is my responsibility; why should 
you meddle 
in my plans? I™m 
the one 
IEEE SOFTWARE  accountable if you™re not happy with 
tlie rcs~~lts.ﬂ The accountability cycle operates continuously throughout a project. The emphasis is likely to vary, focusing pri- 
marily on planning at the beginning, 
then shi‚iung inore toward performance- 
to-plan and 
elid results. However, on a complex project, in which each 
stage reveals previously 
unknown information 
about the 
next stage, 
planning nevei- ends, nor should accountability for planning. 
In a competitive environment where 
reduction of costs and 
cycle times is an ever-present goal, active accountability 
for planning continually fuels the improvement process. 
We directly applied our accountabili- ty model to die design of management systems and team 
operating procedures. These systems and procedures were themselves means toward 
a higher end: 
shaping attitudes and 
behaviors, which 
are ultimately 
the greatest determinants 
of a team™s success. + ‚yust tell me what you want, 
then + ﬁThe less information I share, tlie leave me alone to get the job done.ﬂ a privileged class of people; to emphasize beiizg good rather than 
looking good. Early attempts 
to make this culture 
change through discussion evoked 
little disagreement, yet proved ineffective 
in changing behaviors. We realized that the systems already 
in place (not all of them conscious or lisible) drove behav- 
iors more 
forcefully than our advocated beliefs. By implementing new systems 
based on our accountability model, incrementally and 
11-ith numerous cor- 
rections e71 rmte, we padually began to see behaviors change. 
status review. On a three-week rotation, each product team takes 10 to 40 min- utes to give an accounting of perfor- IMPLEMENTATION The management systems described 
here co-evolved over 
a period of two or more years. They are not clearly sepa- 
rable from each other, in description or in use. Although we hare hundreds of team members and 
even more stakeholders, none of these systems involves 
so many direct participants. 
A team leader 
or some other spokesperson appropriate to 
the occasion typically 
represents each of the eight product teams. Although 
we encourage the stakeholders who are most immediately 
affected to participate directly in 
the accountability process, those actively engaged are 
far outnum- bered by, and serve as de facto proxies progress performance reports, and 
pri- oritized problem 
lists, as described later. The program manager 
and chief engineer routinely attend 
TSRs, along with representatives 
of any teams depen- 
dent on the products or services of the presenting team. 
TSR sessions tend to be highly interactive. No matter how 
much dialogue has taken place 
outside this meeting, it is unusual to coniplete a TSR with no ﬁcourse correctionsﬂ 
or realizations of some miscommunication. 
To reinforce individual responsibil- ity, personal action items 
are recorded with explicit closure 
criteria and 
sus- pense dates, and are tracked to com- pletion. An action item is as likely to be assigned to a stakeholder as to a member of the presenting team, 
when the action required is removing some obstacle, clarifying requirements, rec- onciling conflicts, or providing miss- ing information. Each team 
is expected to take the ini- tiative to identify risks and remove 
obstacles. For example, when presenting 
uiimet resource needs, 
a team is expect- ed to discuss not only what they need, 
but also what they have done to meet that need. Instances of whining, in which the team has not initiated appro- priate action 
to fill their own needs, gen- erally bounce back as an action item for the team leader. Instances 
where an obstacle duly elevated 
remains unre- solved may create an action item for 
the chief engineer or program manager. 
Activity roadmaps. Performance to plan would be 
easy to monitor if each team had only 
one activity, fully 
laid out according to one 
nice, linear 
plan. Unfortunately, this has never been the case for any 
of our product teams. Each 
team has multiple, overlapping, separate 
but often related activities, which seem 
to operate 
according to some vexatious law reminiscent of small 
children: whichever one yozi™w watching isrz™t the one gettiFzg into wouble. When we were right down to the 
line on the 
first major 
design review, JULY 1996  I Today I MMC Software team activity roadmap This illustration is not intended to accurately reflect actual project 
plans Figure 2. The activitj ipoadmap. It includes, at a summa ry level, everything 
a team has to accomplish. Each bar wpiweizts a sepamte activity jir monitoring pzqoses. barely meeting a milestone already 
once postponed, we realized 
that the 
overlap- ping activity in 
preparation for the next major review had 
been overlooked 
in the rush. We were seriously behind before wc started-which inay have 
been inevitable, but at least we would have felt better had it been consciously 
reflected in our plans. Rising from the flames of this inci- dent (which singed 
the feet of a layer or two of management above the team) came the activity roadmap shown 
in Figure 2, fondly known 
as the ﬁcrayon chartﬂ after the shape of the activity bars. Each team™s activity 
roadmap was to include, at a summary level, eveiything they had to accomplish. Each bar repre- sented a separate activity for 
monitoring purposes. Unless agreed 
by stakeholders and so noted on the activity bar, each activity was to have some kind of progress performance report to 
convey concisely yet accurately whether the activity was on track. Recognizing that some 
downstream activities could 
not be planned 
in detail until certain prerequisite 
activities were 
completed, the points of the ﬁcrayonsﬂ were to indicate when detailed planning should be 
in place to guide ensuing 
activities. By glancing down 
the ﬁtodayﬂ line, one could instantly tell 
how many 
progress perforrnaiice reports would together tell the whole story. 
Thus, in the TSRs, the activity roadmap served as an index to the progress performance 
reports that followed. Once the 
team got used to the con- 
cept, the roadmap also became a 
valu- able tool 
in detecting holes 
in the plan. A stakeholder concerned 
that a 
task: may have heen overlooked could bc reassured 
by pointing to its activity bar, and, if necessaiy, unfolding the next layer of 
planning to pinpoint the task in ques- 
tion. If none of the ﬁcrayonsﬂ eiico~ii- passed the task in question, the responsi- ble team could be 
sent back to the draw- ing board to include it in their 
plans. Progress performance reporting. 
To accw rately track 
our planning and progress 
performance, we 
laid out time spans and 
dependencies for all major activities early in the program, 
using cost estimat- 
ing models, corporate experience on comparable tasks, and critical-path 
methodology. Detailed 
task plans 
then evolved as the necessary information IEEE SOFTWARE  t 1. 3,000 r 2,500 L Product X development status Today 7 2,000: /™ I C 3 l5Oo /: , / 5001 a Key: c - 3- Planned completions 
U - - Actual completions 1,00Or I /AY ~ 0 e_ _~_d=q/,- 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213141516 Week Figure 3. Sample eamed-value mmrnaiy chart. For sofizzm-e, xork packnge szze and the y-axzs ﬁeamed value ﬂ a7.e z~szially denominated in epinalent delin- eirable sozwce instmctions. became available. If the point of a crayon passed the today line 
with no detailed task plan in evidence, we knew we were headed for 
trouble. Some detailed task plans could be 
fully contained on a page or two of Gantt chart, in which 
case the progress report consisted of 
showing inchstones 
completed. Other detailed task plans 
comprised so many inchstones (some- times thousands) 
that concise reporting necessitated statistical 
summaries. To serve this 
need, we inherited from 
the LM T AS Avi o ni c s D e p 
a r tni en t the long-standing best practice 
of earned- value statusing.™ EVS is useful when many compo- 
nents must 
pass through the 
same series of process steps-for example, through requirements analysis, preliminary design, detailed 
design, coding, and so on. For 
each process 
step, explicit exit 
criteria are 
defined and 
a development phase weight is assigned to reflect what percent of the total process each 
step constitutes, in 
relative effort. Likewise, 
each component is assigned a work package size that reflects its 
proportion of the total product. Detailed 
task schedules assign a due date 
for each 
component to 
complete each process step. When a component meets the exit criteria for a step, the 
actual completion date is recorded and earned value points 
are awarded, 
in the amount 
of work package size multiplied bj- dei-elopment phase weight. 
Planned and acmal curnu- 
lative values 
earned are plotted 
as a function of time along the 
x-axis to pro- duce a concise statistical summary of performance to plan, as shonn in Figure 
3. For sohare, work package size and 
the y-axis ﬁearned valueﬂ are usually denominated in equivalent 
Deliverable Source Instructions. 
A stakeholder familiar with EVS charts can tell instantly from 
the slopes of the planned and actual lines, and 
the ;ap in between, when 
an activity 
is headed south.™™ However, perfectly aligned planned and actual lines 
don™t always mean all is well. When using EVS to report progress, care 
must be taken not to let offsetting ahead-of- 
schedule and behind-schedule 
tasks paint a misleading picture. 
Two equally weighted components or process steps may play significantly different roles 
in the critical path. In such cases, the reporting teain supplements the EVS graph with back-up 
material-such as lower-level Gantt charts, exception lists, 
or explanatory notes-to support a determination of what, if any, corrective 
action is warranted. Prioritized problem lists. Although the final product delivery is still well 
ahead of us, we 
have already ﬁdeliveredﬂ 
many internal products 
that are crucial to the completion of other products. Once the development of 
a product 
is complete, it is no longer covered by progrm perfor- mance reporting. The focus shifts 
to how well the pyodzict is performing and how responsive the providing team is in resolving problems. 
For each internally delivered prod- uct or product set, the providing team 
maintains a prioritized problem list. Although the list is maintained by the providing team, 
the prioritization is determined by the stakeholders. For instance, if an internally 
developed tool is used by several 
teams, the providing team collects tool-problem reports 
from all users, coordinates priorities 
with all affected teams, and 
uses the resulting prioritized 
list to work the most important 
problems first. Although the addition, closure, and 
prioritization of problems happens 
on a day-to-day, person-to-person basis, a 
snapshot of the top 
five items on each list is also 
presented in TSRs. This ﬁsafety netﬂ catches occasional lapses 
in communication. It also provides an 
opportunity for the more peripheral stakeholders to challenge whether the priorities really best serve 
program interests. For example, are 
the demands of a single user driving 
an inappropriate 
investment of program resources? Can some third party 
offer a workaround that is more affordable in the long run 
than the planned fix? Special emphasis. 
Although the three- JULY 1996  week rotation of TSRs has been an 
effective inethod for routine account- abiliity, many situations havc arisen to necessitate a tighter accountability loop. 
When TSRs or informal coinmunica- 
tioiis indicate 
that an 
activity is ﬁheaded southﬂ or already in trouble, 
it becomes a caiididate for 
the program manager™s special-emphasis list. 
A weekly meeting, chaired by the program manager, nar- rowly focuses 
stakeholdcr attention on 
the designated topics. 
I~Iere the responsible teain presents 
a much narrower but deeper 
view of the at-risk or out-of-bounds activities. Emphasis is on deteriiiining conse- qut:nces with an iinmediate positive effect: What can anyone 
do to improve performance-to-plan now? When war- ranted, the program manager 
calls for daily updates on the activity and related 
action items. 
Once identified for special emphasis, an activity reinains on the weekly agenda until subsequent 
progress reports make it clear that die corrective action has been effective and there is no significant danger of relapse. 
While fulfilling its 
intended purpose, this list 
has also generated some interest- 
ing side effects: 
t Exwa motivation. Although special 
emphasis is not intended to be punitive, 
a team 
inay suddenly find itself able 
to cure a marginal problem through sheer 
determination to get off the list. t Orgataizational bonding. 
Special emphasis is the only aspect of the accountability process 
in which the team inemhers™ home-department managers frequently participate. 
The team hene- 
fits from the managers™ experience, 
per- spective, and power 
to remove obstacles. 
The functional organization benefits 
by getting- up-to-date information 
first- hand, thus 
avoiding unpleasant surprises. 
The team tends to have a healthier rela- 
tionship of interdependcnce with 
the functional organizations 
whose man- agers do participate in 
the special- emphasis meetings, although 
it is unclear whether this is cause 
or effect. t Pmblem coordination. Because of its focus (problem resolution) and 
atten- dance (often broader than 
TSRs), it is not uncoinmon for a special-emphasis presentdtlon to dissolve into on-the-spot 
troubleshooting or brainstorming of a possible solution. While a quick dose 
of this can render instant 
progress, discus- 
sions that ramble too far afield can soak 
up the valuable ume of those waitlng in line to discws their own 
acuwties. Here the program manager as gatekeeper plays a real balancing act. 
Handoffs. The accountability imple- mentahons discussed so far have a com- 
mon prerequisite. you must 
first know who your stakeholders aie aiid what they 
need. Thc needs of our ultimate cus- tomers were, for 
the most part, dearly identified in specifications and 
contract statements of work. The part that 
was hard to get our arms around 
was what each team neededfiom each 0th- In the early planning stage, certain dependencies stood out clearly as we looked back 
from our still-imaginary end product. 
To deliver a validated avionics system, we needed MMC hardware, MMC software, and test 
equipment on which to verify it. NLMC software in 
turn required an 
Ada com- piler, an operating system, and 
inaiiy software development tools, 
not to mention a clear 
definition of software requirements and 
interfaces. It was what we couldn™t see from this vantage point that concerned us. In frustration, we abandoned our nuinerous attemms to draw out all the provide, to an outside customer 
or to 
any other team? + Who needs it? t When will we provide it? 2. What are all the inputs I need from t Who will provide it? t When do we need it? 3. For each output and input listed, where have we documented our provider/consumer agreements 
on t What exactly will be provided (product requiremendcapabilities)? t What exactly will 
constitute completion of the handoff (terms and 
conditi ons)? 
Using Filemaker Pro database soft- 
ware on a Macintosh computer, 
we developed an information model 
to cap- hire and analyze 
the resulting answers. If a team identified the need for an 
input that 
no team planned 
to output, or if the provider™s plans 
didn™t meet the need date, 
the information model raised 
a flag and nagged 
us until we resolved the discrepancy. If an output 
was planned that nobody needed, after dou- other teams to produce the outputs? dependencies on paper. More and more dependencies became vlsible 
as detailed planning progressed, 
hut often they 
were spotted 
with insufficient lead 
hme. We needed an 
expedihous way to detect all the underwater hazards and incorpo- 
rate thein 
into our planning, or we would surely run agi defining all team-to-team handoffs. The thought process each 
team engaged in simultaneously went something like this. 
1. What are all the outputs I must ble-checking for miscommunications, 
we deleted all associated tasks from plans. The question of ﬁWhat other inputs do you need™ﬂ kept reasserting 
itself until all teams certified that their 
detailed planning had progressed far enough that 
they coiild confidently During its first six months, 220 handoffs were incorporated 
into the 
information model, 
with another 10 percent trickling 
in since 
then. These So we began the grueling process 
of ™ answer ﬁNone!ﬂ IEEE SOFTWARE  figures exclude 60 handoffs that were recorded and 
later deleted for various reasons such 
as duplication, not need- ed, or represented an ongoing support 
activity rather than 
a handoff. No wonder our attempts to draw all the dependencies on a single sheet of paper had failed! 
Basing it on user-friendly, flexible software made 
the information 
model easy to expand and revise 
to meet our evolving rnanagernent needs. 
When we wanted to know all the handoffs that were necessary 
to get 
Tape I out the door, the 
handoff system could be tweaked to tell us. When we wanted to know everything that depended on a single handoff 
that was in jeopardy, 
a few keystrokes were 
all it took to find out. When we wanted to focus 
attention on just those 
handoffs that were past due or in jeopardy, it was easy to select them based on the latest stahis 
the pro- viding team had given. 
After the information model 
had paid its way by 
helping with macro 
planning, we unleashed it on 
micro planning. We were beginning to 
recog- nize some undesirable 
patterns, scenar- ios that seemed to get us in trouble over and over again: 
+ Provider and consumer did not reach agreement on exactly what would be handed off, or did not write it down prccisely, resul tiiig in the consumer not getting what he expected. 4 Provider and consumer did not reach agreement on or 
did not record handoff terms and conditions, which resulted in 
the omission of essential tasks and affected the schedule. For example: 4 Provider™s plans-task schedules, methods, staffing plans, resource plans, 
and so on-weren™t thorough and robust 
enough to execute successhlly. +Provider lackcd adequate means 
of apprising stakeholders 
of progress to plan. 
To reflect each 
of these scenarios, fields were added 
to the information model to force inquiry about the 
ade- quacy of planning and to record the joint assessments 
of the providing team 
and its 
stakeholders. checklist was devised to guide these adequacy 
assess- ments, for use b>- each team in develop- 
ing their planning, 
and for continual update to reflect team learning. 
If an 
area of planning was deemed inadequate 
for some handoff, 
the information model demanded 
to know the next step: 
who would do what, by when, to improve the planning? The most ser- ous cases required a long string 
of next steps before 
we were comfortable with 
the planning. Early each week, each 
team lead receives a printout of all handoffs need- 
ing attention, 
and feeds the appropriate 
updates back into the 
information model 
through an administrator 
who verifies that all changes are consistent and 
have been properly coordinated. 
At midweek the team 
reviews any handoffs 
still flagged. This review is facilitated by an overhead system 
that displays the Macintosh screen 
to the entire 
audience, ~ so that changes in the information- model can be made 
on-line as they are 
coordinated. Statistics of overall team performance on handoffs are also reviewed at this meeting, periodically resulting in challenges 
from the 
chief ™ engineer to improve our batting average on meeting internal commitments. 
Assistance. If giving good accountings 
is a hard skill to learn, dispensing valu- 
able consequences 
is even harder. Management ﬁhelpﬂ that 
doesn™t help 
is such a familiar theme that 
countless engineers think Dilbert 
or his creator Scott Adams must live in die next cubi- 
cle. Yet this area 
offers some of the most notable success stories of the MMC experience. We have found out what it™s like 
to be far cnough behind schedule 
to attract serious management attention. 
Such attention could easily have assumed team-unfriendly forms, such 
as replacing team leadership or dispers- ing the 
decision-making authority back into the 
functional departments. This didn™t happen. 
On the first such occasion, 
we clear- ly-in retrospect-needed help from outside the team, 
but hadn™t asked for it. 
The help we received came in the form of the director 
of the affected functional department, who brought with him extensive software manage- 
ment experience and 
an inclination to reinforce rather than 
replace the team accountability process. Consequences during and as a result of his special assignment included 
+ recalibrating.plans for the second increment of software development based on actual production rates for 
die first increment; + shifting some highly 
visible cus- tomer design-review milestones 
to accommodate the more 
realistic time spans resulting 
from this recalibration; 
+ temporarily waiving the ceiling on overtime pay for team 
members with tasks on the critical path; 
+ adding experienced personnel, both from within LMTAS and from our partner, Texas Instruments; 4 redistributing leadership responsi- 
bility within the team to ensure 
both planning and technical 
direction could receive adequate attention; and + adding and upgrading workstations. 
These examples of 
positive and 
con- structive consequences came 
at a critical time in the team™s growth. JULY 1996  Desirable behaviors and attitudes 
ahout assistance were further reinforced by an award-fee 
clause in the 
MMC contract. Each 
year the government 
determines what 
Dercent of 
a uredeter- items, upcoming events, 
current status, and anv uroblems or issues. The more il formal channel of quarterly program 
management reviews brings the same players face-to-face 
for a thorough minjed award fiind 
best reflects excep- accounting 
of program performance-to- 
tional contractor performance, 
based on , plan and results-to-date. These weekly criteria made known to the team at the ~ and quarterly interactions 
are particular- beginning of the performance period. 
ly important and effective for the ongo- 
The criteria emphasized mutual assis- ing clarification and occasional adjust- 
tame within the joint USAF/contractor 
ment of customer expectations. They team, and also 
the sharing of lessons also afford us a socially acceptable learned with 
other projects. This , opportunity to hold our customer emphasis inspired 
the following initia- i accountable for meeting their commit- 
tives, reflected in a first-period award of 
~ ments, such 
as action items, document 
over 94 percent: approvals, and 
contract changes. + convening periodic ﬁgraybeard 
One of our hardest lessons to learn, reviewsﬂ of highly experienced and 
in the 
sense of changing behaviors, 
has respected industry and 
government been in the 
area of 
customer account- 
experts to review our plans and status 
~ ability: the customer expects to hear the and make 
recommendations to the 
~ bad news as well 
as the good, and to joint team, share in the 
solution of problems before 
+ forming joint ﬁred teainsﬂ 
to ana- they become crises. The next section 
lyze alternatives and 
recommend soh- explains why this is such a hard lesson. tions to program-critical problems, 
+ extracting applicable lessons 
learned from 
F-22 Advanced Tactical , CONNECTIONS Fighter activities, and 
+ borrowing the most senior design 
and process experts available to help for- mulate key teain decisions. Cirstomer accountability. 
USAF partici- pants in the 
MMC program have operated quite 
effectively in a dual role, acting both as members of the joint MMC IPD Team and as the customer to whom the contractor team is accountable. The most important and effective channel for customer accountability 
has been day-to-day, person-to-person corn- 
muriication. Because of the TPD approach, this ongoing communication is distributed among a dozen or more 
couriterpart pairs, including but by no means restricted 
to the program manag- 
er anid chief enginecr. To ensure these 
one-to-one channels don™t calcify into silos, weekly telecon- 
ferences bring all the counterparts 
together for a review of open action 
Anyone seriously considering 
the possibility of 
implementing this kind of an accountability process should be aware of 
a couple of interdependencies: between accountability and 
trust, and between accountability and 
learning. Our experience indicates 
&at neither of these interdependencies 
can be broken 
without rendering 
the accountability process ineffective. 
In choosing to implement our model, you marry the entire family. Accountability and 
trust. Accountability depends on trust. The team offering 
up its accountings 
must have trust in its 
stakeholders: + that consequences will be fair, + that assistance will truly be + that direction will be knowledge- 
Stakeholders must equally have 
trust helpful, and 
able and consistent. 
in the team: + tliat accountings will be honest, 
+ that no important information will be suppressed, and 
+ that the competing 
interests of multiple stakeholders 
will be fairly and appropriately balanced. The bad news 
is that trust must be 
earned, not given. The good news is that a proactive accountability process 
is a powerful 
agent in bringing about 
trust. We have found that from a suffi- cient initial margin of trust, account- ability and trust can and will symbioti- cally grow. We have also 
encountered instances where 
carefully planned 
interventions were required to reverse a downward spiral 
of distrust before an 
effective accountability process could 
be implemented. Accountability and 
learning. Account- ability depends on learning. More accurately stated, true accountability presumes a learning organization as described by Peter Senge in The Fifth ﬁTeam learning,ﬂ as Senge calls it, is what fuels the accountability cycle. The team must believe it can learn 
(that is, improve) from the 
feedback of stakeholders. Stakeholders must believe in their obligation to provide useful, carefully 
considered consequences, 
as an inte- gral part of the learning process. Stakeholders must also be 
willing to learn from 
the team™s accountings and reflect 
their learning in ever more appropriate and effective con- sequences. Neither party can believe that learning or teaching is some- body else™s job, or unnecessary. Exercising accountability 
is a critical IEEE SOFTWARE  skill. There is an art to 
providing clear, comprehensive, yet concise account- ings. There is wisdom in knowing when and how to help and 
when to refrain. Every team 
member and stake- holder should be part 
of an ongoing proficiency development program 
to cultivate such skills. Learning to embrace a 
process that is based on unfamiliar mental models 
is difficult for team members. However, this learning 
process can 
be accelerated dramatically through consistent man- agement reinforcement. 
In implement- ing our 
accountability process, 
we repeatedly found 
that notable learning 
bursts and measurable improvements in process adherence followed when the chief engineer or program manager 
focused personal attention on that process and 
reminded everyone of its importance. Embracing new mental models 
is even harder for managers 
at the 
upper boundary of whatever organization is attempting the 
culture change. 
To begin with, 
if the next higher layer of management is outside the culture change boundary, 
there is no soLirce of consistent management reinforcement to accelerate the learning process. Furthermore, changing mental models is truly an 
act of courage for 
those at the upper 
boundary. Raymond 
Smith, CEO of Atlantic Bell, describes this discomfort in an interview with 
Business Ethics™ magazine : I had to completely 
chazge my own ,mindset. And that meant taking someone who hnd lenmed skills exceedin& iid, mid in effect trading them i7zfiibl- n ne::™: softe7. set. It™s nmch ensiei- to covinm7id niid co-ontrol thnrz to be nn evipo?:.ei-ing n-eaticig- eizcozimging boss. It meniis being exposed, to allox people to coach yozi. MASTERING ACCOUNTABILITY function of product design than of on- line ~ontrol.ﬂ~ By analogy, prog~am robustness, the likelihood of achieving desired results 
in the 
presence of noise, should be more a function 
of planning than of performance-to-plan monitoring and consequences. 
The derived notion of ﬁplanning robustnessﬂ seems 
a promising foundation for 
a more proac- tive version of risk management. Viewed 
from this angle, program risk is just an inverse measure 
of planning robustness. 
As instigator of the proactive Hence ﬁriskmanagementﬂ means identi- accountability process, 
I look back and fymg noise (how reality may vary 
from marvel at how far we™ve come; I look 
assumptions), finding 
tlie nonrobust ahead and despair 
at how far away the areas in plans, strengthening them 
if vision still seems. Ure have a long 
way possible, and 
otherwise making 
to go to master accountability; 
the allowances for the 
possible repercussions ,A!KhfC program may 
well end first. The in coordination with stakeholders. pursuit will continue until it does. If the most 
productive strategy 
tlien Here™s a sam-oline of n-hat™s on the road is to detect the weak areas 
in Dlans as IU ahead, ranging 
from near-term 
possibil- ities to wishful thinking. 
Propagating mental models. To date, pri- 
marily the first and second tiers 
of team leadership-less than IO percent of team members-have been directly 
involved in the 
accountability process. For the most 
part, changes in attitudes and behaviors are irisible in those who early as possible, why 
not apply proven 
techniques such 
as software inspectionsﬁ 
in the 
planning process? 
Our previously mentioned handoff-planning adequacy- 
assessment checklists provide 
a starting 
point for 
pursuing this strategy. Just rewards. We have seen that the ability to proactively hold ourselves accountable-implementing manage- have participated. The potential bene- 
fits of proactive accountability 
and the underlying mental 
models are the same regardless of the scope and 
level of team to which they are applied. 
We have yet to propagate what 
the leaders have learned throughout the remainder 
of the team. ment systems that in turn 
shape our mental models-lies largely within our sphere of control as a team. The fur- ther we progress, the more our 
ability to proceed is affected by factors that lie, at best, only marginally within our sphere of influence. Our success in mastering accountability depends on each individual™s conviction 
that fulfill- ing multiple stakeholder 
expectations in a balanced fashion defines 
success. Yet this desired 
belief is often under- mined by the reward systems 
that dominate not only our company but Even when bombarded with 
daily examples, it is hard to decipher what is happening to us here. We begin with well-considered corporate visions, niis- sions, goals, 
and objectives. To base each individual™s reward 
on his or her Robust planning. Accountability for 
Ph?Zi?Zg remains our greatest opportuni- ty for improvement. 
For our 
next gener- ation of accountability-for-planning sys- tems, we are adapting 
ideas from tlie quality process. 
most of industry. Genech Tapchi, one of the masters of the quality process, focuses 
on the concept of ﬁrobustnessﬂ: the degree to 
which a product 
Overcomes unplanned variations in its environment. He asserts that ﬁproduct 
‚robustness™ is more a JULY 1996  contribution to these objectives, 
we dis- 
sect corporate goals and disperse chunks 
to line organizations, further subdivid- ing the chunks at each level of 
the hier- archy. Then we define metrics so that we may objectively measure each chunk. 
Naturally, we reward the people within 
each line 
organization based on these metrics. So what™s going 
wrong? Optimizing the 
chunks does not optimize the organism from 
which they were 
sliced. Subdividing the original goal 
carves the life out of it. What is best for the organism is fre- quently suboptimal for 
some chunks, which all but guarantees opposition 
from their owners. Absent preventive measures, such 
opposition can kill a significant global cost reduction innovation that makes one organiza- tion™s metrics look bad. To make matters worse, 
the metric 
is only an 
imdicatoi- of the chunk, 
and not always a very good one. 
The map, how- 
ever precise, 
is not the territory. 
So maximizing the metrics doesn™t 
neces- sarily even 
optimize the chunks: the metric becomes the graven image 
sub- stituted for the forgotten 
goal. A goal of delivering perfect products may 
lead us to base rewards on defect-density reductions. Absent preventive measures, 
defect density can and will be reduced by not$?adilzg or 1-eporting defects if this is the behavior the reward reinforces. 
The degree to which many team 
members are willing to divorce them- selves from the reward system 
in pref- erence for ﬁdoing the right 
thingﬂ is truly remarkable, and 
adds credence to the theory 
that monetary rewards are a minor factor in employee motivation. Unfortunately, punishment is a stronger motivation, even when limit- 
ed to subtle disapproval. Potential reward, when withheld, equates 
to punishment. Many who are willing to forego personal 
gain in the interest 
of furthering team goals will retreat when faced with the prospect of costing their boss a metrics-based reward. We persist in this folly not because we™re stupid, but because we have not yet found 
a way to design a fair and objective reward system 
that reinforces desirable values and behaviors. REFERENCES I. L.J. ,,l/lenker, Re.nilt.y ofthe Aei-onautical Systems Diuisioii Critical 
l‚vocess Team on Integrated I™voduct Development, Tech. Report ASD-TR-90-5014, Air Force Systems Command, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, 1990. Computing iiz Acmpuce Confirence, accessible via http://lmtas.com./Cap,l/lod/AWAIndex.hunl. 2. R.D. Schlappe and R. 
W. Royston, ﬁSoftware Reuse 
for Capability Modularity,ﬂ l™roc. IYYIAIAA 3. C. Carr, Sn7.ai-t Trui7zing, McGraw-IIill, New York, 1992, 
pp. 13-18. 4. S.R. Covey, 
The Seven Habits ofHigh1~~ Effective People, Simon & Schuster, New York, 1989. 
5. D.W. Uencon, ﬁAn F.arned-Value 
Methodology for Statusing Software 
Development,ﬂ f‚roc. STARS Bzisiness l™ractice,y Areu ~Wunqgement Workshop, Software Technology for Adaptable Reliable Systems 
™L‚echnology Center, Advanced Research Projects 
Agency, Arlington, Va., 1985; 
also accessible via 
http://lmtac.com/Cap~od/ev~main.htm. 6. P. Conklin, ﬁEnrollmcnt Management, 
,Managing the Alpha AXP Program,ﬂ Digitul TechnicalJf., 
Vol. e, 1992. Reprinted in IEEE Softzzam, July 1996, pp. 53-64. 
h Discz$liize, Doubleday/Currency, New York, 1990. 8. M. Kelly, ﬁInterview with Raymond 
Smith,ﬂ Busmess Ethics, 
MajdJune 1992, 
pp. 28-30. 
9. G. Taguchi and D. Clauaing, ﬁRobust Quality,ﬂ Hmva7-d Busshess Rev., Jan./Feb. 1990, pp. 65-75. 10. A.13‚. Ackerruan, 13. Buchwald, and F.H. Lewski, ﬁSoftware Inspections: 
An Effective Verification Process,ﬂ IEEE Software, IMay 1989, pp 31-36. Management by objectives is deeply root- ed. Raymond Smith8 argues convinc- ingly for moving beyond 
MBO to man- agement by commitment, but the 
imple- mentation of a corresponding reward system is not discussed in the interview cited. Does anyone out there have a 
turnkey management by behaviors reward system? The search continues. 
ive years of MMC team experi- F ence substantiate 
some significant 
conclusions that, with two years 
remaining in the 
program, must 
still be qualified as ﬁinterim.ﬂ MMC experi- ence has shown 
that a team 
can, by its own initiative, establish an 
interaction with its stakeholders 
through which it obtains resources, directions, assistance, 
and clarification 
of expectations--in short, can empower itself. Management systems that are based on our 
account- ability model, and in turn reinforce responsible attitudes and behaviors, 
are the key to this empowerment strategy. We hope to prove that this strategy can turn an ﬁimpossibleﬂ program into an unqualified success. 
+ Kathy Van Cleave Pams is a full-time leader 
of the Modular Mission Computer ™learn 
at Lockheed Martin Tactical 
Aircraft Systems. 
As an cngineering project manag- 
er. her roles include team 
effectiveness facilitator, vision tender, managen lent cyctcm dcsiper, nadfly he - -. tener, referee, wordsmith, 
web weaver, and learning advocate. 
Her 22 years in aerospace as software engineer, systcm designer, supervisor, chief engineer, instructor, 
team leader, 
and program manager 
include contributions to space shuttle, F-111, and F-16 avionics, simulation, and 
tCSt systcn1s. Parris received a BA in Mathematics and Philosophy from Rice University. Address questions about this article 
to Parris at MZ 5963, Lockheed Martin Tactical 
Aircraft Systems, P.O. Box 748, Fort Worth, TX, 76101; kvparris@l~~c.lockhecd.corn. IEEE SOFTWARE 