 76IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/04/$20.00 © 2004 IEEEefficiency, and greater customer satisfaction.
In pair programming, a key ingredient in agile
projectsÕ success, pairs of programmers work-
ing together handle all development tasksÑ
each pair sharing one terminal, keyboard, and
mouse.3Ð5Researchers have since reportedthat pair programmers produce higher-quality

code than do developers working alone.6Ð8This finding is intuitively appealing; youÕd ex-
pect collaborators who continuously review
each otherÕs work to find better design and
construction solutions than one programmerworking alone. More surprising is their find-
ing that pair programmers produce code with

little or no significant productivity loss.6Ð8This research contrasts starkly with ourfield study findings. We decided to reexamine

our earlier productivity data from teams of

two and ask: Would our previous findings of

concurrent-work productivity loss be reversed

if we look only at programming pairs rather

than teams of all sizes? If so, we could con-

clude that pairs are naturally more productive
than larger teams, regardless of the collabora-

tive process. If not, we could conclude that the

collaboration mechanisms prescribed in pair
programming might overcome a natural loss
of productivity from concurrent work.We of-

fer these findings and their implications as a
benchmark against which we might measure
the potential of pair programming practices.
feature
A Field Study of DeveloperPairs: Productivity Impacts
and ImplicationsIn a previous industrial field study, we examined programmer produc-
tivity as team size varies. We showed that regardless of size or experi-

ence, the more time team members spend concurrently working on the

same code modules, the less productive they are.
1,2In other words,
teams are more productive when their members work independently.
As our research was underway, the phenomenon of agile software meth-
ods exploded, promising increased quality, shorter time to market, better 
agile methodologiesPair programming purportedly delivers quality code with littleproductivity loss. The authorsÕ field study, outside the pair

programming environment, shows that two-person teams working

independently are more productive than those working concurrently.

Agile methods may overcome inherent productivity losses of
concurrent development.Allen Parrish, Randy Smith, David Hale, and Joanne Hale, 
University of Alabama The conundrum of pair
programming and productivityPair programming exemplifies the highestlevel of collaborative effort, prescribing two
programmers to work side by side at one
computer, jointly responsible for producing

one artifact. One person is the driver, control-

ling the equipment and physically writing the
code; the other is the navigator, performing

ongoing peer reviews and acting as consultant
and advisor. Team members regularly swap

driver and navigator roles.3Ð5In our earlier work, we examined how as-signing development tasks to programmers af-
fects development effort.1,2One result fromthat work is a concurrency metricÑthe degreeto which different programmers report work-
ing on the same module during the same day.

Concurrency measures collaboration poten-tial: in a high-concurrency situation, there is
the potential (and some likelihood) that the

team members are working together. On the

other hand, in a low-concurrency situation
(team members working on the same module
but not on the same day), this probability

obviously diminishes. Although concurrency

isnÕta perfect measure of collaboration, itÕs a

necessary precursor, positively correlated with

collaboration, and relatively easy to noninva-
sively collect in many industrial situations.Pair programmers exhibit very high con-currency, working collaboratively at the same

time on the same task. But they also follow
the prescribed role-based protocol described
earlier. To understand pair programmingÕs im-

pact, one strategy is to establish certain base-
lines in the absence of those practices. Specif-

ically, whatÕs the impact of concurrency in a

situation where pair programming isnÕt prac-

ticed? If concurrency has a positive effect on
productivity in this context, we can conclude

that working concurrently in teams of two of-

fers a natural productivity benefit. On the

other hand, if concurrency has a negative

effect in this context, the pair programming

protocol must counteract this loss. So, how

important is role-based collaboration in max-

imizing pair programming productivity? To establish a baseline in this study, we sep-
arated the concurrency issue from the role-
based protocol. In particular, we examined

high-concurrency and low-concurrency pro-
gramming pairs in a situation where no role-
based protocol was prescribed. Our findingsshow that the former (that is, potentially highly
collaborative pairs) are dramatically less pro-
ductive than the latter (pairs working on the
same task but not at the same time). Although
this certainly doesnÕt imply a productivity loss

with pair programming, it does mean that any
productivity gains reported with pair program-
ming are likely due entirely to the role-based
protocol rather than to any inherent conse-
quences of working closely in pairs.Reexamining our research resultsWe reexamined our previous data isolating
and analyzing the productivity of two-person
teams who were developing a statewide time-
accounting system. The analysis covered 48
modules developed by professional program-
mer pairs. For each such module, we examined
the effect of concurrency on pair productivity.
The contractor was rehosting a legacy systemto a distributed environment. The legacy system
had over 3,000 screens and approximately a
million lines of code.1,2The new system sup-ports over 400 distributed users and accommo-
dates departmental accounting and personnel
systems, inventory control, and a large-scale
bidding system for state infrastructure. The de-

velopers used a fourth-generation tool, a mod-
ern relational database, and a Microsoft Win-

dows-based development environment that

included report generators, COTS libraries,
database systems, and other new components. From preliminary design information, we
measured unadjusted function points (UFPs)
for each module, then recorded actual devel-

opment effort using the development teamÕs

time-accounting system. The system records each

developer using a unique identifier, a module

identifier, time spent (in 15-minute incre-

ments) on the module, and the date the work

was done.1,2Although the recording processmight be inaccurate, using a noninvasive con-
tractor accounting system let us collect a much
more extensive set of productivity data than

otherwise would have been possible.We isolated three factors for this study:
Team size
: modules with developmentteams of size two (n= 48)Concurrency: the degree to which pro-
grammers reported working on the same
module during the same day1,2Productivity: the average number of UFPscompleted per unit of time
September/October 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
77AlthoughconcurrencyisnÕt a perfect
measure ofcollaboration,itÕs a necessary
precursor,
positivelycorrelated, andrelatively easyto collect. 78IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
We measured concurrency by the average
number of programmers reporting work on a

module over all days that the module was un-
der development (see elsewhere for additional

details1). Although the data analyzed doesnÕt
provide posterior measures of quality at the

module level, we tested all the modules using
standard criteria prior to completion. So, from

a functional perspective, all modules met a

minimum quality standard.1,2Concurrency and productivity
We measured productivity by the number of
UFPs developed per hour of programmer ef-
fort. We classified teams reporting concurrency

levels below the median as low-concurrency
and those reporting levels above the median as
high-concurrency.
We ran a simple t-test to determine if a sig-
nificant difference exists in these two groupsÕ

average productivity. This statistical proce-

dure tests the validity of the hypothesis that
two samples (in this case, a low-concurrency

sample and a high-concurrency sample) are
drawn from populations with the same mean

(in this case, with the same average productiv-
ity). Rejecting this hypothesis is equivalent to
concluding that the probability (denoted by
the p-value) is very low that any observed dif-
ferences in average productivity between low-

and high-concurrency groups is due to chance. As Table 1 shows, the t-test results are com-
pelling. Low-concurrency pairs (those work-

ing most independently) developed an average
of 4.7 UFPs per hour, while high-concurrency

pairs (those potentially working most closely
together) developed an average of 1.1 UFPs
per hour. So, the more independent pairs were

over four times more productive than the

more concurrent ones, with a near-zero prob-

ability that such a wide difference could have
occurred by chance alone. This is in stark con-
trast with the reported productivity effects of

the role-based pair programming protocol. Inthese studies, the productivity loss was either
moderate or statistically insignificant.6Ð8Implications for programmingpracticeOutside of a prescribed pair programming
protocol environment, we could make intu-

itively appealing arguments for the productiv-
ity of highly collaborative programming pairs
on the basis of two claims:
A pair of experienced, methodology-
trained professional developers shouldnÕt

need a prescribed collaboration protocol
to effectively and productively plan, com-
municate, execute, and review tasks. 
Programming pairs can learn over time to
work more productively together by de-
vising their own productive collaboration
process. The data from our field study indicates that nei-ther argument holds true. Refuting the first ar-
gument is our finding that the high-concurrency
pairs were significantly less productive despite
the fact that they were experienced, methodol-
ogy-trained programmers. On average, these
professional programmers had 10 years of work
experience. Our assessment of pair productiv-
ityover time refutes the second argument. We

found that pairs were no more productive on
later modules than on earlier modules.There are at least two intuitively appealingexplanations:Pairs working together arenÕt naturally

productiveÑthey need the collaborative
role-based protocol that pair programming
provides to combat this productivity loss.Pairs working concurrently on the same

task might be unproductive because of du-
plicate workÑsimultaneously working on
the same problem or making conflicting
changes that must be reconciled later.
Our field study supports the first rather than
second explanation. Although we recognize the

potential for the second cause of lost produc-

tivity, it doesnÕt appear to be a strong factor in

this case. The team of 16 developers worked at

the same location and used a version control
system with source code tracking and check-in

and check-out file locking. Although this doesnÕt

preclude the possibility of duplicate effort, it
Table 1T-test* results: Productivity versus concurrency level
No. of developedMeanStandard 
Concurrency levelmodulesproductivitydeviation
Low234.7093.973
High251.1250.726
: population mean; 95% confidence interval for 
µlowÐ µhigh = (1.844, 5.323)
T-test of hypothesis, 
µlow= µhigh:t-value = Ð4.26; p-value = 0.000
 September/October 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
79significantly reduces its potential. So, we con-
clude that the role-based protocol prescribed in

pair programming overcomes a natural produc-

tivity loss from working in pairs.
Some prior empirical evidence is avail-
able regarding the productivity effects
of pair programming. However, these
studies involved student programmer pairs6,8or professional programmers working on
short, 45-minute tasks.7Particularly given theincreased use of pair programmingÑin a re-
cent worldwide survey,
935 percent of 104 de-
velopment projects said they incorporate pair

programmingÑmore empirical evidence from

real industry projects is needed.
A key to establishing realistic expectations
will be industry participation in data collec-

tion and experimentation. This requires signif-

icant effort and might involve releasing valu-
able proprietary data. In the interim, our

study provides an industry baseline: Pair col-
laboration requires significant resources, and
a prescribed pair programming protocol
shows promise for reducing this cost and, bet-

ter still, improving productivity.
The concurrency metric provides a valuableframework for future work in this area. In par-

ticular, we can control for it. Thus, among high-

concurrency pairs, we could compare pairs em-
ploying the role-based pair programming
protocol (side by side on a single machine) with

other interaction models and thus evaluate the

typical process model that agile methodologies

employ. Future work must also explore other

factors that might alter the effectiveness of pair

programming practices, including programmer

expertise, problem complexity, problem do-

main, and development environment. This

work is an important next step in the quest to
quantify the overall utility of agile methods.
Setting aside any productivity impacts in anindustrial setting, pair programmingÕs other

valuable benefits are already well established.
Pair programming teams not only create higher-

quality code but also find greater enjoyment in
their jobs and more confidence in their work.7,10Robert Glass lauds agile methodologies for

their emphasis on constant unit testing, contin-

uous integration, customer participation, and

programmer-friendly workload expectations.
11This study certainly doesnÕt try to refute these

claims. We expect to see mounting evidence

that these benefits are real and significant.
References1.R. Smith, J. Hale, and A. Parrish, ÒAn Empirical Study
Using Task Assignment Patterns to Improve the Accu-

racy of Software Effort Estimation,Ó IEEE Trans. Soft-
ware Eng., vol. 27, no. 3, 2001, pp. 264Ð271.2.J. Hale et al., ÒEnhancing the COCOMO Estimation
Models,Ó IEEE Software, vol. 17, no. 6, 2000, pp. 45Ð49.
3.K. Beck, ÒEmbracing Change with Extreme Program-
ming,Ó Computer, vol. 32, no. 10, 1999, pp. 70Ð77.4.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbracingChange, Addison-Wesley, 2000.
5.L. Williams and R. Kessler, 
Pair Programming Illumi-nated, Addison-Wesley, 2003.
6.L. Constantine, 
Constantine on Peopleware, Yourdon
Press, 1995.7.J. Nosek, ÒThe Case for Collaborative Programming,Ó
Comm. ACM, vol. 41, no. 3, 1998, pp. 105Ð108.8.L. Williams et al., ÒBuilding Pair Programming Knowledge
through a Family of Experiments,Ó Proc. 2003 IntÕl Symp.Empirical Software Eng.
, IEEE CS Press, 2003, pp. 143Ð152.
9.M. Cusumano et al., ÒSoftware Development World-
wide: The State of the Practice,Ó 
IEEE Software, vol.20, no. 6, 2003, pp. 28Ð34.10.L. Williams and R. Kessler, ÒAll I Really Need To Know
about Pair Programming I Learned in Kindergarten,Ó

Comm. ACM, vol. 43, no. 5, 2000, pp. 108Ð114.11.R. Glass, ÒExtreme Programming: The Good, the Bad,
and the Bottom Line,Ó IEEE Software, vol. 18, no. 6,2001, pp. 112Ð111.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
About the AuthorsAllen Parrish
is an associate professor in the Department of Computer Science and direc-tor of the CARE Research and Development Laboratory at the University of Alabama. His re-

search interests are in software testing, software deployment, data analysis and visualization,
and highway safety information systems. He received his PhD in computer and information sci-
ence from Ohio State University. Contact him at the Dept. of Computer Science, Box 870290,

Univ. of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0290; parrish@cs.ua.edu.
Randy Smithis an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science at the Uni-versity of Alabama. His research interests are in software effort estimation, software process,
and data analysis. He received his PhD in computer science from the University of Alabama.
Contact him at the Dept. of Computer Science, Box 870290, Univ. of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL

35487-0290; rsmith@cs.ua.edu.David Haleis the director of Management Information Systems programs in the Manufac-turing Information Technology Center at the University of Alabama, and in the Information

Technology-Workforce Resource Center of Alabama. His research interests include aging infra-

structure, enterprise integration and modeling, component-based software development, and
software maintenance. He received his PhD in MIS from the University of Wisconsin, Milwau-
kee. Contact him at the Dept. of Information Systems, Statistics, and Management Science, Box
870226, Univ. of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0226; dhale@cba.ua.edu.
Joanne Haleis an associate professor of management information systems at the Univer-sity of Alabama. Her research interests include software development metrics, software main-
tenance, software cost estimation, and component based development and reuse. She received
her PhD in MIS from Texas Tech University. She is a member of the IEEE and ACM. Contact her

at the Dept. of Information Systems, Statistics, and Management Science, Box 870226, Univ.

of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0226; jhale@cba.ua.edu.
