 20
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
user centric
Editor: Jeff Patton 
 independent consultant 
 jpatton@acm.org
Getting Software RITE
Jeff Patton
Something has always troubled me about 
designing and developing software. Let me 
explain.
It™s both a sad and a lucky thing that my 
profession is also my hobby. (It™s sad because 
I honestly need a real hobby.) I ˜nd soft
-ware design and development extremely challenging 
and enjoyable. I love learning about a complex prob
-lem, noodling around with pos
-sible designs, and then in a quick 
˚ash arriving at what feels like a 
truly elegant solution. I then build 
the solution I™ve designed, making 
slight changes and improvements 
as I go, ˜nally ending up with 
something I™m really proud of. 
Here comes the troubling part. It 
comes when the software is placed 
in front of my end users. They knit 
their brows in confusion as they stare at the user in
-terface, then say apologetically, ﬁI don™t get this.ﬂ 
And that™s when things are going well.
If you™ve never sat with or observed people using 
software you™ve designed, you™re in for a real sur
-prise. For most designers and developers, it feels like 
being hit with a brick. If you can™t empathize, I ad
-mire you.
But this column is actually about a solution to 
the problem.
Validate your software 
 design with users
I ˜nd that, in traditional software development 
 environments, many designers don™t routinely put their 
software in front of users. If the ultimate measure of 
well-designed software is how effectively it serves its 
intended purpose, then validating that it does so is 
critical, and the sooner the better. Many user-centered 
design practitioners do this with usability testing.
A formal usability test is a rather sciencey affair. 
It involves a number of different people in different 
roles, and goes a bit like this:
Prototypers or developers build a user interface 
prototype or piece of working software.
Usability testers select user tasks to validate. A 
user task is an objective that users might have 
relative to the software they™re using. ﬁSending 
an email messageﬂ in an email client is a task. 
ﬁFinding a digital cameraﬂ on a shopping Web 
site is also a task. These tasks are what we™ll ask 
users to perform.
A facilitator introduces a user to the prototype he 
or she will be using and explains a little about the 
test, reinforcing the idea that it™s the software be
-ing tested, not the user. The facilitator then asks 
the user to perform the task, or series of tasks, 
being validated.
Observers then watch, recording observations 
about missteps the user makes and places where 
the user is confused or is struggling with per
-forming the tasks.
In a very formal usability test, observers are 
behind one-way glass or in a separate room 
watching the test as it is recorded with a cam
-era. Being present in the room might bias the 
results by tipping off the user if he or she makes 
mistakes. Formal usability testers might record 
the face of the user, the computer screen, the 
user™s hands on the keyboard and mouse, and, 
using special devices, even the user™s eye motion 
on the screen.
Several users are tested by the team.
Observers record problems during each test, 
then results are combined.
This is all hard work. It bene˜ts from well-trained 
and skilled testing practitioners. Furthermore, we™re 
left with a bundle of well-justi˜ed ˜xes that must 
be carried out on our software. If this is a proto
-type, that™s not so bad. But when we make ˜xes and 
run another batch of users through testing, we of
-ten ˜nd that our ˜xes need ˜xesŠor that one ˜xed 
item reveals another problem. If we™ve been testing 
with working software, the cost of change is even 
higher, and making changes might be dif˜cult. We 
often ship software with known problems because 
we™re out of time and money to make changes.
 user centric
Editor: Jeff Patton 
 independent consultant 
 jpatton@acm.org
 May/June 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 21
USER
 CENTRIC
Lighten up validation
Now, validation needn™t be this formal or 
dif˜cult. I™ll admit I don™t have the skills, 
patience, and equipment to perform this 
sort of testing.
Alternatively, usability testing often in
-volves lightweight paper prototypes, with a 
human who™s moving bits of paper around 
to simulate computer interactions. This ap
-proach is surprisingly quick and effective. 
I™ve done a fair bit of this.
When doing this, I experience the same 
letdown I described at the article™s begin
-ning, when my best design efforts are met 
with confusion by my user. But here™s where 
the story gets better. In paper, I can quickly 
change the prototype to ˜x problems, grab 
another test subject, and try again. And I™m 
always pleased with how quickly things be
-gin to improve using iterative testing.
Turn your validation process 
into your design process
This test-˜x-test-˜x cycle continues until the 
software starts to feel pretty tight. This ap
-proach is called RITE (Rapid Iterative Test
-ing and Evaluation). The name was coined 
by Michael Medlock and his colleagues at 
Microsoft, who documented the approach 
in their paper ﬁUsing the RITE Method 
to Improve Products.ﬂ (See the sidebar for 
more information on this and other further 
reading.)
However, the approach those authors 
described didn™t use paper prototypes; they 
tested the working software. They described 
bringing test subjects in, testing, and hav
-ing usability practitioners and developers 
observe the tests. After usability testers and 
developers discussed problems, developers 
went to work ˜xing critical problems as 
quickly as possible before the next test sub
-ject showed up. They tested again to con
-˜rm they had removed some of the identi
-˜ed errors, and repeated the process until 
the quality of usability felt suf˜ciently high.
This sounds like a great idea, but while I 
don™t ˜nd nearly enough organizations that 
invest in usability testing, I ˜nd nearly none 
that invest in RITE. But recently I had the 
pleasure of talking with Catherine Cour
-age and Craig Villamor of salesforce.com. 
We talked because I was interested in their 
adoption of very short agile development 
cycles, which in other cases have often laid 
waste to rigorous user experience practice.  
Rigorous user experience practice implies 
some amount of user research, some time 
for design, and some time to validate that 
design with users before sending it to devel
-opment. An agile development process of
-ten doesn™t leave time for a lot of this sort 
of work. ﬁWe™ve really embraced the RITE 
method here,ﬂ explained Catherine. I was 
surprised.
Catherine went on to describe that they 
tested all their software using electronic 
prototypes before it went into development, 
and much of it again afterward.
Build a pool of ready users
To support this effort, they need a huge 
pool of users from all over the world, be
-cause salesforce.com™s product is global. 
Salesforce.com builds its pool by asking us
-ers to volunteer in various waysŠfor exam
-ple, through their ﬁidea exchangeﬂ (ideas.
 salesforce.com), invitations in their user-
 experience blog, and user-experience mar
-keting campaigns. ﬁThousands have opted 
in,ﬂ explains Catherine. Every month, doz
-ens of users from that pool work with sales
-force.com staff to remotely test prototypes 
and working software. ﬁOur employees love 
our customers, and our customers are in
-credibly enthusiastic,ﬂ Catherine says.
Keep testing quick, 
 simple, and frequent
Here are some ways salesforce.com facili
-tates testing:
The company uses simple screen-shar
-ing software (GoToMeeting) to share 
prototypes electronically. Testers pass 
control of mouse and keyboard to their 
users to watch them work.
A simple conference call lets a facilitator 
talk to users and lets the user explain 
likes, dislikes, and areas of confusion.
The company sometimes uses Tech
-Smith™s Morae to record the screens and 
audio as users interact with the software.
A projector displays the user™s interac
-tions with the product in a large format 
so that all the product team members 
can easily observe them.
But this is the RITE method, so the 
goal is to ˜x the problems, not just iden
-tify them. ﬁI™ll often start making changes 
while they™re still testing,ﬂ says Craig.
A typical weekly testing cycle has sales
-force.com designers testing Monday, ˜xing 
Tuesday, testing Wednesday, ˜xing Thurs
-day, and then testing again Friday. By the 
end of the week, things are getting pretty 
good. User-experience people, product man
-agers, developers, and others sit in on the 
call and watch the screen. ﬁWhen the user 
gets it right, the whole room cheers!ﬂ de
-scribes Craig. (I assume their conference 
phone is on mute.)
When everyone participates in testing, 
they understand how the software works 
and why the design is the way it is. Cath
-erine explains, ﬁThere™s no UI specŠthe UI 
spec is the prototype.ﬂ
Once you™ve gone RITE, 
 it™s hard to go back
Catherine described her experience going 
back to traditional testing after salesforce.
com purchased a product to add to their 
suite: ﬁIt was like [the movie] 
Groundhog 
Day
Šwe kept seeing the same errors over 
and over and were dying to ˜x them.ﬂ
For me too, iteratively testing and im
-proving my design has become addictive. 
The real joy of software development for 
me comes in delivering great software.
Jeff Patton 
is an independent consultant. Contact him at 
jpatton@acm.org.
Further Reading
C. Courage and K. Baxter, 
Understanding Your Users: A Practical Guide to User 
Requirements Methods, Tools, and Techniques
, Morgan Kaufmann, 2004.
J. Nielsen, ﬁPaper Prototyping: Getting User Data before You Code,ﬂ 14 Apr. 
2003, www.useit.com/alertbox/20030414.html.
M.C. Medlock et al., ﬁUsing the RITE Method to Improve Products: A De˜ni
-tion and a Case Study,ﬂ 2002, www.microsoft.com/downloads/details.
aspx?FamilyID=3b882eb1-5f06-41d9-baba-d39ad13bc3ff&displaylang=en.
C. Snyder, 
Paper Prototyping: The Fast and Easy Way to Design and Re˜ne User 
Interfaces
, Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
