 focus0740-7459/01/$10.00 © 2001 IEEENovember/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
19In this article, I summarize both XPand the SW-CMM, show how XP can help

organizations realize the SW-CMM goals,

and then critique XP from a SW-CMM

perspective.The Software CMMThe Software Engineering Institute atCarnegie Mellon University developed the
SW-CMM as a model for building organi-

zational capability, and it has been widely

adopted in the software community and be-
yond. As Table 1 shows, the SW-CMM is a

five-level model that describes good engi-
neering and management practices and pre-
scribes improvement priorities for software
organizations.Although the SW-CMM is described in a
book of nearly 500 pages, the requirements
for becoming a Level 5 organization are
concisely stated in 52 sentencesÑthe 52
goals of the modelÕs 18 key process areas

(KPAs). The practices, subpractices, and ex-

amples that flesh out the model can guidesoftware professionals in making reason-able, informed decisions about a broad
range of process implementations.The SW-CMM informative materials fo-
cus primarily on large projects and large or-
ganizations. With minor tailoring and com-

mon sense, however, the model can be

applied in radically different environments,
ranging from two- to three-person projects
in small start-up companies to 500-person
projects building hard real-time, life-critical
systems.2,3The SW-CMMÕs rating compo-
nents are intentionally abstract, capturing
Òuniversal truthsÓ about high-performance
software organizations. As a glance at Table

2 shows, the KPAs are clearly important to

all types of software organizations.With the exception of 
software subcon-tract management, which applies only toorganizations that do subcontracting, the
KPAs and their goals can apply to any soft-

ware organization. Companies that focus
on innovation more than operational excel-
lence might downplay the role of consis-Extreme Programmingfrom a CMM PerspectiveMark C. Paulk, Software Engineering InstituteXP has goodengineering
practices that
can work well
with the CMM
and other highly
structured
methods. 
The key is 
to carefully
consider XP
practices and
implement them
in the right
environment.Extreme Programming is an Òagile methodologyÓ that some peopleadvocate for the high-speed, volatile world of Internet and Web

software development. Although XP is a disciplined process, some
have used it in arguments against rigorous software process im-provement models such as the Software Capability Maturity Model.1reports from the field
 tency, predictability, and reliability, but per-
formance excellence is important even in
highly innovative environments.Extreme ProgrammingThe XP method is typically attributed to
Kent Beck, Ron Jeffries, and Ward Cun-

ningham.4,5XPÕs target is small to medium-
sized teams building software with vague or
rapidly changing requirements. XP teams

are typically colocated and have fewer than
10 members.
XPÕs critical underlying assumption is that
developers can obviate the traditional high
cost of change using technologies such as ob-
jects, patterns, and relational databases, re-
sulting in a highly dynamic XP process. BeckÕs

book is subtitled Embrace Change, and XPteams typically deal with requirements
changes through an iterative life cycle with
short cycles.The XP life cycle has four basic activities:coding, testing, listening, and designing. Dy-
namism is demonstrated through four values:continual communication with the cus-
tomer and within the team;
simplicity, achieved by a constant focus

on minimalist solutions;rapid feedback through mechanisms
such as unit and functional testing; andthe courage to deal with problems
proactively.
Principles in practiceMost of XPÕs principlesÑminimalism, sim-
plicity, an evolutionary life cycle, user involve-

ment, and so forthÑare commonsense prac-

tices that are part of any disciplined process.
As Table 3 summarizes, the ÒextremeÓ in XP

comes from taking commonsense practices to
extreme levels. Although some people may in-
terpret practices such as Òfocusing on a mini-
malist solutionÓ as hacking, XP is actually a

highly disciplined process. Simplicity in XP
terms means focusing on the highest-priority,

most valuable system parts that are currently

identified rather than designing solutions to
problems that are not yet relevant (and might
never be, given that requirements and operat-

ing environments change).
Although developers might use many dif-ferent XP practices, the method typically

consists of 12 basic elements:
Planning game: Quickly determine thenext releaseÕs scope, combining business

priorities and technical estimates. The cus-
tomer decides scope, priority, and dates

from a business perspective, whereas tech-

nical people estimate and track progress.Small releases: Put a simple system into
production quickly. Release new ver-

sions on a very short (two-week) cycle.Metaphor: Guide all development witha simple, shared story of how the over-

all system works.
Table 1An overview of the Software CMM
LevelFocusKey process areas
5: OptimizingContinual process improvementDefect preventionTechnology change management
Process change management4: ManagedProduct and process qualityQuantitative process managementSoftware quality management3: DefinedEngineering processes and organizational supportOrganization process focusOrganization process definition
Training program

Integrated software management
Software product engineering
Intergroup coordinationPeer reviews2: RepeatableProject management processesRequirements managementSoftware project planning
Software project tracking and oversight
Software subcontract management
Software quality assuranceSoftware configuration management1: InitialCompetent people (and heroics)20IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001 Simple design: Design as simply as pos-sible at any given moment.Testing
: Developers continually writeunit tests that must run flawlessly; cus-
tomers write tests to demonstrate that

functions are finished. ÒTest, then codeÓ

means that a failed test case is an entry
criterion for writing code.Refactoring: Restructure the systemwithout changing its behavior to re-
move duplication, improve communica-
tion, simplify, or add flexibility.
Pair programming: All production codeis written by two programmers at one

machine.Collective ownership: Anyone can im-prove any system code anywhere atany time.Continuous integration: Integrate andbuild the system many times a day

(every time a task is finished). Continual
regression testing prevents functionality
regressions when requirements change.40-hour weeks: Work no more than 40
hours per week whenever possible; never
work overtime two weeks in a row.
On-site customer: Have an actual user onthe team full-time to answer questions.Coding standards: Have rules that empha-size communication throughout the code.These basic practices work together to cre-November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
21Table 2The Software CMM key process areas and their purposesKey process areaPurpose
Maturity Level 2: RepeatableRequirements managementEstablish a common understanding between the customer and software project team about the customerÕs 
requirements.Software project planningEstablish reasonable plans for software engineering and overall project management.
Software project tracking and oversightProvide adequate visibility into actual progress so that management can act effectively 
when the software projectÕs performance deviates significantly from the software plans.
Software subcontract managementSelect qualified software subcontractors and manage them effectively.
Software quality assuranceProvide management with appropriate visibility into the product and the software process.
Software configuration managementEstablish and maintain the integrity of software products throughout the projectÕs software li
fe cycle.Maturity Level 3: DefinedOrganization process focusEstablish organizational responsibility for software process activities that improve the organization
Õs overall 
software process capability.
Organization process definitionDevelop and maintain a usable set of software process assets that improve process performance ac
ross theprojects and provide a basis for cumulative, long-term organizational benefits.Training programDevelop individualsÕ skills and knowledge so that they can perform their roles effectively and efficiently.
Integrated software managementIntegrate the software engineering and management activities into a coherent, defined software pr
ocess based on the organizationÕs standard software process and related process assets.
Software product engineeringConsistently use a well-defined engineering process that integrates all the software engineering ac
tivities to produce correct, consistent software products effectively and efficiently.
Intergroup coordinationEstablish a way for the software engineering group to participate actively with other engineering groups
 so 
that the project can effectively and efficiently satisfy customer needs.Peer reviewsRemove defects from the software work products early and efficiently. An important corollary effect is to 
develop a better understanding of the software products and the preventable defects.Maturity Level 4: ManagedQuantitative process managementQuantitatively control the performance of the software projectÕs process. Software process perfo
rmance represents the actual results achieved from following a software process.Software quality managementQuantify the quality of the projectÕs software products and achieve specific quality goals.
Maturity Level 5: OptimizingDefect preventionIdentify the cause of defects and prevent them from recurring.

Technology change managementIdentify new technologies (such as tools, methods, and processes) and introduce them into the organ
iza-tion in an orderly manner.
Process change managementContinually improve the organizationÕs software processes with the goal of improving software quality,
 increasing productivity, and decreasing the product-development cycle time.
 ate a coherent method. XP characterizes thefull system functionality using a pool of Òsto-
ries,Ó or short feature descriptions. For the
planning game and small releases, the cus-
tomer must select a subset of stories that char-
acterize the most desirable work for develop-
ers to implement in the upcoming release.
Because the customer can add new stories to
the pool at any time, requirements are highly
volatile. However, volatility is managed by

implementing functionality in two-week
chunks. Having a customer onsite supports
this ongoing cycle of two-week releases.XP developers generate a metaphor toprovide the projectÕs overarching vision. Al-

though you could view this as a high-level
architecture, XP emphasizes design, while at

the same time minimizing design documen-
tation. Some people have characterized XP
as not allowing documentation outside
code, but that is not quite accurate. Because
XP emphasizes continual redesignÑusing
refactoring whenever necessaryÑthere is lit-
tle value to detailed design documentation
(and maintainers rarely trust anything other
than the code anyway).XP developers typically throw away design
documentation after the code is written, al-
though they will keep it if itÕs useful. They also

keep design documentation when the cus-
tomer stops coming up with new stories. At
that point, itÕs time to put the system in moth-

balls and write a five- to 10-page Òmothball
tourÓ of the system. A natural corollary of the
refactoring emphasis is to always implement
the simplest solution that satisfies the immedi-
ate need. Requirements changes are likely to
supersede Ògeneral solutionsÓ anyway.
Pair programming is one of XPÕs more
controversial practices, mainly because it
has resource consequences for the very man-
agers who decide whether or not to let a
project use XP. Although it might appear
that pair programming consumes twice theresources, research has shown that it leads
to fewer defects and decreased cycle time.
6For a jelled team, the effort increase can be

as little as 15 percent, while cycle time is re-
duced by 40 to 50 percent. For Internet-time
environments, the increased speed to mar-
ket may be well worth the increased effort.

Also, collaboration improves problem solv-

ing, and increased quality can significantly
reduce maintenance costs. When considered
over the total life cycle, the benefits of pair

programming often more than pay for
added resource costs.Because XP encourages collective owner-ship, anyone can change any piece of code in
the system at any time. The XP emphasis on
continuous integration, continual regression
testing, and pair programming protects
against a potential loss of configuration con-
trol. XPÕs emphasis on testing is expressed in

the phrase Òtest, then code.Ó It captures the
principle that developers should plan testing
early and develop test cases in parallel with
requirements analysis, although the tra-
ditional emphasis is on black-box testing.
Thinking about testing early in the life cycle
is standard practice for good software engi-
neering, though it is too rarely practiced.The basic XP management tool is the
metric, and the metricÕs medium is the Òbig

visible chart.Ó In the XP style, three or four

measures are typically all a team can stand
at one time, and those should be actively
used and visible. One recommended XP
metric is Òproject velocityÓÑthe number of

stories of a given size that developers can
implement in an iteration.
Adoption strategiesXP is an intensely social activity, and not
everyone can learn it. There are two conflict-
ing attitudes toward XP adoption. XP is gen-22IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001Table 3The ÒextremeÓ in Extreme Programming
CommonsenseXP extremeXP implementation practice
Code reviewsReview code all the timePair programming
TestingTest all the time, even by customersUnit testing, functional testing
DesignMake design part of everybodyÕs daily businessRefactoring
SimplicityAlways work with the simplest design that supports the systemÕsThe simplest thing that could possibly work
current functionalityArchitectureEverybody works to refine the architecture all the timeMetaphor
Integration testingIntegrate and test several times a dayContinuous integration

Short iterationsMake iterations extremely shortÑseconds, minutes, and hoursPlanning game
rather than weeks, months, and years erally viewed as a system that demonstratesemergent properties when adopted as a
whole. As the discussion thus far shows, there
are strong dependencies between many XP

practices, such as collective ownership and
continuous integration.Nonetheless, some people recommendadopting XP one practice at a time, focusing

on the teamÕs most pressing current prob-

lem. This is consistent with the attitude to-

ward change that XP is Òjust rulesÓ and the

team can change the rules anytime as long

as they agree on how to assess the changeÕs

effects. Beck, for example, describes XP
practices as ÒetudesÓ: They help developers
master the techniques, but experienced
users can modify them as necessary.
XP and the CMMThe SW-CMM focuses on both the man-
agement issues involved in implementing ef-
fective and efficient processes and on system-
atic process improvement. XP, on the other

hand, is a specific set of practicesÑa Òmethod-
ologyÓÑthat is effective in the context of

small, colocated teams with rapidly changing

requirements. Taken together, the two meth-

ods can create synergy, particularly in con-

junction with other good engineering and

management practices. IÕll now illustrate this
by discussing XP practices in relation to the

CMM KPAs and goals outlined in Table 2.
XP and Level 2 practicesXP addresses Level 2Õs 
requirements man-agement KPA through its use of stories, an
onsite customer, and continuous integration.

Although system requirements might evolve

dramatically over time, XP integrates feed-
back on customer expectations and needs 
by emphasizing short release cycles and con-

tinual customer involvement. ÒCommon un-
derstandingÓ is established and maintained

through the customerÕs continual involvement

inbuilding stories and selecting them for the

next release (in effect, prioritizing customer
requirements).XP addresses software project planningin the planning game and small releases.
XPÕs planning strategy embodies Watts

HumphreyÕs advice, ÒIf you canÕt plan well,

plan often.Ó The first three activities of this
KPA deal with getting the software team in-

volved in early planning. XP integrates the
software team into the commitment processby having it estimate the effort involved to
implement customer stories; at the level of
two-week releases, such estimates are typi-

cally quite accurate. The customer maintains
control of business priorities by choosing
which stories to implement in the next release
with the given resources. By definition, the

XP life cycle is both incremental and evolu-

tionary. The project plan is not detailed for

the projectÕs whole life cycle, although the

system metaphor does establish a vision for

project direction. As a result, developers can

identify and manage risks efficiently.
XP addresses software project trackingand oversightwith the Òbig visual chart,Óproject velocity, and commitments (stories)

for small releases. XPÕs commitment process

sets clear expectations for both the customer
and the XP team at the tactical level and max-
imizes flexibility at the projectÕs strategic

level. The emphasis on 40-hour weeks is a
general human factors concern; although
CMM does not address it, having Òrational
work hoursÓ is usually considered a best
practice. XP also emphasizes open work-
spaces, a similar Òpeople issueÓ that is outside
CMMÕs scope. XP does not address 
softwaresubcontract management, which is unlikely toapply in XPÕs target environment.
While an independent software qualityassurance group is unlikely in an XP cul-ture, SQA could be addressed by the pair-

programming culture. Peer pressure in an
XP environment can achieve SQAÕs aim of

assuring conformance to standards, though
it does not necessarily give management vis-
ibility into nonconformance issues. Dealing
with process and product assurance using
peer pressure can be extraordinarily effec-
tive in a small team environment. However,

larger teams typically require more formal
mechanisms for objectively verifying adher-
ence to requirements, standards, and proce-
dures. Also, peer pressure might be ineffec-
tive when the entire team is being pushed,

just as a software manager might be vulner-
able to external pressure. This vulnerability

should be addressed at the organizational
level when considering SQA.Although not completely and explicitlyaddressed, software configuration manage-ment is implied in XPÕs collective ownership,
small releases, and continuous integration.
Collective ownership might be problematic
for large systems, where more formal com-
November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
23Taken together,
the two methodscan createsynergy,
particularly in conjunctionwith other good
engineering andmanagementpractices. munication channels are necessary to pre-vent configuration management failures.XP and Level 3 practicesAt Level 3, XP addresses organizationprocess focusat the team rather than organi-zational level. A focus on process issues is
nonetheless implied in adopting XP one prac-
tice at a time, as well as in the Òjust rulesÓ phi-
losophy. Because XP focuses on the software

engineering process rather than organiza-
tional infrastructure issues, organizations
adopting XP must address this and other or-
ganization-level processes, whether in a
CMM-based context or not.Similarly, the various XP-related books,
articles, courses, and Web sites partially ad-

dress the organization process definitionand training programKPAs, but organiza-
tional assets are outside the scope of the XP

method itself. As a consequence, XP cannot

address integrated software management
because there may not be any organiza-
tional assets to tailor.
Several XP practices effectively addresssoftware product engineering: metaphor,
simple design, refactoring, the ÒmothballÓ
tour, coding standards, unit testing, and

functional testing. XPÕs de-emphasis of de-

sign documentation is a concern in many en-
vironments, such as hard real-time systems,large systems, or virtual teams. In such envi-ronments, good designs are crucial to suc-
cess, and using the refactoring strategy
would be high-risk. For example, if develop-
ers performed refactoring after a technique
such as rate-monotonic analysis proved that
a system satisfied hard real-time require-
ments, theyÕd have to redo the analysis. Such
an environment invalidates XPÕs fundamen-

tal assumption about the low cost of change.XPÕs emphasis on communicationÑ
through onsite customers and pair program-
mingÑappears to provide as comprehensive
a solution to 
intergroup coordinationas in-tegrated product and process development.
In fact, XPÕs method might be considered an

effective IPPD approach, although the soft-

ware-only context ignores multidiscipline

environments.Pair programming addresses peer reviews,and is arguably more powerful than many
peer review techniques because it adopts pre-
ventive concepts found in code reading and
literate programming. However, pair pro-

grammingÕs relative lack of structure can

lessen its effectiveness. Empirical data on pair
programming is currently sparse but promis-
ing.6To make informed trade-off decisions,
weÕll need more empirical research that con-

trasts and compares pair programming and
peer review techniques, especially more rig-

orous techniques such as inspections.Beyond Level 3
XP addresses few of the Level 4 and 5
KPAs in a rigorous statistical sense, al-

though feedback during rapid cycles might
partially address defect prevention. Table 4
summarizes XPÕs potential to satisfy CMM

KPAs, given the appropriate domain.
Many of the KPAs that XP either ignores
or only partially covers are undoubtedly ad-
dressed in real projects. XP needs manage-
ment and infrastructure support, even if it
does not specifically call for it.
DiscussionAs the earlier comparison shows, XP gen-
erally focuses on technical work, whereas the
CMM generally focuses on management is-
sues. Both methods are concerned with Òcul-
ture.Ó The element that XP lacks that is crucial
for the SW-CMM is the concept of Òinstitu-

tionalizationÓÑthat is, establishing a culture
of Òthis is the way we do things around here.Ó24IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001Table 4XP satisfaction of key process areas, given the appropriate environmentLevelKey process areaSatisfaction
2Requirements management
2Software project planning
2Software project tracking and oversight
2Software subcontract managementÑ
2Software quality assurance
2Software configuration management
3Organization process focus
3Organization process definition
3Training programÑ
3Integrated software managementÑ
3Software product engineering
3Intergroup coordination
3Peer reviews
4Quantitative process managementÑ
4Software quality managementÑ
5Defect prevention
5Technology change managementÑ
5Process change managementÑ
Partially addressed in XPLargely addressed in XP (perhaps by inference)ÑNot addressed in XP
 Although implicit in some practices, such asthe peer pressure arising from pair program-

ming, XP largely ignores the infrastructure
that the CMM identifies as key to institution-
alizing good engineering and management
practices. Table 5 summarizes XPÕs coverage

of institutionalization in its domain.The CMMÕs KPAs share common fea-
tures that implement and institutionalize

processes. Each KPAÕs institutionalization

practices map to the areaÕs goals; a naŁve XP

implementation that ignored these infra-
structure issues would fail to satisfy any
KPA. XP ignores some of these practices,

such as policies. XP addresses others, such
as training and SQA, by inference. It ad-

dresses still othersÑproject-specific prac-

tices such as management oversight and
measurementÑto a limited degree. As an

implementation model focused on the devel-

opment process, these issues are largely out-

side XPÕs focus, but they are arguably cru-

cial for its successful adoption.Size mattersMuch of the formalism that characterizesmost CMM-based process improvement is
an artifact of large projects and severe relia-
bility requirements, especially for life-critical
systems. The SW-CMMÕs hierarchical struc-

ture, however, is intended to support a range

of implementations through the 18 KPAs

and 52 goals that comprise the requirements
for a fully mature software process.As systems grow, some XP practices be-
come more difficult to implement. XP is, af-
ter all, targeted toward small teams working

on small to medium-sized projects. As proj-

ects become larger, emphasizing a good 

architectural ÒphilosophyÓ becomes increas-
ingly critical to project success. Major invest-

ment in product architecture design is one of

the practices that characterizes successful In-

ternet companies.
7Architecture-based design, designing forchange, refactoring, and similar design
philosophies emphasize the need to manage
change systematically. Variants of the XP

bottom-up design practices, such as architec-
ture-based design, might be more appropri-
ate in large-project contexts. In a sense, ar-
chitectural design that emphasizes flexibility
is the goal of any good object-oriented
methodology, so XP and object orientation

are well suited to one another. Finally, large
projects tend to be multidisciplinary, which
can be problematic given that XP is aimed at
software-only projects.Why explore XP?Modern software projects should captureXP values, regardless of how radically their

implementation differs from XPÕs. Organiza-

tions might call communication and simplic-

ity by other names, such as coordination and
elegance, but without these values, nontrivial
projects face almost insurmountable odds.
XPÕs principles of communication and
simplicity are also fundamental for organi-
zations using the SW-CMM. When defining

processes, organizations should capture the
minimum essential information needed,
structure definitions using good software
design principles (such as information hid-
ing and abstraction), and emphasize useful-
ness and usability.
2For real-time process control, rapid feed-back is crucial. Previous eras have captured
this idea in aphorisms such as ÒdonÕt throw

good money after badÓ; in a quantitative
sense, we can view this as the soul of the

CMMÕs Level 4. One of the consequences of

the cultural shift between Levels 1 and 2 is

the need to demonstrate the courage of our
convictions by being realistic about esti-

mates, plans, and commitments.False oppositionThe main objection to using XP for
process improvement is that it barely
touches the management and organizational
issues that the SW-CMM emphasizes. Im-

plementing the kind of highly collaborative
environment that XP assumes requires en-

lightened management and appropriate or-
ganizational infrastructure.November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
25Table 5XP and institutionalization practicesCommon feature (in each KPA)PracticeSatisfaction
Commitment to performPolicyÑ
Leadership and sponsorshipÑ
Ability to performOrganizational structures
Resources and funding
Training
Measurement and analysisMeasurement
Verifying implementationSenior management oversightÑ
Project management oversightSoftware quality assurancePartially addressed in XPLargely addressed in XP (perhaps by inference)ÑNot addressed in XP
 The argument that CMMÕs ideal of a rig-
orous, statistically stable process is antithet-
ical to XP is unconvincing. XP has disci-
plined processes, and the XP process itself is

clearly well defined. We can thus consider

CMM and XP complementary. The SW-

CMM tells organizations what to do in gen-
eral terms, but does not say how to do it.

XP is a set of best practices that contains

fairly specific how-to informationÑan im-

plementation modelÑfor a particular type
of environment. XP practices can be com-

patible with CMM practices (goals or
KPAs), even if they do not completely ad-

dress them.Most of XP consists of good prac-

tices that all organizations should

consider. While we can debate the
merits of any one practice in relation to
other options, to arbitrarily reject any of
them is to blind ourselves to new and po-

tentially beneficial ideas.To put XP practices together as a
methodology can be a paradigm shift simi-
lar to that required for concurrent engineer-
ing. Although its concepts have been around
for decades, adopting concurrent engineer-
ing practices changes your product-building
paradigm. XP provides a systems perspec-
tive on programming, just as the SW-CMM

provides a systems perspective on organiza-
tional process improvement. Organizations
that want to improve their capability should

take advantage of the good ideas in both,
and exercise common sense in selecting and
implementing those ideas.Should organizations use XP, as pub-
lished, for life-critical or high-reliability 
systems? Probably not. XPÕs lack of design 

documentation and de-emphasis on architec-
ture are risky. However, one of XPÕs virtues is

that you can change and improve it for dif-
ferent environments. That said, when you

change XP, you risk losing the emergent

properties that provide value in the proper
context. Ultimately, when you choose and

improve software processes, your emphasis

should be to let common sense prevailÑand

to use data whenever possible to offer insight

on challenging questions.AcknowledgmentsI gratefully acknowledge Kent Beck, Steve Mc-Connell, and Laurie Williams for their comments. I

presented an earlier version of this article at XPUni-

verse in July 2001.References1.M.C. Paulk et al., 
The Capability Maturity Model:Guidelines for Improving the Software Process, Addi-son-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1995.
2.M.C. Paulk, ÒUsing the Software CMM with Good
Judgment,Ó ASQ Software Quality Professional, vol. 1,no. 3, June 1999, pp. 19Ð29.3.D.L. Johnson and J.G. Brodman, ÒApplying CMM Pro-
ject Planning Practices to Diverse Environments,Ó IEEESoftware, vol. 17, no. 4, July/Aug. 2000, pp. 40Ð47.4.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange,Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1999.
5.ÒeXtreme Programming Pros and Cons: What Ques-
tions Remain?Ó IEEE Computer Soc. Dynabook, J. Siddiqi, ed., Nov. 2000; www.computer.org/seweb/

dynabook/index.htm (current 24 Sept. 2001).6.L. Williams et al., ÒStrengthening the Case for Pair Pro-
gramming,Ó IEEE Software, vol. 17, no. 4, July/Aug.2000, pp. 19Ð25.7.A. MacCormack, ÒProduct-Development Practices that
Work: How Internet Companies Build Software,Ó 
MITSloan Management Rev.
, no. 42, vol. 2, Winter 2001,
pp. 75Ð84.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
26IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001Mark C. Paulkis a senior member of thetechnical staff at the Software Engineering Insti-
tute. His current interests include high-maturity
practices and statistical control for software
processes. He was Òbook bossÓ for Version 1.0 of

the Capability Maturity Model for Software and
project leader during the development of Soft-
ware CMM Version 1.1. He is also involved with

software engineering standards, including ISO15504, ISO 12207, and ISO 15288. He received his bachelorÕs degree in

mathematics and computer science from the University of Alabama in
Huntsville and his masterÕs degree in computer science from Vanderbilt Uni-

versity. Contact him at the Software Engineering Inst., Carnegie Mellon

Univ., Pittsburgh, PA 15213; mcp@sei.cmu.edu.
About the Author