 64IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 20020740-7459/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEEWeÕve talked about software quality
for a long time, developing nu-
merous software quality assurance
approaches in the hope of making
our software increasingly better.

Charles Mann, contributing editorof MITÕs 
Technology Review
, points out thatother technologiesÑtelevisions, cars, air-
planes, bridgesÑhave improved over time astheir engineering matured; he
asks why software has not. In the
February 2001 issue of Com-munications of the ACM, EdsgerDijkstra said that softwareÕs

biggest challenge is Òhow not to
make a mess of it.Ó So, where have
we gone wrong?To answer this question, we
can look at how other disciplines
learn and grow. Software devel-

opment is as much an art as a sci-ence, and we learn lessons from both per-

spectives. Many of us think of ourselves as
engineers: we train in engineering depart-
ments and rely on engineering tools, tech-
niques, and quantitative methods to guide
us. But our workÕs artistic sideÑwhich those

who promote agile methods often empha-
sizeÑplays an important role, too. As good
software developers, we are grounded in
artistic engineering activities such as model-
ing and design. Our good people skills enable
us to work with customers and on teams.

And we need good instincts to select the best

approaches and products to use.
Appreciating instinctInstinctual expertise is hard to develop and
difficult to trust, because it sometimes seems
far afield from the engineering approaches

we are taught. But the decision-making liter-

ature suggests that we should appreciate the

essential role of instinct in the three kinds of
expertise Jens Rasmussen describes (Informa-tion Processing and Human-Machine Inter-
action: An Approach to Cognitive Engineer-
ing,North-Holland, 1986): skill-based, rule-based, and knowledge-based.Skill-basedThis expertise is heavy on instinct, usinghighly integrated, automatic sensory and
motor responses; it takes little conscious ef-

fort to apply these skills. We develop similar

expertise in sports or music. We learn par-

ticular movementsÑhitting a tennis ball a
certain way or playing scales repeatedlyÑ
until they become imprinted and we can do

them instinctively. Effectiveness at this level

depends on our innate skill, our experience,
and how much we practice. It also depends

on a predictable environment; if we raise the

net or change the configuration of the
strings or keys, our skills are less certain and

possibly less useful. In software development, we might be-come skill-based testers by looking for the
same kinds of faults in the same kinds of code
until spotting those faults becomes second na-
ture. Similarly, working many times on simi-

lar projects in similar circumstances could
help us generate excellent cost estimates.Rule-basedBy contrast, when we use rule-based ex-
pertise, we are consciously aware of the
quality timeWhat Software EngineeringCan Learn from SoccerShari Lawrence PfleegerEditor: Jeffrey Voas 
Cigital voas@cigital.com November/December 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
65QUALITY TIMEsteps we take to attain a goal. Not al-
ways explicitly formulated, the steps

are somehow codified into loose or

strict rules that we follow in a given

situation. For example, good soft-
ware designers have rules about
checking interfaces, including excep-
tion handling, and addressing perfor-
mance issues. We might follow these

rules without even realizing it before
we turn a design over to inspectors or
programmers. As with skill-based ex-
pertise, these rules rely on familiarity
with the situation and its context. In

a novel situation or an unfamiliar en-
vironment, a rule-based expert might
need to perform additional analysis.
Knowledge-basedA knowledge-based expert recog-nizes goals, makes them explicit, and
then develops procedures to reach
them. The recognizing and proce-
dure-building could be automatic, in
that the expert seems to know in-
stinctively what to do and when to do
it. Once he or she decides on a grand
plan, the approach becomes rule-
based, where the procedures include
steps to tackle each aspect of the
overall problem. We see knowledge-

based expertise when a good designer
proposes a software architecture. The
designer instinctively knows that one
framework, say pipe-and-filter, will

be more effective than another and
why. Once the overall architecture is

laid out, the designer follows in-

grained rules about the best ways to
document and improve it.Software and soccerInstinct is vital in developing andusing our expertise. To learn to un-

derstand and develop those instincts,
let us look at soccer, a game that

blends art and science. Clearly some
soccer players are more talented than

others and some are better in certain
roles than others. A coach aims to
improve playersÕ talents and blend
them to play a good game. The play-
ers are much like software develop-
ers, and the coach resembles a team
leader or project manager. But look-

ing deeper, we learn more.
Professional soccer players do notjust show up for games, play them,
and leave the stadium. Instead, they
participate in three important ways:

they perfect basic skills, analyze and
abstract from past performances, and

build a set of patterns that eventually

becomes instinctual. These three as-
pects of performance analysis can
help software engineers improve soft-

wareÕs quality. To see why, first con-

sider our basic skills. Good software
development often depends on good
modeling and design. But if we train

software engineers at all, we usually
train them to write programs first

and to think about modeling and de-
sign laterÑafter bad habits are al-
ready embedded in how we do busi-
ness. Instead of focusing first on
programming, we can learn how to
model and design. We can also learn

how to use different modeling and

design approaches together and in
context to determine what a system
will do and how it will do it. That is,

we learn which techniques are appro-

priate in which contexts so that do-
ing good modeling and design be-
come second nature.Next, consider what happens atthe end of the game. At the final
whistle or bell, the players do not
grab their belongings and head for
home. Instead, they join the coach in
the locker room to learn from the

dayÕs play. They might watch videos

of the game or simply recount to each
other what they did and why. As they
discuss their moves, the reasons forthem, and the success or failure of the

plays, the coach builds abstractionsÑ
diagrams with Xs and Os to show
what transpired. The players learn to
see the game not only from their own
perspectives but also from the per-
spective of othersÕ roles and responsi-
bilities. The abstractions capture the
essence of each play and become a set
of patterns players can choose from
in future games. Eventually, the play-

ers act as a teamÑinvoking appropri-
ate patterns based on past experi-
enceÑrather than remaining a
collection of individuals who happen
to meet on the field.In software, we rarely perform
such post-project analysis. We pack

our bags and leave for the next pro-
ject without stopping to analyze
what we did well and what we did

poorly. We build no abstractions of

the requirements, designs, code, or
tests to help us learn what was most

effective. We create no templates or

checklists to capture the best of our

analysis and review. And we do not

use abstractions or patterns to drill

and make instinctual the best actions
and activities.Modeling and abstraction are key
elements in quality improve-
ment, and we want those skills
to become instinctual. We cannot im-

prove our products and processes if

we do not stop to absorb lessons

from the past. Gary KleinÕs research

on decision-making under pressure
(Sources of Power: How PeopleMake Decisions, MIT Press, 1998)tells us that the best decision-makers

are those with rich and diverse Òmen-
tal databasesÓ of metaphors about
which actions are most appropriate
in which circumstances. Unless we

take the time to analyze and abstract
and to build our lessons learned into
skill-, rule-, and knowledge-based ex-
pertise, we will never have the mental

and technical tools to keep from
Òmaking a mess of it.ÓShari Lawrence Pfleegeris a senior researcher atRAND. Contact her at shari_pfleeger@rand.org.Professional soccerplayers do not justshow up for games, play them, and leavethe stadium. 