 42IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 20010740-7459/01/$10.00 © 2001 IEEEin IonaÕs engineering team, we often ig-
nored good engineering processes and prac-
tices. As a result, the code baseÕs overall

health degenerated and was salvaged only
through two successful reengineering ef-
forts and a series of infrastructure projects
designed to improve overall engineering
practices. It wasnÕt until later that we real-

ized how closely our efforts were tied to Ex-

treme Programming.The problems When Iona moved from a start-up to a
market-leading provider of middleware
products in 1999, it faced four major prob-
lem areas: processes and practices, testing,
code entropy, and team morale. An initial

reengineering project that started in 1997

was concluding, and although it focused a
tremendous amount of resources on reengi-
neering, improving testing, and making nec-essary changes to the code base to complywith the latest version of the Corba specifi-
cation, it did not sufficiently address the

four problem areas; it merely skimmed the

surface of what needed to be done. 
Processes and practicesIn early 1999, you could have asked twodifferent engineers from the same Orbix
team how they did their jobs, and each

would have replied differently. This re-

flected the teamÕs lack of process documen-

tation and visibility and its failures to make
process a part of each engineerÕs personal

software practices. Also, there was no focus
on process improvement. The junior engi-
neers assigned to maintenance and en-
hancement had no experience with good
engineering practices and had only a rudi-
mentary understanding of process. To com-

pound the problems, the maintenance andfocusUsing Extreme
Programming in a
Maintenance EnvironmentCharles Poole and Jan Willem Huisman, 
Iona Technologies
The authorsreview 
how efforts 
to introduce
industry-level
best practices 
led to Extreme
Programming,
which improved
the teamÕs 
ability to deliver 
quality support
and product
enhancements.During the 1990s, Iona TechnologiesÕ flagship product was a Corba-
based middleware product called Orbix. We have since created a

newer version of Orbix, but here we discuss how we developed

and, more importantly, now maintain the older version, which rep-
resents the Corba specificationÕs early evolution. We also review the inherent

problems of code entropy due to specification instability and time-to-market

pressures. Over the years, because of these pressures and the rapid growth reports from the field
 enhancement team used disparate sourcecontrol elements across two globally distrib-

uted development sites and lacked a well-
defined and tested interface between config-
uration units. Dependency management

was a nightmare.Testing
In general, quality was never one of OrbixÕs
strong points. We didnÕt document test cover-

age very well, so good metrics were not avail-

able. Our test suites were cumbersome, diffi-
cult to run, and impossible to accurately

report. Also, the test suite used to provide in-
teroperability testing with other Iona products
and product componentsÑor against other

Corba middleware productsÑwas not auto-

mated across the platform set to which we de-
livered our product. Thus, system testing our
product releases was difficult. Furthermore,
instead of having the development and main-

tenance teams monitor quality, a team that

was detached from the engineering effort
monitored it through checklists and forms.
Code entropyBy the end of 1997, we had alreadypatched and repatched the Orbix code hun-
dreds of times to address numerous customer
issues as well as the changing Corba specifi-
cation. These patches often used band-aid ap-
proaches to resolve problems or add func-
tionality and were a major factor in the codeÕs

rapid entropy. Many of these unreviewed

changes were made to a code base that was
never designed to withstand the punishment
meted out by many of IonaÕs larger customer

deployment environments. Customers de-
manded fixes and faster resolve times. The codeÕs degradation further acceler-
ated when Iona removed most of the senior

development staff from the maintenance

team so that they could develop new prod-

ucts. Finally, there was limited acceptance

of the well-documented style guides that

IonaÕs chief architect specified for all code

development, making it difficult to read the

code. Poor structuring of the source codeÕs

directory space also made it difficult to
quickly become familiar with the overall
code structure. 
Team morale
People indicated in reviews that they didnÕt
feel cohesiveness in the team. Many reportedpoor visibility of the projects on which peopleworked. In general, we felt underappreciated
and overworked.Initial history of change
In 1999, prior to the release of KentBeckÕs 
Extreme Programming Explained,1Iona undertook several projects to addressits problem areas. It is in the context of these
projects that it introduced Extreme Pro-
gramming, realizing that many of the things
it was implementing were elements of XP. 
ReengineeringThe second reengineering effort initially
focused on resolving problemsÑwhich many

customers reportedÑrelated to poorly imple-

mented modules. Bug clusters highlighted in

our defect-tracking system clearly identified

these problem areas. Today, this reengineer-

ing effort continues as a part of our XP ef-

fort, which helps engineers resolve problems.

An additional outcome of the initial effort

was reducing the codeÕs complexity by strip-

ping out unused code and implementing sev-
eral patterns that have made it easier to
maintain, test, and understand the code.
WeÕve reduced code size by over 40 percent. 
Improving engineering practicesJim Watson, one of IonaÕs distinguished
engineers, led the reengineering project. In
addition to providing strong technical in-
sight into coding problems, he was also in-
strumental in promoting stronger engineer-
ing practices. He initiated several practices

to encourage growth in the engineering
team, including weekly presentations that
gave everyone an opportunity to present

technical topics of relevance or interest such

as merge strategies, patterns, and estima-
tion. He emphasized code reviews, adher-

ence to source-code management guidelines,
and ownership of and responsibility for
code style. He made engineers consider how
they could constantly improve the quality of
their work in areas such as test coverage,
and he established a more proactive ap-
proach to problem solving. His practices
still strongly influence the team.Automating everything
We established a separate project to
clearly understand the build and test depend-
encies across the older product setÕs various
November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
43 elements and to fully automate the build and
test process. This is an ongoing project, but
so far weÕve been able to build and unit test

the complete product set on a nightly basis.
Efforts continue to better automate the inter-
operability and system tests, which still re-

quire some manual intervention. 
Team consolidation
Before starting the reengineering projects,over 70 engineers maintained and enhanced
the Orbix products. By the time we com-
pleted the major portion of those projects,
we had reduced the team to around 40 but
were servicing three times the number of

customers. Today, the team size is down to

25. In addition to the personnel consolida-
tion, the team managed a single mainline of
code using a well-defined set of common
rules that govern how to merge fixes and en-
hancements into the consolidated mainline.Extreme maintenanceThe second reengineering effort resultedin a remarkable transformationÑwe were

suddenly on the road to a consistent and au-
tomated build, test, and release infrastruc-

ture for nightly product builds and tests.
The reengineering and refactoring efforts
eliminated much of the code complexity and
stagnation, resulting in a clean, well-struc-

tured code base that conformed to Iona

code standards. So, if we saw so much im-

provement, why consider XP? Despite our progress, we had yet to resolveissues of testing, visibility, morale, and per-

sonal work practices. From a management
standpoint, we wanted to do more with less:
higher productivity, coupled with increased

quality, decreased team size, and improved

customer satisfaction. The engineers wanted
more time to do a good job instead of always
feeling pressured to deliver fix after fix. So we
started looking at XP and learned that many
of its elements come naturally to teams work-
ing the maintenance game. According to Kent
Beck, ÒMaintenance is really the normal state
of an XP project.Ó1In our earlier projects, we created a set ofmaintenance processes that describe how a
bug is created, prioritized, analyzed, fixed,
and delivered to the customer. The Genera-

tion 3 team also had a set of processes that
explain how to request, describe, prioritize,
and implement incremental enhancementsand deliver them to customers. Clearly, these
processes already incorporated important
XP elementsÑextreme maintenancemeansfollowing the XP model while a product is in
the mainstream of its product life cycle.2The synergy was so great that we started
to use the term XP to describe the set of

processes and practices the Generation 3 el-
ement and product teams used. We then

started the XP experiment in earnest in an

attempt to resolve our outstanding issues.
Table 1 presents all of the practices pre-

sented in Extreme Programming Explained1and describes how we approached them. 
MetaphorWhen customers report a bug, they de-scribe it in the form of a short story that ex-

plains what they are trying to do and how
the problem manifests itself. We then note

this story in our defect-tracking system and

make it available to the customer and every-
one working with that customer. 
When we receive an enhancement requestor functional requirement, we present it as a

specification on our requirements Web page.

Because of the need for global visibility, and

because customer service representatives and
engineers must be able to update the system,
unlike the bug reports, these requirements are
not presented as index cards and donÕt read as

stories (yet). However, they do contain essen-

tially the same information as traditional re-
quirements. For the purpose of our XP exper-
iment, we left the enhancement request until a

later improvement phase and instead focused
on tracking the bug-fixing stories in a well-
structured Web-based queuing system, visible

to the internal customer (or Customer Ser-

vice), engineers, and engineering managers. We liked the idea of using index cards to
track tasks and decided to implement a story-
board for each of the element teams compris-
ing our consolidated Generation 3 team. Our
goal was to improve the poor visibility of
each engineerÕs work effort. We wrote each

task, regardless of whether it was a customer
issue or internal project task, on a color-coded

card (see Figure 1). Nirmalya Sengupta, our
Generation 3 operations lead,then sat down

with our customer (or Customer Service rep-
resentative), so he could prioritize his list of
bug and internal tasks. The customer could
also view internal tasks and ask to have his
tasks escalated above internal tasks. Cur-We weresuddenly on the road to a consistentand automatedbuild, test, and releaseinfrastructurefor nightlyproduct buildsand tests. 44IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001 rently, only customer issues are rigidly priori-
tized, but we intend to integrate internal tasks

into the prioritization process as well. (Kent
Beck suggests having a Web-accessible digital

camera positioned so that people can regu-
larly look at and zoom in on the story-
boardsÑbut thatÕs for a future project.)
An engineer estimates the completion dateafter 24 hours of initial analysis. When the
task is completed, the engineer records the ac-tual date of completion, and if there were de-
lays, she notes reasons for the delays, observa-
tions, and lessons learned on the back of the

task card. We remove all closed tasks from the

board, extract the data, record it in a spread-
sheet, and store the task card in a task log. In general, bug-fixing tasks should be com-
pleted as two-week pieces of effort. If, afterNovember/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
45Table 1Extreme Programming practice adoptionExtreme ProgrammingAdoption statusThe Orbix Generation 3 experience
The planning gamePartial adoptionWe havenÕt found it necessary to follow a strict iteration planning process. However, to 
understand and manage capacity, it is still critical to monitor estimates of ideal time and actual 

time to completion. Most bugs in our product take about two weeks to fix, so we fell into two-
week patch release iterations. Our customer service and sales organizations act as our customer

proxies, providing a coordinated twice-weekly prioritization of bug issues for each patch. They
also run the test cases that are our acceptance tests for each customer story against each 

patch delivered to a customer. We still get interruptions and midcycle reprioritization, but itÕs 
unavoidable.Small releases Followed religiouslyShort release cycle requirements drive our support efforts, so our customer patch cycle is t
wo weeks. Our point release cycle has moved from months down to weeks. Without automated 
nightly regression and unit testing, we wouldnÕt have come this far. Without a single button 

integration test capability, engineers wouldnÕt have been able to ensure that changes had not 

broken code. Without optimizing our test suites around test time, we wouldnÕt have been able toprovide the necessary timely feedback. 
Metaphor Adopted from start Our metaphor is the customer story as detailed in our bug-tracking system. Our customer
supplies our acceptance test for each story. 
Simple design Partial adoptionThere hasnÕt been as much focus on simple design, because the product is complex, and we 
continue to use high to midlevel design documents to help people quickly understand the over
all system and some system components. In our maintenance environment, there is a clear 
story on which to focus. We tend not to generate design documents for fixes but instead focus 
on implementing the story and passing the acceptance and regression tests. 
Testing Adopted from startTest first is naturally a part of the maintenance process in the Generation 3 team. We donÕt work
on bugs unless a test case is developed and all test cases are run nightly. We also use code
reviews to back up the lack of great test coverage. RefactoringAdopted from startWe took this on as one of the cornerstones of our efforts in improving code maintainability 
and stability. More often than not, the call is to focus on refactoring as a part of an engineerÕs

personal practices. Sometimes in refactoring, we have found ourselves doing wholesale reengineering, but this doesnÕt happen often. Pair programmingSparingly adoptedAlthough weÕve tried it, it is not something the team widely practices. WeÕve used code review
s to try and address code standards, design of fixes, and so forth. 
Collective ownershipAdopted from startWe have people changing code everywhere. Some have a stronger knowledge of certain areas,
 but we have fewer people maintaining the code and we canÕt afford not to have people working 
on all parts of the code. For the most part, weÕve used pairing to gain an edge. We also have a 

strong set of code standards we enforce not only at code reviews but also as a part of the 
check-in process in our source-control system. 
Continuous integration Adopted from startIt took us 18 months to build an automated testing system that was comprehensive but a
lso easyto use and fast. Also, we donÕt use integration stations. Instead we use a mutex file (requiring 
check in and check out) in our source control system to ensure that no one else is integrating 
while we are merging into the mainline. Our merge process is strong and followed quite well. 40-hour week Not adoptedWe havenÕt felt courageous enough to tackle this. 

On-site customer Adopted from startWe use our customer service team and sales force to act in the role as a customer. They set 
priorities and generate acceptance tests.Coding standards Adopted from startWe had already started this one when we began using XP. 
 analyzing an issue, an engineer estimates more
than two weeksÕ worth of work, she splits the
story into several tasks. Anything more is a

refactoring project and should be structured
more along the lines of an enhancement with
clear incremental delivery of functionality
based on tasks extracted from the original cus-
tomer story.
We also incorporated the daily stand-up
meeting into the team (see Figure 2)Ñan XP

element. Each team took 15 to 30 minutes

to review their progress, and each person

took a couple of minutes to talk about what
he or she was working on that day and the
previous day. The focus was not only on im-

proving visibility but also on encouraging
communication between team members.
The qualitative results were immediate.
Some engineers found it difficult to explain

why they spent so much time on issues or
why they looked at things that werenÕt high

priorities on the teamÕs list of tasks. 
Testing
Automation is essential, and one of thefirst initiatives we undertook in 1999 was to

automate our test suites and speed them up.
We completed an extension of that effort in

2000, which lets developers build and test
the entire product set on any platform com-
bination we support by clicking a button
from a Web-based interface or using the

workstation command line. These initia-
tives let us test the entire product set against
the Corba specification, the Orbix API, and
customer-supplied test cases on a nightly ba-

sis or at the engineerÕs discretion on the 17

platforms we support. Both the stories de-

scribing the functionality that the software
supports and those describing the bugs that
customers encountered have tests associated
with them. Engineering requires each cus-
tomer to provide a test case for each re-
ported bug prior to doing any work on the
issue. This test case is automatically in-
cluded in the test suiteÕs nightly runs. 
Any engineer must be able to build theentire product or system and run the test
suite to get immediate feedback on changes
made. Nightly builds are a reasonable inter-
mediate step to this test-on-demand require-

ment, and again the processes we decided to

follow map well to the testing idea at the XP

modelÕs foundationÑtest before you imple-

ment, and test everything often.PairingPair programming in XP is critical to im-proving collaboration and greatly facilitates
mentoring and improvements in engineering
practice. However, convincing engineers that

it is useful and should be incorporated into
their work practices is extremely difficult. Our pair programming experiment cameabout accidentally in late 2000. The Gener-
ation 3 team worked on a particularly diffi-
cult set of customer issues. We had a cus-

tomer engineer working onsite with us.
(Having customers onsite is another XP
principle, although normally we treat our

onsite product managers and customer serv-
ice representatives as our customers.) At dif-

ferent times, the customer teamed up with

various members of the Generation 3 team
to do some pair programming. Likewise,
members of the team gravitated toward a

pair-programming approach as they pro-

gressed with the issues on which they were
working for this particular customer. 
In the end, the qualitative feedback fromthe team was positive. They felt that they
worked more effectively and with a higher
level of communication as opposed to work-
ing independently on individual issues. Also,

the senior staff enjoyed some of the mentoring
that naturally occurred as they interacted with

the junior members of the group. The overall

productivity during this period was also high

and morale improved. Engineers got a lot of

positive reenforcement from each other, and

engineering practices and quality improved as

we actively noted coaching interactions be-
tween engineers. We also got no patch rejec-

tions for the work these engineers did. We are currently trying to formally imple-
ment pair programming.Until we do, we have

asked each engineer to take on one or two

tasks each quarter in which they pair with an-
other team member. WeÕll note the tasks in

which they worked in pairs and will show
them the data at the end of the quarter to46IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001Pairprogramming in XP is criticalto improvingcollaborationand greatlyfacilitatesmentoring andimprovementsin engineeringpractice.Figure 1. The color-coded task card.Date queue   Date active     Expect finish   Date closed
Task:
Area:                Details:
Customer:
Engineer: (hopefully) reinforce the results we got withour initial pair-programming experiment.
Small releasesIn addition to describing functionality, XP
focuses on increments of functionality that
engineers can quickly merge into the main-

line. They merge in bug fixes quite rapidly,

and with the improved nightly build and test

and the one-button test, they can make sys-

tems available as a temporary or permanent
patch within one day. Any initial effort

should focus on releasing a patch every itera-
tion for a large, complex systemÑand au-
tomation and improved testing enable that

end. For projects approaching XP at midlife,

we encourage focusing on automation at any
costs. Rapid turnaround time can only im-

prove customer satisfaction. Unfortunately,

because we just recently started collecting

metrics on mainline breakage, we donÕt have

statistics to show what is currently a qualita-

tive analysis of IonaÕs improvement. 
In addition, because the code base we wereworking with was a legacy code base, we did

not have much to say about how it was put to-

gether. However, we needed to make it main-

tainable and add functionality if required. As

mentioned earlier, one of the improvement ef-

forts we undertook was a major reengineering
of elements of the Orbix product. This effort
incorporated stories that typically took three
to four weeks to implement. By keeping these
increments relatively short, we could more ef-
fectively manage the delivery schedule of our
last minor point release by modifying the pro-
jectÕs scope but not its delivery date, because

we were almost always at a point where we

could deliver a functional product. 
RefactoringWith regards to refactoring, analyzing
bug statistics is important in identifying ar-
eas of code that might need refactoring or
reengineering. This form of customer feed-
back is an important part of targeting im-
provements and stopping code entropy.

Refactoring should always be on an engi-
neerÕs mind when analyzing a problem or

enhancement request: ÒHow can I make this

area of the code work better?Ó as opposed
to ÒHow can I quickly fix this problem (us-

ing the band-aid approach)?ÓWe addressed refactoring in our effort to
improve personal practices. Recent code re-views have revealed that refactoring has be-come part of the engineers toolkit when ap-
proaching a problem. Along with analyzing
a problem, they now identify whether the
area of code they are working on is a candi-
date for refactoring, and they follow up after
delivery with a refactoring task on the story-
board. Sometimes this extends into a reengi-
neering effort if the scope of improvement is

increased, and for some customer issues, we
canÕt afford the time to do the refactoring ef-

fort due to commitments to restore times.

However, for the most part, weÕve seen

fewer problems in our new releases, a signif-
icant decrease in code entropy (as measured
by comments from code reviewers), no patch
rejections over the last few months, and re-
duced code complexity (again, as measured
by comments from code reviewers). Unfor-
tunately, we have not been able to collect

complexity metrics to verify this. Facilities strategyA maintenance team environment shouldcombine personal and team space to en-
hance interactions and collaborations that
should occur in the team. Although not an
explicit XP principle, our facilities strategy

continues to be key to XPÕs success. The pair

programming could not have happened
without changing the engineersÕ workspace,
and the collective ownership, testing, and
continuous integration would have suffered. Prior to initiating our XP project, IonaÕs en-
gineering workspace consisted of the typical
floor planÑit had multiple bays, each con-
November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
47Figure 2. A stand-upmeeting at the 
storyboard.
 taining six shoulder-height cubicles (see Figure
3a). The engineers and engineering managers

initiated a project to restructure the space in
which they worked to enhance team commu-
nication. They created a large central area by

eliminating 20 percent of the individual cubi-
cles and establishing nondelineated group
workspaces. The group workspaces consist of

either a round or rectangular meeting table or

workstation area. In addition, white boards
and flipcharts on tripods were made available
in each work area. They also purchased a

couch, and a catering service now delivers

snacks on a weekly basis (see Figure 3b).
The results are noticeable. Code reviewshappen in the group area; pair programming
happens at the workstations. People discuss
their ideas on the whiteboards and large
flipcharts. There is a measurable increase in

the visibility of what everyone is doing on the
team and the number of conversations andcollaborations that occur. These changes to
the environment were instrumental to our

success in improving overall team morale. We

also have had a visible increase in the number
of team interactionsÑnot only on code re-
views but also regarding ongoing tasks. Qualitative improvementsOur metrics (although not particularlyextensive) seem to show some quantitative
improvements in productivity during the pe-
riod in which we used pair programming to
address specific deliverables or bug fixes for
a major customer. The productivity is based

on a constant work force with no change in
overall work habits in terms of hours spent
fixing bugs. This productivity increase has
continued beyond the initial experiment and
is perhaps attributable to more people using
pair programming and open collaborative
spaces created during that period. 48IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001Figure 3. Orbix Generation 3 cubicles
(a) prior to initiating
the Extreme 
Programming project
and (b) after.
2018
16
14
12
108
6
4
2
07-Sept-0014-Sept-00
21-Sept-00
28-Sept-005-Oct-0012-Oct-00
19-Oct-00
26-Oct-002-Nov-00
9-Nov-0016-Nov-00
23-Nov-00
30-Nov-007-Dec-0014-Dec-004-Jan-0111-Jan-01
18-Jan-01
25-Jan-011-Feb-01
8-Feb-0115-Feb-01
22-Feb-011-Mar-01

8-Mar-01
15-Mar-01

22-Mar-01

29-Mar-01
5-Apr-01
13-Apr-01

20-Apr-01

29-Apr-01
6-May-01Week ending
23212021987231410304008436933218109222
1004436555
7733556672216555
41112New bugsClosed bugs
8 week moving average (closed)Number of bugsFigure 4. Team bug-fixing productivity.
(a)(b)
 As Figure 4 shows, the month of Novem-
ber (the period of this effort) saw a measur-

able peak in productivity over and above
the previous several months. This was an
improvement of 67 percent, based on the
next most productive five-week period, even

though the total number of people-weeks
missed due to holidays during the two most
productive periods is relatively equivalent
(Christmas in the later half of December

and the Indian holiday Diwali at the end of
October and early November). Looking at
the trend line, we see continued improve-

ment, even though the overall team size was

reduced in March 2001 from 36 to 25.
Figure 4 shows several things. First, thenew bugs represent issues that the team

must address. An eight-week running aver-

age trend line would show that this averages
out to four issues a week. Second, the num-
ber of closed issues represents the number of
issues that are resolved in a patch to the cus-
tomer. This patching cycle represents our

XP iteration and is on the order of two to

three weeks (note the closure peaks). 
One of the greatest success stories is im-
provements in visibility. This is the greatest

benefit to the team. Having a storyboard on
which to daily prioritize tasks and discuss
progress encourages best practices, lets peo-
ple see what others are doing, and lets man-
agement gauge progress. Figure 5 shows the
dramatic improvements in our workflow
queues as a result of using the storyboard.

When we installed the board in February
2001, it focused peopleÕs attention on issues

that went unverified for significant amounts
of time. We also saw a dramatic increase in

the number of issues that people started toactively work on. Visibility alone was a
strong motivational factor in this turn-
around. In the future, we hope to scale this

practice across multiple development sites.
How can XP help us further improve?

First, improving the pair program-
ming initiative can improve ourlack of cross-training among the code baseÕs

many modules. It is not a practice for which
this is intended but is a useful side benefit to

a real problem as the team grows smaller.

Engineers have accepted the benefits, but we
are still in the process of structuring a more

general approach to ensuring that the prac-
tice of pairing becomes part of the Iona cul-
ture. Earlier this year, we proposed having

an individual sign up for each new bug, en-
hancement request, or refactoring effort,
making that individual responsible for grab-
bing a partner and working through the is-
sue. Our technical leads felt comfortable

with this approach and they are now using
it as a part of the standard process.
Second, metrics are critical to the replan-ning game, but getting engineers to contribute
is difficult. To plan how long it will take to

complete a story, you must know how long it

took to complete a similar piece of work based
on the estimates of the engineer to whom the
work is assigned. ÒAs the basis for your plan-

ning, assume youÕll do as much this week as

you did last week.Ó3Kent Beck and Martin
Fowler call this rule YesterdayÕs Weather, and

we think it is an appropriate analogy. 
We are currently running an internal proj-
ect to improve our ability to enter metrics into
our defect tracking system and report on themNovember/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
497060
50
40
30
20
1008-Jan-0115-Jan-01
22-Jan-01
29-Jan-015-Feb-0112-Feb-01
19-Feb-01
22-Feb-011-Mar-01

8-Mar-01
15-Mar-01

22-Mar-01

29-Mar-01
5-Apr-01
13-Apr-01

20-Apr-01

29-Apr-01
6-May-01Week ending
6Total number of issues
7113141012322101033391033291033368323783271113613811141495513111141217112101510912181557191381020136102210111012823ImplementedActive
Verified

SubmittedFigure 5. Workflow
queues. automatically. The volume of issues makes it
difficult to track using a simple spreadsheet,
but we do it anyway. Our Operations Lead

speaks to each developer and notes how they

have progressed on the work they are doing.
The limited metrics we have indicate that it
takes an engineer on average two weeks to fix

a bug.3This matches the suggested length oftime to implement a story in the XP model. By
measuring the calendar time with the defect
tracking system, we can measure the calendar

time it took to resolve an issue and ultimately
the teamÕs velocity.
3This information is in-valuable in planning what we will do in the

next patch or release iteration.AcknowledgmentsThe authors thank Kent Beck for working with theOrbix Generation 3 team and the invaluable insights
into the development process he provided that have mo-
tivated our teams to adopt XP. We also acknowledge the

influence of ideas presented in Refactoring: Improvingthe Design of Existing Code (M. Fowler, Addison-Wes-
ley, 1999) and 
Extreme Programming Installed(R. Jef-fries, A. Anderson, and C. Hendrickson, Addison-Wes-

ley, 2000). We presented an earlier version of this article

at XP Universe in July 2001.References1.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1999.
2. G.A. Moore, 
Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Sell-ing High Tech Products to Mainstream Customers
,Harper Collins, New York, 1999, p. 47. 
3. K. Beck and M. Fowler, 
Planning Extreme Program-ming, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2000.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001About the AuthorsCharles Pooleis a senior engineeringmanager at Iona Technologies.  His research in-

terests include Extreme Programming in large
distributed development environments and self-
assembling software paradigms.  He received his

BSE in aerospace engineering from the Univer-
sity of Michigan and his MSE in astronautical en-
gineering from the Air Force Institute of Technol-

ogy. Contact him at charles.poole@iona.com.
Jan Willem Huisman
is currently working with Iona Technologies in
Dublin as an engineering manager responsible
for the maintenance team for the Orbix Genera-
tion 3 product. He has extensive experience in
software quality control and software develop-
ment. He has also been involved in the entire
software development cycle in the areas of pro-
gramming, technical design, testing, project man-
agement, and maintenance. Contact him at jan.willem.huisman@iona.com.IEEEComputer Society
10662 Los Vaqueros Circle
Los Alamitos, California 90720-1314
Phone:+1 714  821 8380
Fax:+1 714  821 4010
http://computer.org
advertising@computer.org
Advertising PersonnelAdvertiser                Page Number
ADVERTISER INDEX
NOVEMBER / DECEMBER 2001James A. VickIEEE Staff Director, Advertising

Businesses
Phone:+1 212 419 7767

Fax:+1 212 419 7589

Email:jv.ieeemedia@ieee.org
Marion DelaneyIEEEMedia, Advertising Director

Phone:+1 212 419 7766

Fax:+1 212 419 7589

Email:md.ieeemedia@ieee.org
Marian AndersonAdvertising Coordinator
Phone:+1 714 821 8380

Fax:+1 714 821 4010

Email:manderson@computer.org
Sandy BrownIEEE Computer Society,

Business Development Manager
Phone:+1 714 821 8380

Fax:+1 714 821 4010

Email:sb.ieeemedia@ieee.org
Debbie SimsAssistant Advertising Coordinator
Phone:+1 714 821 8380

Fax:+1 714 821 4010

Email:dsims@computer.org
Atlanta, GAC. William Bentz III
Email:bb.ieeemedia@ieee.orgGregory Maddock

Email:gm.ieeemedia@ieee.orgSarah K. Huey
Email:sh.ieeemedia@ieee.orgPhone:+1 404 256 3800

Fax:+1 404 255 7942
San Francisco, CAMatt Lane
Email:ml.ieeemedia@ieee.org

Telina Martinez-Barrientos

Email:Telina@husonusa.com

Phone:+1 408 879 6666

Fax:+1 408 879 6669
Chicago, IL (product)David Kovacs
Email: dk.ieeemedia@ieee.orgPhone:+1 847 705 6867

Fax:+1 847 705 6878
Chicago, IL (recruitment)Tom Wilcoxen

Email:tw.ieeemedia@ieee.org

Phone:+1 847 498 4520 

Fax:+1  847 498 5911
New York, NY
Dawn Becker
Email:db.ieeemedia@ieee.org

Phone:+1 732 772 0160

Fax:+1 732 772 0161
Boston, MADavid Schissler
Email:ds.ieeemedia@ieee.org

Phone:+1 508 394 4026

Fax:+1 508 394 4926
Dallas, TXRoyce House
Email:rhouse@houseco.com

Phone:+1 713 668 1007

Fax:+1 713 668 1176
JapanGerman Tajiri

Email:gt.ieeemedia@ieee.org

Phone:+81 42 501 9551

Fax:+81 42 501 9552
EuropeGlesni Evans
Email:ge.
ieeemedia@ieee.orgPhone:+44 193 256 4999

Fax:+44 193 256 4998
Boston University15
California State University Northridge6

CompaqCover 4

Eaton12

John Wiley Inside Front Cover

Monmouth University16

ParaSoft5

Requirements Engineering Conference 20021
