 20 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY 0740-7459/14/$31.00 © 2014 IEEEEditor: 
Eoin Woods
Artechra
eoin.woods@artechra.com
Driving Agile Architecting 
with Cost and Risk
Eltjo R. Poort
THE PRAGMATIC 
ARCHITECT
A LOT HAS BEEN SAID 
and written 
about the relationship between agile de-
velopment and architecture. Roughly 
four years ago, 
IEEE Software
 even fea-
tured a special issue on it (ﬁAgility and 

Architecture: Can They Coexist?ﬂ 
IEEE 
Software
, vol. 27, no. 2, 2010). Now it 
looks like the debate is starting to settle 
down: we see agile methods that include 

architecting, such as the Scaled Ag-
ile Framework, and we see architecting 
frameworks such as TOGAF (the Open 

Group Architecture Framework) adding 
agile elements. As the dust settles, what 
have we learned? At CGIŠa global IT 

and business process services providerŠ

architects have learned to use economic 
drivers such as risk and cost to enhance 
their work™s agility.
Five pieces of advice can help archi-
tects become more effective in an ag-
ile world without having to implement 
new methods or frameworks. They de-

scribe changes in attitude or behavior 

rather than complete practices or prin-
ciples, so they™re easy to digest and ap-
ply. The ideas are based on a solution 

architecting approach called Risk- and 
Cost-Driven Architecture (see the side-
bar). Core to the approach is the use of 

risk and cost to determine the architec-

tural signi˜ cance of concerns. Agility 
is achieved by keeping the architecture 
lightweight, addressing only those con-
cerns that are especially risky or costly. 

A risk- and cost-driven backlog of archi-
tectural concerns balances the generally 
value-driven product backlog to achieve 

ﬁjust enough anticipationﬂ in the evolu-

tion of software solutions.
Decisions Are 
Your Main Deliverable
One of the criticisms of architecture 
from the agile community is based on 
the misconception that an architect™s 
purpose in life is to deliver ﬁan architec-

ture,ﬂ commonly interpreted as a piece 

of documentationŠwhich, according to 
the Agile Manifesto (http://agilemani-
festo.org), is valued less than working 

software. This is a poor representation 

of what real architects do every day: 
they look for architectural concerns to 
address, ˜ gure out the options they have 

for addressing those concerns, and then 
decide the best course of action given 
their current context (the three circles 

in Figure 1). Looking at it this way, the 

architect™s main deliverable isn™t a docu-
ment but a stream of decisions.
1 This way of looking at architecture 
work is perfectly compatible with the ag-
ile mindset, regardless of whether these 

decisions emerge from early implemen-

tation and refactoring, from careful up-
front modeling, or from a combination 
of both. In agile projects, decisions often 
s5pra.indd   208/7/14   1:19 PM THE PRAGMATIC ARCHITECT
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
21emerge from a group process with 
shared ownership, but even then it 
makes sense to look to the architect 
as the person who safeguards the 

overall design™s conceptual integrity. 

Thus, the role of the architect is to 
make sure that the group™s decisions 
are consistent across the whole solu-

tion, even when multiple teams are 

working on it simultaneously.
Keep a Backlog of 
Architectural Concerns
Architects working in an agile envi-
ronment don™t have a preapproved, 
˜ xed set of speci˜ cations they can 
base their designs on. Even archi-

tects working in a traditional water-

fall context can™t rely on the environ-
ment to remain ˜ xed because they™re 
expected to design a future-proof so-

lution that anticipates and can sur-

vive a certain amount of change. 
One of the tools used in the ag-
ile world to embrace change is a 

product backlog: an ordered list of 
requirements waiting to be imple-
mented. A backlog can easily be re-

ordered to accommodate changes 

in requirements or the way they™re 
valued over timeŠmaking it easier 
to embrace change than if an ex-

tensive plan had been drawn up. As 

Figure 1 shows, the architect™s back-
log consists of the architectural con-
cerns to be addressed because they 

determine her workload. By fre-

quently reassessing the priority of 
concerns in the backlog, the archi-
tect becomes more ˚ exible in deal-

ing with new business requirements 
and emerging insights. 
Let Economic Impact 
Determine Your Focus
So how do we prioritize the concerns 
in our backlog? Which should be ad-
dressed ˜ rst? A decade ago, Martin 
Fowler wrote that ﬁarchitecture is 
about the important stuffŠwhatever 

that is.ﬂ
2 We™ve found that consid-
ering economic impact helps us de-
termine what™s important. In other 
words, we™ve found that an estimate 

of a concern™s likely economic im-

pact is a good indicator to assess its 
architectural signi˜ cance. When the 
concerns are about what to build, 

business value is crucial. Many ar-

chitects, however, spend most of 
their time worrying about how to 
build itŠin which case, risk and cost 
are key. When you use risk and cost 

to determine the focus of your at-
tention, you™ll not only ensure your 
economic impact on the project, but 

you™ll also be able to easily explain 

your priorities to business stakehold-
ers in terms that they™ll understand.
Using economic impact as an in-
dicator of architectural signi˜ cance 
also eliminates the fallacy that archi-
tecture should only be about concerns 
RISK- AND COST-DRIVEN 
ARCHITECTURE
Risk- and Cost-Driven Architecture (RCDA) is an approach developed at CGI. It 
was originally intended for internal use by architects shaping solutions to tight 
deadlines in bids and contracts. Due to its agility, scalability, and wide range 
of applicable solutions, RCDA has gathered wider interest and is now used by 

some of CGI™s clients. RCDA was validated by published, peer-reviewed re-
search,
1 and is a recognized architecting method in the Open Group Certi˜ ed 
Architect program (OpenCA).
Reference
 1. E.R. Poort and H. van Vliet, ﬁRCDA: Architecting as a Risk- and Cost Management Discipline,ﬂ 
J. Systems and Software
, vol. 85, no. 9, 2012, pp. 1995Œ2013.
ResearchpossiblesolutionsArchitectural concerns(backlog)Architectural decisionsIdentifyand prioritizearchitecturalconcernsDecidebest-˜ttingsolution FIGURE 1. 
The architect™s daily job: an ﬁarchitecting microcycle.ﬂ Architects watch out 
for architectural concerns to address, ˜ gure out the options they have for addressing 
those concerns, and then decide the best course of action given their current context.
s5pra.indd   218/7/14   1:19 PM 22
 IEEE SOFTWARE 
 |  WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
  |  @IEEESOFTWARE
at a high level of abstraction and not 
about details. Sometimes, the devil 
is in the details, and some low-level 
design decisions can be very riskyŠ

they should be on the architect™s ra
-dar, or even coded by the architect.
Keep It Small
Even in large projects, there are 

two very good reasons to stick to 
minimal architecture:
 Architecture is hard to change, 
and the bigger the architecture, 
the harder it is to tweak. Having 
too many architectural decisions 

becomes ballast as conditions 

change, making it dif˜cult to 
respond quickly; they can also 
unnecessarily restrict the design 

space for the individual develop
-ment teams working within the 

architecture.
 An architect can only safeguard 

conceptual integrity if she can 
understand the architecture in 
its entirety. Too many details, 
and the architect risks losing the 

overview required to maintain 
consistency across a complex 
solution.
In most plan-driven projects, you can 
identify an architecture milestone 
because it™s the moment of commit
-ting to the architecture: after this 
milestone, reversing key architec
-tural decisions becomes very costly 
and time-consuming. The optimal 

amount of ﬁup-frontﬂ architecting 
to be done before this milestone is 
best determined by careful consider
-ation of three factors, namely, size, 

criticality, and volatility,
3 rather 
than through dogmatic slogans like, 
ﬁYou ain™t gonna need it.ﬂ Bigger, 
more complex solutions and solu
-tions that are more business critical 

require more up-front architecting; 
in a more volatile environment, less 
up-front architecting is better. Many 

agile projects, however, have no ar
-chitecture milestone and need a dif
-ferent way to determine how small 

they should keep the architecture.
Just Enough Anticipation
How do architects in agile projects 

determine the right amount of archi
-tecture? According to the ˜rst piece 

of advice above, the architecture is a 

˚ow of architectural decisions. This 

˚ow should be ahead of solution 
development and delivery with just 
enough anticipation. 
The tools at your disposal to de
-termine the right amount of an
-ticipation are dependency analysis, 

technical debt control, and economic 

consideration of future options
4: Use 
dependency analysis
 to 

determine which architectural 

components are needed to real
-ize anticipated user stories.
 Use 
technical debt control
 to 
prevent the solution from deteri
-orating when too many user fea
-ArchitecturemicrocycleDailyArchitectural decisionsArchitectural concernsSprintSolution incrementArchitecturalrunwayimprovementsUserfeaturesSprintbacklogProduct backlogFIGURE 2. 
Scrum context: aligning the architecture microcycle with the daily stand-up meeting to facilitate collective architectural 
decision making.
s5pra.indd   228/7/14   1:19 PM  SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2014 
 |  IEEE SOFTWARE
 23tures are added without taking 
the time for refactoring. Identify 
architectural debt and plan its 
resolution in time. Here, we 

aren™t talking about implementa
-tion debt that can be measured 
by code analysis tools. With 
architectural debt, we mean 

structural imperfections and 

technological gaps that hinder 
agility and can petrify the whole 
solution if left unaddressed.
 Weigh your options by careful 
economic consideration
. Mod
-els like Net Present Value can 
yield objective insight into the 

right timing for implementing 
architectural decisions. Use these 
techniques to discuss the right 

amount of anticipation with 

greedy product managers, wor
-ried operational staff, and other 

stakeholders. Economic predic
-tions, however imprecise they 

sometimes are, still tend to be 
more convincing than references 
to agile dogmas, generic design 

principles or gut feelings.
The Scaled Agile Framework 
(http://scaledagileframework.com) 

uses the metaphor of a runway
 that™s 
continuously being extended while 

in operation, so that it™s always 

just long enough to accommodate 

the new planes that are anticipated 
(the planes in the metaphor are 
upcoming solution requirements). 

The new, bigger planes can only 
land after the runway is extended 
for them: dependency analysis 

determines which runway extensions 

are required to land which planes. 
Sometimes you can temporarily 
extend the runway with an inferior 

material for the sake of speed: this 

represents technical debt that will 
have to be repaid (repaved) at some 
point to prevent accidents. All 
decisions (when to extend or repave 

the runway) should be based on 
sound economic reasoning.
That™s it: ˜ve pieces of advice 
for agile architecting. 
Decisions are your main 
deliverable. The decisions address 
concerns that you keep in a backlog, 

prioritized by economic impact: risk 
and cost. These decisions result in 
a minimal architecture, with just 

enough anticipation. There™s a lot 

more to say on agile architecting, 
pertaining to topics like project 
organization (is the architect a 

member of the development team?) 
and development process (how do 
you achieve short feedback loops?). 

These ˜ve pieces of advice are 

limited to what you should be able to 
apply in any organization or process. 
The advice can be applied in 
agile project methodologies like 
Scrum (see Figure 2), where the 
architecting microcycle of Figure 1 
is used to add architecture runway 

improvements to the product backlog. 

These architectural improvements 
complement user features to create a 
balance of anticipation in the product 

backlog. But the advice is equally 
applicable to architects working 

in plan-driven projects, who also 

often have to time-box their work 

dealing with changes and emerging 
insights. Regardless of the project 
methodology, architects have to make 

sure they address the most signi˜cant 
architectural concerns, where risk 
and cost prove to be good indicators 

of architectural signi˜cance.
References
 1.
 J. Tyree and A. Akerman, ﬁArchitecture 
Decisions: Demystifying Architecture,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 22, no. 2, 2005, pp. 
19Œ27. 
 2.
 M. Fowler, ﬁWho Needs an Architect?,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 20, no. 6, 2003, pp. 
11Œ13. 
 3.
 B. Boehm, ﬁArchitecting: How Much and 
When?,ﬂ 
Making Software: What Really 
Works, and Why We Believe It
, A. Oram 
and G Wilson, eds., O™Reilly Media, 2010, 

pp. 141Œ186. 
 4.
 N. Brown, R.L. Nord, and I. Ozkaya, 

ﬁEnabling Agility Through Architecture,ﬂ 

CrossTalk
, vol. 23, no. 6, 2010, pp. 12Œ17. 
ELTJO R. POORT
 is a solution architect at CGI. 
Contact him at eltjo.poort@gmail.com.
Selected CS articles and columns 
are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
Software Engineering RadioThe podcast for professional developers 

is looking for hosts to interview some of 

the top minds in software engineering. 
Contact bbrannon@computer.org 
for more information.
Sponsored by
The podcast for professional developers 

is looking for hosts to interview some of 

the top minds in software engineering. 
Contact bbrannon@computer.org 
for more information.
Sponsored by
s5pra.indd   238/7/14   1:19 PM