 62IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/04/$20.00 © 2004 IEEEformulated in terms of program conceptsÑ
chunks of knowledge about the program and
application domainÑthe resulting IC activi-

ties also focus on program concepts. More-
over, most change requests originate from the

end user, so the end userÕs view of the program

is the source of most concepts that govern IC.
Additional concepts might originate from
other programmers and deal with the program
architecture or algorithms.Program dependencies also play a crucialrole in IC; if a program component changes,

other dependent components might also haveto change. This is true even for well-designedobject-oriented programs, as this articleÕs ex-

ample demonstrates.IC at workWe illustrate IC in an example involving
Drawlets (www.rolemodelsoft.com/drawlets),

an open source framework that adds graphics
to a host application. (See the ÒPrevious WorkÓ

sidebar for background information and moti-

vation.) Drawlets supports a drawing canvas
that holds figures and lets users interact with

them. The figures include straight lines, free-

hand lines, rectangles, rounded rectangles, tri-
angles, pentagons, polygons, ellipses, and text
boxes. Tools modify the figure attributes, such

as size and location. The host application pro-

vides an instance of the drawing canvas, tool-
bars, and tool buttons. 
Incremental Change in Object-Oriented
ProgrammingIncremental changeadds new functionality and new properties to
software. ItÕs an essential part of software processes such as mainte-

nance, evolution, iterative development and enhancements, and agile
development. Because of that, it plays an important role in practicalsoftware engineering. In this article, we concentrate on IC in the context of object-orientedJava programs and study selected IC activities. Because change requests are 





V⁄clav Rajlich and Prashant Gosavi, Wayne State University
 July/August 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
63Drawlets is well-designed, with more than
100 classes, 35 interfaces, and 40,000 lines of
code and documentation. Kent Beck and Ward

Cunningham developed the original frame-
work, named HotDraw, in Smalltalk, and

RoleModel Software later ported it to Java and
renamed it Drawlets. In this example, we used a host application
called SimpleApplet. Class implements this host application and is a part
of the Drawlets library. SimpleApplet runs in

any browser that supports Java. It displays the
drawing canvas in a browser window and
arranges the toolbars and tool buttons around
it. These tool buttons activate tools that create

or modify figures. Figure 1 shows the Simple-
Applet canvas with a selection of different
shapes.For this example, the change request is toimplement an owner for each figure. An owneris the user who put the figure onto the canvas,
and only the owner should be allowed to mod-
ify a figure. A user inputs his or her ID and
password at the beginning of a session. Any at-
tempt to change a figure must validate that the
figure owner and the current session owner are
the same. This change will make SimpleApplet moreversatile and will let several users work col-
laboratively on a single document. IC design is
our response to the change request.IC designIC  design responds to the change request by
performing certain activitiesÑconcept extrac-tion, location, and impact analysisÑbefore theactual change starts. Both programmers and
project managers participate in the design to
better understand the planned IC and required
resources.Concept extractionAs mentioned earlier, we define concepts as
chunksof 
knowledge about the program andapplication domain. In the natural language
used in change requests, they appear as nouns,
verbs, or short clauses. Concepts let program-

mers and users communicate about the pro-

gram and are also present in the code itself. An
identifiable code fragment, very often a class,

might implement them. In other situations, they
appear implicitly as simplifications and as-
sumptions reflected in certain code segments.

Change requests typically contain several con-A complete version of the Drawlets example appears elsewhere.1The article, ÒThe Staged Model of the Software Lifecycle,Ó summarizes
the role of evolution in the software life cycle.2Iterative change and refac-toring (change that doesnÕt modify the programÕs behavior but modifies the

program structure and makes it more suitable for future evolution) are soft-

ware evolutionÕs main tasks. Martin Fowler has given a comprehensive list

of refactoring transformations.
3Evolving interoperation graphs4are a theoretical model of change prop-agation and are the basis for the figures that appear in this article.
Concept location, impact analysis, and change propagation all requireknowledge of class dependencies. Program analysis is the discipline that de-
velops algorithms that extract class dependencies from a program. You can

access a summary of research on impact analysis and analysis of program

dependencies elsewhere.5A sizable literature exists on software design that anticipates future changes
and prepares software for them.6However, frequently, for various reasons, the
IC isnÕt anticipated and affects many classes. Unanticipated IC, despite being a

very common software process, hasnÕt attracted sufficient study. As a result, itÕs

not part of the textbooks, lacks an established terminology and tool support,

and is largely a self-taught art that successful programmers must discover on

their own.References1.P. Gosavi, 
Example of Change Propagation, masterÕs thesis, Dept. Computer Science,
Wayne State Univ., 2003; www.cs.wayne.edu/~gosavip/thesis/thesis_index.html.
2.V.T. Rajlich and K.H. Bennett, ÒThe Staged Model of the Software Lifecycle,Ó 
Computer, July2000, pp. 66Ð71.3.M. Fowler, 
Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
4.V. Rajlich, ÒModeling Software Evolution by Evolving Interoperation Graphs,Ó 
Annals ofSoftware Eng., vol. 9, 2000, pp. 235Ð248. 
5.S.A. Bohner and R.S. Arnold, 
Software Change Impact Analysis, IEEE CS Press, 1996.6.D.L. Parnas, ÒOn the Criteria to Be Used in Decomposing Systems into Modules,Ó 
Comm.ACM, vol. 29, 1972, pp. 1053Ð1058. Previous Work
Text Label
text
FillLineText
Black
ForeApply
NoFigure 1. Screen shot ofSimpleApplet. cepts, so a programmer must extract the ones
that best characterize the change. 
Coming back to the Drawlets example, thechange request contains the concepts User,

Figure, Canvas, Modify Figure, User ID, User
Password, Beginning of a Session, Validate

Owner, and so forth. The concepts most rele-

vant to our IC are Figure Owner and Current
Session Owner. Both of these concepts are im-

plicit in the old code, which assumes that just

one owner owns both sessions and figures.LocationThe next IC activity is to locate the relevant
concepts in the code. 
Concept location has been the subject ofprevious studies, and several methodologies are
available, including string pattern matching
that finds relevant identifiers or comments,1adynamic testing technique,2and static codesearch.3Each technique has its area of applica-bility (a discussion of these techniquesÕ advan-
tages and disadvantages appears elsewhere4).In our example, we located the concepts bystatic code search. We used this technique

rather than the others because both of the
sought concepts are implicit, so no identifiers
exist to point to their locations and you canÕt

identify them by testing the current code. For

implicit concepts, static code search is the only

suitable technique. The search space is the
class diagram, and the programmer conducts
the search depth-first by going top-down
through control flow dependencies.
The programmer first visits the top class(containing method or ), whichsummarizes the programÕs functionality. This

top class doesnÕt do everything; it delegates

parts of its functionality to other classes.

Hence, if the top class doesnÕt implement the

sought concept, the classes it calls must imple-
ment the concept. Because these classes are
specialized, itÕs usually easy to decide which

ones do and donÕt lead toward the sought con-

cept. Moving down the call graph toward in-
creasingly specialized classes, the programmer
eventually finds the classes that participate in
the concept. If more than one concept is in-
volved in the change, the programmer repeats
the search until he or she locates all concepts. Figure 2 gives a UML class diagram5of se-lected top classes of Drawlets that we searched

for the Figure Owner and Current Session
Owner concepts.  Bold blue arrows indicate the

searchÕs process, which starts in the top class
.The class is responsible forthe whole program. However, after briefly

reading the classÕs code, we determined that it

doesnÕt contain any session or figure attributes,

and thus contains neither Current Session
Owner nor Figure Owner. We concluded that

these concepts must be located in the classes
uses. Class 
supports a selection of different styles for fig-
ures, and we concluded that it couldnÕt contain

the concepts. Similarly, the concepts couldnÕt be

located in or ; thus,they must be located in the classes implement-
ing the interface .is an interface and theclass implements it.There is one and only one instance of for each session ofDrawlets; hence, most of the session attributes
are concentrated in this class and itÕs the logi-

cal location of the implicit concept of Current

Session Owner.
We then searched for the Figure Owner con-
ceptÕs location, repeating the same original steps

until we reached the interface .The interface contains manyfigures but doesnÕt contain properties of in-

dividual figures; so we visited the interface 

. This interface is stillonly a collection of Figure objects and also
doesnÕt contain individual figure properties.

So, we next visited the interface , im-64IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Sequence of steps of concept locationClasses visited during concept location
Classes where the concepts were located
Classes not visitedFigure 2. Summary of

concept location. plemented by class .Class holds most of afigureÕs attributes. ItÕs also the topmost class in

the Figure hierarchy. We concluded that the

implicit concept of Figure Owner resides in

this class. Impact analysisImpact analysis determines a changeÕs ex-
tent. It determines the set of classes IC affects

(the impact set) and presents an opportunityto select a strategy for the change. It also gives
the programmer an opportunity to understand
the relevant code and dependencies that prop-
agate the change. Ideally, IC is limited to one class only, and
the information hiding and abstraction that
the class implements are barriers to propagat-
ing the IC to other classes. However, even in

well-designed systems, some ICs cross these
barriers. Our explanation is that itÕs impracti-

cal to encapsulate all imaginable program con-
cepts because there are simply too many. This

is particularly true about implicit concepts; the

code is based on many assumptions and itÕs

impractical and unlikely that they all will be
encapsulated. If a change request is based on
an unencapsulated concept, itÕs likely to affect

several classes that participate in that concept. Impact analysis starts with the classes foundin concept location. These are the first classes

that the programmer adds to the impact set.

For every new class added to the impact set, the

programmer visits all classes interacting with it.

If the IC will change these classes, theyÕre also

added to the impact set. The programmer con-
tinues this process recursively until he or she

identifies all classes of the impact set.Different kinds of class interactions havedifferent likelihoods of change propagation.
For example, a change in a derived class is less
likely to trigger a change in the base class,
while a change in a base class is more likely to
require changes in derived classes. However, a

safe view is that all classes that have a nonzero
probability of change must be visited and ei-
ther added to the impact set or certified that

they donÕt need change.
In some cases, information passes fromclass A to class B through an intermediary class
X. In this case, a change in A might trigger a
change in B while the intermediary class X re-
mains unchanged. We call this 
hidden propa-gation.5The existence of hidden propagationhas the following consequence: If during im-pact analysis we encounter a class that doesnÕt

change, we still must investigate whether

thereÕs a potential for hidden propagation. If

there is, we must visit the neighbors of this
class even if the class itself didnÕt change. 
In our example of Drawlets, we knew thatand would change, so we put them intothe impact set. We then iteratively visited the

classes and interfaces that interact with these
two classes (see Figure 3). 
The only interface that interacts withis the interface. We determined that it doesnÕt
need any change, but it could propagate the
changes to the classes and interfaces that in-

teract with it. Of these, the class 
and the interface donÕt
need modifications and donÕt propagate this

change any further. However, the class 
-needs a change, so we added it tothe impact set. Next, we visited the classes that interact with(, and), but none required a changeand there was no possibility of propagation. Starting from , we visitedthe interface , which interacts with theclass , and added it to theimpact set. We visited the classes 
-and , added them to the im-pact set, and propagated the change to the
classes beyond them as far as necessary. Figure

3 illustrates the complete impact set and the
extent of the change.IC implementationImplementing IC follows the design phase
and involves actualization, incorporation, andchange propagationactivities.ActualizationDuring actualization, the programmerwrites the code that will implement the new
concept. For a small change, the new code
might be part of an existing class. A larger
change could require implementing a com-
pletely new class or a new subsystem consist-

ing of several new classes. In our Drawlets example, we implemented the
concept Owner in the new class .It holds basic owner data, such as owner ID
and password. A dialog box lets users changeJuly/August 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
65



 the current session owner. It also contains a lis-
tener that notifies the program when the user

clicks on a button in this box. We implemented

this listener in the class . IncorporationIncorporation interconnects the new code
with the old. If the new code is a class, we can
achieve incorporation by declaring instances
of the new class in the old code or vice versa. 
In our Drawlets example, we incorporatedthe newly created classes and into the old code by cre-ating an instance of in both
and . That required changes in theseclassesÕ methods.In the class 
, we added anew argument for figure owner to several ex-
isting public methods. After the modifications,
these methods first compared the identities of
current session owner and figure owner before
making changes to the figures. We also modi-

fied several other methods in this class that
called the above methods. In the class 
, wemodified the function to prevent figures not belonging to the current
session owner from being cut from the canvas.

We implemented several new methods to al-
66IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
New classesClasses or interfaces modified during all three versions of change propagation
Classes modified only during original change propagation or during refactoring
Unchanged classes or interfaces
Figure 3. Drawletsclasses involved in 
incremental change
(IC). low access to the current session owner infor-mation stored in class .Figure 4 shows the situation after incorpora-tion; we added the new classes and and modified the classesand -. Bold blue arrows indicate inconsistenciesin the program and the direction in which they

propagate.Change propagationThis activity parallels impact analysis, butthis time it involves real code changes. An in-
teresting case study discovered that program-

mers often underestimate the impact set.6So,programmers should be open to the possibility
that they might have missed some propaga-
tions during impact analysis. Also, new unan-
ticipated effects of the actual changes could
emerge during this phase. In our Drawlets example, incorporationchanged the classes and . So, they are the start-ing points for the change propagation. Be-
cause change propagation parallels impact
analysis, we donÕt repeat the individual steps

here. The complete set of classes changed in
the change propagation is equivalent to the
impact set (see Figure 3). 
Shorter propagation
Change propagation is a long, difficult, anderror-prone IC activity. A change in any class

requires a thorough retesting of the class andin-

creases the risk that the code will unexpectedly
break. Here, we present two separate and mutu-
ally independent techniques that shorten change
propagation. We applied them before the incor-

poration and change propagation took place. RefactoringTo restructure the program architecture
without changing the programÕs functionality,

we applied refactoring. A comprehensiveoverview of refactoring techniques appears

elsewhere.7Here, we apply several of thesetechniques. During impact analysis, the programmermight find misplaced code that unnecessarily
extends the impact set. In this case, he or she

can improve the program architecture by mov-
ing the misplaced code into its proper place by
refactoring. This results in shortened change
propagation.In our Drawlets example, we noticed that
several classes that create new figures have the
method . This methodhas two main parts:Create a new figure.
If the figure was not created at its intended

location, move it by calling the method. Drawlets creates the figures Ellipse, Rectangle,and several other figures in this way. When the

method changed, the classes thatcreate these figures also had to change. We could improve the software architecture
by placing this functionality in a base class, as
itÕs shared among several derived classes. This

would prevent unnecessary code repetition
and would also shorten change propagation.
To accomplish this, we used the following

refactoring steps:7 Extract method. First, we extracted thecall to method 
from -and put in a new me-
thod .Pull up method. Next, we pulled upmethod intothe base class ConstructionTool.
Inline method. Then, we merged methodinto method.July/August 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
67Future steps of change propagationNew classes
Classes already modified
Classes to be visited next
Other classesFigure 4. The programafter actualization and
incorporation. This refactoring improved the code by re-moving redundancies and shortening the
change propagation, as the data in Table 1

and Figure 3 show.
Splitting the rolesAnother technique that can shorten changepropagation is splitting the roles. We can apply
this when the code uses the same class or same
method in two slightly different roles. Because the
roles are similar, the same code can do both jobs.
The propagating change, however, can
highlight the differences in these two roles.

Only one of them might need updating while

the other one remains the same. Splitting the

two roles and updating only one of them
shortens change propagation.In our example, we observed that themethod is used in Drawlets in twodifferent ways: to move the figure as requested
by the user or as part of the algorithm for cre-
ating new figures. The methodÕs dual role par-

tially causes the extended change propagation.ItÕs obvious that a user-initiated move must
check the user identity, while the creation of

new figures need not. By splitting these two

roles into two functionsÑa new method and the old methodÑwe substantially shortened thechange propagation. The new method first checks the userÕs iden-
tity and then invokes the old method.Observations
In the example, we observed that our IC re-quired large change propagation. The data in
Table 1 show the changeÕs extent and the impact
of the techniques that limit change propagation.Of the three techniques used, splitting led to
changes in the smallest number of classes, while
refactoring improved program architecture and,
thus, future maintainability. Simple propagation

was the easiest technique to employ.
In our example, we chose to work on the
granularity of classes; the typical step was a
visit to a class. We could have presented IC on

other granularities as well, such as the granu-
larity of class members (methods and vari-
ables) or even the finer granularity of state-
ments. The granularity of classes is the
granularity at which the program concepts are
most clearly expressed; many of them are im-

plemented as classes. Classes are also natural
units for code editors and software tools.
Compared to that, smaller granularities pro-
vide information that might be more accurate

but also can be too detailed and voluminous.
As such, it might be appropriate only for small
changes. In our example, the granularity of
classes worked well and was a natural granu-
larity for IC activities.
In this article, we didnÕt explicitly discuss test-
ing, updates of manuals and other documents, or

similar IC activities, but we believe that the ac-
tivities presented here are a compatible subset.
You can apply change propagation to other doc-

uments, and the change propagates through the

dependencies among the documents.The Drawlets example illustrated a largeand delocalized change. In changes that are ei-
ther small or localized, some activities might
become trivial or unnecessary. For example, in

a small or familiar program, concept location
is immediate and doesnÕt require any explicit

activity. 
Localized changes are contained within asingle class and avoid change propagation. For
small changes, it might be reasonable to merge
actualization and incorporation and change
the old code directly without separating these
two activities. Changes that retract functional-
ity might still require location and propaga-
tion, but deleting obsolete code replaces actu-
alization and incorporation.To address the universality of the ac-
tivities presented here, we plan to
study a larger set of ICs in future case
studies. We also plan to address how the ac-
68IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Table 1 The number of classes and interfaces modified by
incremental changeTechnique used in ICClasses modifiedInterfaces modified
Incorporation and propagation only365
Refactoring, incorporation, and propagation365
Refactoring 120
Incorporation and propagation after refactoring255
Splitting, incorporation, and propagation245
Splitting 50
Incorporation and propagation after splitting205
 tivities and techniques described in this articleimpact other software artifacts such as tests

and documentation. We believe that it would be beneficial to ex-
tend the work presented here to other soft-

ware technologies, including databases, net-
works, and the like, and to other technologies
in general.WeÕve observed that concept location,
change impact analysis and change propaga-
tion are overhead in IC, while actualization
and incorporation constitute ICÕs core. Small

changes lead to multiple repetitions of the
overhead, and we speculate that the result is
decreased programming efficiency and an in-
creased likelihood of errors. However, changes

that are too big and deal with too many issues
at once could overload the programmersÕ cog-
nitive capabilities. Hence, we speculate that
thereÕs an optimal IC size, which weÕll try to

find. Although programmers receive change re-
quests from the user community and donÕt

have control over their size, they can often sub-
divide or aggregate change requests into blocks
of the optimal size.The activities of concept location, change
impact analysis, and change propagation em-
ploy program dependencies that program
analysis discovers. We plan to implement a tool

that would extract dependencies from the code

and track the progress of IC activities.We expect that research on IC will improve
the current practice and will contribute to the

accumulation of knowledge in this important
field.References1.T.J. Biggerstaff, B.G. Mitbander, and D.E. Webster,
ÒProgram Understanding and the Concept Assignment
Problem,Ó Comm. ACM, May 1994, pp. 72Ð78.2.N. Wilde and M.C. Scully, ÒSoftware Reconnaissance:
Mapping Features to Code,Ó J. Software Maintenance,1995, vol. 7,  pp. 49Ð62. 
3.K. Chen and V. Rajlich, ÒRIPPLES: Tool for Change in
Legacy Software,Ó Proc. IEEE IntÕl Conf. SoftwareMaintenance, IEEE CS Press, 2001, pp. 230Ð239.4.N. Wilde et al., ÒA Comparison of Methods for Locat-
ing Features in Legacy Software,Ó J. Systems and Soft-ware, vol. 65, no. 2, 2003, pp. 105Ð114.5.G. Booch, J. Rumbaugh, and I. Jacobson, 
The Unified
Modeling Language User Guide,Addison-Wesley, 1998.
6.Z. Yu and V. Rajlich, ÒHidden Dependencies in Pro-
gram Comprehension and Change Propagation,Ó Proc.9th IntÕl Workshop Program Comprehension
, IEEE CSPress, 2001, pp. 293Ð299.7.M. Lindvall and K. Sandahl, ÒHow Well do Experi-
enced Software Developers Predict Software Change?ÓJ. Systems and Software, vol. 43, no. 1, 1998, pp. 19Ð27.8.M. Fowler, 
Refactoring: Improving the Design of Exist-ing Code, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
July/August 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
69
V⁄clav Rajlichis a full professor and former chair in the Department of Computer Sci-ence at Wayne State University. His research interests include the areas of software evolution

and comprehension. He received a PhD in mathematics from Case Western Reserve University.

He is a member of the IEEE Computer Society and ACM. Contact him at vtr@cs.wayne.edu.Prashant Gosaviis a software developer and product manager with Dimensional Con-trol Systems. His research interest is software evolution. He received an MS in computer sci-
ence from Wayne State University. Contact him at prashant@3dcs.com.

We publish 
IEEE Software
as a service to our readers. With

each issue, we strive to present

timely articles and departments
with information you can use.

How are we doing?

Send us your feedback, and help

us tailor the magazine to you!
Write us at
