 to rewrite from scratch a legacy application todemonstrate the technologyÕs ability to inte-

grate with other applications. The legacy ap-
plication was an event notification system
written in Forte and Sybase procedures. By

writing custom applications monitoring spe-

cific business events (for instance, the price of
natural gas), users could use the event notifi-
cation application to notify interested parties.When ThoughtWorks recommended Ex-
treme Programming1as a development ap-proach, some of TCPLÕs architects and project
managers had concerns. For instance, XPÕs
lack of investment in up-front design and doc-
umentation differed from the more traditional
forms of application development they knew.

They also werenÕt sure who would be respon-

sible for the systemÕs overall architecture. For-

tunately, converting skeptics was not a task

for the project team. Rather, we aimed to

demonstrate that XP worked by example. We

had six months to prove the technology, train

the team in XP, learn the business, and pro-

duce a production-ready application. The project team comprised approximately13 people, including a project manager, an it-

eration manager, a build master, a business

analyst, a tester, four junior developers (with

no prior XP experience), and four intermedi-
ate to senior developers (who had XP experi-
ence). Upon delivery, the greenfield code base
feature
Introducing XP intoGreenfield Projects:
Lessons LearnedOne of ThoughtWorksÕ clients, TransCanada Pipelines Limited, is a
leading North American energy company that specializes in natu-
ral gas transmission and power generation. TCPL builds many
custom applications using Sun MicrosystemsÕ Java J2EE. TCPLengaged ThoughtWorks for two reasons. First, TCPL wanted to determine

whether Web service technologies and standards were mature enough to

warrant building applications within the enterprise. Second, they wanted usExtreme Programming
0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEPublished by the IEEE Computer SocietyIEEE SOFTWARE
21ThoughtWorks introduced Extreme Programming into an organizationand successfully completed a bleeding-edge technology project 
with client staff that had no previous experience using an agile
development approach. This article describes how XP helped the
project succeed and shares lessons learned.
Jonathan Rasmusson, ThoughtWorks
 had 21,000 lines of application code and16,000 of test code. The practicesThe project applied many software devel-opment practicesÑnot all of them exclusive to

XP. The following practices worked well and

contributed significantly to the projectÕs over-

all success.Pair programmingI believe pairing is the most powerful XP
practice and made the largest contribution to

our overall project success.2Unit testing, refac-toring, test-first design, and simplicity are vital.

Pairing, however, let the team apply these prac-

tices to their fullest extent. Pairing was the most
effective way to communicate and demonstrate

XP practices to new team members. Not unex-
pectedly, people embraced XP at different

speeds. Not everyone immediately started writ-

ing test-first code, it took time to learn effective
unit testing, and refactoring was not second na-

ture. Pairing, however, brought a level of con-

sistency to the team regarding XP practices. Advice for senior developers pairing withjunior developers would be to work at the ju-
niorÕs speed. A junior developer commented

that he initially found pairing difficult because
the senior person would work too quickly.

The junior felt more like a passenger traveling
on a high-speed train while the senior devel-
oper did all the work. Both developers in a
pair should feel like theyÕre contributing as ef-
fectively as possible.Stand-up meetingsFred Brooks reminds us of the importance
of communication when describing why the
Tower of Babel failed.
3The Tower of Babel
was manÕs second major undertaking, after

NoahÕs Ark. This project had almost every-

thing going for it: a clear mission, plenty of
manpower, materials, time, and sound tech-

nology. So, why then did a project with so

much going for it fail? It lacked communica-
tion and organization.XP advocates daily stand-up meetings as ameans of enhancing project communication.
Just putting everyone in a room and quickly
sharing knowledge at a high level efficiently
enables mass communication between team
members and stakeholders. Team members

ranked stand-ups very high among factorsthey considered essential to the projectÕs suc-
cess. They became Òtown hall meetingsÓ that
everyone wanted to attend for updates on all
the daily project events.
The trick to holding effective stand-ups is toset expectations early. Let the team know that

the point of the meeting is to communicate
quickly and clearly anything directly related to
the project. Design issues, requests for help,
and problems and solutions discovered are all
relevant. Meetings should typically not exceed
15 minutes, and attendance is mandatory. 
Other positive side effects of stand-up meet-ings included project visibility and strong team
building. Everyone from developer to project
manager knew the projectÕs state at any given

time. You could raise small problems and ad-

dress them before they became big problems.
Also, XPÕs social side really shone through

when people got together, shared experiences,

and collectively looked for solutions.Unit testingIf I could only recommend one coding prac-tice to software developers, those who use XP
or otherwise, it would be to write unit tests.Unit tests are low-level tests developerswrite (typically at the class method level) to

prove that their code behaves as expected. On
this project, these tests were invaluable in let-
ting us refactor.
4The tests provided immediate
feedback when we broke something in the

code. They highlighted the sometimes subtle
and difficult-to-detect differences between our
production and development environments. In
a sea of change, the unit tests were our anchor. 
Everyone on the team bought into the con-
cept of unit tests and saw their value. Effective

unit testing, however, took time to learn and

was best implemented in pairs. By pairing those

with JUnit (www.junit.org/index.htm) experi-

ence and those new to unit testing, we quickly

got everyone into the habit of writing tests. Developers seem to evolve somewhat when
it comes to writing unit tests. The first stage, be-
coming test infected(http://junit.sourceforge.net/doc/testinfected/testing.htm), is often sim-
ply convincing developers that writing tests is a
good thing. Once comfortable with the me-

chanics of unit testing, developers can look at

more advanced techniques, such as test-driven
development and using MockObjects (www.

c2.com/cgi/wiki?MockObject). Eventually, test-

infected developers will also start to use tests inXPÕs social sidereally shonethrough whenpeople gottogether, shared
experiences,and collectivelylooked forsolutions.22IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
 their object-oriented designs. When given a de-sign problem, instead of focusing immediately

on the implementation, developers can use the

tests to help establish the objectÕs interfaces

first. Once the tests are written (what the object
is supposed to do), they can go on to make
them pass (how the object behaves).
When writing unit tests, watch out for du-plication. Although you donÕt want to be over-

critical about it at the projectÕs beginning (after

all, we want developers writing lots of tests),
you need to carefully apply the XP practice of
Òtesting everything that could possibly break.Ó
Overzealous application can result in redun-
dant testing of proven functionality. YouÕll no-

tice this when youÕre working in different parts
of the system and you see similar-looking unit

tests. Another warning sign is if you or your
partner are cutting and pasting parts of unit
test code from one test class to another.
Fortunately, everyone on the team saw the
value of unit tests, but IÕve also been on client
sites where selling unit testing to developers
was more challenging. An unobtrusive ap-
proach is to start by convincing developers
that writing a unit test for each bug they fix
will guarantee that the bug will never be rein-
troduced at a later date. Another tactic is to
first get developers to buy into refactoring and
then remind them that you canÕt refactor ef-

fectively without unit tests.Whatever approach you take, developers
must buy into unit tests. Unit tests are the
foundation on which much of XP rests. It lets
developers make changes to the code base with
confidence, minimizes the chances of reintro-
ducing bugs into the system, and allows the
team to refactor continuously and aggressively.
Test-driven development
TDD is a software development technique inwhich you write unit tests prior to implementa-
tion.5Initially, most developers on the team
were unfamiliar with the concept of writing test
code before the implementation. Introducing
TDD took time because of the number of skills
needed before we could apply this practice with

confidence. Developers must first be comfort-
able with the mechanics of writing unit tests.
Strong object-oriented skills and a philosophy
of simple design also aided in applying TDD.Developers often view test-first design asonly a testing technique. However, when ap-

plied effectively, test-first design also helps de-
velopers enhance their OO designs. Tests are an
important side effect, but more important is the

resulting design the technique helps produce.
Pairing was critical when introducing TDD to
the team. On our project, TDD tended to occur
only when one or both developers in a pair were
keen on its application. Working with someone

confident and able to demonstrate TDD by ex-
ample went a long way into bringing others on
board. When people worked alone or with oth-
ers unfamiliar with TDD, the pair often slipped
back into their more comfortable nontest habits.
Introducing the practice into new environments
requires patience and persistence. Ultimately,

however, approximately one-third of the code

was implemented with TDD. RefactoringRefactoring changes a software system sothat it doesnÕt alter the codeÕs external behavior

yet improves its internal structure.
4If simplicityis the destination, refactoring is the vehicle that

gets us there. Taken in isolation, each refactor-

ing is quite simple. How to refactor effectively

is not so obvious. People new to refactoring are

sometimes unclear about when to refactor, and

to what extent. Management can view refactor-

ing negatively when itÕs misapplied. I once wit-

nessed a development team who delayed all

refactoring and testing until the last three days

of a three-week iteration. Over time, the code
became more resistant to change, and introduc-

ing new functionality became nontrivial and

time-consuming. When asked why new features

took so long to implement, developers replied

that they were having to spend large amounts
of time refactoring the code. This resulted in

missed deadlines, unhappy customers, and
management who wanted to hear nothing more
about this practice called refactoring. ItÕs not

fair to blame improperly applied refactoring as
the sole cause of all this projectÕs woes. How-

ever, IÕve seen teams make refactoring a scape-

goat for missed deadlines and other project ills.
Developers should avoid this kind of situation
because refactoring plays an important role on
XP projects and would be a beneficial practice

regardless of the development methodology

used.One of XPÕs cornerstones is that the code
must be in its cleanest and simplest state at all
times,1letting teams more easily handle futurerequirement changes. This is easiest to accom-
plish when developers refactor continuously,
May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
23Pairing wascritical whenintroducing TDDto the team. On our project,TDD tended tooccur onlywhen one orboth developersin a pair werekeen on itsapplication.  as opposed to setting aside dedicated timepurely for refactoring. When we did not refactor continuously, the
code became more cumbersome and resistant to
change. Once again, pairing those new to refac-
toring with those more experienced helped

demonstrate this techniqueÕs effective applica-

tion. When faced with large refactorings, use
stand-up meetings to share your insights and de-
sign goals for that part of the application. Put
warning signs in the code to prevent others from
propagating the undesired design. Over time,
you and the rest of the team will be able to move
toward the simpler, cleaner solution while si-

multaneously delivering new functionality.
Simplest thing possibleEveryone on the team agreed that wewanted to always do the simplest thing possible

when writing code. However, defining simplic-

ity was challenging, particularly relative to the
use of design patterns.
6Some team memberswere quite comfortable with multiple layers of
indirection and applying design patterns. How-
ever, for others, the prescribed design pattern

solutions often seemed overly complex for the

problem at hand. The XP literature reminds us

that we should always Òdo the simplest thing

that could possibly work.Ó Any extra work we
do anticipating future requirements is often un-
warranted and misapplied. Prematurely apply-
ing design patterns is an example of unneces-

sary complexity in the codeÑfor example, a

Strategy pattern with only one strategy.
Design patterns and XP practices appear toclash on the issue of simplicity. Joshua Kerievsky

presented the best explanation IÕve seen regard-
ing this conundrum.7Kerievsky points out thatthe XP simplicity practice has definite merit.
Why overdesign a system in a vain attempt to
anticipate future requirement changes? Instead,
start simply and let the code tell you whether the
use of a pattern is warranted. Design patterns
should be targets for our refactorings. Refactor
into the pattern rather than start there. This sim-

ple advice is powerful and yields a good balance
between XPÕs quest for simplicity and patternsÕ

expressive power.
Continuous integrationWhere JUnit aided us in testing, anotheropen source project called Ant (http://jakarta.

apache.org/ant/index.html) helped us continu-
ously integrate our code into the master build.Ant build scripts resemble make files in Unix.
Our Ant build scripts could check out our lat-
est code, compile it, release it to our target en-
vironment, and run all unit tests through a sin-
gle command. Because Ant is written in Java,
we were able to run the same build process on
various development environments.We also used an open source project started
at ThoughtWorks called CruiseControl (http://

cruisecontrol.sourceforge.net). CruiseControl
periodically scans version control systems for

newly checked-in code. When new code is

checked in, CruiseControl runs the build scripts

and promptly reports if anything is wrong. By continuously checking in code through-out the day and having a build process moni-
tor the applicationÕs state, the team avoided

much of the pain traditionally associated with
software integration.Looking back, I wish weÕd put more em-phasis on making the tests run faster, without

compromising the ability to test the system ex-
actly as it would run in production. At the pro-
jectÕs end, our system took 24 minutes to build.

As a result, developers started running a subset
of the tests only before checking in codeÑless
then ideal. One way to speed up our tests
would be to use MockObjects to fake out Web

container and database calls. Another option
would be to direct our tests against fast, light-
weight, in-memory databases instead of their
full-blown production counterparts. The environmentLike any ecosystem in nature, certain envi-
ronmental conditions help its inhabitants live

and thrive. This projectÕs optimal ecosystem

was when the team was colocated, working

within earshot of one another. Big open spaces

with large tables where developers could sit side

by side and pair-program were most conducive

to a productive work environment. The envi-

ronment resembled the Òcaves and commonÓ
room layout described by Ken Auer.
8In thisscenario, there is a common area for pairs and
groups of developers to congregate and a caves
area for people when they require privacy. This

seems to strike a nice balance between the high-

bandwidth pairing environment and the more

secluded private space we all sometimes need.
Our project did experience a setback, how-ever, regarding the environment. About three

quarters through the project, the team was
moved into another building. Consequently,
Why overdesigna system in a vain attempt to anticipatefuturerequirementchanges?Instead, startsimply and letthe code tellyou whetheryou need to use a pattern.24IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
 we lost our big open area and were placed intotraditional small offices. The immediate effects
were that team members suddenly spent a

greater part of their day getting up and walk-
ing the halls searching for the people they
needed. Communication between team mem-
bers suffered. Stand-up meetings then played
an even more central role in coordinating and
organizing the team.ItÕs the little things that count
Like all things in life, the little things oftenend up making the biggest differences. Little

pats on the back were greatly appreciated.

Management realized that by making the devel-

opers feel genuinely appreciated, developers
continuously went that extra mile. Tasty snacks

for those long iteration-planning meetings and
occasional mid-afternoon coffee runs helped

keep the project fun and the morale high. The

QA department (our tester) also demonstrated

her appreciation to developers who wrote a

thorough set of unit tests by rewarding them
with stickers (much like the ones you might re-
ceive in grade school). These soon became

sought-after items by developers. Although
these small gestures might seem trivial by them-

selves, cumulatively they aided to the projectÕs

success. I encourage teams to look for ways of
making their projects fun and to give each other

occasional pats on the back for a job well done.Release managementWe found TCPL very receptive to how XP
handles release management. We based our re-

lease cycles on two-week iterations, with a for-
mal release in six months. Two weeks sufficed to

predictably add new functionality to the system
and to give management a sense of the projectÕs

progress. The two-week period also kept devel-
opers focused on delivering quickly, without be-

ing lulled into a sense of complacency that can
occur with longer iteration periods. Story plan-
ning worked best when someone with authority,

who could speak on behalf of the customer, was

present. The client also appreciated the fact that
you could reprioritize stories without hugely af-
fecting the project schedule. The XP metaphor The XP metaphoris the words and terms
used to describe the systemÕs overall architec-

ture. Before this project, I did not place the
metaphor practice in high standing relative toother XP practices such as unit testing or
refactoring. Many of the experience reports
and personal conversations with other teams
practicing XP led me to believe that the
metaphor wasnÕt important. My own experi-

ence showed this as we didnÕt talk about or

raise the XP metaphorÕs profile at TCPL. 
Upon reflection, however, I believe we did
have a project metaphor for the project; we
just didnÕt appreciate it at the time. We de-

scribed the event notification system as having
paging-like capabilities. Subscribers to busi-
ness events could be either groups of people or
single individuals. Furthermore, our system
was built up by aggregating existing Web serv-

ices to form a larger application. Although
simplistic, these words and descriptions of

what the system did played an important role
in realizing it. The words used in the metaphor

manifested themselves as abstractions in the
software. ThatÕs the point of the metaphor. 
Although those applying XP often overlookthe metaphor, itÕs a very important aspect of

the development process and shouldnÕt be

overlooked. In future projects, I would aim to

raise the metaphorÕs visibility and importance

in the hopes of realizing better abstractions

and insights in the code.Room for improvementHindsight is 20/20. Given a second chance,we would do some things differently. 
Communication with external groupsIn the later development stages, we needed
external services and expertise, such as data-
base and system administrators for configur-
ing and setting up our production environ-
ments. We set up stories within our iterations

regarding interaction with these external
groups. These stories became the most diffi-
cult and the longest to complete.
One mistake we made was assuming that
these other groups would work within our time

framesÑtwo-week iteration periods. When
working with external groups, itÕs helpful if you

can send a scout ahead (preferably a project
manager to talk to the external groupsÕ leaders)

to ensure everyone is on the same page and to

minimize any roadblocks ahead of time. It

might also have helped to invite external group

members to a few of our stand-up meetings.

Through their presence at these meetings, we
could have gently shown them how we worked
May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
25Little pats on
the back were greatlyappreciated.Managementrealized that by making thedevelopers feelgenuinelyappreciated,developerscontinuouslywent that extra mile. and shared with them our objectives and goals.
More communication would have led to better
task, activity, and schedule coordination. If you

depend on an external group, start working
with them sooner rather then later.
Get a real business customerThe projectÕs direction was periodically chal-
lenged. Because the projectÕs business backers

periodically changed, so did the requirements.
So, it wasnÕt always clear what business prob-

lem we were trying to solve. On one hand, our

mandate was to replace a legacy application. On
the other hand, the new technology we were
working with could also help other groups
within TCPL solve their business problems. Story planning sometimes became tricky,
and the analyst and project manager had to pe-
riodically juggle stories for multiple clients.

Story planning would have been much easier if
we had a single business customer continuously

present on the project driving requirements.Looking back, I believe we did a good jobof gathering and implementing requirements
from multiple stakeholders. How might things
have turned out if we had a single strong busi-
ness partner from the beginning? Would we

have forgone certain technology investigative
spikes? Might we have done things even more
simply? Although not always feasible, I would
strive for a single business customer.
Make testers a part of the teamWe added our quality assurance resource, or
tester, to the team partway through the project.

As a developer who was continuously writing
tests, it was not immediately clear to me what
role this person would play. Would she write

further tests we hadnÕt thought of? Perhaps she

would devise a formal test plan verifying that

the new application sufficiently matched the
legacy applicationÕs functionality. Fortunately,

our tester had the experience and foresight to

see that a testerÕs role on an XP project differed

from than that of a QA-style project. 
Initially, she primarily focused on the ap-
plicationÕs quality. She would pair test user

stories with developers; she highlighted
missed test cases and verified that a suffi-
cient number of tests were being written. She
collected metrics the team wanted to see (for
instance, ratio of production code to test

code and unit test coverage). She manually
tested the application, looking at usabilityissues with a focus on how well the program
intent matched customer expectations.
As the project progressed, our testerÕs focus
shifted. Although she always kept one eye on
overall application quality, she began playing

more of an analyst role on the team. She began
attending story-planning meetings and helped
flush out requirements for future iterations.

She built trust with external customers by

helping them write acceptance tests.
After reviewing this article, our tester com-
mented that early XP literature did not de-

scribe what role testers should play on XP
projects. It seemed that formal, traditional QA
testers werenÕt part of the XP team. She asked

me to answer the following question: ÒDid

you find having a QA tester as part of the
team invalidated or supplemented any of the
other XP practices?Ó This question was easy
to answer because our tester became a valu-
able team member and greatly contributed to
the projectÕs overall success. ItÕs important to

note, however, that she didnÕt play the tradi-

tional role of QA testerÑthat role didnÕt exist.

Testing and quality are a team responsibility

that you shouldnÕt relegate to an outside en-

tity, such as a traditional QA group. Better re-

sults will be achieved when testers are made a
core part of the team. They can aid customers

in defining and automating acceptance tests as

well as play the role of analyst and flush out
hidden requirements and assumptions. Lisa
Crispinand Tip HouseÕs book, 
Testing Ex-
treme Programming, is a good reference forthe role testers play on XP projects.9How did we get people to do XP?Pete McBreen points out that itÕs difficult to
find software developers who are neutral on the

subject of XP.
10ItÕs hard to be neutral as a de-
veloper because of how XP practices can differ

from more traditional forms of software devel-

opment. For example, consider pair program-
ming and TDD. Most developers today do not

write code in pairs and do not write tests before

implementing the solution in code. These prac-

tices do not come naturally for most develop-

ers, and many who tried applying XP on proj-
ects commented on the difficulty of getting
developers to apply these two key practices.So how did we manage to get most of theteam applying XPÕs practices most of the time?

Fortunately, on this project, most project partic-

ipants were keen on applying XP by the book.ItÕs hard to beneutral as a developerbecause of howXP practicescan differ from moretraditionalforms ofsoftware
development.26IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
 We didnÕt have to defend XP or its practices; we
simply had to apply them to the best of our abil-
ity. Even with strong backing from most of the

management team, however, it was still a chal-

lenge to get everyone to continuously apply the
practices at a high level. XP takes discipline.Having good communicators and team play-ers in key positions on the project played an im-

portant part in transitioning the team to XP.

Without a strong iteration manager, demon-

strating iterative development would have been
challenging. The iteration manager performed
many tasks. He ensured that stories were writ-
ten in a timely manner and conducted the bi-

weekly iteration meetings. He collected esti-
mates and tracked developer velocity. In short,

he helped set the projectÕs rhythm. 
The build master also played an importantrole. Although not represented formally in XP
literature, this role helped in setting up project
build files and enabling continuous integration
services. A strong technical lead and develop-
ers who worked well with others rounded out
the team. Having a critical mass of people
(about half the team) on the project who were
familiar with XP helped demonstrate both the
spirit of XP and its practices.Extensive pair programming best demon-strated routine XP practices. The very practice

that many found difficult to apply on XP proj-

ects was a tremendous learning and communi-
cation tool for our team. Not only was pairprogramming instrumental in demonstratingXP practices, it also spread domain knowledge

throughout the team. Pair programming and
colocated team members kept everyone on the
same page and prevented problems from
falling through the cracks.Demonstrating good citizenship towardother team members also helped create a

team-oriented culture supportive of XP prac-

tices. For instance, it was not uncommon dur-
ing stand-up meetings for developers to offer
their help when other team members were

having trouble with their stories. The team

leaders reminded everyone that it was accept-
able to stop and help others, sometimes at the
expense of their own work. A culture built on

acts such as this helped form a strong team.
People sincerely wanted to help one another
and make the project a success. A secondary
effect of encouraging good citizenship was
that the code was kept in a relatively clean
state. Because developers felt that they had the
time to do the right thing, many Òbroken win-
dowsÓ11were fixed before they became largerproblems.Finally, but perhaps most importantly, hav-
ing team members who worked well with oth-
ers helped gently introduce XPÕs more foreign

practices such as pair programming and TDD.
XP is a very social way of developing software.
The success of its adoption is greatly enhanced
if the people working together are effectiveMay/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
27Table 1Our experience with XP practicesXP practice Degree of adoptionComments
Planning gameFullThe team met regularly for story planning. Stories were captured and tracked on an Excel 
spreadsheet.Small releasesFullIterations took two weeks.
MetaphorPartialWe developed models and words, not explicitly referred to as metaphor, to describe the system. 
Simple designFullWe kept the design simple, but we could have done things even more simply.
Test-driven developmentPartialThose comfortable with TDD wrote all code test first. Those developers unfamiliar with TDD 
slipped back into non-test-first periodically.
RefactoringFullWe continuously refactored all code.
Pair programmingFullMost code was worked on in pairs. This practice was crucial for demonstrating XP by example.
Collective ownershipFullAll developers could (and did) work with any area of the application at any time.

Continuous FullAn automated build process compiled, tested, and deployed our software integration multiple 
times a day. This was done with CruiseControl, Ant, and JUnit.
Sustainable paceFullThere was no overtime on the project. Developers typically worked about 40 hours a week.

On-site customerPartialThe customer responsible for proving Web services technology was on-site. The customer of 
the legacy application we were replacing was not.Coding standardsFullThe team discussed and agreed on coding standards at the projectÕs start.
 communicators, like working in teams,are humble, and enjoy learning from

others. All of this is important to help
create a Òno blameÓ culture, where peo-
ple arenÕt afraid to help one another

and do what is right for the project.
Fortunately, the team members on this

project possessed these characteristics.This project was a success for
all parties involved. We fin-

ished on time and on sched-ule. TCPL uses the system in produc-

tion and is planning further
enhancements. TCPL was very im-

pressed with agile development
methodologies and will continue to use
them on future projects. As with any

project, it helps tremendously if you
have good peopleÑgood not only in
their ability to work with technology
and develop software but, more impor-
tantly, possessing good communication

skills. XP is a team-orientedway of de-

veloping software and works best with
people who can express their ideas and
work well with others. Teams made up

of good people will always find a way
to make projects successful. AcknowledgmentsThis article would not have been pos-sible without the help and support of
many people. I thank Vivek Sharma,

Dean Larsen, Jason Yip, Eric Liu, Paul

Julius, David Fletcher, Olga Babkova,

Janet Gregory, Brad Marlborough, Lau-

rie Williams, and Tannis Rasmusson for

their insightful comments on drafts of
this article.References1.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained:Embrace Change,Addison-Wesley, 2000.
2.L. Williams and R. Kessler, 
Pair ProgrammingIlluminated, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
3.F. Brooks, 
The Mythical Man-Month, Addi-son-Wesley, 1975.
4.M. Fowler et al., 
Refactoring: Improving theDesign of Existing Code, Addison-Wesley,
1999.5.K. Beck, 
Test-Driven Development: By Exam-
ple, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
6.E. Gamma et al., 
Design Patterns: Elements ofReusable Object-Oriented Software, Addison-Wesley, 1995.
7.J. Kerievsky, ÒPatterns and XP,Ó 
Extreme Pro-gramming Examined, G. Succi and M. March-esi, eds., Addison-Wesley, 2001.
8.K. Auer and R. Miller, 
Extreme ProgrammingApplied: Playing to Win
, Addison-Wesley,
2002.9.L. Crispin and T. House, 
Testing Extreme Pro-
gramming,Addison-Wesley, 2002.
10.P. McBreen, 
Questioning Extreme Program-ming, Addison-Wesley, 2003.
11.A. Hunt and D. Thomas, 
The Pragmatic Pro-grammer: From Journeyman to Master, Addi-son-Wesley, 1999.
For more information on this or any other computing topic,please visit our Digital Library at http://computer.org/

publications/dlib.About the AuthorJonathan Rasmussonis a computer engineer with ThoughtWorks. He enjoys building enterprise
applications and searching for better ways to write software. His research interests include agile develop-
ment methodologies and exploring the human side of software development. He received an MS in com-
puter engineering from the University of Alberta, Canada. Contact him at ThoughtWorks, 805-10th Ave.

SW, 3rd Floor, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2R 0B4; jrasmusson@thoughtworks.com.
How to Reach UsWriters
For detailed information on submitting articles,
write for our Editorial Guidelines (software@
computer.org) or access http://computer.org/

software/author.htm.
Letters to the EditorSend letters toEditor, 
IEEE Software10662 Los Vaqueros Circle

Los Alamitos, CA 90720
software@computer.org
Please provide your title, affiliation, and emailaddress with your letter.
On the Web
Access http://computer.org/software for

information about IEEE Software.SubscribeVisit http://computer.org/subscribe. 
Subscription Change of AddressSend change-of-address requests for magazinesubscriptions to address.change@ieee.org. 
Be sure to specify IEEESoftware
.Membership Change of AddressSend change-of-address requests for IEEE
and Computer Society membership to 
member.services@ieee.org.
Missing or Damaged CopiesIf you are missing an issue or you received 
a damaged copy, contact help@computer.org.
Reprints of ArticlesFor price information or to order reprints, 
send email to software@computer.org or fax

+1 714 821 4010.Reprint PermissionTo obtain permission to reprint an article, 

contact William Hagen, IEEE Copyrights and
Trademarks Manager, at whagen@ieee.org.
How to Reach Us