 104IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/06/$20.00 © 2006 IEEEloyal oppositionEditor: Robert L. Glass Computing Trends 
rlglass@acm.orgWhen computer-aided software engi-
neering became Òthe next big
thingÓ for software development in

the Õ90s, I really believed it would
make a difference, that it could cut

through the fog of confusion andlead to designs of unprecedented clarity.
Within five years, though, CASE was gone,
sunk by contentious disputes
over methods, disillusion in-
duced by its failure to live up

to unrealistic claims, and its

slow response to the arrival of

object orientation.
Beyond these reasons, how-ever, I felt that something more

fundamental was missing. These
tools and methods produced
designs that simply werenÕt
particularly useful for developing systems. Un-
derstanding the designersÕ intent, and even an-
swering the basic question, ÒHow does it
work?Ó required a sort of mental reverse engi-
neering. Object orientationÕs advent has, con-

trary to expectations, produced only a modest

clearing of the view.
The need for explanationCombine this with the observation that a
projectÕs success depends critically on the

depth and breadth of the teamÕs understanding

of the task, and itÕs clear how our approach to

design must change to move beyond these
problems. All but the simplest designs must be
actively explained to those who need to under-stand them, not just presented as if they were

self-evident facts. Designs must be taught, and
their documentation must act as tutorials, not

just descriptive references.
The design process generates a large amountof explanatory information, in the formof ar-

guments for correctness, efficiency, and gen-

eral fitness, and in the reasons for rejecting al-
ternatives. At a more abstract level, a designer
doesnÕt introduce an element into a design

without having some purpose for it, and

knowing its purpose is often the key to under-
standing it.The cost of letting this hard-won informa-
tion slip away is visible everywhere, and not just

in the effort to regenerate it thatÕs expended by

anyone who needs any part of it. I often see
teams run in circles because theyÕve forgotten
key findings, and itÕs not unusual for everyone

leaving a meeting to have a different idea of
what was decided. Poor understanding is a drag
on the process, and worse: it leads to poor deci-

sions, confusion, and, ultimately, chaos.
Cascading benefitsConversely, writing an explanation of what
youÕre doing, as you go, brings cascading ben-
efits. Most obviously, you can get everyone on

the same page. More important, perhaps, is
that doing so is an excellent way to separate
what you really understand from what you
Explanation-Oriented DesignAndrew Raybould
É in which I oppose the practice of leaving the understanding of a design as an exercise for the reader.
Continued on p. 103 September/October 2006IEEE SOFTWARE
103LOYAL OPPOSITION
just think you know, and what you
never realized you donÕt know. I often

find better, and usually simpler, ways of

doing things: the first person to learn

from an explanation-oriented design is
its author.
WeÕre all familiar with explanatory
technical writing of various styles: arti-
cles and papers in technical journals, lec-
ture notes, presentations, textbook chap-
ters, and even the description section of
patents. An explanation-oriented design
grows into a hierarchy of topics, each
described this way. Ideally, the work is

threaded together with hypertext links
and indexed by a search engine.The problem with pictures
These examples point to my one area
of contention with the established view

of how to document designs, which is

through graphical models. From an ex-

planation-oriented viewpoint, diagrams
have a serious problem: they lack the
expressive power with which to explain
rational arguments, especially about

abstract concepts (if you disagree, draw
a diagram that, by itself, presents a

counterargument).Explanatory technical writing, in
contrast, uses text as the primary mode
of expression, with diagrams playing

an important, but subsidiary, role of il-

lustrating selected aspects, particularly
relationships between things. This is

also typical of explanation-oriented 
designs.Agility and formalityItÕs important to realize that agile
methods donÕt do away with design;

they perform it by other means. Agile

teams depend greatly on their mem-

bersÕ understanding of those designs,
and so will benefit from clear, pertinent

explanations. For greater agility, focus

mainly on explaining your designÕs

most difficult, critical, and counter-
intuitive aspects. At the other extreme,

for mission-critical systems where reli-

ability is of the essence, you might

want your explanations to include rig-
orous formal proofs of correctness and

performance.This ideaÕs roots go back at least to

Donald KnuthÕs book 
Literate Pro-
grammingfrom 1973,1but it has
never entered the mainstream. One rea-

son might lie, paradoxically, in some of

its strengths: demanding neither new
tools nor special knowledge, it en-
hances any methodology and can be
adopted incrementally. Unfortunately,

people are more excited by radical
ideas, especially when ÒvalidatedÓ by
the existence of tools and certification
programs. You can choose, however, to
advance this principle by asking one
simple question: how can I help my

colleagues understand my design?Reference1.D. Knuth, 
Literate Programming, Center forthe Study of Language and Information, Stan-
ford Univ., 1992.
Andrew Rayboulddevelops trading systems for theSecurities Industry Automation Corp. Contact him at andrew.

raybould@ieee.org.Copyright and reprint permission: Copyright © 2006 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics En-gineers, Inc. All rights reserved. Abstracting is permitted with credit to the source. Libraries are permit-
ted to photocopy beyond the limits of US copyright law for private use of patrons those post-1977 ar-

ticles that carry a code at the bottom of the first page, provided the per-copy fee indicated in the code is

paid through the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Dr., Danvers, MA 01923. For copying,

reprint, or republication permission, write to Copyright and Permissions Dept., IEEE Publications Ad-
min., 445 Hoes Ln., Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331.
IEEE Software (ISSN 0740-7459) is published bimonthly by the IEEE Computer Society. IEEE head-
quarters: Three Park Ave., 17th Floor, New York, NY 10016-5997. IEEE Computer Society Publications

Office: 10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., PO Box 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314; +1 714 821 8380; fax

+1 714 821 4010. IEEE Computer Society headquarters: 1730 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC

20036-1903. Subscription rates: IEEE Computer Society members get the lowest rate of US$47 per year,

which includes printed issues plus online access to all issues published since 1988. Go to www.computer.

org/subscribe to order and for more information on other subscription prices. Back issues: $20 for mem-
bers, $128 for nonmembers (plus shipping and handling). This magazine is available on microfiche. Postmaster:Send undelivered copies and address changes to IEEE Software, Membership ProcessingDept., IEEE Service Center, 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331. Periodicals Postage Paid at New

York, NY, and at additional mailing offices. Canadian GST #125634188. Canada Post Publications Mail

Agreement Number 40013885. Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to PO Box 122, Niagara Falls,
ON L2E 6S8, Canada. Printed in the USA.Continued from p. 104Stay on Track
IEEE Internet Computingreports
emerging tools, technologies, 

and applications implemented through

the Internet to support a worldwide
computing environment.
In 2006Ð7, weÕll look at¥Web Services for Geographic
Information Systems¥Malicious Software

¥Autonomic Computing
... and more!
www.computer.org/internet
