 12IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEUsing agile methods to develop largesystems presents a thorny set of issues.
If large teams are to produce lots of
software functionality quickly, the ag-

ile methods involved must scale to
meet the task. After all, a small teamcould create the software if the functionality to
be delivered was small and, conversely, could
be delivered given we had the time.
Scaling agile teams thus becomes an
issue if the only option for meeting
a system delivery deadline is to
have many developers working
concurrently.
At the First Invited CanadianWorkshop on Scaling Agile Meth-

ods held 20Ð21 February in Banff,

Alberta, 35 concerned professionals
met to discuss these issues. The in-dustrial delegates, who had been
putting agile methods to work
(using lightweight methods like

Crystal, Extreme Programming,
Dynamic Systems Development
Method, Feature-Driven Develop-
ment, Scrum, and a scaled-down
version of the Rational Unified

Process) addressed a wide range of
issues, notably how toScale agile methods to very
large projects with barely suffi-

cient up-front planning and ar-
chitectural workDeploy a federation of coordi-
nated teams (each internally op-
erating as an agile team) in scal-
ing up agile ideasUse agile methods in teams
larger than a typical XP team Characterize the agile contin-
uum through different projectcaricatures, ranging from typical collocated
XP projects to large, multiteam, multiyear
ones The academic delegates shared their experi-
ences and ideas on how toUse agile practices, such as test-driven devel-
opment and pair programming, as pedagog-
ical tools in software engineering curricula
Investigate agile practicesÕ effectiveness Reconcile agile methods with architectural
paradigmsDeploy agile methods in research projectsSignificant issuesDuring the first day, delegates reached con-
sensus on the following top seven issues asso-
ciated with scaling agile methods. Non-pure agile methods: reconciling agilemethods with plan-oriented practicesMost delegates agreed that agile methods fit
small projects where problems of scale are
minor. However, difficulty arises in scaling

these methods to fit large projects where teams

of teams work together. Most delegates also

agreed that deploying agile methods in organi-
zations involves using a mixed metaphor: agile
methods must operate in a world where both
agile and traditional methods can be used to-
gether. The issue then becomes how to scale

agile methods without sacrificing the under-
lying principles of the Agile Manifesto (see
www.agilemanifesto.org for the history of the

agile movement, its goals, and its governing
philosophies). Generating guidelines for non-sweet-spot agile projectsA sweet-spot agile project typically involvesa small, self-organizing, collocated team ofmanagerScaling Agile MethodsDonald J. Reifer, Frank Maurer, and Hakan Erdogmus
Editor: Donald J. Reifer Reifer Consultants d.reifer@ieee.org July/August 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
13MANAGERfewer than 20 developers and one ormore on-site customers. The team usu-
ally works together on a variable-scope
application with unstable or emergent
requirements, relying mainly on an oral
culture based on high-bandwidth, face-
to-face communication. What con-
stitutes a large project and where the
sweet spots are for deploying agile
methods was probably the workshopÕs

most hotly debated topic. Some argued
that agile methods shouldnÕt be used

outside their original domain of fit.
Others suggested that developers would
scale agile methods to larger projects
whether delegates liked it or not. All
agreed that guidelines for scaling them
are needed. 
Augmenting agile practices to fitlarge projectsThe additional practices that wouldbe necessary to scale agile methods came
up repeatedly, especially when discussing

non-sweet-spot agile projects. For exam-
ple, some suggested that the concept of a
daily team meeting could extend to in-
clude a daily intrateam project meeting.
Others discussed the issues associated
with scaling planning meetings and re-
quirements engineering concepts. Al-
though workshop attendees exchanged
ideas, choosing proper practices and
strategies is still an open issue.Addressing integration issues in anagile projectMost delegates agreed that reportedÒgreen fieldÓ projects are idealistic.
Most applications exploit existing ar-
chitectures and use extensive amounts
of legacy software, commercial off-
the-shelf packages, and components.
How these reusable components con-
strain the use of agile methods as ele-
ments of scale drew considerable dis-
cussion. To accommodate legacy and

COTS software, some suggested that
test-drivers be written to reveal all rel-
evant external behavior. Coordinating

the use of standard frameworks and
components across teams of teams
when agile methods and collective
ownership principles are used was an-
other hot issue.Scaling agile in an enterprise acrossapplicationsCoupled with the issues of legacywere those associated with product
families and lines.  Participants agreed

that applications do not exist in isola-
tion in an enterprise. At the workshop,

delegates pondered how to handle the

communications barriers across the en-
terprise when using agile methods to
build systems. Most wanted to avoid
stovepipes when scaling a project, as
applications are produced using short
iterative cycles. Some thought that sys-
tematically generalizing and aggregat-
ing user stories across similar applica-
tions to factored-out framework stories

could help in managing requirements.Handling dispersed development in an
agile projectTeam size and how to grow it so that
the team could operate in a dispersed
(and often geographically separated) en-
vironment also drew discussion. Al-
though some had experience growing
teams of teams across geographic 
distances, the participants formed little
consensus on how to overcome the 
communications barriers. Some dele-
gates suggested a team hierarchy and a
phased rollout modelÑfor example, ar-
chitecture team first, then feature and in-

tegration teams. Others considered this a
serious threat to agility. Synchronizing

the beats of the individual teams and the
possibility that the slowest or the weak-est team would determine the projectÕs
overall pace or fate were major risks. Integrating testing as systems getbiggerMost delegates agreed that the agileapproach of having customers write
acceptance tests as new features are im-

plemented pays dividends. However, in

a large project, securing sufficient cus-
tomer involvement is unrealistic. Some-
one suggested that QA teams of busi-

ness analysts could take over the task
of writing customer acceptance tests.
The issue becomes how to mechanize

the agile approach without unduly bur-
dening the customer community.
Early adopter experiencesNext, we discussed ways to resolve
these issues. Although we didnÕt quite

answer the questions, we did capture
our early adoptersÕ experiences relative
to these issues, primarily in the form of
lessons learned. We present the top

seven lessons early adopters learn.ItÕs going to happen
While several participants, especiallyMartin Fowler in his keynote address, ar-

gued that scaling XP and agile projects is

probably the last thing you would want
to do, most delegates agreed it would
happen anyhow. Because of the commu-

nal push for scaling, developers will do it
despite strong warnings otherwise.The shorter, the better
Everyone agreed that spending timegetting releases out according to pre-
established, short, time-boxed sched-
ules, with whatever functionality they
could, is advantageous. Although no
consensus emerged on the optimum du-
ration, most agreed that weeks rather
than months was the proper range for
iterations and releases. Participants
agreed on the value of continuous inte-
grations and automated build-and-test
processes. Instead of talking about
what the product functionality would
be, developers could show customers
products that are Òpotentially ship-
pable.Ó This approach removes the sub-
jectivity from the discussions. Most delegates agreedthat the agile approachof having customerswrite acceptance testsas new features areimplemented paysdividends.  14IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
MANAGERImproving communications on large projectsFor large projects, participants advo-
cated the benefits of using daily project

meetings where team leaders get to-
gether to work through issues; identify

desired functionality; and coordinate re-
lease contents, iterations, and progress.Up-front investment will help In a departure from current thinking,delegates working on large projects
agreed that some architectural develop-

ment was needed before pushing ahead
with iterations. This could be done
quickly using an architecture team.
Team members then could move on to

seed a large-scale agile projectÕs sub-

teams. While the architecture will con-

tinue to evolve over the projectÕs life cy-

cle, the tendency will be to stabilize it
and discourage any significant changes.
A stable architecture will provide teams
with the context for decision making.However, this approach poses a threat

to agility because it might tip the scale in

favor of up-front planning rather than

letting the architecture emerge naturally. 
A federation strategy can helpSeveral delegates suggested that afederation of onsite customers could

give developers the daily feedback they
need. Knowing who speaks for the cus-
tomer on what issue is the key to success

in such an arrangement. Establishing
known points of contact for specific
items, therefore, is essential in large pro-

jects, delegates felt. Multiple customer
representatives might not speak with a

single voice anymore, making binding
decisions more difficult to reach.
Packaging components can reducescaling problems Some delegates recommended thatpackaging components with wrappersthat communicated essentials about
their features to those unfamiliar with
them would minimize integration prob-
lems on large projects. Writing test dri-

vers to reveal how components behave
in a specific context is another strategy.

Because the focus rests on releases, this
strategy would ease the communica-
tions problems and permit using com-
ponents in their proper context. While
wrapping cloned components for use in
different contexts will reduce commit
clashes and alleviate integration prob-
lems in a collectively owned code base,
it will increase redundancy and thus re-
duce maintainability.
Set lower expectationsLarger teams tend to be less tolerantto change. Adopters of agile methods
should therefore be extremely conserva-

tive when setting expectations for
change, especially when using these new
methods on large projects.
The workshop built bridges that let del-
egates from academia, industry, and

government discuss their experiencesand concerns. Momentum to keep the
dialogue flowing was probably the
workshopÕs most important output. To-

ward these ends, plans for a second
workshop on scaling agile methods for
next year are moving forward. Planners
are augmenting the Canadian Agile Net-
work Web site (http://can.cpsc.ucal-

garay.ca) with additional resources for

those interested in putting agile methods
into practice in industry, academia, or

government. The organizers thank the
delegates for a job well done. We learned

a great deal and are encouraged by the
positive results of agile method use.Donald J. Reiferis a visiting associate with the Centerfor Software Engineering at the University of Southern California
and president of Reifer Consultants. Contact him at dreifer@
earthlink.net.Frank Maureris an associate professor in the ComputerScience Department at the University of Calgary. Contact him at

maurer@cpsc.ucalgary.ca.
Hakan Erdogmusis a research officer at the NationalResearch Council of Canada. Contact him at hakan.erdogmush@
nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.CIGITAL, INC.
Employment OpportunitiesCigital helps clients build bettersoftwarefaster. Our Software Quality Management(SQM) solutions help companies increase
productivity while mitigating the business
risks associated with software failure. At
Cigital, we specialize in researching, devel-

oping and delivering next-generation SQM
technologies that help our clients repeat-
edly develop and deliver software better
and faster. We are currently searching for

exceptional candidates at all levels to be-
come integral parts of our team.Director of Science: Will be responsible
for determining the direction of scientific
and technical research at the labs. Success-

ful candidate must have at least ten years of
experience winning, managing and grow-
ing cutting-edge research initiatives. Must

possess strong scientific research skills and a

proven track record of: (1) winning re-
search contract/grants, (2) publishing peer-

reviewed articles, and (3) pushing forward

an organizationÕs overall research agenda.
Research Scientists:
Successful candi-dates must have a Ph.D. in Computer Sci-
ence and have performed noteworthy re-

search in the field of software assurance.

Excellent writing skills, a good publishing
record and demonstrated potential for ob-
taining external research funding are re-

quired. Must be willing to mentor juniorstaff members.Research Associates:
Successful candi-dates must have a Masters in Computer Sci-
ence (or equivalent) with a strong back-
ground in core computer science areas.
Must possess excellent research and analyt-

ical skills and the wherewithal to tackle dif-
ficult, open-ended problems. Must be a
self-motivated, quick learner with the ability
and interest to rapidly absorb new tech-
nologies.Our researchers must be familiar with
cutting-edge technologies in the fields of
software assurance (reliability, safety, secu-

rity), software engineering (OOA/D, test
planning, execution and automation) or
software analysis. In addition to performing

research, candidates at all levels are respon-

sible for investigating new areas for propos-
als, writing and presenting papers, and
pushing the technology envelope. Cigital is located in Northern Virginia,
just minutes outside of Washington, DC, in

one of the nationÕs fastest growing technol-

ogy regions. As the leading authority in the
field of software assurance, Cigital offers an
excellent salary and benefits package, along

with a casual, relaxed atmosphere center-
ing around highly motivated teams.If you are committed to excellence and
want to be involved with tomorrowÕs technol-

ogy today, visit http://www
.cigital.comandemail your resume to pgleeson@cigital. com.Cigital Inc., 21351 Ridgetop Circle, Suite
400, Dulles, VA 20166. 
CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING
