 16IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 20020740-7459/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEEThe software industry seems to be em-bracing yet another change to the way
it does business. Because of their em-

phasis on agility and time-to-market,

many programming shops are moving
to agile methods. Unlike more tradi-
tional approaches, these methods focus on

generating early releases of working productsusing mostly collaborative tech-
niques such as pair programming,
refactoring, and having customers
work on site as team members.

Programmers use these releasesÑ
which are working products, not

prototypesÑto demonstrate fea-
tures and functions to stakehold-
ers involved in their use, market-
ing, and support. This article surveys the experi-ence software engineers in a widerange of industries have had in deploying
agile methods. The survey
Fads come and go, in software engineeringas in everything else. Practitioners want to
know if agile methods are real or just more

hype. To answer that question, I surveyed 10

industry segments using the approach illus-
trated in Figure 1. I designed the survey to Determine what practices early adoptersof agile methods are usingAssess the scope and conditions govern-
ing their useEvaluate the costs and benefits associated
with their useTable 1 summarizes the demographics of
the 32 organizations, representing 28 firms,

that responded (several large firms had more
than one organization trying to use agile
techniques). To transfer a technology, these

firms use it on a pilot to prove to themselves

that it works, use it on a pathfinder to de-
termine how to integrate the technology

with their processes, and then move it onto
production projects.  As expected, five of the

14 firms that responded are involved in e-
commerce and e-business applications. The
information these early adopters supplied
gives us insight into how to tap the power of

these emerging practices.The 14 firms using agile methods cited alaundry list of practices as agile: collective
ownership, concurrent development, contin-
uous integration, customer collaboration,

daily standup meetings, product demos in-
stead of documents, Extreme Programming
(XP), frequent product releases, full stake-

holder participation, individuals and interac-
tions, just-in-time requirements, metaphors
instead of architectures, nightly product
builds, pair programming, rapid application
development, refactoring, retrospectives, sto-
ries for requirements, team programming,
and test-driven development.The databaseÕs 31 projects showed that
those firms pursuing agile methods were

motivated because they had a poor record of

delivering acceptable products to market on
time and within budget. Most projects were
relatively small (typically fewer than 10 par-
ticipants) and were pursued as pilots or

pathfinders. All projects were in-house de-managerHow Good Are Agile Methods?Editor: Donald J. Reifer Reifer Consultants d.reifer@ieee.org July/August 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
17MANAGERvelopments (as opposed to con-tracted out), lasting one year or less
and involving low-risk methods. Furthermore, the firms character-ized their projects as having stable re-
quirements, established architectures,
and a high degree of development flex-
ibility. Products under development

were mostly quick-to-market applica-
tions (generally Web-based and client-

server oriented). Teams were cohesive

and staffed with motivated, experi-
enced performers, most of whom were

relatively young and thus perhaps
more open to new ideas. Although
there was some skepticism, most prac-
titioners involved with agile methods
were enthusiastic about the prospects.Although software engineers inthe various industries differed on
what constituted best agile practices,
invariably they agreed that a projectÕs

process must be cyclical and involve
builds and increments done in par-

allel. Furthermore, they said, these

projects must involve collaborative or-
ganizations that include participation
by all stakeholders during develop-
ment. These projects always included
full-time participation by customers or
users while the work was being done,
rather than relying on reviews, and re-
sulted in working product demos, not
documents or prototypes that are of-
ten thrown away.
Differences arose in the actual formof the process used, such as spiral,incremental, or 
similar methods,as 
wellas on how informal or flexible the

process should be.
The engineers indifferentindustries disagreedon who

the stakeholders were andhow deep
their involvement shouldbe. Opinionsdiffered as well on what practices fell
under the cate
gory of agile meth-
odsÑExtreme Programming, rapid
application development, team pro-
gramming, and so on.
The biggest surprise was that mostresponding organizations were at

Level 2 or greater under the Software
Capability Maturity Model (see Table

2). For the most part, these advanced
organizations were willing to try some-

thing new because they were having
problems meeting delivery expecta-tions even though their pro-cesseswere mature. Also, most of the orga-

nizations trying agile methods were
modifying their processes to incorpo-
rate those that worked into their way
of doing business.The results so farIn summarizing the results either
measured or observed by these early
adopter organizations, seven of the
14 organizations that used agile
methods captured hard cost, produc-
tivity, and quality data. Five of these

had benchmarks that they could use
for comparisons. Hard data includedProductivity improvement: 15 to23 percent average gain based on
published industry benchmarks.2Cost reduction: 5 to 7 percent on
average based on published indus-
try benchmarks.2Time-to-market compression
: 25to 50 percent less time compared

to previous projects in participat-
ing firms.Quality improvement: Five firmshad data showing that their defect
rates were on par with their other

projects when products or appli-
cations were released. 
These numbers normalize contribu-tions of all participating firms inde-
pendent of their CMM levels.In addition, the seven organiza-tions that didnÕt capture hard data

used soft data to justify their move toInformation fromquestionnaires and interviews
Firm upsurvey goals
GoalsLiterature searchQuestionnaireInterviews
1Developsurvey instrument
2Publish resultsand conclusionsFindingsIEEE Software/XP Agile UniverseInterest5Developfindings4Canvas broadspectrum of industry
3MailinglistsFigure 1. Survey approach showing steps taken to access industry
response to XP methods.Table 1Characteristics of responding firmsFirms usingYear StateAverage size
Industryagile methodsProjectsfirst triedof progress(KESLOC)*
Aerospace112001Pathfinder23
Computer232000Pilot32
Consultants122000Pilot25
E-business5152000Production33
Researchers112000Pilot12
Scientific002001PilotN/A
Software242000Production25
Telecom252000Production42
Total1431Average31.8
*KESLOC = thousand equivalent source lines of code computed using formulas that normalize reused
and modified code in terms of new lines of code (see Barry BoehmÕs discussion of the mathematical ap-
proach involved).1 18IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 2002MANAGERagile methods. Most used some formof survey to capture stakeholder
opinions, and all used recruitment,
morale, and other intangibles to build
a case for trying and retaining agile
methods. All argued passionately for
continued use of agile methods based
on qualitative factors, and all pressed
for help in resolving the issues that re-
volved around technology transfer.
In any case, the jury is still out be-
cause the sample size (14 organiza-
tions and 31 projects) is just too small
to derive any firm conclusions. In ad-
dition, the ÒhardÓ data gatheredmight be tainted by the Hawthorne ef-

fect common in efforts of this type,
which relates to the small sample size.
(These were small, low-risk projects

staffed by select teams under con-

trolled situations, so the results might
neither scale to larger projects nor re-

flect higher-risk situations.) We will

just have to see if agile methods can
scale to address larger efforts.The percentages IÕve cited can bedeceptive. Although cost, schedule,
productivity, and quality are related,
they must be considered separately.
For example, as we all well know, de-

creasing cost by accepting reduced
quality can accelerate schedule but
result in lost market share. And in-
creasing productivity could increase
a companyÕs cost as software staff is

busily producing the wrong product.
In such cases, rework increases as
does schedule.1In the ÒSurvey summary and recom-
mendationsÓ sidebar, IÕve organized

my findings by the questions the
survey sought to answer. Recommen-

dations are aimed at addressing key is-
sues identified by early adopters. I
hope this initial report from the field

on agile methods prompts others to
put their experiences in the public do-

main. I am currently preparing a pa-

per detailing this surveyÕs findings for

presentation at XP Agile Universe. If
youÕre interested in this topic but can-

not attend, contact me for a copy of

that paper. 
References1.D.J. Reifer, 
Making the Software BusinessCare: Improvements by the Numbers, Addi-son-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2002.
2.D.J. Reifer, ÒLet the Numbers Do the Talk-
ing,Ó Crosstalk, Mar. 2002, pp. 4Ð8.
Donald J. Reiferis president of Reifer Consultants and a vis-iting associate at the Center for Software Engineering at the Univer-
sity of Southern California. Contact him at d.reifer@ieee.org. HeÕd
like to hear from you.Table 2Software CMM ratings of responding firmsIndustryNumber of agile projectsLevel 1Level 2Level 3Level 4Level 5No Rating
Aerospace11
Computer33
Consultants211
E-business15618
Researchers11
Scientific0
Software4 22
Telecom5221
Totals31126418 
Survey Summary and RecommendationsQuestions asked and responsesWhat do users think agile methods are?Devised list of variants and invariants based on user perceptions, not on a  search.WhoÕs using agile methods?
Small, in-house teams developing software for quick-to-market applications.Do they provide added value?Although reports from the field were positive, the sample was too small to

make any broad conclusions.What are the issues plaguing users?Most issues revolve around classical problems in managing technology change.RecommendationsClearly define what Òagile methodsÓ means.Build a business case for agile methods using ÒhardÓ data to justify the move.When adopting agile methods, recognize that you are changing the way
your organization does business.Provide those moving to agile methods with support for making the transition.

Support should include startup guidelines, Òhow toÓ checklists, and measure-

ment wizards; a knowledge base of past experience accessible by all; and
education and training, including distance education and self-study courses.