 14IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEDuring the past year, I have listened to
Barry Boehm, Watts Humphrey, and

other software engineering sages argue
that Extreme Programming and the
Software Capability Maturity Model
are compatible. They contend that or-
ganizations implementing XP practices can eas-

ily fit them under the SW-CMM because it rep-

resents a framework for self-improvement.
Mark Paulk, one of SW-CMMÕs authors, cap-

tures the consensus in this way: 
When rationally implemented in an appropriateenvironment, agile methodologies address many
SW-CMM Level 2 and 3 practices. The ideas in
the agile movement should be care-
fully considered for adoption where
appropriate in an organizationÕs busi-

ness environment. (ÒAgile Methodolo-
gies and Process Discipline,Ó Cross-Talk
, Oct. 2002, pp. 15Ð18)So why then canÕt a firm moving
to XP be rated a Level 2 or 3? If XP
and the SW-CMM are amenable,

why do lead assessors and process
proponents frown when the twoterms are uttered in the same sentence? Why do
XP team members avoid following the plan-
driven processes their organizations have in-
serted that comply with the 318 practices orga-
nized in 18 key process areas comprising the
SW-CMM? Is there a problem? 
Needless to say, I believe there is a problem
that organizations must address. Otherwise,

sides will form, battles will rage, and nobody
will reap the benefits that either technology
provides.Pointing fingersDuring the past six months, I have workedwith two commercial firms on large Web-based

projects that are moving to XP. Both have es-
tablished process organizations and have been
rated Level 3 via formal assessments. In both,

wars are raging over what each side views as in-
compatibilities between XP and the SW-CMM.
Any discussion of conflict should begin withintelligence about the combatants. Both projects
are large (over 1 million lines of Visual C++ and

Java), distributed, and complex. Parts of both
are being programmed by teams of teams that

are geographically distributed across at least two

continents and multiple time zones. Both pro-
jects are driven by time-to-market considera-
tions, and neither will have its requirements fully
defined until delivery. Both firms view require-

ments as a learning process and are building ap-
plications that are new and volatile. Extreme
pressure exists to deliver functionality on time.Project 1 is building application servers forday traders in the US and Europe. Traders use

these analytical programs to profile markets,
which vary from country to country. New algo-

rithms provide trending and other information
that users value differently according to national
preferences. The developers have taken care to

scale XP practices such as pair programming for
use on this large project. Pairs are staffed daily
within geographical hubs; each of which is a
center of expertise for a specific market segment.
For example, day traders in the power segment
employ different analysis techniques than those
in the semiconductor industry, so developers for

these two applications are not paired together. 
This projectÕs developers moved to XP to
speed products to market. They resist using
processes their process group has established
as too formal and involving too much docu-
mentation. The business manager has shel-
tered the XP teams from process group criti-
cism, claiming that this is a pilot project. The
process group has elevated the dispute to se-
nior managers, arguing that because their
process represents industry best practices, no-
body should be exempt.managerXP and the CMMDonald J. ReiferEditor: Donald J. Reifer Reifer Consultants d.reifer@ieee.org May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
15MANAGERProject 2 is developing Web-
hosted applications for use across the
enterprise using a newly defined ar-
chitecture. Spurred on by cost sav-
ings realized in putting travel plan-

ning and record keeping on the Web,

senior management has dictated that
all company systemsÑfrom account-
ing to supplier managementÑmust
reside on Web servers, located

around the world, within the next 18
months. Where the schedule came
from, nobody knows. Teams of

teams have worked for over a year to
satisfy managementÕs requirement. 
The developers chose XP because
it gave them hope for meeting the sched-
ule. If the firm relied on past processes,

their estimating models predicted it
would take them at least five years to

put these applications on their portal.

As expected, when the companyÕs man-

agers heard these numbers, they shut
their ears. The mandate is 18 months.
So be it.The developers modified XP prac-tices to address the scaling issues re-
lated to large projects, with the major
modifications in testing. Each applica-
tion placed on the Web had to be up-

ward compatible and provide equiva-
lent performance. Independent test
teams formed to verify these goals
against weekly builds. This in turn
forced changes to the XP test-first prac-
tice and generated additional test docu-
mentation. Nobody on the team com-
plained; the amount of documentation
produced using the modified XP prac-
tices was considerably less than gener-
ated using the organizationÕs Level 3

processes. However, the quality assurance
team raised lack of test documentation

as an issue to senior management. Un-
der XP, QAÕs role was greatly dimin-

ished, so they analyzed early builds and
pointed to the high error content. To

add to the intrigue, the XP manager
kicked the QA people off the project

because he felt that they were not

adding value. Words then got heated,

and QA went on the warpath. As a re-
sult, the project is at a standstill, with

nothing getting done. People are wait-ing for the open issues to be resolved. In both organizations, workers haveformed camps. Instead of trying to
make XP work rationally with the firmÕs

existing processes, each side is pointing
fingers at the other. No one seems to be

trying to apply XP within the SW-CMM

context rationally and profitably as the

sages have suggested.Management pressure to deliver ac-
cording to an unreasonable schedule
seems to be the root of the friction. XP
adherents feel that they donÕt have time

for the formality expected when using
their existing plan-driven approaches for
software development. Process propo-
nents argue that they need to take the
time, or else quality will suffer and cus-
tomer satisfaction will be sacrificed.
When you think about it, both argu-

ments contain elements of truth.Fixing problemsSo, how do we fix the problem? Do
we force XP engineers and process
group members to kiss and make up?
How do we implement XP in concert

with the SW-CMM?
In answering these questions, princi-
pals from these two firms agree that
they should try to use the SW-CMM as

a framework for embracing XP prac-
tices. This will serve two good purposes:
The firms can capitalize fully on the

process infrastructure they have created
and the experience gained as they ramp
up their XP projects and transition XPÕs

practices across their organizations.
Also, tthey can address the issues ofscale in XP in acceptable ways. 
In Project 1Õs case, they could have
used many of their existing processes
as they addressed the geographical dis-

persion of talent using dynamic pair
programming. For Project 2, they

could have modified QA processes to
play a more useful role on the project,
especially in assuring adherence to the

additional testing practices XP added.Next, their process organiza-tions should provide hard-hitting
advice for folding XP practices un-
der the SW-CMM umbrella. Instead

of resisting change, they should em-
brace it, especially if the results re-
duce time-to-market and cost. Suitably
rewritten process manuals should show
developers how to put lightweight

practices to work in, as Mark Paulk
suggested, Òappropriate environ-
ments.Ó Using this approach, organiza-
tions could continue to apply the
lessons learned on XP projects across
the enterprise.Finally, the Software Engineering In-
stitute should propagate the lessons
learned through their conferences, pub-
lications, and Software Process Im-

provement Network chapters. The SEI

could provide leadership and stimulate
the process community to develop rec-
ommended XP mappings to the SW-

CMM. In addition, it could put these

mappings on its Web site and highlight

them as part of outreach. After all,
Level 5 organizations should have a
technology change-management pro-
cess in place to permit them to incor-
porate innovations such as XP into
normal practice. The XP transition
could serve as a useful case study for
implementing such a process.Most leaders in the field agree that
XP and the SW-CMM are philo-

sophically compatible. However,
putting XP to work in an SW-CMM

environment is often difficult, because
guidance on how to take advantage of
existing best practices is not available
while transitioning to XP. If the process

community provided this guidance, the
XP community would gladly use it to

smooth this transition.