 0740-7459/11/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE
 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2011
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 9CHEMICAL ABSTRACTS SERVICE 
(CAS) receives data from 61 patent of-
˜ ces worldwide and more than 10,000 
scienti˜ c journal titles. For approxi-
mately 150 years, the technology and 

processes associated with this data 

were paper-basedŠuntil two years ago, 
electronic publishing supplanted print 
in only a few cases. It has been aston-

ishing to see an entire industry mov-

ing to electronic-only publication so 
quickly, thereby steering architectural 

changes at a rapid pace as well.
One of the ˜ rst segments to move to 
all-electronic publishing was the patent 

of˜ ces. The quantity of paper required 

to print patent documentation became 

insurmountable a long time ago, so pat-
ent of˜ ces started taking pictures of the 
documents and publishing the images. 

Similarly, the volume of CAS™s jour-

nal subscriptions required us to start 
taking pictures of pages, the result of 

whichŠvirtual paperŠrepresents an 

exact replica of the original ﬁauthor-

ityﬂ publication for CAS scientists to 
analyze.
Today, however, we™ve also found a 
need to extract information from the 
picture. Many excellent optical char-
acter recognition (OCR) technologies 
are available in a hundred or so lan-

guages, but they fail when someone 
needs to extract a chemical structure, 
formula, or reaction. This is because 

there are no dictionaries that the char-

acter recognition program can use to 
check the accuracy of its work, mean-
ing sometimes the OCR programs in-

advertently introduce errors. The most 

frustrating thing about inaccurate 
OCR of chemical information is that 
at some point all the data were elec-

tronic before the publisher printed the 

magazine or the patent of˜ cial made a 
picture of the patent application. We™re 
left dealing with the accumulated er-

ror of transformation from data to 
image, then image to data. In this ar-
ticle, I discuss some of the challenges 

we face at CAS and how learning from 

a hurricane meteorologist helps you 
make better architectural decisions in 
a changing environment.
Setting the Stage
CAS receives electronic data feeds in 

different formats from different pub-
lishers, different formats from the 
same publisher, and lots of changes 

with or without notice. Scale this up 

from 61 patent of˜ ces to more than 
10,000 journals, and you get a sense 
of the problem. To compound mat-

ters, with electronic publications, CAS 

might get several revisions instead of 
the ﬁone true versionﬂ represented by 
What an Agile 
Architect Can 

Learn from 

a Hurricane 

Meteorologist
Eric Richardson, 
Chemical Abstracts Service
You™ll have to read further to ˜ nd out! There are so many 
interesting things about this articleŠit™s the ˜ rst in a series 
based on presentations from the SATURN conference. 
My ˜ rst college degree was in chemistry, so there was 
an immediate connection for me with this story about 
chemical abstracts. The author brings us architectural 
wisdom, combined with an agile point of view and weather 
forecasting. Enjoy! Š
Linda Rising, associate editor
INSIGHTS:
 AGILE DEVELOPMENT
 10
 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
INSIGHTS:
 AGILE DEVELOPMENT
a ˜ nal printed publication, post peer 
review and copyedit. A patent might 
come to us as an application, a revi-
sion, and, ˜ nally, a grant, and the con-

tent is usually different in each version. 

In the past, it was very easy to know 
when to put the content in front of a 
chemist for analysis. Today, we have to 

make a decision: Do we analyze it now, 

later, or both?
At CAS, we foresee a three- to ˜ ve-
fold increase in the number of article 

versions to be processed as we antici-
pate the somewhat longer-term elimi-
nation of physical, printed publica-
tions. Our architecture has to handle 
the shift from the ﬁone true versionﬂ 
that arrived in the mail to data feeds 

from publishers with items at different 
points in their life cycles. Our business 
processes will change from waiting for 

that ˜ nal version to arrive, analyzing it 

once, and never looking at it again to 
incremental analysis performed several 
times as the article progresses through 

the publisher™s work˚ ow.
When a publisher changes how it 
represents data, we might know about 

it in advance or when it ˜ rst arrives in 

the new form. Scanned images are rep-
resentation agnostic, meaning that an 
image doesn™t care if you name a seg-

ment ﬁcalloutﬂ or ﬁsidebar,ﬂ or if the 

publisher switches from serif to sans 
serif or from Helvetica to Arial. Pixels 
are pixels. However, we very much care 

if the data feed goes from this:
<author>

<˜ rst-name>Eric</˜ rst-name>

<last-name>Richardson</last-name>
</author>
to this:
<author>
<name lang=ﬂENﬂ>

<given>Eric</given>

<family>Richardson</family>
</name>
</author>
That kind of change requires someone 
to change the logic extracting the data. 
Sure, you could try to create a system 

that could handle any name representa-
tion you throw at it, but add addresses 
and scale to more than 100 languages, 
and the complexity quickly rivals natu-
ral language processing.
All software systems have an archi-
tecture, de˜ ned as ﬁthe structure or 

structures of the [program or comput-
ing] system, which comprise software 

elements, the externally visible proper-

ties of those elements, and the relation-
ships among them.ﬂ
1 Software archi-
tects attempt to lend predictability to 

the notoriously unpredictable realm of 
software design and development and 

take a longer, broader view than devel-

opers and project managers. They ﬁare 
expected to facilitate software develop-
ment projects as well as represent the 

overall system™s quality attributes.ﬂ
2CAS was an early information tech-
nology adopter, and consequently, we 
have a large base of legacy software. 
Our legacy systems are immensely 

valuable, but they™re based on paperŠ

virtual paper now, but still paper work-
˚ ows. They also carry some heavy bag-
gage from the days of batch processing.
When we were ˜ rst trying to incor-
porate electronic data feeds at CAS, 
it became clear our virtual paper-

oriented processes and systems weren™t 

up to the task. We tried to replace our 
content management system with one 
more appropriate, only to ˜ nd our 

work˚ ow was tightly coupled to the old 
system. In light of this discovery, we 
adjusted our path to enable incremental 

replacement of legacy systems, begin-

ning with efforts to minimize the im-
pacts of all paper work˚ ows. The next 
step in our architecture™s evolution will 

put service facades on legacy systems, 

allowing us to decouple the consumer 
from the implementation. We don™t 
know exactly what will drive our busi-

ness processes as we evolve, so we™re 
evaluating several alternatives. For-
tunately, we have a good idea of what 

those processes are, which is where 

we™re taking immediate action. When 
we decide on a work˚ ow engine, it can 
exploit the work we™ve already ˜ nished.
An Interesting Analogy
Like meteorologists who forecast how 

a storm system develops and changes 
over time, agile architects forecast how 
software systems evolve. Meteorolo-

gists use many different kinds of data 

sources as inputs to forecasting, and 
architects need to gather diverse data 
types and employ different techniques 

in their efforts. But unlike the meteo-

rologist, who has well-established me-
teorological practices for forecasting, 
the agile architect has far fewer stan-

dard practices to follow.
Agile software development is about 
solving immediate needs, continually 

adapting and refactoring as problems 

arise. One of the four core values in 
the agile manifesto is ﬁresponding to 
change over following a plan.ﬂ Some 

agile practitioners regard architecture 

as overhead, an antique from the age of 
waterfall development methodologies. 
Yet, agile development has a critical 

need for architecture. If software de-

velopers didn™t need to produce work-
ing software on short schedules, they 
Like meteorologists who forecast 
how a storm system develops and changes 
over time, agile architects forecast 
how software systems evolve.
  NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2011
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 11wouldn™t need agile development. If 
they didn™t need to continue produc-
ing working software as the system 
evolves, they wouldn™t need software 

architecture. Software architecture nat-

urally gravitates to plans, designs, and 
structure, preferably before the writing 
of any code. Agile development natu-

rally gravitates to expediency and ˚ uid 

structures. How do we embrace the 
bene˜ ts of both approaches to create 
ﬁgoodﬂ architectures in an agile world?
We can look to the work of meteo-
rologists for inspiration. They™ve had 

to learn about the behavior of large 

complex systems for much longer than 

computer scientists. The principles hur-
ricane meteorologists use to assist in 
predicting the behavior of large, com-

plex weather systems are applicable 

to large, complex software systems as 
well.
Sifting through the Data
If you give a hurricane meteorolo-
gist a giant pile of data about a storm 
spinning in the middle of the Atlantic 
Ocean and ask her to determine ex-

actly where it will come ashore, she can 

analyze the data, construct a detailed 
and accurate model of the atmospheric 
conditions and weather patterns, run 

some simulations, and come up with a 

forecastŠtwo months after the storm 
hits. It™ll probably be wrong, but not 
by much, a moot point for the people 

in the storm™s path. The problem isn™t 
with the forecast™s accuracy but with 
the time needed to prepare it. On the 

other extreme, if given a satellite image 

and a few points of other dataŠand 
a few minutesŠa hurricane meteo-
rologist can prepare a forecast so un-

certain it might as well not even exist. 

There is a point where forecast accu-
racy and timeliness overlap. The model 
favored by hurricane meteorologists is 

to do just enough data acquisition and 

analysis to be reasonably certain what 
the storm will do and then start telling 
people to get ready. 
The same holds true for designing 
software architecture. An architect 

can spend a great deal of time design-

ing what he thinks is a perfect system 
only to present it when it™s irrelevant. 
Big design up front (BDUF) is ignored 

in agile development in favor of two al-

ternatives: no design up front (NDUF), 
which leads to accidental software ar-
chitecture, or enough design up front 

(EDUF). But what is ﬁenoughﬂ design?
Making a Forecast
Before agile architects can make any 

plans, they ˜ rst have to decide on the 
target architecture. This is a very dif-
˜ cult thing to do because it has many 

factors to consider, the most impor-

tant being business goals. Most busi-
nesses have a de˜ ned planning horizon, 
typically ˜ ve years.
3 Technological and 
cultural factors are also major consid-
erations. How will an organization™s 
culture respond to both business de-

mands and technological change? 

Developing the target architecture 
requires the ability to speculate knowl-
edgeably with these factors in mind. 
Even though it™s impossible to get ev-
erything exactly right, focus on the 

longer-term business goals when setting 

technical goals.
Predicting the Path
A hurricane doesn™t move in a straight 

line or at a constant speed. As the storm 
progresses, the hurricane meteorologist 
issues updates with different projected 

paths, each one adjusted incrementally 

rather than radically from the previous 
one. An architecture™s path is similar: 
the architect takes the architecture in 
its current state and forecasts its devel-
opmental path according to business 
goals, technology evolution, and other 

factors. Even in ﬁgreen ˜ eldﬂ develop-

ment at a new company, the current ar-
chitecture is de˜ nedŠit might not be 
well de˜ ned, but it™s there.
Most software systems, like storms, 
evolve over time, and the architect 

must maintain system stability during 

that evolution. She knows the architec-

ture will change just as a storm™s path 
changes. Skilled at predicting where 
the system is going, the agile architect 

needs to be able to predict without ac-

cidents. Likewise, the architect™s imple-
menters must have concrete predictions 
or they™ll improvise (and allow ﬁacci-

dentsﬂ to happen).
The Cone of Uncertainty
The farther away a storm, the more 

uncertain the forecast, which is what 
meteorologists call the 
cone of uncer-
tainty
. Hurricane meteorologists fore-
cast a storm™s projected path, knowing 

that the storm won™t follow this path 
exactly. Therefore, when publishing a 
projected path, most meteorologists 
also publish how wrong they think it™s 
likely to be. This deviation is expected 

and acceptable. Architects, especially 

agile architects, need to learn thisŠ
that it™s okay to be a ﬁlittleﬂ wrong. 
Even if an architect got lucky and was 

right yesterday, she has no guarantee 

that she™ll be right tomorrow. It also 
doesn™t mean she was truly wrong yes-
terday. Of course, it isn™t good if the ar-

chitect is a lot wrong. If a hurricane me-
teorologist predicts landfall in southern 
Florida, and New York is hit instead, 
Architects, especially agile architects, 
need to learn thisŠthat it™s okay 
to be a ﬁlittleﬂ wrong. 
 12 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
INSIGHTS:
 AGILE DEVELOPMENT
what would happen? No one would lis-
ten to that meteorologist again.
As agile architects, we know the 
target isn™t going to remain constant. 

Moreover, we know we™re going to be 

wrong about its location. Nevertheless, 
an estimate of direction is still neces-
sary because there™s work to do, so di-

rect the development teams to take the 

architecture closer to where it should 
end up.
Creating a Projected Path 
The hardest part of the agile process is 
deciding how to get to where you think 
you want to go. The architect needs to 
create a plan so that the development 

team can take action immediately. The 

design should be speci˜ c where it mat-
ters and ˚ exible where it doesn™t. Ju-
nior development staff should have 

very precise direction on what to pro-

duce. Senior developers need less con-
crete guidance, but they still need to 
know about variables. If you™re unsure 

whether you™ll use SOAP, REST, RMI, 
Corba, or some other standard, your 
team leaders must understand this un-

certainty to help them with subsequent 

migration when you ˜ nally do set ar-
chitectural standards. Gather the data 
you can, analyze it, make a guess, and 

then tell people it™s a guess.
Hurricanes follow the prevailing or 
steering winds. They go with the ˚ ow. 

As Ruth Netting notes, ﬁWhen the 

steering winds are strong, it is easier 

to predict where a hurricane will go. 
When the steering winds are weak, 
a storm seems to take on a mind of 
its own, following an erratic path 

that makes forecasting very dif˜ cultﬂ 
(http://kids.earth.nasa.gov/archive/
hurricane/movement.html). The target 

architecture is in˚ uenced by steering 

winds as well. When a particular tech-
nology or set of technologies really take 
hold and gain momentum and mind-

share, it™s easy to follow along (think 

Web 2.0). When a technology emerges 
and gets some adoption, it™s more dif˜ -
cult to decide to use it (think CORBA).
Wind shear is the difference in speed 
and direction of winds at different al-

titudes. According to the Weather Un-

derground website, ﬁWind shear is of-

ten the most critical factor controlling 
hurricane formation and destructionﬂ 
(www.wunderground.com/education/

shear.asp). Corporate culture, technical 

inertia, and legacy systems all in˚ uence 
an architectural effort™s impact. Just 
as shearing winds can tear a hurricane 

apart, culture, inertia, and intractable 
legacy systems can destroy an archi-
tecture program. However, these in-

˚ uences aren™t always negativeŠwind 

shear is what keeps most hurricanes 
from reaching Category 5. Technical 
wind shear can lead to investigations 

into alternate solutions or compromises 

to lessen the impact on legacy systems. 
At best, wind shear encourages the ar-
chitect to factor in other priorities and 

viewpoints when making decisions.
One huge advantage the agile archi-
tect has over the hurricane meteorolo-

gist is the ability to shape the forces 
at play. Some of the steering winds 
affecting architectural direction are 

project managers and senior technical 

staff. Working with and in˚ uencing 
them is essential. If they™re working at 
cross-purposes, they become destruc-

tive shearing winds. The agile archi-

tect must educate so that even the most 
intractable techie will at least under-
stand, even if they don™t agree with the 

architectural decision. Disagreement is 

a good thing. The agile architect must 
remember wind shear is an excellent 
moderating force; too much is what 

causes problems.
At CAS, many people have a 

seat at the table when we dis-
cuss architecture. Business 
leaders, technical managers, and devel-
opment leads from both legacy and new 

systems all have input on architectural 
direction. As the agile architect at these 
meetings, I learn about business driv-

ers and technical trade-offs made in 

legacy systems and I share the possibili-
ties afforded by modern methodologies 
and technologies. Together, we™re plan-

ning an acceptable path to sustainable 
architecture. By adopting the serenity 
and vigilance of a hurricane meteorolo-

gistŠidentifying the forces, some con-

trollable, some not, that steer our ar-
chitecture and continually assessing the 
impactŠthe agile architect can respond 

to changing conditions with an incre-

mental, agile approach that keeps us 
able to respond to the next change.
References
 1. L. Bass, P. Clements, and R. Kazman, 
Soft-
ware Architecture in Practice
, Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 1998.
 2. P. Abrahamsson, M. Ali Babar, and P. 
Kruchten, ﬁAgility and Architecture: Can 
They Coexist?ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 27, no. 2, 
2010, pp. 16Œ22.
 3. S. Tockey, 
Return on Software: Maximizing 
the Return on Your Software Investment
, Addison-Wesley, 2008.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
ERIC RICHARDSON 
is the architect for editorial systems at Chemical 
Abstracts Service. His interests include software engineering, distributed 
systems, and applying agile principles to evolve architectures. Richardson has 

an MS in computer science from Franklin University. He™s a member of IEEE 

and the ACM. Contact him at eric.richardson@cas.org.
 Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
