 112IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 20010740-7459/01/$10.00 © 2001 IEEEWhat do these modern, buzzword
software methods have in com-

mon: eXtreme Programming,
Crystal, lean programming, scrum,
feature-driven development, adap-
tive software development, ÒgoodenoughÓ software, personal soft-

ware process/team software pro-

cess, Rational Unified Process,
rapid development, code com-
plete, ...?They all offer something in ex-change for a change in work
habits, and sometimes in ex-

change for a ÒcultureÓ change,
too. An important reason organi-
zations do not adopt such meth-
odsÑthat is, do not use them indaily software developmentÑis that what
the methods offer is not as important (read
Òcost-effectiveÓ) as staying with the status
quo. This has nothing to do with inertia or

resistance to change. Put more strongly,

what these methods offer is irrelevant. Put

more diplomatically, what they offer is not

strategic for the enterprise.All the buzzword methods offer to reducecost or effort, duration or time to market, or

defects, and most offer to reduce all of these.

How can we object? DonÕt we all agree that

those reductions are desirable, even neces-
sary, especially considering our professionÕs
sorry state?My perspective comes from two dis-parate directions: I have read nearly every-
thing on adopting process innovations, and
I have seen adoption succeed and fail in
many software development organizations.
What explains the difference between suc-

cess and failure? The standard answers are
about upper-management commitment and

sponsorship, the ability or persuasiveness of
change agents, the divisibility of the innova-
tion, how disruptive the innovation is, and
whether the change is planned and man-
aged. All those are important, but I have
seen something that is more powerful and

more dominant: alignment with strategy.

When the method is aligned with the orga-
nizationÕs strategy, the adoption is much

more often successful.
WhatÕs your strategy?Sometimes strategy is called value propo-sition, which Jamie Fabian defines asa set of facts, assumptions, and percep-tions underlying assessments of what is
ÒvaluableÓ to someone. ItÕs a theory, put

forth to see if it is valid. The value prop-
osition is what the seller suggests as the
reason(s) why the buyer should select aloyal oppositionWhy Software ProcessInnovations Are Not
AdoptedStan RifkinEditor: Robert L. Glass Computing Trends 
rglass@indiana.eduContinued on p. 110 110IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 2001LOYAL OPPOSITION
On the flip side, what makessomeone pick a specific option is
the value that a particular indi-
vidual perceives he/she will derive
from that choice.
(For an annotated list of this andother sources of inspiration for this
article, see the sidebar.)
The Discipline of Market Leaders,by Michael Treacy and Fred Wier-

sema, is a study of 80 high-perfor-
mance firms. It seeks the secret to
such high performance. Treacy and

Wiersema find only three sustainable

value propositions: operational ex-cellence, product innovativeness, andcustomer intimacy
. To succeed, all
organizations must meet a threshold
in all three and then excel at only

one. The selection and implementa-
tion of that one value proposition is
the strategy, and everything in the or-

ganization must align to it to achieve
high performance. If an organiza-
tionÕs operations and its strategy do

not align, a more efficient, alignedcompetitor can fill the gap, conse-quently taking away the first organi-
zationÕs customers.
Finding out what worksThe Discipline of Market Leaderscan serve as a filter or screen to see if
a method will work for your organi-
zation. Take, for example, a new

method that promises to improve

product quality. This aligns with op-

erational excellence, which usually
involves being the lowest-cost pro-
vider because you offer the highest-
quality product in the marketplace.
(Highest quality implies lowest price
because the producer is not introduc-

ing errors and therefore does not
have to incur the cost to detect, re-

move, or rework them.) If your orga-

nization does not seek operational
excellence, a method that tries to
achieve quality by, for example, in-

stilling more discipline will appear
antistrategic, and your software prac-
titioners will not adopt it.Imagine a method that emphasizescreativity. This aligns with product

innovativeness, the proposition that
your organization alone offers a cer-
tain combination of features. Innova-tiveness is inherently unpredictable;it cannot be usefully planned. So, risk
management is the central skill re-
quired, and plans per se are not as
important. (And we consumers and
end users are well aware that when

we are working with something new,

we are much more tolerant of quality

problems. In fact, we exchange our
quality standards for innovation.) If
your organization seeks product in-
novativeness, it is a prime candidate
for the methods Martin Fowler de-
scribes in ÒPut Your Process on a

Diet: Lightweight Methods.ÓIf your organization seeks cus-tomer intimacy, its strategy is proba-

bly Òone-stop shoppingÓÑhaving an
infinite menu. (Many information
systems departments and providers fit
this category.) Therefore, your orga-

nization offers a total solution, every-
thing from a single source, all inte-
grated and harmonious. You focus on

the main capabilities you provide:
flexibility and the ability to change
quickly. So, for example, you need to

be able to add a feature, field, or
process at a momentÕs notice and not

take long to implement it and not
have a ripple effect. Accordingly, your

organization should be driven toward
methods that support an architecture,
an overall picture of the total system
that contains high barriers between
functions to avoid side-effects.Finding out what doesnÕtThe Discipline of Market Leaderscan also help you determine which
methods will not work for your or-
ganization. If you need to be archi-
tecture-centric, you are unlikely to be
attracted to a method that permits
architecture violations or is even ar-
chitecture-neutral. If you are innova-
tion-driven, quality needs to be only
at the threshold set by the market-
place, which you can find out by
benchmarking. Your quality only

needs to be good enough. Making it
better than the threshold provides no
payoff because it is not a differentia-

tor. If you are selling features, your

development discipline needs to be
only as good as the marketplace tells
you, no higher. You would not likely
Continued from p. 112
Time
Functionality1PerformanceReliabilityConveniencePrice2PerformanceReliabilityConvenience3PerformanceReliabilityTechnology
trajectory
Figure 1. Each parallel line marks a different market segment for the
same set of products. Line 3 is the upscale line of products, 2 the
midrange, and 1 the downscale. The fast-rising technology trajectory

line is the subject of The InnovatorÕs Dilemma, by ClaytonChristensen. Organizations forming the technology trajectory are

surprise competitors to those along the parallel lines. (This figure is
based on Figure 8.4 in The InnovatorÕs Dilemma.) July/August2001IEEE SOFTWARE
111LOYAL OPPOSITION
be attracted to a method that im-
posed a great deal of discipline, be-
cause that would put you out of the
feature business and into the pre-
dictability and quality business.Triangulation
There is evidence in addition toThe Discipline of Market Leaders
that strategy alignment is critical for
implementation success. In The Inno-vatorÕs Dilemma
, Clayton Chris-tensen points out that during the typ-
ical life cycle of products and ser-

vices, different factors (performance,
reliability, convenience, and price)

become differentiators. (For exam-
ple, see Figure 1, in which each par-
allel line marks a different market
segment for the same set of products.

Line 3 is the upscale line of products,
2 the midrange, and 1 the down-
scale.) When all the competitors offer
those factors, they become commodi-
ties. So, depending on where you are
in the cycle, you will select the
method that optimizes the factor that
is most important to your customers.
You would select first a method that

optimizes product performance, then
later one that optimizes reliability,
then later one that optimizes conve-
nience, then finally one that opti-
mizes cost. Of course, now other

considerations creep in: Which soft-
ware development or managementmethods provide a path from onefactor to the next one in the series?

Which methods preclude evolving to
another method or tool? Which
methods lock you into them so that
you cannot easily progress as the cy-
cle demands?Iscreen each new buzzword method
by evaluating the value proposi-
tion it offers. If the method sup-ports my strategy, implementation

will likely be easy, all other things

equal. If it doesnÕt, I donÕt consider

itÑthe cure would be worse than the
disease.Stan Rifkinis a principal with Master Systems, an advi-sory services firm that specializes in helping organizations for

whom computing is strategic. He worked at the Software Engi-
neering Institute on implementing software process improve-
ment and is cochair of the 2002 Software Engineering Process
Group Conference. He has a BS in business administration, an
MS in computer science, and is completing a doctorate in educa-
tion. He is a member of the IEEE Computer Society, the ACM, the

Foundation for the Empirical Study of Programmers, the Acad-
emy of Management, the Institute for Operations Research and
Management Science, the Project Management Institute, and the
Future Search Network. He is on the editorial board of Empirical
Software Engineering. Contact him at sr@master-systems.com.
Copyright and reprint permission:Copyright © 2001 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-neers, Inc. All rights reserved. Abstracting is permitted with credit to the source. Libraries are permitted to
photocopy beyond the limits of US copyright law for private use of patrons those post-1977 articles that
carry a code at the bottom of the first page, provided the per-copy fee indicated in the code is paid through

the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Dr., Danvers, MA 01923. For copying, reprint, or re-

publication permission, write to Copyright and Permissions Dept., IEEEPublications Admin., 445 Hoes

Ln., Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331.
Circulation:IEEE Software(ISSN 0740-7459) is published bimonthly by the IEEE Computer Society. IEEE
headquarters: Three Park Ave., 17th Floor, New York, NY 10016-5997. IEEE Computer Society Publications

Office: 10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., PO Box 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314; (714) 821-8380; fax (714)

821-4010. IEEE Computer Society headquarters: 1730 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20036-

1903. Subscription rates: IEEE Computer Society members get the lowest rates and choice of media optionÑ

$40/32/52 US print/electronic/combination; go to http://computer.org/subscribe to order and for more infor-

mation on other subscription prices. Back issues: $10 for members, $20 for nonmembers. This magazine is

available on microfiche.Postmaster:Send undelivered copies and address changes to Circulation Dept., IEEE Software, POBox 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314. Periodicals Postage Paid at New York, NY, and at addi-

tional mailing offices. Canadian GST #125634188. Canada Post Publications Mail Product (Cana-
dian Distribution) Sales Agreement Number 0487805. Printed in the USA.Information SourcesClayton Christensen, The InnovatorÕs Dilemma: When New Technologies
Cause Great Firms to Fail
, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Mass.,
1997. This breakthrough book by an economist illustrates that products, even

software ones, have a life cycle and that different value propositions matter

during different phases.
Jamie Fabian provides a good discussion of value proposition at www.
jobcircle.com/career/coach/jf_1999_12.html.Martin Fowler, ÒPut Your Process on a Diet: Lightweight Methods,Ó 
SoftwareDevelopment, vol. 8, no. 12, Dec. 2000, pp. 32Ð36. This article inspired this
Loyal Opposition column.Mary Poppendieck, ÒLean Programming: Assembly-Line Techniques Apply to
Software, Too,Ó 
Software Development, vol. 9, no. 5, May 2001, pp. 67Ð72.
An advocate of so-called lean or lightweight methods, as learned from Toyota

manufacturing.Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema, 
The Discipline of Market Leaders:
Choose Your Customers, Narrow Your Focus, Dominate Your Market
, PerseusBooks, Reading, Mass., 1995. The clearest explanation of strategy for us lay

readers. For a comprehensive discussion of this book, see my article ÒWhat

Makes Measuring Software So Hard?Ó in the May/June 2001 IEEE Software. Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
