 26IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 20000740-7459/00/$10.00 © 2000 IEEEcan be flexible and adaptable in definingand applying an appropriate variant of
Scrum. This article describes our experience

implementing this process.Why Scrum?
As members of the Software Technology
Group, our group is responsible for intro-
ducing new technologies and processes into
our organization at AG Communication
Systems in Phoenix, Arizona. We research

new approaches and sponsor their introduc-
tion and growth. We also conduct develop-

ment project checkups for ongoing projects
and postmortems for completed ones. In our periodic postmortems and check-ups, we noticed some recurring problems

for our New Business Opportunity (NBO)
projects. Figure 1 lists some comments aris-ing from projects at our organization thatfaced significant challenges.In the new telecommunications market
where our company operates, change is over-
whelming. Software developers have always
complained about changing requirements,
but in traditional approaches they assumed
they would understand the requirements be-
fore moving on to the next phase. In the cur-
rent environment, however, project require-

ments might be unclear or unknown even as
the project gets underway. Indeed, the mar-

ket might not be definedÑit might even be

that no one clearly understands the product
under development. Most development teams respond with,
ÒMake the chaos go away! Give us better
requirements!Ó Unfortunately or not, chaos

is the reality in this new business environ-
The Scrum Software
Development Process
for Small TeamsLinda Rising and Norman S. Janoff, 

In todayÕs software
developmentenvironment,requirements oftenchange during theproductdevelopment lifecycle to meet
shifting businessdemands, creatingendless headachesfor developmentteams. We discuss
our experience inimplementing theScrum softwaredevelopmentprocess to addressthese concerns.At AG Communication Systems, software development teams
range in size from two to several hundred individuals. Intuitively,

the development process thatÕs appropriate for very large teams

wonÕt work well for tiny teams and vice versa. In our organiza-
tion, process diversity means adopting a flexible approach to development
processes so that each team can apply what works best. In experimenting
with the Scrum software development process, we found that small teams 

 mentÑas software devel-opers we must learn how

to meet customer needs

and turn this chaos to our
advantage.In seeing that some ofour NBO projects were
more successful than oth-
ers, we struggled to exam-

ine the postmortem data to

learn the secrets of those
successful projects. Here

are some comments from

successful teams:We did the first piece and then reesti-

matedÑlearn as you go!We held a short, daily meeting. Only

those who had a need attended.The requirements document was high-
level and open to interpretation, but we

could always meet with the systems en-
gineer when we needed help.
About this time, we discovered the ScrumWeb sites  (www.controlchaos.com/safe and

www.jeffsutherland.org) and read a paper pre-

senting patterns for using the Scrum software
development process from the 1998 Pattern
Language of Programs Conference.1 From theScrum Web sites we learned that Scrum is a

process for incrementally building software in
complex environments. Scrum provides em-
pirical controls that allow the development to
occur as close to the edge of chaos as the de-
veloping organization can tolerate. The Scrum software development processdescribed in this article developed in a col-
laboration between Advanced Development
Methods and VMARK Software. Both com-
panies were reporting breakthrough pro-
ductivity. This approach overlapped signifi-

cantly with what we saw in postmortems of

successful projects. Our organization has

long used patterns successfully, not just for

design but for organization and process as
well.2,3Many existing patterns supportedwhat we learned about Scrum and saw in

the postmortem data (see the ÒWhatÕs a Pat-

tern?Ó sidebar). For example, Scrum advo-
cates the use of small teamsÑno more than

10 team members. Jim CoplienÕs ÒSize the

OrganizationÓ pattern recommends 10-per-
son teams,4while Fred Brooks argues that
Òthe small sharp team, which by commonJuly/August 2000IEEE SOFTWARE
27We need to do a better job of change management. We had too many outside distractions.
We need customer feedback during the iterative development approach weÕre taking.
The users gave us a huge list of requirements. We knew we werenÕt going to be able to
deliver everything they wanted.
Development took place in focused chaos, and there was no one to go to with questions.
We need a way to structure the chaos somehow, because all NBOs must deal with that.
We have been used to thinking in terms of years for development; now we have to turn out

products in months.WeÕre chasing an emerging market. It changes weekly.
We wasted a lot of time estimating and developing test plans for features that we never

developed. We should have cancelled this project earlier. It took almost two years to recognize that. 
We need well-defined phases and someone who is close enough to see progress and deter-

mine what we can check off.
Figure 1. Participant

comments from proj-
ects facing challenges.In the late 1970s, two books appeared, written by Christopher Alexan-der and his building architect colleagues. The Timeless Way of Building 
andA Pattern Language
presented AlexanderÕs description of recurring problems
in creating cities, towns, neighborhoods, and buildings, and the solutions to
these problems.1,2He used the pattern form to document the problems and
their solutions.Each pattern describes a problem that occurs over and over again in
our environment and then describes the core of the solution to that
problem in such a way that you can use this solution a million timesover without ever doing it the same way twice.2Software professionals have also observed recurring problems and solu-
tions in software engineering. There is evidence of patterns at all levels of

software development, from high-level architecture to implementation, testing,
and deployment. There is considerable work going on to apply this technol-
ogy to software engineering. Patterns go a long way toward capturing what

experts know, letting them share that knowledge with others.
On the surface, a pattern is simply a form of documentation. Pattern au-
thors document solutions they have observed across many software projects.

Experienced designers read these patterns and remark, ÒSure, IÕve done

thatÑmany times!ÓThis kind of documentation captures knowledge, previously found only inthe heads of experienced developers, in a form that is easily shared.
Patterns are not theoretical constructs created in an ivory tower; they are
artifacts that have been discovered in multiple systems. In patterns, the solu-

tion is one that has been applied more than twice. This Òrule of threeÓ en-
sures that the pattern is documenting tried and true applications, not just a

good idea without real use behind it.The approach calls to mind the notions of cohesion and coupling Ed Your-
don and Larry Constantine developed during many late Friday afternoon

postmortem sessions, discussing lessons learned from past projects.
3The co-hesion and coupling ideas captured qualities of real systems. The guidelines
were not theoretical musings, but rested on observations of system capabili-

ties that made life easier for developers and maintainers.This is true for all patterns.
References1.C.A. Alexander, 
The Timeless Way of Building
, Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1979.
2.C.A. Alexander et al., 
A Pattern Language
, Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1977.
3.E. Yourdon and L. Constantine, 
Structured Design, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1978.
WhatÕs a Pattern? consensus shouldnÕt exceed 10 people.Ó
5Be-cause Brooks, Coplien, and postmortems of
successful teams all support this and many
other Scrum tenets, we felt confident about

undertaking a pilot project.Although most of our NBO teams were
small, some had grown to exceed the limit of
10. We thought initially that we could simply
divide larger teams into collections of smaller
subteams, each no larger than 10. We found

that when the subteams are independent and
the interfaces well defined, this works. When
the overlap is considerable and the interfaces
poorly understood, the benefits are not as

great. Clearly, this is not an approach for

large, complex team structures, but we found
28IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 2000The following reports summarize
three diverse software development
teamsÕ experience with Scrum at AG

Communication Systems. The A-Team

developed a new multiplatform simulator

for the internal use of our GTD-5 EAX

switching system software developers.
The B-TeamÕs focus was a new product

in the small call center market. The C-
team developed a new feature for the

GTD-5 EAX switching system.A-TeamA-TeamÕs new leader called for a
project checkup. As a result of some

problems that surfaced during the

checkup, we offered to give a short

Scrum presentation. The team decided topilot a one-month sprint. To provide
some on-the-job training in the ap-
proach and also to learn how this team

would adapt the approach to its appli-
cation, we sat in on the Scrum meetings.At first, the team was uneasy aboutspending a lot of time in daily meetings
and proposed holding sprint meetings
every other day. The schedule of Mon-

day, Wednesday, and Friday one week,

followed by Tuesday and Thursday of

the following week seemed to work best.

During these meetings, the team began
to grow together and display increasing
involvement in and delight with othersÕ
successes. The team completed a suc-

cessful sprint, with the planned compo-
nents delivered on time.
The team began to cooperate almostimmediately. The changes happened be-

fore our eyes. One plausible explanation
is that our developers are superb engi-
neers; they love to solve problems. When
one team member shares an obstacle in
the Scrum meeting, the entire teamÕs re-

sources come together to bear on that
problem. Because the team is working
together toward a shared goal, every

team member must cooperate to reach
that goal. The entire team immediately
owns any one individualÕs problems. 
Detailed problem solving does nothappen in the meeting, of courseÑonly
an offer of help and an agreement to

meet after the Scrum meeting. For exam-
ple, a team member would say, ÒI ran into

a problem.Ó Typical responses would be,

ÒI had that problem a couple of weeks
ago. I can help with that. LetÕs talk offline;Ó

ÒI know who is working in that area. IÕll
help you get in touch with them;Ó or ÒIÕm

having the same problem myself. LetÕs get

together after the meeting and talk about

it.Ó We immediately noticed an increase

in volunteerism in the team.The celebration of small successeswas also evident. At every meeting, as

small tasks were completed and the
team could see progress toward the
sprintÕs goal, everyone rejoiced. On

the sprintÕs last day, we could feel the

excitement as the responses around
the table were, ÒI finished my task! I
finished my task! I finished my task!Ó
They did it. They reached their goal
together. 
Figure A lists comments from the
team leader at the end of the sprint.Our biggest outcome from this pilotcame in the definition of the Scrum mas-
terÕs task. We originally thought that this

role would be hard to fill: we needed

someone who could facilitate a tightExperience Reports
Give it time to get started before expecting big results. It gets better as the

team gains experience.Tasks for a sprint must be well quantified and achievable within the sprint time

period. Determine the sprint time by considering the tasks it contains.
Tasks for sprints must be assigned to one individual. If the task is shared, give

one person the primary responsibility.
Sprint tasks might include all design-cycle phases. We set goals related to fu-

ture product releases in addition to current development activity.
Scrum meetings need not be daily. Two or three times a week works for us.
The Scrum master must have the skill to run a short, tightly focused meeting.
Stick to the topics of the sprint. ItÕs very easy to get off topic and extend what

was supposed to be a 10 to 15 minute meeting into a half-hour or more.Some people are not very good at planning their workload. Sprint goals are

an effective tool for keeping people on track and aware of expectations.
IÕve noticed an increase in volunteerism within the team. TheyÕre taking an in-
terest in each otherÕs tasks and are more ready to help each other out.
The best part of Scrum meetings has been the problem resolution and clearing

of obstacles. The meetings let the team take advantage of the groupÕs experi-

ence and ideas.Figure A. A-TeamÕs team leader comments.
 that even small, isolated teams on a largeproject could make use of some elements of

Scrum. This is true process diversity.
While conducting a project checkup, wethought that Scrum might address some of
the issues facing the particular team. After
we described the approach as we then un-
derstood it, the team decided to try Scrumand became our first pilot project. We didnÕt
understand a lot about the approach, so we
learned as we went along, as did the team.
The pilot project and each succeeding proj-
ect taught us more about what worked for
each group and what components would ad-
dress particular needs.The ÒExperience ReportsÓ sidebar de-July/August 2000IEEE SOFTWARE
29meeting, keep everyone on track and
solve problems on the fly. The A-Team

experience taught us that the team
solves the problemsÑor most of them.

The team still needs a capable Scrum
masterÕs guidance, but the team ad-

dresses and resolves most issues.After this pilot project, we continued topresent the Scrum overview at team meet-

ings and to leaders of various business
units: we took the Scrum story to both the

grassroots level and to management.
Whenever we detected a flicker of inter-
est, we volunteered to work with the team
to implement Scrum. Once the team be-
gan to use the process, we attended the
Scrum meetings in the first sprint to pro-
vide guidance, lend moral support, and

share successful experience across teams.
We saw first hand what worked well for

us and what teams learned about things

that we could adapt for our environment.

This was process diversity in action. Teams

could modify Scrum to meet the teamÕs

needs. We could help them tailor the

process based on what we had learned.
B-TeamTodayÕs chaotic telecommunications
business environment reflects back on
development teams. A teamÕs software

developers might need to simultaneously
support the present release in the field,

develop new features for the next release,
and estimate features for a future release.
Management might also tap some of the
developers for other projects.The B-Team found itself in this situa-
tion. One week into their first sprint, the

company made a major strategic

change that significantly affected the

backlog items committed for delivery.

Should the team violate a cardinal

Scrum principle by letting outside fac-
tors affect the sprint? Painful as it was,
the team decided to modify the backlog
to reflect the new strategy. They consid-

ered the outside influence a global
change event, not the typical occur-
rence of a new or modified feature. We

learned that rules for any approach

must be considered in light of the over-
all business context. Any rule is just a

rule, and if there are compelling busi-

ness reasons, no process should stand
in the way of making the best decision

for the overall project.Scrum works best when each devel-oper focuses exclusively on the sprint. B-
Team developers had numerous responsi-

bilities in addition to the sprintÕs backlog

items. As a consequence, the team over-
committed itself. In Scrum, overcommit-
ment becomes visible very quickly. Rapid

feedback helps keep developer commit-
ment aligned with the goals of a time-
boxed sprint.B-TeamÕs Scrum master used an Excel
spreadsheet to track the backlog items,
sorting the backlog by person and by

priority, for each sprint. Some team

members reported backlog completions

in every Scrum meeting, while others

could only report partial progress. To

address the partial-progress reporting,

the team tried to define task granularity
to allow completion of at least two tasks
per week. If tracking the backlog be-
comes too complicated, though, it sug-
gests that perhaps the team is trying to

make the process too difficult.
During the daily meetings, the Scrummaster would call attention to backlog-
item priority. This was especially helpful

for new team members, who might
have gone off in another direction. The

B-Team completed a series of incremen-

tal sprints that led to a product pre-

sently in market trials with a number of

customers.C-TeamWe tried applying some of the Scrum
development process for preliminary

testing and bug fixing for a C-Team fea-

ture. The team was scheduled for four

testing times in eight days, so they
planned a half-hour Scrum meeting be-
fore and between each test time.During the brief team meetings, team
members could ensure that the proper

load was used for the next scheduled test

time. They redefined some testing proce-
dures to make things go faster. The meet-

ings let all testers hear what was planned
and volunteer to work in the next test time.

The meeting also served to remind every-

one of current load problems and events

planned for the next couple of days.
The group as a whole decided the kindof testing to perform in the next test time,

not just the tester who worked that test time.
Added fixes were announced to the group.The Scrum master announced the lat-est load schedule and informed every-

one of information from outside the

group that might have come in over e-
mail but was missed by someone on the

team. During one meeting, the Scrum
master made a phone call to check the
load status to help decide whether to go
ahead with the next scheduled test time.We saw that the regularly scheduled
meeting gave the team an efficient way

for sharing information and tracking

progress. The team met its goal. The
feature was ready for integration testing
at the end of the sprint.Even though all three teams imple-mented different instantiations of Scrum,

they were all enthusiastic about the ap-
proach and felt that the experience had
been a successful one. They were all

willing to continue using it on their next
release or project.  scribes three of our experiences in imple-
menting the Scrum approach.Scrum
A scrum is a team of eight individuals in
Rugby. Everyone in the pack acts together

with everyone else to move the ball down

the field.For those who know rugby, the image is
clear. Teams work as tight, integrated units

with each team member playing a well-defined
role and the whole team focusing on a single
goal. In development teams, each team mem-
ber must understand his or her role and the

tasks for each increment. The entire team
must have a single focus. The priorities must
be clear. As we now describe, the Scrum de-

velopment process facilitates this team focus. How does Scrum work?
Scrum is a software development processfor small teams. As Coplien and Brooks
have shown, small teams that work inde-
pendently are more effective.
4,5Well-
seasoned research in social dynamics sup-
ports this view. The phenomenon called 
so-cial loafing, identified as early as 1927,empirically measured individual contribu-
tion to a group effort.6Using a gauge at-tached to a rope, the study found that indi-
viduals pulling the rope averaged 138.6
pounds of pressure. However, groups of

three averaged only 2.5 times the individual
rate, and groups of eight averaged less than
four times the individual rate.As in all projects, there must be an initialplanning phase. During this phase, the proj-
ect team must develop an architecture and

identify a chief architect. During develop-
ment, the team should be prepared to make

changes to this architecture, but they need a
plan, an architecture, and a chief architect
at the start. The chief architect defines the

development projectÕs vision based on this

architecture and ensures that visionÕs consis-

tency throughout all the development
phases. CoplienÕs pattern ÒArchitect Con-

trols ProductÓ  supports this understanding:

ÒThe Architect role should advise and con-
trol the Developer roles and communicate
closely with the developers.Ó4After initial planning, a series of shortdevelopment phases, or sprints, deliver theproduct incrementally. A sprint typically

lasts one to four weeks. A closure phaseusually completes product development. The team tracks all currently identified
tasks, capturing them in a list called the

backlog. The backlog drives team activity.
Before each sprint, the team updates the

backlog and reprioritizes the tasksÑeach
team signs up for a number of tasks and
then executes a sprint. Individual team

members agree to complete tasks they be-

lieve are feasible during each sprint. The
team defines task granularity as appropri-
ate, commonly specifying that a task must
be completed in less than a weekÑlarger
tasks are more difficult to define and report.
During a sprint, no changes are allowdfrom outside the team.What happens during a sprint?A sprint produces a visible, usable, deliv-erable product that implements one or more

user interactions with the system. The key
idea behind each sprint is to deliver valuable
functionality.
Each product increment builds on previ-ous increments. The goal is to complete tasks

by the sprintÕs delivery date. A sprint is time-

boxed development, meaning that the end
date for a sprint does not change. The team
can reduce delivered functionality during the
sprint, but the delivery date cannot change.
During the sprint, the team holds fre-quent (usually daily) Scrum meetings. These
meetings address the observation made by
Brooks: ÒHow does a project get to be a year
late? One day at a time.Ó5When the teamcomes together for a short, daily meeting,
any slip is immediately obvious to everyone.
The meetings involve all team members, in-
cluding those who telecommute. The meet-
ings serve a team-building purpose and
bring in even remote contributors, making
them feel a part of the group and making
their work visible to the rest of the team.How do you plan and estimate?Often, the marketing group or the cus-tomer will set the release date. With a re-

lease date set, the development and market-
ing groups must work together to provide
the features with the highest value for the
productÕs first release. Marketing should

prioritize the features, while the product de-

velopment group provides estimates for the
effort. Marketing and product development
must agree on the target set of features. If
30IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 2000





 the product development group cannot de-liver the requested features, the groups must
negotiate a reduced set of features. 
In negotiating features in the release, man-
agement must identify available developers
for feature development. The number of de-

velopers for each team must meet the Scrum

recommendation: no more than 10. Of

course, you can have several teams. To com-

plete negotiations with the marketing depart-

ment, the product development group must
have the required developers committed to
the project for the identified time period. Once negotiations between the market-ing and product development groups are
complete, the backlog is allocated to sprints
in priority order. The product development

group also establishes the target develop-
ment environment and determines the risks

associated with it. While the marketing de-
partment understands what the customer
needs and the value to the customer, prod-

uct development members understand the
risk of new technologies, tools, or software

processes. They identify and address these
risks in the decision-making that leads to
the feature allocation to sprints. In general,
they address risky items in early sprints to
allow time to recover if technical difficulties
arise.Planning proceeds relatively quickly be-cause the initial assumptions will surely change
as sprints deliver incremental functionality.
Who leads the team?The Scrum master leads the Scrum meet-ings, identifies the initial backlog to be com-

pleted in the sprint, and empirically measures

progress toward the goal of delivering this in-
cremental set of product functionality. The

Scrum master ensures that everyone makes

progress, records the decisions made at the

meeting and tracks action items, and keeps
the Scrum meetings short and focused. The Scrum master works constantly to
reduce product risk through the incremental
delivery of features, rapid response to devel-

opment obstacles, and continual tracking of
the delivery of backlog items.What happens during a Scrum meeting?
Each team member must answer three
questions:1.What have you completed, relative to the
backlog, since the last Scrum meeting?2.What obstacles got in your way of com-
pleting this work?3.What specific things do you plan to ac-
complish, relative to the backlog, be-
tween now and the next Scrum meeting?
The Scrum meeting should last 15 to 30
minutes, which provides enough time to ad-

dress obstacles, but does not allow time to

brainstorm a solution. All discussion other
than responses to the three questions is de-
ferred to a later meeting involving only
those actually affected by the discussion.
The goals of the Scrum meeting includefocusing the effort of developers on the
backlog items,communicating the priorities of backlog
items to team members,keeping everyone informed of team
progress and obstacles,resolving obstacles as quickly as possible,tracking progress in delivering the back-
log functionality, and
addressing and minimizing project risk.
What happens at the end of a sprint?At the end of a sprint, the team producesan increment that builds on previous incre-

ments. The team can trim functionality but

must meet the promised delivery date.After each sprint, all project teams meetwith all stakeholders, including high-level
management, customers, and customer rep-
resentatives. All new information from the

sprint just completed is reported. At this
meeting, anything can be changed. Work
can be added, eliminated, or reprioritized.
Customer input shapes priority-setting ac-
tivities. Items that are important to the cus-

tomer have the highest priority. 
New plans and estimates are made fol-lowing the same process discussed under
ÒHow do you plan and estimate?Ó Assign-
ments are then made to teams for the next

sprint.As sprints finish, estimates become

better as planners see what each team has
produced in previous sprints. With the small

time increments, the planners must be care-
ful in their estimation, because, as Brooks
states, ÒExtrapolation of times for the hun-

dred-yard dash shows that a man can run a
mile in less than three minutes.Ó
5Because each sprint produces a visible, us-July/August 2000IEEE SOFTWARE
31




˘
 able, increment, product delivery can takeplace after any sprint. In fact, delivery of a

sort does take place and feedback from the
business and marketing side and from cus-
tomers is a reaction to the current incre-
mentÕs delivery. Typically, final delivery takes

place after a wrap-up phase that is run as a
final sprint.
The organization can make one very im-portant decision at the end of a sprint:
whether to continue product development.
Given what was delivered during the last
sprint and the current state of the market,
the stakeholder meeting should address the
question, ÒShould this project continue?Ó

This is a business decision and must be
made after considering all the technical and
marketing issues.As a result of the interaction of small
teams in small, focused development cycles,the product becomes a series of man-
ageable chunks,progress is made, even when require-
ments are not stable,
everything is visible to everyone,team communication improves,
the team shares successes along the way

and at the end,customers see on-time delivery of
increments,customers obtain frequent feedback on
how the product actually works,a relationship with the customer devel-
ops, trust builds, and knowledge grows,
anda culture is created where everyone ex-
pects the project to succeed.
Most of ScrumÕs elements are not

new. It is basically an incremental,

time-boxed development with anadded twist: the frequent meetings where the
three questions are asked. Barry BoehmÕs

spiral model certainly addresses the element
of risk in software development.7The essen-tial ideas behind the spiral model are exactly
the same as those in ScrumÑjust speeded
up! A sprint typically lasts one to four weeks
and an entire project only a few months.
During that short time, the original cus-
tomer might leave and a new one arriveÑ
with new constraints. In addition, technol-
ogy might change out from under the team.WeÕve found that Scrum is appropriate
for projects where we canÕt define require-

ments up front and chaotic conditions are
anticipated throughout the product devel-
opment life cycle. At AG Communication

Systems, we continue to evolve the ap-

proach as our development groups gain ex-
perience with it.AcknowledgmentsWe thank the open-minded, openhearted develop-
ment teams and managers at AG Communication Sys-
tems for their continued support of innovative ideas,
as well as the reviewers for their helpful comments.References1.M. Beedle et al., ÒSCRUM: An Extension Pattern Lan-
guage for Hyperproductive Software Development,Ó
Pattern Languages of Program Design 4, N. Harrison,
B. Foote, and H. Rohnert, eds., Addison-Wesley, Read-

ing, Mass., 2000, pp. 637Ð651.2.B. Goldfedder and L. Rising, ÒA Training Experience
with Patterns,Ó Comm. ACM, Vol. 39, No. 10, Oct.
1996, pp. 60Ð64.3.N.S. Janoff, ÒOrganizational Patterns at AG Communi-
cation Systems,Ó The Patterns Handbook, L. Rising,ed., Cambridge Univ. Press, New York, 1998, pp.

131Ð138.4.J.O. Coplien, ÒA Generative Development-Process Pat-
tern Language,Ó Pattern Languages of Program Design,J.O. Coplien and D.C. Schmidt, eds., Addison-Wesley,

New York, 1995, pp. 184Ð237.
5.F.P. Brooks, 
The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Soft-ware Engineering, Addison-Wesley, New York, 1995.
6.L. Fried, ÒWhen Bigger Is Not Better: Productivity and
Team Size in Software Development,Ó 
Software Engi-neering Tools, Techniques, Practice
, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp.
15Ð25.7.B.W. Boehm, ÒA Spiral Model of Software Develop-
ment and Enhancement,Ó Computer, Vol. 21, No. 5,
May 1988, pp. 61Ð72.32IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 2000
Linda Risingis the editor of The Pattern Almanac 2000 (Addison-Wesley) and 
A Pat-terns Handbook(Cambridge Univ. Press) and was also the feature editor for a special issue of
IEEE Communications on design patterns in communications software, which appeared in April1999. She is interested in patterns and processes for software development and has worked in
the telecommunications, avionics, and strategic weapons systems industries. She has a PhD
from Arizona State University in the area of object-based design metrics and is a member of
the ACM and IEEE Computer Society. Contact her at risingl@acm.org.
Norman S. Janoff 
is a software project engineer at AG Communication Systems inPhoenix, Arizona. He has worked as a software manager on a large telecommunication switch-
ing system and as a software engineer. His current research interests include software processes

and software metrics. He received a BS in electrical engineering from the University of Michi-
gan, an MS in electrical engineering from the University of Illinois, and an MBA from the Uni-
versity of Chicago. Contact him at AG Communication Systems, 2500 W. Utopia Rd., Phoenix,

AZ, 85027; janoffn@agcs.com.