 88
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE
focus 2
developing scientific software
Software Design 
 for Empowering Scientists 
David De Roure, 
University of Southampton
Carole Goble, 
University of Manchester
The Taverna 
Workbench, a 
scienti˜c work˚ow-
management 
system, and the 
myExperiment 
social Web site for 
sharing scienti˜c 
experiments follow 
six principles for 
designing software 
for scientists. 
Science is becoming increasingly digital. Scientists™ tools are not just the experi
-mental apparatus of the laboratory but are also the software apparatus they 
use to conduct their research, analyze data, search databases, run simulations, 
and record their scienti˜c process. New scienti˜c techniquesŠfrom DNA mi
-croarrays to sensor networks in the environmentŠare generating volumes of data that 
wouldn™t get processed without software assistance.
Watch researchers at work, and you™ll see 
a lot of computer activity as they use applica
-tions, services, and data that might be local to 
the laboratory or enterprise, or accessed on the 
Web. These new research tools and methods are 
evident across a broad spectrum of disciplines. 
Some researchers, such as bioinformaticians 
working with protein sequences, might conduct 
research entirely 
in silico
. Meanwhile, chemists 
in the laboratory are using computers for look
-ing up procedures, designing their experiments, 
conducting and recording their work, and run
-ning simulations, searches, and analyses. Climate 
change researchers are capturing the latest earth 
observation and sensor network data, and run
-ning and testing computer models. Musicologists 
are extracting features from recorded music as 
part of musical analysis. Archaeologists are ex
-ploring 3D visualizations of their digs. 
Software tools are crucial for these increasingly 
data-intensive scienti˜c practices, and with the 
right tools, a tremendous potential exists for scien
-ti˜c advancement. Taverna and myExperiment are 
two complementary tools that help scientists tackle 
these challenges: Taverna provides automation of 
scienti˜c data processing tasks, making them sys
-tematic and repeatable, whereas myExperiment 
facilitates the discovery and sharing of scienti˜c 
digital objects, encouraging reuse and avoiding re
-invention. These tools™ comparative success owes 
much to a software design approach that under
-stands the practice and culture of scientists.
Scienti˜c Work˚ows 
Some data processing is highly repetitive, requiring 
scientists to repeat processes with different data, 
vary parameters, and implement small changes. 
Clearly, automation can help speed things up and 
make them more repeatable. This, in turn, lets sci
-entists concentrate on the science rather than the 
repetitive handling of data through multiple tools 
and applications. So, increasingly, scienti˜c activi
-ties at the computer are ﬁprogrammed.ﬂ Some dis
-ciplines have created scripting solutions, perhaps 
adopting their favorite scripting languages and 
creating libraries to handle their discipline-speci˜c 
data; others adopt work˚ow systems that auto
-mate data processing through a series of stages. 
  January/February 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 89
Taverna is one of many scienti˜c-work˚ow-
management systems (see the ﬁOther Scienti˜c 
Work˚ow Management Systemsﬂ sidebar for a 
brief overview of others).
1 It supports what we 
might call 
application-level work˜ows
, as op
-posed to other systems that focus on scheduling 
tasks across computing resources. Emerging from 
the UK™s e-Science program, scientists use Taverna 
extensively for various life science problems: gene 
and protein annotation; proteomics, phylogeny, 
and phenotypical studies; analysis of microarray 
data and medical images; high-throughput screen
-ing of chemical compounds; and clinical statistical 
analysis. Increasingly, other disciplines are adopt
-ing Taverna, too. 
Work˚ows lead to new scienti˜c outcomes. For 
example, Paul Fisher and his colleagues have re
-ported bene˜ts from being able to ﬁsystematically 
analyse any results we obtain without the need 
to prematurely ˜lter the data for human conve
-nience,ﬂ
2 which enabled them to identify a candi
-date gene that they had previously missed. Work
-˚ows are systematic and unbiased, and they capture 
data analysis methodologies explicitly. Taverna™s 
and other work˚ow environments™ popularity is 
changing not only how scientists program their ex
-perimentsŠusing high-level operators in terms of 
the problem and steps in terms of the scienti˜c op
-erationsŠbut also how they propagate and com
-municate their experimental methods among and 
across communities.
Social Experiments
Scienti˜c work˚ows and scripts are particularly 
valuable because they describe pieces of the sci
-enti˜c process. Providing a work˚ow along with 
experimental results helps others interpret the 
results, ensures that the process can be repeated, 
and facilitates reuse of the method. Along with 
this value comes a costŠwriting scripts and work
-˚ows isn™t always easy. So, it™s handy to share 
scripts and work˚ows with colleagues so that they 
don™t have to be created from scratch. Sharing the 
scienti˜c method in this way promises to be more 
powerful than that, however, because scientists in 
one domain can borrow a method from another. 
Figure 1 illustrates a real-world example of this.
All these bene˜ts of sharing work˚ows and 
scripts motivated us to create the myExperiment 
social Web site. Using myExperiment, research
-ers can share experiments no matter what work
-˚ow system they use. Figure 2 shows the cycle of 
work˚ow discovery in myExperiment and editing 
in Taverna (for example). Although sometimes de
-scribed as ﬁFacebook for scientists,ﬂ myExperiment
  Ł Paul writes workflows for identifying biological pathways  i
mplicated in resistance to Tr
ypanosomiasis (caused by  t
he parasites Tr
ypanosoma congolense and Tr
ypanosoma  vivax) in cattle and mice (see [2])Ł Paul meets Jo. Jo is investigating Tr
ichuris muris, another parasite but this time in mouse. She is using  t
he same kind of applications and services, and some  different data setsŁ Jo reuses one of Paul™s workflows without change.Ł Analysis of the resulting data by Jo identifies some  biological pathways involved in sex dependence in the m
ouse model, believed to be involved in the ability of  m
ice to expel the parasite. It takes two days for the analysis.Ł Previously a manual two year study by Jo had been unable to do this.Recycle, Reuse, RepurposeWo
rkflows and Know-howFigure 1. Scienti˜c work˚ow example. Here, a work˚ow is successfully 
reused to achieve a new scienti˜c outcome. (With thanks to Paul 
Fisher and Joanne Pennock, the University of Manchester.)
Other Scienti˜c
Work˚ow Management Systems
In addition to the Taverna work˜ow system we describe in the main text, sev
-eral other work˜ow systems have been developed to aid scienti˚c research.
1Triana
This open source problem-solving environment developed at Cardiff Universi
-ty combines an intuitive visual interface with powerful data-analysis tools. Sci
-entists have already used Triana for a range of tasks, such as signal, text, and 
image processing, so it includes a large library of prewritten analysis tools 
and lets users easily integrate their own tools. (See 
www.trianacode.or
g.)
Kepler
This project™s overall goal is to produce an open source scienti˚c work˜ow 
system that lets scientists design scienti˚c work˜ows and execute them ef
-˚ciently using emerging grid-based approaches to distributed computation. 
Kepler is based on the Ptolemy II system for heterogeneous, concurrent mod
-eling and design. (See http://kepler-project.org.)
Pegasus
Pegasus (Planning for Execution in Grids) bridges the scienti˚c domain and 
the execution environment by automatically mapping the high-level work
-˜ow descriptions onto distributed infrastructures such as the TeraGrid and the 
Open Science Grid. (See http://pegasus.isi.edu.)
Reference
 1.
 I.J. Taylor et al., eds., 
Work˜ows for e-Science:
 Scienti˚c Work˜ows for Grids
, Springer, 2007.
 90
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
is different from sites for sharing pictures, slides, 
and so on because it focuses on scientists™ special 
requirements, such as the need to attribute work, 
control visibility, handle licensing, and work with 
distributed data collections. myExperiment cou
-ples decoupled communities and brings commu
-nity intelligence to work˚ow systems. 
Take work˚ow reliability, for instance: a 
work˚ow™s success depends on all the services 
being available and working as expected, which 
is a challenge. Many services that are linked as 
steps in a work˚ow are third party, autonomous, 
and changeable, so work˚ows tend to decay. By 
sharing work˚ows within a community, we can 
achieve community recommendations and work
-˚ow maintenance. By tracking work˚ow use, my
-Experiment can recommend popular and reliable 
work˚ows and services. It also lets us exchange 
scripts and work˚ows for multiple tools, broaden
-ing the scientist™s toolkit.
The Software: 
 Superclients and the Web
Taverna is a distinctive work˚ow system because 
it™s a 
superclient
, meaning anyone can download 
it and run it on his or her desktop or laptop PC 
without extra installations or system adminis
-tration. You can use it to plumb together any 
services you can access on and from your PC, 
whether they™re in the enterprise or on the Web, 
by running a Taverna work˚ow. The idea is that 
using Taverna should be as simple as using a Web 
browser, except that it runs work˚ows instead of 
displaying Web pages.
Taverna has three main parts. The Taverna en
-actor is the engine that takes a Taverna work˚ow 
and executes it, using the data the user provides, 
over the services described in the work˚ow. In 
the enactor™s early form, it did simple data stag
-ing from service to service; it™s evolved to support 
streaming, runtime determination of services from 
Taverna enactorTavernaworkflowworkbenchScufl (Simple ConceptualUnified Language) workflow myExperiment Virtual Research EnvironmentFigure 2. Work˚ow 
discovery in 
myExperiment. 
 A scientist discovers 
a work˚ow in 
myExperiment, runs it 
and edits it in Taverna, 
and uploads it back to 
myExperiment.
  January/February 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 91
service groups, and numerous extension points for 
developers.
The Taverna Workbench provides a graphical 
editor for work˚ows and, signi˜cantly, a means for 
users to choose services. The availability of services 
for a particular domain is what makes Taverna easy 
to use in that domain. Adding new services is easy, 
supported by a scavenging tool and service cata
-logues. Finally, the
 Taverna language is a simple 
data˚ow language called the Simple Conceptual 
Uni˜ed Language
 (Scu˚)
 that has implicit iteration 
constructs, manifested graphically in the Taverna 
editor and encoded in XML. Scu˚ is a declara
-tive language with its semantic roots in functional 
programming, and it can interoperate with several 
other scienti˜c work˚ow tools. It™s quite different 
from languages such as WS-BPEL (Web Services 
Business Process Execution Language), which sup
-port a control-˚ow paradigm. 
Meanwhile, myExperiment is a very different 
piece of softwareŠa Web-based application, built 
on the Ruby on Rails (RoR) platform, that pro
-vides a modern Web 2.0 look and feel, social fea
-tures, and lean APIs. Rather than just a single site, 
such as Facebook or YouTube, myExperiment is 
also a software package that you can install inde
-pendently in a laboratory. It supports content ex
-change between Web applications, different my
-Experiment installations, and digital repositories. 
It™s also designed to be extensible, so that it deals 
not in work˚ows or scripts per se but in scienti˜c 
objects. This enables sharing documents, presen
-tations, service descriptions, notes, ontologies, 
plans, and so forth. More generally, myExperi
-ment deals in experiments; you can use it to glue 
together heterogenous collections such as distrib
-uted experimental data or, for example, packs of 
work˚ows. We call these collections 
encapsulated 
myExperiment objects
.Software for Science
Taverna has been adopted extensively, topping 
55,000 downloads from Sourceforge to date and 
averaging more than 40 a day since 2006. myEx
-periment went from conception to open beta in 
nine months, with the code base delivered by a 
core team of two developers. Now at 12 months, it 
has more than 1,300 users, despite limited adver
-tising and being such a specialist tool.
Although adoption of Taverna has been broad, 
this isn™t always the caseŠwe™ve developed sys
-tems in the past that were ˜ne examples of well-
designed software but were disdained or neglected 
by their intended users. Scientists have challenging 
and changeable applications that they might really 
understand but that are hard to communicate or 
stabilize. They™re concerned with getting scienti˜c 
results rapidly to compete with their peers and de
-velop their reputations. Scientists want reliability 
and con˜dence in their software but, paradoxi
-cally, are less concerned with generic solutions that 
they or others can replicate among their commu
-nities and that evolve systematically. On the other 
hand, these very things motivate software engi
-neers, who want to build the best solution and one 
that many other users will adopt, but who aren™t 
the specialists who will ultimately use the software. 
Sometimes, computer scientists are in the mix, too, 
and they must compete with their academic peers 
by exploring interesting technologies and innova
-tive methods that could well be at odds with the 
scientists™ and software engineers™ needs.
Six Principles 
 of Designing for Adoption
Scientists, to be successful, must be fundamen
-tally sel˜shŠMike Ashburner, a Cambridge ge
-neticist, once said that ﬁScientists would rather 
share their toothbrush than their data.ﬂ You must 
recognize that they adopt software on the basis 
of what it will do for them. So, what counts the 
most? It™s not clever software or innovative tech
-nologies but rather content and relevance. When 
we developed Taverna, we established a set of de
-sign principles and a working practice with our 
scientists, which myExperiment evolved further.
31. 
Fit In, Don™t 
Force Change
We made no obligation for service providers to 
change their services to ˜t into Taverna. Instead, 
we rapidly assembled contentŠmore than 3,500 
service operations covering all the major service 
providers in the community (the bioinformatics 
community routinely uses more than 900 data
-bases
4). Our early users were prepared to tolerate 
less-than-perfect interfaces because their favorite 
service was available. Users don™t have to change 
how they work to use the systemŠthey simply 
download Taverna and can use work˚ows imme
-diately, viewing their data with the same applica
-tions as before. Its functionality sits comfortably 
with their existing environment and practice, and 
barriers to adoption are kept low at the expense of, 
for example, elegant-type systems. 
In myExperiment, our motto is ﬁbring myEx
-periment to the user,ﬂ rather than force the user 
to come to myExperiment. So, for scientists who 
are already using Web sites and wikis in their 
work, we make it easy to bring myExperiment 
functionality through their existing interfaces. 
We™ve 
developed 
systems in the 
past that were 
˜ne examples of 
well-designed 
software but 
were disdained 
or neglected by 
their intended 
users. 
 92
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
For those who don™t, we made the Web interface 
as familiar as possible.
2. Jam 
Today and More Jam 
Tomorrow
This is about incentives. Incremental development 
and incremental content give scientists an immedi
-ate return on the time and effort they invest. So, we 
must match the 
activation energy
 users require to 
adopt a feature with the reward they gain. We must 
get core capability and quick wins out promptly. 
We built our user communities the way we built the 
software: scientists and developers journeying to
-gether. Telling our scientists to commit time and ef
-fort to something that they wouldn™t get any bene˜t 
from along the way would have been pointless.
Taverna has immediate bene˜t because it auto
-mates repetitive, time-consuming tasks and prom
-ises greater value in the future as more work˚ows 
become available and as users become work˚ow 
creators (if they wish). myExperiment gives an im
-mediate return by providing examples of work˚ows 
others have written and the promise of more work
-˚ows and community help.
3. Just in 
Time and Just Enough
Coupled with the previous point, we learned not to 
try to be too smart (always a temptation for com
-puter scientists). Being ﬁbetter, not perfectﬂ lets us 
respond to users™ immediate needs rather than go
-ing away and building a complete solutionŠwhich 
would be more resource intensive and, in our ex
-perience, quite possibly wrong. It™s better to solve 
the problems users already know they have than 
to make them wait for solutions to problems they 
don™t yet know they have and perhaps never will. 
In Taverna, for example, we worked on fancy 
knowledge-based descriptive techniques for ser
-vices to automate work˚ow composition. It 
turned out that users didn™t want this functional
-ity at all. They wanted quick ways to ˜nd relevant 
services, and then they wanted help in building 
the work˚ows themselves. Building software to 
power a Web site such as myExperiment is differ
-ent from building work˚ow system softwareŠfor 
one thing, we found it easier to be incremental, 
involve a distributed and disparate user commu
-nity in the design process, capture their input, 
and be agile in response.
4. 
Act Locally, 
Think Globally
Instead of setting out to build a universal work
-˚ow system or a universal social-networking site, 
we targeted a community we already knew. More
-over, we picked a few close ﬁfriends and familyﬂŠ
that is, local pioneers who are stereotypical exam
-ples of a certain class of scientists with a certain 
class of problemsŠand built our system for them, 
working closely with a few key service providers 
as well. Ultimately, when our local scientists were 
happy, so were those we™d never worked with be
-fore. So, we delivered Taverna with sets of services 
that met target user communities™ speci˜c needs 
and made it easy to extend to others. Meeting local 
needs encourages adoption; making the software 
extensible broadens it. Our experience suggests 
that customization outvotes genericity, extensibil
-ity outvotes comprehensivity, and scruffy and ˚ex
-ible outvotes smart but rigid
. In myExperiment, we never made assumptions 
about what users wanted. Because we were lim
-ited to a core team of two developers, it was es
-sential to impose a simple mantra: only implement 
features that users have asked for.
 Our failures oc
-curred when we tried to second-guess a solution 
for which there was no clear user problem state
-ment. As Don Wells said, ﬁDon™t solve a problem 
before you get to it.ﬂ
55. Let Users 
Add Value
Extensibility and customization are crucial to adop
-tion because they empower users. Users best un
-derstand the visualization tools they want to use or 
the services they want to incorporate. Many are ca
-pable developers or have developers working with 
them. Taverna lets users and developers enhance the 
system by creating content, integrating services, and 
developing software. They can extend it through 
new services and plug-ins and can share these exten
-sions so that Taverna™s value accumulates. We don™t 
need to create the extensions ourselves but rather 
provide support and training for others to do so. 
The small team associated with myExperiment 
means that maximal reuse and reusability is a ne
-cessity. We aimed to use third-party code and ser
-vices as much as possible and to make our services 
available through a simple Representational State 
Transfer (RESTful) API. We published this API 
as early as possible to let others start development 
and build functionality mashups. Within hours of 
releasing the API, we had more people developing 
outside the team than within it. By providing a net
-work of cooperating data services with simple in
-terfaces that make working with content easy, we™re 
both providing and reusing services. myExperiment 
also supports lightweight programming models for 
ease of integration in loosely coupled systems.
6. Design for Network Effects
Our users aren™t just heroic e-scientists harness
-ing computing resources to tackle major scienti˜c 
Taverna 
 has immediate 
bene˜t because 
it automates 
repetitive, 
time-consuming 
tasks.
  January/February 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 93
breakthroughs; we also work with numerous re
-searchers conducting routine processes on a daily 
basis, service providers who supply the resources 
they use, and work˚ow developers willing to 
share their know-how. Harnessing this long tail 
enables  network effects and provides community 
intelligence. 
In myExperiment, ˜nding work˚ows must be 
easy, and sharing and adding them and other scien
-ti˜c assets to the pool must be useful and straight
-forward. Usage statistics for work˚ows and ser
-vices provide a basis for recommendations, as well 
as the more explicit mechanisms of reviewing and 
tagging favorites. 
These principles interconnect, of course, and 
are predicated on well-designed, loosely coupled 
modular software. Principles 2 and 3 led us to 
adopt a perpetual beta software development 
methodology. Taverna uses a plug-in and code 
manager that manages third-party-supplied ex
-tensions and provides automatic updates. We 
develop and test the myExperiment codebase 
continuously and make weekly updates to the 
live service. Both projects are just as muchŠor 
perhaps even moreŠabout content as software. 
We were reminded of this when we went to open 
beta with myExperiment; the ˜rst bug report 
that came in was about a spelling error in a user-
 provided work˚ow description. Users come to 
the site for work˚ows and, as with Taverna, 
we™ve been careful to bootstrap the system so 
that the users have ﬁjam today.ﬂ
Building Trust 
 between Users and Developers
These six design principles depend on a good re
-lationship between users and developers. Taverna 
began as an e-Science pilot project in 2001; one-
third of the team that built the early prototypes 
were bioinformaticians. Now, a six-person soft
-ware engineering team, together with a three-
 person user outreach team (also bioinformati
-cians) delivers and supports the software as 
part of the Open Middleware Infrastructure In
-stitute UK (OMII-UK) and in close collabora
-tion with its user communities.
Throughout myExperiment, we™ve operated 
with two core developers, with a larger team 
around them providing occasional support, in
-cluding part-time liaison staff for speci˜c re
-search communities.
We™ve achieved this collaboration in both proj
-ects through our six principles of user engage
-ment. Figure 3 shows these in relation to our six 
design principles.
1. Keep Your 
Friends Close
In addition to community development with local 
pioneers and external early adopters, OMII-UK 
operates a scheme of beta testers and product/area 
liaisons (PALs) who don™t work directly for OMII-
UK but are the eyes and ears in the communities 
they do work in. Taverna™s PALs are critical to 
identifying user needs and developing the commu
-nity. By choosing these individuals, we recognize 
their worth to both OMII-UK and to their com
-munity; all parties bene˜t and so does the design 
and adoption of the software
.For myExperiment, we built user advocacy into 
its management plan. User workshops (dubbed 
parties
) are combined with 
community champi
-ons
. Our friends-and-family users (including scep
-tics!) and the broader communities are involved at 
all timesŠthrough everyday use of the Web site, 
consultations about mockup page designs, and 
user evaluation sessions. 
Our advocates are all our software™s day-to-
day usersŠmostly postdoctoral scientists and 
postgraduates. In academia, we can achieve soft
-ware adoption through these users rather than by 
targeting more senior scientists. However, if we 
want their (and community) support, they must 
have sympathetic patrons such as professors and 
laboratory managers. A more controversial view
-point is to pick good scientists who are seeking 
a competitive edge. Those who want to overtake 
Keep yourfriends closeEmbedFavors willfavor youKnowyourusersAnticipatechangeSkepticChampionsCoalfaceusersPatronsKeep sight of thebigger pictureDESIGN PRINCIPLESUSER ENGAGEMENT PRINCIPLESFriends andfamilyFit inJam today,jam tomorrowJust enoughjust in timeAct locally,think globallyEnable usersto add valueDesign fornetwork effectsFigure 3. Principles 
of software design 
for adoption and user 
engagement. Achieving 
the design principles 
(inner circle) depends 
crucially on the 
relationship between 
the software providers 
and the users, achieved 
through the user 
engagement principles 
(outer circle).
 94
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
their peers will look to new tools to help them and 
will be more willing to try them out.
2. Embed
We embed developers with users and users with de
-velopers, getting them to sit side by side for long pe
-riods. No amount of requirements documentation 
or design meetings can compensate for day-to-day 
contact. We started myExperiment by embedding 
the developers in an end-user laboratory so they 
could gain ˜rst-hand experience with the work 
environment, particularly with respect to sharing, 
communication, and understanding nonfunctional 
requirements.
3. Look at the Bigger Picture 
Developers and computer researchers tend to get 
hung up on some point that users won™t worry 
about in the overall scheme of things. Our software 
isn™t the only software our users use, and they™re 
using it to do only the science they really want to. 
Day-to-day, they use complex tools that they™re fa
-miliar and comfortable with and metaphors that 
seem peculiar to those on the outside but are stan
-dard in their discipline. Mimic these tools and link 
with them because they™re part of the overall pro
-cess. Consider the whole life cycleŠwe can accel
-erate science not just by accelerating experiments 
but also by reducing the time it takes to devise an 
experiment.
4. 
Favors 
Will Be in Your 
Favor
Building trust is a two-way activity requiring com
-promise and favors. In Taverna™s early days, we of
-ten wrote speci˜c code to help our pioneering scien
-tists get their scienti˜c results. For every pioneer, we 
ﬁsacri˜cedﬂ one developer in support. You could 
argue that this effort was a waste, but of course it 
wasn™t. The developers learned about the problem, 
and the users felt we were on their side. The devel
-opers got ﬁjam tomorrow,ﬂ too, receiving added, 
patient attention from scientists when it came to 
evaluating prototypes and designs. Letting users 
add value gives them ownership of the softwareŠ
another plus encouraging adoption. Today, we still 
developŠor help partners developŠbespoke code 
that leads to a general release (design principle 4). 
In myExperiment, we prioritize tasks and allocate 
development efforts on the basis of the return in 
adoption.
5. Know Your Users
Rarely is there one kind of user. For example, 
for our software, we have bioinformaticians and 
biologists (two distinct user groups), domain-
 expert developers producing applications, ser
-vice developers, service providers, and system 
administrators. All have different needs and 
fears. Taverna is designed for expert bioinforma
-ticians, not biologists.
Also, know your users™ backgrounds and ex
-periences. The bioinformaticians who use Tav
-erna are young postdocs and postgraduates fa
-miliar with online gaming, instant messaging, 
˜le sharing, social networking, and Internet 
shopping sites. So, basing myExperiment on this 
experience and others was natural. Searching for 
work˚ows should be like shopping on Amazon 
or searching with Google; creating work groups 
should be like creating groups on Facebook. Fa
-miliar interfaces mean no training. 
6. Expect and 
Anticipate Change
User needs will change. Success will mean that sci
-enti˜c practice will change, as will expectations. 
Scientists who were happy with a slow response or 
minimal data-management support will now need 
production-level database support and reliable, 
rapid delivery. You will need to ˜nd new pioneers, 
and new user classes will emerge.
When we started out, we replicated current sci
-enti˜c practice. The focus was on interoperating 
services, making services accessible, and work˚ow 
creation.
6 Two years later, we were inventing new 
practice. Work˚ows had to integrate data, not just 
link services, discovery had become an issue with 
so many services, and work˚ow editing and reuse 
were as important as creation from scratch. Now 
we have a work˚ow repository that is used and cu
-rated by the community and is itself being accessed 
by scripts and work˚ows. The software changes 
the science, which changes the software. The chal
-lenge for developers is predicting and anticipating 
these trends within the six design principles.
Re˚ections
We based our six design principles on several 
years of experience in the e-Science program, ob
-serving both success and failure. In this article, 
we™ve looked at the design of two quite different 
pieces of softwareŠthe superclient and the Web 
application. Although they™re both in the work
-˚ow domain, we believe we can apply our design 
principles more broadly. They actually cover soft
-ware design™s social aspects, which is signi˜cant 
in the collaborative context of e-science. They 
might extend also to systems-level science, which 
ﬁintegrates not only different disciplines but also, 
typically, software systems, data, computing re
-sources, and people.ﬂ
7 This broader applicability 
Letting users 
add value 
gives them 
ownership of 
the softwareŠ 
another plus 
encouraging 
adoption.
  January/February 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 95
is exempli˜ed by our chemistry colleagues who 
are ﬁblogging the labﬂ and have taken a sympa
-thetic design approach.
8Being able to realize our principles in engineer
-ing practice brings trade-offs. For example, using 
RoR in myExperiment imposed something of a 
straitjacket that made it dif˜cult for us to act lo
-cally with multiple user interface models while 
thinking globally in the back end. However, hav
-ing a programming model that lets us spend more 
time with users and less time writing code has 
been hugely effective. We anticipate extensive use 
of Web 2.0 functionality mashups for scientists. 
Considerable consistency exists between our de
-sign and engagement principles, and Web 2.0 de
-sign patterns.
In this article, we focused on our principles 
rather than their implementation. Manag
-ing myExperiment has much in common 
with Extreme Programming (XP), given that we 
implemented a core team across two sites with 
one-week iterations, had onsite customers at both, 
and performed continuous integration. Although 
others have discussed XP for scienti˜c research,
9 we™ve explored a rather different scenarioŠde
-coupled communities of independent and auton
-omous scientists doing everyday research, which 
is the emerging world of open science. We found 
it natural to be agile and responsive with a Web 
application.
We™re both delivering software to scientists 
and empowering them (and their computing ex
-perts) to participate in software creationŠsoft
-ware is the power behind the scientists, and sci
-entists are the power behind the software. We 
believe this empowerment is essential. Being pre
-scriptive won™t work because scientists must be 
as comfortable using their software apparatus as 
they are any other scienti˜c tool. It™s not so much 
about rolling out software as rolling in users, and 
it can happen only if software designers are will
-ing to cross the line and take a user-centric view 
of the software design process.
Acknowledgments
The Taverna team, past and present, is extensive: spe
-cial thanks to the lead architect, Tom Oinn, and to 
Hannah Tipney, our ˜rst bio-pioneer. Thanks to all 
our developers, product/area liaisons, advocates, and 
myExperiment ﬁfriends and family,ﬂ including Jiten 
Bhagat, Andy Brass, Simon Coles, Don Cruickshank, 
Paul Fisher, Jeremy Frey, Antoon Goderis, Duncan 
Hull, Douglas Kell, Matt Lee, Bertram Ludäscher, 
Danius Michaelides, Stuart Owen, Rob Procter, Mar
-co Roos, Stian Soiland, Robert Stevens, Ian Taylor, 
David Withers, and Katy Wolstencroft.
References
 1.
 T. Oinn et al., ﬁTaverna: Lessons in Creating a Work
-˚ow Environment for the Life Sciences,ﬂ 
Concurrency 
and Computation: Practice and Experience
, vol. 18, 
no. 10, 2006, pp. 1067Œ1100.
 2.
 P. Fisher et al., ﬁA Systematic Strategy for Large-Scale
  Analysis of GenotypeŒPhenotype Correlations: Ide
n- ti˜cation of Candidate Genes Involved in African Try
-panosomiasis,ﬂ 
Nucleic Acids Research
, vol. 35, no. 16, 
2007, pp. 5625Œ5633.
 3.
 D. De Roure, C.A. Goble, and R. Stevens, ﬁDesigning 
the myExperiment Virtual Research Environment for 
the Social Sharing of Work˚ows,ﬂ 
Proc. 3rd IEEE Int™l 
Conf. E-science and Grid Computing
 (E-science 07), 
IEEE CS Press, 2007, pp. 603Œ610.
 4.
 M.Y. Galperin, ﬁThe Molecular Biology Database Col
-lection: 2007 Update,ﬂ 
Nucleic Acids Research
, vol. 35, 
12 Jan. 2007, pp. D3Œ4.
 5.
 A.I. Antón and D. Wells, ﬁPoint/Counterpoint: Don™t 
Solve a Problem Before You Get to It/Successful Soft
-ware Projects Need Requirements Planning,ﬂ 
IEEE 
Software
, vol. 20, no. 3, 2003, pp. 44Œ47.
 6.
 R. Stevens et al., ﬁExploring Williams-Beuren Syn
-drome Using myGrid in Bioinformatics,ﬂ Bioinformat
-ics, Aug. 2004, pp. 303Œ310.
 7.
 I. Foster and C. Kesselman, ﬁScaling System-Level 
Science: Scienti˜c Exploration and IT Implications,ﬂ 
Computer
, vol. 39, no. 11, 2006, pp. 31Œ39.
 8.
 C. Neylon, ﬁWorkshop on Blog Based Notebooks,ﬂ 
Sci
-ence in the Open: An Openwetware Blog on the Chal
-lenges of Open and Connected Science
, 2008; http://
blog.openwetware.org/scienceintheopen/2008/02/29.
 9.
 W.A. Wood and W.L. Kleb, ﬁExploring XP for Scien
-ti˜c Research,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 20, no. 3, 2003, 
pp. 30Œ36.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit our 
Digital Library at www.computer.org/csdl.
About the Authors
David De Roure
 is a full professor in the School of Electronics and Computer Sc
i- ence at the University of Southampton, where he was a founding member of the Intelli
-gence, Agents, Multimedia Group and is responsible for e-science. He™s the director of the 
myExperiment project and has UK and international roles in developing interdisciplinary 
e-research activities. De Roure received his PhD in computer science from the University 
of Southampton. He™s a fellow of the British Computer Society. Contact him at dder@ecs.
soton.ac.uk.
Carole Goble 
is a full professor in the School of Computer Science at the University of 
Manchester, where she coleads the Information Management Group. She has worked closely 
with life scientists for many years and is the director of the myGrid project, the largest UK e-
science pilot project, which has produced the widely used Taverna Work˚ow Workbench open 
source software. Goble is a fellow of the British Computer Society. Contact her at carole.
 goble@manchester.ac.uk.
