 0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEENovember/December 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
103bookshelfEditor: Warren Keuffel 
wkeuffel@computer.org
In Extreme Programming, customers writeuser stories describing the features they
want, while developers estimate the time re-
quired to develop those features. User sto-
ries serve the same purpose as traditional

requirements specifications, but their styleand level of detail are different. Understanding

those differences is a major challenge in working

with user stories. User Stories Applied: For AgileSoftware Developmentexplores user stories ex-tensively, discussing common misunderstandings

and integration with other XP aspects.
Requirements elicitation vs. story gathering
This five-part book begins by discussing howto get started writing stories. Author Mike Cohn
encourages participants to communicate early,

clarifying story contents while keeping the pro-
ject on track. The book is practical, addressing
different challenges to successful story gatheringand ways to deal with common questions. Cohnexplains how to painlessly plan and manage the
use of stories within different software projects.User Stories Appliedargues against tradi-tional requirements gathering, called require-ments elicitation, because system functionalitiesare rarely easily captured. The traditional ap-
proach can miss some requirements, but in story
gathering, they evolve over time as the project
progresses and team members communicate and
understand more. Cohn states that the IEEE 830
requirements specifications are different from
user stories due to their error-prone recording

process, delay in cost estimation, and focus on
fulfilling a requirements list rather than the in-
tended userÕs goals. He also says that stories dif-

fer from use cases and scenarios in their scope,
purpose, and level of detail. Use cases and sce-
narios cover a larger scope and focus on imple-
mentation rather than business goals.Strengths and weaknessesCohn defines each team memberÕs responsi-
bilities in realizing the story-centered activities.
He doesnÕt just tell you what to do during the

development process but how to do it without
ambiguity. He shares his industry experiences

of projects as well as story-driven development
failures and successes, showing that XP pro-
jects are people oriented and that team mem-
bers must tailor some activities to their own en-
vironment. Chapters end with questions that
test reader understanding. The book also con-
tains pointers to resourceful related Web sites
UnderstandingStory-Driven
DevelopmentPr
ocessesMoshood Omolade SaliuUser Stories Applied:For Agile Software Development
by Mike Cohn, Addison-Wesley, 2004,
ISBN 0-321-20568-5, 268 pp., US$34.99.ÒJava: An Absolute ReadÓby Art Sedighi
A review of Absolute Javaby Walter Savitch.
ÒGuiding the Future of Legacy CodeÓ
by Adam Geras, MichaelSmith, and James Miller
A review of 
Working Effectively with Legacy Code
by Michael C.Feathers.www.computer.org/software/bookshelf
ONLINE REVIEWS 104IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
BOOKSHELF(but it unfortunately lacks a glossary). The book has concrete examples
throughout. Cohn presents an exam-

ple of a comprehensive, hypothetical,
real-world software project in Part 4
and illustrates how to develop an ini-

tial stories set, carry out the estima-

tion process, and plan the release.My main criticism is the length. ItÕs no
doubt a valuable book, but Cohn could

have easily omitted some information
without compromising the message. For
example, Chapter 13 (ÒWhy User Sto-

ries?Ó) presents no new material.
However, I enjoyed reading 
User Sto-ries Appliedand strongly recommend itto anyone involved in an XP project.
The book remains true to XPÕs spiritÑ

its writing style is simple, itÕs easy to fol-

low, and it guides readers through

working with stories. You donÕt have to

be an expert to understand the book;

even end users can flip through it and

understand their crucial responsibilities
in making projects successful.
Moshood Omolade Saliuis a PhD candidate incomputer science and a member of the Laboratory for Software

Engineering Decision Support at the University of Calgary,

Canada. Contact him at saliu@cpsc.ucalgary.ca.
The Grid AlmanacShubhashis SenguptaTheGrid 2:Blueprint for a New
Computing Infrastructure, edited by
Ian Foster and Carl Kesselman, Mor-
gan Kaufmann, 2003, ISBN 1-55860-
933-4, 748 pp., US$59.95.The set of technologies collectivelyknown as grid computing has the poten-

tial to become the next distributed com-
puting paradigm. As a software infra-

structure, grids allow flexible, seamless

sharing of a heterogeneous network of

resources to achieve higher throughput
of compute- and data-intensive tasks.
Equally important, as a framework, grids

usher in virtualization at the application

and infrastructure layers to maximize en-
terprise resourcesÕ utilization. It would be
wrong to ascribe a single motivating fac-
tor for adopting grids or to investigate a
single technology element for grid de-
scription. The Grid 2: Blueprint for aNew Computing Infrastructureweavestogether different grid computing con-
cepts, contexts, usage, frameworks, ar-
chitecture, applications, and infra- struc-
turesÑand it does a remarkable job at
that. I canÕt think of a more comprehen-

sive volume that addresses the entire

spectrum of grid issues and technologies.
Building the case for GridThe Grid 2is a compilation of essays
by prominent researchers and practition-
ers. The first chapters set the context and
imperatives from the e-sciences and en-

terprise points of view. The frameworks

section, which presents gridsÕ anatomy
and physiology, looks like the gist of Ian

FosterÕs famous papers.
The next several chapters discuss e-sciences grid applications, such as the dis-

tributed aircraft maintenance environ-
ment, telepresence, data federation, insilicodrug discovery experiments, anddigital image analysis. A notable inclu-

sion is emergent game technologies
(www.butterfly.net), a successful com-

mercial grid implementation of multi-
player and distributed online games.
The architecture section introducesservice-oriented architecture and the
Open Grid Services Architecture, a

stateful Web services extension for grid 

services. It also introduces the Globus
toolkit, a reference implementation of
OGSA and frameworks for resource
management, data management, dis-
covery and information services, and
grid security. The essays discussÑalbeit

at a high levelÑreliable remote execu-
tion, resource coallocation, advance
reservation and description, and provi-
sioning and monitoring for service-level
agreements. Remaining sections discuss data and
knowledge, including access, integration
and management, and grid tools, includ-

ing grid programming models and appli-

cation execution environments. Chapters
look at parallel programming languages

(and frameworks such as the Grid Analy-

sis and Display System) and component
technologies and their suitability in the
grid environment. The book also dis-
cusses grid performance management
and the grid infrastructure, including
multisite grid production, links with P2P
technologies, and compute and network
elements at the grid fabric layer.
Not a Òhow toÓ bookThe Grid 2traverses the breadth ofgrid technologies and use cases rather

than delving into specific technology or

implementation details. Although chap-
ters cover almost every grid topic, thereÕs

room for improvement. The Data Grids
section is thin and doesnÕt discuss poten-

tial enterprise application areas such as

data mining and distributed query pro-

cessing. Readers learn a lot about e-sci-

ences grid applications, but the corre-

sponding industry application examples

(such as batch applications in computa-

tional finance) are conspicuous by their
absence. I expected a more elaborate

treatise on grid fabric technologies (such

as InfiniBand) and protocols (such as grid

resource allocation and management)
and a chapter on commercial grid vendor
offerings. However, the book is already

voluminous; including these topics
would have made the size unmanageable.
The Grid 2provides excellent back-ground coverage and pointers for further
exploration. ItÕs a notable contribution

to demystifying grid computing technol-
ogy basics. My colleagues and I have

benefited immensely from this excellent
reference book, and IÕd recommend it to
all grid researchers and practitioners.Shubhashis Senguptais a principal researcher atSETLabs Infosys Technologies. Contact him at shubhashis_

sengupta@Infosys.com.Handbooks for Software ManagersFernando Berzal
Software Engineering Handbook,by Jessica Keyes, Auerbach Publica-
tions, 2003, ISBN 0-8493-1479-8, 858
pp., US$139.95.TheSoftware Project ManagerÕs
Handbook:Principles That Work at
 November/December 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
105BOOKSHELFWork, 2nd ed.
, by Dwayne Phillips,John Wiley &Sons, 2004, ISBN 0-471-

67420-6, 504 pp., US$73.50.A well-written handbook can be an
excellent toolÑa concise, extensive, and

portable reference. Two recent hand-

books address software managers with
varying degrees of success.
Covering too much groundAt more than 850 pages, 
SoftwareEngineering Handbookcontains awealth of information about successful
software development projects. Its three

sections are different enough in content
and style that they could be three differ-
ent volumes, each focusing on practical
information for the software manager. 
Software Engineering Handbooktries to introduce too many concepts at
the same time. The first section com-
bines useful, practical advice, interviews,
and surveys with an oversimplified, bi-
ased software engineering introduction.
An otherwise excellent chapter on the
importance of focusing on user needs
and involvement also contains a poor re-
view of traditional methodologies and
an XP introduction that lacks critical
analysis. An outdated overview of ob-
ject-oriented design methodologies does-
nÕt even mention UML. Jessica Keyes in-

adequately covers agile development
processes and object-oriented tech-
niques, but her clear, concise guidelines,

practical checklists, extensive comments
on metrics, and pointers to valuable,
lesser-known techniques are worthwhile.
The second section includes 45 shortchapters on different techniques, guide-
lines, philosophies, and studies for soft-
ware development managers, including

chapters on software metrics, estimation
methods, quality programs, peopleware
issues, reuse models, and computer-aided

software engineering tools. The material
comes from well-known authors, includ-

ing Barry Boehm and Lawrence Putnam,

and improvement programs in top-notch
companies, including Hewlett-Packard,
Digital Equipment Corp., AT&T, Mo-

torola, and Pricewaterhouse Coopers.The catalog of so-called Òquality and
productivity techniquesÓ might be useful
if youÕre looking for alternatives to your
current development practices since itcontains key points behind some classic

software engineering works. However,

most chapters refer to techniques popu-
lar in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
The final sectionÑnearly 400 pagesÑ
has templates and complete sample
documents, surveys, and a detailed

function-point counting guide. Com-
plete documents, which conventional
textbooks usually lack, are useful for
properly using feasibility studies, pro-
ject plans, and system specifications.
You can easily customize the sample

surveys to fit your own development
environment.As Deependra Moitra said in a previ-
ous book review (Mar./Apr. 2004) and

Robert Glass reiterated in his Loyal Op-
position column (July/Aug. 2004), most
software engineering books cluster
around a unique point of view. 
SoftwareEngineering Handbook offers some ma-terial that standard software engineering
books donÕt have. However, Keyes aims

too high in trying to offer a complete
guide. The result is a volume of three sep-
arate books thatÕs probably too expen-

siveÑand too unselective.A useful guide for novice managers
The Software Project ManagerÕs Hand-
bookclearly explains what it takes to be agood software project manager. As Alis-

tair Cockburn said, Òsoftware develop-
ment is a (resource-limited) cooperative
game of invention and communication.Ó
As such, Òpeople issuesÓ are more impor-

tant to a software projectÕs success than

technology itself. However, because such

projects have limited resources, managers
must keep a keen business perspective to
build the right software. Fortunately, au-

thor Dwayne Phillips describes sound
management principles that you can use
to tailor your development processes.You wonÕt find undiscovered man-
agement secrets here but discussions of
often forgotten facts. For example, any
managerÕs main responsibility is to cre-

ate and maintain a good work environ-
ment. That involves facilitating team-

work and personal interaction, being
available to employees, and focusing
on tasks more than on particular tools.Phillips organizes the book accordingto four basic management principles:
Choosing the right balance betweenpeople, process, and product is a context-
dependent decision.Managers mustchoose the right development process for
a project. Waterfall, evolutionary, and

spiral processes all have sweet spots and

are best in different situations.Managers must help team members
maintain a shared project vision.ItÕs easy
to promote visibility with low-cost solu-
tions, such as displaying relevant project
information on walls with whiteboards,
sticky notes, and posters.Configuration management, a keyCMMLevel 2 process area, helps to or-

ganize people into efficient, effective

groups.Phillips discusses configurationmanagement more extensively than any

other technique, reminding us that itÕs an

understood area in software engineering.Use standards (particularly IEEEstandards) judiciously.
As guidelines, not
strict rulebooks, they save time and
money by not reinventing the wheel and
by avoiding costly omissions. The bookÕs

anecdotes vividly illustrate how forget-

ting basic principles can lead to disaster.
The Software Project ManagerÕs
Handbookcovers day-by-day manage-ment practices, basic principles, and a
meticulous run-through of the software
development lifecycle phases. However, I

didnÕt like the lengthy, reiterative final

chapter, which uses a cookbook style to

describe sample projects with different
lifecycle models. Nonetheless, this how-
to guide might be useful for pragmatic,
busy people.PhillipsÕ succinct explanations makethis handbook a first-rate information
source for novice project managers. It
presents useful techniques, from BuzanÕs

mind maps, V-charts, and Gilb charts, to

earned-value tracking, slip-lead charts,

and Rayleigh models. Their coverage is

shallow, given the bookÕs length, but each

chapter has relevant references for addi-

tional information. As Phillips states, Òan

informed manager is more likely to suc-

ceed,Ó and this handbook is a good start-
ing point.Fernando Berzal 
is an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science and AI at the University of
Granada, Spain, and cofounder of iKor Consulting, a small IT
services and consulting firm. Contact him at berzal@acm.org
. Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
