 36IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEEAdopting agile practices is a process of con-
tinuous learning and improvement. The tran-

sition required hard work, intense focus, and

strict discipline. As a team, we discovered

many things about ourselves, our process, and
our products. Every discovery revealed a bet-

ter understanding of what it takes to success-
fully deliver software at a sustainable pace. By telling our story, we hope to help others
in the software industry successfully transition

to agile development. The time is right for the

software development community to improve

its historically low success rate, and agile de-
velopment might provide the answer.
Starting down the agile path
People assume that a company that designsand builds project management software has

all the knowledge and tools necessary to con-

tinuously perform software development flaw-
lessly. The truth is, we struggle just like every-
one else.
Primavera has its roots in construction andengineering. Our culture supported the com-
monly used waterfall development approach,
and the development team worked hard over
the years to distribute high-quality releases to
a growing, diverse market as quickly as possi-
ble. The team followed the typical cycle,

which usually resulted in working late nights
and weekends in an attempt to finish projects
on time. PrimaveraÕs project managers typically used
a command-and-control philosophyÑa few
people, usually those farthest from the action,

made the decisions without directly involving

the developers doing the actual work. Further-
more, relationships between the development
team and other departments began to deterio-

rate because expectations were seldom ful-
focus 1Primavera Gets Agile: A Successful Transition to Agile
DevelopmentPrimavera Systems provides enterprise project portfolio manage-

ment solutions that help customers manage their projects, pro-
grams, and resources. Our development organization employs 90

business analysts, programmers, testers, documenters, and project
managers. When we decided to improve how we build software and in-

crease the quality of life for everyone on the team, we found our answer in

agile software development. 
adapting agilityBob Schatz and Ibrahim Abdelshafi, Primavera SystemsPrimaveraÕs
development team
is a model for
others looking 
to adopt agile

processes. Learn
how to deliver high-
quality software
while improving
your teamÕs quality

of life. filled. So, in conjunction with a leadership
change in 2001, we took a hard look at the

many issues we had to resolve with respect to

the organization, its people, and its processes.
In particular, we had to improve the com-

panyÕs perceptions of its own development

team, and the team itself had to reduce its

deep-rooted dependency on the organizational
hierarchy and break down functional silos
within the department.
We started by identifying and then syn-
chronizing the vision and values driving our
initiatives. We set out to be a world-class de-

velopment team, focused on our customers

and recognized within industry not only for
our products but also for how we developed
them. We also hoped to create an environment

where we could learn and grow, explore our

creativity, and have fun.
Changes made in the first year positively af-
fected the team and started to repair relation-

ships in the company. We also moved into a

new office space, which for many symbolized a

new beginning. We began working on team

building, learning how to work better across

functional teams. We also enforced a set of

shared values using the Fish! Philosophy to help
establish desired behaviors.
1Everything we did moved us one step closerto our vision, but several nagging questions re-
mained: Why do software development pro-

fessionals repeat the same ritual over and over
again with the same painful results? Why do
we push ourselves to exhaustion, working 18-
hour days, seven days a week, to deliver soft-
ware that many users donÕt really appreciate?

Why do we repeatedly lead people down that
same path?Despite the changes weÕd made, followingthe development of a software release in

March 2003, we r
ealized it was time for amore significant change. After working to ex-
haustion, we celebrated our victory, thinking

we had delivered a great release. Then we dis-

covered a different perception outside of de-
velopmentÑothers thought the release lacked
features and had quality issues and usability

problems. This resulted in feelings of frustra-
tion, disappointment, and apathy for the de-
velopment team. We needed to be able to up-

date priorities and features on the basis of
shifting market needs, and we needed to get

more people involved in the development

process. We needed to be agile.
Discovering and implementingScrum
Adopting an agile process began with ourwillingness to take risks. We knew we might

fail, but nobody wanted to take on another
project using the current development process.
We started reading about iterative develop-
ment to get some ideas and found an overview
of a process called 
Scrum. It comprised a set of
project management principles based on small
cross-functional self-managed teams (
Scrumteams), 30-day iterations (sprints), and 40-hour work weeks. The process involves having each Scrum
team and product owner work together at thebeginning of each sprint to define the sprintÕs

goals. The product owner,  typically  someone

from the marketing department, acts as the
product manager. He or she determines which

features must be implemented in a release to sat-
isfy the market needs. Additionally, each team

has a Scrum masterwho coaches the teamthrough the process and removes any obstacles.
Each day, the teams hold a 15-minute stand-up

meeting and each team member states his or her
accomplishments for the previous day and plans
for the current day as well as any obstacles pre-
venting the team from doing its work. The
Scrum masterÕs primary role is to remove such

obstacles, enabling the team to remain focused. Each iteration concludes with a sprint re-view, in which the team demonstrates its ac-complishments to the stakeholders, product
owners, customers, and other department repre-
sentatives. The review provides an opportunity
to receive constructive feedback, which helps
shape and refine the product backlog. Because Scrum acts as a wrapper aroundexisting development processes, it can work

with any existing methodologies you follow.

We felt it would complement rather than clash

with our culture, so the management team in

development met to discuss our chances of

success with agile and Scrum. We then went a

step further and called Ken Schwaber, one of

ScrumÕs creators.
2After visiting our office andlearning more about our culture, Ken was not

only confident that Scrum could work for
usÑhe agreed to be our coach.One of the first things we 
didnÕt
do wasstart telling everyone that we planned to use a
new process. We didnÕt want to make people

nervous or apprehensive, and we wanted to
give them time to adjust to the changes. Plus,
May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
37Because Scrum acts as a wrapperaround existingdevelopmentprocesses, itcan work withany existingmethodologiesyou follow. 
 You need a
sponsorÑsomeone whoÕswilling to puteverything onthe line and iscommitted tomoving to agile.38IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
when you run around announcing your newprocess and all its benefits, you can quickly set
unrealistic expectations. 
Instead, Ken started by holding a workshopfor the entire development team, talking about

agile development and ScrumÕs principles.

Then we held a training session to certify 15
Scrum masters.Although we presented Scrum as the solu-
tion to our problems, reaction was mixed. Peo-

ple were uncomfortable with a change of this

magnitude, because they worried how their

roles and responsibilities would change. They

also questioned who would provide direction;
they wanted creativity and freedom but werenÕt

necessarily ready to take on such responsibility.

Regardless of these concerns, we knew this was
the right thing to do and thus were committed

to making the necessary changes. 
Tips for moving to agile
One of the first discoveries we made is that
you need a sponsorÑsomeone whoÕs willing

to put everything on the line and is committed
to moving to agile. Someone has to stand up
to the critics, encourage the leaders, and com-
municate the teamÕs vision. 
For anyone leading the transition to ag-ile, here are some tips we learned from our
experience. Use objective coaching. When undertaking asignificant transition, itÕs extremely helpful to

get honest, objective feedback from an outside

source. Coaching helped enforce a learning
cultureÑwe would iteratively learn new tech-

niques, try them, and see where we could im-

prove. When you ÒliveÓ in the environment
every day, you can miss little things that make

a big difference.Focus on teamwork. Teamwork and team
building are critical to establishing self-man-

aging teams. Team colocation is a real boost to

productivity. As managers learn to properly

delegate to teams, they should shift their focus

from tasks and assignments to team dynamics.
Teamwork is what makes agile work so well,

but getting teams to perform their best re-

quires a lot of attention.
Use the established agile language. 
Many or-ganizations, in their efforts to adopt new tech-

niques, try to soften the blow by adapting thelanguage to something more familiar in the
culture. This could be a mistake when imple-

menting agile. Its language differs from what

we know and recognize in traditional develop-
ment, but using the new language forces peo-
ple to think in new ways and helps foster cre-
ativity. If you change the agile language to

match what was previously known, people
tend to slip back into their old ways.Get executive support. Unlike other initiatives,such as ISO and CMM (which often come in
a top-down directive from management), agile

is growing in a bottom-up fashion. Adopting
agile, or implementing any significant change,
requires an executiveÕs sincere support. It can

be a bumpy ride until things settle down, and
having executive support lets the learning take
hold despite any problems or failures.DonÕt work overtime. One of the key motiva-
tions for moving to agile is its ability to create
a sustainable pace for the development team.
The death marches must stop! We need to

quickly and firmly deal with software teamsÕ

addiction to overtime. We can consistently de-

liver high-quality, complex systems without

working nights and weekends.Learn to negotiate and set expectations. 
In ag-ile, negotiation and expectation-setting are on-
going activities, because the team gathers feed-
back and demonstrates the product after each

iteration. Negotiation skills become critical as

team members learn to work with each other

and with developers outside the team. Watch for trouble. 
Watch for subtle trouble
signs early in the adoption. As with any tran-
sition, people will always look for reasons to
return to what they know. Managers and lead-

ers must give positive reinforcement to keep
people in a learning mode. By continuously
trying new things, creativity will take hold and
team performance will rise.
Expect hard work. There is no silver bulletÑsaying youÕre agile doesnÕt make you agile.

Despite what many might say, thereÕs no easy

answer to adopting agile. It requires a change
in how we work as an industry and will man-
ifest itself in different ways in every organiza-
tion. The best we can do is to learn fromÑand

continuously improve uponÑour experiences.  A tool for managing the Scrum
projectDespite what people might think about ag-ile, it requires discipline and strong project
management. In many organizations, project
management tools provide insight into a proj-
ectÕs progress. Primavera provides a compre-

hensive suite for project portfolio manage-

ment, which we used effectively to manage our

first Scrum project. The suiteÕs Project Man-

agement module captured the release backlog
and represented each of its features as a top-

level Work Breakdown Structure
element.Then we created a 
resource teamto representeach Scrum team on the project. Figure 1 il-

lustrates the release backlog, captured in the
WBS View, along with a list of teams assigned

to each feature on the backlog.
At the beginning of a sprint, each Scrumteam selected individual features from the re-

lease backlog by assigning itself to the corre-
sponding WBS element. The Scrum team then

broke down each feature into detailed require-

ments and added them as lower-level WBS el-

ements. Team members then broke down each

requirement into multiple 8- to 16-hour tasks

and assigned themselves to these tasks.At the end of each day, team members up-
dated the remaining work for each of their
backlog tasks using the lightweight, Web-based
Team Member modulethat we created (see Fig-

ure 2). They also used the tool to create and

modify assignments for additional features on

the release backlog. The tool fed the updated

remaining durations back into the release back-

log. As the team completed a feature or re-

quirement, the tool marked the corresponding
WBS element as complete in the release view.
The Scrum masters used the updated infor-May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
39Figure 2. The TeamMember module, 
showing the original
duration for each task
on the sprint backlog,
the developer 
responsible for 
completing the 
task, and the taskÕs 
remaining duration 
at the end of each 
day of the sprint.Figure 1. A projectÕs release backlog, as 
displayed using
PrimaveraÕs Project
Management module. mation in the project to generate daily burn-downcharts for their teams. They also createdrelease burndown charts for the project, which
provided an up-to-the-day view of the projectÕs

process and its completed features. Figure 3
shows the release burndown report for the first
five sprints, captured inside the WBS view.
At the end of each sprint, the product own-
ers reviewed the release backlogÕs priorities us-

ing the WBS view and adjusted priorities and
requirements as needed. The Scrum teams be-

gan their next planning session, assigning them-
selves to the revised release backlogÕs highest-

priority items.Measuring our successIn a Scrum environment, itÕs often difficult
to measure your success against a predeter-

mined plan because Scrum lets business own-

ers adapt and change their plan every sprint.
However, measuring ScrumÕs impact based on

product quality and time to market was easy.
We experienced a 30 percent increase in
quality as measured by the number of cus-
tomer-reported defects in the first nine months

following the releaseÑ0.36 defects per KLOC
for this release versus 0.51 in the previous re-
lease. In addition to providing our customers
with a higher-quality release, the reduced num-

ber of reported defects allowed us to focus on

the next release rather than addressing exist-
ing issues.Implementing Scrum on this project alsoimproved our time to market. We had planned

to deliver two parallel releases in a risk-loaded
14 months. The flexibility that Scrum providesenabled the product owners to adjust to mar-ket conditions and consolidate the two releases
into one backlog containing the highest-value
items from both releases. We delivered this

combined release four months early. Had we

followed our traditional development process,
working on the two releases separately, we

couldnÕt have changed course midstream to de-

liver one release with the combined feature set.The true benefits of adopting Scrum on this
project, however, go beyond measuring the

number of features completed during the re-
lease cycle. We gained many intangible benefits

as a development team and as an organization. 
Benefits to the teamScrum created a long-term, sustainable pacefor the development team while significantly

improving the work environment. During the
projectÕs entire development cycle, the team

never worked overtime or weekends. Addi-

tionally, developers got to work outside their

roles to help their Scrum team achieve its
sprint goals. This teamwork made the work
environment more enjoyable for the develop-

ers and helped build trust between them,
which is fuel for high-performance teams.
Developers took ownership of the featuresthey created and took pride in showing their
work to the stakeholders during sprint re-
views. The teams also worked closely with the
product owners and consequently had a much
better understanding of their workÕs impor-

tance and the business value of the features
they were implementing. The featuresÕ design

and implementation ensured delivery of the
desired business value. Working closely with

the product owners and stakeholders gave de-
velopers more influence on the product and

what went into the release backlog.
Furthermore, there was no turnover duringthis projectÕs 10-month release cycle. One devel-

oper, two weeks away from resigning to return

to his hometown, enjoyed the new work envi-

ronment so much that he put off leaving for
more than a year. The developers came out of

this project fresh and ready to work on the next

assignment; we started the first iteration of the

next release the day after completing this release. Benefits to the businessSeeing slices implemented during eachsprint review made it easier for product own-

ers to focus on the highest-value items. In
40IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Figure 3. A releaseburndown report for 

the projectÕs first five
sprints. many cases, seeing 50 percent of the featureimplemented was sufficient to meet the desired

business value and, as a result, the product
owner could either drop the remaining re-
quirements for that feature or reduce their pri-

ority in the release backlog. Also, rather than

passing their decisions through layers of man-
agement, product owners were able to work

closely with developers during the sprint.Scrum also put the stakeholders much closer
to the work,because they saw the productevolve during monthly sprint reviews. This
gave them higher confidence in the teamÕs abil-

ity to deliver specific value in the desired time-

frame. It also made them more aware of the

changing requirements on the release backlog.
Scrum didnÕt necessarily give the stakeholders

more control of the release backlog, but it let

them provide more input to the product own-

ers early in the development process. Obstacles encounteredAlthough our first release of Scrum was asuccess, we did encounter a few problems

along the way. 
A main principle of Scrum is to show only
Òpotentially shippableÓ increments at the sprint

review. In the earlier sprints, we noticed that

the teams were too eager to show their accom-
plishments during the sprint reviews and, in
some cases, showed features that were either
not fully tested or still had high-priority bugs
pending. Instead of addressing these issues at
the beginning of the following sprint, teams
were eager to pick new items from the release
backlog so they could show them at the fol-
lowing sprint review. Over time, the backlog of

bugs grew and many of the features, while hav-

ing impressive functionality built into them,
werenÕt in shippable condition. We eventually

had to dedicate a full sprint to fixing bugs to
stabilize the product. Another issue we encountered was focusing
on short-term deliverables and, in some cases,

losing sight of the code baseÕs technical infra-

structure and long-term maintainability. We

have a stable and extensible architecture, which
helped minimize this risk, but we need to make

sure not to neglect this in future releases.Also, stakeholders were concerned with the
lack of metrics regarding the projectÕs projected

completion date. Stakeholders could clearly see
the progress made from sprint to sprint, but they
couldnÕt tell how much work remained on spe-
cific features or how much work remained untilthe release. Scrum can make it difficult to deter-

mine how far you are from release because, by

definition, the requirements change from sprint
to sprint. However, we could have better col-

lected data from the teams and created reports
for the stakeholders. The only report we gener-
ated was the release burndown, which didnÕt

sufficiently communicate the remaining work.Evaluating stakeholder feedback duringsprint reviews created additional challenges.
The stakeholders attended most sprint reviews

and provided valuable feedback, some of which

involved suggestions such as, ÒThis feature
looks great, but it would really be nice if we
could also sort by this field.Ó Developers tended

to treat these suggestions as new requirements
for the following sprint review, even though

stakeholders generally didnÕt expect them to

take the comments literally. In many cases, the

product owners werenÕt even aware that these

items were being addressed. The lesson learned

was to be more disciplined about adding feed-

back to the product backlog so that the product

owners have final say regarding the priority of

these additional requirements.
WeÕve taken several steps to address
these problem areas. First of all,
weÕre stricter in enforcing allScrum practices. There arenÕt many rules in

Scrum, but you need to adhere to the ones that

exist. We set clear criteria on what constitutes

a completed feature, and only features that fit
the criteria are shown to stakeholders at sprint
reviews. We also assisted teams in doing better

planning by helping them break out their

work at the beginning of each iterationinto

truly shippable feature increments.Furthermore, we gave priority to the codebaseÕs maintainability and extensibility by hav-

ing the product owners add technical mainte-
nance items to our current release backlog. We

then worked with them to prioritize these

items against the other features on the back-

log. This process ensures that infrastructure

maintenance items donÕt get lost in the mix

and are addressed every sprint as part of the
overall release.Finally, weÕre currently reemphasizing the
good engineering practices we had in place prior

to using Scrum as well as reducing the number of

bugs introduced early on in the development cy-May/June 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
41There arenÕtmany rules inScrum, but youneed to adhereto the ones thatexist. cle. To that end, weÕve started adopting some Ex-
treme Programming practices, such as test-driven

development and some pair programming. After
seven sprints of implementing TDD, our defect

count has dropped to less than 10 per team,which represents over a 75 percent improvementin defect rates relative to the previous release.
As a result of these improvements, the teams

can now be 
confident that theyÕre always onlyone month away from a potential releaseÑa

foundation of the Scrum development process.
The biggest lesson we learned from Scrumis that, as a team, building software is a con-

tinuous learning process. We must have the

discipline to honestly assess what weÕre doing
and not be afraid to make changes. By consis-
tently refocusing, weÕve been able to change
our process, step by step, and we continue to

make improvements every day.
References1.S.C. Lundin, H. Paul, and J. Christensen, 
Fish!: A Re-markable Way to Boost Morale and Improve Results
,Hyperion, 2000, p. 112.2.K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, 
Agile Software Develop-ment with Scrum, Series in Agile Software Develop-ment, Prentice Hall, 2002, p. 158.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
About the AuthorsBob Schatzis the vice president of development for Primavera Systems, where he leadsthe team that develops PrimaveraÕs software solutions for enterprise project, resource, and

portfolio management. His research interests are in managing the development of large enter-
prise software systems. He received his BS in computer science from Temple University and is

pursuing his MS in organizational dynamics from the University of Pennsylvania. Contact him
at bobschatz@yahoo.com.Ibrahim Abdelshafiis the director of programming for Primavera Systems. HeÕs re-
sponsible for developing the architecture to support a multiplatform, highly scalable product
that supports organizations around the world. His research interests include scaling the agile
process to an enterprise development environment. He received his MS from Carnegie Mellon
University and his MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. Contact him
at iabdelsh@primavera.com. EXECUTIVECOMMITTEE
President:
GERALD L.ENGEL* 
Computer Science & Engineering

Univ. of Conn
ecticut, Stamford
1 University Place
Stamford, CT 06901-2315

Phone: +1 203 251 8431
Fax: +1 203 251 8592
g.engel@computer.org
President-Elect:
DEBORAH M.COOPER*
Past President: 
CARL K.CHANG*
VP, Educational Activities: MURALI VARANASI€
VP, Electronic Products and Services: 

JAMES W.MOORE
(2ND VP)*VP, Conferences and Tutorials: 

YERVANT ZORIAN€

VP, Chapters Activities: 
CHRISTINA M.SCHOBER*

VP, Publications: MICHAEL R.WILLIAMS (1ST VP)*
VP, Standards Activities:
SUSAN K.(KATHY) LAND*
VP, Technical Activities: 
STEPHANIE M.WHITE€
Secretary: 
STEPHEN B.SEIDMAN*
Treasurer: 
RANGACHAR KASTURI€
2004Ð2005 IEEE Division V Dir
ector: GENE F.HOFFNAGLE€

2005Ð2006 IEEE Division VIII Director: 

STEPHEN L.DIAMOND€

2005 IEEE Division V Director-Elect: 

OSCAR N.GARCIA*

Computer Editor in Chief: DORIS L.CARVER€
Executive Director: 
DAVID W.HENNAGE€
* voting member of the Board of Governors
€nonvoting member of the Board of Governors
EXECUTIVE STAFF
Executive Director:
DAVID W.HENNAGE
Assoc. Executive Director:
ANNE MARIE KELLY
Publisher:ANGELA BURGESS
Assistant Publisher:
DICK PRICE
Director, Administration:
VIOLET S.DOAN
Director, Information Technology & Services: 

ROBERTCARE

Director, Business & Product Development: 

PETER TURNERPURPOSE
The IEEE Computer Society is the
worldÕs largest association of computing profes-

sionals, and is the leading provider of technical

information in the field.
MEMBERSHIPMembers receive the month-ly magazine Computer, discounts, and opportu-nities to serve (all activities are led by volunteer 
members). Membership is open to all IEEE
members, affiliate society members, and others

interested in the computer field.COMPUTER SOCIETY WEB SITEThe IEEE Computer SocietyÕs Web site, at 

www.computer.org
, offers information and
samples from the societyÕs publications and con-

ferences, as well as a broad range of information

about technical committees, standards, student
activities, and more. BOARD OF GOVERNORSTerm Expiring 2005:
Oscar N. Garcia, 
Mark A. Grant, Michel Israel, Rohit Kapur, 

Stephen B. Seidman, Kathleen M. Swigger, Makoto

Takizawa

Term Expiring 2006:
Mark Christensen, Alan Clements, Annie Combelles, Ann Q. Gates, 
James D. Isaak, Susan A. Mengel, Bill N. Schilit
Term Expiring 2007:
Jean M. Bacon, George V.
Cybenko, Richard A. Kemmerer, Susan K. (Kathy)

Land, Itaru Mimura, Brian M. OÕConnell, Christina
M. Schober
Next Board Meeting: 
10 June 2005, Long Beach, CA
IEEE OFFICERSPresident and CEO: 
W.CLEON ANDERSON
President-Elect: 
MICHAEL R.LIGHTNER
Past President: 
ARTHUR W.WINSTON
Executive Director: 
TBDSecretary: 
MOHAMED EL-HAWARY
Treasurer: 
JOSEPH V.LILLIE
VP, Educational Activities: 
MOSHE KAMVP, Pub. Services & Products: 
LEAH H.JAMIESON
VP, Regional Activities: 
MARC T.APTER
VP, Standards Association: 
JAMES T.CARLO
VP, Technical Activities: 
RALPH W.WYNDRUM JR.
IEEE Division V Director: 
GENE F.HOFFNAGLE
IEEE Division VIII Director: 
STEPHEN L.DIAMOND
President, IEEE-USA: 
GERARD A.ALPHONSE
COMPUTER SOCIETY OFFICESHeadquarters Office
1730 Massachusetts Ave. NW 

Washington, DC 20036-1992

Phone: +1 202 371 0101  
Fax: +1 202 728 9614
E-mail: hq.ofc@computer.org
Publications Office
10662 Los Vaqueros Cir., PO Box 3014

Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314
Phone:+1 714 8218380

E-mail: help@computer.org

Membership and Publication Orders:

Phone: +1 800 272 6657  

Fax: +1 714 821 4641
E-mail: help@computer.org
Asia/Pacific Office
Watanabe Building

1-4-2 Minami-Aoyama,Minato-ku

Tokyo107-0062, Japan

Phone: +81 3 3408 3118  

Fax: +81 3 3408 3553
E-mail: tokyo.ofc@computer.org
