 Short and Winding Road:
Software in Car Navigation Systems
Han Schaminée and Hans Aerts
Car navigation started as an embedded product in expensive cars. Then it became 
an independent box, sold aftermarket. The volume that companies like TomTom 
have been able to accumulate now allows them to pursue the automotive original 
equipment manufacturers market. 
ŠMichiel van Genuchten and Les Hatton
TOMTOM IS KNOWN 
for 
aftermarket 
navi-
gation systemsŠseparate devices sold inde-
pendently of the car. In April 2009, TomTom 
launched its ˜ rst in-dash navigation system 

(built into the dashboard by the car manu-

facturer at the factory). The system is up-
graded annually, allowing the introduction 
of new features and innovations over its life-

time. This column describes the product, its 

place in the automotive industry, and the de-
velopment of its software. 
A Short History of Car Navigation
Car navigation started as a feature of expen-
sive cars in the 1980s. The systems didn™t 
use GPS and each car manufacturer™s system 
was unique. It became a separate aftermar-

ket device about 10 years ago, when the US 

made a more accurate GPS signal available 
for civilian use, thus making navigation less 
dependent on the vehicle itself. Today, Tom-

Tom™s sales exceed 10 million devices per 

year, which is more than the two to nine mil-
lion cars that the largest car manufacturers 
sell each year. This lets TomTom invest more 

in car navigation than the typical car origi-
nal equipment manufacturer (OEM). Thus, 
TomTom can introduce new functionalities 
faster when the OEMs agree to use the syn-
ergy of aftermarket products.
Handling Different Innovation Speeds
Over the last two decades, the automotive in-
dustry has gone through an impressive turn-
around to ensure substantially higher qual-
ity levels. An example is the requirement to 

have less than a 0.01 percent failure rate at 

the car manufacturing line. A car consists of 
a large number of subassemblies from many 
different suppliers. The industry introduced 

rigid processes for architecture, validation, 

and supplier management to realize this 
breakthrough in quality. Better quality had 
been a differentiator in the market for a long 

time, but most car manufacturers have now 
achieved the same high levels. Customer dis-
satisfaction no longer comes primarily from 

quality issues, but more from slow innova-

tion, especially for functions not directly re-
lated to the car itself but to the humans in-
side (audio, communication, and so on). 
The industry is faced with different in-
novation rates for functions offered outside 
the car and there™s a growing need to rap-
idly introduce innovations such as digital 

audio, smart phones, and social media. This 
Editor: 
Michiel van Genuchten
Straumann
genuchten@ieee.org
Editor: 
Les Hatton
Kingston University

l.hatton@kingston.ac.uk
IMPACT
0740-7459/11/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE
 JULY/AUGUST 2011
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 19
 20 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/SOFTWARE
IMPACT
requires not just a way to upgrade the 
systems during the car™s lifetime, but 
also a rapid response to new concepts 
introduced by the smart phone indus
-try. Traditional development processes 
for cars and their (safety-critical) com
-ponents
1 no longer keep pace with the 
introduction of innovative concepts.
Traditional development cycles fo
-cused on timely delivery of high-quality 
products and sought the complete elim
-ination of uncertainty, both in time and 
quality. Projects typically started with 
a thick and detailed product speci˜ca
-tion designed to meet customer require
-ments four years later, followed by a 
three-year development cycle, including 
one year of validation of the ˜nal prod
-uct. The result was a high-quality prod
-uct designed to survive seven years in 
the new car catalog with a 10-year life 
cycle for the car itself. Many new cars 
have infotainment equipment based 
on technology already a decade old in 
the consumer marketŠfor example, 
cassette audio has only recently been 
phased out and MP3 introduced! 
Introducing higher speeds of innova
-tion without compromising quality re
-quires a different look at how to deal 
with project uncertainty. 
Dealing with Uncertainty
TomTom has adapted its processes in 
three areas to accommodate short lead 
times:
no waiting,
no waste, and
dealing with uncertainty.
Many projects show a very detailed 
activity plan, with clear due dates for 
each activity. Managers often feel their 
project is under control if they can en
-sure their engineers have met their 
ﬁcommittedﬂ dates. But because of 
development projects™ intrinsic uncer
-tainty, every committed date requires a 
buffer, often expressed as the difference 
between the best case and worst case. 
It comes down to human nature that 
such committed dates are seldom suc
-cessfully met.
2 We characterize our approach as an 
agile way of working (http://agileman
-ifesto.org) with a good backlog of ac
-tivities and clear reporting on progress 
aimed at a best-case target. We com
-bine this with a consolidated buffer at 
the end of the critical path, which al
-lows shorter lead times and a higher 
probability of meeting deadlines. Man
-agers should steer on buffer consump
-tion and allow their engineers to con
-sume the buffer, although it™s better to 
avoid it whenever possible. 
Traditional development cycles often 
implement a waterfall process beginning 
with a de˜ned speci˜cation that includes 
change control and documents the de
-sign before implementation and a ˜nal 
test period. Because it™s hard to predict 
consumer needs three years out owing 
to rapidly changing customer expecta
-tions, an increasing amount of change 
requests leads to a lot of wasted effort. 
We™ve substantially reduced waste 
by organizing the project in an agile 
manner, starting with the well-de˜ned 
section of the speci˜cation and leaving 
detail prioritization to the executing 
team, while maintaining close coopera
-tion with the car manufacturer. The or
-ganization should focus on making the 
best product in the market rather than 
executing the contract and speci˜cation. 
Much traditional documentation (de
-sign documents and so on) is hardly ever 
used again and can easily be replaced by 
a more compact form, giving an engi
-neer a faster introduction to the subject. 
Each project is a compromise be
-tween speci˜cation, quality, and time. 
As we mentioned, quality is very impor
-tant in the automotive industry and car 
manufacturers prefer to err on the side of 
safety. Quality requirements are there
-fore higher than the average end user 
might expect. When a tier-one supplier 
(communicating and delivering directly 
to the car OEM) is involved, this supplier 
will again raise the quality requirements 
to minimize any quality risks.
Because introducing a new car is a 
complicated project with many suppli
-ers, the design end dates for each com
-ponent must be absolutely respected. 
This implies a buffer before the com
-mitted end date and an increased lead-
time. The only way to limit this buffer 
is by adding a buffer in the speci˜ca
-tion. A standard way to achieve this is 
to split the speci˜cation into ﬁmust-doﬂ 
and ﬁnice-to-haveﬂ elements leading to 
the required buffer. By implementing 
an end-user friendly way of upgrading 
a released system with new function
-ality, organizations can reduce the im
-portance of postponing certain func
-tionality to later releases. 
Such techniques considerably helped 
TomTom achieve faster lead times 
without compromising quality. We ex
-pect that innovations in the consumer 
space will occur even faster and in˚u
-ence customer expectations for people-
 centric car functionality. Car manufac
-turers might therefore need to recon
-sider some of their own processes to 
deal with functions that have different 
innovation rates. 
Sales Volume 
 and Software Size
The size of the application software in 
TomTom Portable Navigation Devices 
(PNDs) has grown rapidly (see Fig
-ure 1). The continuous introduction of 
new features has led to a yearly code 
size growth of typically 25Œ30 percent. 
Sales volume of the PNDs grew even 
faster, allowing the required invest
-ments for all high-speed innovations. 
The ˜gures for 2009/2010 are dif˜cult 
to interpret: the automotive industry 
crisis of 2008-2010 in˚uenced the sales 
volume, and signi˜cant refactoring 
of the code base in 2010 resulted in a 
4 percent decrease in code size despite 
ever-continuing feature growth. In 
2011, the ﬁnormalﬂ growth of the code 
size has resumed again. 
  JULY/AUGUST 2011
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 21IMPACT
In comparison with previous Impact 
columns, some similarities and differ-
ences come to mind. An obvious com-
parison is the one on the Bosch software 

in automotive systems.
1 A similarity 
is that both Bosch and TomTom have 
a higher volume than the largest car 
OEM. The route each company took to 

achieve that higher volume, however, 

is completely different. A major differ-
ence is that Bosch software is safety 
critical and closely integrated with 

dedicated integrated circuits for the 

automotive industry. It thus follows a 
different development approach. Tom-
Tom software development looks more 

like that of mobile phones
3 than safety-
critical ˚ ight management software
4 or medical equipment.
5TomTom has substantially in-

creased the purchasing of 
in-dash navigation systems 
by some 400 percent because of the 
signi˜ cantly lower price of entry. It 

achieved this lower price using existing 
consumer product technologies while 
meeting automotive quality require-

ments. From TomTom™s point of view, 

this has resulted in a much larger share 
of the market leading to a shared num-

ber-two position in 2010. 
References
 1. J. Mössinger, ﬁSoftware in Automotive 
Systems,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 27, no. 2, 2010, 
pp. 92Œ94.
 2. E. Goldratt, 
Critical Chain
, North River 
Press, 1997.
 3. L. Bouchard, ﬁMultimedia Software for 
Mobile Phones,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 27, no. 
3, 2010, pp. 8Œ10.
 4. D. Avery, ﬁThe Evolution of Flight Manage-
ment Systems,ﬂ
 IEEE Software
, vol. 28, no. 1, 
2011, pp. 11Œ13.
 5. L. Ho˚ and and J. van der Linden, ﬁSoftware 
in MRI Scanners,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 27, 
no. 4, 2010, pp. 87Œ89.
HAN SCHAMINÉE 
is senior vice president of 
engineering at TomTom™s Business Unit Automotive. 
Contact him at han.schaminee@tomtom.com.
HANS AERTS 
is vice president of software 
development at TomTom™s Business Unit Automotive. 

Contact him at hans.aerts@tomtom.com.
Sales volume and software size02,000,0004,000,0006,000,0008,000,00010,000,00012,000,00014,000,00020042005200620072008200920102011YearSales volume0
2,000,0004,000,0006,000,0008,000,000
10,000,00012,000,00014,000,000Lines of codeSales volumeLines of codeFIGURE 1. 
Growth of TomTom portable navigation device sales volume and code size over 
the years.
Learn about computing history 
and the people who shaped it.COMPUTING 
THENhttp://computingnow.

computer.org/
ctSelected CS articles and columns 

are also available for free at 

http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
