 34IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 20010740-7459/01/$10.00 © 2001 IEEErequirementsÑgathered by the previous con-
sultancyÑthat had outlived their build-by

date. On the other side (the hard place), was a

client that, acknowledging that it had
switched horses midstream, was willing to
scale back on functionality but refused to
budge on delivery date. In short, Thought-

Works found itself with a mere two months to

both turn the project around and deliver a
business-ready application. For the purposes

of this article, weÕll say that the delivery date
was February 2nd, Groundhog Day.
The application under construction wasWeb-enabled and powered by Enterprise Java

Beans. Although the system had a smart n-tier architecture, its innards were seriously ill.
The business objects served as little more
than mappers to the database. The session
bean methodsÑthe applicationÕs brain
trustÑwere superlong tendrils of procedural
code. The written codeÑits style, semantics,and legibilityÑvaried wildly depending onthe area of the application one happened to
be nosing about in. Tests, where they existed,

were expected to fail. Building and deploy-
ment were a near mystery to more than half

the development staff.Possibly because of the problemÕs sheer
size and pervasiveness, ThoughtWorks was

slow to realize how fundamentally bad things

were. Even when the danger became appar-
ent to the consultants on site, the team lead
and project manager had to compete with
several other projects for overstretched re-
sources. However, once the situation was

clearly stated and understood, Thought-
Works responded with a swift and sustained

effort. The problem areas in the application
were identified, and developers with relevant
expertise were brought in. After two long

months, the project delivered on time. But we

didnÕt stop there.
focusRecovery, Redemption, 
and Extreme ProgrammingPeter Schuh, ThoughtWorks
The authorrecounts the tale
of a development
projectÕs
rejuvenation
through XP: the
successes, the
shortcomings,
and, ultimately,

the lessons
learned.In the autumn of the New Economy, my employer, ThoughtWorks,
recognized that one of its projects had maneuvered itself into a bit of

a jam. In the software development industry it is well understoodÑ

and occasionally admittedÑthat such situations occur. What is less
well-known, however, is how to address them. For this particular project,

the prospects were not good. On one side (the rock), was a development

team both behind schedule and coding to more than a yearÕs worth of 
reports from the field
 Damage controlI was one of four ÒThoughtWorkersÓ who
began flying to the client site in early Decem-
berÑjust two months prior to go-liveÑto as-
sist the six developers already on site. Our
mandate was to slap the application into
shape no matter the cost. Full of vigor and
with little appreciation for the hundred miles

of bad road ahead of us, we saw this as an op-
portunity to test-drive Extreme Programming
in a project recovery setting.
By mid-January, conference-room dinners
were the norm, all-nighters customary, and

weekends worked through. Although we
bought, distributed, and even read and
quoted Extreme Programming Explained,1we disregarded practically every XP princi-pleÑfrom the 40-hour workweek, to testing,
to continuous integration.As the severity of the matter quickly be-came apparent, we were forced to concede
that the impending deadline did not allow us
the luxury of XP. Instead, we cut up the appli-

cation and parceled it out by areas of expert-
ise: servlets, documentation generation, busi-

ness engines, database, and so on. Deemed

untenable, the servlet package was all but

rewritten. Elsewhere, refactoring became an
opportunistÕs endeavor. If a developer decided

that refactoring would take less time than
complementing ugly code with more of the
same, then that developer refactored. Other-
wise, we sucked it up and coded ugly. This was

a humbling exercise that engendered such
memorable comment tags as ÒItÕs 3:30 in the

morning. Please forgive me.Ó This was found

atop a 150-line switch statement.Coding standards and test writing were
goals we aspired to and occasionally met. In
lieu of an object model or static documenta-

tion, one developer scrubbed the database
clean and reverse-engineered it into a data

model. The model was maintained regularly,

and it served as the applicationÕs most reli-

able high-level specifications.The 70-plus-hour workweeks would nothave persisted had developer pampering not

been administered by both the project man-
ager and the top levels of ThoughtWorks man-

agement. Conference-room dinners featured
catered sushi, the project manager graciously
made 2 a.m. ice cream runs, and the company
paid for last-minute, full-fare tickets for hur-
ried trips home. ThoughtWorksÕ management

made it clear, through words, acts, and expen-
ditures, that it understood and genuinely ap-
preciated the sacrifices the team was making.In the end, it all came together the last weekof January. The application did its part by

bursting nearly every seam on the 30th, forc-

ing a 24-hour go/no-go decision. The team re-

doubled its efforts. Things improved. Func-

tional tests passed. We performed the last

build six hours prior to go-live. Four hours

later, 5,000 rows of data were sneaked into the

database. After eight weeks, we delivered the
systemÑminus some requirements and plus a
few too many bugsÑon time. One member of
the team best expressed the general consensus:

ÒIÕm glad I did that once. I never want to do it
again.Ó The nuts and bolts of code reformOn 3 February, the system was live, and we
were all well aware of its shortcomings. The
client had a long list of functionality for us to
add, not to mention the requirements it had
dropped to meet go-live. Meanwhile, the
team was determined to refactor the applica-
tion into something we werenÕt embarrassed

to leave our names on. The team lead and
project manager negotiated with the client for
time to apply Òease of maintenanceÓ to the
system (a senior developer proposed the term
in response to the suggestion that Òrefactor-

ingÓ not appear on timesheets). With the

worst behind us and an easier road ahead,
several team members (but by no means all)
decided that this refactoring phase would be
an opportune time to begin adopting XP.
Walking out of the starting gate
The switch to XP was a slow, unsteady
process. Not only was the current code base a
reluctant conspirator, but only perhaps a

third of the team really supported adopting

XP. Another third was impartial, and, as

might be expected, the final third was quietly
but vehemently wishing that all this extreme
nonsense would just go away. What began as

lone developers and pairs taking some first
steps toward agile processesÑwith patience
and determinationÑbecame a teamwide push
to adopt XP.
Testing and building both benefited from
single-handed accomplishments. The few ex-
isting tests were unreliable, largely because

they depended on nonrestorable data that had
either been altered or dropped from the data-
base. One developer set out to base the exist-November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
35 ing tests on data that could be replenished,then bundled those tests into a JUnit-based
test suite (see the JUnit Web site, www.ju-

nit.org). Another developer streamlined the
build process, reducing it to a few simple

steps that could be quickly learned, letting
every developer on the team perform a build
before checking inÑour first step toward
continuous integration. Some developers paired up to take onmore traditional development tasks. We at-

tacked the buggiest sections of the application
first. Because we knew new functional re-
quests were not a long away off, refactoring,
for the most part, was pursued gently.

Mediocre code was improved upon when
convenient, while truly untenable code was
gutted and rewritten. From a teamwide per-
spective, the senior developers advocated a
unified coding standard, JavaDoc-based com-
menting (see the JavaDoc Tool homepage,

http://java.sun.com/j2se/javadoc/index.html),
and unit tests for all refactored or new code.Learning from successes and building on mo-mentumShortly after Groundhog Day, two devel-
opers began applying a constants pattern to
the application. Because the constants, as they
are wont to be, were used throughout the ap-

plication, the switch was neither smooth nor
painless. The general consensus was that
refactoring was necessary and that the pattern
was solid for both current use and extensibil-
ity. The team agreed, however, that we needed

better communication for future refactoring.
The result was an increase in email Òadvi-
sories,Ó pick-up development discussions,
and regularly scheduled code reviews.The teamÕs analysts had readily accepted
the story card as their new document, both as
a way to distribute functionality requests to
the developers and as a basis on which to ne-
gotiate with the client. When the analysts
handed the first batch of cards to develop-
ment, some pairs and some individuals began
cleaning up the portions of the application as-
sociated with their cards. Tests began to ap-

pear in the newly refactored areas of code,
and these were added to the main suite. One
developer made the build process portable, so
everyone could build locally prior to checking
in. The build machine was moved from an oc-
cupied developerÕs space to an otherwise

empty cube. The number of builds per day in-creased, and the number of broken buildsplummeted.The one insurmountable impediment we
encountered after Groundhog Day was the
clientÕs lack of cooperation in XP. Without

objecting to the shift, the client nonetheless
refused to participate in the process in any

meaningful way. The teamÕs project manager

and analyst (both ThoughtWorkers) assumed

the role of the XP customer by writing story

cards, providing domain knowledge on de-
mand, and communicating decisions. How-
ever, the clientÕs absence in these activities

certainly affected us. Without a decision

maker to sit in the same room with the team,
we could never fully implement the planning

game, nor could we convince the customer to

make official iterations more frequent than
every three months. The irony of all this was

that ThoughtWorks was doing development

on site. The client was paying to fly multiple

ThoughtWorkers out every week, only to

house them several office buildings down the
road from any potential users.
Making it up as you go alongBy April, nearly all the functionality we
had originally promised the client had been
coded into the application and had passed
user acceptance testing. Once it was clear the
project was no longer in imminent danger, a

few team members turned their attention to
the more fundamental aspects of develop-
ment. Innovations in these areas furthered
our adoption of XP.
The first crucial change was the mandate
of a nightly greenbar. (A 
greenbaris thegraphically displayed result of a successful
test run in JUnit; conversely, a 
redbaris the re-sult of any test that fails.) It took weeks to
whittle the error log down and see our first

greenbar. When this occurred, we tacked a

calendar to the wall alongside the build ma-
chine and recorded the result of each dayÕs

last build with a red or green sticky note.
With this highly visible performance measure

serving as a reminder, developers began to

work toward nightly greenbars. Then, about
a month after the calendar was posted, it
veered dangerously into the red, just as a ma-
jor delivery date was approaching. After five
days of consistent redbars, one developer
sounded the alarm, emailing a teamwide plea
for a greenbar. Having been alerted to the sit-

uation, the analysts and project manager be-We attacked the buggiestsections of the applicationfirst.36IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001 gan pressuring development to promote onlybuilds that greenbarred, and the calendar
moved back into the green. In the end, the calendar served two pur-poses. First, by providing a simple, straight-
forward metric, it gave development a clear
and attainable performance goal. Second, be-
cause it was viewable and easily understood
by the rest of the team, it served as a failsafe

mechanism for development. When the devel-
opersÑin a heads-down coding frenzyÑ
failed to follow their own rules, the other

team members could push them back in line. Once again, we improved the buildprocess, this time simplifying it to a push-of-
a-button procedure that eased the adoption of
continuous integration.2Possibly as impor-tant, we automated build promotionÑfrom
the development environment, through inter-
nal testing, to user acceptance testing (UAT).

Automation started with code checkout and
ended with the emailing of unit test results.
This meant that even analysts could promote
builds, and they did. Guided by the auto-
mated test results, which ran on every build,

an analyst could promote the latest greenbar
build into a testing environment. This saved
development the hassle of being on call to
perform the task and resulted in quicker feed-
back on new functionality and bug fixes.Finally, several developers teamed up to de-
vise and code a test-data generator, dubbed

ObjectMother.
3Through a handful of simplemethod calls, this utility provided a complete,
valid, and customizable structure of business

objects (think of an invoice: its lines, all related
charges, remit to, bill to). ObjectMother
yielded numerous benefits. Because it made the
test suite database-independent, we could swap
UAT and even production databases in and out

of the development environment, letting devel-
opers code and debug against real data. More-
over, ObjectMother drastically simplified the

creation of test data within code, resulting in
three major benefits. First, developers were
much less likely to cheat and base their tests on
supposedly persistent data in the test database.
Second, it became much easier to convert ex-
isting tests that did rely on persistent data. Fi-
nally, developers began writing more tests.
Past the finish line and still runningTo reduce travel costs, the project began
rolling off some of its more experienced per-

sonnel in late March, little more than three
months after the cavalryÕs arrival. Junior de-
velopers who had proven their mettle now
took greater responsibility, and fresh, impres-

sionable recruits came on board. Good prac-
tices were passed along, and XP-based devel-
opment gained more momentum. Within six

months, the project had metamorphosed its
well-deserved infamy within ThoughtWorks

into high repute.If we had to do it all over again
Notwithstanding everything IÕve said,what saved the project was not XP. Instead, it

was a well-financed and tremendously suc-
cessful death march. The clientÕs refusal to

budge on the delivery date was the single
greatest contributing factor to this outcome.
Groundhog Day meant that the team could
not step back and reassess the situation. It
meant that we could adjust the course of de-
velopment only by degrees, not by turning it
on its head. The developers new to agile
processes had no time to adopt a coding stan-
dard or collective ownership, build a continu-
ous integration process, or learn to program
in pairs. More often than not, we didnÕt have

time to refactor bad code, so the hack fre-
quently won out over the simplest thing that
could possibly work. The irony of it, however,

was that Groundhog Day took the code live,
and XPers prefer to work with live code.Although XP wasnÕt the teamÕs immediate
salvation, it did, in the end, make the appli-

cation sustainable beyond Groundhog Day.

Our gradual adoption of XP recovered, re-
tooled, and rejuvenated the code base. Be-
cause of the projectÕs nature, I believe we

were correct to put many agile processes on

hold during the first months of rehabilita-

tion. However, we could have introduced

some principlesÑsuch as improving the
build and test processesÑmuch earlier. This

section distills our experiences with XP into a

list of steps that might have best served our

team (or any project in similar or less dire

straits). Table 1 details our overall experience

with each XP practice.
What you should do right awaySo, itÕs two months to go-live,the team
methodology to date has been waterfall, the
project is a month and a half behind sched-
ule, and Beelzebub is banging at the front
door. What do you do? Lock the door.

Okay, what next?
November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
37Within sixmonths, theproject hadmetamorphosedits well-deservedinfamy withinThoughtWorksinto highrepute. Before considering XP or any best practices.
For starters, I cannot stress enough how es-

sential ThoughtWorksÕ support was to the

projectÕs initial success. First, I do not believe

the project would have ever met its original
goal without serious moral and financial com-

mitments. Employees simply will not give up
their lives for two months and deliver the near
impossible, gift-wrapped, if they donÕt have

constant reminders of how important the mat-
ter is and how valuable they are. Second,

ThoughtWorks contributed to our initial suc-

cess by making intelligent staffing decisions.
When a project is in danger and requires extra

developers, additional resources must target

the projectÕs specific needs. Finally, reputation

matters. ThoughtWorks has long asserted that

its employees are its greatest asset, and it has
continuously backed those words with deeds.

(Forgive me if this comes off as a shameless

corporate pitchÑit is not.)Target the build process.
This is one of thefirst things we should have done. Developers
are keen to things that yield the greatest ben-

efit from the least effort. A long, arduous
build process discourages developers from
taking responsibility for the code they check
in. Conversely, the simpler it is to perform a

buildÑthe less time it takesÑthe more likely
it is that a developer will want to know thatnew code integrates successfully. Making the
build process portable, so it can run on devel-
oper machines, further encourages responsi-
ble check-ins. Assuming the process is swift
and easy, what developer would not check

out the latest code, perform a clean compile,
and check in with confidence? The build process doesnÕt have to be true
push-of-a-button at this stage, but it must be
streamlined to a handful of steps. The benefit
to the team is obvious and measurable: few
things in software development are more dis-
couraging than spending an entire day trying
to make a clean build.Organize a test suite.Even if it is the first
working test class to go into the code base,
write an AllTests class and run it at the end of

every build. Add any existing tests that do
pass, or can easily be made to pass, to All-
Tests. Treat a build that redbars no differently

than one that fails to compile. (YouÕll have to

sell this idea to the analystsÑor the clientÑas
well.) Encourage developers to write tests and
add them to the test suite, but donÕt shove test

writing down their throats (at least not yet).
Finally, I recommend against including old

tests that fail, even if the team intends to get

them working some time in the future. Seeing

a greenbar has a particular psychological
value. A redbar that you consider a virtual38IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001Table 1Adoption of XP practicesPracticeAdoption statusThe experience
Planning gamePartially adoptedThe client never really got involved in the planning game (similar to the absence of an on-site 
customer; see below). Nor did the entire development team participate. Small releases Not adoptedWe could never get client buy-in.
Metaphor Not adoptedThe one XP practice we overlooked. We did not attempt to implement metaphor.
Simple design Fully adoptedThis went hand-in-hand with refactoring. It became a serious endeavor and permeated its way 
through the application.Testing Fully adoptedAcceptance tests were written and used. There was, however, some kicking and screaming 
regarding unit tests. Some developers were behind them, some neutral, and some had to be shamed into writing them. In the end, even unit-testing gained team-wide support.Refactoring Fully adoptedAt least half the team had refactoring in mind moments after they landed on the project, but serious
projects were put off until after Groundhog Day. There was no difficulty mustering team-wide 
support after that.Pair programming Partially adoptedWe began pairing seriously, but slacked off and settled in at perhaps 30 percent of all devel
oper time.Collective ownership Fully adoptedEasily accepted by the team. Developers still had their favored areas, but moved about freque
ntly, 
and anyone could change any portion of the code.Continuous integration Fully adoptedThe process arose from our automated build scripts; the team quickly embraced it.
40-hour week Not adoptedAfter Groundhog Day, some weeks may have been 40, but some were 60. This depended on where 
we were in the iteration cycle.On-site customer Partially adoptedAlthough we were on site, the client never provided an XP-like customer. The project manager 
and team analyst stood in, with some success, in the role of the customer.
Coding standards Partially adoptedA single standard was proposed and influenced some team members. Peer pressure had an 
effect at times. JavaDoc was incorporated into the build process. greenbar because Òthose test never pass any-wayÓ isnÕt the same.
Write an ObjectMother.
Writing an object gen-
erator is not a trivial task, but it pays for itself
by shortening the time spent writing new tests
and fixing broken ones. The utility reduces the
effort-versus-benefit ratio for test writing. De-
velopers are much more likely to write a test

when they can acquire an invoice and all its as-
sociated objects from one simple method call;

they are much less likely to write the same test

when the invoice, its lines and charges, the cus-
tomer, the bill-to address, and perhaps the as-

sociated assets all have to be instantiated and
bound together before calling get-total. An Ob-

jectMother also makes it easier to maintain
tests when their associated business objects
change, because it consolidates the instantia-
tions into one space instead of letting them be

spread across the application.Practices to phase in earlySo youÕve taken care of the most crucial el-
ements. Now you can move on to phase two.Continuous integration.If a project has a sim-ple build process and a serviceable test suite,
the next step is to combine these and tackle
continuous integration. There are two ways
to approach this. The first is the standard se-
rialized XP practice based on a build machine
or build token, where developers queue up
one at a time to build, test, and integrate their
changes.1The second alternative, a variationwe use at ThoughtWorks, is for developers to

build and test on their own machines before
checking in. Backed up by multiple builds per
day (to keep everybody honest), this has
proved a successful practice.2Either way, con-
tinuous integration drastically reduces the
time developers would otherwise waste con-
verging code. It had a noticeable effect on our
team as soon as we implemented it.Gentle refactoring.Refactoring is good, but atthis stage in a projectÕs recovery, it must be tem-

pered for several reasons. First, it may be diffi-
cult to get client buy-in. Second, the worse the
code base is and the less likely it is to follow the

principles of object-oriented abstraction, the
more difficult it will be to isolate portions for

retooling. Third, at least in the beginning, you
probably wonÕt have either a quick build

process or dependable test results as success in-dicators. Nonetheless, do pursue gentle refac-toring from the start. Remove insufferable por-

tions of code and undertake any refactoring
task that offers low risk and high value. Simply simplicity.
Simple design is straightfor-ward to those in the know and aggravatingly
intangible for anyone anywhere else. For our
team, as we wended our way along trails of
bad code in the first months of project recov-
ery, we could easily pick out issues such as

overdesign and logic duplication; however, be-

fore Groundhog Day, we had no time to ad-

dress these issues. After Groundhog Day, as

refactoring and new functionality became
everyday business, we remembered the squalor
we had wallowed through and consistently
strove for simplicity. We pushed logic that per-

meated through the session beans back into the

business layer and again refactored the servlets.
Weekly code reviews were initiated, and sim-

plicity regularly rolled off nearly every tongue.Coding standard.This is easy to encouragewithout spending too much time or effort. In
our case, we were fortunate to have two stan-
dards to fall back on. First, we had a proposed
in-house coding standard that one team mem-

ber had helped author several months earlier.

This document was both a good primer for the
greener developers and a good starting point
for further discussion and debate. Second, we
relied on the JavaDoc standard for code com-
menting, which we further leveraged by incor-

porating the generation of API docs directly
into our build process. This practice is easiest
to encourage when you have an in-house or
open standard (such as JavaDoc) that you can
simply pass or email about and then occasion-
ally refer to during discussions.Stand-up meetings.We never introduced
these, and I believe it was a major mistake.
Quick, daily, face-to-face meetings keep de-

velopers informed about what others on the
team are doing. They help stop people from
stepping on each otherÕs toes. They keep the

team lead informed about whoÕs ahead and

whoÕs behind. They air new ideas and prevent

people from duplicating work.Mind the database.Okay, this isnÕt an XP
process, but itÕs definitely as important as one.

The database is an essential component of

nearly every business applicationÑneglect it
November/December 2001IEEE SOFTWARE
39Refactoring isgood, but at thisstage in aprojectÕsrecovery, it
must betempered forseveralreasons. at your peril. Nothing good ever comes of adatabase architected without a mind to con-
version or reporting. Similarly, a database that

updates schema for new attributes and entities
but not deleted onesÑa database that lets test
data pile up and atrophyÑwill be cantanker-

ous to develop with, hard to test on, and diffi-
cult to alter. Conversely, a well-architected and

maintained database, through intelligent and

efficient data organization, can guide good de-
velopment. Finally, as mentioned earlier, in

lieu of an object model or other documenta-
tion, a data model can provide an extremely

handy overview of the application.What to do when the pressure lets upGroundhog Day has come and gone, andyouÕve phased in several XP practices. So
whatÕs next? 
Step back and relax.Once the project has metsome of its immediate goals (a major delivery
or go-live date), the development team should
step back and get everything into perspective.
If the time has come for serious refactoring,
what parts of the application should be put
through the grinder first? How is the adop-
tion of XP coming alongÑwhoÕs resisting and

whoÕs welcoming it? How is the teamÕs men-

tal health? If the last couple months have been
a bloodbath, should some exhausted team
members be rolled off the project? Would the

project benefit from new recruits and fresh

perspective?Iterations and small releases.I didnÕt list this
practice earlier because the principles in the
first two groups weigh in as either more im-
portant or easier to accomplish. Why? Be-
cause a project plan is already in place, and
negotiating for a formal change to that plan
expends the scarce resources of both time and
political capital. However, even without for-

mal customer consent, a team can institute in-
ternal iterations. We did this. They were not

the same as true iterations because the cus-
tomer wasnÕt bearing down on us, but break-

ing the work out internally was definitely bet-
ter than delivering once every three months.Get an on-site customer.
This is also on mywish list of XP practices to phase in early. I

fear, however, that any project that falls to the

level of depravity that ours did does so partly
because there has been no real participationon the customerÕs part. Therefore, attempting
to foster customer input early in the recovery
process may well be a Sisyphean endeavor. If

your project can actually produce a real cus-
tomer earlier, then Tyche has shined on you.
Roll in the rest of XP.
As the pace of the proj-ect returns to something akin to normal, the
team should address the remaining elements
of XP. As a rule, when you add functionality

to poorly written areas of the application,
refactor the code. Start looking at patterns.
What parts of the application might benefit
from their use? Encourage pair programming
and make changes to the workspace to facili-
tate it if necessary. Story cards and the plan-

ning game should become the means by
which the functionality is proposed, deliber-
ated, and built into the application. We never

got serious about metaphor or the 40-hour
workweek; they should, however, be given se-

rious consideration.Communicate, communicate, communicate.If you have so far managed to avoid institut-
ing stand-up meetings, put them in place now.

Whenever possible, XP principles should
propagate from the bottom up rather than be-
ing imposed from the top down. Ideally, this

means that the team as a whole decides what
XP principles it will introduce and get serious
about first. Involve the entire team in estima-

tion. All these things foster a sense of collec-
tive ownership, not only of the code but also
of the projectÕs general well-being.
Had our client been willing, many
members of our team would have
razed the code base and started
again from step one. But few clients are so
giving and few projects so fortunate. Fur-
thermore, who is to say a project will not fal-
ter againÑfor similar or wholly different
reasons? In such situations, little is achieved
without a lot of hard work.XP had no hand in recovering our projectbut weighed in heavily on its redemption. Be-
fore Groundhog Day, although we discussed

XP and made occasional, nearly clandestine
incursions into agile development, we simply
could see no way to rewrite our development
process in the time we had. Rather, we

stepped in to shore up and compensate for theQuick, daily,
face-to-face
meetings keepdevelopersinformed aboutwhat others onthe team aredoing.40IEEE SOFTWARE
November/December 2001 current process until we had the time to ad-dress the many issues in earnest. After
Groundhog Day, we made a sincere and sus-

tained effort to go XP, which was successful

on many levels. In the end, we landed some-
where within the realm of agile development

without quite having achieved XPÑbut it
was quite a good place to be.I cannot stress enough how the team com-position factored into our success. If we did
not have so many stars and suckersÑthose ca-
pable of great things and those willing to put

their lives on hold to make great things hap-

penÑthe project would have never attained

the success it did. Ultimately, our projectÕs re-

demption rested on two strong foundations:
the processes drawn from Extreme Program-
ming and the team that applied them.AcknowledgmentsFirst and foremost, credit goes to the fellowThoughtWorkers with whom I endured the worst

death march I ever wish to be a party to. I am quite
grateful to have worked with such a team. Many
thanks, also, go to Martin Fowler for suggesting the
topic for the article and providing the guidance neces-
sary to ensure that it was written. Ipresented an ear-

lier version of this article at XP2001 in May 2001.References1.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained,Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1999.
2.M. Fowler and M. Foemmel, ÒContinuous Integration,Ó
www.martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.

html (current 16 Oct. 2001). 3.P. Schuh and S. Punke, ÒObjectMother: Easing Test Ob-
ject Creation in XP,Ó www.thoughtworks.com/cl_

library.html (current 24 Oct. 2001).
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
About the AuthorPeter Schuhis a team lead at ThoughtWorks,
Inc., a provider of custom e-business application de-
velopment and advanced system integration services

to Global 1000 companies. He has written and spo-
ken about XP, the adoption of agile processes, agile

developmentÕs impacts upon database administra-

tion, and the ObjectMother pattern. With a BA in
English literature and an MA in international rela-
tions, he is an unapologetic interloper in the soft-ware development industry. Contact him at ThoughtWorks, Ste. 600, 651 W.

Washington, Chicago, IL 60661; peschuh@thoughtworks.com.
Possible topics include but are not limited to the following:¥Coding for network (grid-based) applications

¥Coding for high-availability applications

¥Coding for compatibility and extensibility

¥Coding for network interoperability

¥Effective use of standards by programmers

¥Lessons learned from game programming

¥Techniques for writing virus-proof software

¥Simple and commonsense techniques for making   
multithreading and concurrency easier and more reliable¥Coding implications of continually increasing processing 
and memory resources
¥Agents: When, where, and how to use them

¥PDAs and the future of ÒwearableÓ software 

¥Is ÒagileÓ programming fragile programming? 

¥Prestructuring versus restructuring of code

¥Integration of testing and construction
HAVE YOU EVER HAD AN EXPERIENCE
in constructing software that gave you un-expected insights into the larger problem of software engineering and development
of high-quality software? If so, IEEE Softwareencourages you to submit your experiences, insights, and observations so that others can also benefit from them.
A unique aspect of software engineering is that techniques used at the smallestscale of individual software construction are often relevant even for the largest
software systemsÑand vice-versa. We are looking for articles that encourage a

better understanding of this commonality between programming in the small and
programming in the large, and especially ones that explore the larger implications
of hand-on software construction experiences.¥Aspect-oriented programming
¥Impacts of language choice on application cost, stability, 
and durability¥Proliferation of Internet-based computing languages (for
instance, Perl, Python, Ruby)¥ÒThrow-awayÓ programming and languages: Good, bad,
or just ugly?¥Code ownership in an Internet economy

¥When, how, and where to use open source

¥choosing languages for your applications

¥Lessons learned in buying and using tools

¥XML: Where to next? What will follow it?

¥How to keep documentation from diverging

¥Personal-level configuration management

¥Personal-level defect analysis

¥Build processes for the new millennium

¥Deciding when to branch code bases
CALL FORARTICLES: SoftwareConstruction
Construction Editor: Terry Bollinger, terry@mitre.orgSubmissions are accepted at any time; contact software@computer.org
 Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
