 0740-7459/09/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
 November/December 2009   
IEEE SOFTWARE
 11
Philippe Kruchten 
˜ University of British Columbia 
˜ kruchten@ieee.org
career development
We all warmed to the speaker as he listed 
the many hurdles facing today™s soft
-ware developers. The audience, experi
-enced programmers all, were happy to 
hear someone speak so frankly about 
the absurd demands imposed on them 
by an uncomprehending, pointy-haired manage
-ment. Emboldened by our support, the speaker 
continued con˜dently: ﬁ– and,ﬂ 
he proclaimed, ﬁdevelopers don™t 
like to do documentation, because 
it has no value for them.ﬂ His lis
-teners nodded enthusiastically, 
exchanging smiles and knowing 
glances. Yes, ™tis indeed so, you 
could hear them think.
Wait! I thought, isn™t the pri
-mary purpose of design docu
-mentation to help 
others
? It™s 
rarely created for its authors™ bene˜tŠalthough 
sometimes the process of explaining things to oth
-ers can help us clarify and organize our thoughts. 
How is it possible that there™s such a distorted view 
of documentation? 
Still, after 30 years as a developer of large in
-dustrial software, this self-centered and disdainful 
attitude toward documentation didn™t surprise me. 
Like ˜nicky domestic helpers who announce that 
they ﬁdon™t do windows,ﬂ I™ve often heard software 
developers state proudly that they ﬁdon™t do docu
-mentation,ﬂ even refusing lucrative job offers that 
stipulated it. This viewpoint is echoed in the widely 
praised Agile Manifesto (http://agilemanifesto.
org), issued by the software industry™s avant-garde, 
which proclaims: ﬁWorking software over compre
-hensive documentationﬂŠas if these two are neces
-sarily mutually exclusive!
Why Document Designs?
In other engineering disciplines, the need to pro
-duce design documentation is considered de rigeur, 
a sometimes unpleasant but necessary chore for the 
sake of higher good. It™s well understood that the 
purpose of documentation is to instruct those who 
are unfamiliar with a system (or who may have for
-gotten it) about how the system is structured, how 
it works, and the design rationale that led to it. 
The primary consumers of design documentation 
are those who are responsible for maintaining and 
evolving the system. However, other stakeholders, 
such as users, testers, and project managers,
 and, 
yes, even salespeople
 may also need to know about 
a system™s design.
The only alternative to design documentation 
is discovery by exploring the system, akin to try
-ing to ˜nd one™s way through a jungle without a 
map or compass. This task is dif˜cult even when 
experts are available to guide and instruct the nov
-ice. System knowledge gained in this way is usu
-ally unstructured, incomplete, and inconsistent. It™s 
also inef˜cient, since experts might need to repeat 
their instructions over and over again for different 
groups. Thus, while producing design documenta
-tion comes at a cost, the investmentŠif done prop
-erlyŠusually pays off substantially in the future.
Moreover, when it comes to software, the need 
for good design documentation seems even more 
pressing, considering that
 ˜modern software is increasing in complexity,
 ˜software systems are typically revisited and re
-vised more often than other types of systems, 
and
 ˜code maintenance is usually delegated to less 
experienced junior staff who are unfamiliar 
with the code.
Yet, the trend in practice seems to be headed 
in the opposite direction. The rationale given is 
the dif˜culty of keeping documentation in sync 
Bran Selic
Agile Documentation, 
Anyone?
 12
 IEEE SOFTWARE   
www.computer.org/software
CAREER DEVELOPMENT
with something that is as highly dynamic 
as software, and the cost of producing 
documentation when the same time and 
resources could be used to generate more 
code (ﬁworking software over comprehen
-sive documentationﬂ). Finally, there are 
those who argue that code is its own docu
-mentation, the only one that contains the 
real truth. 
Anyone familiar with industrial soft
-ware will recognize these arguments as 
bogus. Industry is replete with stories 
of decades-old legacy code that no one 
dares touch because no one understands 
it. The intellectual effort required to un
-derstand anything but the simplest code 
through direct inspection can be substan
-tialŠeven in cases of well-documented 
code (which, sadly, is the exception rather 
than the rule). The problem, of course, is 
that the semantics of the core concepts 
of popular computer languages are usu
-ally far removed from the semantics of 
the application domain. The breadth of 
this gap is the reason why we still need 
programmers. Furthermore, there™s the 
added complexity of coping with the 
sometimes esoteric and unintuitive syn
-tax of programming languages, which 
isn™t always driven by its communication 
value for human readers but by the needs 
of compilation technology (for example, 
single-pass compilation). Thus, when in
-specting code, the human reader must 
replicate a compiler™s parsing function, 
while at the same time trying to under
-stand the code at the higher application 
level. And, even when we ˜nally discern 
how some program fragment works, we 
still might not understand the rationale 
behind its design.
The preference for code over documen
-tation in the Agile Manifesto is based on 
the conclusion that it™s more effective to 
have something concrete that works and 
which can be objectively assessed and 
modi˜ed than it is to assess and modify 
something that™s merely a plan. This is in
-deed so, but it only argues against a spe
-ci˜c category of design documentation: 
those voluminous and detailed documents 
describing 
planned
 implementations, cre
-ated and polished before there™s an un
-derstanding of the problem or experience 
with the solution. Documents of this type 
quickly become obsolete, and much of the 
effort invested in producing and updating 
them is wasted. As Helmuth von Moltke 
noted, ﬁNo plan survives the ˜rst contact 
with the enemy.ﬂ In this case, the ﬁen
-emyﬂ is the reality exposed by working 
code, which can quickly uncover issues 
that are dif˜cult to anticipate in design. 
Still, the ineffectiveness of such ﬁblindﬂ 
a priori design documents isn™t an argu
-ment for eliminating design documenta
-tion or making it super˜cial. It™s interest
-ing that the authors of the manifesto used 
the phrase ﬁcomprehensive documen
-tation,ﬂ which can be traced to the root 
ﬁto comprehendﬂŠthat is, to understand. 
Isn™t rapid understanding what all agile 
processes are striving for? In agile devel
-opment, we reach understanding through 
experimentation with working systemsŠ
undeniably a most effective way to learn. 
However, this path is available only to the 
original designers, not to those who fol
-low in their footsteps or those who are un
-able to participate directly in the design.
Agile Documentation 
So, what type of documentation is useful, 
what should it look like, and when should 
it be produced?
Clearly, documenting software at the 
code level is foolish; this simply results 
in the nightmare of trying to keep dupli
-cated information consistent (code com
-ments often fall into this useless category). 
Instead, we need design documentation 
at a higher level of abstraction, stripped 
of unnecessary technological detail and 
closely coupled to application concepts 
and requirements. These should incorpo
-rate design rationale, including descrip
-tions of rejected design alternatives. These 
are, in fact, 
architectural
 speci˜cations
: technology-independent descriptions of 
the higher-level structure and behavior of 
systems along with key design principles.
Such documents not only help us see 
the forest hiding in a sea of code but, by 
documenting the core design principles, 
they help us maintain consistency when 
making ˜ner-grained design decisions. 
Furthermore, architectural speci˜cations 
serve as the primary medium by which the 
diverse system stakeholders communicate 
with the design team and with each other. 
With the exception of relatively small 
systems that can be prototyped and ex
-perimented with quickly, doing high-level 
design by coding (as recommended, for 
example, in Extreme Programming
1) is 
unwise. The semantic distance that must 
be covered between working code and 
something that stakeholders ˜nd mean
-ingful and can evaluate is too vast to be 
covered easily, particularly if short itera
-tions are used to achieve agility.
In effect, I™m talking about 
agile design 
documentation
, which keeps step with 
design and development. To avoid waste, 
the effort expended on such documents 
should be proportional to the design™s sta
-bility. That is, the more stable the design, 
the more extensive the documentation. 
However, even in the earliest stages, the 
documentation must be adequate to serve 
its primary communications purpose. 
One promising approach to this is 
based on using higher-level domain-
 speci˜c modeling languages that produce 
executable models. This involves rapid 
construction of architectural models 
(sometimes requiring relatively small code 
fragments embedded and executed along 
with the model) that can be evaluated in 
the usual agile manner. This avoids the 
high overhead of coding complex struc
-tures using programming languages. 
Such models can then be easily integrated 
into documents using modern custom
-izable document generation systems, 
along the lines of Donald Knuth™s 
literate 
programming
.2In our rush to code and produce some
-thing that worksŠand software is ex
-ceptional in its ability to short-circuit 
the path from idea to realizationŠwe 
must take care not to discard something 
that the long history of engineering has 
established as fundamentally useful. In
-stead, we must adapt it to our medium 
and processes.
References
 1.
 K. Beck, 
eXtreme Programming Explained
, Addison-Wesley, 2000.
 2.
 D. Knuth, ﬁLiterate Programming,ﬂ 
The Com
-puter J.
, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 97Œ111.
Bran Selic 
is president of Malina Software Corp., which 
provides consulting services to Fortune 100 clients worldwide, 
and an adjunct professor of computer science at Carleton 
University and the University of Toronto. Contact him at 
selic@ieee.org.
