 4 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | PUBL
IS
HED BY TH
E IEEE COMPUT
ER SOC
IE
TY
 0740-7459/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
A Lifetime Guarantee
Forrest Shull
THE 
THEME OF 
this special issue is 
software sustainabilityŠthe capability 
of software systems to endure different 
types of change over their lifetimes. In 

our special features, you™ll ˜nd a dis
-cussion of technical solutions aimed at 
supporting software changes via robust 
architectures. While the technical side 

is undoubtedly important, discussions 

of software sustainability often get 
tangled up in several thorny business 
issues, especially in the government ac
-quisition/systems engineering domain, 
which is where I most often work. 
Questions that sound easy (but turn 

out not to be) abound: Who should pay 
for rework? What are the trade-offs be
-tween paying for extra robustness and 
software quality up front versus han
-dling changes on an as-needed basis af
-ter delivery?
These are very large questions that 
touch on topics not only in this special 

issue but also in several recent issues: 
the ﬁtwin peaksﬂ model of software re
-quirements and design, which discusses 
how changes to one are interrelated 
with the other (Mar./Apr. 2013), and 

the metaphor of technical debt, which 

helps us understand trade-offs between 
short-term goals and long-term quality 
(Nov./Dec. 2012).
Interestingly, while the research 
community is further illuminating the 
complexities of the topic, I™m aware of 
one company, Advanced Information 

Services, that has boiled down the busi
-ness aspects into a very straightforward 

model for its customers: ﬁ˜rm ˜xed-

price contracting with performance 
guarantees, including a lifetime war
-ranty on software defects.ﬂ 
In the domain of US federal con
-tracting for software-intensive systems, 
where many large projects are con˜g
-ured as ﬁcost-plusﬂ (that is, the con
-tractor is reimbursed for all of its al
-lowed development costs, up to a limit), 
it™s hard to overstate what a surprise 

it is to ˜nd this type of price guaran
-tee. First and foremost, it™s important 

to notice how the usual cost-plus con
-tracting approach puts the majority of 

risk on the acquirer (here, the US gov
-ernment); compare that with how AIS™s 

˜rm ˜xed-price moves the risk to the 

contractor. (The risk here is based on 

the fact that if the project turns out to 
be more complicated or requires more 
rework than originally expected, the 

contractor still only receives the origi
-nally agreed upon price.)
Founded in 1986, AIS has of˜ces 
at multiple locations across the US. In 

1999, it was a recipient of the presti
-gious IEEE Computer Society Soft
-ware Process Achievement Award, 

ﬁpresented to recognize outstanding 

achievements in improving an orga
-nization™s ability to create and evolve 

software-dependent systemsﬂ (www.

computer.org/portal/web/awards/spa). 
To ˜nd out more about how AIS 
is able to provide this quality guar
-antee, I spoke with AIS CEO Girish 

 Seshagiri. (For highlights of our discus
-sion, an audio clip is available at www.
 computer.org/software-multimedia.)
Focus on Defects
The idea for a lifetime warranty against 

software defects was a natural one, 
 Seshagiri said, because he was spend
-FROM THE 
EDITOR 
Discussions of software 
 sustainability often get tangled 
 up in several thorny business issues.
  NOV
EMB
ER/
DE
CEMB
ER 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 5STAFFLead Editor 
 Brian Brannon
 bbrannon@computer.org
Content Editor 
 Camber Agrelius
Manager, Editorial Services
 Jenny Stout
Publications Coordinator
 software@computer.org
Production and Design Editor,
 Jennie Zhu-Mai
Webmaster,
 Brandi Ortega
Illustrators
 Robert Stack and Alex Torres
Cover Artist
 Eero Johannes
Director, Products & Services
 Evan Butter˜eld
Senior Manager, Editorial Services
 Robin Baldwin
Senior Business Development Manager
 Sandra Brown
Membership Development Manager
 Cecelia Huffman
Senior Advertising Coordinator
 Marian Anderson
 manderson@computer.org
CS PUBLICATIONS BOAR
DThomas M. Conte (chair), Alain April, 
 David Bader, Angela R. Burgess, Greg Byrd, 
Koen DeBosschere, Frank E. Ferrante, 
 Paolo Montuschi, Linda I. Shafer, 
 and Per Stenström
MAGAZINE 
 OP
ERA
TION
S COMMI
TTEE
Paolo Montuschi (Chair), Erik R. Altman, 
 Nigel Davies, Lars Heide, Simon Liu, 
 Cecilia Metra, Shari Lawrence P˜eeger, 
Michael Rabinovich, Forrest Shull, 
 John R. Smith, Gabriel Taubin, 
 George K. Thiruvathukal, Ron Vetter, 
 and Daniel Zeng
Editorial: 
All submissions are subject to editing 
 for clarity, style, and space. Unless otherwise 
 stated, bylined articles and departments, 
 as well as product and service descriptions, 
 re˜ect the author™s or ˚rm™s opinion. Inclusion in 
 IEEE Software
 does not necessarily constitute endorse
-ment by IEEE or the IEEE Computer Society.
To Submit: 
Access the IEEE Computer Society™s 
 Web-based system, ScholarOne, at 
 http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/sw-cs. Be sure to se
-lect the right manuscript type when submitting. Articles 
must be original and not exceed 4,700 words including 
˚gures and tables, which count for 200 words each.
IEEE prohibits discrimination, harassment and 
 bullying:
 For more information, visit www.ieee.org/
web/aboutus/whatis/policies/p9-26.html.
ing time looking at the number of de
-fects on AIS projects post-delivery. This 
metric is one of the key things that all 
project teams report to him, and one of 

his best ways as CEO to get a measure 

of customer satisfaction from the com
-pany™s work. 
Often on government projects, the 
majority of the maintenance effort goes 

to ˜nding and ˜xing bugs. If the de
-veloper does higher-quality work in 

the ˜rst place, much of that effort can 
be redirected toward new features and 

system capabilities, or toward adaptive 
changes that allow the system to change 
as conditions do. Seshagiri reasoned that 

surely this would be an attractive propo
-sition for his government customers. 
And it wasŠbut also noteworthy 
was the effect on his developers. A pol
-icy like this sends a message that can be 

empowering, namely, that developers 
have to stand behind the work they do. 
Giving developers the ability to make 
RE
 CONFEREN
CE AWAR
DTo help mark the 21st occurrence of the IEEE International Requirements Engi
-neering Conference (RE) and the ﬁcoming of ageﬂ of this long-running event, 
IEEE 
Software
 sponsored a best paper award for the conference™s industry track. This 
was a slightly different arrangement from our usual award process because con
-ference organizers directly selected the best paper.
John Terzakis of Intel received the award at RE in Rio de Janeiro in July 2013 
for his paper titled ﬁThe Impact of Requirements on Software Quality across 
Three Product Generations.ﬂ His paper was noteworthy for demonstrating the 
impact of well-written and well-reviewed requirements on multiple generations of 
an Intel product, with data on software defects and other quality indicators. Ter
-zakis received a free digital subscription in recognition of his achievement.
Many thanks go to Orlena (Olly) Gotel, the RE 2013 program chair, for all her 
work with us to make this happen.
FIGURE A.
 IEEE Software 
editorial board members Jane Cleland-Huang (left) 
and Neil Maiden (right) present the best paper award to author John Terzakis.
 6 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
Edecisions that enable them to do this 
with con˜dence fosters an environment 
with not only high expectations but 
also one where people can be especially 

proud of their work.
I asked Seshagiri whether he found 
it necessary to educate his customers 

about the bene˜ts of a quality-focused 

approach, on the assumption that this 

would mean a more expensive con
-tract. But he disputed the basis for the 

question. Looking across the life cycle, 
he™s found that the overall cost is actu
-ally lower with a focus on high-quality 
development. And the ability to meet 

schedule and cost goals becomes more 
predictable as well, another win for 
customers. In fact, Seshagiri wondered 

why software seems to be one of the 

few disciplines to take the stance that 
increased quality means higher cost, 

when so many other industries have 
discovered that improved quality brings 
reduced cost, increased market share, 

and other bene˜ts.
Seshagiri did grant me that gov
-ernment acquisition personnel are re
-sponding to several different pressures 

when they award contracts, of which 
cost is only one. But in the current cli
-mate, high quality is no longer optional. 
Minimizing the $15 to $40 billion (de
-pending on which estimates you be
-lieve) that US taxpayers pay for defect 

˜xing on acquired systems is a worthy 

goal, but avoiding catastrophic dam
-age to national assetsŠwhich could 

happen from successful cyberattacks 

that exploit poor-quality systemsŠ

is absolutely necessary. As former US 
Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta has 
said, ﬁThe next Pearl Harbor we con
-front could very well be a cyberattack 

that cripples our power systems, our 
grid, our security systems, our ˜nancial 
systems, our governmental systemsﬂ 

(www.nbcnews.com/id/43828271/ns/
 technology_and_science-security/t/
 nations-fight-against-cyber-intruders
 -goes-local/#.UkH9PYbkt8E).  Given 

the existence of such threats, Seshagiri 
notes that the future looks very bright 
for companies that can deliver virtually 

defect-free software systems with a size 

of man hundreds of KLOC.
Enabling Technologies?
I asked Seshagiri to talk a bit about 

how AIS can offer such guarantees: 
Would he attribute this capability to 
process, technology, or people? A bit 

surprisingly to me, he pointed imme
-diately to people issues as the determi
-nant, noting that the work that™s done 

in software development is overwhelm
-ingly carried out by people on teams: 

ﬁThe crux of the matter is, how do 
you form a team, how do you motivate 
that team, how do you manage them to 

where they can manage themselves?ﬂ 
AGILE CONFEREN
CE AWAR
DContinuing our relationship with the Agile Conference, 
IEEE Software
 sponsored a 
best research paper award at the event this year in Nashville. The winner was se
-lected by a committee consisting of representatives from our magazine™s editorial 
board (John Favaro and Maurizio Morisio) as well as from the research track pro
-gram committee (Mark Ardis and Lucas Layman). 
Based on the input of our four expert judges, the award went to ﬁProposing 
Regulatory-Driven Automated Test Suites,ﬂ by Patrick Morrison, Casper Holmgreen, 

Aaron Massey, and Laurie Williams. In the words of one judge, ﬁThe Morrison paper 
is a solid new research result, showing that behavior-driven development (BDD) 
speci˚cations are appropriate for standards-based compliance assessment. It ad
-dresses a clear industrial need that has emerged with the growing importance of au
-tomated health care information systems.ﬂ 
Many thanks go to our selection committee for their timely and thorough reviews, 
as well as to research track chair, Richard Turner, for all his work on arranging this 
collaboration.
FIGURE B. 
IEEE Software 
editorial board member Linda Rising (left) and 
research track chair Richard Turner (right) were in Nashville to present the best 

research paper award to author Laurie Williams. 
  NOV
EMB
ER/
DE
CEMB
ER 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 7One thing certainly 
doesn™t
 help 
achieve high-performing teams: ow
-ing to time-to-market pressures, teams 
are often forced to work against arbi
-trary and unrealistic schedules. When 

this situation occurs, teams fall into a 
culture of ﬁdeliver it now, and we™ll ˜x 
it later.ﬂ So AIS avoids the root cause 

by not committing to a schedule with
-out all of the team members™ participa
-tion to accurately determine how long 

the work will actually take. Even if the 

schedule isn™t what the customer wants, 
this gives teams the conviction to de
-fend the estimate and explain why it™s 
realistic and necessary. 
This of course requires investment in 
developer training and effort. For it to 

work, software developers must be able 

to estimate, create personal plans for 
how they will accomplish and track the 

work, and measure and manage their 
own quality. But this method avoids the 
vicious cycle that Seshagiri described: 

poor quality causes most of the sched
-ule problems; schedule problems end up 
as quality disasters. 
I mentioned that I was surprised 
that ﬁprocessﬂ wasn™t the top answer, 
given that AIS is a CMMI level 5 com
-pany. Seshagiri was quick to agree that 
 process can be helpful. But too often, pro
 - cess artifacts can end up being pro
-duced by process compliance person
-nelŠnot the developers themselvesŠ
and then those artifacts don™t actually 

provide much insight into what™s really 
being done. As AIS has found, process 
only helps if the team doing the work 

takes ownership of the process and can 
create a process that actually helps get 

the work done. The team must be in
-volved in deciding what process they™ll 

use for the work. And that brings us 

back squarely to people issues: When 

people have the ability to choose their 
own planning horizons and the meth
-ods used to accomplish the task, the 
quality they can deliver is amazing.
I asked Seshagiri whether every de
-veloper is cut out for, or even interested 

in, such work. On one hand, I could see 

this approach being empowering: people 
give input into estimating delivery win
-dows and have a degree of choice to de
-termine their own right way to get there. 
But I could also see how this might be 
daunting because it relies on a set of 
skills that not every developer has and, 

in fact, might not even want to attain. 
THE UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE, KNOXVILLE
The Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
(EECS) at The University of Tennessee (UT) is seeking candidates for 

multiple faculty positions in computer science, computer engineering, 

and software engineering, which are further speci˜ed as follows.  

Successful candidates will be expected to teach at both undergraduate 

and graduate levels, to establish a vigorous funded research program, 

and to have a willingness to collaborate with other faculty in research.  
EECS is housed in a new $37.5 million teaching and research facility 

completed in 2012. The department currently has an enrollment of 

more than 550 undergraduate and 220 graduate students, with a 

faculty of 40, and research expenditures that exceed $13 million per 

year. EECS has strong research partnerships with organizations such 
as the nearby Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
ERICSSON-HARLAN D. MILLS CHAIR OF SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
Applications and nominations are invited for the Ericsson-Harlan D. 
Mills Chair of Software Engineering. Associate Professors and recently 

promoted Full Professors are strongly encouraged to apply, although 

consideration will be given to all outstanding candidates. Applicants 

should have demonstrated an outstanding independent research and 
teaching program in software engineering or in a related software-

encompassing ˜eld, and should be capable of working with other 

faculty to further strengthen our existing research. Applicants should 

have an earned Ph.D. in Computer Science or equivalent and be 
eligible for appointment at the rank of full Professor. 
COMPUTER ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER SCIENCE
Applications are sought for two tenure-track junior-level faculty 
positions in Computer Science and in Computer Engineering. 

Applicants should have an earned Ph.D. in Computer Engineering, 

Computer Science, or a related ˜eld. Individuals with expertise in 

computer architecture, high performance computer systems, parallel 

and distributed computing, performance modeling and simulation, 

computing theory, cloud computing, data analytics, digital 

systems, VLSI, computational accelerators, dependable and secure 

systems, software engineering, intelligent systems and robotics are 

encouraged to apply, although quali˜ed applicants from all areas of 
computer science and computer engineering will be considered. 
The University of Tennessee welcomes and honors people of all 
races, genders, creeds, cultures, and sexual orientations, and 

values intellectual curiosity, pursuit of knowledge, and academic 

freedom and integrity. Interested candidates should apply through 

the departmental web site at http://www.eecs.utk.edu and submit 

a letter of application, a curriculum vitae, a statement of research 

and teaching interests, and contact information for three references. 

Review of applications will begin on December 15, 2013, and continue 

until the positions are ˜lled.
The University of Tennessee is an EEO/AA/Title VI/Title IX/Section 504/ADA/ADEA institution in the provision of its education and employment programs and services.
 8 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFROM THE EDITOR
Seshagiri noted that this approach 
does require a level of professional dis
-cipline. You must ˜nd people who are 
predisposed to working in a disciplined 

way, with an interest in planning their 

work, tracking their progress and their 
own defects and understanding where 
their own problem areas lie. One rea
-son people push back is simply that 

not all developers have been trained 
to work in this fashion, which often 
has more to do with the way develop
-ers have learned to work throughout 
their careers when faced with arbitrary 
scheduling decisions. 
As a recent example, AIS had a 
17-person team that delivered 750 
KLOC four weeks ahead of schedule 
with no security vulnerabilities. Half 

of that team was fresh out of college, 

which worked to their advantage. Ses
-hagiri notes that if he can reach people 

before they learn a particular working 
style and train them on techniques that 

will help them get the job done and bet
-ter understand their own performance, 

he ˜nds that many (but not all) people 

really do prefer to work that way. 
Connecting to Security
Although software security brings its 

own set of specialized issues and so
-lutions, this type of professional dis
-cipline also has an important role in 

building secure systems, Seshagiri said. 

Individuals should have an understand
-ing of known problems and existing 

security vulnerabilities to inform their 

understanding of what is necessary for 

a quality system. And this set of prob
-lems is fairly well understood: in the 

US, organizations such as the Depart
-ment of Homeland Security and the 
Software Engineering Institute™s CERT 
program have invested effort into com
-piling usable repositories of common 
weaknesses and other secu
-rity issues. 
One of the problems 

that Seshagiri sees 
in the industry is 
an overreliance on testing 
tools and approaches. These 

do have bene˜ts, but they 
can™t replace professional de
-velopers who are willing to 
stand behind and take pride 

in their own personal work. 
These developers should be 
supported by being provided 

with the necessary knowl
-edge about security vulner
-abilities and how they can 

occur throughout the life cy
-cle. This information should 
be institutionalized into the 
way that developers do their 

work, by being built into the 

types of quality checks that 
get deployed as the software 
is developed, whether it be on 
checklists for inspections or other ap
-proaches. This is where organizational 

processes can help.
But again, such rigor must also be 
embedded in a developer™s personal 

process. For example, every component 

that an individual developer builds at 
AIS needs to be zero-defect when it gets 
past the component unit test phase. If 

the components are high quality them
-selves, then AIS can focus the effort on 
detecting and ˜xing any issues related 
to integrationŠand that also relies on 

sound design and architecture practices 

to reduce those defects. For this rea
-son, component quality is another met
-ric that gets tracked and reported up 

to Seshagiri at the CEO level. His goal 
is that 80 to 90 percent of the compo
-nents should be defect-free in integra
-tion, systems, and acceptance testing. 
Seshagiri acknowledged that they 
don™t always reach that mark, but a 
side bene˜t of aiming for that goal is 

that when coding is complete, they 

know what the defect pro˜le will be 
downstream. And that™s where they get 
the level of assurance necessary to of
-fer warranties on their code.
FORRE
ST
 SHULL 
is a division director at the 
Fraunhofer Center for Experimental Software 
Engineering in Maryland, a nonpro˚t research and 

tech transfer organization, where he leads the 

Measurement and Knowledge Management Division. 

He™s also an adjunct professor at the University of 

Maryland College Park and editor in chief of 
IEEE 

Software
. Contact him at fshull@computer.org.
Selected CS articles and columns 
 
are also available for free at 
 
http://ComputingNow.computer.org.



IEEE o˜ers a variety of open access (OA) publications:
Discover top-quality articles, chosen by
 the IEEE
 peer-review 
standard of excellence. 
Unrestricted access to today™s groundbreaking research
 via the IEEE 
Xplore® digital library
Learn more about IEEE Open Access
www.ieee.org/open-access
12-TA-0424-Open Access 3.25x4.75 Final .indd   19/24/12   10:06 AM