 2 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | PUBL
IS
HED BY TH
E IEEE COMPUT
ER SOC
IE
TY
 0740-7459/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
Editor in Chief: 
Forrest Shull 
 Fraunhofer Center for Experimental Software 
Engineering, fshull@computer.org
IEEE Software
  To be the best source of reliable, useful, peer-reviewed information for leading software practitionersŠ
Mission Statement
 the developers and managers who want to keep up with rapid technology change.
Engineering Values: 
From Architecture 

Games to Agile 

Requirements
Forrest Shull
ﬁThe values to which people cling 
most stubbornly under inappropriate 
conditions are those values that 

were previously the source of their 
greatest triumphs.ﬂ ŠJared Diamond
, Collapse: How Societies Choose to 
Fail or Succeed
PERSONAL 
PRINCI
PLES 
and values 
are important. Articulating the per
-sonal qualities that we prize gives us a 
way to set goals for ourselves and re
-˜ect on whether we™re living up to our 
own standardsŠor whether we™re so 
caught up in the day-to-day grind that 
we make a thousand little compromises 

and never notice.
Similarly, 
professional
 principles are 
touchstones that let us aim for rigor in 

our work rather than spending our ef
-forts on a thousand different trade-offs 

and kludges. Perhaps such engineering 
principles are even more important in 
the early phases of any software life cy
-cle, when the freedom to interpret the 
problem and design solutions can be al
-most unbounded.
And yetŠwhen taken to extremes 
or applied blindly, any principle can 
produce the very outcomes that it 
was meant to avoid, sti˜ing creativity 

and leading to bad decisions. Philippe 

Kruchten brought this point home to 
me afresh during his recent keynote and 
the personal interview that followed by 

enunciating some important values and 

their potential misuses in software re
-quirements and architecture.
Kruchten™s work has often focused 
on software architecture, and in his 
consulting work, he has observed a 
large number of teams and their dy
-namics in operation. When I caught up 

with him at the Better Software East 
conference, he had just given a key
-note summarizing some of the negative 
behavioral patterns that he has often 

seen in the ˚eld (he referred to them as 
ﬁgames architects playﬂ). I was struck 
by how many of these initially sounded 

like positive engineering principles 
taken to extremes, which seems to be 
a cautionary tale regarding the poten
-tial for rules to get embedded out of 

context.
For Kruchten, one of the root causes 
of such games is that, like other hu
-FROM THE 
EDITOR 
When taken to extremes or applied 
blindly, any principle can produce the very 

outcomes that it was meant to avoid.
  MARCH/
APR
IL 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 3mans, software professionals can be 
misled into thinking of ourselves as 
more rational than we are. Cogni
-tive biases come into play during soft
-ware development just as in other ac
-tivities. For example, too often we fall 

rapidly into con˚rmation biasŠ˚nd
-ing valid-sounding reasons to support 
the things that we already believe. He 

also cautioned that we shouldn™t put 
the onus for such behavior just on ar
-chitects: software development is one 
large continuum of decisions, and the 
same types of biases can come into play 
in each. Looking earlier in the life cy
-cle, we would be kidding ourselves to 

think that users and requirements ana
-lysts are perfectly rational, and it™s just 

the ﬁsoftware guysﬂ who misinterpret 

things and go off in strange directions. 
The Pilot Project
Let™s begin with a game Kruchten 

identi˚ed that™s close to my own heart 
as an empiricist: the pilot project. 
There™s a solid principle at the heart 

of this one
 Šnamely, a desire to be 
intentional and cautious about new 
tools and technologies. A key compo
-nent of making software engineering 
an evidence-driven ˚eld rather than 
one at the whim of fads is trying novel 
approaches in small-scale but realistic 
settings to see if the claimed bene˚ts 

can really be obtained in one™s con
-text (and at what price). Surprising as 
it sounds, I™ve seen organizations go 
off the rails by mandating widespread 

adoption of new technologies that turn 

out to be more complicated in practice 
than initially realized.
However, the ﬁgameﬂ begins when 
organizations march into pilots with a 

preconceived idea of the outcome they 
want to see and eliminate anything that 

would be an obstacle to getting that 

prede˚ned outcomeŠeven if those ob
-stacles are, you know, actually related 

to the way they normally do business. 
So how do we monitor ourselves 
and understand whether con˚rmation 
bias is actually coming into play? One 
heuristic is to count how often we hear, 

ﬁBut we™re not doing [something] on 
this project because this is just a pilot.ﬂ 
Has ﬁjust a pilotﬂ become the mantra 

that we need to chant when removing 

anything that could possibly get an 
outcome other than our preferred one? 
It™s also useful to consider whether 
WELCOME 
TO THE 
EDITORIAL BOARD
I™m happy to welcome to our editorial board Adam Welc, who will be oversee
-ing our coverage of programming languages and paradigms. Welc is a principal 
member of the Technical Staff at Oracle Labs, where he works on the develop
-ment of domain-speci˜c languages. Previously, he worked as a researcher at In
-tel and Adobe, developing novel approaches for concurrent programming. He has 

a solid track record of research publications and has often been invited to speak 
in both academic and industry contexts. In addition, Welc™s record of service to 

the research community has been exemplary, including working as a program 
committee member for many symposia, workshops, and conferences. The practi
-cal applicability of his work is demonstrated by the seven patent applications on 
which he is a co-author.
Welc is succeeding Laurie Tratt in this role. I™d like to thank Tratt again for all 
of his efforts and the many projects he undertook for us.
STAFFLead Editor 
 Brian Brannon
 bbrannon@computer.org
Manager, Editorial Services
 Jenny Stout
Editors
 Camber Agrelius and Linda World
Publications Coordinator
 software@computer.org
Production Editor/Webmaster
 Jennie Zhu-Mai
Contributor
 Alex Torres
Cover Artist
 Eero Johannes 
Director, Products & Services
 Evan Butter˜eld
Senior Business Development Manager
 Sandra Brown
Membership Development Manager
 Cecelia Huffman
Senior Advertising Coordinator
 Marian Anderson
 manderson@computer.org
CS PUBLICA
TIONS BOARD
Thomas M. Conte (chair), Alain April, 
 David Bader, Angela R. Burgess, Greg Byrd, 
Koen DeBosschere, Frank E. Ferrante, 
 Paolo Montuschi, Linda I. Shafer, 
 and Per Stenström
MAGAZINE 
 OP
ERA
TIONS 
COMMI
TTEE
Paolo Montuschi (Chair), Erik R. Altman, 
 Nigel Davies, Lars Heide, Simon Liu, 
 Cecilia Metra, Shari Lawrence P˚eeger, 
Michael Rabinovich, Forrest Shull, 
 John R. Smith, Gabriel Taubin, 
 George K. Thiruvathukal, Ron Vetter, 
 and Daniel Zeng
Editorial: 
All submissions are subject to editing 
 for clarity, style, and space. Unless otherwise 
 stated, bylined articles and departments, 
 as well as product and service descriptions, 
 re˜ect the author™s or ˚rm™s opinion. Inclusion in 
 IEEE Software
 does not necessarily constitute endorse
-ment by IEEE or the IEEE Computer Society.
To Submit: 
Access the IEEE Computer Society™s 
 Web-based system, ScholarOne, at 
 http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/sw-cs. Be sure to se
-lect the right manuscript type when submitting. Articles 
must be original and not exceed 4,700 words including 
˚gures and tables, which count for 200 words each.
IEEE prohibits discrimination, harassment and 
 bullying:
 For more information, visit www.ieee.org/
web/aboutus/whatis/policies/p9-26.html.
 4 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFROM THE 
EDITOR
we™ve hand-picked a team that™s excep
-tionally good and might have obtained 
a successful outcome regardless of the 
technology or process they apply.
Blink
Another example Kruchten gave is 

ﬁblinkﬂŠin which we tell ourselves 
that we have suf˚cient experience and 
know-how and can make decisions 

quickly, based on experience and in
-tuition. Given that architects typically 
face a wide range of potential solutions 
for any system, being able to quickly 

make assessments about good strategies 
is important. After all, one recent best
-seller has argued that such intuition is 

an important attribute of brilliant deci
-sion makers (M. Gladwell, 
Blink: The 

Power of Thinking without Thinking
, Back Bay, 2007). 
When done by architects who truly 
have the experience, such quick and 

intuitive assessments can be valuable 

in focusing efforts on the path with 
the most likely chance of success. The 
dif˚culty comes when cognitive biases 

come into play and lead to this ideal 
being applied in circumstances in 

which it has no business.
How do we recognize when we™re 
stumbling into the negative ﬁblinkﬂ 

game? Perhaps by paying attention to 

how much the architects are really lis
-tening to the requirements folks. Do 

requirements analysts get to articulate 

what they™re looking to do with the 

system before they start hearing about 
pulldown menus, Apache servers, and 
other detailed solution elements?
Analysis Paralysis
Some of Kruchten™s games spring not 

from a lack of rationality but from 
being too rational. For example, the 
opposite of ﬁblinkﬂ is over-focusing on 

analysis to the detriment of actually 

getting things done. As with the other 
games, it™s hard to argue with the 
desire to do a thorough and rigorous 

analysis. 
But too often, we might simply be 
afraid of making decisions, so continued 

analysis becomes a convenient decision-

avoidance strategy. For architects, this 
game can also take the form of a million 
questions and requests for clari˚cation 

to the requirements team. While it can 

always be healthy to challenge require
-ments, extreme forms of this effectively 

push off any responsibility for engi
-neering decisions to other stakeholders. 

In either case, while you™ve been trying 
to know everything about everything, 
you™re potentially blocking progress on 

other fronts as well.
Kruchten™s response to how to miti
-gate this tendency is to come to terms 

with the fact that we can™t make perfect 

decisions. On almost any development 
project, we have to make progress, even 
if it™s imperfect. Rather than aiming for 

perfection, it™s often healthier instead 

to aim to have some kind of traceback 
that lets the team recover if it reaches a 
bad state.
IEEE
 SOF
TW
ARE 
SP
ONSORS 
ACSEAC
 BES
T PA
PER 
AW
ARDS
The 2012 edition of the African Conference on Software Engineering and Applied 
Computing (ASEAC) took place on 24 and 25 September in Gaborone, Botswana. 
The conference, which debuted in 2011 in Cape Town, South Africa, was sponsored 
by the IEEE Computer Society and the University of Botswana. ACSEAC 2012 fea
-tured 17 paper presentations, a keynote address delivered by former 
IEEE Software
 editor-in-chief Hakan Erdogmus, two invited talks, and an industry workshop. More 

than 60 delegates attended, representing a dozen countries including South Africa, 

Uganda, Madagascar, Botswana, Kenya, Egypt, and Nigeria. Several representatives 
from Botswana™s software industry and government of˜cials were also present. 
As in 2011,
 IEEE Software
 supported ACSEAC with a Best Paper Award. Four 
papers were shortlisted by the conference program committee for the award. A se
-lection committee chaired by Erdogmus and composed of ˜ve conference organizers 
and ˜ve 
IEEE Software 
board members reviewed the shortlisted papers and voted for 

the one they felt had the highest relevance to software practice. The 2012 winners 
of the Software ACSEAC Best Paper were authors Brett Ausmeier, Thomas Camp
-bell, and Sonia Berman from the University of Cape Town for their contribution ﬁIn
-door Navigation Using a Mobile Phone.ﬂ The authors described how they designed, 

implemented, and evaluated novel and practical heuristics to let users navigate in
-door environments with smart mobile devices without relying on a GPS signal. 
The selection committee was impressed by the real-world practical applications 
of the selected paper and its style of experimentation and evaluation. As one review
-er noted, ﬁThe authors have made a valuable contribution through their open and 

detailed descriptions of their experience in every step, including the dif˜culties en
-countered along the way and the alternatives proposed to confront each dif˜culty.ﬂ 
Our congratulations go to the winners and our thanks to selection committee 
members Cornelius Ncube, Julius Stuller, Lorenzo Catelli, Keith Chen, Ventatesh-
Prasad Ranganath, John Favaro, Ayse Bener, Maurizio Morisio, Linda Rising, Bob 
Glass, and Hakan Erdogmus. 
ACSEAC 2013 will be held in Nairobi, Kenya.
 FROM THE 
EDITOR
A Healthy Perspective
What if I have a plausible and rational-
sounding story that reassures me that 
I™m holding fast to my values when 
I™m actually applying them inappro
-priately? Kruchten recommended not 

aiming to avoid cognitive biases en
-tirely (since we can™t easily change the 

result of millions of years of human 

evolution) but rather to have someone 

on the team who thinks differentlyŠ
that is, someone who doesn™t have the 
same biasesŠwho can challenge the 

status quo and help us see what we™ve 
missed. 
Lest this all start to seem a little 
abstract, I also had the chance to talk 
with someone who™s been putting 
similar approaches into practice: Ellen 
Gottesdiener is an internationally 

recognized expert in agile practices. In 

working with various organizations, 
Gottesdiener and her colleague Mary 
Gorman have developed an approach 

to requirements management in an 

agile context that is proving useful 
(www.discovertodeliver.com). As we 
talked, I realized that Gottesdiener 

was presenting an approach that, 
serendipitously, seemed designed to 
help avoid the traps and pitfalls that 

Kruchten had presented.
The agile teams that I™ve been part 
of had typically represented require
-ments by means of user stories. Gottes
-diener noted that teams often start at 

this level because it helps them make 
some quick progress, but there are 
limits. In fact, she™s found that teams 

bene˚t from looking more holistically 
at requirements and advocates think
-ing about the potential options for the 
system across seven dimensions (users 

involved, interfaces to other entities, 
actions or capabilities provided, data 
used by the system, controls enforced, 

environmental constraints, and qual
-ity attributes). Teams explore options 
along these dimensions and evaluate 
and reevaluate them. They sketch plans 
for implementing options according to 

three time horizons:
generalized ideas of what the prod
-uct is evolving into; 
more speci˚c options to be included 

in the next release; and
detailed descriptions of the work al
-located to the current iteration. 
It™s important to note that all three 
levels of planning aren™t created by 

doing a lot of time-consuming, deep 

thinking upfront. But at least the team 
can begin development having identi
-˚ed some big chunks of  functionality 
that can be ˜eshed out into stories as 

work continues (aiming to avoid analy
-sis paralysis). 
The methodology also encourages 
the team to think about what value is 

being provided by work across all three 
time horizonsŠand what value is being 
provided to different stakeholders. The 

point of identifying all of these dimen
-sions and time horizons isn™t that this 
is the magic analysis that will reveal all 
important factors. Rather, this set of 

terminology and attributes provides the 
means for having a structured conver
-sation among the various stakeholders, 
who likely have different backgrounds 

and possibly even vocabularies. (In 
short, the structure is a support mecha
-nism for implementing Kruchten™s advice 
of getting input from different perspec
-tives which can help avoid falling into bi
-asesŠit ensures that all stakeholders are 

actually talking about the same things 

and eliciting relevant information.) 
The important thing to realize is 
that as always with agile, we™re look
-ing for ways to get quick feedback. It™s 

important to informally value the sto
-ries and periodically revisit those deci
-sionsŠbut we need to avoid long and 

expensive analyses. As Kruchten noted, 

it™s not realistic to aim for making per
-fect decisions. This may mean that re
-work later becomes necessary as we 
HOW TO 
REACH 
US 
WRITERSFor detailed information on submitting articles, 
write for our Editorial Guidelines
 (software@computer.org) or access 
 www.computer.org/software/author.htm.
LETTERS TO THE EDITORSend letters to
 Editor, 
IEEE Software
  10662 Los Vaqueros Circle
  Los Alamitos, CA 90720
  software@computer.org
Please provide an email address 
 or daytime phone number with your letter.
ON THE WEBwww.computer.org/software 
SUBSCRIBEwww.computer.org/software/subscribe
SUBSCRIPTION 
 CHANGE OF 
ADDRESSSend change-of-address 
 requests for magazine subscriptions 
 to address.change@ieee.org. 
 Be sure to specify 
IEEE Software.
MEMBERSHIP  CHANGE OF 
ADDRESSSend change-of-address requests for 
 IEEE and Computer Society membership to 
member.services@ieee.org.
MISSING 
 OR DAMAGED 
COPIESIf you are missing an issue or you 
 received a damaged copy, contact 
 help@computer.org.
REPRINTS OF 
ARTICLESFor price information or to order reprints,
 send email to software@computer.org 
 or fax +1 714 821 4010.
REPRINT PERMISSIONTo obtain permission to reprint an article,
 contact the Intellectual Property Rights Of˜ce 
at copyrights@ieee.org.
 MARCH/
APR
IL 2013
 | IEEE SOFTWAR
E 5 6 IEEE SOFTWAR
E | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/
SOFTWAR
EFROM THE 
EDITOR
get a better understanding of what is 
needed. But nothing is free; the cost of 
rework needs to be evaluated against 
the bene˚t of having gotten a better 

idea of customer needs and tested the 

system™s ability to meet them. 
Essentially, what Gottesdiener pre
-sented was a software ﬁprocessﬂ in the 

best sense of the term: an approach 

that can be tested (and, dare I say, pi
-loted) as to the value it provides, and 

one that advocates speci˚c steps not for 

their own sakes, but as guideposts that 
guard against us falling into the games 
and cognitive biases that we can recog
-nize in any human endeavor.
As always, my conversations 

with Philippe and Ellen con
-tained more details and fasci
-nating anecdotes than I could include in 

this article. If you are interested in this 

subject matter, you can ˚nd the full inter
-views at www.computer.org/software-
 multimedia/march-april-2013.
FORRES
T SHULL 
is a division director at the 
Fraunhofer Center for Experimental Software 
Engineering in Maryland, a nonpro˜t research and 

tech transfer organization, where he leads the 

Measurement and Knowledge Management Division. 

He™s also an adjunct professor at the University of 

Maryland College Park and editor in chief of 
IEEE 

Software
. Contact him at fshull@computer.org.
IEEE SOFTWAR
E CALL FOR PAPERS
Special Issue on Architecture Sustainability

Change is the norm in software, and architects must address and 

embrace it to ensure the architecture can endure different types 
of change via ef˚cient maintenance and evolution throughout its 
entire life cycle. Some changes might only affect local parts of a 
system, while others have more systemic impact that can involve 
various stakeholders and disciplines. 
In general, architects can employ three approaches to handle 
change: refactoring, renovating, and rearchitecting. Such strategies 
contribute to the overall area of architecture sustainabilityŠbut 
have yet to be treated as a coherent whole. The aim of this special 
issue is to encourage such discussions. 
Possible topics include but are not limited to:
State of the art and practice in architecture sustainability
Recognizing architectural sustainability problems early by 
architecture introspection (performed by the architects them
-selves) and assessment (performed by a third party)
Fundamental elements of architecture refactoring, rearchi
-tecting and renovating, how they complement each other, 
and strategies for recognizing when they are appropriate 
Ensuring architecture sustainability through architecture 
governance
Processes, tools, and technologies to support refactoring, 
renovating, rearchitecting, and their governance
Managing traceability between requirements and architec
-ture decisions that lead to architecture success or problems
The effect of architectural drift or erosion on architectural 
sustainability and potential countermeasures
Questions?
For more information about the focus, contact the guest editors:
Paris Avgeriou, University of Groningen, The Netherlands, 
paris@cs.rug.nl
Michael Stal, Siemens Corporate Technology, Germany, 
michael.stal@siemens.com
Rich Hilliard, software systems architect, USA, 
 
r.hilliard@computer.org
Submission Guidelines
Manuscripts must not exceed 4,700 words including ˚gures and 
tables, which count for 200 words each. Submissions in excess of 

these limits may be rejected without refereeing. The articles we 

deem within the theme and scope will be peer-reviewed and are 

subject to editing for magazine style, clarity, organization, and 

space. We reserve the right to edit the title of all submissions. Be 

sure to include the name of the theme or special issue for which 

you are submitting.
Articles should have a practical orientation and be written in a 
style accessible to practitioners. Overly complex, purely research-

oriented or theoretical treatments are not appropriate. Articles 

should be novel.
 IEEE Software 
does not republish material 

published previously in other venues, including other periodicals 

and formal conference/workshop proceedings, whether previous 

publication was in print or electronic form.
Full author guidelines: 
www.computer.org/software/author.htm
Submission details: 
software@computer.org

Submit an article: 
https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/sw-cs
FIND US ON FACE
BOOK 
& TWITTER!facebook.com/
ieeesoftware
twitter.com/
 ieeesoftware
