 0740-7459/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE
 JULY/AUGUST 2013
 | IEEE 
SOFTW
ARE 3Getting an Intuition 
for Big Data
Forrest Shull
LET ME PUT 
my personal experience 
right up front: as a researcher, I™m a 
data analyst by trade and have spent 
a large portion of my career combing 

through data sets of various sizes, do
-mains, and quality. I even enjoy statis
-tics humor (for example, http://xkcd.

com/552). It™s a rewarding job, but I™ve 

seen lots of ways that analysts can get 

things wrong, including having faith in 
untrustworthy data, bad assumptions 
made about what the data are really 

describing, and incorrect mathematics. 
(The now-infamous Reinhart-Rogoff 
spreadsheet error, which has had real-
world implications in the extent to 

which it affected the evidential support 
for policies of economic austerity [www.
nytimes.com/2013/04/30/opinion/debt
 -and-growth-a-response-to-reinhart
 -and-rogoff.html], is exactly the kind of 

thing that keeps me up at night.)
In this issue, we™re tackling the topic 
of software analytics, and it™s truly an 

exciting time to be following this ˜eld 

and watching the many capabilities 
being developed. But given the size of 
the datasets involved, how do you dis
-tinguish an ﬁaha!ﬂ moment, where 

the size and richness of the data yield 
a surprising new insight, from a ﬁRe
-inhart-Rogoff moment,ﬂ where the size 
and richness of the data make it easy to 
miss an error somewhere along the line 
that spuriously affects the conclusions?
Recently, I had the opportunity to 
speak with some of the experts doing 
very exciting work with big data to ask 
them, how do you build trustable big 

data systems?
Iterative 
Model Building
Paul Zikopoulos, director of techni
-cal professionals for IBM Software 
Group™s Information Management 
division, also leads the World Wide 

Competitive Database and Big Data 

Technical Sales Acceleration teams. 
Several of his 16 published books are 
on the subject of big data. I started 

by expressing to him my worries that, 

given the size of a typical ﬁbig dataﬂ 
dataset, analysts can no longer intuit 
for themselves about what™s really in 

their data. He didn™t dismiss this con
-cern, but he turned to a helpful meta
-phor and asked me to think about big 

data analytics as being like using GPS 

while driving a car. Both have helpful 
capabilities and can support a person 
in doing things that he or she couldn™t 

do as well by themselves. But just like 

a driver can get into trouble by blindly 
following GPS and ignoring the real
-ity outside the car window, it would be 
a mistake to slavishly follow the data 

miners to the point where you™ve lost 
the connection to reality. 
Paul emphasized an idea that I™ve 
heard from other sources as well: the 

best way to think about using big 
data, if you want to make sure that 
It would be a mistake to slavishly follow 
the data miners to the point where 

you™ve lost the connection to reality.
 4 IEEE 
SOFTW
ARE | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/SOFTW
AREoutcomes are real and appropriate, 
is to think of the mode of interaction 
as being one of hypothesis testing. 
The data miners will produce some 

results, but it™s up to the domain ex
-perts to come up with possible expla
-nations for what those results really 

mean and then ˜nd ways to test those 

hypotheses. Such testing might involve 

more data mining or exploring ideas 
via data visualizations. On this latter 
point, a range of visualizations will 

work and need not be sophisticated to 
be usefulŠtag clouds can be surpris
-ingly effective even on big datasets for 
understanding themes and patterns. 

The advantage of big data and the au
-tomated data mining that goes with 

it is that such hypothesis testing can 

be done at scaleŠthousands of runs 

of the models can be done overnight 
with different parameters. Moreover, 

doing this hypothesis testing correctly 
has to be viewed as a collaborative 
enterprise: the feeling of ﬁI think I™ve 

found somethingﬂ has to come from 

the business user, who can recognize 
actionable and insightful ˜ndings as 
they come along. But exploring and 

nailing down those ˜ndings requires 

working with the IT department to 
run the tests on various hypotheses.
One way to describe the process is 
as ﬁrapid model development.ﬂ Or
-ganizations build models of what™s in 
the data, at rest, in the usual way. The 

model gets evaluated in the ways we™re 

used to, starting with measures of pre
-cision and recall, and those metrics 

are used to ˜ne-tine the model from 

there. The usual best practices (such 

as masking personal data) must be ap
-plied, but in ways capable of dealing 

with the volume of data streaming in. 
Big data changes the aperture on the 
modelŠwe™re dealing with many more 

attributes and data points than ever be
-foreŠbut not the underlying mechan
-ics. As always, my conversation in
-cluded many more nuggets than would 

˜t into this column; interested read
-ers will enjoy hearing more of Paul™s 

thoughts on big data at www.computer.

org/software-multimedia.
Building the Human 
 Intuition in Big Data
Intrigued by the idea of visualizations 

helping humans better understand 
what™s lurking in all that big data, I 
talked with experts at the University 

of Maryland™s Human Computer In
-teraction Lab (HCIL). The HCIL is the 
oldest center in the US focusing on re
-search in HCI, and is still going strong. 
I spoke with Catherine Plaisant, Asso
-ciate Director of Research, and Megan 
Monroe, PhD student. Their ﬁEvent
-Flowﬂ project represents an important 
effort in making ﬁbig data-sizeﬂ datas
-ets more tractable for human reasoning.
The project™s goal is to summarize 
very large datasets of medical data, con
-sisting of records from millions of pa
-tients, on a single display so that users 

can get an overview without scrolling or 

paging. In this view, EventFlow presents 

an aggregate of the data that shows the 
most common patterns. It also lets users 
query and interact with the dataset to 

look in more detail at speci˜c subsets. 

(For more info, including demos, see 
the video at http://medianetwork.oracle.
com/video/player/2079912021001 or 

the project homepage at www.cs.umd.
edu/hcil/event˚ow.)
This project grew out of prior work 
that focused on summarizing a single 
person™s medical data. That earlier 
work focused on using a representation 
called ﬁLifelinesﬂ to provide an easy-

to-understand summary of one person™s 
SA
TU
RN AW
ARDS
Continuing a tradition that was started in 2010, 
IEEE Software
 this year collaborated 
on recognizing top content at the Software Engineering Institute™s SATURN 2013 
conference, which was held 29 April to 3 May. The SATURN conference aims to 
help architecture practitioners from around the world connect with one another, 

share best practices, and ˜nd promising solutions. Within that already very forward-
looking and practical community, 
IEEE Software
 helps call attention to the kind of 
rigorous yet pragmatic content that we like to feature by sponsoring two awards. 
Selected based on votes from attendees, the Architecture in Practice Award is 
given to the presentation that best describes experiences, methods, and lessons 
learned from the implementation of architecture-centric practices. This year™s 

winner was Simon Brown of Coding the Architecture, for his presentation titled 
ﬁThe Con˚ict between Agile and Architecture: Myth or Reality.ﬂ The New Directions 
Award is given to the presentation that best describes innovative new approaches 

and thought leadership in the application of architecture-centric practices. This 
year™s winner was Darryl Nelson of Raytheon for his presentation titled, ﬁNext-Gen 
Web Architecture for the Cloud Era.ﬂ General Chair Bill Pollak noted that ﬁthese 

awards – contribute to the maturation of the practice of software architecture by 
recognizing sound and innovative practices.ﬂ
Several additional presentations at the conference were also recognized based 
on positive feedback from conference attendees, as well as their relevance to both 

architecture practice and the 
IEEE Software
 audience; they™ve been invited to submit 
articles for consideration in future issues.
  JULY/AUGUST 2013
 | IEEE 
SOFTW
ARE 5FROM THE 
EDITOR
medical history over years of care. The 
EventFlow work now builds another 
level of complexity where analysts can 
look across many such patients. Such 

work supports new approaches to med
-ical research, in which an increasing 
number of investigations can now be 
done retrospectivelyŠthat is, by ana
-lyzing what has happened in previous 

cases where the illness or event was 
seenŠand don™t always require new 
clinical studies to investigate a spe
-ci˜c hypothesis. The intended users for 
now are clinical researchers, although 
I think it™s easy to imagine a physician 

in the not-too-distant future asking 

EventFlow to help identify records that 
match a current patient, to get a sense 
of how treatment options have worked 

in the past.
Catherine and Megan mentioned 
that the EventFlow dataset™s size was a 

novelty for visualization work and rep
-resented new challenges related to scale. 

But at the same time, they stressed that 
the challenges weren™t where you might 
expect: performance and processing 

power weren™t areas of concern; rather, 
the hard problems were related to how 
to make the display usable given the 
amount of data that had to be pre
-sented intelligibly.
In describing the importance of sup
-porting visualizations for such large 

datasets, Megan likes to reference the 

saying that ﬁit™s more about the jour
-ney than the destination.ﬂ She painted 

a picture that was very similar to Paul™s 

theme of ﬁhypothesis testing.ﬂ Cer
-tainly, it™s possible to give researchers 
an answer to a given question just us
-ing data mining techniques. But often, 
the very de˜nition of what constitutes 
a meaningful event pattern changes as 
researchers do the exploration through 

visualization tools.
We might think that the volume of 
big data ensures that the answers are 

always buried in there, just needing 

to be found. However, Catherine and 

Megan have found that, just like hy
-pothesis testing in the small, analysts 

often realize that they need yet more 

data as new hypotheses arise. They 

described a cycle they™ve often seen, 
in which data needs to narrow down 
relatively quickly; as a user discovers 

what™s interesting and relevant, it™s of
-ten only a subset of the available data 

˜elds that become important. But even 
STAFFLead Editor 
 Brian Brannon
 bbrannon@computer.org
Content Editor 
 Camber Agrelius
Manager, Editorial Services
 Jenny Stout
Senior Editor
 Linda World
Publications Coordinator
 software@computer.org
Production and Design Editor,
 Webmaster
 Jennie Zhu-Mai
Contributor
 Alex Torres
Cover Artist
 Eero Johannes 
Director, Products & Services
 Evan Butter˜eld
Senior Manager, Editorial Services
 Robin Baldwin
Senior Business Development Manager
 Sandra Brown
Membership Development Manager
 Cecelia Huffman
Senior Advertising Coordinator
 Marian Anderson
 manderson@computer.org
CS PUBLICA
TIONS BOARDThomas M. Conte (chair), Alain April, 
 David Bader, Angela R. Burgess, Greg Byrd, 
Koen DeBosschere, Frank E. Ferrante, 
 Paolo Montuschi, Linda I. Shafer, 
 and Per Stenström
MA
GAZIN
E  OPE
RA
TIONS
 COMM
ITTEE
Paolo Montuschi (Chair), Erik R. Altman, 
 Nigel Davies, Lars Heide, Simon Liu, 
 Cecilia Metra, Shari Lawrence P˚eeger, 
Michael Rabinovich, Forrest Shull, 
 John R. Smith, Gabriel Taubin, 
 George K. Thiruvathukal, Ron Vetter, 
 and Daniel Zeng
Editorial: 
All submissions are subject to editing 
 for clarity, style, and space. Unless otherwise 
 stated, bylined articles and departments, 
 as well as product and service descriptions, 
 re˜ect the author™s or ˚rm™s opinion. Inclusion in 
 IEEE Software
 does not necessarily constitute endorse
-ment by IEEE or the IEEE Computer Society.
To Submit: 
Access the IEEE Computer Society™s 
 Web-based system, ScholarOne, at 
 http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/sw-cs. Be sure to se
-lect the right manuscript type when submitting. Articles 
must be original and not exceed 4,700 words including 
˚gures and tables, which count for 200 words each.
IEEE prohibits discrimination, harassment and 
 bullying:
 For more information, visit www.ieee.org/
web/aboutus/whatis/policies/p9-26.html.
IB
M IMP
AC
T UNC
ONFE
RENC
EIEEE Software
 also had a presence last month at IBM™s Impact conference, where 
we sponsored the ﬁUnconference.ﬂ In contrast to a traditional conference, in an 
unconference, potential speakers and topics come from volunteers and confer
-ence attendees (in this case, numbering over 8,000), who vote for the most inter
-esting selections. 
IEEE Software
 is pleased to help support this innovative format, 
which so well re˚ects our emphasis on addressing the hot topics that software 
engineers need to master to keep up with their ˜eld.
To set the right tone, the unconference was kicked off with a thought-provok
-ing discussion between Grady Booch, author of our ﬁOn Computingﬂ department, 

and Tim O™Reilly, the founder and CEO of O™Reilly Media, two leading experts who 

are as familiar as anyone with the topics on the mind of today™s software engi
-neers. Enjoy excerpts from their fun and insightful back and forth at www.
 
computer.org/software-multimedia.
 6 IEEE 
SOFTW
ARE | WWW.COMPUT
ER.ORG/SOFTW
AREFROM THE 
EDITOR
in big data, it often becomes impor
-tant to expand the dataset to draw 
in more types of information as new 
questions arise. Data analysis often 

has cycles of dataset contraction and 

expansion as users get a better idea 
about what™s interesting, and that cy
-cle doesn™t change just because we™re 
dealing with big data.
For all of the above reasons, my in
-terviewees stressed that visualization 

isn™t in an adversarial role to data min
-ing, although it™s sometimes presented 
as if computer-assisted and automated 
pattern detection are two incompatible 
and competing philosophies. The real
-ity is quite the opposite: visualization 
and data mining should proceed in tan
-dem, each helping the other to deliver a 
holistic look at the data™s meaning.
And as to how those visualizations 
should be designed in the era of big 

data, Ben Shneiderman, the HCIL™s 

founder, has a mantra that visualiza
-tion tools should provide an overview 
˜rst, then allow zooming and ˜lter
-ing, and provide deeper details on de
-mand. Megan and Catherine have a 

lot of experience that shows this still 
provides a useful approach even when 
dealing with big data; to hear more 

about these experiences, listen to our 

conversation at www.computer.org/

software-multimedia. 
Thus the directions that research 
is taking for visualizing big data are a 

mix: both applying existing principles 

such as ﬁdetails on demandﬂ at higher 
levels of scale (for example, providing 
more levels of drill-down between the 

overview and the lowest level of gran
-ularity) and also coming up with new 

and specialized visualizations that al
-low larger quantities of data to be rep
-resented intelligibly. And as such tools 
become more sophisticated and more 
mainstream, I can hope we™re building 

toward a scenario where humans can 

be just as comfortable with the nuts 
and bolts of a big dataset as we™ve been 
for other analyses.
FORR
EST SHULL
 is a division director at the 
Fraunhofer Center for Experimental Software 
Engineering in Maryland, a nonpro˜t research and 

tech transfer organization, where he leads the 

Measurement and Knowledge Management Division. 

He™s also an adjunct professor at the University of 

Maryland College Park and editor in chief of 
IEEE
 Software
. Contact him at fshull@computer.org.
WELC
OME NEW A
DVIS
ORY 
BO
ARD
 MEM
BERS
I™m very pleased to welcome two new members to our advisory board.
Rafael Prikladnicki is a professor in the Computer Science School at PUCRS, 
Brazil. His areas of expertise are distributed software development and agile 
methods for software development. Prikladnicki is director of the Technology 

Management Agency (AGT) at PUCRS, where he™s responsible for managing the 
interaction between PUCRS and its industry and government partners for the 
development of R&D projects. His 2007 book, 
Distributed Software Development: 

Developing Software with Distributed Teams
, was the ˜rst Portuguese book on this 
topic, and he also leads one of the main research groups in this area in Brazil. In 

2011, Prikladnicki received the PhD innovation award, promoted by FAPERGS (the 

state of Rio Grande do Sul funding agency) for his research on global software 
engineering, conducted in collaboration with companies at Tecnopuc (PUCRS™ 
Scienti˜c and Technology Park). 
Walker Royce is the Chief Software Economist in IBM™s Software Group and a 
principal consultant and practice leader specializing in measured improvement of 

systems and software development capability. Royce is the author of three books: 

Eureka! Discover and Enjoy the Hidden Power of the English Language
 (Morgan 
James, 2011), 
The Economics of Software Development
 (Addison-Wesley, 2009), 
and 
Software Project Management, A Uni˜ed Framework
 (Addison-Wesley, 1998). 

From 1994 through 2009, Royce was the vice president and general manager of 
IBM™s Rational Services organization and built a worldwide team of 500 technical 
specialists in software delivery best practices and $100 million in consulting 

services. Before joining Rational/IBM, he spent 16 years in software project 
development, software technology development, and software management roles at 
TRW Electronics & Defense. Royce was a recipient of TRW™s Chairman™s Award for 

Innovation for his contributions in distributed architecture middleware and iterative 
software processes in 1990 and was a TRW Technical Fellow. 
NEXT I
SS
UE:
September/
October 2013
 The 
Many 
Faces 
of Software 
Analytics
See 
www.computer.org/software
 -multimedia for multimedia 
content related to this article.
