 50 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE
focus 1
those who followed agile™s standard ﬁKISŠ
 Keep it Simpleﬂ approach and initialized the 
timer™s hardware registers in the order the 
parameters were passed into the subroutine 

(TCOUNT
, then 
TPERIOD
; see Figure 1, lines 11, 12); 
and 
those who set the registers in a contrary order 
 (TPERIOD
, then 
TCOUNT
; lines 16, 17). 
The ˜rst group™s tests failed (lines 29, 30); the sec
-ond group™s tests passed (lines 23, 24). Before the 
students informed us of this incongruence, they 

discussed the issue among themselves and iden
-ti˜ed a previously unrecognized silicon anomaly: 

the 
TPERIOD
 register was overwriting the 
TCOUNT
 register.
Why did inexperienced students successfully 
identify an undocumented feature that industrial 

˜rms, with product lines involving many tens of 

thousands of units of this processor, did not? We 
believe that the Embedded-Unit TDD environ
-ment enabled the students to easily apply basic 
agile concepts. In particular, the framework pro
-vided a stable, easy-to-learn environment through 

which the students could solve problems gener
-ated at both the hardware and software levels. 
Also, TDD reminds many students of other as
-pects of their training: strong parallels exist be
-tween the scienti˜c method and TDD, with the 
establishment of a hypothesis (test) followed by 
its experimental realization (solution code).
Given this initial success, we asked ourselves a 
question related to our own research: Would gen
-eralizing other agile concepts into a full embedded 

system approach assist during medical embedded 
instrument development? Christian Denger and his 

colleagues indicate that people in this area often 
have no formal testing training, leading to many 
health and safety concerns.
2 Bill Greene has sug
-gested that agile™s barely suf˜cient processes should 
be acceptable to embedded system engineers who 
recognize the need for reliable products but aren™t 
Since 2004, we™ve successfully used a prototype test-driven development (TDD) 
embedded system test framework, called Embedded-Unit, in our undergradu
-ate classes and research work.
1 During the original course offering, we gave 
students a brief introduction to TDD concepts for embedded development. We 
then asked them to write tests that expressed the design ideas surrounding the initialization 

of the Analog Devices ADSP-BF5XX (Black˜n) processor™s core timer. When developing 
the code to satisfy the tests, the students split into two groups:
The authors discuss 
their successes 

and the remaining 
challenges in 
helping customers 

and developers 

apply an Extreme 
Programming-
inspired life cycle 
 
and testing 

frameworks to 

embedded system 
development.
Michael Smith, 
University of Calgary
James Miller, 
University of Alberta

Lily Huang, 
NovATel

Albert Tran, 
DirectVoxx 
A More Agile 
 Approach to Embedded 
System Development
embedded software
  May/June 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 51eager to implement process improvement edicts 
from above.
3 Indeed, with many embedded prod
-ucts having a near-zero tolerance for defects, a 
highly test-oriented process would seem to provide 
an appropriate design approach.  However, Greene 

and those following in his footsteps point out the 

same basic problems in adopting many agile con
-cepts: lack of tools to support speci˜c embedded 

requirements, memory limitations when using ex
-isting tools translated into this new environment, 

stricter timing requirements, and issues speci˜c 
to the particular processor used in the product™s 
design.  
Recently we™ve identi˜ed how to use new de
-bug hardware in modern embedded processors to 

solve many of the problems detailed by Greene.
4,5
 Therefore, the time was appropriate to explain why 
we felt that one simple embedded teaching success 
should be expanded into a full-blown Extreme 

Programming-inspired (XPI) embedded life cycle.
XPI Embedded System Life Cycle
Biomedical-instrument development typically starts 

with an initial scienti˜c investigation to examine 
new hypotheses for medical diagnosis and analysis. 
This is followed by the proposed algorithm mov
-ing through several life-cycle phases to the ˜nished 

medical embedded product. We believe that the 
lack of consideration of agile approaches for devel
-opment within biomedical and other embedded en
-vironments is caused by two factors:
Lack of full life-cycle support
 . Embedded ap
-plications have a life cycle different from that 
of desktop applications. So, agile production 
processes require signi˜cant alteration to meet 

this new domain™s demands.

Lack of tool support
 . Without full life-cycle 
tool support, no change to production pro
-cesses can succeed. Again, desktop tools 

must be adapted to accommodate this new 
environment.
While XP is normally considered a ﬁgeneral 
approach,ﬂ we™ve adapted an XP subset to de˜ne 

the core of a full life-cycle fault prevention ap
-proach to producing embedded software. Because 
industrial-based empirical studies have demon
-strated that TDD is an effective defect reduction 
strategy in nonembedded situations,
6 we antici
-pated that these advantages would transfer into 
the embedded domain. However, signi˜cant ad
-aptation is required, so XP™s creators might well 

not view the adapted approach as being faithful 

to their original concept. Our XPI process seeks 
to transform their preexisting processes into a 
Figure 1. The 
Embedded-Unit tests 
 for initializing the 

Black˜n core timer 

via two seemingly 

equivalent C++ routines 

(lines 11, 12 and 
 16, 17). Undocumented 

silicon-level behavior 

resulted in one assert 

unexpectedly failing 

(line 29) and another 

unexpectedly passing 

(line 30). 
 52 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   www.computer.org/software
structure that recognizes this new domain™s pro
-duction objectives.
Stage 1: Envisioning XPI Embedded Products
In effect, this stage produces requirements. The 
customers or end users (domain-knowledgeable 
personnel) should be able to specify their ideas as 
a set of acceptance tests (in conjunction with stan
-dard user stories) in a straightforward manner. 

However, our approach to implementing Stage 
1 deviates from the traditional viewpoint in four 
respects:
Coverage
 . Current acceptance-test-oriented ap
-proaches provide limited information regard
-ing test case volume and diversity. However, 

guidance toward the production of a compre
-hensive set of tests from the customer, in con
-junction with the domain technical specialists, 

is paramount to successful production.

Nonfunctional tests. 
 Kent Beck describes XP 
nonfunctional testing as a process to be un
-dertaken after system production.
7 However, 
we believe that nonfunctional acceptance tests 
must be speci˜ed as early as possible, so we™re 
redeveloping acceptance-testing frameworks to 

support these essential components.

Domain-speci˜c support
 . The current test vec
-tors supported by acceptance-testing frame
-works are straightforward, and assume that 

you can encode knowledge using simple data 

types (such as strings and numbers), an ap
-proach appropriate for the business commu
-nity. However, the embedded community has 

its own fundamental data typesŠfor example, 
signals and imagesŠwhich currently aren™t 
well supported. 

High-level prototyping
 . Unlike a standard XP 
process, our acceptance tests now drive a high-
level prototyping stage (Stage 2) rather than the 
˜nal production stage (Stage 4).
The tabular form used in the Fit/FitNesse test 
frameworks (illustrated later in Figure 2) is one 
way for the customer to produce executable test 

statements.
8Stage 2: XPI Prototyping
Consider a medical instrumentation application. 

At this point in development, domain-knowl
-edgeable technical personnel produce an initial 

prototype to analyze the proposed embedded so
-lution. The solution would revolve around numeri
-cal algorithms implemented in a mathematically 
oriented scripting language such as Matlab. This 
stage effectively de˜nes the system™s functionality 
and the corresponding set of test objectives. This 
involves two steps:
Developing additional acceptance test cases
 . During prototype production, interteam com
-munication will lead to additional understand
-ing of the system, captured as additional accep
-tance test cases.
Using TDD supported by a testing framework 
 designed for Matlab development
.9 Despite the 
domain technical specialist being highly skilled 
in writing Matlab code, ﬁformalizedﬂ testing 
tends to be an overlooked skill in the specialist™s 

repertoire. Adopting TDD is intended to resolve 

this problem.
In other words, whereas Stage 1™s acceptance tests 

provide the initial skeleton for the prototype, Stage 

2 adds ﬁ˚eshﬂ onto this outline.
Stage 3: Initial XPI Production System
We must rewrite the system in a high-level compiled 

language such as C or C++. The biggest issues here 
surround the refactoring necessary to support mov
-ing Matlab ˚oating-point calculations onto high-
speed, low-cost embedded processors 
that can han
-dle
 integer operations. This ﬁtranslationﬂ requires 
awareness of the issues of determining levels of 

signal scaling to maintain appropriate algorithmic 

accuracy.
Stage 3 basically repeats the pattern from Stage 
2, but in a new programming language using a 

new unit-testing framework. However, because of 

the existence of the previous stages, we™ve already 
constructed numerous tests. So, much of this third 
stage is better described as a ﬁdesign by contract 

meets TDDﬂ process. This iterative, and gradual, 

form of producing contractual objectives should 
lower the task™s cognitive overhead, leading to ﬁav
-erageﬂ practitioners producing more-comprehensive 
contractual statements.
Stage 4: 
Full XPI Production System
By the fourth stage, we™re fully involved with the 

target embedded environment itself. The system, 
although repeating earlier patterns, now needs to 
adapt to its new hardware environment with lim
-ited memory resources and must support interac
-tions with device-speci˜c peripherals on the target 
system. The system undergoes further modi˜cation 
to tune for the required performance by
rewriting inef˜cient programming constructs,
 using signal-processing-speci˜c 
 #pragma
 state
-Unlike 
 a standard 
 XP process, 
our acceptance 
tests now drive 
a high-level 
prototyping 
stage.
  May/June 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 53ments to direct architecturally aware compilers, 
and
rewriting critical components in low-level, 
 highly customized machine code.
The unit test framework becomes a signi˜cant issue 

because the unit tests must now live on the embed
-ded board. The transmission of any testing scripts 
from the host machine to the target, or the reverse 

transmission of test-relevant diagnostic informa
-tion, becomes a major undertaking that possibly 

compromises real-time operations.
Refactoring
This central issue in TDD processes must be reex
-amined in light of this new environment. A recent 
study of software developers™ work habits by Em
-erson Murphy-Hill and Andrew P. Black suggests 
that
10developers use refactoring tools mainly for re
- naming functions or methods or for moving or 
extracting methods from classes; and
experts perform more-complex refactoring 
 by hand rather than with tool support, a con
-cept that hardly seems agile (Murphy-Hill and 
Black™s comments also imply nonexperts don™t 
perform complex refactoring).
Although we need standard capabilities such 
as renaming in a Matlab refactoring tool, we also 

need features with no equivalence in desktop refac
-toringŠfor example, the ability to recognize and 
declare variables to automate the addition of the 
equivalent of 
int fooArray[XXX]
 for each dynamically al
-located Matlab array. This would be useful in mak
-ing automatic Matlab-to-embedded-system code 

translation tools more reliable and ef˜cient. The 

advantages of a tool capable of refactoring classes 

are unclear; many developers avoid using Matlab 
classes, given the inef˜ciency with which transla
-tion programs convert these classes into code that 
embedded compilers can handle.
As for manual refactoring, it will be IT nonspe
-cialists who will produce the Matlab code during 

Stage 2 prototyping. Would any real payback occur 

if they refactored the code at this earlier life-cycle 
stage? We believe the answer is no. Refactoring seeks 
to improve the code™s structure. However, early re
-organization will likely hide possible embedded-
 system-speci˜c ef˜ciencies that, at Stage 4, would 
permit the embedded code to meet key real-time is
-sues. Indeed, many standard refactoring practices 
are more appropriately applied only in Stage 4 of this 

embedded life cycleŠand then only to the (many) 
embedded code sections that aren™t time critical. In 

addition, would the nonprogramming specialists in 

the (medical) embedded industry
2 have the neces
-sary capabilities or training for manual refactoring? 
We again believe the answer is no, despite unit tests 
offering some protection against the additional de
-fects that manual processes are likely to introduce.
Embedded XPI 
 Testing Frameworks 
The following case studies investigate the issues 

surrounding development of the wide variety of 
testing frameworks needed to support our pro
-posed XPI embedded life cycle.
Case Study 1: Supporting 
 Continual Customer Involvement 
As low-level embedded developers, we initially 
excluded any customer support component from 
our embedded life-cycle processes, assuming that 
only a low-level, embedded-xUnit, developer-
 oriented viewpoint was necessary. Initial ex
-perience and industrial feedback quickly dis
-avowed us of this assumption.
We implemented a three-level Fit approach 
(see Figure 2) to fully support customer in
-volvement. In Stage 1 (product envisioning), a 
 Matlab-Fit server lets the customer get in
-volved with the developers to explore the ba
-sic ideas behind the product. The developers 
then express these ideas as Matlab code (Stage 
2) and then demonstrate to the customer, via 

Matlab-Fit, that they™re remaining true to the 

original concept. Using other servers lets the 
developers use the same customer tests when 
the product moves out of theory (Stage 2) and 

into simulation (Stage 3, using C++-FitNesse
7) and actual product testing (Stage 4, Embedded-
FitNesse
11).This work with Matlab-Fit was successful; 
however, several issues remain. Certain embed
-ded test classes, such as those involving precise 
mathematical relationships, are easy to express 

through Fit tables. However, although existing 
Fit ˜xtures make representing images syntacti
-cally possible, there™s no real semantic support 
for Fit as a communication framework for dis
-cussing the image-related issues common in 
medical applications. Essentially, the support is 
limited to detailing whether or not correspond
-ing pixels in two images are identical.
All the technical logistics are in place for 
Embedded-FitNesse, but true practicality cur
-rently eludes us. We could, for example, extend 

Fit tables to handle the timing relationships 
 54 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   www.computer.org/software
needed to generate the embedded system sig
-nals that activate devices accepting, rejecting, 
or packing medical samples on the basis of use-
by dates. However, the Fit server (running in 

Java and C++ on a PC) must interact with the 

embedded development system API (propriety 
code) to control the processor over an elongated 
test execution path (see Figure 2). Given the 

continual reloading of recompiled code occur
-ring over this channel, the current Embedded-
FitNesse prototype is too slow to act as a test 
framework to support practical acceptance-

test-driven de
 velopment.
Case Study 2: Generating Stage 2 xUnit 
Tools
We initially planned to support the latter three 
stages of the embedded life cycle using identical 
xUnit tests. The complex Matlab/C++ interface 
makes this possible but impractical.
We™re extending MUnit
9 to enable us to use a 
TDD approach to perform fundamental research 
before tackling true product speci˜cation. For ex
-ample, we need to modify this automated Matlab 
testing framework to better visualize whether a 

hypothesis test failed because of a fundamental, 
theoretical misunderstanding or simply because 
of a missing scaling factor during algorithm 

implementation. The standard MUnit visualiza
-tion primitive ﬁPress the PASS button if this pic
-ture looks correctﬂ is totally inadequate for this 

purpose, in addition to being nonautomated. To 
compensate, we™ve extended MUnit to use new 

test approaches that extend the concept of what 

constitutes a failure beyond the basic interpreta
-tion of incorrectness (
FAILURE()
 will
 ﬁset the barﬂ 
red). We now permit a Gaussian error distribu
-tion to generate an 
ACCEPTABLE_FAILURE() 
(ﬁset the 
barﬂ speckled green) if the experimental sig
-nals possess a low signal-to-noise ratio but force 

an 
EXPECTED_FAILURE()
 report (ﬁset the barﬂ yel
-low) when the experimental signals have a high 
signal-to-noise ratio. 
Case Study 3: Generating Stage 3 
 and 4 xUnit 
Tools
The agile community strongly holds one key te
-net: tests should be written in the language of the 

code they™re validating. If that concept is worth
-while, then so should be its obvious extension: 
tests should be run on the system being validated 

This approach is related to the hardware-in-a-
loop testing ideas expressed at www.embedded.
com/15201692. That requirement rapidly com
-plicates the solution for developing an embedded 

system TDD framework, as we discussed earlier. 
Compared to desktop systems, there are limited 
memory resources, limited report-generating 

capabilities, and a stricter need to meet timing 
requirements.
3Greene suggested taking an assembly xUnit 
path to handle embedded testing.
3 With the 
wide range of assembly languages across many 
           Common Fit tableTest resultsFixture for test casesInternal to host machineExternal to host machineStage 2Product prototypingMatlab APIMatlab engineFitNesse Web serverWiki editor and storageRunnerFit serverStage 3Product simulationC / C++Stage 4Full productionDSP interface classDSP APIDSP IDDEExternal targetAssertions: 3 right, 0 wrong, 0 ignoredDSPFixture.CalculateTemperatureTestFixturevoltWidth outputTemperature100 195300 115500 35Figure 2. The three 
levels of a Fit test 

framework necessary 

for delivering customer 

acceptance tests in an 

embedded environment. 

The developer needs an 

equivalent three layers 

of unit tests.
  May/June 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 55processor families, we considered such an ap
-proach as both problematic and unnecessary 
given that C, a subset of C++, was originally 
designed to supply a universal (not processor-

speci˜c) assembly language. In a 2005 article 

on embedded TDD,
12 we discussed modifying 
an existing CPPUnitLite testing framework
13 to meet embedded systems requirements. When 
this framework is transposed and extended into 
the embedded environment as Embedded-Unit, 

its nonscripted nature can be used to full advan
-tage to ensure that real-time embedded function
-ality isn™t disrupted by continual PC processor 

communication overhead associated with issu
-ing test requests.
CHECK( )
 is a fundamental assert in unit testing 
(see Figure 1) and is equivalent to the macro
#define CHECK(condition)

  if (!(condition)) FAILURE(#condition);
Within CCPUnitLite, the low-level macro 
FAILURE( )
 uses the C++ iostream (header ˜le) to communi
-cate with the host system, which retains the po
-tential of causing a considerable impact on real-

time operation. To provide a better match to the 

embedded environment, an additional 
FAILURE( )
 channel was added within Embedded-Unit to 
make use of the JTAG Background I/O Telem
-etry Channel (BTC) available on current proces
-sors. BTC is a high-speed boundary-scan-based 
(JTAG) host-processor communications link 
that interferes minimally with normal processor 
operations. This is the ˜rst of many examples 

where co-opting specialized hardware in mod
-ern processors can overcome the obstacles to us
-ing agile methods in the embedded realm.
3Additional forms of the 
CHECK()
 asserts proved 
useful given that a different set of variable types 
are experienced in the embedded domain than 
in the business environment. For example, a 

key byte pattern (
0xF0
) might arrive au naturel 
over an 8-bit Host Link port, hidden as part of a 
16-bit serial peripheral interface channel packet 
(0x03F0
), or automatically cast into a signed 32-
bit value (
0xFFFFFFF0
) by the compiler.
In contrast to Embedded-FitNesse, Embed
-ded-Unit has proved both practical and use
-ful across a variety of processor architectures 

(single-core, multicore, and processor clusters). 

A local ˜rm is performing trials using Embed
-ded-Unit as a testing tool in an existing industry 

product involving a multithreaded natural-voice 

recognizer interacting with peripherals using a 

USB hardware stack.
5 Embedded-Unit was ini
-tially developed for the Analog Devices Black˜n 
(ADSP-BF5XX) processors. We have extended 
this embedded test framework to work with 

other processor families (Texas Instruments 

C64XX, C64XX+, and TMS470/ARM proces
-sors), in multiprocessor clusters (ADSP-TS201 

TigerSHARC), and on multicore processors 

(ADSP-BF561 Black˜n).
Case Study 4: 
Testing 
 Standalone Embedded Systems
Don™t assume that porting tools into an embed
-ded environment is simply a case of recompiling 
the code and hoping that it ˜ts into the embed
-ded system™s available memory. For example, 
consider the identi˜cation of race conditions in 

multithreaded applications. Currently, no tools 
deal effectively with general race conditions; most 
research focuses on handling data races. These 

conditions are notoriously hard to ˜nd because of 

their timing-dependent, nondeterministic nature. 
Existing software-based dynamic detection tools 
rely on invasive instrumentation to pass informa
-tion to the (host) runtime analysis engine.
14 Read
-ers familiar with Intel Thread Checker might have 
noted the following performance-related com
-ment in the tool™s internal help pages:
It is not uncommon for the memory to grow 
to twenty times the original memory re
-quirements and for the execution time (CPU 

use) to increase to more than 300 times the 

original execution time.
The impact of such an instrumentation package is 
unacceptable given embedded systems™ real-time 
requirements and limited system memory. In ad
-dition, the overall slowness of such tools makes 
them inappropriate as part of a proactive TDD 

process oriented to identifying data-race problems 
in multithreaded code early in the design process. 
To overcome these dif˜culties, we™ve prototyped 
a lightweight high-speed TDD framework plug-in, 
E-Race.
4 This plug-in innovatively employs the 
hardware registers originally added to processors 
to help debug code by watching traf˜c along the 
data and instruction buses. With this approach, 

the original thread code runs without modi˜ca
-tion, with the instruction and data ˚ow monitored 
by a low-impact hardware watchpoint unit com
-bined with a short exception handler (see Figure 3 
on the next page). Information on data race and 

other con˚icts determined through the exception 
handler is analyzed through extensions to the ex
-isting Embedded-Unit testing-framework syntax.
 56 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   www.computer.org/software
Although using a hardware-assisted embedded 
TDD framework for data race analysis conceptu
-ally offers orders-of-magnitude performance ad
-vantages over software instrumentation, its actual 
implication isn™t straightforward. Although the is
-sues discussed are speci˜c to the Analog Devices 
Black˜n processor, we ˜nd similar issues when 
exporting this Embedded-Unit plug-in to other 

processors.
With the Black˜n processors, we had already 
successfully used the processor™s internal data 

watchpoint address and counter registers to de
-velop WatchDataClass tests to monitor data 
activity.
1,12
 However, in a multithreaded test 
framework, action rather than passive monitor
-ing is needed. With watch register hardware sup
-port, we can write non-software-instrumented 
tests that run in a threaded environment to check 

whether
code segments that are setting and releasing 
 locks are executing in an incorrect sequence,

too many code executions are necessary to 
 obtain a lock before access to shared variables 

is granted,

a critical region of code isn™t being correctly 
 protected, or

appropriate locksets are absent when shared 
 memory is being accessed.
We developed Embedded-Unit tests to inves
-tigate two aspects of the E-Race plug-in. First, 

we wanted to explore how to use the instruction 

watch registers in our design of a prototype hard
-ware-assisted ﬁhappens-beforeﬂ data race analy
-sis toolŠan application not envisioned by the 

original chip designers. We also wanted to ensure, 

using the hardware data watch register capabil
-ity, that all accesses to shared memory from code 

occur under valid lock protection. This second is
-sue involves a speci˜c embedded issue given that, 
unlike Java, customized assembly code functions 

are frequently written to access memory with in
-direct pointer operations. 
Unfortunately, writing code to satisfy the 
watch-data requirements failed because of hard
-ware issues. The existing silicon implementation 

of the data watch registers throws the processor 
into an emulation mode, more appropriate for 
manual debugging than for an automated testing 

framework. Using Embedded-Unit to provide a 

stable hardware design environment, we explored 
new approaches that took into account two facts: 
we were using specialized hardware debug regis
-ters in a manner that the original silicon design
-ers couldn™t have envisioned, and these debug reg
-isters didn™t behave as we had anticipated on the 

basis of the manufacturer™s documentation.
Without going into a great deal of low-level 
detail, it™s suf˜cient to say that we obtained a 

solution by setting the hardware watch regis
-ters to ﬁsparselyﬂ trace the program execution 

˚ow rather than examining the processor state 
at every instruction. Although we implemented 
this solution to solve hardware imperfections, it 

proved the key to meeting the performance re
-quirements we needed for using E-Race in a test
-ing framework capable of supporting TDD pro
-cesses. Acquiring a data lock might take only a 

single C++ instruction in a thread-based appli
-cation, but the same operation requires multiple 

machine instructions. There™s no need to watch 

ﬁeveryﬂ instruction for possible data manipula
-tion operations. Compared to the 300-fold per
-formance loss and 20-fold increase in code size 

reported for the Intel Thread Checker software 

tool, using the hardware-assisted E-Race tool for 

data race identi˜cation incurs only a 5- to 8-fold 
performance overhead, and an increase in mem
-ory requirements of only several hundred lines 
(not Mbytes) of assembly code, independent of 
the size of the code being checked.
The E-Race plug-in has demonstrated a further 
way that the wide range of hardware capabilities 
in modern processors can be co-opted to enable 
the testing frameworks necessary to support an 
XPI embedded life cycle. Other examples include 

the use of hardware registers that monitor code 

ef˜ciency without additional software overhead, 
thus opening opportunities for nonfunctional 
tests that can directly evaluate power consump
-tion associated with particular code variants for 

handheld embedded applications. A wide range of 
timers are available on modern microcontrollers. 
This provides a redundancy that allows the use 

of timers for standard purposes while simultane
-InitializeRun originalthreadsHardwarewatchpointunitException handlerData race analysisReport resultsEmbeddedUnittesting frameworkFigure 3. Data race 
detection with E-Race. 

This hardware 

approach avoids 

extensive software 

instrumentation.
  May/June 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 57ously permitting the hardening of the testing en
-vironment so that it continues to function despite 
the nonarrival of signals (hardware handshaking) 
between the processor core and external peripher
-als. We™ve also explored applying a hardware pro
-gram trace buffer to provide a low-impact alter
-native to the software instrumentation normally 

used for analyzing test coverage.
5Our XPI embedded life cycle deviates from 

accepted XP concepts in fundamental 
ways, but it offers a path to solve many 
embedded issues. Currently, our TDD approach 
to support embedded system customer accep
-tance tests through Matlab-Fit and Embedded-
FitNesse is best described as showing ﬁpotential.ﬂ 
In contrast, we™ve had measurable success with 

the xUnit side of embedded TDD frameworks to 

support the XPI life cycle. MUnit can help gener
-ate a Matlab-executable speci˜cation document, 

but it requires further modi˜cation to be truly 

useful. Embedded-Unit, based around the non
-scripted CppUnitLite, provides an easy-to-learn 

TDD framework that operates within the limited 

resources of a single-processor, multiprocessor, 

or multicore environment without disrupting the 
system™s real-time operation. This tool has proved 
useful in identifying previously undocumented 

silicon issues and has been extended to support 

multithreaded application development.
Acknowledgments
Financial support was provided through a collabora
-tive R&D grant from Analog Devices (in Canada and 
the US) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering 

Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the Province 

of Alberta, and the University of Calgary. We thank 

A. Geras of Ideaca Knowledge Services for produc
-ing the prototype of the Matlab-Fit tool and for many 

useful discussions related to industrial applications of 

agile methodologies.
References
 1.
 J. Miller and M.R. Smith, ﬁA TDD Approach to In
 tro-
  
ducing Students to Embedded Programming,ﬂ 
Proc. 
12th Ann. Conf. Innovation and Technology in Com
-puter Science Education
 (ITiCSE 07), ACM Press, 
2007, pp. 33Œ37. 
 2.
 C. Denger et al., ﬁA Snapshot of the State of Practice in 

Software Development for Medical Devices,ﬂ 
Proc. 1st 
Int™l Symp. Empirical Software Eng. and Measurement
 (ESEM 07), IEEE CS Press, 2007, pp. 485Œ487.
 3.
 B. Greene, ﬁAgile Methods Applied to Embedded Firm
-ware Development,ﬂ
 Proc. Agile Development Conf.
 (ADC 04), IEEE CS Press, 2004, pp. 71Œ77.
 4.
 F. Huang et al., ﬁE-Race: A Hardware-Assisted Ap
-proach to Lockset-Based Data Race Detection on 

Embedded Products,ﬂ 
Proc. 19th Int™l Symp. Software 
Reliability Eng.
 (ISSRE 08), IEEE CS Press, 2008, pp. 
277Œ278. 
 5.
 A. Tran et al., ﬁA High-Performance Hardware-

Instrumented Approach to Test Coverage for Embedded 
Systems,ﬂ 
Proc. 19th Int™l Symp. Software Reliability 
Eng.
 (ISSRE 08), IEEE CS Press, 2008.
 6.
 J.C. Sanchez, L. Williams, and E.M. Maximilien, ﬁOn 
the Sustained Use of a Test-Driven Development Prac
-tice at IBM,ﬂ 
Proc. Agile 2007
, IEEE CS Press, 2007, 
pp. 5Œ14.
 7.
 K. Beck, 
Test-Driven DevelopmentŠby Example
, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
 8.
 W. Cunningham, 
FIT: Framework for Integrated Tests
, 2002; http://˜t.c2.com.
 9.
 B. Phelan, ﬁMUnit: Matlab Unit Testing,ﬂ XTargets; 

http://xtargets.com/cms/Tutorials/Matlab-
 Programming/MUnit-Matlab-Unit-Testing.html.
 10.
 E. Murphy-Hill and A.P. Black, ﬁRefactoring Tools: Fit
-ness for Purpose,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 25, no. 5, 2008, 
pp. 38Œ44.
 11.
 J. Chen et al., ﬁMaking Fit/FitNesse Appropriate for 

Biomedical Engineering Research,ﬂ 
Proc. 7th Int™l 

Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in Software
, LNCS 4044, Springer, 2006, pp. 186Œ190.
 12.
 M. Smith et al., ﬁE-TDDŠEmbedded Test Driven De
-velopment: A Tool for Hardware-Software Co-design,ﬂ 

Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in Software 
Engineering
, 6th Int™l Conf. XP 2005
, LNCS 3556, 
Springer, 2005, pp. 145Œ153.
 13.
 M. Feathers, CppUnit Wiki; cppunit.sourceforge.net/
cppunit-wiki.
 14.
 S. Savage et al., ﬁEraser: a Dynamic Data Race Detector 

for Multithreaded Programs,ﬂ 
ACM Trans. Computer 
Systems
, vol. 15, no. 4, 1997, pp. 391Œ411.
About the Authors
Michael Smith 
is a full professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering and an adjunct professor in the Department of Radiology at the University of 
Calgary. His research focuses on the application of software engineering and customized 

real-time digital-signal-processing algorithms in the context of mobile embedded systems 

and biomedical instrumentation. Smith has a PhD in physics from the University of Alberta. 

He is a Professional Engineer in the Association of Professional Engineers, Geologists, and 

Geophysicists of Alberta as well as a member of the IEEE and the International Society of 

Magnetic Resonance in Medicine. He also holds the title Analog Devices University Ambas
-sador. Contact him at smithmr@ucalgary.ca.
James Miller 
is a full professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi
-neering at the University of Alberta and an adjunct professor in the Department of Electrical 

and Computer Engineering at the University of Calgary. His research deals with software 

technology, engineering, and measurement, with a current focus on Web engineering. Miller 

has a PhD in computer science from the University of Strathclyde. He is a Professional Engi
-neer in the Association of Professional Engineers, Geologists, and Geophysicists of Alberta 

and a member of the IEEE. Contact him at james.miller@ualberta.ca.
Lily Huang 
is a ˜rmware engineer with NovATel in Calgary. She has an MSc in software 
engineering from the University of Calgary. Contact her at lily.huang@novatel.com.
Albert Tran 
is a systems design engineer at DirectVoxx in Calgary, where he™s develop
-ing natural-voice user interfaces for mobile systems. He has a BSc in computer engineering 

from the University of Calgary and is soon returning there to complete his MSc thesis on the 

testing and reliability of embedded systems. He is a graduate student member of the IEEE. 

Contact him at albert.tran@directvoxx.com.
