 70 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE
tools of the trade
Editor: Diomidis Spinellis 
 Athens University of Economics and Business 
 dds@aueb.gr
There™s not a lot you can change in the process 
of constructing a building. You must lay the 
foundation before you erect the upper ˜oors, 
and you can™t paint without having the walls 

in place. In software, we™re blessed with more 

freedom.
I recently experienced this when I implemented 
wpl
, a small system that extends arbitrary Web 
pages with links to Wikipedia en
-tries. (Try it at www.spinellis.gr/
wpl.) The system has many parts: 
tools that convert the Wikipedia 

index into a longest-pre˚x search 
data structure; an HTML parser; 
code that adds links to phrases 

matching Wikipedia entries; and 

a Web front end that fetches the 
page, adds the links, and returns 
it back. As I was adding the ˚nish
-ing touches, I re˜ected on the process I used to con
-struct the system. (I ˚nd a postmortem examination 
deeply satisfying, but this is probably because I™m 
not a medical doctor.)
What struck me were the different approaches I 
used to construct each of the system™s main parts. 
For the search data structure, I worked bottom-up: 
I ˚rst read about and experimented with a couple of 

alternatives, learning about Bloom ˚lters, tries, and 
Patricia (Practical Algorithm to Retrieve Informa
-tion Coded in Alphanumeric, and I™m not making 
this up) trees. Next, I designed the data layout and 

the low-level bit-twiddling code to add and locate 
entries. Only then did I write the tools for building 
the index and an API for searching entries in the 

data structure.
For the HTML parser and word-linking code, 
I started somewhere in the middle. I wrote a state-
transition engine to parse ﬁtag soupﬂ HTML 

(HTML that isn™t necessarily well formed), and then 
I extended it with code to add links to suitable text, 
and I added an appropriate interface.
As you™ll probably expect, for the Web front end, 
I followed yet another approach, working in a top-
down fashion. I ˚rst wrote down the server™s main 
tasks and their precise descriptions; once these were 

in place, I started working on their implementation.
As I re˜ected on my construction process, I 
wondered what made me choose three different ap
-proaches within a week: bottom-up, middle-out, 

and top-down. Are my programming work habits 
really so chaotic as they appear? If so, what am I 
doing writing columns in a magazine for software 

professionals?
The Hidden Logic
Fortunately, I quickly realized there was logic be
-hind my choices. On each subsystem, I started on the 
most dif˚cult part; the one with the largest number 
of known unknowns. For term searching, this was 

the data structure and the associated code. I needed 

a structure where I could quickly search (thousands 
of times for each processed page) for a page™s words 
and phrases matching one of the millions of Wiki
-pedia entries. For this, the structure should be com
-pact enough to ˚t in memory, yet ˜exible to allow 
for longest-pre˚x matchingŠa tall order. Once I 
had solved this low-level problem (by using a space-

optimized version of a Patricia tree), designing an 
API and building the indexing tools were easy.
Similarly, the most dif˚cult problem in the page-
processing part was the HTML parsing. On the 
basis of Postel™s law, ﬁbe conservative in what you 
do; be liberal in what you accept from others,ﬂ code 
that processes Web pages should be able to parse 
Diomidis Spinellis
Start with the 
 Most Dif˜cult Part
  March/April 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 71TOO
LS
 OF 
TH
E TRA
DEanything that remotely looks like HTML. In my 
system I had to do this ef˚ciently for the very nar
-row task of recognizing word sequences that could 

be linked to Wikipedia. In this case, the high-level 

interface and the lower-level word search and re
-placement code were considerably easier, so I ended 
up starting in the middle.
Finally, when the time came to implement the 
Web front end, I initially experienced writer™s block, 
not knowing where to start. I realized I had no clear 
understanding of how the various pieces would ˚t 
together: how to obtain the Web request™s param
-eters (to which language™s Wikipedia to link, and 
what character encoding to use), when to retrieve 
the page, what to do with the HTTP header I re
-ceived, and how to construct the response™s header. 

I escaped this impasse only when I designed the 
functionality in a top-down fashion, a choreogra
-phy that I expressed in just nine lines of high-level 
C++ code. Once I had those lines in front of me, I 

could easily see what each part would need to do. 
When I was ready to code the low-level functional
-ity, the actual mechanics of setting up socket com
-munications and talking HTTP were (almost) bor
-ing details.
... 
And Its 
Advantages ...
Starting with the most dif˚cult part has three main 
advantages. The most important concerns the man
-agement of design constraints. On a blank sheet 

of paper, the constraints we face are minimal, but 

each design decision imposes new restrictions. By 

starting with the most dif˚cult task, we ensure that 
we™ll face the fewest possible constraints and there
-fore have the maximum freedom to tackle it. When 
we then work on the easier parts, the existing con
-straints are less restraining and can even give us 
helpful guidance.
For instance, when I designed the search data 
structure in a bottom-up fashion, I realized that 

choosing the UTF-8 variable-length character en
-coding had signi˚cant advantages in terms of space 
and time ef˚ciency. Had I started my work top-

down by specifying an API that mandated the use of 
wide characters, I might have needlessly constrained 
my choice of the data structure. In contrast, when 

designing the Web front end, having various ill-
 ˚tting pieces of functionality would make it more 
dif˚cult to assemble them into an ef˚cient whole. 
So in that case, top-down design was appropriate.
The second advantage is the early shrinking of 
the project™s cone of uncertainty. Any development 
project involves elements that we don™t know at the 
beginning and discover as we progress. By putting 

the most dif˚cult (and consequently risky) part 
quickly behind us, we rapidly minimize the project™s 
unknowns and can therefore make more informed 
and intelligent decisions regarding budget, progress, 

staf˚ng, and functionality.
The ˚nal advantage has to do with human na
-ture. At a project™s beginning, we have the highest 

levels of enthusiasm and motivation; at later stages 

we can expect some disillusionment and even burn
-out. By starting with the most dif˚cult part, we 
ensure that we undertake it with a positive can-do 
attitude rather than a defeatist spirit. We can even 

apply this principle on a smaller scale by schedul
-ing dif˚cult work early in the day when the mind 
is clear and distractions are minimal. Plan boring 
meetings where they belong: at the end of the day.
... 
Further 
Applied
You can also apply the principle I™ve described 

when ordering elements of the software life cycle: 
requirements elicitation, high- and low-level design, 
coding, debugging, testing, and maintenance. Yes, 

if you™re venturing into an unknown application 

territory, start by gathering requirements. Change 
your plan, however, if you know approximately 
what you need to do, you have a good communi
-cation channel with your users, and the most dif
-˚cult part of the project is, for instance, how you™ll 
display a complex data set. In this case, your prob
-lem is not the project™s requirements but its render
-ing functionality. Therefore, spend some time ex
-perimenting with what you can achieve with, say, 
OpenGL or Ajax. Then, when you™re discussing 

requirements with your users, you can steer them 

toward the technically achievable directions rather 
than letting them specify functionality that will be 
costly to implement.
Along the same lines, if you think that testing 
will be more dif˚cult than low-level coding (it fre
-quently is in many application domains), start by 

writing your test cases. If you believe that main
-taining your system will involve a lot of effort, plan 

ahead by designing a domain-speci˚c language that 
will simplify the most common maintenance tasks. 
If your design involves a large API, sketch its con
-ventions before specifying its actual elements. If you 
think your code will need a lot of debugging, liber
-ally sprinkle assertions, logging, and hooks.
The list goes on. Whatever you do, just remem
-ber: start with the most dif˚cult part.
Diomidis Spinellis 
is an associate professor in the Department of 
Management Science and Technology at the Athens University of Econom
-ics and Business. He recently coedited
 Beautiful Architecture
 (O™Reilly, 
2009). Contact him at dds@aueb.gr.
 Any 
development 
project 
involves 
elements that 
we don™t know 
at the beginning 
and discover as 
we progress. 
Post your comments online by visiting the column™s blog: 
www.spinellis.gr/tools
