 94IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEEbookshelfEditor:Warren Keuffel 
wkeuffel@computer.org
Programs that perform sophisticatednumerical calculations critically de-
pend on the algorithms they use. Even
if you obtain the correct requirements,

come up with a brilliant architectural
design, and write maintainable and ef-ficient code, itÕs the underlying algorithm that

will often make or break your application. The

ÒNumerical RecipesÓ series of books distills in
an accessible format the background theory,

solid algorithms, and working programs for per-
forming all but the most advanced numerical-
analysis tasks needed for scientific computing
and many engineering applications.The book series has grown from the 1988original Fortran-based book to include sepa-
rate versions for Fortran 77, Fortran 90 (deal-
ing with parallel computing), C, and C++. The
second edition of Numerical Recipes in C++:
The Art of Scientific Computing
is more than
50 percent larger than the first and includes
more than 300 algorithms.Authoritative guidelines for complex calculations The bookÕs chapters detail linear algebraic
equation solutions, interpolation and extrapo-

lation, and functionsÕ evaluation and minimiza-tion. They also cover Monte Carlo methods,
root finding, Eigensystems, the Fourier trans-
form and its applications, data modeling,
boundary value problems, ordinary and partial
differential equations, and integral equations.
The book also contains other algorithms that
scientists might find useful, such as those dealing
with the statistical description of data, randomnumbers, compression, coding, and arbitrary-precision arithmetic. The bookÕs range of topics
is extremely wide; hopefully, the next editionÕs

minimization techniques discussion will in-
clude additional stochastic methods apart from
simulated annealing, such as genetic algorithms
and tabu search techniques.Anyone performing calculations morecomplex than integer addition and subtrac-
tion is likely to benefit from this bookÕs some-

times wry guidelines. If, for example, you
think that is the way to find the Eu-

clidean distance between two points, youÕd
better rush out for a copy of the book. The
authors label this formula as Òbad!Ó and ex-
plain that it will overflow if any of the num-
bers is as large as the square root of the largest

representable number. Instead, they propose

that you useIn most cases, the authors donÕt formally
examine the proposed algorithmsÕ stability
and accuracy propertiesÑdoing so would eas-
ily quadruple the bookÕs size with minimal

benefit to most readers. Instead, true to the
bookÕs title, the authors offer tried-and-tested

recipes that will make your scientific program-

ming a success.Major improvementsThe second edition finally does away with theababababab1122+()+()<ab22+Coding for NumbersDiomidis SpinellisNumerical Recipes in C++: The Art of Scientific Computing, 2nd edition
by William H. Press,
Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery, Cambridge University Press,

2002, ISBN 0-521-75033-4, 1,002 pp., US$70.00. January/February 2005
IEEE SOFTWARE
95BOOKSHELFFortran-derived arrays and matrices in-dexed from Element 1 that were infest-
ing earlier editions and uses a number of
C++ features to improve the algorithmsÕ
presentation and value. Most impor-
tant, the authors use a family of tem-

plated objects to support a uniform im-

plementation of variable-sized vectors
and matrices. You can easily adapt the

provided containersÕ minimal imple-

mentation into a wrapper for the more

full-featured matrix library you might
be using. In addition, the bookÕs code

isolates all program elements in appro-
priate C++ namespaces; efficiently passes
arguments to functions using C++ ref-
erences; uses the 
constkeyword toidentify function arguments that wonÕt

be modified; and declares small, heav-

ily used functions as Òinline.ÓUnfortunately, the reader expecting
to find the C++ object-oriented and

generic programming features applied
on the algorithms themselves will be
severely disappointed. The authors pre-
sent all algorithms as global functions,
still named with cryptic 1960s Fortran-

era, six-character identifiers: amotsa,bessk1, covsrt, erfcc, and frprmn.They claim that this makes the func-

tions easier to reuse in other applica-
tions, since the functions carry rela-

tively little additional supporting
baggage; the six-character identifiers
maintain continuity and compatibility
with the seriesÕ widely used earlier edi-

tions. However, I was left wondering

how the power of full-fledged generic

programming; the C++ Standard Tem-

plate LibraryÕs containers, iterators,

and algorithms; and the use of object-
based information hiding, encapsula-
tion, and inheritance could have been
applied to the bookÕs substantial and

important body of algorithmic knowl-
edge. Given that the book will be heav-
ily used by scientists of all fields for

years to come, its failure to use the ab-

stractions and methods that we com-

puting professionals consider impor-
tant software building blocks is a

problem that our profession should

face, explain, and address.Diomidis Spinellisis an associate professor in the De-partment of Management Science and Technology at the Athens

University of Economics and Business. Contact him at dds@aueb.gr.
A Book by AnotherNameJohn R. DanceProgramming in the .NET Environmentby Damien Watkins, Mark Hammond,

and Brad Abrams, Addison-Wesley,

2002, ISBN 0-201-77018-0, 523 pp.,
US$44.99.A few years ago, I was working withan object framework whose base class
provided a default identity-basedHash()and Equals(). I created a con-crete subclass and wanted Equals()tocompare the contents of my object, not
just check for identity. I overrode
Equals()and happily went on my way.
Unfortunately, I had made a beginnerÕs

mistake. ThereÕs a strong relationship
between Equals()and Hash(). If twoobjects are Òequal,Ó the hash function
must return the same value for both ob-
jects. If documentation is going to de-
scribe the .NET System.Objectclass,Equals, and GetHashCode,then it
must necessarily describe this strong
relationship. The .NET Framework

Software Development Kit documenta-

tion passes this test. Unfortunately,

Programming in the .NET Environ-
ment does not.
The book should actually be calledCommon Language Runtime from the

Perspective of a Compiler Writer 
be-cause thatÕs what it covers best. Com-

pilers and tools normally expose the
CLR, so many people just think of it as
their compiler runtime. This book skill-
fully highlights and demonstrates with
concrete examples various pieces of the
CLR. Key parts of the CLR are the
type, metadata, and execution systems
and how they interact across multiple
languages. Each system gets an entire

chapter in the book, which shows how
both the CLR and base framework of
.NET support building and deploying
various types of applications. The book
only broadly describes the framework
class library, but, admittedly, a full de-

scription would take several volumes.
About one-third of the book consists of
appendices that describe, from the per-
spective of those that did the work, the
porting of several language compilers
to the .NET environment.Although thereÕs good material
here, it canÕt overcome two major

flawsÑthe unevenness of both the ma-
terial and the editing. (These comments
The book should actuallybe called CommonLanguage Runtime fromthe Perspective of aCompiler Writer because thatÕs what itcovers best.ÒUncovering Ignorance in Software DevelopmentÓby Paul FreedmanA review of The Laws of Software Process: A New Model for the Productionand Management of Software by Philip G. Armour.
ÒA Definitive Source about UMLÓby Wilson Pardi Jr.
A review of UMLBible 
by Tom Pender.
www.computer.org/software/bookshelf
ONLINE REVIEWS 96IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
BOOKSHELFdonÕt pertain to the appendices, which
were written by different authors about
different languages.) The main chap-
ters divide into thirds: the CLR proper,

Òprogramming in the large issues,Ó and
the framework. If I were a betting man,

IÕd say each author wrote one section.

The framework section covers some of
the same issues discussed in the type
and metadata sections. The authors
should have referred to the previous

chapters rather than describe the issues
again. Some of the work in the begin-
ning of the book needed additional ma-
terial, but perhaps it was dropped on

the cutting-room floor. Often, intro-

ductory text describes the problems a

construct is meant to solve, but then

we dive down into the details so much

that the solution is buried.
Careful editing should have resolvedthese and other issues. Other flaws in-
clude a paragraph that appears on a
page owing to a cut-and-paste prob-
lem, references to source codes and di-
rectories we donÕt have (and have no

easy way of locating without a URL),
and definitions that are given once but
never used again. Although the mater-
ial is good, there are too many prob-
lems to ignore.
In retrospect, the text concentrates
most on troublesome components of
the .NET environment to a compiler
porting effort. Perhaps a different title
would have better reflected the bookÕs

content. Multiple examples and pages
cover reflection and code generation
through System.Reflect.Emitser-vices. However, the section coveringSystem.Threadingis very brief. Af-ter giving a threading example, the text

doesnÕt highlight the critical language

constructs (C# lock statement) or
classes (Mutex, Monitor) supporting
synchronization. Instead, it says, ÒBe
careful when dealing with multi-
threaded code, as each thread has ac-
cess to the same state and the various
threadsÕ reads and writes to it can be

interleaved.Ó Unfortunately, I can only

offer the same counsel about buying
this book: ÒBe careful.Ó
John R. Danceis a senior software engineer at Palm-Source.Contact him at john.dance@palmsource.com.
Get Excited about Extreme ProgrammingDavid Arthur Eatough
A Practical Guide to Extreme Program-
mingby David Astels, Granville Miller,
and Miroslav Novak, Prentice Hall,
2002, ISBN 0-13-067482-6, 378 pp.,
US$29.99.When I first heard about Extreme
Programming (XP) and unit testing, I

was skeptical. At the time, I had more

than enough code to write and debug.
Taking time to write more codeÑeven

unit test codeÑjust didnÕt make sense.
However, over the course of the last
three years, IÕve learned how to unit-
test. Today, I rely on my unit tests.

They decrease the time from when I

break something to when I know itÕs

brokenÑreducing the time gap from
days, weeks, or even months to mere
minutes. Now, when code I modified

breaks something, I immediately know

that I need to change it. The obvious
advantage is that the code is still fresh
in my mind, so I can easily remember
what I tried to do. Because of unit test-
ing, IÕm a more productive developer,

and I produce higher-quality code.
But hereÕs the drawback: How do you
get to know and love unit testing with-
out years of trial and error writing unit
tests? Many books and papers are avail-able about unit-testing theory. However,
youÕll find an invaluable example of a
unit-tested application in A PracticalGuide to Extreme Programming.The bookÕs most remarkable feature
is its 122-page appendix, which ex-
plains the application and provides a
complete source listing for it. The au-

thors also explain how to download
the programÕs source code, giving you a

real-world example of a unit-tested ap-
plication. YouÕll be able to roll up your

sleeves, play with code, and see how
unit testing can help you find problems
that code changes introduce.However, this book isnÕt just about
unit testing. It also provides a great snap-
shot and insightful discussion about cur-
rent XP principles and practices. The
book discusses XP roles, including that
of the architect. I agree with the authors
that the projectÕs architect should under-

stand how to develop great software, but
that rather than doing all the big up-
front design per usual, he or she should
look at the system as it evolves. The ar-
chitect can then find the architectureÕs

weaknesses and work with the team to
improve the system.The planning section contains agood summary of estimating and
scheduling user stories. I particularly
liked the concept of small development
tasks, called Òsand,Ó which can be
added when the development team fin-

ishes its stories early. This gives the

team a quick win, and the customer

also gets something of value. Too of-

ten, the developer-customer relation-

ship is focused on what didnÕt get done.

Many small wins throughout the devel-
opment process can boost the morale
of everyone involved.
Planning an XP project gets muchharder with a large-team environment. It
can be done, but it takes some real work.
The authors talk openly about the chal-
lenges of scaling an XP project, includ-
ing communication, coordination, and
dealing with multiple sites. They recom-
mend using several smaller teams, most
of which will focus on one aspect of the
project. However, some development
teams will have to coordinate and collab-
orate with the customer on the smallerteamsÕ work. Regardless of the ap-
Many books and papers are availableabout unit-testingtheory. YouÕll find an
invaluable example of a unit-tested applicationin A Practical Guide to
Extreme Programming. proach, be prepared to put more effortinto organization and communication
when using XP with a large team.The authors discuss various optionsfor gathering and capturing user re-
quirements through user stories, use
cases, and features. In every case, they
noted: ÒIf you can get the customer to
ride alongside, both of you will enjoy
the ride more.Ó However, they could

have provided more practical advice on
what to do if your customer wants to
use some of XPÕs features but still wants

to give you requirements and come
back later to see what has been accom-
plished, rather than riding along and
providing feedback throughout the proj-

ectÕs development.
Overall, I enjoyed A Practical Guideto Extreme Programming. ItÕs true to its
title, providing both a solid introduction

and practical advice on using XP.

Whether youÕre new to XP and want to

understand its concepts or simply need

some practical advice, this book will get
you excited about XP.
David Arthur Eatough
works for LANDesk Software.Contact him at deatough@acm.org.IT Project Estimation:Recommended for
BeginnersKevin C. Desouza and Yukika Awazu
IT Project Estimation: A Practical
Guide to the Costing of Software
byPaul Coombs, Cambridge University
Press, 2003, ISBN 0-521-53285-X, 173
pp., US$40.00.IT Project Estimationdiscusses theart of creating, managing, and main-
taining project estimates. Paul Coombs
begins by explicating the nature of esti-
mates, then discusses who should do
the estimating, how they should do it,

and how to review and continuously
maintain estimates to gauge project
performance. The book also covers im-
portant items such as analyzing projectrisks. In the concluding chapters,Coombs provides an interesting case
study that demonstrates the use of his
guidelines. The book includes a supple-
mental CD containing various Mi-
crosoft Excel templates that you can

use while conducting estimating exer-

cises. Any project manager can use
CoombsÕ guidelines regardless of in-

dustry, though they might be of greater

value to IT projects.
The book covers concepts with aneloquent simplicity. The writing is easy

to read and understand. We especially

enjoyed CoombsÕs 12 Òblindingly obvi-

ous rules of estimationÓÑevery project
manager should post these in his or her
office and refer to them before beginning
a project. Chapters are presented se-
quentially in the order of execution. The
book also has a nice collection of refer-
ences on specific estimation topics, such
as Function Point Analysis. However, the

bookÕs key strength also contributes to

its key weakness; itÕs a good read for a

novice or aspiring project manager but
offers little for a seasoned one.Managing IT projects on time andwithin budget still remains an elusive

goal. Various surveys have estimated

that 30 to 65 percent of software de-

velopment projects become runaway

projects. Key reasons cited are inade-

quately specified objectives, bad plan-
ning and estimating, newness of the
technology being implemented, inade-
quate project management methodol-
ogy, insufficient senior staff on the
team, and poor performance by hard-
ware or software suppliers.
Recently, we completed a study of
why managers fail to detect signs of
and pull the plug on out-of-control
projects (Y. Awazu, K.C. Desouza, and

J.R. Evaristo, ÒStopping Runaway In-
formation Technology Projects,Ó 
Busi-ness Horizons, 2004). We found that
IT projects are particularly difficult to
manage and they have peculiarities
that tend to blow project management

problems out of proportion:
TheyÕre riskier because the field is
still immature. Managers must con-
tend with a constant barrage of new
products, tools, and technologies.
Moreover, managing these tools and

technologies isnÕt even close to being

a science.IT projects face undue pressure in
comparison to traditional projects,
because many still view them as cost
centers. They get bare-minimum bud-
gets compared to other organiza-
tional endeavors, with little room for
slack or redundancy. As a result, it

doesnÕt take much for a project to

start running away.
IT projects arenÕt department- or

group-specific; they typically affect
multiple departments and involve
multiple stakeholders. Sacrificing in-
dividual agendas to attain the global
goal isnÕt an easy task.
All these problems have a centralthemeÑpoor estimation of efforts. Un-
less we have good estimates of the po-
tential cost, time, and resource ex-
penses, we wonÕt be able to schedule,

plan, manage, or track a project. We

commend Coombs for contributing his
thoughts on how we might move proj-
ect estimation into the realm of science,

and away from its current state of ad

hoc art.Kevin C. Desouzais the director of the Institute forEngaged Business Research, a think tank of the Engaged Enter-
prise. Contact him at desouza@engagedenterprise.com.Yukika Awazu
is a research fellow at the Institute for Engaged Business Research. Contact her at awazu@
engagedenterprise.com.January/February 2005
IEEE SOFTWARE
97BOOKSHELFUnless we have goodestimates of the potentialcost, time, and resourceexpenses, we wonÕt beable to schedule, plan,manage, or track a project.