 96
 IEEE SOFTWARE
 | PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY
 0740-7459/11/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE
TOOLS OF THE TRADE
Editor: 
Diomidis Spinellis
Athens University of Economics 
and Business, dds@aueb.gr
Agility Drivers
Diomidis Spinellis
When the facts change, I change my mind. What do you do, sir? Š
 John Maynard Keynes
A MANAGEMENT PRACTICE 
is ma-
ture when even government bureaucra-
cies decide to adopt it. The March 2011 
publication of the UK™s information 

and communications technology strat-

egy marks this moment by advocating 
that ﬁthe application of agile ICT de-
livery methods [...] will improve gov-

ernment™s capability to deliver projects 

successfully and realise bene˜ ts fasterﬂ 
(www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/
government-ict-strategy). This begs a

question: Were we misguided in the 
decades when we advocated stringent 
control of requirements and a tightly 

milestone-driven development process?

Interestingly, noŠwe were right then, 
and we™re right now. Things have 
changed, which is why we can today 

smugly apply agile practices and reap 

impressive dividends. 
Numerous new factors drive agil-
ity by increasing our productivity. Our 

growing ability to swiftly put together 

sophisticated software affords us the 
luxury to listen to our customers, to try 
out new things, to collaborate across 

formal boundaries, to make mistakes, to 
redesign as we move alongŠin short, to 
be agile. Knowing these factors helps us 

realize when we can afford to be agile 

and when not. (Hint: agile development 
of a plane™s ˚ ight control software from 

the ground up is still not a good idea.)
Technology
On the technological front, two key 

drivers come from the system software 
we can use: the operating system and 
database management systems. Al-

though I admire the conceptual clarity 

and simplicity of 1970s-era Unix, the 
truth is that a modern operating sys-
tem distribution offers many facilities 

that transform past major projects into 

a weekend job. These facilities include 
standardized networking, interprocess 
communication, graphical user inter-

face support, sophisticated typeface 
and 3D rendering, and load balancing 
across many CPUs. Database manage-

ment systems (perhaps thankfully) have 

not advanced as much on the function-
ality they offer, but they have become 
ubiquitous. If you™re carrying a smart-

phone, you probably have one or more 

relational database management sys-
tems (RDBMSs) running inside your 
pocket. Therefore, if a program re-

quires structured access to persistent 

data, it can readily call a database; de-
velopers no longer need to waste time 
laboriously crafting bespoke data for-

mats and access methods.
One level up come libraries. Gone 
are the days when each self-respecting 

program contained one or more sorting 

subroutines and other ﬁutilityﬂ func-
tions. Now the Java platform comes 
with no less than 3,776 classes and inter-

faces. From an 
AbstractAnnotationValueVisitor
 to a 
ZipOutputStream
, it™s all there. Other 
platforms, from Perl to .NET, are simi-

larly feature-rich, making many soft-
ware development tasks a simple mat-
ter of gluing together existing classes. 

If a class isn™t part of the platform, it™s 
likely to be available as an add-on com-
ponent. If the task at hand requires a 

large dataset (say, the Earth™s map) 

or relies on constantly changing facts 
(think ˚ ight information), someone will 
have probably developed a correspond-

ing Web service we can use.
This brings me to application in-
teroperability. After a few false starts 

(remember DCOM and Corba?) we 

seem to have sorted out how one ap-
plication can readily communicate 
with another when they™re a continent 

apart. Without laborious prearrange-

ments, the Internet and RESTful inter-
faces provide us hassle-free access to 
data, from the movement of stocks to 

that of tectonic plates. This paradigm 

is so prevalent that public-facing ap-
plications failing to provide a Web ser-
vice interface are perceived as crippled. 

Libraries (again) make using these ser-

vices a joy. With less than a screenful of 
code, I can obtain a book™s cover image 
from Amazon.com, send out a tweet to 

thousands of readers, and even use a 
SOAP interface.
A standardized presentation layer 
for our applications is also slowly 
evolving. While Ajax is by no means 
a perfect application development 
TOOLS OF THE TRADE
–continued on p. 95
Post your comments online 
by visiting the column™s blog: 
www.spinellis.gr/tools
  JULY/AUGUST 2011
 | IEEE SOFTWARE
 95
TOOLS OF THE TRADE
framework, it offers a neat way to run 
 applications from any desktop, and the 
establishment of HTML5 is likely to 
improve things even further.
Programming languages have kept 
pace with our requirements, providing 
impressive features that used to be the 
subject of academic researchŠthreads, 
nimble type systems, duck typing, mod
-ules, metaprogramming, and support 
for object-oriented and functional pro
-gramming are only some of the goodies 
that let us churn out more sophisticated 
and powerful code each day. Further 
pushing the productivity envelope are 
scripting languages, which allow us to 
express in a couple of lines what used 
to be a student™s ˜nal-year project.
But all these impressive technologies 
I™ve outlined here come at a cost. They 
require resources to develop, effort to 
master, muscle to run, and patience to 
endure their (inevitable) shortfalls. Yet 
even in this regard, we™re blessed with 
many countervailing forces.
CPU power clock rates and mem
-ory capacities have increased by many 
orders of magnitude. The ˜rst IBM 
PC came with a 4.77-MHz CPU, a 
360-Kbyte ˚oppy disk, and 64 Kbytes 
of RAM. During the past decade, hav
-ing satis˜ed the needs of the most de
-manding of˜ce worker, the resources 
available on a modern desktop now 
provide us the power to run all the agil
-ity-enabling technologies I™ve outlined 
and also the tools to conquer their com
-plexity. These include IDEs that provide 
refactoring support and online help for 
all methods of Java™s 3776 classes, opti
-mizing compilers and runtime systems 
that make our readable code run ef
-˜ciently, unit-testing frameworks that 
take the fear out of refactoring, light 
markup methods like Javadoc that ˜
-nally materialize literate programming, 
and languages with an interactive top 
level that promote experimentation and 
bottom-up development. Tools such as 
wikis, instant messaging applications, 
version control systems, and bug track
-ers smooth the collaboration with col
-leagues across the hall or around the 
world. In addition, various cloud plat
-forms allow the rapid and scalable de
-ployment of user applications and de
-veloper facilities at a reasonable cost.
... and the Environment
Technology isn™t the only force driv
-ing agile development practices. So
-cial factors are equally important. 
Software developers are no longer re
-trained mathematicians or physicists, 
but computer science graduates who 
are also increasingly participating in 
cross-disciplinary programs. It™s only 
natural to expect more from such peo
-ple, including the ability to closely col
-laborate with clients on solutions that 
address their real needs. Changes in 
the management culture, with ˚atter 
hierarchies, less formal reporting, and 
emphasis on teamwork, also help shift 
the software project management focus 
from the milestone-based handover of 
responsibility into collaboration with 
colleagues, in-house business and mar
-keting departments, and customers.
Moreover, developers can tap 
into a variety of resources for help. 
 Programming-by-googling is becoming 
the standard way of writing code as de
-velopers use the Web to ˜nd code ex
-amples, suggestions for handling cryp
-tic error messages, peer advice from 
professional forums, and, most im
-portantly, open source code. This last 
resource is an agility enabler through 
the vast number of readily accessible, 
useful components coupled with their 
(sometimes deceptively) hassle-free pro
-curement and licensing. Do you want 
to add PDF generation or speech output 
to your application? You can download 
and link such components to your code 
in a matter of minutes.
Then come two mutually opposing 
forces. On the one hand, the ubiquitous 
availability of user-friendly, polished, 
and versatile consumer-oriented IT ap
-plications has increased the expecta
-tions of all users. They want their ERP 
to be as fast as Google™s search and its 
interface as intuitive as their iPhone™s. 
That™s a tall order for a traditional de
-velopment method and a clear call for 
agility. On the other hand, these and 
other consumer applications are lower
-ing users™ expectations regarding fea
-tures and reliability. Millions are dis
-covering that sending 140-character
 messages over a platform that occasion
-ally overloads (indicated by a whale 
lifted aloft by birds) is a perfectly ac
-ceptable, even addictive, way to com
-municate. Agile practices are ideal for 
swiftly delivering such good-enough so
-lutions in an environment that can tol
-erate the occasional failure. Finally, the 
ubiquitous availability of IT infrastruc
-tures makes the scale of today™s de
-ployments considerably larger. IT sup
-port that used to target accounting and 
management is today covering all the 
organization™s employees and custom
-ers. This increases the risk of centrally 
planned, rigidly executed projects, fur
-ther driving the need for agility.
I™m sure that by now you™re con
-vinced that the landscape of mod
-ern software development has 
changed vastly over the years in ways 
we haven™t yet fully appreciated. It™s 
therefore natural to adjust the way we 
develop software. Where agility drivers 
are present, it™s a shame to preserve the 
status quo. Realizing that better out
-comes are possible, we must adjust our 
development processes, demand more 
from our software suppliers, and de
-velop in-house capacity to organically 
grow applications and services that will 
delight and even captivate our users 
and customers.
DIOMIDIS SPINELLIS 
is a professor in the Depart
-ment of Management Science and Technology at 
the Athens University of Economics and Business. 
Currently he is serving as the Secretary General 
responsible for information systems at the Greek 
Ministry of Finance. Contact him at dds@aueb.gr. 
–continued from p. 96
