 0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEPublished by the IEEE Computer SocietyIEEE SOFTWARE
89The Personal Software ProcessThe Software Engineering Institute atCarnegie Mellon University developed the Per-sonal Software Process and its cousin, theTeam Software Process, to give individual en-

gineers and project teams guidance on effective
day-to-day work habits.The PSP and TSP have proven themselves inmany organizations worldwide because theyGreatly increase a teamÕs ability to work to

a plan and deliver on scheduleTeach engineers how to measure and ana-

lyze their performance, enabling more effi-
cient learning and improvement
Provide sophisticated quality management,
letting engineers create much higher-quality

code than they are used toThe PSP and TSP have also increased produc-tivity and reduced cycle time.SAIC has created a process for small soft-ware teams based on PSP principles. YouÕre

meant to customize the out-of-the-box PSP

process to meet individual and organizational
needs. Our process uses all the PSP elements,
such as personal design and code reviews, de-
sign standards, inspections, process improve-
ment proposals, detailed task planning, earned
value, quantitative defect and process manage-
ment, and frequent postmortem analyses. We

also added several teamwork elements and a
methodical risk-management approach.WeÕve completed two highly successful soft-
ware development and maintenance projects
with this process. Mars, the first real-life use ofquality timeTrends in Software Process:
The PSP and Agile MethodsJohn A. Stark and Ron CrockerEditors: Nancy Eickelmann Motorola nancy.eickelmann@motorola.com
Jane Huffman Hayes University of Kentuckyhayes@cs.uky.edu
Water cooler discussions often gravitate to trendsÑthe ÒlatestÓ software process, pro-
gramming language, or Web development paradigm. Some of them justly deserve the title

ÒtrendÓ or Òfad;Ó others do not. In this article, two practitioners share their experience
with current, yet diverse, software process approaches that are starting to greatly affect
the industry. John Stark describes Science Applications International CorporationÕs

(SAIC) experience with the Personal Software Process. Ron Crocker shares MotorolaÕs

experience with agile methods, a lighter-weight process approach. It appears that despite

their diversity, both approaches have resulted in improved productivity and in similar or

even higher-quality levels of the resulting products (from previous releases).ÑJane Hayes
 90IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
DEPT TITLEPSP training at SAIC, was a new devel-opment effort. The application was a
PC-based data manipulation and for-
matting tool with a graphical user in-
terface, written in C++ with the Unified

Modeling Language. A team of three
developers worked on it for 38 weeks
using an iterative life cycle. They re-
corded and analyzed detailed task and
defect data weekly.
The second project, Pluto, involvedmaintaining an existing application for
nine weeks. The application and devel-
opment environment resembled that of

Mars; in fact, two of PlutoÕs three de-

velopers came from the Mars project.
The developers used lessons learned
from Mars postmortems to fine-tune
the process for Pluto. Because Pluto
was a maintenance project, the work

involved applying enhancementsÑ
rather than creating whole C++ classes
from scratchÑeach requiring a few
lines of code in several places (for ex-
ample, a new GUI button, computa-

tional code to perform the function,
plus report generation code).After completing both projects, wehad quantitative, unbiased data de-
scribing their performance. The same
process clearly did not work equally
well for both projects. The same life cy-

cle and phase sequence applied well,
but the effort required for each phase
differed significantly between the two

projects. Furthermore, we discovered

that using the same phase definitions
for both project types didnÕt work well.

We must complete more projects of

each type to confidently describe the
magnitude of the differences.
Mars and Pluto are the most effec-tive projects in our organizationÕs his-

torical database. Of the 16 projects in

the five-year database,Mars and Pluto had the two best ef-
fort estimates (Pluto was within 5

percent of actual).Mars had the best schedule perfor-
mance (within 15 percent of plan).

Pluto was over by 29 percent (two
weeks) but included more function-

ality than originally planned.Pluto had the lowestÑand Mars the
third lowestÑpost-delivery defect
density after at least six months of
operation. This led to a noticeable
lack of maintenance headaches and,
therefore, to happy customers.Probably the most rewarding resultof using the PSP-based process is that
the process elements and management
activity did not slow down the project
pace, as you might expect. Instead,
Mars and PlutoÕs total productivities

were, respectively, 37 percent and 213

percent above our historical average.Agile methodsWith agile methodsÑsuch as Extreme
Programming, Scrum, Crystal, Grizzly,

and even the Unified ProcessÑwe funda-
mentally expect requirements to change.
(The ÒAgile Manifesto,Ó http://agileman-
ifesto.org, provides a more complete def-

inition of the term agile.) Instead of try-
ing to predict the future, these methods
encourage incremental design and imple-
mentation driven by real feedback from
working software. More formal design

activities are not anathema to agile meth-
ods. Rather, they encourage sufficient

amounts of these activities to meet the
projectÕs needs. (See Alistair CockburnÕs

Agile Software Development [Addison-Wesley, 2001] for the definition of Òsuffi-

cientÓ in this context.)AtMotorola, we ran our pro-
jectsÑimplementations of new cellu-

lar radio technologiesÑas agile pro-
jects. We chose an agile approach

because our principal difficulty wasnÕt

the technology per se; instead, the
technology was not Òfully cooked.Ó
We expected that as we implemented

the technology, aspects of it would

emerge and change the requirements
and implementation. With this expec-

tation, we attacked the problem from
several directions concurrently; we
worked on the systemÕs highest-risk

portion first, but we also worked on
the less risky portions to prepare for
integrating the entire system.To convert from chaos to order, we
used an agile practice we call strataÑrelatively independent end-to-end lay-
ers cutting across the system at a given
semantic layer. One of us, Ron Crocker,

defines this practice further in Large-Scale Agile Software Development(Ad-dison-Wesley, to be published in 2003).

(In a previous article, we term the same

concept cluster.1We changed the name
because cluster evokes a mental image

of clumps or groups, while strata
brings a correct picture of layers.) Our

project had five strata: radio, call-pro-
cessing control (signaling), data bearer
service (bearer), data collection, and
the communication link to the base sta-
tion (ATM) (see Figure 1). The subsys-

tems (numbered at the bottom of theQUALITY TIMEThe same processclearly did notwork equally wellfor both projects.For Further ReadingK. Beck, Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, Addison-Wesley,
1999.
A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley, 2001.
R.T. Crocker, 
Large-Scale Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley, to be
published in 2003.
C. Larman, ÒThe Agile Unified Process: Why it Reduces the Risk of Failure,Ó

Valtech, 2001.

K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, 
Agile Software Development with Scrum
, PrenticeHall, 2001. May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
91DEPT TITLEcolumns) represent physical elements in
the systemÑfor example, Subsystem 2

might represent a subscriber unit (in this
case, a mobile phone). The bars crossing

the columns are the strata; they repre-

sent all functionality associated with a

specific aspect of the system. The names
of the subsystems and the strata are
mostly uninteresting; what is important

is that the strata cross subsystem bound-

aries and necessarily involve members
of all the involved teams.
The strata gave us the main advan-tage of early end-to-end feedback on
the real implementation of a stratumÕs

focus area. Consider the signaling and
bearer strata; because these layers in-
clude both the mobile and base station
parts, early verification generally re-
quires a functional radio link before we
can validate anything, and the bearer
stratum depends on the signaling stra-
tum to create the path. To solve this

problem, we encouraged the building
of ÒscaffoldingÓ to support the strata.
For the signaling stratum, we createdthe channel simto look like the real ra-dio link and to validate the signaling
end-to-end. Likewise, we could do end-

to-end validation of the bearer stratum
using the same channel sim.As a secondary benefit, the strataÕs
end-to-end nature let us build and verify
complete cross-subsystem implementa-
tions of the systemÕs various functions.

This functionality included the necessaryintegration activities
among the corres-
ponding team mem-
bers. Because this
work occurred early
in the project, when
the pressure was low
and the time to ship-
ping seemed far away,

it gave the integration
teams time to form
into high-performing
teams. At the end,
when the pressure
was high and time
was short, they were
highly effective at di-
agnosing and fixing
problems. Likewise,
the released system re-
quires integration of
the strata; the light
blue box in Figure 1
represents one such
integration. As strata

are integrated, the in-

tegration points are
within subsystems
and correspondingly
within teams.Our results were promising. Not only
did we release two systems of sub-
stantial size (> 500 KLOC each,mostly C++) in about a year, each with

less than five significant defects, we did
so while maintaining a high level of
change accommodation. The strata ap-
proach proved valuable because the
early integration increased our confi-
dence in the systemÕs functionality while

building high-performing cross-subsys-
tem teams. Both the time required and

the costs (total costs and staffing levels)
were less than anticipated using our or-
ganizationÕs standard approach, and the

productÕs quality was somewhat better

than anticipated. What we gave up in
formality of process and artifacts was re-
placed with the communication and

feedback the strata approach provided.
We had trouble reporting project status

to our senior management so that they
could decide if the project was proceed-
ing successfully. As the strata approach

became more familiar to everyone, this
difficulty disappeared.Reference1.R. Battin et al., ÒLeveraging Resources in
Global Software Development,Ó IEEE Soft-ware, vol. 18, no. 2, Mar./Apr. 2001, pp.
70Ð77.John A. Stark is the chief software engineer for ScienceApplications International CorporationÕs Predictive Technologies

Division. Contact him at starkj@saic.com.Ron Crockeris a fellow of the technical staff in Mo-torolaÕs Network Advanced Technology group. HeÕs currently the

principal investigator of performance implications of architec-
tural decisions. Contact him at ron.crocker@motorola.com.QUALITY TIMEData collectionBearerSignalingATM
RadioSubsystem 1Subsystem 2Subsystem 3Subsystem 4Subsystem 5Subsystem 6
Figure 1. The projectÕs strata and numbered subsystems.Visit us on the Web at
http://computer.org/software
FUTURETOPICS INCLUDE:
Model-Driven DevelopmentDeveloping with Open Source
SoftwareThe State of the Practice ofSoftware EngineeringStay in the software game
Stay in the software game
