 30IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/06/$20.00 © 2006 IEEEdevelopment cycle and its accompanying jar-gon, including Òdelivering to QA,Ó Òmeeting
the QA criteria for delivery,Ó and Òprioritizing

bugs.Ó Agile practices require full integration
of testing and development, which can alter
both organizational structures and high-level
product-release policies. As a result, fully
adopting agile quality practices is slower and
more difficult than adopting agile program-
mer-oriented practices, such as pair program-

ming and test-first programming, which are as-
similated only within the development team.6Currently, few real projects that implement
full agile quality processesÑand thus undergo

these sometimes radical changesÑhave re-
ported substantial findings. Here, we present

and analyze new data from a real, large-scale

agile project to develop a business-critical en-

terprise information system for the Israeli Air

Force (IAF). Our results offer new evidence that

agile testing practices actually work, dramati-
cally improving development quality and pro-
ductivity in line with Kent BeckÕs flat cost-of-

change curve.1We describe the organizationÕs
successful practices and guidelines in four key

areas: test design and activity execution, work-

ing with professional testers, planning, and de-

fect management. This article closes several

gaps in existing publications,1,2,7most notablyby describing how to effectively use profes-

sional testers and how to thoroughly accept-

ance-test a system thatÕs too large and complex

for a single customer to specify.
Project overview
The IAFÕs enterprise information system is
critical to daily operations and information se-
curity. As a result, the target system is highly

complex and must be of the utmost quality.

The IAF considered the project risky both be-

cause of its size and because it was the first
project of this scope to be developed in the or-
focusAgile Software Testing in aLarge-Scale Project
Agile software development in general, and Extreme Programming
(XP)1in particular, promote radical changes in how software de-
velopment organizations traditionally work. This is particularly

true in software testing. Agile development completely redefines
quality assurance workÑfrom formal roles to day-to-day activitiesÑmak-

ing some traditional QA responsibilities and outputs irrelevant.2Ð5Agile de-velopment also eliminates the backbone of many organizationsÕ software software testing
David Talby and Arie Keren, Air Force, Israel Defense ForcesOrit Hazzan and Yael Dubinsky,
TechnionÐIsrael Institute of Technology
Quantitative andqualitative data
from a large, real-
world XP project
validates agile
testing practices 
and offers
guidelines 
in four key
development areas. ganization using an XP-based method. Conse-quently, many different stakeholders closely

scrutinized the development process.
To manage risks and provide full and timely
information about the projectÕs progress, the

team developed a set of metrics,
8consistentlycollected and analyzed data, and held regular
reflection meetings and formal debriefings.

External consultants helped with and aug-
mented these efforts.We derived our data from the study proj-
ectÕs first four releases (over eight months).

Our quantitative data is the same that the

project team used for ongoing project tracking
and decision making, so itÕs of high quality

and validity. Our qualitative data includes

recordings of formal reflection meetings and

debriefings, along with data from question-
naires, interviews, and an analysis of formal
organizational documents depicting and ex-
plaining project decisions. To our knowledge,

this is the most comprehensive data set from
an actual project using agile quality practices
that has published its results to date.
Conforming to XPThe project team implemented many of the
standard XP practices,1,7which weÕve itali-
cized in this and the next section.
XPÕs basic practice is 
short releases. Theteam delivered working software at each iter-

ation, which typically lasted two weeks. At the

end of each iteration, the team formally pre-

sented the system to the customer for feed-

back. The team fully 
testedthe system everytwo weeks. Team members fully specified,

coded, and tested each new feature during the

iteration. Moreover, developers performed full

regression testing at every iteration, fixing all
known defects. The goal here was to achieve

several measurable testing benefits: few new

and open defects, a short average time for de-
fect fixes, and short average defect longevity.
The team used the 
planning game practiceto plan project iterations and releases.1In theplanning game, the entire team meets and the

customer describes and prioritizes the stories
that the systemÕs next release should imple-

ment. The team then breaks the stories down

into development tasks and estimates their
cost. PlanningÕs goal is to keep a 
sustainablepace and define refactoring activities, thusachieving simple design.From the projectÕs start, there was signifi-
cant customer collaborationand fruitful com-munication among teammates. The customer

participated in all planning games at both the
release and iteration levels. In addition to re-
viewing the system during formal meetings,
the customer regularly viewed in-development
features and discussed them with analysts, de-
velopers, and testers. Formally, however, the

customer belonged to a different organiza-
tional unit and had other duties.The project also employed XPÕs
whole-teamand sit-together practices. From day one, theproject team met in the same room and was

managed as a single, coherent team. This team
included developers, architects, a tester, and

business analysts. The exception to the whole-
team practice was the customer, who had a

workstation in the team room but used it only
occasionally. These team-centered approaches

resulted in two measurable test-related bene-
fits. First, the defect-management overhead
was lower than in traditional projects, where
the QA and development teams are separate
entities. Second, the project produced fewer
false defects (Òfalse alarmsÓ) than traditional
projects do.Team members promoted an 
informativeworkplace using story cards on the wall,which describe the details of the different de-

velopment tasks and their status. They also
published up-to-date design diagrams and
held a stand-up meetingevery morning. Fi-
nally, the team practiced 
continuous integra-tion, achieving one to three integration buildson an average development day.
Diverging from classic XPThe project differed from classic XP proj-ects in three respects. First, in addition to code

and tests, the team was required to produce

detailed specifications as a development-
process output. This was required due to or-

ganizational policies and obligations, as well
as because the project had to produce semifor-

mal specifications for a metadata repository9to enable automatic code generation. So, com-
pleting a feature in this project meant com-

pleting its specifications, code, and tests. Team

members were thus encouraged to use 
pairprogramming, collective ownership, and cod-ing standard practices for not only code butalso specifications and tests.Second, unlike in classic XP, the projectÕs
acceptance testing (also known as user testing)July/August 2006IEEE SOFTWARE
31Few realprojects thatimplement fullagile qualitypractices havereportedsubstantialfindings. was far too complex for the customer to fullyspecify. According to the projectÕs leaders, ac-

ceptance testing would require the equivalent

of two full-time personnel. This finding led the

organization to use professional testersÑa
common choice in large-scale projects. So, the

project modified the customer testspractice toretain its essence while making it practical: Do

thorough acceptance testing, but not only by
the customer.
Third, the project modified 
test-driven de-velopment to focus on the continuous creationof automated acceptance tests rather than unit
tests. In classic XP, code is developed by first

writing a (failed) unit test, then writing the

code to make it pass, and so on. This project
required a solution for automating the massive
amount of constantly generated acceptance
tests. The solution was a toolÑwell integrated

in the projectÕs development environmentÑ

that simulates an end user working on the
complete multitier system.10Unlike classic XP,
which automates acceptance tests as coded
unit tests, in this critical project, the organiza-

tion considered only real simulation to be ad-

equate acceptance testing. So, while the proj-

ect still used unit testing, writing test scenarios

directly into the automated acceptance-testing

tool was preferred whenever possible. In this

respect, test-first development meant planning

test scenarios before coding and never consid-
ering a feature ÒcompleteÓ before all its tests

were written and passed.Each of the three exceptions to standard
XP procedures is a typical issue for large-scale

projects. Nonetheless, such differences must
be kept in mind when generalizing our agile
development results.
Test design and executionMaking sure that testing is everyoneÕs on-
going business is a big challenge. This project
tackled it by making testing part of each team
memberÕs work, and a key measure of both

team and personal productivity.
Everyone tests
In a traditional project, Òeveryone is re-sponsible for quality,Ó
2but in agile projects,everyone actually writes tests. This includes all
developers, business analysts, and even the
customer. For the IAF, this was a radical shift

from existing practices. 
The organization im-plemented the practice after developers received
the required extra training, but the customer
took part only in defining and reviewing some

test cases.Having everyone test offered several proj-
ect advantages. First, it eliminated the teamÕs

reliance on the single, assigned project tester,

who would have otherwise constituted a ma-

jor bottleneck. This proved highly important

becauseÑfor reasons unrelated to the proj-

ectÑthe tester was replaced twice during the

first three releases. Second, because developers
were responsible for writing tests for each new
feature, their test-awareness increased and

they prevented or quickly caught more edge
cases while they worked.Finally, because people knew that they were
required to test their specifications and code,

they designed them for testability.
11That is,where appropriate, developers added special
features or design considerations to the code
to make hard-to-test features testable. Such
coordination tasks are often difficult and ne-
glected when developers and testers work as
separate teams.Product size = test sizeMeasuring progress is also crucial; the proj-ect team tackled it by defining the projectÕs

product size metrics as the number of regres-

sion test steps run at each iteration.
8TheÒrunning and tested featuresÓ metric12in-spired this approach. The projectÕs leaders

chose this approach for two reasons. First, be-
cause test size is more highly correlated with

complexity than are lines of code or specifica-
tions, itÕs a better approximation of product

size. Second, such a metric sends a strong mes-
sage to the team: only features that have full
regression testing at each iteration are counted
as delivered product size.
Reaching and increasing the product sizemetric is a nontrivial team goal; in this case,
the team performed it successfully in 12 out of

the 13 iterations we studied. Figure 1 plots the

product size metric over this period of time.
Untested work = no workAnother related factor is how the organiza-tion promotes developer testing. This is a ma-

jor issue in shifting to agile development, par-
ticularly in organizations where testing is
poorly perceived. The key to success is similar
to that with product size metrics. In this case,

untested work equals no workÑin all chan-32IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
How an
organizationpromotesdevelopertesting is amajor issue inshifting to agile
development. nels and under all conditions. The case is sim-ilar for task completion. At each iteration

summary, the team reviews the iterationÕs

tasks to investigate incompletion or time esti-
mation errors. The team considers tasks lack-
ing full written tests as incompleteÑthat is,

failuresÑeven if they already ÒworkÓ and
were presented to the customer.
In response to a written questionnaire ad-ministered after two releases, over 90 percent

of team members ranked acceptance and sys-
tem tests as Òhighly importantÓ; the remaining
10 percent ranked them as Òimportant.Ó Fur-

thermore, 33 percent were either ÒinterestedÓ

or Òvery interestedÓ in taking a leading role in
acceptance testing, and almost 60 percent
were ÒinterestedÓ in leading system testing.Working with professional testers
In agile projects, everyone on the team fullytests their own work. So, professional testers

add value not through more testing, but by

writing some of the developersÕ tests, thus

freeing them to code more new features. Pro-

fessional testers can also create better test sce-
narios, although this ability varies greatly
among individuals. Using professional testers

nonetheless raises two key challenges for or-
ganizations adopting agile development: test-
ing bottlenecks and coordinating the testing
work among testers and programmers.Easing bottlenecks: Code less, test moreDealing with testing bottlenecks is rela-
tively straightforward: developers simply code
less and test more. Figure 1 illustrates this,

comparing the product-size metric points at-
tained by tests that the entire team ran to the

points attained by the teamÕs testers alone. The

graph lines show the various phases the proj-
ect went through. At first, only the tester was

running tests. This became impractical within

a few weeks as the software grew in size; at

that point, most tests were handed over to

other developers. The only iteration in which
the total size decreased was when the tester
was unexpectedly removed from the team

(owing to an emergency in another project).

However, the team recovered and took over

testing the following week. Later, for the third

release (3.3 in figure 1), a new tester joined the

team and tester-generated points increased

again. In this process, the team proved capable
of coping with any tester availabilityÑtesterabsence affected development speed but didnÕt
compromise full, continuous testing.Encourage interaction over isolationInitially, the project tester didnÕt work with
other team developers but instead wrote

cross-feature tests and automated the cus-
tomer-defined use cases. The testing person-

nel managerÑwho wasnÕt an XP team mem-

berÑrequired this separation for two
reasons.First, common wisdom states that testers
must be independent of programmers to pre-

vent implementation details from affecting

their test designs. This 
contaminationargu-ment maintains that testers canÕt write ade-

quate tests for a feature if a programmer has
already explained the testing requirements.
Second, one of testingÕs aims is to verify that

detailed specifications are up-to-date. So,

testers traditionally write tests according to
the specifications, not to what someone has

ÒunofficiallyÓ told them. An unspecified fea-

ture is viewed as a kind of bug.These two claims form many QA profes-
sionalsÕ core objection to agile testing.
13Theclaims target basic XP principlesÑwhole-team
and developer testing, in particularÑand in-
sinuate that theyÕre unsuitable for producing
quality software. The counterargument isnÕt

that these claims are false but simply that the

alternative is better overall. Published reports
on professional testersÕ experience in agile
teams support this.4,14,15They also emphasizethat testers must change their mind-set if
July/August 2006IEEE SOFTWARE
33Iteration1.11.21.31.42.12.22.32.43.13.23.33.44.1
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,000Number of steps in test scenariosEntire teamProfessional testers in the teamFigure 1. Product size
per iteration. The team
ran more passing test
scenariosÑreflecting a
bigger productÑon all
iterations except one.
Note that all tests must
be rerun on each 

iteration and are not
Òaccumulated.Ó 34IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
theyÕre to successfully integrate into an agileteam; our findings support this as well.In our study, testers working independently
found many minor mismatches between writ-

ten specifications and the system, and few ac-

tual bugs. The mismatches were tracked and

resolved as bugs; they were usually trivial, tak-
ing only minutes to fix. However, because de-

velopers tested each task as they wrote it, few
actual system bugs remained at this stage. So,
working with testers in this way was highly in-
efficient: in one extreme case, the tester found

only two actual bugs after three weeks of test-
ing a complex feature.These results reassured the projectÕs man-
agement that developers could effectively test
the software themselves. In turn, the organiza-

tion decided to integrate the tester into the

project team. The tester began to work on

tasks with pairs of developers, writing tests in
parallel with coding after they had all in-
spected the featureÕs specifications and gener-

ated a set of test cases accordingly. Although

we havenÕt yet collected data on the methodÕs

effectiveness, it does seem clear that, in this

agile project, continuous interaction is the

more productive choice.Activity planningPlanning for quality activities involvestime-allocation challenges in feature testing,
regression testing, and repairing defects.Integrate feature testing and codingIn agile development, feature testing is al-
ways an integral part of each featureÕs devel-

opment and time estimation. Testing and cod-
ing time are usually equal: if feature A is esti-mated to require five hours of specifications
and 10 hours of coding, for example, it would
typically be allocated 10 hours for writing and
running tests. This estimation can change on a
per-task basis, such as when a team knows in

advance that a given feature is more difficult to
test than others or requires refactoring of exist-

ing tests. As a rule, features are time-estimated

to completion. Feature A, for example, would

be planned as a single, 25-hour task. This again
stresses that no task is considered complete un-
til its tests are written and running.Regression testing: Divide and conquerIn our study project, regression testing was
considered as global (rather than personal)
overhead and allocated as a global time period.
This works because regression tests are usually

run on each iterationÕs last day, with the testing

work divided among team members. Figure 2a

plots the net number of hours for running and

maintaining regression tests in each iteration.

As the figure shows, during the first two itera-

tions, the variance between iterations was small

enough to make this global approach the cor-
rect choice. The net time required of the entire
team at each iteration was about half a day; this

changed over time, owing mainly to substantial
growth in team size in the third release.
Allocate bug-fix time globallyThe project also allocated a global timepool for fixing defects; experience and avail-
able data thus far indicates that this was a
good choice for two reasons. First, estimating
the time to fix a defect is extremely difficult051015202530354045501.11.21.31.42.12.22.32.43.13.23.33.44.1
010
20304050601.11.21.31.42.12.22.3
IterationIteration
2.43.13.23.33.44.1
(a)(b)
Net hoursNet hoursFigure 2. Testing and defect repair. 

The study project 
considered both 
regression testing 
and defect fixing as
global overhead. 
(a) Net hours 
devoted to running 

and maintaining 
regression tests. 
(b) Net hours 
devoted to fixing 
defects. because defect complexity is unpredictable. Atthe same time, as figure 2b shows, the law of

averages applies here, indicating that we can

reasonably predict the time required for fixing
all defects in a forthcoming iteration. We can

also adjust this much-more-stable estimate at
each iterationÕs planning game according to

the number of open defects at the time (see,

for example, iterations 2.1 and 2.4).Second, planning defect resolution as an in-dividual task results in high overestimates. In
the single iteration that allocated time on a
per-defect basis, each defect was estimated to

require at least four hours, with the highest

single defect estimate being nine hours. Such
overestimation occurs because a single, unex-
pectedly complex defect might well require

that much time. But, as the data shows, itÕs

highly improbable that many unrelated defects

will simultaneously require that much time.
Defect managementDefect management involves two majorchallenges: managing workflow and selecting
and scheduling the defects to fix.Use a team-centered defect-management approach
Defect management workflow is much sim-
pler in agile projects than in traditional ones in
three ways:Anyone can open a defect (once its devel-
opers declare that the defective feature is

Òdone,Ó itÕs considered a defect).
Anyone can close a defect, after fixing it
and running the related tests.
Anyone who finds a defect also assigns it
to someone to be fixed.
Team members routinely view their own de-
fects list and fix the defects. If theyÕre assigned

a defect by mistakeÑfor example, a defect re-

lated to a subject they know nothing aboutÑ
they can reassign it. This eliminates a sizable
overhead from team leaders,4who tradition-ally are responsible for this task. For example,
the team leaders on two comparable tradi-
tional projects at the IAF estimated that they

devote one to three hours per week to defect

management, compared to zero for the agile
projectÕs leaders.
Team-centered, XP-based develop
ment iskey to enabling project members to successfullyassign defect fixes to each other. XPÕs whole-
team and sit-together practices require that
everyone, including the tester, sit in the same

room. The informative-workplace practice re-
quires that everyone participate in the planning

game and daily stand-up meetings, so people

know each other and everyoneÕs respective

knowledge areas. Given this, team members

can usually identify the right person to fix a

given bug. This doesnÕt occur when the testing

team is separate from the development team.
The same practices also reduce false defectreports. Such reports either duplicate existing

defect reports or are created owing to devel-
oper misunderstanding. During our study pe-
riod, only 29 false defects were recorded, con-

stituting 7.5 percent of all defects. Sixteen of

these false defects were recorded in a single it-

eration (2.3), in which the tester worked sepa-
rately from the team. These numbers are low;

during the same periods, our two reference
projects at the IAF reported four to eight times

more false defects.Fix defects as soon as possibleLetting team members assign bug-fixing re-sponsibilities requires that the average bug-fix
time is shortÑin this study, it was slightly over

an hour (see figure 3). This speed is crucial to

ensure that precise load balancing of bugs

among team members is unimportant. When a

bug could require a day or more to fix, team

leaders must assign such work to prevent bot-
tlenecks and ensure that deadlines are met. In

this case, the average bug-fix time remainsJuly/August 2006IEEE SOFTWARE
35Iteration0.000.200.400.600.801.001.201.40
1.601.802.001.21.31.42.12.22.32.43.13.23.33.44.1
HoursFigure 3. Average net
time to fix a defect per
iteration. relatively constant, even as the applicationgrows significantly in size and complexity. This

agrees with the flat cost-of-change curve,1acentral benefit of agile development.The average time is based on developer re-ports of the total net time they spent working

on defects (developers complete daily reports
on time spent on each task). The team
achieved this very low averageÑan order of
magnitude or more lower than most projects,

including those in the same organizationÑfor
two reasons. First, thereÕs little overhead to re-

produce defects because testers and program-
mers work on the same baseline. Second, team

members fix defects as soon as theyÕre found,
when the relevant code is still fresh in the de-

velopersÕ mind.
In traditional projects, a feature-complete
version is sent to the QA group, which sends

back a large stream of defects of varying im-

portance. Because the effort to repair defects

always greatly exceeds the available resources,
a lengthy process of prioritizing defects begins.
The team fixes the most urgent defects first,

during time slots preallocated for this activity
during project planning.Agile projects replace this process with a
simple rule: fix every defect as soon as you dis-

cover it. This is required because the team re-

leases software to its customers at every itera-

tion, and releases shouldnÕt, in principle,

contain known bugs. In our case study, the

rule was that defects should be fixed as soon
as possibleÑthis does not necessarily mean im-
mediately, however, simply because theright
person to fix a defect wasnÕt always immedi-
ately available. In addition, teams sometimes
find defects during regression testing, at the

end of an iteration, that they canÕt fix in time.

Given this, our projectÕs team devoted the be-

ginning of each iteration to fixing the previous
iterationÕs open defects.
Figure 4 shows a defectÕs average longevity
over time. During the first four iterations, the

team fixed all defects within a week (usually at

the start of the next iteration after their dis-

covery). The team relaxed the pace slightly in

the next two releases. However, the average

remained low and relatively constant relative
to traditional projects (in the organization and

elsewhere). Moreover, these averages relate to

alldefects, not only critical or urgent ones.
Fixing all defects as soon as possible hasseveral advantages. First, as we discussed ear-
lier, defects require far less time to fix with this

approach. Second, working on a clean and
highly stable code base makes new develop-
ment faster. Third, besides avoiding the over-

head of prioritizing and planning defect fixes,
this rule avoids unpleasant customer negotia-
tions over which defects to solve. Such negoti-
ation is often forced upon both sides when a

projectÕs delivery date approaches andÑbecause

traditional development projects test late in
the processÑit becomes clear that not all de-

fects will be fixed before the deadline. In the

project studied here, the team fixed all defects

routinely and, given its perceptions about
product quality, planned no Òstabilization pe-

riodÓ toward the official delivery date.Another significant difference from com-mon practice that often surprises traditional
practitioners is that agile projects have no con-
cept of defect severity. This relieves developers

of both the pressure to stabilize the system just

before the delivery date and the need to coerce
the customer into dictating which defects to

fix (and which to not fix). So, the only consid-

eration regarding a given defect is whether to
fix it. If the answer is no, the defect isnÕt

opened. If the answer is yes, itÕs fixed when itÕs

cheapest to do soÑright away.
Our studyÕs data and analysis are useful

both to practitioners wishing to estab-
lish new agile teams and to researcherslooking for high-quality, real-world data. In

addition to illustrating applicable tactics, our36IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Iteration00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.11.21.31.42.12.22.32.43.13.23.33.44.1
Weeks
Figure 4. A defectÕs average longevity per 
iteration. The average
is for all defects, 
regardless of severity.
 data shows that agile testing works. The proj-ect team cut by an order of magnitude the time
required to fix defects, defect longevity, and de-

fect-management overhead. Even on such a
large-scale project, the team achieved full re-
gression testing at each iteration and developer
testing. It also resolved all defects over a sig-
nificant time period that included both person-
nel changes and team growth.
Implementing the presented process re-quired a new mind-set at personal and organi-
zational levels, and it remains a challenge to
expand its adoption to other IAF projects.
One key motivator for such expansion, in the
IAF and industry-wide, is the continued publi-
cation of quality data on large-scale agile proj-
ects. We strongly encourage and call for fur-

ther investigation on these issues, and, in
particular, on long-term agile projects, proj-

ects spanning multiple coordinating teams,
and projects that are concurrently developing

and maintaining production systems.References1.K. Beck and C. Andres, 
Extreme Programming Ex-plained, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley, 2005.
2.L. Crispin and T. House, 
Testing Extreme Programming
,Addison-Wesley, 2002.
3.C. Kaner, J. Bach, and B. Pettichord, 
Lessons Learnedin Software Testing: A Context-Driven Approach
, JohnWiley & Sons, 2002.
4.R. Leavitt, ÒLetÕs End the Defect Report-Fix-Check-
Rework-Cycle,Ó 2005, presentation, 2005; www.rallydev.

com/kportal.jsp?doc=wp6.5.B. Pettichord, ÒAgile Testing Challenges,Ó 
Proc. PacificNorthwest Software Quality Conf.,2004; www.io.com/
~wazmo/papers/agile_testing_challenges.pdf.6.V. Ramachandran and A. Shukla, ÒCircle of Life, Spiral
of Death: Are XP Teams Following the Essential Prac-

tices?Ó Proc. XP/Agile Universe, LNCS 2418, Springer,
2002, pp. 166Ð173.7.K. Beck, 
Test Driven Development: By Example
, Addi-son-Wesley, 2002.
8.Y. Dubinsky et al., ÒAgile Metrics at the Israeli Air
Force,Ó Proc. Agile 2005 Conf., IEEE Press, 2005, pp.12Ð19.9.D. Talby et al., ÒThe Design and Implementation of a
Metadata Repository,Ó 
Proc. IntÕl Council on SystemsEng. Israeli Chapter Conf., Incose-IL, 2002.10.D. Talby et al., ÒA Process-Complete Automatic Accep-
tance Testing Framework,Ó 
Proc. IntÕl Conf. SoftwareÑ
Science, Technology and Eng.
(SwSTE 05), IEEE CSPress, 2005, pp. 129Ð138.11.B. Pettichord, ÒDesign for Testability,Ó 
Proc. PacificNorthwest Software Quality Conf., 2002; www.io.com/
~wazmo/papers/design_for_testability_PNSQC.pdf.12.R. Jeffries, ÒA Metric Leading to Agility,Ó 
XP Maga-zine,14 June 2004; www.xprogramming.com/xpmag/
jatRtsMetric.htm.13.M. Stephens and D. Rosenberg, 
Extreme ProgrammingRefactored: The Case against XP, Apress Publishers,2003.14.L. Crispin, ÒExtreme Rules of the Road: How an XP
Tester Can Steer the Project toward Success,Ó

STQE/Better Software Magazine, July/Aug. 2001, pp.24Ð29; www.testing.com/agile/crispin-xp-article.pdf.
15.B. Pettichord, ÒDonÕt Become the Quality Police,Ó
StickyMinds.com, 1 July 2002, www.stickyminds.

com/sitewide.asp?Function=edetail&ObjectType=

ART&ObjectId=3543.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
July/August 2006IEEE SOFTWARE
37About the AuthorsDavid Talbyis a software team leader in the Israeli Air ForceÕs M
AMDASoperational soft-ware development unit, and a doctoral student in computer science at Hebrew University,

Jerusalem. His research interests are in parallel computer scheduling and workload modeling,
and software process improvement initiatives focusing on agile methods. He received his MSc
in computer science and MBA in business administration from Hebrew University. Contact him

at the School of Computer Science and Eng., Hebrew University, Givat Ram, Jerusalem 91904,

Israel; davidt@cs.huji.ac.il.Orit Hazzanis an associate professor in the Department of Education in Technology and
Science at TechnionÐIsrael Institute of Technology. Her research interests are in human aspects

of software engineering, particularly relating to agile software development and XP develop-
ment environments. She is coauthor (with Jim Tomayko) of 
Human Aspects of Software Engi-neering (Charles River Media, 2004). She received her PhD in mathematics education from theTechnionÐIsrael Institute of Technology. SheÕs a member of the ACM and the ACM Special Inter-

est Group on Computer Science Education. Contact her at the Dept. of Education in Technology

and Science, TechnionÐIsrael Inst. of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel; oritha@techunix.

technion.ac.il.Yael Dubinsky
is a visiting member of the human-computer interaction research groupat the Department of Computer and Systems Science at La Sapienza, Rome, and an adjunct lec-
turer in the Computer Science Department at the TechnionÐIsrael Institute of Technology. Her

research examines the implementation of agile software development methods in software
teamwork, focusing on software process measurement and product quality. She received her

PhD in science and technology education from the TechnionÐIsrael Institute of Technology. Con-

tact her at 7 Pinchas Rozen St., Haifa 34784, Israel; yael@cs.technion.ac.il.Arie Kerenleads the Magnet divisionÕs systems-engineering group in Israel Aircraft Indus-
tries, and previously led the MAMDASsoftware development unitÕs C
4I engineering group in theIsraeli Air Force. His research interests are in systems analysis, architecture, and development
processes. He received his PhD in computer science from Hebrew University, Jerusalem. Contact

him at 43 Lilach St., Modiin-Reut 71908, Israel; ariekk@netvision.net.il.