 he OMGÕs Model Driven Architecture
(www.omg.org/mda) is an ambitious ef-

fort to build programs from models us-

ing model transformations.1I believethat model-driven agile developmentisan effective software development prac-tice, but I have concerns about the proposed
MDA. I agree with othersÑsuch as Martin
Fowler, Steve Cook, Scott Ambler, and Jean

B”zivin (see the ÒRelated WorkÓ sidebar)Ñ
that we should neither naively ac-
cept nor cavalierly reject MDA
without the broader software com-
munity first appropriately examin-
ing and evaluating it.On modelingModeling is at the core of many
disciplines, but it is especially im-

portant in engineering because it fa-

cilitates communication and con-
structs complex things from smallerparts. Since at least Simula 67 (one of the first

object-oriented languages), many have viewed
software development as the development and

refinement of models. Models facilitate theun-

derstanding, simulation, and emulation of the

artifacts under development. Depending on
model paradigms and cognitive styles, engineers
express models using diagrams, structured text,
and storyboards of one form or another. 
Software modelers depend on and use engi-neering analogies but often fail to understand
them. Engineers realize that the models arenÕt

the product: theyÕre abstractions of the prod-
uct. In fact, in most cases, the models are only
partial abstractions of the product, used to
highlight important aspects that the engineer
should know about the product. The term ex-ecutable specificationis an oxymoronÑif thespecification were truly executable, it would

actually be Òthe thing.Ó Otherwise, it would

merely model Òthe thing,Ó which is by defini-
tion partial and incomplete. UML: The good, the bad, and the uglySoftware engineering welcomed the OMGÕs
intervention to stop the silliness in notation,
just as other, more mature disciplines have wel-

comed similar interventions. The good in UML
is that it provides a common and useful visual
notation for describing many of the software
artifacts used in modern OO analysis, design,
and development.2Tools also help generate
code templates and reverse-generate diagrams
from code. Recent additions such as Way-

pointer (www.jaczone.com/product/overview)

and CodaGen (www.codagen.com) provide

rule-based support for software processes and
code generation. Theindustry uses UML per-

vasively to document and discuss software de-
signs. Additionally, toolsthat will one day

have the usability and productivity of real
drawing tools support UML. The software community naturally as-
sumed tool interchange and interoperability

would be the OMGÕs next contribution. But

hereÕs where we move from the good to the

bad. The OMG dropped the ball and ex-
pended no serious efforts on tool interoper-

ability. Nor was there any follow-through on
0740-7459/04/$20.00 © 2004IEEEPublished by the IEEE Computer SocietyIEEE SOFTWARE
15Editor: Martin Fowler ThoughtWorks 
fowler@acm.orgMDA: Revenge of the Modelers or UML Utopia?Dave Thomas 16IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
DEPT TITLEdeveloping reasonable structured syn-tax for UML artifacts. This says a lot
about tool vendorsÕ power at the OMG
and underlies some of the real prob-
lems with UML evolution and MDA it-
self. XMI Metadata Interchangeap-

pears to be a backdoor project from
the Meta Object Facility efforts, with a
scramble to embrace XML. MOF ef-

forts continue on a Òhuman-readable
notation.Ó The name says it all!And now we move to the ugly. ItÕs
well known that language design by
committee, especially with the techno-
politics of ÒcoopetitionÓ between ven-
dors and personal brands, is unlikely to
produce a well-designed language. For
example, the Activity concept is one of

those political compromises in UML

1.0, and itÕs been elevated to a metaclass

for capturing all behavior in UML 2.0.3UML 2.0 lacks both a reference im-plementation and a human-readable
semantic account to provide an opera-
tional semantics, so itÕs difficult to in-

terpret and correctly implement UML

model transformation tools. For exam-
ple, key concepts such as use cases lack
sufficient semantics to support model
refinement. Why not provide a simple
accessible operational semantic ac-count, perhaps through a metacircularinterpreter? The revised Scheme report
and the annotated reference specifica-
tions of Pascal and XML facilitate a se-
rious external review in the language
and modeling community. Such a se-

mantic account would no doubt point
out semantic holes and ambiguities,
leading to an improved specification
and reducing the time required to build

robust MDA tools.In principle, the process is open to
including missing items, such as script-
ing, decision tables, higher-order func-

tions, relations, a proper type system,

and initialization and finalization.
However, the reality is that vendor iner-

tia, usually in implementing standards,
typically makes version 2.0 the last real
version for many years. Many in the ex-
ecutable-UML crowd apparently work
in domains that only require state ma-
chines, so they might have a vested
commercial interest in UML remaining
less than a complete language (see www.

jot.fm/issues/issue_2003_01/column1).Model engineeringUsing metamodels is powerful and is
very useful for self-description. Meta-

models form the foundation of modelengineering,1of which MDA is a spe-
cific exemplar. Model engineering, or

model-driven development, treats soft-

ware development as a set of transfor-

mations between successive models
from requirements to analysis, to de-

sign, to implementation, to deployment. Model-driven development, as pop-ularly practiced in Simula, Smalltalk,
Lisp, Haskell, APL, and so forth, views
models as useful partial descriptions
that people transform, with tools, into
programs. Agile developmentÕs essence

is that it emphasizes peopleÕs impor-

tance in not only the modeling process
but also the transformation process. Model-engineering (www.metamodel.
com/wisme-2002) advocates usually ar-
guethat we can almost completely au-

tomate the model transformation
process using a catalog of model trans-
formations that convert one model to
another. Research is promising in this

area, which, like compilation and code
generation before it, will no doubt

yield some interesting techniques for

program refinement. MDA further specializes the model-engineering approach to using the MOF
and associated UML models. The OMG

MOF plays a key role in MDA because
itÕs the Holy Grail that unifies UML,

UML profiles, and hence MDA platform-
specific models. MetamodelsModern metamodeling has its foun-
dation in computational-reflection work,
although for many years, databases, op-
erating systems, languages, and tools
contained self-descriptions that today we
often call schemas, metadata, or meta-
classes. Metamodeling is, in many ways,

the computational equivalent of the phi-
losophy of selfÑdefining concepts and
expressing them at the right level in the
reflective tower is difficult and requires a
lot of mental precision. Does a particular

concept belong in the model, metamodel,
or meta metamodel? IBMÕs AD/Cycle used entity-relation-
ship models (the UML of that era born
again as the Object Modeling Tech-

nique) to define a grand unified meta-
model, called the Information Model.DESIGN
For more information on Model Driven Architecture, see
D.S. Frankel, Model Driven Architecture: Applying MDA to Enterprise Com-puting, John Wiley & Sons, 2003S.J. Mellor and M.J. Balcer, 
Executable UML: A Foundation for Model DrivenArchitecture, Addison-Wesley, 2002
To learn what Martin Fowler, Steve Cook, Steve Ambler, and 
Jean B”zivinsay
about MDA, see M. Fowler, ÒModel Driven Architecture,Ó 2004, http://martinfowler.com/

bliki/ModelDrivenArchitecture.htmlS. Cook, ÒDomain Specific Modeling and Model Driven Architecture,Ó 2004,
www.bptrends.com/publicationfiles/01-04%20COL%20Dom%20Spec%

20Modeling%20Frankel-Cook.pdfS. Ambler, ÒModel Driven Architecture Is Ready for Prime Time,Ó 
IEEE Soft-ware, Sept./Oct. 2003, pp. 71Ð73J. B”zivin, ÒMDA: From Hype to Hope, and Reality,Ó invited talk, UML 2003,
www.sciences.univ-nantes.fr/info/perso/permanents/bezivin/UML.2003/

UML.SF.JB.GT.ppt
 May/June 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
17DEPT TITLEAD/Cycle let all methodologists of theday map their concepts, proven or not,
into the IM. For example, we could suc-
cessfully map OO concepts such as ob-
jects, methods, and packages into the IM
with little difficulty simply by interpret-
ing the IM in our own way and over-
loading an existing metaconcept. This let
us store OO models in an IM that actu-
ally had no idea what an object was. The key point is that metamodels letyou easily add new concepts. However,

they donÕt ensure that these concepts

make semantic sense, nor do they ensure
that different metamodels (such as UML

profiles) are consistent or orthogonal. Platform-specific modelsA critical component of successfulMDA tooling is the existence of sound
platform-independent models and plat-
form-specific models1for various targetplatforms such as J2EE, J2ME, MS.NET
Windows and Compact Frameworks,

and Linux Apache. PSMs must model
the target platforms with sufficient preci-

sion to allow model transformations
from UML PIMsto code.  
For restricted behaviors, such as statemachine models, creatingPIMs and

PSMs are relatively easy. PIMs describe a

limited form of behavior that is useful

for an applicationÕs specific domains.

However, a state machine or OMT mod-

els alone can describe few complete ap-
plications. Furthermore, we hardly need
MDA to generate code from a state ma-
chine or entity-relationship models be-
cause these have existed for years!However, it is distinctly nontrivialÑ
many would argue impossibleÑto sup-
port and evolve semantically correct
PSMs for platforms such as J2EE or
.NET. These platforms contain thou-

sands of APIs, many of which are
poorly documented or donÕt conform to

the textual specifications that partially
describe them. Add to this the layers of
middleware and enterprise applications
such as SAP, Oracle, and Peoplesoft,

and we have a mountain of software
that lacks any comprehensive model. Furthermore, even if through someHerculean effort we could produce
such a PSM, it would no sooner beavailable than the vendorÕs next release
would render it outdated. We have

decades of experience building auto-
mated code generators for compilers
and yet still find it challenging to build
a code generator for the Itanium
processor, let alone for an Itanium run-

ning a particular vendorÕs OS, JVM,

J2EE, and middleware. The accidental

complexity of the stack makes a com-
prehensive PSM virtually impossible.Some MDA proponents respondthat they generate the code from the
model and then let the developers deal
with the remaining specifics of plat-
forms, libraries, and legacy interfaces.
This is a nightmare because now the

poor developer, misled by the Òall you

need is UMLÓ hype, is stuck having to
debug and develop code that a tool
generated. They are forced to dive deep
into the most difficult part of the de-
velopment cycleÑusing a specific-
platform API. 
Domain-orientedprogramming and domain-
specific languagesWe must pay more attention to
methods, tools, and models that di-
rectly support domain-oriented pro-
gramming.4UML is useful for many IT
applications or telecom style systems

that we can substantially describe us-
ing OMT or Object Chart style specifi-
cations. It provides little leverage for a
biologist, process control engineer,
hedge fund analyst, or other domain
specialist whose primary interest is in
modeling directly in the application
domain rather than in learning IT spe-

cialistsÕ lingua franca, be it UML or
Java. Domain-specific languages lift the

platformÕs level, reduce the underlying

APIsÕ surface area, and let knowledge-
able end users live in their data without
complex software-centric modelsand

the API field of dreams. 
any have tried to build rich, com-
prehensive, unified models and
languages including PL/I, Algol68, i-Case (such as AD/Cycle), and
ADA.5In each case, they were well mo-tivated, basing their models on leading-
edge ideas. However, these models

were unsuccessful due to their latent

complexity, lack of interoperable im-

plementations, the accidental complex-
ity of real platforms, and the rapid rate
of change in the industry. MDA, as cur-

rently defined and espoused, will likely
meet the same fate. However, used in

moderation and where appropriate,
UML and MDA code generators are
useful tools, although not the panaceas
that some would have us believe.References1.A. Kleppe, J. Warmer, and W. Bast, 
MDA Ex-
plained: The Model Driven Architecture-Prac-
tice and Promise, Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
2.M. Fowler and K. Scott, 
UML Distilled: ABrief Guide to the Standard Object Modeling
Language, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
3.M. Bjorkander and C. Kobryn, ÒArchitecting
Systems with UML 2.0,ÓIEEE Software,July/Aug. 2003, pp. 57Ð61.4.D. Thomas and B.M. Barry, ÒModel Driven
Development: The Case for Domain Oriented
Programming,Ó Companion of the 18th Ann.ACM SIGPLAN Conf. Object-Oriented Pro-
gramming, Systems, Languages, and Applica-
tions, ACM Press, 2003, pp. 2Ð7.5.T. Hoare, ÒThe EmperorÕs Old Clothes: The
ACM Turing Award Lecture,Ó 
Comm. ACM,vol. 24, no. 2, 1981, pp. 75Ð83. Dave Thomasis cofounder of Bedarra Research Labs(www.bedarra.com) and OpenAugment Consortium (www.

openaugment.org), and an adjunct professor at Carleton Univer-

sity, Canada and the University of Queensland, Australia. He is also

a founding director of AgileAlliance.com and founder of ObjectTech-

nology International (www.oti.com). Contact him at dave@
bedarra.com; www.davethomas.net.
DESIGN






