 78IEEE SOFTWARE
September/October 20020740-7459/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEESome in the academic communitymight
argue that such reality-based software de-
velopment reflects industry practice. This
might be an accurate generalization of the
past, but recent trends suggest that a pur-
poseful and disciplined approach to soft-

ware development is more effective than an
extemporaneous one.1Organizations (suchas Raytheon2and General Dynamics3) aremaking conscious efforts to transform proj-

ects from initiation rites that yield 
next-time-IÕll-do-it-differentlylessons into beingventures that promote this-worked-and-IÕll-do-it-againexperiences. They see softwaredevelopment as more than a grab bag of

technical undertakingsÑthey envision it as
the purposeful orchestration of technical

and nontechnical activities. We can mirror

this visionÑand hopefully the successesÑin
college project courses if we are prepared to
accept what industry is learning. The lessonis that software development requires disci-
pline, and we can foster discipline using

well-conceived software processes.We outline our rationale for moving from
a product-oriented approach to a process-
oriented one, our experiences in determining
suitable process weight, and lessons we
learned in attempting to make reality-based
software experiences less painful and more
real.Using processes in the softwareengineering classroomUsing processes to develop software inthe college classroom has mirrored industry

history (see the ÒA Brief Process HistoryÓ

sidebar on page 81), although on a much
more attenuated and compressed time scale.

While most projects adhere to the classical

school of development, there is a growing
recognition by instructors of the usefulness
focusSoftware Process in theClassroom: The Capstone
Project ExperienceDavid A. Umphress, T. Dean Hendrix, and James H. Cross, 
Auburn UniversityA process-oriented
perspective on large
student projects
guides students in
integrating end-to-

end life-cycle skills
and provides
consistency of
experience among
projects. The
authors discuss
what they learned
after conducting 49

capstone projects.Imagine the traditional college project course: students bunch togetherin groups, are assigned a sizable software development task, and are
told to Òhave at it.Ó Instructors expect them to integrate the technical

skills theyÕve learned in previous courses, learn to work synergistically
as a team, plan and track their work, satisfy their customerÑand produce
sound software. Yet, more often than not, projects so framed teach their

participants yet another way not to develop software.educating software professionals
 of process, however meager, for student
projects in the academic world.Although much can be said for the feel-ings of freedom and independence gained by

letting students build software as they
please, the simple fact is that most students

have not been taught beginning-to-end proj-
ect skills. Current computer science and
software engineering curricular models en-
sure students have taken a variety of classes
relating to programming. However, this

does not assure that they have integrated the
knowledge they gained in coursework into a
comprehensive and functioning whole, nor
does it guarantee that they have the social
skills required for a successful project.Using software processes in the classroomhelps in three ways. First, the processesde-

scribe the tasks that students must accom-
plish to build software. Suitably detailed, a
process model can describe the life-cycle ac-
tivities: their sequence and starting and
stopping conditions. It can also define the
projectÕs artifacts, outlining their appear-

ance, content, and the method students
should use to build them. In a sense,
processes let students focus on the creative
task of building software by defining activi-
ties instead of wasting time inventing them.

Second, processes can give the instructor
visibility into the project. Viewed this way,

they describe the rules under which the
project operates. The instructor can query

students on their progress down to the
granularity of the process description; stu-
dents follow the rules outlined in the
process to report status to the instructor.

Third, processes can provide continuity and
corporate memory across academic terms.
Instructors can build solutions to general

project problems into processes, thus improv-
ing the projectÕs educational worth over time.
Capstone projects We have concluded 49 capstone software
development projects, 27 of which used var-
ious process-oriented approaches. Each proj-
ect entailed a team of three to five students
developing new software or making signifi-
cant enhancements to existing software. All
the projects involved a customer who used
the product after delivery. We conducted the

projects at the graduate and undergraduate
levels. Graduate teams worked for a year,

while undergraduate teams worked for a sin-gle academic term. On average, graduatestudents had five years of software develop-
ment experience; undergraduates generally
had no professional exposure. All students
had taken programming-intensive classes
and at least one design class before starting
their project. Most students had completed a
software process class. Projects ranged
widely in domain, programming language,
and hardware platform; examples included
constructing software tools in Java for desk-
top computers, developing controllers in C
for embedded hardware, and building proj-
ect-tracking tools in Visual Basic for hand-

held computers. Software process trends in student teamsOur outlook on process follows the his-
tory of industry trends; that is, we started

with no process, injected too much process,

and then backed off to what we felt was a

satisfactory balance of discipline and chaos.
Indeed, we found that injecting process into

the academic environment requires the same

technology transition skills and tools used
in industry.
Our traditional capstone projects fol-lowed the classical school of software devel-
opment. Although each team developed

software for widely differing customers and
domains, the projects were similar in na-
ture: They captured requirements and de-
signs, but seldom validated or verified them.

Teams ignored designs in the heat of final

deadlines. The bulk of the project work
came at the end of the project, and was nor-

mally done by a small subset of the team
working exhaustive, long hours. Project
documentation was pretty, but generally

vacuous. It was often relegated to the
weaker members of the team as a way of

providing them a task that got them out of

the way of the software construction. Re-

quirements were scaled down from the ini-
tial promises to the customer, usually near

the projectÕs end. The product delivered by

the team could not fully pass customer-

designated acceptance tests. Delivered soft-
ware consisted of graphical user interfaces
with little functionality underneath. Cus-

tomers could seldom install the software

without significant assistance.Three themes emerged from the post-mortem analyses we conducted across the

projects. First, teams had difficulty balanc-
September/October 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
79We started withno process,injected toomuch process,and then backedoff to what wefelt was asatisfactorybalance ofdiscipline andchaos. ing the workload throughout the project.They conducted elaborate requirements
statements and designs, but then discovered
that they had underestimated the technical
prowess necessary to implement the product

within the project time frame. In most cases,

their designs relied on mental models of

how they thought software componentsÑ

either prebuilt or organicÑworked, only to

discover later that those models were in-

complete, too simple, or erroneous. Because
they typically followed a waterfall-like life-
cycle, they discarded their carefully crafted
soft upstream project artifacts when build-

ing hard deliverables. Even when teams
built software in iterative cycles, they
tended to first concentrate on features they

knew how to write and delayed working on
technically difficult or complex features.

Projects thus consisted of large amounts of
unproductive work punctuated with short
bursts of intense development.Second, skills that students learned intheir course work did not scale well to mul-
tiple-person large projects. Configuration
management was the most obvious stum-
bling block. Many teams did not have a
mechanism for controlling their source code,
claiming that such measures added un-
wanted overhead. Instead, they placed their
code in a central repository, copied needed

files to their local workspaces, made

changes, and then replaced the files without
regard to whether the original contents had

changed in the interim. They depended on
email and word of mouth to control inad-
vertent file destruction. Not only did these
informal communication methods break
down with erratic work schedules, but the
overall scheme of continually evolving the
software prevented falling back to known
baselines in times of trouble. Additionally,

teams reported that they did not track de-
fects, especially in the projectÕs final stages,

and often did not know if bug fixes were
ever incorporated into the delivered product.Finally, team membersÕ responsibilities
were not clear. Although all project partici-

pants had some technical background, few

had training in team dynamics. At the proj-

ect onset, teams invariably organized
around an egoless model without a formal
leader and few defined roles. They rational-

ized that this model advocated the most po-
lite form of team government: students gen-
erally felt uncomfortable about presuming aself-appointed leadership role and waited
for a natural leader to emerge. They felt

similarly about other team responsibilities,

assuming that team members would natu-

rally gravitate to whatever tasks felt most
comfortable to them. Although some teams

contained the right personalities for this
to work, most teams quickly became rud-
derless committees with few clear lines of
accountability for project activities. Team

members with weak skills or shy personali-
ties eluded productive work by shielding

themselves behind ambiguous role expecta-
tions. Members with strong personalities,

not wishing to receive a poor grade, com-
pensated for weaker members by taking on
additional work, thus paving the way for ill
feelings. Once the personality of the team fi-

nally emerged, it was often one of cliques,

contention, and miscommunication.Interestingly, during project postmortems,
technical programming skills surfaced as
only a minor concern. The team participants
felt they were adequately equipped to write
code. What they lacked were skills to deal
with integrated project issues. They needed
guidanceÑat some level of abstractionÑon
how to develop software. In other words,
they needed a process. Process 1: MIL-STD-498We chose to adapt MIL-STD-498
4as thefirst process model, abandoning an initial
attempt to cobble together a software devel-

opment process from scratch as too con-

trived. We chose this standard because it

was actively used at the time, described in-
formation requirements of numerous soft-

ware life-cycle activities, and was free. Working with the customer and the proj-
ect supervisor, each team spent the projectÕs

first week editing the MIL-STD-498 docu-

ment specifications to meet project particu-

lars. This periodÕs goal was to have each

team define how it would conduct project

business. In reality, this did not happen. Just

as traditional teams spent precious upfront
time putting together intricate but unrealis-

tic designs, these new teams developed elab-

orate process descriptions that they soon
jettisoned as too complex. Projects devolved
to ad hoc development, but with standard-
ized documentation.
In retrospect, choosing MIL-STD-498
80IEEE SOFTWARE
September/October 2002Skills thatstudentslearned in their course workdid not scale well tomultiple-personlarge projects. was naŁve. We thought team participants
would be able to define how to conduct a

project if they knew what content they

needed to produce for project documents.

Taking the view that documentation is a

side effect of the software development ef-

fort, we thus thought our students would

use the documentation templates as guides
as to what activities they should perform. For seasoned software developers, this isnot an unrealistic expectation. However, the
student teams perceived the main focus of

their work to be documentation, not soft-

ware. The standard outlined the content of
artifacts resulting from each life-cycle stage,

but it did little to help them identify and

organize development tasks that would
produce the artifacts. Project postmortems

showed that the generic MIL-STD-498 was
too abstract to achieve reasonable consis-September/October 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
81Two disparate schools of thought regarding software devel-
opment have emerged from the software industry over the past

25 years. The classical school views building software primarily
as a product-drivenactivity, one that treats software as a
ÒthingÓ with little regard to how it was developed. It professes

that anyone with suitable programming skills can write software
and that activities leading to a software product are free form

and chaotic by nature. This school obtained and retains its out-
look from programmingÕs early days, a time in which software

development was a cottage industry that depended on expert

artisans to craft software. Its hallmarks are reliance on gurus

and heroes, homegrown methods and techniques, and a body
of knowledge that is largely anecdotal. A contemporary school of thought appeared in the 1970s.
This school drew its ideals heavily from the manufacturing sec-

tor and, as such, emphasized that the way software is built de-
termines, to a large extent, the end productÕs quality and the

developersÕ quality of life. This view of software as a 
process-drivenactivity recognizes the value of technical prowess centralto the classical school but suggests more. It proposes that soft-
ware construction is not a free-for-all but rather is best done
under circumstances in which relationships between key devel-
opment activities are defined explicitly. These relationships, also

known as processes, identify the tasks needed to produce a
software product of known quality.
Most projects in industry today fall on a continuum some-
where between the classical and contemporary camps. Of par-

ticular interest is what portion of the continuum the industry em-

phasizes at any point in time. The industry primarily focused on the classical school in
programmingÕs early days. Methodological processes describ-

ing the technical steps for building software appeared in the

1970s. These processes, combined with the industryÕs interest

in software life-cycles, pushed the philosophical focus away

from pure programming classicism. This shift became more
pronounced in the 1980s with the US governmentÕs move to

contain costs in embedded system software. This was mani-
fested with the Ada movement and its attempts to marshal

frameworks for common methods and tools. DOD-STD-2167
and subsequent military and industry efforts to standardize

high-level life-cycle activities fueled the momentum toward the
contemporary school during this time. The 1990s saw possibly
the height of the process dialectic with the application of the

ISO 9000 series to software development and the Capability
Maturity Model for Software. Numerous process models ap-

peared at this time, including MIL-STD-498 and IEEE 1074 

(for a comprehensive history, see Yingxu WangÕs and Graham

KingÕs 
Software Engineering Processes: Principles and Applica-tions1).Focus on the contemporary philosophy took an interesting
turn of events in the mid-1990s. Until this point, the working

assumption was a more-is-better attitude in defining the way in

which software is built. Standardized and de facto process
models touched on virtually every development aspect. Empiri-

cal evidence showed that process discipline improved projectsÕ
ability to contain cost, schedule, and defects;2but this disciplinecame at a cost. Operating an organization at CMM Level 5,
fully compliant IEEE 1074, or other so-called heavyweight
process meant overhead in the processÕs care and nurturing.

Many developers felt encumbered by unnecessary bureaucracy

in strongly process-driven efforts. 
This led to a grass roots backlash in the late 1990s and
early 2000s against heavyweight processes to process models
that were not as confining. Lightweight processesÑnow known
as agileprocessesÑappeared to establish equilibrium betweenthe classical and contemporary extremes, consequently shifting

the development focus to a more nonpartisan part of the philo-

sophical continuum.3Processes and process patterns, including
Extreme Programming, Scrum, Adaptive Software Develop-
ment, and Crystal, are currently embraced by the industry as

ways of providing some of the contemporary schoolÕs engineer-

ing discipline, while leaving room for the classical schoolÕs raw

creative horsepower.
4References 
1. Y. Wang and G. King, 
Software Engineering Processes: Principles and Appli-
cations, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla., 2000.2. S. McConnell, ÒThe Business Case for Better Software Practices 2002 Keynote,Ó
2002, www.construx.com/BusinessCaseForSoftwarePractices-Keynote.pdf.
3. M. Fowler and J. Highsmith, ÒThe Agile Manifesto,Ó Software Development,vol. 9, no. 8, Aug. 2001, pp. 28Ð32.
4. M. Fowler, ÒPut Your Process on a Diet,Ó 
Software Development, vol. 8, no. 12,Dec. 2000, pp. 32Ð37.
A Brief Process History
 tency among teams without a significantamount of added detail. Although teams
that used MIL-STD-498 for their project re-
fined the standard slightly for subsequent
teams, it retained a document-centric aura
that crippled its acceptance by the students. Process 2: IEEE 1074
We tailored the documentation templates
of MIL-STD-498 to the bare minimum and
then turned to IEEE 1074
5to add an activ-ity-centric flavor to the software develop-

ment process. We chose this because it enu-

merated a development projectÕs activities

and described the interchange of project ar-
tifacts among those activities. Thus, IEEE

1074 described project tasks and MIL-STD-
498 described document formats.Teams began their projects by defining
their own procedures for conducting ma-
jor technical development activities; that
is, they defined their own Software Life
Cycle Model Process and Development
Process portions of IEEE 1074. We pro-

vided them with procedures for perform-
ing activities with which they had little 
experience, such as configuration manage-
ment, product installation, project moni-toring, and so on. In short, we gave them
instructions on how they should carry
out the standardÕs Project Management,

Pre-Development, Post-Development, andIntegral processes. Here again, the teams were overwhelmed
with the processÕs weight. The portion of

the process we provided was a hefty 41

pages, to which we expected the project

teams to add their individual process de-
scriptions (usually amounting to approxi-
mately 10 pages). Our document shrank to
20 pages over two years, but never seemed
to be distilled to a kernel that could capture

the studentsÕ imagination and dispel their
suspicions of unnecessary bureaucracy.
Like the MIL-STD-498 experience, teams
using IEEE 1074 developed procedures that
were well intentioned but unrealistic. Team

participants had been writing code in an ad
hoc fashion throughout their college educa-
tion; consequently, defining technical tasks

that team members could carry out uni-

formly was unfamiliar territory. Team

processes typically polarized: they were ei-
ther so vague that they were of little guid-
ance, or so legalistic that they were imprac-
tical to implement and monitor. 
The intended effect of using IEEE 1074
was to show the teams that they could ap-

ply discipline to software development.
However, because they had not experienced

processes independent of structured class-
room assignments, at the projectÕs outset,

the teams focused their attention more
on satisfying the process than on build-
ing a product. On average, several weeks

passed before they adapted and adopted
the process. Because of process overhead,
IEEE 1074 teams produced the same
amount of software in an entire project as
the ad hoc development teams produced

in several weeks, thus raising skepticism

among the students about a process-oriented
approachÕs value.
Process 3: Team Software Process
Realizing that the process was encumber-ing the product development, we moved

next in the direction of lightening the
process weight by adopting the Team

Software Process.6Our students had moresuccess with this because the process de-
fined explicit project scripts and team roles.The TSP was out-of-the-box readyÑstudents

didnot have to add their own process de-

scriptions.Project teams understood the entireprocess within the projectÕs first days and

could adjust it when needed. The time they

spent on the project was no longer concen-
trated at product delivery time but was dis-
tributed more evenly across the project. The
cyclic activities that the TSP promotes let
the students build, test, and deliver software
in manageable increments. Moreover, the

end-of-phase reviews that it prescribes gave

convenient points for the instructor and the
customer to provide feedback to the team. 
The downside of the process was in the
bookkeeping. Students overwhelmingly re-
jected the myriad forms that the the TSP re-

quires, even when those forms were avail-
able electronically. They felt imposed on to

follow the personal processes that the TSP

prescribesÑso much so that we came to

doubt the veracity of process data we col-

lected by the projectÕs end. Candid post

mortems on these projects showed that the

students appreciated the high-level disci-
pline that the TSP imposed, but they balked
at the details.
Studentsappreciated thehigh-leveldiscipline thatthe TSPimposed, butthey balked atthe details.82IEEE SOFTWARE
September/October 2002 Process 4: Extreme ProgrammingWe turned to Extreme Programming
7inan effort to break out of the TSPÕs heavy re-

liance on staff work. XP had the TSP-like
advantage of being simple and understand-
able. It also advocated an overall develop-
ment discipline in which project teams had

to produce demonstrable results at regular

intervals. Unlike the TSP, in which scripts

describe explicit instructions on conducting
various process activities, XP gives general
guidelines. XP philosophy reduces software
development processes to the bare essen-
tials. It stresses a working product over
elaborate documentation and measurements.
It was also on the cusp of the classical school
of thought; only its reliance on established,

predefined commonsense activities prevented
it from degenerating into chaos.
XPÕs emphasis on getting software work-
ing early in the project and its relaxed ap-
proach to requirements and design appealed
to our project teams. It provided a suitably
welcoming bridge from the extemporaneous

software development of the classroom to a
more disciplined mindset required for the

project. Like the TSP, XPÕs incremental cy-

cles smoothed the studentsÕ effort across the

project. That we described the XP process

using guidelines rather than prescriptive
rules was not an obstacle. The guidelines
were sufficiently detailed and intuitive

enough to let the teams know what they

should be doing, yet abstract enough to let
the teams choose how best to carry them

out. Finally, project successÑwhich we

measured by how the finished software met

customersÕ expectationsÑsurpassed that of
previous projects, whether they had used a
process or not. Conducting the projects using XP was
not without disadvantages. First, the project
teams collected little statistical process data.

XPÕs project velocity let teams measure

progress, but the metric was not detailed

enough to provide any insight into process
improvement. The project velocity was sim-

ple to measure and difficult to conceal, thus

providing an accurate glimpse into project
progress, but we had to augment it with

other metrics. Second, student class sched-
ules made XPÕs pair programming activity

unrealistic. Several project teams experi-

mented with programming in virtual pairs
using online collaborative tools, but theystopped when their frustration with the
tools outweighed the perceived advantages
of pair programming. Third, our students
underestimated XP. They mistook its infor-

mality as an invitation to seat-of-the-pants
design and coding. We took special efforts

to point out that although XPÕs published

descriptions seem casual, its mechanics of

system metaphors, design refactoring, de-
layed optimization, and configuration man-
agement require careful attention.Lessons learnedTable 1 summarizes our experiences with
software processes, showing that the aca-
demic environment is not so different from

the industrial one. Indeed, it mirrors in
miniature industrial trends and attitudes to-

ward software developmentÑsoftware de-
veloped using the classical school of thought
was not meeting our customersÕ needs. Our
developers could not produce a consistently
high-quality product by carrying out project
activities extemporaneously. For us, heavy-

weight processesÑthat is, processes that
were highly detailed and prescriptiveÑ
reduced project ad-libbing; however, they

introduced a level of bureaucracy that inter-
fered with product development. Ironically,

like the classical school of thought, the end
result was software that did not meet our

customersÕ needs. We had to find a suitable

process weight that balanced what was be-
ing built with how it was being built. This

then gave us sufficient control over projects
to maintain a relatively consistent level of
software quality and a relatively consistent
educational experience for the students.So how can educators infuse process intoprojects? We have five suggestions.
Develop a process cultureIntroducing processes into the classroomenvironment is not easier than injecting them
into the workplace. It requires careful work

with all project stakeholders (students, in-

structors, and customers) to educate them

on the processesÕ purpose, obtain commit-
ments to abide by processes, identify
process boundaries, and so on. Seek agilityStudents typically enjoy coding, but notanalyzing, designing, testing, and communi-
cating. Agile processes, such as XP, are easiest
September/October 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
83Introducingprocesses intothe classroomenvironment isnot easier thaninjecting theminto theworkplace. for students to accept and perform becausethe processes focus on working software as
the main artifact. In contrast, a heavyweight
process gives the impression of ponderous bu-
reaucracy. Matching the process weight to the

studentsÕ abilities, expectations, and tolerance
is vital to a projectÕs success. None of the

process models we constructed are bad; in
fact, we used bits and pieces from each
process model in the subsequent one. We

found that, in our environment, lighter
process models more closely matched our stu-
dentsÕ culture. Specifically, XP was a suitable

process because it was malleable enough to fit
the diversity of our development efforts and
the variety of our studentsÕ skills.Develop a process infrastructure Giving the students a written process de-scription is not enough. Instructors must also
provide them with process orientation and re-

sources they can use when they have a ques-
tion. Most importantly, students must have

the tools that support process activities. This
includes adequate hardware and software for
development, configuration management,
testing, method support, and so on. We cau-

tion others attempting this that the infrastruc-
ture must support the process, not subvert it.
Tools can influence the way in which students

carry out process activities. An ill-conceived
collection of tools can encourage actions the
process does not allow, resulting in a tool-

process impedance mismatch; on the other
hand, wisely selected tools can actually pro-
mote process discipline.Use processes to focus learning Few students are skilled in all the techni-
cal and nontechnical activities that projectwork requires; consequently, instructors

should develop processes that focus stu-
dentsÕ efforts on project learning objectives.

For instance, instructors might construct a
project process to give only light guidance
to tasks familiar to students. It might give
detailed, prescriptive guidance to unfamiliar
tasks that, if students invented it, would de-

tract from their learning objectives. It might
even describe a ÒmetaÓ process for having
the students define their own tasks for a
particular segment of the project. 
Seek realismLike its counterpart in industry, process
enactment in the classroom requires enforce-
mentand adjustment. Instructors should ex-

pect students to know the process and adhere

to its guidelines. In-project process audits

are effective tools for assessing process use
and perception. When a process-related prob-
lemarises, a mechanism should be in place

to change the process so that the problem is
not repeated in subsequent projects. Stu-

dents should not be denied success because
of a poor process; similarly, they should not

blame the process for their lack of success.We came to the hard realization

that we were faced with the chal-
lenge of infusing a new technol-
ogyÑsoftware processesÑinto the class-
room. Contrary to the conventional wisdom
that we could dictate to our students how

we wanted them to write software, we had

to carefully couple the software process to
the studentsÕ abilities, expectations, and cul-
84IEEE SOFTWARE
September/October 2002Table 1Process evolution over 49 capstone projects, with significant lessons learnedAd hocMIL-STD-498IEEE 1074Team Software Process Extreme Programming
Experience 22 projects over5 projects over 10 projects 4 projects8 projects
level10 years2 yearsover 4 yearsover 1 yearover 1 year
AdvantageRite of passageInsight into artifact Insight into network  Understandable Emphasis of
contentof project activitiesprocesscommonsense approach
DisadvantageProduct seldomDocumentation-centricComplexityPaperworkPerceived
met customer outlookinformality
expectationsFeature adopted Projects with Documentation templatesProcess frameworkCyclic development,All except
and carried forwardactual customersteam rolespair programming

Biggest lessonLittle control over Knowing documentationOverwhelming Process measurementRefactoring, configuration

learnedproject variabilitycontent does not unless tailoredaccuracy decreasesmanagement, and
necessarily lead to knowing as number ofdesign simplicity
project activitiesmeasures increasesare deceptively difficult
 ture. None of the processes we used were in-
herently poor; we had to find the particular

process that matched our culture and let us
achieve the educational objectives of the
project course.In the end, we found that introducing
processes into our capstone project courses
benefited our instructors, students, and cus-

tomers. Instructors have increased visibility

into projects, students have guidance on

how to conduct themselves, and customers

have a better engineered product. References1.S. McConnell, ÒThe Business Case for Better Software
Practices 2002 Keynote,Ó 2002, www.construx.com/

BusinessCaseForSoftwarePractices-Keynote.pdf.2. P. Bowers, ÒRaytheon Stands Firm on Benefits of
Process Improvement,Ó CrossTalk
, vol. 14, no. 3, Mar.
2001, pp. 9Ð12.3. M. Diaz and J. King, ÒHow CMM Impacts Quality,
Productivity, Rework, and the Bottom Line,Ó

CrossTalk
, vol. 15, no. 3, Mar. 2002, pp. 9Ð14.
4. Defense Department MIL-STD-498, Software Develop-ment and Documentation
, Washington, D.C., 1994.
5. IEEE Std. 1074-1997
, IEEE Standard for DevelopingSoftware Life Cycle Processes, IEEE Press, Piscataway,
N.J., 1998.6. W. Humphrey, 
Introduction to the Team Software
Process, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2000.
7. K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2000.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
About the AuthorsT. Dean Hendrix
is an associate professor ofcomputer science and software engineering at
Auburn University. His research areas are software

engineering, software visualization, and reverse en-
gineering. He received his PhD from Auburn Uni-
versity. Contact him at the Department of Computer

Science and Software Engineering, 107 Dunstan
Hall, Auburn University, AL 36849; hendrix@eng.

auburn.edu; www.eng.auburn.edu/~hendrix.
David A. Umphressis an associate pro-fessor of computer science and software engi-
neering at Auburn University. His research inter-

ests are software processes, requirements
engineering, and software engineering educa-
tion. He received his PhD from Texas A&M Uni-

versity. Contact him at the Department of Com-

puter Science and Software Engineering, 107
Dunstan Hall, Auburn University, AL 36849;
umphress@eng.auburn.edu; www.eng.auburn.edu/~umphress.
James H. Crossis professor and chair of theDepartment of Computer Science and Software En-
gineering at Auburn University. His research inter-

ests include software engineering environments,
software visualization, and object-oriented method-
ology. He received his PhD from Texas A&M Univer-

sity. Contact him at the Department of Computer

Science and Software Engineering, 107 Dunstan
Hall, Auburn University, AL 36849; cross@eng.
auburn.edu; www.eng.auburn.edu/~cross.
SEPTEMBER / OCTOBER 2002CodefastInside Back Cover
Hewlett PackardBack Cover

John Wiley &Sons1

SAP LabsInside Front Cover

Scientific Toolworks11

Software Development Conference63
Advertising PersonnelAdvertiser / Product                  Page Number
Marion DelaneyIEEEMedia, 

Advertising Director
Phone:+1 212 419 7766

Fax:+1 212 419 7589

Email: md.ieeemedia@ieee.orgMarian AndersonAdvertising Coordinator
Phone:+1 714 821 8380

Fax:+1 714 821 4010

Email:
manderson@computer.org
Sandy BrownIEEE Computer Society,

Business Development Manager
Phone:+1 714 821 8380

Fax:+1 714 821 4010

Email: sb.ieeemedia@ieee.orgDebbie SimsAssistant Advertising 
Coordinator
Phone:+1 714 821 8380

Fax:+1 714 821 4010

Email: dsims@computer.org
Mid Atlantic 
(product/recruitment)
Dawn Becker
Phone: +1 732 772 0160

Fax:      +1 732 772 0161

Email: db.ieeemedia@ieee.orgMidwest (product)David Kovacs
Phone:   +1 847 705 6867

Fax:        +1 847 705 6878

Email: dk.ieeemedia@ieee.orgNorthwest (product)John Gibbs
Phone:    +1 415 929 7619

Fax:        +1 415 577 5198

Email:   
jg.ieeemedia@ieee.orgSouthern CA (product)Marshall Rubin
Phone:   +1 818 888 2407

Fax:       +1 818 888 4907

Email: mrubin@westworld.orgSouthwest (product)Royce House
Phone:   +1 713 668 1007

Fax:        +1 713 668 1176

Email: rh.ieeemedia@ieee.orgJapanGerman Tajiri

Phone:+81 42 501 9551

Fax:+81 42 501 9552

Email:  gt.ieeemedia@ieee.org
EuropeRob Walker

Phone:+44 193 256 4999

Fax:+44 193 256 4998

Email:r.walker@husonmedia.com
New England  (product)
Jody Estabrook
Phone:   +1 978 244 0192

Fax:        +1 978 244 0103

Email: je.ieeemedia@ieee.orgNew England  (recruitment)
Barbara Lynch

Phone:   +1 401 738 6237

Fax:        +1 401 739 7970

Email: bl.ieeemedia@ieee.orgMidwest (recruitment)Tom Wilcoxen

Phone:   +1 847 498 4520

Fax:        +1 847 498 5911

Email: tw.ieeemedia@ieee.org
Northwest (recruitment)Mary Tonon

Phone:    +1 415 431 5333

Fax:         +1 415 431 5335

Email: mt.ieeemedia@ieee.orgSouthern CA (recruitment)Karin Altonaga
Phone:   +1 714 974 0555

Fax:       + 1 714 974 6853

Email: ka.ieeemedia@ieee.orgSoutheast (product/recruitment)
C. William Bentz III
Email:bb.ieeemedia@ieee.orgGregory Maddock

Email:gm.ieeemedia@ieee.orgSarah K. Huey
Email:sh.ieeemedia@ieee.orgPhone:+1 404 256 3800

Fax:+1 404 255 7942
Advertising Sales RepresentativesSeptember/October 2002IEEE SOFTWARE
85