 48IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEEOver the 20 years since, software engineeringand project management have made giant
strides in terms of concepts, methodologies, and
automated tools. Yet the track record on soft-

ware projects remains poor. In a 2001 update of

its 1994 CHAOSreport, the Standish Group didfind some improvements in software develop-
ment project success.
2,3However, of 280,000
projects surveyed, 137,000 were still late, over
budget, or both; and 65,000 failed outright.These failures arenÕt specific to any product
and seem to be free of vendor and implemen-

tation bias as well. Describing massive distri-
bution problems from a flawed implementa-
tion of SAPÕs R/3 enterprise resource planning

(ERP) system, IT journalist Malcolm Wheat-

ley reported in CIOmagazine that theÒblameÓ was evenly spread around: ÒSAP im-
plementations are no more likely to go down

the tubes than ERP systems from other ven-dors,Ó Wheatley wrote. ÒAn alarmingly longlist of top-drawer integrators have fallen flat
on their faces.Ó4Large IT projects seem especially vulnera-
ble. Whether they are ERP systems, customer

relationship management (CRM) or supply
chain management (SCM) systems, or any
similarly complex IT initiative, the scenario of
delays, dissatisfied clients, and horrendous
cost overruns is common. ÒIT and business
managers are famous for making commit-

ments without enough knowledge or informa-
tion and for setting unrealistic timetables for
decisions and actions,Ó reports Gartner Re-
search, a technology market research firm.5Not understanding the relationship bound-aries between an IS organization and its sig-
nificant partners ... contributes to unknown
and unacceptable levels of performance. Many
traditional IT projects fail the Òon time, on
focusSingle Goal Set:A New Paradigm for IT Megaproject SuccessIn 1985, Alfred Spector and David Gifford interviewed a preeminent

bridge designer, Gerard Fox, to compare bridge building with com-

puter systems design. They wanted to find commonalities as well as

differences that could help improve software development processes:
Civil engineering is one of the most classical of the engineering disciplinesÑit has well-developed de-signs, procedures, and tools at its disposal. Bridges rarely fall down. In contrast, computer systems de-
sign is one of the least classical of the engineering disciplines, and its products are often poorly under-
stood, unmanageably complex, and unreliable.1project management
C. Venugopal, 
Krysalis Consultancy ServicesFocusing IT projectmanagement on
implementing a
single overarching
goal might
substantially
increase project
successes. budgetÓ goal because of internal politics, amismatch between technologies and staff
skills, and a constant tendency to rethink re-
quirements.5Whether or not we agree with GartnerÕs diag-
nosis, we must concur with their observation

that IT projects are notorious for failing to
meet their objectives and leaving behind dis-
satisfied clients and bruised implementation

teams.Could our way of viewing IT megaproject
goals be at the root of failed implementations?

Could a different paradigm ÒcureÓ the problem?A megaproject perspectiveClimbing Mount Everest was also a mega-project. Itinvolved a challenging goal, largeteams, several intermediate milestones, and
unpredictable extraneous circumstances. It ex-
perienced major overruns of money, time,

even lives. Was the project a success? The an-

swer is a categorical yes. I postulate that we
think of it this way because the project had an
overarching goalÑreaching the peakÑand
succeeded in achieving it.We could make the same case for landing
men on the moon
.These ultimate successesnegated how much the cost overran the origi-
nal budgets and how many intermediate mile-
stones werenÕt met. Achieving the single goal

gave the project the label of success.
This does not mean that cost or time over-
runs are unimportant. It means only that once

the project achieves its key goal, it is consid-
ered to be successful. Subordinate goals are
relegated to subsequent projects, and the

teams that implement them work from a cul-

tural mindset based on success. This mindset

motivates success in achieving the subordinate
goals as well.Managing user expectationsFocusing on a single goal also helps manageuser expectations from the project. My experi-

ence observing several project implementa-
tions suggests that unmet expectations are a
major cause of project failures. The original
Chaos report confirms this observation.
3Thisreport identified various project success fac-

tors. Those addressing aspects of user expecta-

tions included a Òclear statement of require-

ments,Ó Òclear vision and objectives,Ó Òrealistic
expectations,Ó and ÒownershipÓ of 
the project.Together these factors accounted for nearly 30
percent of the positive indicators for projectsuccess. All these factors are related to manag-
ing user expectations, so any methodology
that helps in this task offers a good starting

point for developing a new IT project man-
agement approach. Taking a single or key goal

approach is a step in this direction.IÕve found that IT initiatives for which an
organization has few expectations fare better
in their implementations. For example, an or-

ganization that implements an ERP system be-
cause an aging legacy application will soon go
out of support can easily define a clear and
limited goalÑnamely, to implement a system

that at least meets the minimum functionality

of the existing legacy system. So long as this is
the case, the implementation remains rela-
tively straightforward and the project goes

through smoothly.
IT methodology revisitedIT project management borrowed from tra-
ditional engineering disciplines to develop its
own body of knowledge. The classic waterfall
process model is a case in point. As a model of

software project management, it derives from

staged process charts common to other engi-

neering projects. Most large IT project imple-

mentation methodologies, such as SAPÕs Ac-

celerated SAP model, are variations of this
basic model. However, building software differs from
building a bridge. For one thing, software is
inherently, not accidentally, complex, as Fred-erick Brooks describes it in ÒNo Silver Bul-

let.Ó6For example, it doesnÕt scale up by a
mere repetition of the same element in larger

sizes: ÒIn most cases, the elements interact

with each other in some nonlinear fashion,
and the complexity of the whole increases

much more than linearly.Ó
6To this complexity, Brooks attributes Òthe
difficulty of communications among team
members, which leads to product flaws, cost

overruns, schedule delays.Ó In IT projects such
as ERP and SCM, the additional complexities
of client teams and conflicting business imper-
atives sully the already murky waters of soft-
ware development. Nor do the geopolitical

complexities of this millenniumÕs global deliv-

ery model simplify the problem.
Agile or lean methods represent the latestdevelopment methodology for managing IT
projects.7The agile movementÕs proponents
September/October 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
49IT projects arenotorious forfailing to meettheir objectivesand leavingbehinddissatisfiedclients andbruisedimplementationteams. 50IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
view organizations as complex adaptive sys-
tems in which requirements are emergent.8Thus, they propose development methodolo-

gies that allow a project to emerge rather than

follow a detailed plan. This gives rise to itera-

tive approaches that respond to continuing

feedback. Of course, agile methods are not an

entirely new idea; spiral, incremental, and other

such methodologies are variants of this theme.
The movement has fierce loyalists andequally vocal antagonists. One criticism is that
reacting to every micro change event, rather
than to major milestones, could compromise

the eventual delivery. Recognizing this, Barry

Boehm has recommended that large projects

using agile methods establish at least three
major milestones Òto serve as project progress
indicators.Ó9In other words, preventing large
projects from spiraling out of control requires
some sort of centripetal force.
Toward a Single Goal Set paradigmCombining this centripetal control forcewith an overarching project goal could give
rise to a new methodology for successful proj-
ect implementation. The approach would fo-
cus on a single project goalÑone that all enti-
ties in an organization can appreciate and own.Ideally, the methodology requires zeroing
in on a single goal for the whole enterprise,
but building consensus around a single goal
for a large project might be impossible. There-

fore, a project might have to refine the method

by adding a selected few subprocess goals to
the single overarching goal. In practice, there-
fore, an organization would deploy the
methodology by agreeing first on a core
process and a single goal for this process,called the 
summit goal. Then the organizationwould agree on two or, at most, three addi-

tional vital processes and define goals for
them. Ideally, it would define these process

goals in terms of a specifictransaction event,

which is easy to track or measure,rather than

a business deliverable, which is more amor-
phous and difficult to pin down. The summit

goal and the two or three vital process goals

become the Single Goal Set, as shown in figure1, for the IT project implementation. 
The SGS is the centering force for the proj-
ectÑlike a gyroscope, always keeping the
project from spiraling out of control. The
project implementation is iterative. The first

iteration aims solely at achieving the SGS.
Subsequent iterations seek to achieve subordi-
nate goals. The process therefore incorporates
the flexibility of agile methods, while ensuring
the overall goal-oriented discipline of tradi-
tional planning methodologies. It is agile in its
simplicity and iterative nature. It is disciplined
in its overarching implementation goal, under-
stood and accepted by all.The SGS methodology comprises 10 steps:Identify the organizationÕs core process for

the project.Identify any other key processesÑthe
fewer the better, to a maximum of three.
Define a single goal for the core processÑ
that is, the summit goalÑand goals for
each key process. These become the SGS

for the implementation program.Identify subordinate goals, although they
apply to other processes and arenÕt the fo-

cus of the first implementation iteration.
Work intensely to build consensus around

the projectÕs SGS.
Use internal communication to stress the

IT projectÕs SGS.
Focus the implementation team only on
achieving the SGS. Subordinate goals are
not addressedat all in the first iteration.
When the project meets the SGS, declare

the project successful. Identify gaps in the subordinate goals and
assess their organizational impact.In subsequent iterations, bridge the gaps
and achieve the subordinate goals.This methodology intrinsically optimizes
resource allocation. Time, money, effort, and

other investments are spent first on realizing
1 only2 to 3maximum Single Goal Set (SGS)Summitgoal Key process goalsOther goalsFigure 1. Single GoalSet. A summit goal 
reflects the projectÕs
overarching purpose.
The methodology can 
support two or three

subprocess goals, if
necessary to achieve

consensus on large,

complex systems.  the organizationÕs most important goals. Only
after achieving the SGS does the project take
up subordinate goals for implementation. Tra-

ditional methodologies often lack this sharp
focus and result in a project that spends its

budget with none of the goals fully satisfied.
Any additional budget goes to rescuing what
now looks like a sinking ship.Can an entire organization adopt just onesummit goal? I believe it can. In fact, I postu-
late that most organizations have one powerful
driver or goal that leads them to attempt the IT
initiative in the first place. Somewhere along
the line, in the process of scoping the IT proj-
ect, this goal gets diffused. Consultants and
product vendors inundate the company with a
large set of possible benefits that raise the or-
ganizationÕs expectations to impossible levels.

When these expectations fail to materialize, we
are left with yet another failed project.I did a quick survey of five diverse compa-
nies. All five had recently implemented large IT
projects, and all were completely dissatisfied at

the projectÕs end. I asked them just one ques-

tion: ÒWhy did you go for this major IT initia-

tive?Ó Table 1 summarizes their responses. It

also suggests a summit goal or SGS that corre-
sponds to their answers.
Table 1 shows that all five companies had
one or two overriding reasons for venturingon a large IT project. The core of the sug-
gested methodology is to capture these reasons
in a goal statement and keep it in the forefront

of the project implementation as a summit

goal or SGS.Proposed methodologyThe 10 SGS steps fit into a four-stage proj-
ect management methodology that makes no
major departure from classical implementation
methodologies. The difference is only in keep-
ing the project focused on a very small number
of sharply defined, well-understood, and

agreed-upon goals for the implementation.Define and adopt stage
In this stage, the methodology asks key per-sons in the organization to answer the ques-

tion, ÒWhat is the single most important ben-

efit I wish to see at the end of this IT project?Ó
Of course, different role holders in the com-
pany would answer the question differently.

The project manager or another designated
project championfacilitates the process of ar-riving at a consensusÑor near consensusÑon
the implementation SGS. The project cham-
pion must have sufficient organizational au-
thority to lead this crucial phase of the project.Once the project achieves consensus, thecore implementation team starts the process ofSeptember/October 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
51Table 1 
Example summit goal statements for major IT initiativesType of companyKey megaproject driverSGS statement
Large multilocation manufacturing Had to phase out legacy system because its relational 1.Consolidate companywide books accurately  
companyDBMS was going out of support in one year by second day of each month.
Wanted to consolidate all businesses/locations and2. Have an alternate system in place when the 

close the books across the companylegacy system goes out of support. 
Manufacturing subsidiary of an  
Had to integrate to the parent company ERP1. Integrate key business processesÑgeneral
international companywithin six monthsledger and sales order processing, 
inventoryÑwith parent company.
Discrete manufacturing unitHad to effectively manage an inventory spread across1. Connect to subcontractors and monitor  

a large number of subcontractors. Current systemstocks on a real-time basis.

was ad hoc manual and legacy. Auditors had passed  

strictures at the last audit and the board had mandatedthat a system be put in place. Fast-moving consumer goods retailerWas operating a countrywide distribution system with1. Connect to dealer network. 

archaic reporting systems2. Capture customer feedback from specified 
Wanted to get a customer pulse that could help bring  
touch pointsÑthat is, those interfaces where
products to market quickly and take on very aggressive  the customer interacts with the organization.
competition.   52IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Allworkarounds,processchanges, andcustomizationsmust aim at the
single purposeof achieving the SGS.adopting the SGS across the organization.This is also largely a change management ini-
tiative and requires using all the standard or-
ganizational methods for bringing about posi-
tive change. The team publicizes the SGS as
the IT projectÕs purpose. The publicity must

clarify the SGS benefits to the organization
and to individual departments.This stage ends when most people in the or-
ganization identify with and take ownership
for achieving the SGS.Create stageIn the second stage, the team creates the im-
plementation blueprint, focusing only on
achieving the SGS. The team maps any prod-
uct functionality to fit the SGS deliverable.

The methodology requires all workarounds,
process changes, and customizations to aim at
the single purpose of achieving the SGS, and it
allows no compromise of this purpose.
Implement stageThe team then takes up the blueprint for
implementation. This stage requires periodic

evaluations to ensure that SGS deliverables
fully satisfy all stakeholders. Where necessary,

the team might have to integratewith legacy

systems, create workarounds, and resort to

additional data entry to ensure that the SGS

deliverables are not compromised. Meeting

the SGS successfully will greatly reduce the
pressures on the organization and project
team. The general bonhomie that follows suc-

cess facilitates the subsequent iterations of the

implementation to take care of suboptimiza-

tions that crop up in the single-minded pursuit

of the SGS.
Evaluate and iterate stageFinally, the project takes up subordinate
goals for review and implementation after
careful cost-benefit evaluation. Goals that
donÕt justify the investment are dropped; other

goals might be postponed, and the rest are

taken up for implementation. Because the

project has already achieved its principle ob-
jectives, business benefits have already started
to accrue. Further investments in time, energy,

and money only add to the benefits set.Example projectConsider an organization that couldnÕt
close its books immediately after the end of an
accounting period. As part of an international
conglomerate, the organization receives a cor-

porate mandate to finalize its accounts and
post results by the first day of every quarter.

To meet this mandate, the organization is con-

templating a change to a new ERP system. In
addition to the corporate mandate, the organ-
ization wants to create systems that give it an

accurate view of channel inventory on a real-
time basisÑsomething current practices donÕt

support.The organizationÕs SGS then consists of
two goals:Accurately close the books and declare re-
sults by the first day of every quarter.
View the channel inventory on a real-time

basis.The IT project implementation focuses only
on these goals. It creates the systems, subsys-

tems, and process changes required to achieve

them in the implementation. Once the project

achieves these goals to the satisfaction of all
the process participants, the organization an-

nounces the projectÕs successful completion.
Only then, during evaluation and iteration,does the project team evaluate other process
goals. LetÕs say the evaluation finds that man-

ual data entry has become necessary at two
manufacturing locations. The project resolves
this problem by creating a subsystem, process
change, or workaround.The methodology implements these subse-quent steps Òoff line,Ó as it were. That is to say,

the problems are localized to a small group of
users and donÕt color the success of the whole

project. The project can tackle local issues and
problems without pressure and noise that

might jeopardize the overall project success.Suboptimization issuesCritics of this methodology might say itopens the door to suboptimizationsÑfor ex-
ample, redundant data capture or omitted
subprocesses in the first iterationÑbecause it

lacks a total process view up front. However,

I call these planned suboptimizationsÑsome-thing akin to planned redundancy in a nor-
malized table to achieve higher retrieval effi-

ciency. The crux of the methodology is to meet

the most important implementation drivers

and not to compromise the business needs

they represent.
 The evaluation stage would consider all suchsuboptimizations and their impact on cost,quality, and deliverables. If justified from a

cost-benefit perspective, the project would take
them up for resolution through workarounds
or customizations as appropriate.Large IT projects lack a consistently sat-
isfied client because they donÕt opti-

mally allocate resources toward achiev-ing the most vital organizational business goals.
Inevitably, a resource crunch builds up by the

time the project reaches midlife. A huge nega-
tive sentiment also accumulates, which further
vitiates project success. To address this endemic

problem, the SGS project methodology ensures
that resources are first allocated to the critical
deliverables. Achieving the SGS establishes a
successful frame of mind for the project team,
which also adds to the overall acceptance of the
IT solution in the organization. IT project management must find answersfor the malaise of myriad failed projects. The sit-
uation calls for a new paradigm. Perhaps a sim-
ple, first-principles approach is the answer.
For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.
References1.A.Z. Spector and D.K. Gifford, ÒA Computer Science
Perspective of Bridge Design,Ó Comm. ACM, vol. 29,no. 4, 1986, pp. 267Ð283.2.Extreme Chaos, market research report, StandishGroup IntÕl, 2001.3.The CHAOSStudy, market research report, StandishGroup IntÕl, 1994.4.M. Wheatley, ÒERP Training Stinks,Ó 
CIO, 1 June2000; www.cio.com/archive/060100_erp.html. 
5.ÒIT Spending and the IS Budget,Ó white paper,Gartner
Research, 2001; www.gartner.com/4_decision_tools/
measurement/measure_it_articles/july01/mit_is_budjet1.
html.6.F.P. Brooks, ÒNo Silver Bullet: Essence and Accident in
Software Engineering,Ó Computer, vol. 20, no. 4, 1995,pp. 10Ð19.7.T. Williams, ÒAssessing and Building on the Underlying
Theory of Project Management in the Light of Badly
Overrun Projects,Ó research paper 2004/7, Strathclyde
Business School, 2004; www.managementscience.

org/research/ab0407.asp.8.J. Highsmith and A. Cockburn, ÒAgile Software Devel-
opment: The Business of Innovation,Ó Computer, vol.34,no. 9, 2001, pp. 120Ð122.
9.B. Boehm, ÒGet Ready for Agile Methods, with Care,Ó
Computer, vol. 35,no. 1, 2002, pp. 64Ð69.
September/October 2005IEEE SOFTWARE
53About the AuthorC. Venugopal
is an IT and business consultant with Krysallis Consulting Services while he
also pursues a PhD in IT project management at Anna University. His research interests are in
IT and general management. He received his B.Tech. with honors from the Indian Institute of

Technology and his masterÕs in management from Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management

Studies, Bombay University. Contact him at No. 7, Golden Amity, F 86, 2nd St., Annanagar,

Chennai, India 600102; cvenugopal@gmail.com.Tomorrow's PCs, handhelds, and Internet will use technology 
that exploits current research in artificial intelligence. Breakthroughs 

in areas such as intelligent agents, the Semantic Web, data mining, 

and natural language processing will revolutionize your work and 
leisure activities. Read about this research as it happens in 

IEEE Intelligent Systems. SeetheFutureof
ComputingNow
inIEEEIntelligentSystemsIEEESUBSCRIBE NOW!http://computer.org/intelligent
