 16IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEIn its own way, the Extreme Programming
methodology exudes this same advice: Be com-
municative with everyone on the teamÑinclud-

ing customers, end users, and business folks.
Consistently and doggedly strive to understand
and deliver what your customers want with the
highest possible quality. Frequently offer feed-

backÑa one-minute manager would never hold
back until a formal appraisal cycle to give feed-
back to employees. Similarly, XP developers

never spend extended periods of time on any

one development practice, as in a waterfallish
process. Instead, every few minutes (every one
minute is probably a stretch), a developer iter-

ates from one practice to another (such as test,
design, code, test, design, code, and so on). The

purpose of this Òevery few minutesÓ cycling is
to get feedback early and often on decisions

that have been madeÑfrom requirements deci-
sions to design decisions and the like. 
focusThe XP Programmer: The Few-Minutes ProgrammerWritten over two decades ago, The One-Minute Manageris stilla top-selling book.1In just over 100 pages, it exudes adviceto managers on short (one-minute) techniques for achieving a
positive result with their employees, improving their produc-
tivity and job satisfaction. The authors explain how communication and
consistency can improve results with minimal time and effort.guest editorÕs introduction
Laurie Williams, 
North Carolina State University  Few-minutes project managementSome software development projects beginwith lengthy cycles of determining a contrac-
tual set of requirements and developing an ex-
tensive project management plan for project
completion. Relatively, XP teams spend just a

few minutes on each of these activitiesÑmany

times each day. 
XP programmers gather requirements as
short, natural-language statements that are es-
sentially the customerÕs words written on

small index cards. Called user stories, thesecards are commitments for further conversa-
tion between the customer and developers and
are not intended to completely specify require-

ments. Generally, they represent desired work-

ing code that the developers can produce for
the customer to try, as opposed to documents,

designs, or database schemas customers can
only review.
The customers prioritize their user stories,and the developers estimate how long imple-
menting the requirement will take. If an esti-
mate exceeds the length of one iteration (which
is typically one to three weeks), the customer

and developer work together to break the user
story into multiple stories. Ultimately, each user

storyÕs developer estimate will be no longer

than one iteration. When user story cards are complete withrequirements statements, customer priorities,

and developer estimates, the planning game
begins. To play, the customer and some devel-

opers lay the user story cards out on a table.
They have a joint understanding of how much
time is available for the release (a small num-
ber of iterations) and how many people will be

involved in development. They slide the cards
around on the table until the customer
chooses his or her highest-priority user stories
to keep the team busy for the release on the

basis of the developersÕ time estimates. 
An important premise in XP is that the de-velopers work at a sustainable pace (that is,
they should stop when they are tired). XP in-
corporates this practice into project planning

because tired programmers are more error-

prone, and the defects injected during their

overtime could take longer to find and fix than

the overtime itself. Additionally, requiring de-

velopers to dedicate too much time to their
jobs, as is common in the industry, can eventu-

ally affect their personal life and cost the proj-
ectÑfor example, by resulting in high turnover. 
Once the customer chooses the user stories,software developers select which ones theyÕd
like to ÒownÓ and implement. Because a user
story is intentionally an incomplete descrip-
tion of the requirements, an important XP
practice is to converse with representative cus-
tomers. Before beginning a story, the storyÕs

owner spends a few minutes with the cus-

tomer to better understand what he or she
wants. As implementation proceeds, the cus-

tomer and developers will often spend few-
minute periods clarifying requirements and
demonstrating work in progress. On the basis

of these short inspections by and conversa-

tions with the customer, the developers can

adapt their work to best suit the customerÕs

desires. Each day, the development team spends a
few minutes in a stand-up meeting. The team

intentionally stands up in a circle during the
meeting to motivate members to keep the

meeting as short as possible. One by one, each
developer talks for a few moments about The prior dayÕs accomplishments 
Any obstacles, difficulties, or stumbling

blocks faced What he or she plans to accomplish dur-
ing the current day on the basis of the se-
lected stories and tasks These short meetings make team members
publicly accountable for their progress and
plans and provide an opportunity to get help

from teammates in overcoming problems. 
After each iteration, the customer views theworking software and provides feedback. The
developers can calculate the iterationÕs 
veloc-ityto best plan how much work they can ac-complish in future iterations. Velocity is basi-

cally the number of daysÕ worth of work

accomplished during the iteration period. The
customer and developer then replay the plan-
ning game so that the customer can change or
reprioritize the requirements in the pipeline

and developers can update their estimates. As
such, detailed project management is only
done for the immediate futureÑthe next one-

to three-week iteration. Few-minutes designSome software development projects canproceed with lengthy cycles of defining a
product architecture and developing high- andMay/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
17Consistently anddoggedly striveto understandand deliver whatyour customerswant with thehighest possiblequality.
 low-level system design. Again, XP teams
spend just a few minutes on each of these ac-

tivities many times each day. 
Before starting development, the team spendsa few minutes coming up with a system

metaphor or a Òstory that everyoneÑcustomers,
programmers, and managersÑcan tell about
how the system works.Ó
2The metaphor guides
a system of names for objects and their rela-

tionships and a common vocabulary. As op-

posed to a system architecture, the metaphor

shapes the system, and this shape evolves over
time. When a pair of programmers starts work-

ing on a user story, they spend a few minutes

brainstorming how they would implement the
functionality. This could take the form of

sketching a class diagram on a white board

(which would be erased after implementing the
code), a quick CRC (Class Responsibility Col-
laborator)card session,
3or possibly some dab-bling in code right away. 
When coding, XP programmers iterativelyspend a few minutes writing automated unit test
cases (which will fail when run, because the
code hasnÕt been implemented yet), followed by

a few minutes of implementation code develop-
ment to pass the tests they just wrote. This prac-
tice, called test-driven development(TDD),4keeps the systemÕs concrete design as simple as
possible. The programmers write only the code
that must pass the test cases; they donÕt develop

an impressive superstructure to handle some an-
ticipated but not yet requested or prioritized re-
quirement. They often write these automated
test cases using an xUnit testing framework (see
http://xprogramming.com
/software.htm), and
the tests grow and reside with the implemen-
tation code (although in a different code hier-

archy). The developers generally donÕt spend

even a few minutes loading up their code with
comments. Instead, they use descriptive vari-
able names to ensure their code is simple and
reveals their intentions. This practice amelio-
rates the general tendency of out-of-date com-
ments and provides ÒexecutableÓ documenta-
tion, which is obviously kept current.Programmers do not own the code theywrite. Instead, the code belongs to the teamÑ
so anyone can change or enhance anyone
elseÕs code to complete their job without wait-

ing even a few minutes for the original pro-

grammerÕs permission. The programmers can

change each otherÕs code because of the exten-

sive TDD test cases, which provide an alert if
a change breaks some previously implementedfunctionality. Ideally, throughout the day, pro-

grammers spend a few minutes refactoring5their code or improving the codeÕs concrete de-

sign without changing the functionality. 
Few-minutes feedbackFrequent feedback is essential. XP teams,
including the on-site customer, spend a few

minutes every day providing this feedback.One form of feedback is acceptance test cases.The customer writes at least one acceptance test
case for each user story. Initially, this test case pro-

vides early feedback to the developer on whether
he or she understands the user story properly.

Ron Jeffries calls this the Card, Conversation,
Confirmation cycle (www.xprogramming.com/

xpmag/EXPCardConversationConfirmation.htm),
which involves writing a user story card, having
the customer and developer converse about the
cardÕs requirement, and using the acceptance

test case to confirm the requirementÕs comple-

tion. At the end of each iteration, the customer
can see the completed, working software that
implements the prioritized user stories. He or
she can then run the test cases to ensure the sys-
tem works as expected. If it doesnÕt, the devel-

opment team has spent a recoverable amount of
time going down the wrong path. The customer
can revise his or her user stories and acceptance
test cases and prioritize fixes to the running soft-
ware so that the developer can better meet his or
her needs in the next planning game. Several development practices providefeedback every few minutes to the program-
mers on the implementationÕs correctness.

With TDD, the developers continuously run

their code against a suite of automated test
cases. By doing this, they constantly get feed-
back that they are writing Òclean code that
works.Ó4Similarly, pair programming
6pro-vides feedback on a minute-by-minute basis.
With pair programming, two developers

work together at one computer, collaborating

on the same design, algorithm, code, or test.
The two are perpetual brainstorming part-
ners. This practice provides the driver (the
programmer at the keyboard) with feedback

on his or her ideas and code. Together, the

TDD and pair programming focus on contin-
ual quality assurance.
When a pair completes some functionality,
they ensure that their new automated test

cases run and that the automated test cases inXP teams valueface-to-face
communicationand spendessentially thewhole day,
every day,
communicating.18IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
 the code base run. They then put their new
code into the code base. Pairs integrate their
code into the code base at least once per day,

receiving immediate feedback if a problem ex-
ists with the build and their new code. 
Few-minutes team buildingOn some software development projects,
the team members do not know each other

that well. Consider the stereotypical program-
mer who comes in each morning with head-
phones on, listing to music, codes while email-
ing questions to teammates all day, and leaves

after many hours of work (only then removing
the headphones). XP teams value face-to-face communica-tion and spend essentially the whole day, 
everyday, communicating. They value colocationso

that everyone on the team (which includes
the developers, testers, customers, analysts,coach, and manager) can talk face-to-face
whenever anything needs clarification or or-
ganization. Instead of listening to music and
remaining isolated, the programmer talks to
his or her partner all day as they both code.
This communication breaks down barriers,
creating camaraderie and communities of
practice within the team. Through the daily

stand-up meetings, team members learn what

others are working on and struggling with and
how they can help each other so that the

whole team succeeds. 
XP bettingSoftware engineers have a long-held beliefthat they must Òget out defectsÓ as early as
possible. They must do the requirements right
the first time, or there will be detrimental ef-fects throughout development. They must de-velop a solid architecture before they start
coding, or the project will be in trouble. The

XP contention that it is better to spend a rela-

tive few minutes on these kinds of activities

can seem bewildering.
Consider a team that plans to have twomembers spend three months developing a
solid, well-specified, and inspected require-

ments document. The team will certainly

spend six person-months on this document.
Instead, an XP team might have two people

spend a week documenting the best set of user
stories the customer can create at that time. In
this case, the team spends two weeks develop-

ing this first version of the requirements docu-
mentÑthus banking five and a half months.
They can later spend this time on revising re-
quirements or the product on the basis of cur-

rent knowledge, including the customerÕs per-

ception of the working software that has been
developed thus far. The XP bet is that they will

not have to spend more than the saved five
and a half months to revise the requirements
or the product and that the customerÕs current

view of their desires is better than their initial

view.
The two theoretical graphs in Figure 1 rep-resent this betting process and depict the cu-

mulative expense incurred in software devel-
opment over time. Figure 1a represents the
traditional method and philosophy of devel-
opment. Most of the expense is spent on new
development, whether for a document, a de-
sign, or code. Inevitably, some revisions will

occur during the development cycle, although
the aim is to minimize revision expense.Conversely, Figure 1b represents an XP
May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
19Time
Time
(a)(b)
RevisionNew developmentRevision
New developmentExpenseExpenseFigure 1. (a) Desiredcumulative expense
in traditional 
software 
development; 
(b) observed 

cumulative expense
in agile development.  projectÕs cumulative expense. In this case, the
expense incurred for new development and for

revision has a much different profile, demon-
strating a large increase in revision and a cor-
respondingly large decrease in new develop-
ment. However, strong anecdotal evidence

suggests that the additional revision does not
exceed the expense that would have been in-
curred had extensive up-front requirements
engineering, planning, and designing oc-
curred. So, both graphs indicate the same level
of expense incurred over similar time periods.
(Researchers are investigating the validity of
these anecdotal claims.) In a traditional project, development pro-ceeds with a Òdo it right the first timeÓ philos-
ophy with the objective of Òsatisfying the orig-
inal contract.Ó This is an appropriate approach
for projects without a significant degree of re-
quirements variability. In an XP project, devel-

opment proceeds with a Òdo it right the last
timeÓ philosophy with the objective of Òde-
lighting the customer.Ó The XP, few-minutes
programming approach is appropriate for
projects with a significant degree of require-
ments variability. 
The XP articles in this issue share ex-

periences of few-minutes program-

mers in three different domains and
environments. Jonathan Rasmusson discusses
using XP in a bleeding-edge technology proj-
ect for a North American energy company.

William Wood and William Kleb share their

experiences with XP in a NASA research envi-
ronment. Finally, Orlando Murru, Roberto

Deias, and Giampiero Mugheddu relate their
experiences using XP in an Internet startup in
Italy. These teams have succeeded by being

communicative and consistent. We hope you

can learn from their experiences.AcknowledgmentsMany thanks to Kent Beck, Ron Jeffries, and mygraduate students for their helpful suggestions on this
Guest EditorÕs Introduction. Also, I couldnÕt have

published this special issue without the astute reviews,
suggestions, and shepherding of the program chairs
(Michele Marchesi, Giancarlo Succi, and Don Wells)

and program committees of the XP/Agile Universe
and XP 2002 conferences. I also thank the authors
who cheerfully withstood my infatuation with Mi-
crosoft WordÕs ÒeditingÓ feature as they improved and

extended their conference papers. (Now they know
what itÕs like to be one of my graduate students!)  
References1.K.H. Blanchard and S. Johnson, 
The One-Minute Man-ager, Berkley Publishing Group, 1983.2.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange,Addison-Wesley, 2000.
3.D. Bellin and S.S. Simone, 
The CRC Card Book, Addi-son-Wesley, 1997.
4.K. Beck, 
Test-Driven Development: By Example
, Addi-son-Wesley, 2002.
5.M. Fowler et al., 
Refactoring: Improving the Design ofExisting Code, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
6.L. Williams and R. Kessler, 
Pair Programming Illumi-nated, Addison-Wesley, 2003.
20IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
Extreme Programming is just one methodology in the emerging class ofagile software development methodologies.
1Ð3The June issue of Computerfeatures broad perspectives on agile software development. One article in

the issue places agile software development in the context of the history of

iterative and incremental development. Two others focus on balancing agile

software practices with the need for more stringent, plan-driven approaches.

Additionally, two experience reports share perspectives on introducing agile

processes in an organization. Finally, Barry Boehm and Kent Beck debate

how to achieve agility through discipline.     
References1. K. Beck et al., ÒThe Agile Manifesto,Ó 2001, http://agilemanifesto.org. 2. A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley, 2001.
3. J. Highsmith, Agile Software Development Ecosystems, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
Joint Theme with ComputerAbout the AuthorLaurie Williams
is an assistant professor of computer science at North Carolina StateUniversity. Her research interests include agile software development methodologies and prac-

tices, software reliability, software testing, and e-commerce. She received a PhD in computer

science from the University of Utah. She is the coauthor of Pair Programming Illuminated(Ad-dison-Wesley, 2003) and 
Extreme Programming Perspectives (Addison-Wesley, 2003). She is a
member of the IEEE and ACM. Contact her at williams@csc.ncsu.edu.  Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
