 0740-7459/00/$10.00 © 2000 IEEEJuly/August 2000IEEE SOFTWARE
19design, algorithm, code, or testÑdoes in-deed improve software quality and reduce

time to market. Additionally, student and

professional programmers consistently find
pair programming more enjoyable than

working alone.Yet most who have not tried and tested
pair programming reject the idea as a re-
dundant, wasteful use of programming re-
sources: ÒWhy would I put two people on a
job that just one can do? I canÕt afford to do

that!Ó But we have found, as Larry Con-

stantine wrote, that ÒTwo programmers in

tandem is not redundancy; itÕs a direct route

to greater efficiency and better quality.Ó
1Our supportive evidence comes fromprofessional programmers and from ad-

vanced undergraduate students who partic-
ipated in a structured experiment. The ex-
perimental results show that programming

pairs develop better code faster with only a
minimal increase in prerelease programmer

hours. These results apply to all levels ofprogramming skill from novice to expert.
Earlier Observations
In 1998, Temple University professor
John Nosek reported on his study of 15
full-time, experienced programmers work-

ing for a maximum of 45 minutes on a chal-

lenging problem important to their organi-

zation. In their own environments and with
their own equipment, five worked individu-
ally and 10 worked collaboratively in five
pairs. The conditions and materials were
the same for both the experimental (team)

and control (individual) groups. A two-
sided t-test showed that the study provided

statistically significant results. Combining
their time, the pairs spent 60% more min-

utes on the task. Because they worked in
tandem, however, they completed the task

40% faster than the control groups, and

produced better algorithms and code.2Most of the programmers were initiallyskeptical of the value of collaborating andStrengthening the Casefor Pair ProgrammingLaurie Williams, 
North Carolina State UniversityRobert R. Kessler, 
University of UtahWard Cunningham, 
Cunningham & CunninghamRon Jeffries
The software industry has practiced pair programmingÑtwoprogrammersworking side byside at one computer on thesame problemÑwith great successfor years. But people who havenÕt
tried it often rejectthe idea as a waste of resources. 
The authorsdemonstrate thatusing pair programming inthe software developmentprocess yields better products inless timeÑand happier, 
more confident programmers.
For years, programmers in industry have claimed that by workingcollaboratively, they have produced higher-quality software prod-

ucts in shorter amounts of time. But their evidence was anecdotal

and subjective: ÒIt worksÓ or ÒIt feels right.Ó To validate these
claims, we have gathered quantitative evidence showing that pair program-
mingÑtwo programmers working side by side at one computer on the same  20IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 2000thought it would not be an enjoyable
process. But, according to Nosek, ÒTo the

surprise of the managers and participants,
all the teams outperformed the individual
programmers, enjoyed the problem-solving
process more, and had greater confidence in
their solutions.Ó2Pair programming is not new. In 1995,
Larry Constantine reported observing pairs of
programmers producing code faster and freer
of bugs than ever before.2The same year, Jim
Coplien published what he called the devel-
oping-in-pairs organizational pattern.3In 1996, Smalltalk code developer andconsultant Kent Beck, with authors Ward

Cunningham and Ron Jeffries, began devel-
oping the Extreme Programming software
development methodology (see the sidebar).
XP is now practiced by programmers
worldwide. A significant part of XP is pair

programming, and people who practice XP
are the largest known group of pair pro-
grammers. The XP methodologyÕs success

rate is so impressive that it has aroused the
curiosity of many software engineering re-
searchers and consultants. The XP founders

credit much of this success to the use of pair

programming by all XP programmers, ex-
perts and novices alike.The Development CycleIn pair programming, two programmersjointly produce one artifact (design, algo-
rithm, code). The two programmers are like
a unified, intelligent organism working with
one mind, responsible for every aspect of

this artifact. One partner, the driver, con-

trols the pencil, mouse, or keyboard and
writes the code. The other partner continu-

ously and actively observes the driverÕs

work, watching for defects, thinking of al-
ternatives, looking up resources, and con-
sidering strategic implications. The partners
deliberately switch roles periodically. Both

are equal, active participants in the process
at all times and wholly share the ownershipof the work product, whether it is a morn-

ingÕs effort or an entire project.
Ideally, pair programmers will always
work together. But realityÑillness, time

conflicts, or even efficiencyÑdictates that at

times the pair must split. Experienced pair

programmers prioritize the parts of the de-
velopment cycle, deciding which are most
important to work on together and which
can be done separately. They must also de-

cide what to do with the independently de-
veloped work when they reunite. When a
larger group adopts pair programming as
the normal way of working, the long-term
continuity of a particular pair becomes less
important. By pairing regularly with all
members of the group, an individual pro-

grammer maintains sufficient general aware-
ness to substitute for a missing partner at a
momentÕs notice.
Unanimously, the pair programmers we
have observed agree that pair analysis and
pair design are critical to success. That is,

two brains are better than one when per-
forming analysis and design. Pairs consider
many more possible solutions to a problem
and converge more quickly on which solu-

tion to implement. According to researchers
Nick Flor and Edwin Hutchins, the feed-
back, debate, and idea exchange between
partners significantly decrease the probabil-
ity of proceeding with a bad design.
4Col-laborators often can perform tasks that are
too challenging for one to do alone. In an
anonymous online survey (http://limes.cs.
utah.edu/questionnaire/questionnaire.htm),
one professional programmer reflected, ÒIt
is a powerful technique as there are two

brains concentrating on the same problem
all the time. It forces one to concentrate
fully on the problem at hand.Ó
While one partner is busy typing or writ-ing down the design, the other partner can
continuously review the design and thinkYou know what I like about pair programming? First, itÕs something that has been shown to
help produce quality products. But, itÕs also something that you can easily add to your pro-

cess that people actually want to do. ItÕs a conceptually small thing to add, as opposed to

having an overblown methodology shoved down your throat. And, when times get tough,
you wouldnÕt likely forget to do pair programming or decide to drop it Òjust to get done.Ó I

just think the idea of working together is a winner.
ÑChuck Allison, Consulting Editor, 
C/C++ Users Journal (in a conversation with Laurie Williams)
 July/August 2000IEEE SOFTWARE
21more strategically about its implications.
Will it run into a dead end? Is there is a bet-

ter strategy? Thus, pair programming pre-
vents design defects or removes them almost
as soon as they hit the paper. A further ben-

efit is the elimination of design tunnel vi-
sionÑmaking a design decision and sticking
with it no matter what. With partners re-

viewing and questioning decisions, the ex-
ploration of design alternatives increases. To

prepare for an effective joint analysis and de-
sign session, programmers should individu-
ally research the problem they need to solve
and perhaps do experimental prototyping.After developing a quality design, thepair must implement it. Again, one pro-
grammer is the driver, who types code into

the computer, while the other observes, con-

tinuously reviews the code, and considers
the implementationÕs strategic implications.

This side-by-side form of code review is an
effective and efficient form of defect re-
moval. As Gerald Weinberg observes, 
ÒThe human eye has an almost infinitecapacity for not seeing what it does not
want to see.... Programmers, if left to
their own devices, will ignore the most
glaring errors in their outputÑerrors
that anyone else can see in an instant.Ó5With pair programming, four eyeballs
are better than two, and a huge number of
defects are prevented right from the start.Programmers view pair analysis and de-sign as more critical than pair implementa-

tion. Pairs report that they sometimes work
on implementation individually, usually the

rote, routine, or simple coding phases of a
project. They find that doing this type of pro-

gramming individually is more effective. De-

velopers report that having a partner for de-
tail-oriented tasks such as drawing a graphi-
cal user interface doesnÕt help much. Some

programmers code average-complexity mod-
ules individually if a situation such as a time
conflict dictates, but most immediately feel
uncomfortable and more error prone. Some

even say that any work done individually
should be scrapped and redone by the pair.

Most programmers perform a thorough re-
view of the individual work before incorpo-

rating it in the project. A small minority inte-

grate individual work without review.
The least critical part of the developmentcycle is pair testing, as long as the pair de-
velops the test cases together. Pairs some-

times split up to run test cases, often side by
side at two computers. When they discover
defects, the partners usually rejoin to find

the best solution.University ExperimentIn 1999 at the University of Utah, seniorsoftware engineering students participated
in a structured experiment. Its purpose was
to validate quantitatively the anecdotal and
qualitative pair-programming results ob-
eXtreme Programming is a software development methodthat favors informal and immediate communication over the de-

tailed and specific work products required by many traditional
design methods. Pair programming fits well within XP for rea-
sons ranging from quality and productivity to vocabulary devel-

opment and cross training. XP relies on pair programming so
heavily that it insists all production code be written by pairs.XP consists of a dozen practices appropriate for small tomidsize teams developing software with vague or changing re-
quirements. The methodology copes with change by delivering
software early and often and by absorbing feedback into the
development culture and ultimately into the code.Several XP practices involve pair programming:Developers work on only one requirement at a time, usually
the one with the greatest business value as established by
the customer. Pairs form to interpret requirements or to place

their implementation within the code base.Developers create unit tests for the codeÕs expected behavior

and then write the simplest, most straightforward implemen-

tations that pass their tests. Pairs help each other maintainthe discipline of writing tests first and the complementary,
though quite distinct, discipline of writing simple solutions.Developers expect their intentions to show clearly in the
code they write and refactor their code and otherÕs if neces-

sary to achieve this result. A partner who has been tracking

the programmerÕs intention is well equipped to judge the

programÕs expressiveness.
Developers continuously integrate their work into a single
development thread, testing its health by running compre-
hensive unit tests. With each integration, the pair releases
ownership of their work to the whole team. At this point, dif-
ferent pairings can form if another combination of talent is

more appropriate for the next piece of work.
To learn more, see Kent BeckÕs book,
1or consult the eXtremeProgramming Roadmap at xp.c2.com, where a lively commu-
nity debates each XP practice.Reference1.  K. Beck, 
eXtreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, Addison Wesley Longman, Reading, Mass., 2000.
What Is eXtreme Programming? 22IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 2000served in industry. All students attended the
same classes, received the same instruction,
and participated in class discussions on the
pros and cons of pair programming. On the

first day of class, 35 of the 41 students
(85%) indicated a preference for pair pro-
gramming. Later, many of the 35 admitted

that they were initially reluctant, but curi-

ous, about pair programming.We divided the students into two groups,
both composed of the same mix of high, av-
erage, and low performers, as determined by
their grade point averages. Thirteen students
formed the control group, in which all
worked individually on all assignments.

Twenty-eight students formed the experimen-

tal group, in which all worked in two-person,
collaborative teams on the same assignments
as the individuals. The collaborative pairs
also had additional assignments to keep the
workload equal between the two groups.All 28 students in the experimental grouphad expressed an interest in pair program-
ming. Some students in the control group
had wanted to try pair programming. Prior
to enrolling in this class, the students had
significant coding practice. Most had indus-
try internship experience, and most had
written small compilers, operating system
kernels, and interpreters in other classes.The experiment compared cycle time, pro-ductivity, and quality between the two groups.

The students recorded the time they spent on
the project in a Web-based tool. An impartial

teaching assistant executed automated testing
to analyze programming quality.
Pair JellingLong conditioned to working alone,many programmers venture into their first
pair-programming experience skeptical of

benefiting from collaborative work. They
wonder how much additional communica-
tion will be required; how they will adjust
to the otherÕs work habits, programming

style, and ego; and whether they will dis-
agree on aspects of the implementation. In-

deed, programmers go through an initial ad-
justment period in the transition from soli-

tary to collaborative programming. (A
recent article provides guidelines on making
this transition.6) Our anecdotal evidenceand observations show that in industry this
adjustment period varies from a few hours

to several days, depending on the individu-als. In the university experiment, the stu-
dents generally adjusted after the first as-
signment, although some reported an even
shorter adjustment period.For the first assignment, the pairs finishedin a shorter elapsed time and produced a bet-
ter product than the individuals. On aver-
age, however, they took 60% more pro-

grammer hours to complete the assignment.
These results are similar to NosekÕs results

described earlier. After the adjustment pe-

riod, this 60% decreased dramatically to a
minimum of 15%. The end of the second as-
signment marked an important milestone:
all students reported they had overcome the
constant urge to grab the mouse or keyboard
from their partnerÕs hands.
It doesnÕt take many clean compiles or
declarations of ÒWe just got through our

test with no defects!Ó for the partners to feel

as one. Tom DeMarco and Timothy Lister

describe this type of union asa jelled team.... a group of people sostrongly knit that the whole is greater
than the sum of the parts. The production
of such a team is greater than that of the
same people working in unjelled form.
Just as important, the enjoyment that peo-
ple derive from their work is greater than
what youÕd expect given the nature of the
work itself. In some cases, jelled teams
working on assignments that others would
declare downright dull have a simply mar-
velous time.... Once a team begins to jell,
the probability of success goes up dramat-
ically. The team can become almost un-

stoppable, a juggernaut for success.7Jon Katzenbach and Douglas Smith ex-plain what happens when a team jells: The

members of such a team learn the strengths

and weaknesses of each member.
8With this
knowledge, they can adjust their activities
to exploit strengths and avoid weaknesses.
As a result, the teamÕs productivity exceeds

the sum of its individualsÕ productivity.
Pair-Programming ResultsSome may question the value [of pair pro-gramming] if the collaborators do not
perform ÒtwiceÓ as well as individuals, at
least in the amount of time spent. For in-

stance, if the collaborators did not per-
form the task in half the time it takes an

individual, it would still be more expen-


 July/August 2000IEEE SOFTWARE
23sive to employ two programmers. How-ever, there are at least two scenarios

where some improved performance over
what is expected or possible by a single
programmer may be the goal: (1) speed-
ing up development and (2) improving
software quality.
2Some organizations that use pair pro-gramming heavily have achieved superior re-
sults. The largest example is the Chrysler
Comprehensive Compensation System (the
C3 project discussed in Ron JeffriesÕ side-
bar). After finding significant initial develop-
ment problems, Beck and Jeffries restarted
the development using XP principles, includ-
ing the use of pair programming. In the last
five months of development, almost the only
defects that made it through unit and func-
tional testing were written by solo program-
mers. The payroll-system software, which
handles roughly 10,000 employees, and con-
sists of 2,000 classes and 30,000 methods,
went into operation in May 1997, almost on
schedule.9In the online survey of professional pairprogrammers, we found similar experiences.For example, one respondent wrote:I strongly feel pair programming is theprimary reason our team has been suc-
cessful. It has given us a very high level of
code quality (almost to the point of zero

defects). The only code we have ever had
errors in was code that wasnÕt pair pro-

grammed.É we should really question a
situation where it isnÕt utilized.
Our university experiment producedquantitative results similar to industry re-
sults. The students completed four assign-
ments over a period of six weeks. The pairs
always passed more of the automated post-

development test cases (see Table 1). Their

results were also more consistent, while the
individuals varied more about the mean.
Some individuals didnÕt hand in a program

or handed it in late; pairs handed in their
assignments on time. We attribute the pairsÕ

punctuality to positive pressure the part-
ners exert on each other. They admit to

working Òharder and smarterÓ because
they donÕt want to let their partner down.

Without this pressure, individuals donÕt

perform as consistently.
In addition to the development-qualitybenefits found in our study, we can think of
three reasons why pair programming might
be more valuable to industry than our re-

sults indicate. First, the longer defects re-

main in the product, the more costly it is to

find and fix them. The rework necessary to

bring individual programmersÕ quality lev-
els up to that of collaborative programmers
could be very time consuming and expen-
sive. Some of these defects could escape to

the customer. Second, unclear designs are

difficult to change in later releases, resulting

in the long-term cost of poor quality. Third,

a side effect of pair programming is a high

order of staff cross training, which removes

additional long-term costs from develop-

ment. As Beck writes, ÒEven if you werenÕt

more productive, you would still want to
pair, because the resulting code quality is so

much higher.Ó
10Many people reject the idea of pair pro-
gramming because they assume that putting
two programmers on a job that one can do
will increase programmer hours 100%. In
our experiment, however, after the initial

adjustment period, the total

programmer hours the pairs
spent on each assignment de-
creased dramatically (see Fig-
ure 1). If we had required the
individuals to spend addi-
tional time improving their

code to the level of the pairsÕ

code, the individuals would
have taken even more time
than the pairs. By working in
tandem, the pairs completed
their assignments 40% to
50% faster.
In todayÕs market, getting a
quality productout as quickly

as possible is a competitive ad-
vantage that might even mean
survival. Fixing defects after
release to customers can cost
far more than finding and fix-

ing them during development.
Program 1100%80%
60%
40%
20%0%Program 2Program 3
IndividualsPairsFigure 1. Comparisonof pair programmersÕ
and individualsÕ 
project completion
times. (Data entry

problems prevented
accurate recording of
the completion times
for Program 4.)Table 1Percentage of Test Cases Passed*IndividualsPairs
Program 173.486.4
Program 278.188.6
Program 370.487.1
Program 478.194.4
*The difference in quality levels is statistically significant to p< 0.01; pis the probability that these results could occur by chance. 24IEEE SOFTWARE
July/August 2000The benefits of getting a product out faster,
reducing maintenance expenses, and im-
proving customer satisfaction outweigh any
programmer-hour increase that pair pro-

grammers might incur.
For several reasons, programmer-hours
do not double with pair programming as
one might expect. First, collaboration im-
proves the problem-solving process. As a re-
sult, far less time is spent in the chaotic,

time-consuming compile and test phases.
Said one of the students in the experiment:
When I worked on the machine as thedriver, I concentrated highly on my work.

I wanted to show my talent and quality
work to my partner. When I was doing it,

I felt more confident. In addition, when I
had a person observing my work, I felt

that I could depend on him, since this
person cared about my work and I could
trust him. If I made any mistakes, he
would notice them, and we could have a
high-quality product. When I was the
nondriver, I proofread everything my

partner typed. I felt I had a strong re-
sponsibility to prevent any errors in our
work. I examined each line of code very
carefully, thinking that if there were any

defects in our work, it would be my fault.

Preventing defects is the most important
contribution to the team, and it put a bit

of pressure on me.Additionally, pairs find that by pooling
their joint knowledge, they can conquer al-
most any technical task immediately. In

teaching the university class that partici-
pated in the experiment, the instructor no-

ticed that individual workers asked two or
three times more technical questions than
did collaborative workers. While waiting
for the answers to these questions, these stu-
dents were generally unproductive. We

would expect this situation to translate to a
professional environment.As mentioned earlier, pair programmers
put pressure on each other to perform,
keeping their partner focused and on task.
Programmers have told us that even if they
come to work after a bad night or are pre-
occupied with other thoughts, their partner
draws their attention to the task at hand.
They are less likely to spend time talking
on the telephone, reading and answering e-
mail, or surfing the Web if their partner is
waiting. Because of this peer pressure,
pairs usually have a stronger motivation to
complete the task during the session; there-
fore, they work with much greater focus
and intensity than individuals.Pair SatisfactionUnlike many techniques put forth to im-prove software quality and productivity,

pair programming is one that programmers
actually enjoy. Pair programming improves

their job satisfaction and overall confidence
in their work. In the online survey of pro-

fessional pair programmers, 96% stated
that they enjoyed their job more than when

they programmed alone. We surveyed the

41 collaborative programmers in the uni-
versity experiment six times. Consistently,

more than 90% stated that they enjoyed

collaborative programming more than solo
programming. Additionally, virtually all the

surveyed professional programmers stated
that they were more confident in their solu-

tions when they pair programmed. Almost
95% of the students echoed this statement.A natural correlation exists between thesetwo measures of satisfaction. That is, the
pairs enjoy their work more because they are
more confident in their work. Someone is

there to help them if they are confused or un-
knowledgeable. They can bounce ideas off a
friend. They spend more time doing chal-
lenging design and less time doing annoying
debugging. They leave each session with an
exhilarated, we-nailed-that-one feeling. In-
deed, having engaged in pair programming
ourselves, we agree completely that it is far
more enjoyable than individual program-

ming. We too have experienced the shared

euphoria that follows the successful comple-
tion of a collaborative task.Although most programmers enjoy pairprogramming, sometimes they have trouble
working with a particular partner. The diffi-

culty often arises from being paired with
someone with excess egoÑthe my-way-or-

the-highway attitude. Or the problem might

be too little egoÑpartners who have trouble
asserting themselves and thus contribute lit-
tle. The majority of participants in our

study and in our survey were self-selected
pair programmers. Further study is needed
to examine the eventual satisfaction of pro-
grammers forced to pair program despite
their resistance.



˝


 July/August 2000IEEE SOFTWARE
25Large-group software projects areprone to peculiar difficulties. As the

well-known BrooksÕs law states,
ÒAdding manpower to a late software proj-
ect makes it later.Ó
11The logic behind thislaw focuses on intercommunication effort:
In tasks requiring communication amongthe subtasks, the effort of communication
must be added to the amount of work to
be done.... The added burden of communi-
cation is made up of two parts, training
and intercommunication.... If each part of
the [n] task[s] must be separately coordi-nated with each other part, the [intercom-
munication] effort increases as n(n+1)/2.
11Integrating the partitioned tasks of pro-
grammers requires this extra intercommuni-
cation effort. Pair programming can halve
the number of separate tasks to be integrated,
and thus we anticipate that large groups con-

sisting of pair-programming teams should

fair much better. We would like to run an-

other university study to analyze the effect of
pair programming on larger groups.Finally, we would like to see the same ex-
periments applied in an industrial settingÑ
perhaps with part of a larger development

team. Anyone interested in running such an

experiment should contact Laurie Williams

(william@csc.ncsu.edu). References1.L.L. Constantine, 
Constantine on Peopleware, Yourdon
Press, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1995.2.J.T. Nosek, ÒThe Case for Collaborative Programming,Ó
Comm. ACM, Vol. 41, No. 3, 1998, pp. 105Ð108.
3.J.O. Coplien, ÒA Development Process Generative Pat-
tern Language,Ó Pattern Languages of Program Design,J.O. Coplien and D.C. Schmidt, eds., Addison-Wesley,

Reading, Mass., 1995, pp. 183Ð237.4.N.V. Flor and E.L. Hutchins, ÒAnalyzing Distributed
Cognition in Software Teams: A Case Study of Team

Programming during Perfective Software Maintenance,Ó
Proc. Empirical Studies of Programmers: Fourth Work-
shop, Ablex Publishing, New York, 1991, pp. 36Ð64.
5.G.M. Weinberg, 
The Psychology of Computer Pro-gramming Silver Anniversary Edition, Dorset House,New York, 1998.
6.L.A. Williams and R.R. Kessler, ÒAll I Ever Needed to
Know about Pair Programming I Learned in Kinder-

garten,Ó Comm. ACM, Vol. 43, No. 5, 2000, pp.
108Ð114.
7.T. DeMarco and T. Lister, 
Peopleware, Dorset House,New York, 1977.
8.J.R. Katzenbach and D.K. Smith, 
The Wisdom of
Teams: Creating the High-Performance Organization
,Harper Business, New York, 1994.
9.A. Anderson et al., ÒChrysler Goes to ÔExtremesÕ,Ó 
Dis-tributed Computing, Oct. 1998, pp. 24Ð28.10.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange, Addison Wesley Longman, Reading, Mass.,
2000.11.F.P.J. Brooks, 
The Mythical Man-Month, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1975.
by Ron Jeffries
Like most programmers, I had done some pair program-ming, usually when working on something particularly tricky or

during some difficult debugging sessions. Although Ward Cun-

ningham had recommended full-time pair programming a few
times, my first experience with ÒrealÓ pair programming came
on the C3 [Chrysler Comprehensive Compensation] project,

where I was coach.I was sitting with one of the least-experienced developers,working on some fairly straightforward task. Frankly, I was

thinking to myself that with my great skill in Smalltalk, I would
soon be teaching this young programmer how itÕs really done.
We hadnÕt been programming more than a few minutes
when the youngster asked me why I was doing what I was do-
ing. Sure enough, I was off on a bad track. I went another

way. Then the whippersnapper reminded me of the correct

method name for whatever I was mistyping at the time. Pretty
soon, he was suggesting what I should do next, meanwhile
calling out my every formatting error and syntax mistake.
IÕm not entirely stupid. I noticed very quickly that this most
junior of programmers was actually helping me! Me! Can you
believe it? Me! Since then, thatÕs been my experience every

time in pair programming. Having a partner makes me a better

programmer. Ward was rightÑas usual.
My First Pair-Programming Experience
Laurie Williams
is a faculty member at North Carolina State University. Her research 
interests are software engineering, software process, collaborative programming, and 
e-commerce. She received a BS in industrial engineering from Lehigh University, an MBA from

Duke University, and a PhD in computer science from the University of Utah. Contact her at

williams@csc.ncsu.edu.Ward Cunningham
is a founder and owner of Cunningham & Cunningham, a consultingfirm. Among his contributions to the developing practice of object-oriented programming, he cre-
ated the CRC design method, which helps teams find core objects for their programs. He is active
in the Hillside Group and has served as program chair of its Pattern Languages of Programs Con-

ference. Contact him at ward@c2.com.Robert R. Kessler
is a professor and chairman of the Department of Computer Scienceof the University of Utah. In the early 1990s, he founded the Center for Software Science, a Utah
Center of Excellence. He recently completed seven years as coeditor in chief of the InternationalJournal of Lisp and Symbolic Computation. His research interests include agents, software engi-neering, distributed systems, and visual programming. Contact him at kessler@cs.utah.edu.Ron Jeffries
is an independent consultant. He has been developing software since 1961, when he accidentally got asummer job at the Strategic Air Command headquarters, where they accidentally gave him a Fortran manual. He and his
teams have built operating systems, language compilers, relational and set-theoretic database systems, and manufacturing
control and applications software, producing about a half-billion dollars in revenueÑand he wonders why he didnÕt get
any of it. For the past few years, he has been learning, applying, and teaching the eXtreme Programming discipline. Con-
tact him at ronjeffries@acm.org.