 0740-7459/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
 November/December 2008   
IEEE SOFTWARE
 29
Designing Then and Now
Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock
The changing of a vague dif˜ culty into a speci˜ c, concrete form is a very essential element in thinking. 
 ŠJohn Pierpont Morgan
Twenty-˜ ve years ago I was programming 
in 8086 assembly language for a low-cost 
graphics terminal. Our team followed 
structured-design practices. We developed 
module decomposition diagrams and printed 
them on an ozalid printer. Our software 
blueprints really were blue! We wrote functional 
speci˜ cations and de˜ ned the subroutine call struc-
ture before implementing any 
code. We wrote and debugged our 
coding sitting in a common work 
area. We held code reviews and 
shared effective coding practices.
On the graphics display sub-
system, where I was team lead, 
we practiced collective code own-
ership. Anyone could implement 
any routine; when you ˜ nished 
one, you just picked up the next 
on the list. We held a meeting the week before any 
milestone to discuss tactics. After each milestone, 
we met to discuss how to make our next iteration 
successful. Our product-marketing manager main-
tained a list of features. Anything above the cut 
line was essential; anything below, a nice-to-have. 
There™s a striking similarity between the rhythms of 
our work then and today™s Scrum practices. Incre-
mental, steady delivery seems to require close team-
work, frequent planning, and attention to detail and 
design quality.
Changes in Technologies
Since my assembly programming days, technology 
changes have been dramatic. When I ˜ rst started 
programming in Smalltalk in the mid-1980s, I 
experienced the sheer joy of writing code where I 
asked objects to do something without having to 
know how they speci˜ cally performed their tasks. 
Finally, I didn™t have to keep a myriad of little 
details in my head while programming. The key 
for me grasping the power of this new way of de-
signing was the realization that objects™ responsi-
bilities (but not their implementations) interacted. 
Extremely productive Smalltalk designers didn™t 
decompose problems so much as craft networks of 
responsible, interacting objects.
In Smalltalk, we wrote and immediately ex-
ecuted code, getting nearly instant feedback. The 
development environment had a wealth of reusable 
classes and a browser to locate and organize them. 
The standard fare of today™s development environ-
ments was a big deal back then. In Smalltalk, the 
entire code base was accessible. That openness en-
abled us to learn by reading and emulating work-
ing examples. New Smalltalk developers spent a 
lot of time browsing code.
The distinction between application code and 
stable class libraries wasn™t clearly demarcated. If 
you didn™t like the implementation of any Small-
talk class, you could change it. This was great for 
rapid programming but sometimes led to applica-
tion-speci˜ c behaviors being added to the most bi-
zarre places. I developed a design sense by seeing 
both good and bad code.
Since those open Smalltalk days, however, 
I™ve grumbled at poorly designed code that was 
unchangeable and ugly. Stable class libraries al-
low developers to use them with con˜ dence, but 
Editor: Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock 
 Wirfs-Brock Associates 
 rebecca@wirfs-brock.com
design
 30
 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   
www.computer.org/software
DESIGN
stability comes at a price. Widely distributed class 
libraries are dif˜cult to improve without breaking 
working code. Even if we design to an interface, 
not an implementation, we™re still confounded 
when interfaces change. That™s why today many 
developers lag behind in adopting the latest ver
-sions and migrate to a new release only after it has 
proven stable.
Although object technology has had a big im
-pact on software development, it isn™t the only tool 
in a well-rounded toolkit. Grady Booch™s thoughts 
on design choice (ﬁWhy We Model,ﬂ 
Object Mag
-azine
, Nov. 1996) bear repeating:
In software, what models we choose to make 
greatly affects our world view. If I build a 
 system through the eyes of a database de
-veloper, I™ll end up with an entity-oriented 
schema that pushes behaviors into triggers 
and stored procedures. If I build a system 
through the eyes of a structured analyst, then 
I™ll end up with a system that™s algorithmic-
 centric, with data ˚owing from process to 
process. If I build a system through the eyes 
of an object-oriented developer, then I™ll 
end up with a system whose architecture 
is centered around a sea of classes and the 
patterns of interaction that animate those 
classes. Any one of these might be right for a 
given application and a given development 
culture.
Our technology choices today are wide and 
varied. Most complex systems involve a mix of 
technologies. We have a wealth of competing ar
-chitectural platforms. Experienced designers must 
make trade-offs and select from a variety of appro
-priate technologies for solving the task at hand.
Larry Constantine, coinventor of Structured 
Design, observes that
change (and fads) are going to continue. And 
although Structured Design might not be on 
the forefront of many people™s design prac
-tices these days, the principles and practices 
that are ﬁbest practicesﬂ in object design 
these days exemplify the values of Structured 
DesignŠavoiding unnecessary coupling and 
forming highly cohesive objects.
Moving to newer technologies means not that we 
ignore our past but that we adapt and embrace 
practices that enable our software to ˚ex, grow, be 
expressive, and meet users™ needs.
Bob Martin re˚ects that, although tools and 
technology have rapidly changed, programming re
-mains largely the same:
But in the face of all this massive change, 
this rampant growth, this almost unlimited 
wealth of resources, there is something that 
hasn™t changed much at all: code. Today™s 
modern programming languages may be rich 
with features and power, but they are not or
-ders of magnitude better than their ancestors. 
We still write programs made out of calcula
-tions, ﬁifﬂ statements, and ﬁforﬂ loops. We 
still assign values into variables and pass a
r-guments into functions. Programmers from 
twenty-˜ve years ago might be surprised that 
we use lowercase letters in our programs, but 
little else would startle them about the code 
we write. We are like carpenters who started 

out using hammers and saws, and have pr
o- gressed to using air hammers and power 
saws. These power tools help a lot; but in 
the end we are still cutting wood and nailing 
it together. And we probably will be for the 
next twenty-˜ve years.
Changes in the Thinking-
Designing-Coding Cycle
Twenty-˜ve years ago, I spent a fair amount of 
time thinking about and sketching solutions 
before I coded them. This was essential when 
programming in assembly language or when I 
could squeeze only one or two programming 
cycles into each day owing to lengthy compile-
link-execute times. That lag timeŠand the dis
-connect between design ideas and their pro
-gram representationŠmagni˜ed the need to 
desk-check my work.
Today™s power tools enable us to cut code 
and test our design ideas much more quickly. 
This is a signi˜cant improvement. Yet the more 
code we create, the more opportunity we have 
for it to grow unwieldy, inconsistent, and un
-maintainable. Unless we want our code base 
to grow into a Big Ball of Mud (Brian Foote 
and Joseph Yoder, ﬁBig Ball of Mud,ﬂ 
Proc. 
4th Conf. Pattern Languages
 of Programs
, 1997), it requires care and attention. With fre
-quent design-test-code cycles, we can rapidly 
validate design ideas. These cycles also reduce 
chances to create large tangles of untested, un
-testable code. That™s one reason proponents 
of test-driven development (TDD) are gaining 
traction. TDD advocates propose it as a design 
method, not just a testing practice.
But whether you adopt TDDŠwriting tests 
before you implement codeŠas a design prac
-tice, attention to code quality and design main
-tenance is ever important. Ward Cunningham 
coined the term ﬁtechnical debtﬂ to explain 
how we should manage this effort:
Today™s power 
tools enable 
us to cut code 
and test our 
design ideas 
much more 
quickly. This 
is a signi˜cant 
improvement. 
  November/December 2008   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 31
DESIGN
I have always promoted writing excellent 
code, not cruft [unpleasantly built-up code]. 
I am happy to see code that solves today™s 
problems, not imaginary problems that 
might appear in the future. As time advanc
-es, once excellent code shows its limitations 
and requires attention. I argue that the 
required work can be scheduled as part of 
a management policy, much like funding a 
company includes managing ˜nancial debt. 
In fact, well-managed debt serves as an ac
-celerator. Part of that management includes 
paying back principal. A design that grace
-fully accepts refactoring will prove more 
valuable than big design up front.
We can continue to grow and evolve a large 
code base only when we pay attention to technical 
debt. The challenge is choosing an opportune time 
to pay off that debt. We need to know enough 
about our design™s current limitations and chal
-lenges but not be inundated with so much debt 
that any rework appears daunting. Best design ef
-forts rarely happen when we feel hurried, pinched 
by project schedules, or overwhelmed by the task™s 
sheer magnitude.
Changes in Design 
Expression
When I programmed in assembly language, I 
didn™t put much thought into how I expressed my 
design in code. I followed naming schemes and 
established conventions. But I remember being in
-trigued by Donald Knuth™s literate programming. 
The central ideas behind literate programming 
are human readability and code comprehension. 
This approach combines explanatory documen
-tation and source code so that they don™t get out 
of synch.
We still live with that problem, and we don™t 
write literate programs. I suspect that™s because 
we aren™t comfortable writing prose about our 
code. Instead, we hope it will be comprehended 
on its own (with judiciously placed code com
-ments). Yet, the combination of code as prose 
and prose about the code is what adds value. 
Those who advocate intention-revealing names 
and expressive code echo these values, but they 
don™t go far enough.
Code alone isn™t abstract enough to convey 
design ideas to others because it™s too easy to get 
lost in its nonessential details. So, we™ve always 
informally drawn and told stories about our soft
-ware, in spite of any modeling tool or expressive 
programming language.
Although the Uni˜ed Modeling Language 
(UML) consolidated many different design con
-cepts, most designers I rub shoulders with aren™t 
˚uent in it. They know rudimentary class and se
-quence diagrams but don™t see the merit in learn
-ing any of its sophisticated nuances. They typi
-cally use UML to describe their software after 
they have constructed it, not to formulate its de
-sign. Even with advances in modeling tools, pro
-gramming languages, and design practices, we™re 
still exploring how best to express our designs. 
The ﬁbestﬂ approach depends on design context 
as well as our collaborators™ interests, inclina
-tions, and skills.
Over the past 25 years, we™ve made great ad
-vances in tooling, technologies, and tech
-niques that make software design more con
-crete. But design still requires careful thought. 
We still must exercise judgment. There isn™t one 
simple way to think about and describe soft
-ware. Informal design tools and techniques com
-plement more formal ones. New techniques and 
design approaches will come along. And respon
-sible designers will keep learning and improving 
their craft.
Acknowledgments
The quotes from Larry Constantine, Bob Martin, and 
Ward Cunningham are from personal conversations 
and emails. I thank them for pro
-viding these important insights.
Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock
 is president of 
Wirfs-Brock Associates. Contact her at rebecca@
wirfs-brock.com; www.wirfs-brock.com.
GAME CHARACTER SOFTWARE ENGI-
NEER,
MS in Computer or Software
Engineering, 1 yr exp. Send resume to
Arcadia Entertainment, Inc., 900 Island
Drive, Suite 203, Redwood City, CA
94065.

DISTRIBUTED MMO SERVER DEVEL-
OPER
, MS in Computer or Electrical
Engineering, 1 yr exp. Send resume to
Arcadia Entertainment, Inc., 900 Island
Drive, Suite 203, Redwood City, CA
94065.
Classified Advertising
SUBMISSION DETAILS:
Rates are
$110.00 per column inch ($125 mini-
mum). Eight lines per column inch
and average five typeset words per
line. Send copy at least one month
prior to publication date to: Marian
Anderson, Classified Advertising,
IEEE Software
, 10662 Los Vaqueros
Circle, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314;
(714) 821-8380; fax (714) 821-4010.
Email: manderson@comput er.org.
Become a reviewer for
The key to providing you 
quality information you can 
trust is 
IEEE Software
™s peer 
review process. Each article 
we publish must meet the 
technical and editorial 
standards of industry 
professionals like you. 
Volunteer as a reviewer and 
become part of the process.
Email 
software
@computer.org
