 0740-7459/09/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
 November/December 2009   
IEEE SOFTWARE
 9Editor: Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock 
˜ Wirfs-Brock Associates 
˜ rebecca@wirfs-brock.com
design
Successful software systems often live far 
longer than their original designers an
-ticipated. And over their lifetime, most 
of those systems evolve. Developers who 
make modi˜cations, ˜x bugs, and add new 
features to long-lived systems have an easier 
time of it if they keep the code base habitable (ﬁCre
-ating Sustainable Designs,ﬂ Rebecca Wirfs-Brock, 
IEEE Software
, May/June 2009) 
and preserve design integrity. But 
even so, maintenance can be pain
-ful when new requirements invali
-date initial design assumptions. 
Given that we can™t anticipate the 
design impact of every future re
-quirement, is it enough to keep 
our code clean and our designs 
well factored? Or should we be 
doing something more?
Support Design Variability
Most complex systems support a fair amount of 
variability from the start. Some systems support 
those variations poorlyŠthey™re rife with cut-copy-
and-paste reuse and overly complex code. Condi
-tional checks and hard-coded constants are com
-mon. The code is as uninspired as its designers 
were. As a consequence, the implementation may 
support a high degree of variation, but the design is 
accidental or chaotic. The system squeaks by with 
in˚exible, dif˜cult-to-change code.
A more ˚exible design would have fewer hard
-wired assumptions, ˜xed values, and duplicated 
code. It might have been refactored and revised 
numerous times to accommodate shifting design 
concerns. Most likely, it was initially designed to be 
testable and it continues to be tested. Initially, ab
-stractions may have been identi˜ed, but they too 
have been reworked and revised. The current de
-sign is coherent because of its revisionist designers. 
Flexible design is the byproduct of preparation 
and continued attention to detail. Where there™s a 
lot of variability in a design problem, a ˚exible solu
-tion will incorporate appropriate design hooks that 
allow for developers to predictably add planned 
extensions. Once they™ve established ways to sup
-port speci˜c variations, developers can follow pre
-de˜ned extension recipes rather than hacking in 
new features that are similar to existing ones.
Extremely ˚exible designs, however, can be un
-necessarily complex. If you don™t watch out, soft
-ware that™s too cleverly designed ends up with a pile 
of complexity that™s rarely used but must be under
-stood in order to maintain the system. Extending 
such a design can involve making many error-prone 
steps. Yet even elegantly crafted ˚exible designs can 
have steep learning curves. New developers need to 
be taught the right way to make changes and ex
-tensions. They need to learn design idioms. Coding 
conventions need to be enforced.
Joshua Kerievsky, in 
Refactoring to Patterns
, offers advice on how to avoid overly complex solu
-tions: ﬁPatterns are a cornerstone of object-oriented 
design, while test-˜rst programming and merciless 
refactoring are cornerstones of evolutionary design. 
To stop over- or under-engineering, balance these 
practices and evolve only what you need.ﬂ
OK. We all know we shouldn™t create elaborate 
solutions when simpler, adequate solutions suf˜ce. 
And we should refactor our design when we™re 
faced with changing requirements. But how can 
you know whether you™re evolving a design along 
reasonable dimensions? Is agile development the 
answer? Agile development processes embrace the 
Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock
ﬁOne must always be aware, to notice even though the cost of noticing is to become responsible.ﬂ 
 ŠThylias Moss
The Responsible Designer
 10
 IEEE SOFTWARE   
www.computer.org/software
DESIGN
notion of making decisions at the last 
re
-sponsible
 moment. 
On agile projects, just-in-time require
-ments drive incremental development. As 
a consequence, design activities are short 
and focused on the current iteration. You 
design to meet current requirements and 
don™t have time to over-design.
Indeed, agile development can be a 
heady experience when you™re fed a steady 
stream of right-sized requirements. If you™re 
so lucky, you can be extremely productive. 
You don™t fret about tomorrow™s problems; 
instead you solve the problems of the day. 
You get to focus on simple design and clean 
code. Frequent, timely feedback gives you 
insights into the next problem you tackle. 
You work closely with others. Nobody 
goes off and does cowboy coding or clan
-destine design. 
But agile development isn™t always a de
-signer™s paradise, as Joe Yoder and Brian 
Foote pointed out in their Agile 2009 con
-ference debate, ﬁBig Balls of Mud: Is This 
the Best that Agile Can Do?ﬂ Agile prac
-tices, if followed naively, can lead to system 
decay (also known as big balls of mud; see 
their original big balls of mud pattern at 
www.laputan.org/mud). Lack of any up
-front design can lead to muddled design. 
Continuously evolving a software archi
-tecture can prove expensive. Piecemeal 
growth can be haphazard and lead to less 
than optimal designs. Late changes to re
-quirements can cause signi˜cant design 
churn.
It seems obvious, but it™s worth stat
-ing: no development process can eliminate 
disruptions caused by signi˜cant require
-ments changes. When your design context 
changes, of course you need to rethink 
earlier decisions. One myth that should 
be dispelled about agile design is that it al
-ways happens just in time at the keyboard 
with no upfront planning or thought about 
design. That may make for a sensational 
story, but it™s only common when you™ve 
already ˜gured out the hard bits. If your 
development tasks are predictable and rou
-tine, well then, you don™t need to spend a 
lot of time thinking about your design. 
Your primary job is to produce working 
code and keep it clean. But when tackling a 
new and challenging design problem, even 
agile designers take time to explore their 
optionsŠespecially if there™s great risk or 
uncertainty. It™s the responsible thing to do.
Flexibly Support 
 Core Variations
But given the shifting design context that 
many of us live with, whether we work 
on agile projects or not, what can we do 
to better support variability that™s inher
-ent in most software? James Coplien wrote 
about commonality-variability analysis 
in his PhD thesis and in ﬁCommonality 
and Variability in Software Engineeringﬂ 
(IEEE Software
, Nov./Dec. 1998).
The ˜rst three steps of commonality-
variability analysis aren™t strictly about 
design. Instead they characterize the vari
-ability that your software needs to sup
-port. These activities set you up to make 
more informed design decisions. Ideally, 
you should do this for core areas of soft
-ware functionality that have signi˜cant 
impact. You start by asking what func
-tions will change over time or work dif
-ferently because of certain known condi
-tions. A list of points of variation, or 
hot 
spots
, can focus your efforts. Each hot 
spot becomes a separate design problem.
Coplien outlines these steps for analyz
-ing and then solving the design for a hot 
spot:
 1.
 Establish the scope of the variationŠ
how much of the design will you 
consider?
 2.
 Identify what™s common and what 
varies.
 3.
 Bound the degree of variability the de
-sign solution will support. Place spe
-ci˜c limits on how much variation it 
can support. Explain those limits.
 4.
 Exploit commonalities in a design solu
-tion; while
 5.
 Accommodating the variability.
Ideally, you should do this analysis col
-laboratively with business decision-makers 
having relevant domain expertise. This is 
especially important if you anticipate elabo
-rate or costly design solutions. Experienced 
designers often spot potential variations 
that business experts might not. If we soft
-ware designers work collaboratively with 
business decision-makers, we can jointly 
determine whether potential points of vari
-ability are real and meaningful to the busi
-ness, or just byproducts of our highly tuned 
abstraction skills. If they™re important, then 
we should pay extra attention.
James Taylor, in ﬁUsing Business Rules 
in Stable, Core Processesﬂ (http://jtonedm.
com/2009/09/03/using-busines-rules-in-
stable-core-processes) distinguishes be
-tween core business processes that are 
stable and predictable, from those at the 
business™s edges where change is the norm 
and business processes and rules seemingly 
never settle down. Whether you design IT 
software or embedded systems, it makes 
sense to focus on crafting ˚exible solutions 
for the known, stable parts. The other 
parts may be important, but their design 
constraints will keep changing and evolv
-ing. It may be good enough to keep the 
code habitable.
Fortunately, you can apply everything 
you™ve learned about good design to creat
-ing a ˚exible design solution. However, it 
requires extra effort. You may need to:
 ˜refactor, isolate, encapsulate, and redis
-tribute responsibilities;
 ˜design places where behavior can be 
ﬁtunedﬂ or replaced;
 ˜use factoring strategies and known 
patterns;
 ˜design con˜gurable behavior and data;
 ˜apply inheritance when variations are 
relatively few and static, or choose 
composition when variations are many 
or need to change at runtime;
 ˜de˜ne interfaces that can be imple
-mented by different classes; and
 ˜enable dynamic con˜guration of sys
-tem behavior.
When you propose a ˚exible design so
-lution, it™s reasonable to state your design™s 
limitations. Flexibility always has limits. A 
well-designed, ˚exible solution encapsu
-lates known variable aspects and provides 
mechanisms that adequately support ex
-pected changes and adaptations.
Identifying ﬁjust enoughﬂ ˚exibility is 
a key design skill. And at the end of 
the day, a responsible designer should 
strive to make informed decisions about 
what™s an appropriate amount of design 
˚exibility.
Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock
 is president of Wirfs-Brock 
Associates. Contact her at rebecca@wirfs-brock.com; www.
wirfs-brock.com.
