 68 IEEE SOFTWAR
E   Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0740-7459/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE
design
Editor: Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock 
 Wirfs-Brock Associates 
 rebecca@wirfs-brock.com
Good software designers share many traits, 
habits, practices, and values, whether they 
work on agile teams or not. Many design
-ers value design simplicity, communica
-tion, teamwork, and responsiveness to 
stakeholder needs. So what distinguishes 
agile design from other design processes? Do suc
-cessful designers working on agile projects need 
radically different techniques and 

skills?
Agile Design Supports 
Existing Values
As a reviewer of experience re
-ports at several agile conferences 
for the past ˜ve years, I™ve vi
-cariously experienced the joys, 
struggles, and triumphs of several 

successful design teams. Most 
didn™t ignore their corporate culture or existing de
-sign context even though they shifted priorities and 

added many new practices. Adopting agile develop
-ment seems to go hand in hand with articulating 
what you value, then ˜nding ways to improve on 
what you already do well.
Jon Spence, a principal engineer at a medical-
instrumentation company, sums up his initial at
-traction to agile development (ﬁThere Has to Be a 

Better Way,ﬂ 
Proc. 2005 Agile Conf.
, IEEE Press, 
2005, pp. 272Œ278):
There™s nothing wrong with plan-driven, 
 waterfall-based, document-centric approaches. 
They™re just not suited to controlling com
-plex activities like software development. We 
needed to adopt agile software development 
because it™s the best technique for the activities 
we™re trying to manage and control.
After studying literature, talking to agile thought 
leaders, and thinking about how agile practices 
might ˜t in his company™s development process, Jon 
and a handful of colleagues launched an agile ini
-tiative. They proposed adopting new practices that 

seemed radically different from their current ones:
forming small development teams;
giving each team freedom to adapt its develop
-ment process;

emphasizing simple designŠdesigning only for 
current, not speculative, needs;

developing in short, two-week iterations; and
re˚ecting at the end of each iteration.
They followed test-˜rst development on all new and 

changed, nontrivial, non-GUI code. They refactored 
code to maintain simple design only when that code 
had unit tests in place.
Initial reactions to their proposal were largely 
supportive. Yet some wondered about how pair pro
-gramming might impact productivity and whether 

it would disrupt the status quo of solo development. 

Management viewed refactoring as having the po
-tential for gold plating. So, they proceeded with the 
understanding that these practices would get a fair 
trial and were subject to change as they learned and 
Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock
Attitude is a little thing that makes a big difference. ŠWinston Churchill
Designing with 
an Agile Attitude
  March/April 2009   
IEEE SOFTWAR
E 69DES
IGN
applied them. In addition to having project 
management support, Jon asserts, ﬁit was 
equally important to have friends and allies 
in management, both immediate manage
-ment and upper management.ﬂ
Jon™s team came from a culture that 
values measuring productivity and mak
-ing process improvements. So, as part of 

adopting agile practices, they closely moni
-tored the amount of rework, the speed with 
which they completed tasks, and how ef
-fectively they worked through their feature 
backlog. As a result, they decided to re
-duce teams from 12 members to four to six 

members, add a team of system engineers 

to support the product manager in de˜n
-ing product features and functionality, and 
adjust their planning meetings to improve 
intrateam communication.
Agile Design 
Improves 
through Re˜ection
Frequent checkpoints let designers learn 

and re˜ne their software and how they 
work. Marilyn Lamoreux, a colleague of 
Jon™s, has recounted how she introduced 

end-of-iteration re˚ection meetings into 

their project (ﬁImproving Agile Team 
Learning by Improving Team Re˚ections,ﬂ 
Proc. 2005 Agile Conf.
, IEEE Press, 2005, 
pp. 139Œ144). Initially, some developers be
-lieved that meetings weren™t ﬁreal workﬂ no 
matter what the meetings™ agendas were. A 
common belief was that effective meetings 

should have a detailed agenda and result in 
actions, decisions, and to-do lists. Her ˜rst 
attempts at conducting re˚ections were 

only moderately successful.
After investigating, Marilyn decided 
to introduce Conversation Café (http://
 tinyurl.com/4kxmcv), a technique that 

com
  
bines simple ground rules and a talk
-ing token to guide conversation. The ˜rst 
time she tried it, Marilyn was stunned by 
how successful it was. She was able to insti
-gate a thought-provoking design discussion 

about why some code had errors and how 
to improve it. Marilyn speculates that this 
technique worked because it ﬁtaught our 

teams some of the conversational practices 
that open minds and hearts to new ideas.ﬂ
Even following this technique, teams 
still occasionally have unproductive re˚ec
-tion meetings. Marilyn says, ﬁLearning to 

re˚ect is a process that takes persistence, 
practice, feedback, and adaptation.ﬂ And, I 

might add, determined efforts to seek out 
and experiment with ways to make a par
-ticular practice effective.
Agile Happens 
 One Step at a Time
Agile design and development practices 

don™t have to happen all at once to be suc
-cessful. David Kane reports on how he in
-crementally introduced agile development 

techniques into a team that designs soft
-ware used by US National Cancer Institute 
scientists and researchers (ﬁIntroducing 
Agile Development into Bioinformatics: 

An Experience Report,ﬂ 
Proc. 2003 Ag
-ile Development Conf.
, IEEE Press, 2003, 
pp. 132Œ139). David™s team already worked 

collaboratively on development and had 

ready access to experimental biologists in 
a lab across the hall. The team wanted to 
adopt agile methods, but they also needed 

to continue to make releases while they 

learned new techniques. They had varying 
degrees of knowledge about agile methods 
and needed time to develop their skills.
One of the ˜rst things David did was get 
their code base under better con˜guration 
management. Shortly afterward, he intro
-duced the team to automated testing. As 
their test case coverage grew, they started 

refactoring portions of ugly code, cleaning 
up the design and removing unnecessary 
complexity and coupling. It wasn™t until 

more than a year and a half into agile adop
-tion that they introduced code reviews and 

one-day-a-week pair programming. They 

wanted code reviews to complement their 

existing practices and help share knowledge 
among team members. Each iteration, one 
developer would pick two to six classes to 
review from those he or she created or mod
-i˜ed. Others would review the code well be
-fore the end of the iteration, giving enough 
time for revision. They found reviewing and 
discussing code let them raise design and 

implementation issues that occurred across 
larger portions of their code.
Agility Comes 
 with an Attitude
Developing complex software can be dif
-˜cult no matter how good designers get 

at architecture, tooling, or technology. 
Although agile techniques and practices 

vary, successful agile designers I know are 

passionate about producing high-quality 
incremental design solutions. They aim 
to design and implement solutions for the 

current problems at hand simply and ef
-˜ciently. They adopt practices, tooling, 
and technology that enable them to pro
-duce results. They prefer to connect their 
design work to real, not presumed, needs 
and aren™t satis˜ed with being only heads-
down problem solvers or coders. They 

expect to give and take criticism and ask 

clarifying questions of teammates and 
other project stakeholders. And they take 
care not to ignore details that could derail 

design quality or put their project at risk.
So what does it take to be an effective 

designer in an agile development envi
-ronment? Although I don™t ˜nd agile 
development to require drastically different 

design or technical skills, it does demand 

teamwork and cooperation. Agile designers 
need to sharpen their communication and 
collaboration skills as well as their techni
-cal practices. They should value collabora
-tion and collective understanding as much 
as good design and development practices. 
It™s a matter of attitude more than any spe
-ci˜c technique or process.
Rebecca J. Wirfs-Brock
 is president of Wirfs-Brock 
Associates. Contact her at rebecca@wirfs-brock.com; www.
wirfs-brock.com.
Developing complex 
software can 
 be dif˜cult no matter 
how good designers 
 get at architecture, 
tooling, or technology. 
