 30IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEobjectives leads to a culture clash when apply-ing basic XP practices. We decided to explore this culture clash
when the Langley Creativity and Innovation Of-
ficesolicited bids for exploring nontraditional

methodologies for aerospace engineering re-
search. C&I was looking for a way to produce
extraordinary gains in productivity or enable
entirely new applications. We submitted a bid

and received one-year funding to perform a
short prototyping assessment of XP at the
NASA Langley Research Center. We conducted
the project using a GNU/Linux operating sys-tem, the Emacs integrated development environ-
ment, and the Ruby programming language.1,2We had prior experience programming related

algorithms for the advection-diffusionequationusing Fortran but no experience in team soft-

ware development, object-oriented design,
unit testing, or programming with Ruby.
As the project began, we realized that we
first had to deal with several cultural conflicts
before implementing the 12 XP practices.
Cultural conflictsKent Beck lists nine environments that he
says donÕt work well with XP.
3 Six of these
nine are counter to the existing culture at Lan-

gley. However, Beck prefaces his assertions

with the caveat that the list is based on his per-
sonal experiences: ÒI havenÕt ever built missile
focusExploring XP for Scientific ResearchExtreme Programming, as an agile programming methodology, fo-
cuses on delivering business value. In the realm of exploratory,

long-term, small-scale research projects, prioritizing near-term

tasks relative to their business or scientific value can be difficult.Assigning even a qualitative monetary value can be particularly challenging
for government research in enabling fields for which business markets have not

yet developed. The conflict between near-term value and long-term research 
Extreme Programming
Eight of Extreme ProgrammingÕs 12 practices are seeminglyincompatible with the existing research culture. However, despite

initial awkwardness, the authors successfully implemented an XP
prototype-assessment project at the NASA Langley Research Center.
William A. Wood and William L. Kleb, 
NASA Langley Research Center
 nosecone software, so I donÕt know what it is
like. É If you write missile nosecone software,
you can decide for yourself whether XP might
or might not work.Ó The software we were de-
veloping was intended for aerothermal predic-
tions on nosecones of hypervelocity vehicles
(see the ÒOur Software ProductÓ sidebar), so
we set out to decide for ourselves if XP could

work in such a research-oriented environment.
Here, we detail the six counter environments

as they apply to our project.First, according to Beck, the Òbiggest barrierto the success of an XP projectÓ arises from an

insistence on complete up-front design rather
than just steering the project along the way. In

February 2002, NASA announced a $23.3 mil-
lion award to Carnegie Mellon University Òto
improve NASAÕs capability to create depend-

able software.Ó Two-week training courses in

the Software Engineering InstituteÕs Team and

Personal Software Processes have already be-
gun, complete with 750 pages of introductory

textbooks. The TSP assigns two-thirds of the

project time to requirements gathering, docu-
menting, and design. It does not allow coding,

with the possibility for steering, until the final
third of the project. Furthermore, significant
steering can trigger a Òrelaunch,Ó in which you
start the requirements and design processes all
over again. We used XP exclusively, avoiding

the institutional bias toward the PSP and TSP.
The second cultural practice at odds withXP is big specifications. LangleyÕs ISO 9001

implementation includes a 45-page flowchart
for software quality assurance (LMS-CP-4754)
and a 17-page flowchart for software planning
and development (LMS-CP-5528), in which
only one of the 48 boxes, located 75 percent of
the way through, contains ÒCode and Test.Ó

At the risk of being ISO noncompliant, we ig-
nored the approved software process, deferring
the issue to when, or if, an ISO audit uncovers
the discrepancy.
Third, Beck observes that ÒReally smartprogrammers sometimes have a hard time
with XPÓ because they tend to Òhave the hard-
est time trading the ÔGuess RightÕ game for
close communication.Ó Not only do re-
searchers typically have doctoral degrees, but
the reward structure under which they operate
is based on peer review of the personÕs stature

in the field. The Research Grade Evaluation

Guide4emphasizes individual stature overteam membership. We had to suppress our de-
sire to be recognized for solo achievement andbelieve that two people doing XP would be

more productive than the sum of our individ-

ual efforts.  Fourth,although adopting XP for large
teams has been a frequent subject of debate,

we faced the opposite problemÑa small team

of only two people. Maintaining the distinct
roles of programmer, customer, recorder, and

coach was challenging. With very small teams,

the literature was unclear as to which tasks we
could safely perform solo and which would
rapidly degenerate into cowboy coding. In ad-
dition, with only two developers, we couldnÕt

have the cross-fertilization benefit of rotating
partners. Plus, interpersonal conflicts were a

potential problemÑif communication turned
to confrontation, there were no other team

members to play the role of mediator. Ad-

dressing these concerns required diligence in
delineating roles and a conscious decision to
stay focused on productive work. To rein in

cowboy coding, we used test-driven pair pro-
gramming exclusively when implementing fea-
tures. We also preferred pair programming

during refactoring but allowed solo refactor-
ing when scheduling conflicts precluded pair-
ing. However, we agreed not to break any ex-

isting tests or add any functionality.
Fifth, according to Beck, ÒAnother technol-ogy barrier to XP is an environment where a

long time is needed to gain feedback.Ó One
role of a government research center is to pur-
sue long-term, revolutionary projects. Devel-

opment cycles can last a decade, and the feed-
back loop on whether the project is headed inMay/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
31The research value we aimed to deliver was a software test bed for eval-
uating the performance of a numerical scheme to solve a model advection-

diffusion problem. The model employs a multistage Runge-Kutta strategy for

temporal evolution with multigrid sequencing. The particular algorithmic re-

search feature is a strategy for the pointwise optimization of the Runge-
Kutta coefficients to achieve particular damping characteristics as a tool for

convergence acceleration.1For more information on the actual software
product,2contact the authors.1. W.L. Kleb, W.A. Wood, and B. van Leer, 
Efficient Multi-Stage Time Marching for Viscous
Flows via Local Preconditioning, Paper 99Ð3267, Am. Inst. Aeronautics and Astronautics,1999. 2.W.A. Wood and W.L. Kleb, ÒRunge-Kutta Circular Advection Problem Solver,Ó 
NASA Tech
Briefs, vol. 26, no. 12, 2002, p. 38.Our Software Product a fruitful direction is often measured in years.
XP prefers steering inputs on a days-to-weeks

time frame. We didnÕt know if we could recast

long-term research goals into small, tangibleincrements suitable to XPÕs two-to-three-week
iteration cycles. Fortunately, in practice, al-

though the research feedback timescale re-
mains large, we successfully decomposed the

technical features into small iteration chunks
by following XPÕs simple design practice.
Finally, Beck cautions against Òsenior peo-
ple with corner officesÓ because of the barriers
to communication. At research centers, senior

engineers typically have individual offices or
cubicles, and colleagues are spread over multi-
ple buildings at the local campus. Projects can
also involve collaboration with an off-site
coworker, such as a university professor. For

our experiment, we refactored our office cubi-
cal layout into a commons and alcoves5devel-opment room (see Figure 1), with copious

marker board space and a pair programming
station.The pair programming station had si-

multaneous dual keyboard and mouse inputs
connected to a 16-processor Beowulf cluster
(see Figure 2).Implementing XP practicesWe made a serious effort to apply the 12 XP
practices by the book (see Table 1 for a sum-

mary of our experience). Due to the six cultural

conflicts just listed, eight of the 12 XP practices
presented implementation challenges.On-site customerThe biggest challenge was the on-site cus-
tomer. XP places a premium on the cus-

tomerÐdeveloper relationship, requiring an on-

site customer. Both the customer and developer

have clearly defined roles with distinct respon-
sibilities, interacting on a daily basis. The cus-

tomer focuses the developer on the business
value, while the developer educates the cus-
tomer on the feasibility and cost of feature re-
quests. In the context of long-term research, the
technologies being explored might be immature
or uncertain, years removed from commercial
potential. In this situation, the funder is too far

removed from the research to serve as a suitable
customer. So, the researcher is essentially the

ÒcustomerÓ for his or her own development ef-

fortÑat least for several years. What happens
to the balance of power between customer and

developer when they are the same person? This was a significant concern for us, be-cause we were primarily writing software for

our own use. With two team members, we de-

cided that, during the planning game, the indi-32IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
Figure 1. (a) The original 15«17«office layout: large, isolated
work spaces with desks separated by towering bookcases and
joined by a narrow aisle. (b) The refactored layout: small, 

isolated work spaces with tables and a large common area

consisting of a Beowulf cluster, a pair programming station, a

conference table, and whiteboards. We can move the partition

at the upper right to further isolate a private work area, and

all three areas can now accommodate pair programming.(a)(b)Figure 2. The pair programming station has two task chairs, a 60-inch-wide Anthro AdjustaCart, wireless keyboards and

mice, and two LCD displays supporting a merged 2560 
1024-pixel desktop. You can see the sustenance itemsÑrefrigerator,

microwave, fresh-air supply, and plantsÑon the right.
 vidual with the most to gain from using the
software would serve as the customer while
the other individual would serve as the devel-
oper. During coding, we both served as devel-

opers until questions arose, at which point one
of us answered the question in the customer

role. Switching roles proved challenging for
the individual performing dual jobs.During the planning game, thinking of sto-ries was difficult without simultaneously esti-

mating their cost. Communication was essen-
tial, and we had to make a conscious effort to
think in a goal-oriented way. Furthermore, the

customer had to remain focused on end results
rather than think of the developerÕs work.

However, forcing a user-oriented viewpoint

helped focus the research effort, and although

difficult and uncomfortable, the explicit role

of customer during the planning game im-
proved the research projectÕs value. Even out-

side the context of XP, we recommend a plan-

ning game with a customer role for other

research projects as an effective focusing tool.Simple designAnother potential showstopper was the re-quirement for simple designs. Performance is
always an issue for numerical analysis, and
past experience with procedurally imple-
mented and speed-optimized algorithms has
verified the exponentially increasing cost of
changing the fundamental design of elaboratecodes. The lure of premature optimization for
the developer is strong, particularly in the ab-
sence of a business-value-oriented customer.
We accepted this practice with skepticism,
because poorly conceived numerical analysis al-
gorithms can be prohibitively time-consuming
to run. Our approach was to include perform-

ance measures in the acceptance tests to flag
excessive execution times and then to forge
ahead with the simplest design until the per-
formance limits were exceeded. Once we en-
countered a performance issue, we used a pro-
filer to target refactorings that would speed the
algorithms enough to pass the performance cri-
teria. The speed bottlenecks were not always
intuitive, and it became evident that premature
optimization would have wasted effort on ar-

eas that were not the choke points while still
missing the eventual culprits.7Pair programmingPair programming also appeared to be a
poor fit at firstÑit seemed a small team would

suffer from not being able to rotate pairs.

However, we actually achieved productivity

gains through pairing. The pair pressure effect
led to intense sessions that discouraged cutting
corners, and the constant code review pro-

duced cleaner, more readable code that was

much easier to modify and extend. Also, even
though we each had over 20 years worth of
programming experience, there was still some
May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
33Table 1 Our experience with XP practicesXP practiceDegree of adoptionComments
Planning gameFullWe followed it by the book.
1Small releasesFullTwo-week iterations worked well for a project of this scope. 
MetaphorFullWe used a naive metaphor because both players spoke the same jargon. 
Simple designFullWe accepted this with skepticism, but it made future optimization easier than expected. 
Test-driven developmentFullComprehensive test coverage is the key to agility. 
RefactoringFullThis was integral to test-driven development; we followed 
Refactoring: Improving theDesign of Existing Code,6often verbatim. Pair programmingFullWe added new functionality only when working in pairs, improving source code readability. 
Collective ownershipFullWe used CVS code control with no access restrictions. 
Continuous integrationFullWe implemented four levels of automated tests with feedback ranging from seconds to hours. 
Sustainable pacePartialConcurrent duties and nonoverlapping schedules made the pace difficult to sustain. 
On-site customerPartialOur most difficult practice was very beneficial when implemented diligently. It can lead to loss of 
focusif not followed. 
Coding standardsFullCode had to be mutually understandable to both members of the pair. Clarity, over
consistency, was the guideline.
 cross-fertilization of tricks and tips that accel-
erated individual coding rates. Collective ownershipThe collective code ownership practice con-flicted with our established practices in the

field and conflicted with the promotion crite-

ria. We didnÕt experience any problems, but

we donÕt yet know the long-term impact of not

having sole code ownership with regard to
promotion potential. However, we anticipate

that the more prolific research output enabled
by XP will more than compensate for the loss

of single code ownership in terms of profes-
sional prestige. Sustainable paceXPÕs 40-hour week was problematic, though
perhaps for an inverse reason as encountered in
programming shops. We had only about 10

hours per week mutually available for joint
programming, with the rest of the time ab-

sorbed by responsibilities for other tasks or un-

available owing to conflicting schedules. We

thus negotiated pair programming time during
daily stand-up meetings, and we always added
new functionality during joint sessions in a test-

driven format. With the pair-created tests serv-

ing as a safety net, we allowed solo refactoring
to increase the rate of progress. Also, we occa-
sionally conducted disposable spikes and frame-
work support on our own. Test-driven development
Testing, perhaps ironically for a scientific re-
search community, was not commonly done at

the unit level prior to this project, and it also

wasnÕt clear what would be the appropriate

granularity for tests. However, we implemented

four levels of fully automated testing. We wrote

unit tests using an xUnit framework for each
class. We ran the collection of all unit tests
along with an instantiation of the algorithms
devoid of the user interface as the integration

test, running in a matter of seconds. Smoke
tests, running in under a minute, exercised
complete paths through the software, including

the user interface. Full stress tests, which took
hours, included acceptance tests, performance
monitoring, distributed processing, and numer-

ical proofs of the algorithms for properties such

as positivity and order of accuracy. We could

initiate all levels of testing at any time and au-

tomatically executed all forms nightly.
MetaphorWe conducted a search for a system
metaphor and eventually selected the naive
metaphor, as no other analogy seemed suit-

able. The naive metaphor worked well, since
both the customer and developer (often the
same person) spoke the same jargon.Continuous integrationContinuous integration conflicted with thetraditional approach of implementing algo-
rithms in large chunks. We addressed this by

assembling a dedicated integration machine
and by crafting scripts to automate develop-
ment and testing tasks. The planning game
and simple design helped pare implementa-
tions down to small chunks suitable for fre-
quent integration.ResultsThe pilot project consisted of two release
cycles, each subdivided into three two-week it-
erations, for a total project length of 12

weeks. Table 2 lists the estimated and actual

pair time spent working on stories and tasks
for each iteration. The times reported do not

include time spent on the planning game (usu-
ally two hours at the start of each iteration).
The overall average velocity for the project
was approximately one, and the average time
per week spent on development was approxi-
mately eight hours.The measured velocities show variations inthe work pace from twice as fast as expected

to half speed. For the first iteration, the actual
time to code the selected features took about
as long as we expected. For the next two iter-

ations, our proficiency improved such that we
completed tasks in about half the time ex-

pected. By iteration 2.1 (first iteration of sec-

ond release cycle), we incorporated the im-
34IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
Table 2Work effort for two-week iterations over 
two release cyclesIterationTotal
1.11.21.32.12.22.3
Estimated hours19141581729102
Actual hours22888301894
Velocity12210.51.51
 proved work rate into our predictions of task
times, halving the times that would have been
predicted for the first cycle, so that although

the ÒvelocityÓ dropped to one, the actual work
pace was remaining constant.During iteration 2.2, the velocity droppeddramatically to one-half. We had become

overly confident and sloppy. The tasks were

not well defined during the planning game and
the task times were not well estimated. The
process of breaking requirements down into
specific tasks during the planning game is a
key part of system designing in XP, and we

struggledwith the poor design. Although we

could sense during the iteration that the rate
of progress had slowed, the velocity measure-
ment clearly made the productivity drop visi-
ble, and the short iteration cycle kept the

problem from dragging on. We took the plan-

ning game more seriously for the final itera-
tion and productivity improved.We produced 2,545 lines of Ruby code for
an average of 27 lines per hour (productivity of
a pair, not an individual). A breakdown of the

types of code written shows that the average

pair output was the implementation of one

method with an associated test containing six

asserts every 45 minutes. This productivity in-

cludes design and is for fully integrated, refac-

tored, tested, and debugged code. Our prior
performance on similarly scoped projects not
developed using XP has shown an average pro-
ductivity of 12 lines per hour, or 24 lines per

hour for two workers. However, this historical

productivity is for designed and integrated, but

not tested, code. Furthermore, a subjective

opinion of code clarity shows a strong prefer-
ence toward the pair-developed code.
Of the total software written, 912 lineswere for production code, 1,135 lines were for

test code, and 498 lines were for testing scripts
and development utilities. The production
code contains 120 method definitions, exclu-
sive of attribute accessor methods. The auto-
mated test code, both unit and acceptance,
contain 128 specific tests implementing 580 as-
sertions. A prior, non-XP project we performed

implementing comparable functionality re-
quired 2,144 lines of code, approximately
twice as large as the current production code.
We attribute the reduction in lines of code per

functionality to merciless refactoring, the con-
cisely expressive nature of the dynamically
typed Ruby language, and the continuous codereview inherent in pair programming. Table 3
summarizes our productivity results.Our results indicate that the XP approachto software development is approximately
twice as productive as similar historical proj-
ects weÕve undertaken. This study imple-
mented functionality at the historical rate but
also supplied an equal amount of supporting
tests, which are critical to the research effortÕs

scientific validity and were not included in the
historical productivity rates. Furthermore, the

functional code base is about half as many
lines of code as expected, and the codeÕs read-

ability was much improved. Continual refac-
toring, emergent design, and constant code re-
view, as provided by XP, are largely responsible

for the improved code aesthetics.Our pilot projectÕs evaluation endorses

using XP for mission-critical software

development at NASAÕs Langley Re-
search Center. Currently, XP practices are be-

ing adopted by the High-Energy Flow Solver
Synthesis project, which has been in progress
for three years and employs 10 to 15 people
(see http://hefss.larc.nasa.gov). The HEFSS

legacy code contains over 500,000 lines of
Fortran90, a procedural language that is more
challenging to apply agile development meth-
ods to than is an object-oriented language
such as Ruby. Full XP techniques are being

used with Ruby for a variety of maintenance,
support, and testing tasks: Fortran templating,
automated generation of complex arithmetic
code versions, generalized Fortran unit testing
framework development, continuous regres-
sion suite automation, and release, installa-
tion, and configuration scripting. May/June 2003IEEE SOFTWARE
35Table 3Productivity measuresTotalPer pair-hour
aProduction code Lines91210
Functions1201.3
Test codeLines113512
Tests1281.4
Assertions5806
Utility scriptsLines4985
aTotal pair output per hour is the sum of this column, and includes design, keyboarding, and debugging time.
 36IEEE SOFTWARE
http://computer.org/software
Although the HEFSS teamÕs transition to
the XP development model is not fully com-

plete, response from the participants has been

favorable. Adhering to XP practices enhanced
the development pace, bug trapping, and
maintenance tasks. The prior software devel-
opment process was not well defined and did

not track progress metrics, precluding a quan-
tifiable statement about the benefits of XP

adoption for HEFSS.References1. D. Thomas and A. Hunt, 
Programming Ruby: ThePragmatic ProgrammerÕs Guide
, Addison-Wesley, 2001.
2. Y. Matsumoto, 
Ruby in a Nutshell: A Desktop QuickReference, OÕReilly & Associates, 2002.3. K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange, Addison-Wesley, 2000.
4. Workforce Compensation and Performance Service: Re-
search Grade Evaluation Guide, Transmittal Sheet TS-
23, Office of Personnel Management, Washington,

D.C., 1976; www.opm.gov/fedclass/gsresch.pdf.
5. C. Alexander, S. Ishikawa, and M. Silverstein, 
A PatternLanguage: Towns, Buildings, Construction
, Center forEnvironmental Structure, Oxford Univ. Press, 1977.
6.  M. Fowler, 
Refactoring: Improving the Design of Exist-ing Code, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
7.E.M. Goldratt and J. Cox, 
The Goal: A Process of On-going Improvement, 2nd ed., North River Press, 1992.For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit ourDigital Library at http://computer.org/publications/dlib.
About the AuthorsWilliam A. Wood
is a researcher in the Aerothermodynamics Branch of the NASA Lang-ley Research Center. His research interests include reentry aerothermodynamics. He received

his PhD in aerospace engineering from Virginia Tech. He is a member of the American Inst. of

Aeronautics and Astronautics.Contact him at william.a.wood@nasa.gov. 
William L. Kleb
is a researcherin the Aerothermodynamics Branch of the NASA Lang-
ley Research Center. His research interests include reentry aerothermodynamics. He is also a

PhD candidate in aerospace engineering at the University of Michigan. He is a member of the
American Inst. of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Contact him at william.l.kleb@nasa.gov.
http://computer.org/security
IEEE Security & Privacy
Ensure that your networks operate safely and provide critical
services even in the face of attacks. Develop lasting security

solutions, with this new peer-reviewed publication. Top security

professionals in the field share information you can rely on:  
DonÕt run the risk!Be secure.Order your charter
subscription today.
¥Wireless Security
¥Securing the Enterprise¥Designing for Security
¥Infrastructure Security
¥Privacy Issues
¥Legal Issues ¥Cybercrime
¥Digital Rights Management ¥Intellectual Property Protection and
Piracy
¥The Security Profession 
¥Educationfor
