 80IEEE SOFTWARE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society0740-7459/04/$20.00 © 2004 IEEEThis article presents a new software develop-ment process based on model-driven develop-

ment (MDD), called 
test-driven modeling. (Thebasis of this article is a project in MotorolaÕs

iDEN division that is extending and migrating a
large legacy telecommunication system to new
platforms using TDM.)This process involves

automatic testing through simulation and using
executable models as living software system ar-
chitecture documents. In TDM, we use the same
message sequence charts (MSCs) for both sys-
tem analysis (or design documents) and unit test
cases. Similarly, we use the same high-level mod-

eling diagrams for both automatic code genera-
tion and living software architecture documents
to guide the systemÕs detailed implementation in
later phases. Thus, we can save a significantamount of time by reusing MSCs and modeling
diagrams compared with traditional plan-driven
methods. We all know that testing is important for
any software development, and itÕs challenging

to figure out how much testing is enough. Cov-
erage analysis in TDM addresses this difficulty.
Test-driven modelingFigure 1 outlines the TDM workflow. TDMÕs
main idea is to apply the XP test-driven para-
digm to an MDD process.4,5We can divide the
TDM process into six phases:System requirements specificationHigh-level modeling (HLM)Low-level modeling (LLM)Modeling-quality controlAutomatic code generationTarget platform testing
This article focuses on TDMÕs modeling as-
pect and thus discusses only the HLM, LLM,
feature
Test-Driven Modeling forModel-Driven DevelopmentExtreme Programming is a code-centric, lightweight software devel-opment process.
1Ð3One of XPÕs main goals is achieving agilityÑthat
is, delivering working products to customers and quickly adapting to
changes. XPÕs strategy is to minimize software development effort
(by doing Òthe simplest thing that could possibly workÓ1) and documentation.Testing plays a key role in this because XP developers write test cases before

code and the code is only complete once it has successfully passed its test cases.3model-driven developmentA new software development process called test-driven modeling
applies the Extreme Programming test-driven paradigm in a model-
driven development environment. Practical results show that
developers can effectively apply TDM to large projects with high
productivity and quality in terms of the number of code defects.Yuefeng Zhang, 
Motorola modeling-quality control, and code generation
phases. For convenience, the modeling dia-

grams I use in this section are based on the

Specification and Description Language (SDL)
modeling language6(ITU-T Z 100, www.itu.
int/rec/recommendation.asp?type=products&la
ng=e&parent=T-REC-Z) and the commercial

modeling tool Telelogic TAUSDL Suite (www.

telelogic.com/products/tau/sdl). The Object

Management Group (OMG; www.omg.org)

adoptedSDLÕs main modeling features in UML

2.0 (www.omg.org/uml), which is supported by

the next-generation modeling tool Telelogic

TAU G2/Developer. Thus, we should be able to

use TDM with TAU G2 with minimum change.

To avoid disclosing MotorolaÕs proprietary in-

formation, I used the SDL diagrams for a demo
model in this article. Normally, MSCs are part

of a model.4,5However, for the convenience of
discussion, I treat MSCs as separate entities in

the rest of this article.High-level modelingHLM starts with system requirements.HLMÕs two main goals include identifying
The systemÕs use case scenarios (that 

is, MSCs) from the system requirements

specificationThe software system architecture that can re-
alize the identified use case scenarios (that is,
MSCs)MSCs represent the systemÕs dynamic behav-
ior, and the software system architecture rep-

resents the systemÕs static behavior.
A system MSC (see Figure 2) in HLM treats
the system as a black boxÑthat is, it only indi-

cates message exchanges between the system and

the system environment (UML actors). The soft-

ware system architecture only indicates which

subsystems are used in the system (see Figure 3),

how they are connected to each other to form a

system, and which active and passive classes and
objects are used and how they are connected

within a subsystem (see Figure 4). An active/pas-

sive object is an instance of an active/passive

class. HLM doesnÕt define an active or passive

objectÕs behavior. This definition is one of the

major tasks in LLM. However, we can define a

dummy state-transition chart for each active ob-

ject in HLM for architecture-verification pur-
poses. These dummy state-transition charts just

need to be good enough to reproduce the identi-
fied MSCs. At this point, the MSCs focus on sig-nals and ignore the data associated with signals.

We replace the dummy state-transition charts

with real state-transition charts in LLM. After
that, we can refine the system MSCs with signal

data and finish the system unit testing by execut-
ing the refined system MSCs. 
HLM is test driven because we create the sys-tem MSCs first and then define the software sys-
tem architecture against them. The MSCs are

automatically executed by simulation to verify
whether the software system architecture meets

system requirements (MSCs). Finally, we refine

and execute the MSCs for system unit testing. September/October 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
81Modeling-qualitycontrolAuto codenononoyesyesPassing?Execute system MSCs by simulationCreate systemmessage sequence charts (MSCs)System requirementsTarget platform testing
Identify software system architecturePassing?Next iteration?Execute subsystemMSCs by simulationCreate subsystem MSCsMeet coverage criteria?Perform coverage analysisAutomatic code generationLow-level design:state transition chartsLow-level modelingHigh-level modelingnoyesyesFigure 1. Test-drivenmodeling (TDM) 
workflow.
 Low-level modelingLLMÕs main goal is to define the subsys-
temsÕ dynamic and static behavior. Similar to

the system definition, subsystem MSCs define

the subsystemÕs dynamic behavior. Addition-
ally, a subsystemÕs static behavior is defined by
the static behavior of the sub-subsystems,
and/or possibly by the static behavior of the
active or passive objects within the subsystem.
An active object has its own thread of execu-

tion, and it calls passive objects for services. A
state-transition chart in SDL defines an active

objectÕs static behavior. For example, Figure 5

shows the state-transition chart of the active

object ssm from the demo model in Figure 3.
Similar to a system MSC, a subsystem MSCin LLM treats the subsystem as a black boxÑ

that is, it only indicates message exchanges be-
tween the subsystem and its environment. Sub-
system MSCs are derived from system MSCs

through MSC decomposition. A decomposed
MSC shows the systemÕs internal behaviorÑ

that is, message exchange between subsystems
and active objects. The system and subsystem
MSCs are suitable for system and subsystem
unit (black box) testing, while the decomposed
MSCs are useful for system integration testing. The amount of work for LLM can be huge,depending on a projectÕs size. Thus, typically

we subdivide LLM into multiple iterations.

Each iteration implements a subset of subsys-
tem MSCs. In this manner, like XP and other

model-driven processes,4,5TDM is incremen-tal and iterative because the system function-
ality is developed in multiple iterations. Each
iteration adds more system features on top of
previous iterations incrementally.
LLM is test driven in that we create sub-
system MSCs first and then define the detailed
design (state-transition charts) of subsystems

against subsystem MSCs. Finally, we enhance

the subsystem MSCs with signal data and then
automatically execute them by simulation to

verify whether the subsystemsÕ design meets
subsystem requirements (that is, MSCs).
Modeling-quality controlAs I described earlier, MSCs are used as test
cases in TDM. An MSC can refer to other MSCs

(see Figure 2for an example) and thus we can

build an MSC hierarchy. So, a test case can in-

clude other test cases. A set of related MSCs can

be organized and executed by the modeling tool

together as a test suite; such a suite is called a

module in Telelogic TAU SDL Suite. Like tradi-

tional test cases, multiple suites of MSCs are al-

lowed and can be executed by the Telelogic TAU

SDL Suitetogether in a batch mode. Once an

MSC execution is completed, a summary report
82IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Figure 2. The system MSC call_establishment for a demo SDL model.The rounded rectangle represents an MSC reference, indicating that the
MSC call_establishmentrefers to the MSC define_macros for reuse. Bsc

is the subsystem, and ssm and jr are active classes. Env_0 represents
the subsystem bscÕs environment.Figure 3. A demo SDL model in Telelogic TAU SDL Suite, indicating 
an application system Proto that contains subsystem bsc, which 
contains two active classes, ssm and jr. The model includes two 

data type and SDL signal definition files, maps.pr and BSC.sdl.env_0bscdefine_macrosCallReq($CALL_REQ_DATA)ResReqResReqAck($RES_REQ_DATA)($RES_REQ_DATA)CallReqAckCallEst($CALL_REQ_ACK_DATA)($CALL_EST_DATA)CallEstAck($CALL_EST_ACK_DATA)to ssmto ssmto ssmfrom jrfrom jrfrom jr will be automatically generated by the modelingtoolto indicate which MSCs passed or failed the

testing. If an MSC execution fails, then the mod-
eling toolwill automatically generate and display

an MSC graphically to indicate the exact failure

point.The challenge with testing is to determinehow much is enough. For manual coding, the an-

swer to this question is typically fuzzy. However,

in TDM, the answer is intuitiveÑthat is, we

hope to achieve a high coverage percentage (ide-

ally 100 percent). We obtain the answer by look-

ing at graphical coverage trees that the modeling

tool automatically generates.A coverage tree

shows which design elements and state transi-
tions have been covered by the executed MSCs

(see Figure 6 as an example). By looking at the

uncovered design elements and state transitions
in the coverage trees, we can easily identify addi-
tional MSCs (typically exception-handling use

case scenarios) to cover them. These additional
MSCs are normally directly executed without
model changes (see the LLM phase in Figure 1).

In this manner, we can effectively increase the

coverage percentage. One project goal is to agree

on a coverage percentage amount that, when
reached, indicates we have completed testing.
A coverage tree for a reasonably large SDLmodel tends to be too big for easy analysis. Inthis case, I recommend showing only the SDL

symbols that MSC execution doesnÕt cover, as

Figure 6 shows.The model quality is test driven in that the
coverage tree is generated by executing MSCs
and itÕs in turn used to identify more MSCs to

be executed. 
September/October 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
83process ssmCallSetup(7)idleŒCallReq(itcHeader,
CallReqData)truetrueelsefalseSccpNum :=CallReqData!sccp_id!data;in_map(SccpMap, SccpNum)ŒŒNullfalseCallTerminatedData!sccp_id!data :=
SccpNum;jrCallReq(itcHeader,
CallReqData)
to offspring via ssm_jradd(SccpMap,SccpNum,offspring)offspringCallTerminated(itcHeader,

CallTerminatedData)

via stimFigure 5. Part of the
state-transition chart for

the active object ssm in
the demo model.block bscmain(1)vpubscvpureqvpubsc[(jrtovpu)]vpuackstimbsc[(ssmtostim)][jrtostim][(jr_to_ssim)][(ssm_to_jr)]ssm_jr[(stimtossm)][(vputossm)]stimbscack
stimjr(0,10000)ssm(1,1)Figure 4. The architecture of the subsystem bsc, indicating that twoactive classes ssm and jr are used within bsc. The dashed arrow 

represents that an active object ssm creates the instances of the 
active class jr.
 84IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
Automatic code generation
Like other MDD processes,5TDM is model-
centric in that a modeling tool automatically

generates the code from a design model.
Typically, we install and use a modeling
tool to generate code on a generic machine
(Solaris in this case), but the target machine is

a different platform. In this case, the automat-
ically generated code for simulation will differ
from the automatically generated code for the
target platform. In addition, we canÕt do per-
formance testing through simulation. Thus,
target platform testing is necessary even
though the simulation results indicate that the

design is correct in terms of meeting system

and subsystem requirementsÑthat is, passing
MSC execution. Automatic testing tools such
as the Telelogic TAU TTCN Suiteare available

for target platform test automation. By using

TTCN tools and a related MSC-to-TTCN test
case translation tool, the same set of MSCs
used in the system and subsystem testing with
simulation can be modified and then trans-
formed into TTCN test cases for the system

and subsystem testing on the target platform.
Automatically generated code is test drivenbecause itÕs subject to testing on the target plat-

form, and the issues (such as auto code defects
and performance issues) revealed during target
platform testing will trigger code regeneration
after the issues have been resolved by tracing
them back to either design (modeling) or code-
generator issues (defects or enhancements).Comparing TDM and a test-driven processAs I mentioned earlier, TDM aims to use the
test-driven idea underlying a typical test-driven
software development process such as XP to en-
hance a typical model-driven software develop-
ment process for agility and quality. Thus, we

can compare many TDM process activities, arti-
facts, or characteristics with those of another
test-driven process (see Table 1). 
Table 1Comparing test-driven modeling with a test-driven process (such as Extreme Programming)CorrespondenceTDMTest-driven process 
Corresponding processImplementation ModelingCoding
activitiesTestingSimulationTest-case execution against real application code
Corresponding processTest caseMSCTest-case implementation (for example, a set of test
artifactsdriver objects calling a set of application object methods)Test suiteA set of MSCsA set of test-case implementations
Corresponding process Test drivenCreate MSCs firstCreate test cases first
characteristicsTest automationAutomatic MSC execution using a Automatic test-case execution using a tool (such as
tool (such as Telelogic TAU)JUnit for Java)
Regression testingExecute all the MSCs for the current Execute all the test-case implementations for the current
and previous iterationsand previous iterations
IterativeMultiple development iterationsMultiple development iterations

IncrementalEach iteration implements more system Each iteration implements more system functionality on
functionality on top of previous iterationstop of previous iterationsFigure 6. Part of an SDL symbol coverage tree for the subsystem bsc
in the demo model. Leaf nodes represent SDL symbols, and different

shapes represent different SDL symbols. White leaf nodes indicate the

SDL symbols not covered, while grayed leaf nodes (not shown in this
figure) indicate the SDL symbols covered. The number associated
with a leaf node represents the number of times the corresponding

SDL symbol was executed during MSC execution (zero indicates the
symbol was never executed). Practical experiencesHere we discuss our experiences in model-
ing-tools selection and our implementation of
a project using TDM with the selected model-

ing tool. Tools selection
A key factor in adopting TDM with successis the modeling toolÕs capability. Many com-

mercial modeling tools are available, but not
all of them will let us effectively implement

TDM. The following were themajor criteria

in tools selection for the project:
Full code generation. In TDM, modeling
is codingÑthat is, developers only work
with models (such as SDL or UML dia-
grams) and code will be automatically
generated from models. This requires that
the modeling tool be able to generate fully
executable code rather than a skeleton of
code as certain modeling tools do.MSC verification. To be test driven in
TDM, MSCs must be used as test cases.
This requires that the modeling tool we

use can execute MSCsÑthat is, given an
MSC, the tool can automatically verify
whether or not the model (design) can re-

produce the MSC. Certain modeling tools

only support MSC tracingÑthat is, gener-
ating an MSC based on an interactive sim-
ulationÕs execution. Then, visual compari-

son is necessary to verify whether the

generated MSC meets requirements. These
tools canÕt implement TDM effectively.
Test automation.
TDM requires regres-
sion unit testingÑthat is, in each iteration,
not only the MSCs assigned to that itera-

tion but also all the MSCs implemented in

previous iterations must be executed. Thus,

there can be numerous MSCs. This requires

that the modeling tool we use can execute a

set of MSCs without human intervention.
Standards compliance.To avoid being
locked into a particular tool vendor, the

modeling tool must support internation-
ally standardized modeling languages
(such as SDL and UML). In addition, the
tool vendor must support the latest model-
ing language, UML 2.0, in the near future.CPU performance.Our project has spe-cific CPU performance requirements from
customers. The code that the modeling

tool generates must meet these require-
ments. MotorolaÕs historical data indi-
cates that tool vendors tend to fail to en-

hance their modeling tools in time if a

CPU performance problem occurs with

the code that their tools generated. In

some cases, tool vendors canÕt enhance

their modeling tools to meet our CPU per-

formance needs. We avoid this difficulty

by using a Motorola proprietary auto-
matic code generator. To this end, the

modeling tool we use must be able to in-

terface with the Motorola code generation

tool so we can replace the modeling toolÕs

built-in code generator with the Motorola
code generator when necessary.
Based on these criteria, we found that Tele-
logic TAU SDL Suite was the only tool that

met all the requirements.We observed one limitation with Telelogic
TAU SDL Suite. Currently, the simulator gener-

ated from an SDL model by Telelogic TAU SDL

Suite doesnÕt let the data value associated with

a signal or message in an MSC change without
breaking the MSC execution. Hence, MSCs are
sensitive to model changes (especially the
changes to data types) because the execution of

some MSCs can fail due to those changes. It can

be time consuming to fix all broken MSCs if the

number is large. We can resolve or alleviate this

problem by defining macros in MSCs to cen-

tralize the modification of data values. 
ResultsTDM was applied in the project to develop
the core components of a large telecommuni-
cation system in Motorola using SDL and
Telelogic TAU SDL Suite. The system consists

of nine subsystems that are deployed as sepa-
rate operating system processes. Six of these
subsystems are automatically generated, and
the other three (including user interfaces)
arenÕt suitable for SDL modeling. More than

60 people work on this project, divided into
groups. Some external groups are in different

geographical locations. A big group is subdi-
vided into multiple teams, and each team con-

sists of two to 10 developers. Different teams

are responsible for developing different sub-
systems. The memb
ers in a typical team sit
close to each other and often work together.

Weekly face-to-face group meetings foster com-

munication among teams within a group as do

weekly conference call meetings among groups.September/October 2004IEEE SOFTWARE
85Telelogic TAU
SDL Suite wasthe only toolthat met all therequirements. 86IEEE SOFTWARE
www.computer.org/software
About the AuthorA modeling and code-generation coordinatorhelps coordinate modeling and code-genera-
tion activities across teams and groups.Practical experiences demonstrateTDM can improve productivity signifi-

cantly compared with a traditional plan-

driven development process by automatic

code generation. For instance, some metrics

data from MotorolaÕs iDEN division indi-

cated that this project achieved approxi-

mately five times productivity improve-
ment in terms of KAELOC/Staff Month.
TDM can improve quality level signifi-
cantly by comprehensive simulation and
coverage analysis. For example, some met-
rics data from MotorolaÕs iDEN division

indicated that this project achievedap-

proximately 20 percent better phase con-

tainment in terms of the number of defects

that escaped from the modeling phase into

the target platform testing phase. For

some projects in MotorolaÕs iDEN divi-

sion, we achievedfrom two to three times

better phase containment up to zero de-

fects in target platform testing.
Telelogic TAU SDL Suite supports simula-
tion (MSC execution) at different levels (sys-

tem, subsystem, and active object). This lets

TDM apply the test-driven mechanism at both
the system and subsystem level. Telelogic TAU SDL Suite supports symbol
and state-transition coverage trees. The symbol
(that is, modeling element) coverage tree is
similar to the traditional code path coverage,
but the state-transition coverage tree is unique
for MDD. A state-transition coverage tree
shows which combinations of states and sig-
nals are covered. With this project, we can typ-

ically achieve close to 100 percent symbol cov-
erage by performing coverage analysis if we
donÕt use  third-party components (such as

SDL abstract data types). However, the achiev-

able state-transition coverage percentage level
can be low in certain circumstances. For exam-
ple, SDL lets asterisk states and input signals
indicate any states and signals. An asterisk

state immediately followed by an asterisk inputsignal in SDL means that any state can handleany input signals in a state-transition chart.
This can make the state-transition coverage
percentage extremely low for a reasonably
large model with many states and signals. We

can resolve this problem by temporarily re-
placing an asterisk state or signal with a con-
crete representative state or signal during cov-
erage analysis.
In theory, we can use TDM to develop proj-
ects of any size. However, like other MDD

processes,4,5from a return-on-investment per-
spective, the major benefit of adopting TDM

normally comes from reusing the process to

develop multiple releases of an application

system or related systems and subsystems. It
might not make economic sense to adopt the

process for a one-time small project due to
process start-up overheads (such as a model-
ing tool license fee and learning curve).The practical experiences of the project
show that the Telelogic TAU SDL

Suite meets our needs in implement-ing TDM. The TDM process and the modeling
tool Telelogic TAU SDL Suite helped us suc-

cessfully start the development of the first re-
lease of our product. Two new product releases

are already underway using the same develop-
ment process and modeling tool. To maintain

the current product releases and to develop
new releases, we expect to use the same process
and tool in the foreseeable future. A similar
process has also been successfully used in other
organizations within Motorola.AcknowledgmentsI thank Associate Editor-in-Chief Stan Rifkin for
his recommendation, careful review, and proofread-

ing. I also thank the reviewers for their constructive
comments and Motorola managers for approving this
articleÕs publication.
References1.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained, Addison-Wesley, 2000.
2.G. Succi and M. Marchesi, 
Extreme Programming Ex-amined, Addison-Wesley, 2001.
3.K. Auer and R. Miller, 
Extreme Programming Applied,Addison-Wesley, 2002.
4.I. Jacobson, J. Rumbaugh, and G. Booth, 
The UnifiedSoftware Development Process, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
5.B. Douglass, 
Real-Time Design Patterns
, Addison-Wes-
ley, 2003.
6.J. Ellsberger, D. Hogrefe, and A. Sarma, 
SDLÑFormalObject-Oriented Language for Communicating
Systems, Pearson Education, 1997.Yuefeng Zhang
is a distinguished member of the technical staff at Motorola. His re-search interests include model-driven development, agile software development process, and
modeling tools and their applications to automatic code generation. He received his PhD in
computer science from the University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada. Contact

him at iDEN BSC, iSD/GTSS/Motorola, Arlington Heights, IL; yzhang1@email.mot.com.