 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)RMIT UniversityRMIT UniversityRMIT UniversityRMIT UniversityPACIS 2014 Proceedings. AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF LEAN AND AGILE INFLUENCES 
IN SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT 
Usman Durrani, School of BITL, RMIT University, Mel
bourne, Australia, 
usman.durrani@rmit.edu.au 
Zijad Pita, School of BITL, RMIT University, Melbou
rne, Australia, zijad.pita@rmit.edu.au 
Joan Richardson, School of BITL, RMIT University, M
elbourne, Australia, 
joan.richardson@rmit.edu.au 
John Lenarcic, School of BITL, RMIT University, Mel
bourne, Australia, 
joan.lenarcic@rmit.edu.au 
Abstract 
Based on a web based survey of 158 IT software deve
lopment practitioners, mostly from different 
organizations, this paper examines the application 
of Software Configuration Management (SCM) 
process in adaptable software development environme
nts. From the literature review six independent 
variables and five dependent variables were derived
 to answer the research question ﬁhow does 
organization size impact on the usage of SCM proces
s in adaptable software development 
environments?ﬂ The six hypotheses confirmed that or
ganization size does not impact on the usage of 
SCM process in adaptable software development envir
onments. Also, all sizes of organizations 
consider SCM process valuable and have similar soft
ware traceability approaches with different 
process formalities and tools sophistications. This
 study helps SCM practitioners to build a better 
understanding of the relationships between adaptabl
e software development environment, lean 
principles and practices, and the tools and technol
ogies established to facilitate the coexistence of 
Agile and SCM practices. 

Keywords: Adaptable Software Development Environmen
t, Agile Software Development, Lean 
Thinking, Software Configuration Management, SCM, T
raceability. 
 1 INTRODUCTION 
Rapid advancement in software and hardware technolo
gy took information systems (IS) to a new era, 
where people were constrained to find ways to manag
e and control their software development 
processes. Consequently, a new discipline was evolv
ed, the Software Configuration Management 
(SCM), the concept that apply to all items to be co
ntrolled and traceable, although there are some 
differences in implementation between hardware Conf
iguration Management and software 
Configuration Management (Abran & Moore, 2001). The
 SCM process is considered as a discipline 
for controlling the evolution of complex systems by
 developing and using standards and procedures 
for managing an evolving software systems (Sommervi
lle, 2007).  
According to Leon (2005), SCM traceability approach
 should be implemented in all software 
projects Œ irrespective of size of the project and 
organization. The current approaches for traceabili
ty 
mainly rely on complete requirement specification a
rtefacts. This is considered as a fundamental 
problem for the management of information in the ag
ile environments. Hence, there is a need for new 
and specific approaches for traceability in agile s
oftware development methodologies, that may 
provide better integration among the various enviro
nments and tools to share traceability information 
(Aizenbud-Reshef, Nolan, Rubin, & Shaham-Gafni, 200
6). 
Studies have been performed to develop detailed tra
ceability methodologies to address the question 
ﬁhow to improveﬂ or more specifically ﬁhow to run a
 Software Process Improvement projectﬂ 
(McFeeley, 1996; Naveh & Erez, 2004; Shaikh, Ahmed,
 Memon, & Memon, 2009). Unfortunately, 
even these methodologies are still very generic and
 cannot directly answer questions, such as, ﬁhow to
 
implement or improve the SCM processﬂ or more speci
fically ﬁhow to run a Software Process 
Improvement project to implement or improve the SCM
 processﬂ. 
This study focuses on empirical analysis of the SCM
 process in lean and agile software development 
environments in different size of organizations. Th
is is achieved by analysing the relationship betwee
n 
six independent variables: organization size, lean 
thinking principles, agile methods, SCM practices, 
values of SCM process, and grades of software chang
e traceability and five dependent variables: 
adaptable software development environment, softwar
e change traceability solutions, agile methods in 
adaptable software development environment, SCM pra
ctices in adaptable software development 
environment and values of SCM process in adaptable 
software development environment.  
The study was only conducted in the software develo
pment organizations with the coexistence of agile 
methodologies and SCM process. For this study, the 
organization size was defined based on the 
number of employees directly related to the softwar
e development operations to study the complexity 
of software traceability strategies. Other economic
 contexts of organization size, such as market shar
es, 
organization financial worth etc. were left for the
 future study. This study will facilitate SCM 
practitioners by finding relationships between adap
table software development environment, lean 
principles and practices, and the tools and technol
ogies (management systems) established to facilitat
e 
the coexistence of Agile and SCM process and practi
ces. 
The rest of paper proceeds as follows. The next sec
tion is the literature overview, followed by analys
is 
of data based on a web based survey of 158 software
 development companies. Then the results of 
research hypotheses are presented. Finally, a summa
ry of the survey results, limitation and the 
possibilities for further research is presented. 
2 LITERATURE REVIEW 
2.1
 Software Configuration Management (SCM) Process and
 Framework 
SCM is a software engineering process that makes so
ftware development traceable. SCM is central 
and essential services to all the major processes o
f systems and software engineering, such as, projec
t 
 management, requirement management, design, impleme
ntation, integration, verification, 
release/transition, and operation & maintenance. SC
M comprises of seven primary lower-level 
processes and two special instances of applying tho
se lower-level processes. Seven primary lower-
level processes include: planning, management, conf
iguration identification, configuration change 
control, configuration status accounting, configura
tion auditing, and configuration release 
management. Two special instances are interface con
trol and supplier configuration item control 
(IEEE.Std.828, 2012).  

Even though SCM activities can be initiated at any 
stage during a product™s life cycle, it is better t
o 
have the SCM system in place from the beginning (Le
on, 2005). As compared with early SCM 
systems, modern SCM systems provide a wide range of
 high-level functionality, such as, construction, 
structure, auditing, components, team, process, acc
ounting, and controlling (Dart, 1990). 
SCM framework is a layered structure which comprise
s of policy, process and practices to manage the 
life cycle of any software system. The framework, d
efines how to relate the requested system 
requirements to system components, and the methods 
used to identify different versions of the system. 
In other words, for a system to work effectively an
d efficiently, a SCM framework must be defined 
and implemented regardless of the software developm
ent methodology used. 
Most SCM standards have an embedded assumption that
 a waterfall model will be used for system 
development (Bersoff & Davis, 1991). Regardless of 
its nature, the SCM process should be 
implemented by all projects without considering the
ir size, complexity, or the stage (conceptual, 
design, development, testing or maintenance) of the
 project (Leon, 2005). Also, the standards have to 
be adapted to modern software development approache
s, based on incremental specification and 
development. 

2.2
 Lean Thinking Principles, Tools and Practices 
Leanness stands for the fundamental approach capabl
e of minimizing the risks and side-effect in 
reengineering business process to adapt change in a
ny direction (Luo, Zhang, & Ren, 1996). Lean is a 
way of thinking that enables organizations to ﬁspec
ify value, line up value creating actions in the be
st 
sequence, conduct these activities with interruptio
n whenever someone requests them, and perform 
them more and more effectivelyﬂ(Womack & Jones, 199
6). Principles of lean are universal and are 
broadly accepted across many disciplines (Poppendie
ck, 2011). The main purpose of implementing 
lean manufacturing is to increase productivity, red
uce lean time and cost, and improve quality (Wong, 
Wong, & Ali, 2009).  

The five principles that drive this lean thinking p
rocess are: 1) define each product such that it 
precisely meets customer requirements (value), 2) i
dentify the value stream for each product, 3) all 
value to flow through the value stream without dela
ys or barriers, 4) all the customer to pull value 
rather than the manufacturer producing to forecasts
 (pull), 5) and pursue perfection and practice 
continuous improvement (perfection) (Womack & Jones
, 1996).  
2.3
 Software Traceability 
Traceability is ﬁthe ability to describe and follow
 the life of a requirement, in both a forward and 
backward directionﬂ(Gotel & Finkelstein, 1994). At 
the most basic level, traceability is simply the 
opportunity to relate information that is recorded 
between objects, artefacts or management systems of
 
some kind, along with its ability to examine the re
lationships within (Ramesh & Jarke, 2001).  
Studies have investigated the phenomenon of traceab
ility using different terminologies and looking at 
the relations between software documents (Nguyen & 
Munson, 2003), software artefacts 
(Spanoudakis), objects (Ramesh & Jarke, 2001), prod
ucts of the development process 
(IEEE.Std.610.12-1990, 1990), product fragments, pr
oject item (Gills & Borzovs, 2005), sources and 
stakeholders (Ramesh & Jarke, 2001) etc. This resea
rch will look at traceability through SCM process 
 from management systems perspective and their relat
ions within the context of organization and 
project levels.  

The basic idea behind using this perspective is tha
t management systems are the entities that contain 
different types of sources which are then associate
d with various types of objects depending on syntax
 
and semantics (Ramesh & Jarke, 2001). Also, the res
ulting management systems are managed, used, 
and administered by different kinds of stakeholders
. This, as a result, covers traceability in a given
 
context both, from process and product knowledge pe
rspectives (Mohan, Xu, Cao, & Ramesh, 2008). 
This study defines the traceability as: ﬁthe abilit
y of tracing from one management system containing 
particular types of objects and the sources to anot
her based on defined syntax, semantic relations and
 
implementation contextﬂ. 

This study also defines management system as ﬁthe i
mplementation of a certain degree of process, 
practices and work instructions, facilitated by too
ls and technology to deliver specific and valuable 
information about defined sources and objects to th
e target stakeholders for the operational and 
strategic alignment of the businessﬂ.  
3 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The survey was emailed via Qualtrics tool and admin
istered by RMIT University to the population 
Linkedin groups, as well as to the IT professional 
in the researcher™s direct Linkedin network contact
s. 
Total population for the main survey was approximat
ely 1400 respondents. Majority of the 
participants were selected using purposive/judgemen
t sampling through researcher™s direct contacts. 
According to Cooper and Schindler (2003), judgement
 sampling occurs when a researcher selects 
sample members to comply to some criterion. The tot
al number of surveys returned was 158, 
representing 11.28% response rate.  

3.1
 Research Questions 
This study investigates the research question: how 
does organization size impact on the usage of SCM 
process in adaptable software development environme
nts? Sub research questions (SRQs) that help to 
later address the main research question are: 

· SRQ1: Does the organization size affect the impleme
ntation of adaptable software development 
environment?  
· SRQ2: Does the organization size affect the impleme
ntation of SCM practices in the adaptable 
software development environment?  
· SRQ3: Is the SCM process considered valuable by all
 size of organizations?  
· SRQ4: Do different sizes of organizations have diff
erent software change traceability capabilities?  
· SRQ5: Does the importance of various management sys
tems associated with SCM process vary in 
different sizes of organizations?  
· SRQ6: Does the empowerment of project teams to cust
omize SCM process, associated 
management system linkage, and roles to perform SCM
 process, vary in different sizes of 
organizations? 
3.2
 Survey Structure 
The survey structure include four sections consisti
ng of ten demographic items, four Likert-type scale
 
items that addressed Lean Thinking principles, SCM 
practices, value of SCM process, and grades of 
software change traceability solution, thirty five 
nominal items, and fourteen open-ended written 
response items.  

Initial section addressed the participants™ organiz
ation demographics and the identification of lean 
principles, ASD methods and its usage. The five poi
nt Likert-type scale was used for lean principle 
item. This followed by a section which addressed th
e participants™ usages of SCM process, and the 
 associated practices, along with reference to diffe
rent improvement standards, usage frequency for the
 
projects in the organization, and the value for the
 organization. The four and five point Likert-type 
scale was used for SCM practices and SCM process re
spectively. 
The subsequent section then addressed the organizat
ions™ or projects™ traceability capabilities and 
structure. It also identified the types of manageme
nt systems used along with their collaboration or 
independence functioning. The five point Likert-typ
e scale is used for grades of existing software 
traceability solution item. The last section of the
 survey included items 30 through 59 that identifie
d 
specific tools used in various management systems c
ategories and it perceived importance for the 
organization.  
4 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
This study introduces six independent variables, fi
ve dependent variables and their associations 
presented as a conceptual framework (Figure 1) base
d on a literature review. The independent 
variables represented as the ovals and the rectangl
es represent dependent variables. 
 Figure 1. Conceptual Framework 

Once all the values of the dependent variables are 
identified through their associated independent 
variables, six hypotheses associated with independe
nt variable ﬁorganization sizeﬂ will statistically 
test 
 the mean difference between three different organiz
ational size groups, small organizations (1 to 20 
employees), medium organizations (21 to 200 employe
es), and large organizations (more than 200 
employees). 
5 DATA COLLECTON AND ANALYSIS 
The survey participants were located globally; ther
efore, Qualtrics was proved to be the best tool 
choice to collect data for the geographically diver
se participants. This approach reduced the time and
 
cost of the survey and allowed the participants to 
take the survey at their own convenience. The total
 
length of the pilot and the main survey was 3 month
s. The target population was taken from the 
Linked-in groups as well as the IT professionals in
 the researchers™ direct Linked-in network.  
5.1
 Assessment of Validity and Reliability of Survey Da
ta 
Since this research is of exploratory nature, a rel
iability analysis to test the internal consistency 
of the 
data is necessary for the independent variables so 
that each and every factor is ensured of a high lev
el 
of reliability. The Cronbach™s alpha as the most co
mmon method is used for calculating internal 
consistency reliability (Rubin & Babbie, 1997). For
 exploratory studies, it is agreed that a lowest 
Cronbach™s alpha level of 0.6 could be deemed accep
table (Nunally, 1967). Reliability analysis was 
performed only on the independent variables with Li
kert-scale. All variables had the acceptable level 
of reliability, ranging from .776 to .938. 

5.2
 Descriptive Statistics and Demographic Analysis 
The demographic data collected from the survey were
 categorized into five perspectives: organization 
profile; organization™s software development enviro
nment and the associated culture; demographics of 
the SCM process in the agile organizations; its usa
ge of process improvement standards, frequency of 
SCM process usage, and the customization to the pro
cess for the valuable implementation; traceability 
solutions which exist in the organizations; demogra
phics of the management systems in place in the 
actual environment along with its value and perceiv
ed importance for the organizations. 
5.2.1
 Lean Practices, Agile Software Development Environm
ent and Culture 
Respondents were asked about various lean principle
s and practices in their software development 
environment and the associated organizational cultu
re (Liker, 2004; Womack & Jones, 1996). 
Majority of the respondents (from all size organiza
tions) either agreed or strongly agreed with the 
existence and the influence of these principles and
 properties. 
In regards to use of agile software development met
hodology, out of 143 respondents, 44% selected 
ﬁmixed agile methodsﬂ. Scrum and FDD were identifie
d as the next most widely used agile methods 
with a response rate of 28.7% and 10.5% respectivel
y. 
Based on the response received, we can argue that a
ll sizes of software development organizations 
consider lean practices as a key ingredient in the 
development of agile organizational culture. It is 
evident from the fact that majority of the responde
nt organizations (all sizes) are using mixed agile 
software development methodology for their operatio
ns. Their practices include continuous 
assessment through value stream to identify value-a
dding or waste practices in their software 
development methodologies in alignment with the cus
tomer expectation. 
5.2.2
 SCM Process and Practices 
From the total respondents, 74.1% confirmed that th
ey have SCM process in their organizational 
environments. 
 Further analysis was performed to identify distribu
tion of SCM implementation in terms of 
organization size based on employees directly relat
ed to software development. Only 11.6% from the 
sample group of small size organizations confirmed 
the existence of SCM process in their organization,
 
while in the case of medium and large size organiza
tions the existence of SCM process was 89% and 
100% respectively.  

Based on the responses received, we can argue that 
although the large software development 
organizations are still the biggest consumer of the
 SCM process, the evidence has shown that the small
 
and especially the medium sized organizations are c
atching up in terms of SCM process maturity to 
their larger competitors. The key motivator for thi
s maturity was the involvement of these small and 
medium size organizations in the software developme
nt projects where traceability was either 
mandated by the project sponsor or it was seen as a
n internal component of a quality system 
engineering process. 

5.2.3
 Software Traceability Solutions and the associated 
Management Systems 
Majority of the respondents (86.8%) used SCM proces
s as a key mechanism for providing software 
change traceability in their organizations. Only 8%
 responses were received from the small 
organizations. Remaining responses either belonged 
to group medium organizations 76% or large 
organizations 87%. 

In regards to the motivation behind having the soft
ware change traceability, 8.5% respondents 
indicated that such traceability requirement was ﬁM
andated from project sponsorﬂ, 47.2% respondents 
choose ﬁComponent of a quality system engineering p
rocessﬂ, and 35.8% respondents mentioned 
ﬁBothﬂ as a motivation behind software traceability
 solution. Only 6.6% respondents indicated 
ﬁNeitherﬂ of the above option and two respondents h
ave selected ﬁOtherﬂ. Based on the analysis of the 
responses received, it was revealed that software t
raceability solutions using SCM process exists in a
ll 
size of the organizations but the process formality
 and the tool or technology sophistication varied 
based on the requirements mandated by the project s
ponsor or the improvement standard followed as a 
component of internal quality system engineering pr
ocess. 
5.2.4
 Management Systems and its Value and Perceive Impor
tance 
Respondents were presented with a list of most comm
only used categories of management systems (as 
initially identified through the literature review)
 and were asked to select the systems that exist in
 their 
organizations for the perspective of software chang
e traceability. Respondents were further asked to 
identify if these management systems works ﬁIndepen
dentlyﬂ (means, that it neither expect any input 
from the external management system nor provide any
 output to the external management system), or 
ﬁCollaborativelyﬂ (means, that it works in a cooper
ative mode of exchanging the information with 
external management systems). The response rate of 
36.3% for independent use was reported and the 
response rate for collaborative use was 63.7%. Henc
e, we can argue that in most case the management 
systems exist in harmony and operate through collab
oration with each other. 
6 HYHPOTHESES RESULT 
Parametric procedures are used and considered appro
priate because the assumption of independence of 
data, normality of the distribution and homogeneity
 of variance were satisfied for all of the 
independent variables.  

An analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was conducted 
to examine the lean thinking principles and 
properties, SCM practices, values of SCM process, a
nd the grades (features) of software change 
traceability solutions that exist in agile software
 development organizations. Chi-Square test was als
o 
performed to verify the independence of organizatio
n size from the importance of different 
management systems studied. 
 6.1
 Hypothesis 1 
The first hypothesis was used to investigate ﬁSRQ1:
 Does the organization size affect the 
implementation of adaptable software development en
vironment?ﬂ The null hypothesis is: H01: 
Organization size has no affect in the establishing
 adaptable software development environment. 
The results were not significant F(2, 155)=1.46, p 
>.05 (see Table 1) and indicated that lean thinking
 
and properties exists in all sizes of software deve
lopment organization. Respondents from small 
organizations (n=25) had a (Mean) M=50.82 and (Stan
dard Deviation) SD=5.37. Respondents from 
medium organizations (n=47) had M=49.01 and SD=5.64
, and the large organizations (n=86) had 
M=48.34 and SD=7.12; however, differences were not 
significant.  
  Sum of Squares 
df 
Mean Square
 F 
Sig. 
Between Groups 
119.694 
2 
59.847 
1.434 
.241 
Within Groups 
6467.643 
155 
41.727 
  Table 1. ANOVA test for adaptable software developm
ent environment 
On the basis of above ANOVA test we accept the null
 hypothesis (H01), ﬁorganization size has no 
effect in the establishing adaptable software devel
opment environmentﬂ. In other words, all sizes of 
organizations considers lean principles, tools, and
 practices (as stated in section 2.2) important for
 the 
development of adaptable software development envir
onment. In addition, these organizations are 
frequently using these practices to identify value-
adding software development processes, lining up 
these processes in the best sequence to deliver bus
iness goals. 
6.2
 Hypothesis 2 
The second hypothesis is used to investigate ﬁSRQ2:
 Does the organization size affect the 
implementation of SCM practices in the adaptable so
ftware development environment?ﬂ The null 
hypothesis is: H02: Organization size has no influe
nce in the adoption of SCM practices. 
The results were not significant F(2, 103)=0.89, p 
>.05 (see Table 2) and indicated that SCM practices
 
exists in all sizes of software development organiz
ation. Respondents from small organizations (n=13) 
had an M=38.32 and SD=6.14. Respondents from medium
 organizations (n=28) had M=37.52, and 
SD=3.75, and the large organizations (n=65) had M=3
8.98, and SD=5.00; however, differences were 
not significant.  

  Sum of Squares 
df 
Mean Square
 F 
Sig. 
Between Groups 
42.307 
2 
21.153 
.894
 .412 
Within Groups 
2435.785 
103 
23.648 
  Table 2. ANOVA test for Software Configuration Mana
gement 
On the basis of above ANOVA test we accept the null
 hypothesis (H02), ﬁorganization size has no 
influence in the adoption of SCM practicesﬂ. In oth
er words, the result confirms that it is a 
misconception that the software configuration proce
ss is only suitable for the large organizations 
and/or complex projects. Also, from this point of v
iew, the embedded assumption that most SCM 
standards will use waterfall model for the system d
evelopment can be challenged (Bersoff & Davis, 
1991). It also confirms the statement of Leon (2004
) that the software configuration management 
process should be implemented in all software proje
cts irrespective of the size of the project and 
organization because the change is inevitable in al
l projects, and an unmanaged change is likely to 
cause trouble. 
 6.3
 Hypothesis 3 
The third hypothesis is used to investigate ﬁSRQ3: 
Is the SCM process considered valuable by all size 
of organizations?ﬂ The null hypothesis is: H03: Org
anization size has no influence in the valuable 
usage of SCM process. 

The results were not significant F(2, 103)=0.48, p 
>.05 (see Table 3) and indicated that values of SCM
 
process is realized in all sizes of software develo
pment organization. Respondents from small 
organizations (n=13) had M=26.24, and SD=4.94. Resp
ondents from medium organizations (n=28) 
had M=26.27 and SD=3.08, and the large organization
s (n=65) had M=25.34 and SD=5.20; however, 
differences were not significant.  

  Sum of Squares 
df 
Mean Square
 F 
Sig. 
Between Groups 
21.096 
2 
10.548 
.476
 .623 
Within Groups 
2283.083 
103 
22.166 
  Table 3. ANOVA test for Value of Software Configura
tion Management Practices 
On the basis of above ANOVA test we accept the null
 hypothesis (H03), ﬁorganization size has no 
influence in the valuable usage of SCM processﬂ. In
 other words, researcher has not only found the 
evidence of the existence of software configuration
 management process in all sizes of organizations, 
but as a result of hypothesis 3, we can state that 
all sizes of organizations also considers software 
configuration management as valuable for their soft
ware development activities.  
6.4
 Hypothesis 4 
The fourth hypothesis is used to investigate ﬁSRQ4:
 Do different sizes of organizations have different
 
software change traceability capabilities?ﬂ  The nu
ll hypothesis is: H04: All sizes of organizations 
have similar level of software change traceability 
capabilities. 
The results were not significant F(2, 103)=0.24, p 
>.05 (see Table 4) and indicated the existence of 
sophisticated software change traceability solution
 in all sizes of agile software development 
organization. Respondents from small organizations 
(n=13) had M=39.32 and SD=8.93. Respondents 
from medium organizations (n=28) had M =39.39 and S
D=6.68, and the large organizations (n=65) 
had M=40.50 and SD=8.59; however, differences were 
not significant. 
  Sum of Squares 
df 
Mean Square
 F 
Sig. 
Between Groups 
32.021 
2 
16.010 
.239
 .788 
Within Groups 
6889.085 
103 
66.884 
  Table 4. ANOVA Test for the software change traceab
ility capabilities 
On the basis of above ANOVA test we accept the null
 hypothesis (H04), ﬁall sizes of organizations 
have similar level of software change traceability 
capabilitiesﬂ.  In other words, all sizes of 
organizations have either agreed or strongly agreed
 that their software traceability solution have the
 
characteristics of covering the entire software dev
elopment lifecycle, simple, affordable, maintainabl
e, 
accessible to all relevant stakeholders, scalable, 
customizable, auditable, and helping to reduce the 
cost 
and time to deliver the product.  

On the other hand, all sizes of organizations have 
also given the similar responses in terms of the 
granularity of their existing traceability solution
. This includes trace of product and process knowle
dge 
from:  

· stakeholder and the requirements raised  
· requirements raised and the iterations performed to
 complete the work 
· requirement raised and all other related requiremen
ts  
· requirements raised and code developed 
· requirements raised and baseline under version cont
rol 
 · code developed and the associated baselines 
· requirements raised and test performed 
· test performed and the associated baseline 
· baseline to build/release package 
· build/release package and the target managed enviro
nment 
· target managed environment to stakeholder evaluatio
n 
Regardless of the similarities that were identified
 in terms of the capabilities and granularities in 
different sizes of organizations, one aspect was al
so identified to be different in most organizations
. It 
was their strategy to implement different traceabil
ity tools and the level of sophistication provided 
by 
the each tool. As a result, the overall management 
systems also varied in terms of how much 
information it records manually or automated. 

6.5
 Hypothesis 5 
The fifth hypothesis is used to investigate ﬁSRQ5: 
Does the importance of various management 
systems associated with SCM process vary in differe
nt sizes of organizations?ﬂ  The null hypothesis is
: 
H05: Importance of various management systems assoc
iated with SCM process does not vary in 
different sizes of organizations. 

A Chi-Square test was performed to investigate whet
her the importance of six management systems, 
such as, Release Management System (RMS), Defect/Is
sue Management Systems (DIMS), Version 
Control Management System (VCMS), Build Management 
System (BMS), Release/Deployment 
Management System (RDMS) and Content Management Sys
tem (CMS) are independent from the 
organization size (OS). All six chi-square tests re
sulted in the acceptance of the null hypothesis tha
t 
the organization size and six management systems va
riables being tested are independent of each other,
 
with x2=11.644 and p-value=0.070 for OS versus RMS,
 x2=3.813 and p-value=0.432 for OS versus 
DIMS, x2=2.796 and p-value=0.592 for OS versus VCMS
, x2=7.647 and p-value=0.265 for OS versus 
BMS, x2=10.036 and p-value=0.123 for OS versus RDMS
, and x2=2.940 and p-value=0.816 for OS 
versus CMS. 

Based on the feedback and as a result of chi-square
 test, it was identified that organizations regardl
ess 
of their size considers all six categories of manag
ement systems as either important or very important
 
in their software development environment. The only
 difference between different sizes of 
organizations was the capability of the management 
systems based on the combination of process 
capability and the tool sophistication. 

6.6
 Hypothesis 6 
The sixth hypothesis is used to investigate ﬁSRQ6: 
Does the empowerment of project teams to 
customize SCM process, associated management system
 linkage, and roles to perform SCM process 
vary in different sizes of organizations?ﬂ  The nul
l hypothesis is: H06: Empowerment of project teams 
to customize SCM process, associated management sys
tem linkage, and roles does not vary in 
different sizes of organizations. 

A Chi-Square test was performed to investigate whet
her the empowerment of project teams to 
customize SCM process, associated management system
s, and roles are independent from the 
organization size - OS. All three chi-square tests 
resulted in the acceptance of the null hypothesis t
hat 
the organization size and three customization varia
bles being tested are independent of each other, 
with x2 = 0.42 and p-value = 0.979 for OS versus em
powerment to SCM Process customization, x2 = 
0.894 and p-value = 0.640 for OS versus empowerment
 to customize Management Systems linkage 
customization, x2 = 1.733 and p-value = 0.420 for O
S versus empowerment to customize the SCM 
Role. 
 In other words, questions were asked regarding the 
empowerment given to the project team to 
customize the software configuration management pro
cess, or how different management systems 
connects with each other to share the information, 
or how the software configuration management role 
will perform in the context of the project environm
ent. The responses were received from all sizes of 
organizations and based on the chi-square test we c
an state that all sizes of organizations delegate t
he 
power to the project teams to customize software co
nfiguration practices according to their project 
context. It includes using the existing tools and p
rocess in alignment with customer or management 
goals.  It was also indicated by the respondents fr
om all sizes of organizations that their organizati
ons 
have given them the empowerment to define the workf
low between different establish management 
systems in their organization according to the cont
ext of the project and using the value based mind s
et 
to only include what add-values to the goals of the
 project. In addition, respondents have also 
indicated that they were given the empowerment to d
efine who is going to perform configuration 
management role in their project rather than taking
 a fixed resource to perform the job. 
7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Through the use of six research hypotheses, this st
udy found that organization size does not impact on
 
the usage of software configuration management proc
ess in adaptable software development 
environments. It is also identified that all sizes 
of organizations consider SCM process valuable in 
their environments and have similar software tracea
bility approaches with different process formalitie
s 
and tools sophistications. Finally, all organizatio
ns regardless of their sizes believe in the importa
nce 
of management systems for the traceability and give
 empowerment to the project teams for the 
customization of SCM process and the workflow of th
e associated management systems according to 
the customers™ expectations. 

It was identified that most of participants emphasi
zed on the implementation of software change 
traceability from the management systems perspectiv
e instead of directly looking at the software 
development processes and tools required in the env
ironment. It was observed, that after the 
identification of the required management systems i
n the software development environment, these 
participant organizations have adjusted their exist
ing software traceability capabilities through the 
lean 
and agile principles aligning it with the customer 
expectation. 
Study also identified the existence of collaborativ
e management systems for the establishment of the 
software configuration management process and its v
aluable contribution towards software traceability 
in their environments. The key strategy identified 
was the ﬁempowerment of project teamsﬂ to 
customize their software configuration management p
rocess, associated roles and the relevant 
management systems in order to establish the softwa
re traceability. These project teams had taken a 
value-based approach to identify and assess their v
alue-streams and then scaled- up or down software 
configuration management process formality and the 
tools sophistication keeping the management 
systems fully compliant with their prevailing softw
are improvement standards.  
Although the large organizations were still identif
ied as the biggest consumers of the software 
configuration management process, small and medium 
organizations have also shown a strong 
tendency towards adopting this process for the soft
ware traceability purpose. Results have shown that 
organizations of all size are taking a value-based 
approach to implement the software configuration 
management process based on the customer expectatio
n and also consider that as a component of a 
quality system engineering process.  

Regardless of the approaches taken, in all cases, m
anagement systems were established primarily 
because of value-adding contribution in the given s
cope rather than for the purpose of introducing a 
particular software improvement standard. In most c
ases, once the value-adding management systems 
were in place, project teams were empowered to cust
omize their solutions to incorporate software 
quality or improvement standards for the purpose of
 compliance audits. 
 The limitation of this study is inability to identi
fy the large sample of the small size organizations
 (1 to 
20 employees) having the software configuration man
agement process in their agile software 
development environment. As a result, the study cou
ld not compare the effectiveness of the software 
configuration management process in small organizat
ions with their counterparts in medium and large 
organizations. Hence, overcoming this limitation wi
ll be a part of our future research work. 
References 
Abran, A. and Moore, J. (2001). SWEBOK: Guide to th
e Software Engineering Body of Knowledge. 
1st
 Edition. California: IEEE Computer Society Press. 
Aizenbud-Reshef, N., Nolan, B. T., Rubin, J. and Sh
aham-Gafni, Y. (2006). Model traceability. IBM 
Systems Journal, 45(3), 515-526.  
Bersoff, E. H. and Davis, A. M. (1991). Impacts of 
Life Cycle Models on Software Configuration 
Management. Communications of the ACM, 34(8), 104-1
18.  
Cooper, D. R. and Schindler, P. S. (2003). Business
 Research Methods. 7
th
 Edition (McGraw Hill 
International Edition ed.). New York: McGraw Hill I
nternational/Irwin. 
Dart, S. (1990). Spectrum of functionality in confi
guration management system. CMU/SEI-90-TR-11.  
Gills, M. and Borzovs, J. (2005). Software Testing 
and Traceability. University of Latvia.  
Gotel, O. C. and Finkelstein, C. (1994). An analysi
s of the requirements traceability problem. In 
Proceedings of the First International Conference o
n Requirements Engineering, 1994. 
IEEE.Std.610.12-1990. (1990). IEEE Standard Glossar
y of Software Engineering Terminology. 
IEEE.Std.828. (2012). IEEE Standard for Configurati
on Management in Systems and Software 
Engineering. IEEE Std 828-2012 (Revision of IEEE St
d 828-2005), 1-71. doi: 
10.1109/ieeestd.2012.6170935 
Leon, A. (2004). Software configuration management 
handbook. Boston/London: Artech House, Inc. 
Leon, A. (2005). Software Configuration Management 
Handbook. Boston/London: Artech House. 
Liker, J. (2004). The Toyota WayŠ14 Management Prin
ciples from the World™s Greatest 
Manufacturer. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Luo, S., Zhang, X. and Ren, S. (1996). A paradigm f
or engineering business process and its 
information system. IEEE International Conference o
n Systems, Man, and Cybernetics. 
McFeeley, B. (1996). IDEAL: A User's Guide for Soft
ware Process Improvement: DTIC Document. 
Mohan, K., Xu, P., Cao, L. and Ramesh, B. (2008). I
mproving change management in software 
development: Integrating traceability and software 
configuration management. Decision 
Support Systems, 45(4), 922-936.  
Naveh, E. and Erez, M. (2004). Innovation and atten
tion to detail in the quality improvement 
paradigm. Management Science, 50(11), 1576-1586.  
Nguyen, T. N. and Munson, E. V. (2003). A model for
 conformance analysis of software documents. 
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop 
on Principles of Software Evolution, 
2003. 
Nunally, J. (1967). Psychometric Theory. New York: 
McGraw Hill. 
Poppendieck, M. (2011). Principles of lean thinking
. IT Management Select, 18.  
Ramesh, B. and Jarke, M. (2001). Toward reference m
odels for requirements traceability. Software 
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 27(1), 58-93.  
Rubin, A. and Babbie, E. (1997). Research Methods f
or Social Work. Pacific Grove, California: 
Brooks/Cole Publishing Company. 
Shaikh, A., Ahmed, A., Memon, N. and Memon, M. (200
9). Strengths and weaknesses of maturity 
driven process improvement effort. International Co
nference on Complex, Intelligent and 
Software Intensive Systems, 2009. CISIS'09. 
Sommerville, I. (2007). Software Engineering.8
th
 Edition. Addition-Wesley. 
Spanoudakis, G. Supporting the Construction of Deci
sion Models for Software Selection: Towards a 
Probabilistic Traceability Approach. 
 Womack, J. P. and Jones, D. T. (1996). Lean thinkin
g: Banish waste and create wealth in your 
organisation. Simon and Shuster, New York, NY, 397.
  
Wong, Y. C., Wong, K. Y. and Ali, A. (2009). Key pr
actice areas of lean manufacturing. International 
Association of Computer Science and Information Tec
hnology-Spring Conference, 2009. 
IACSITSC'09. 
 