 PAsiaConferenceonInformationSystems
(PACIS)
PACIS2009Proceedings
AssociationforInformationSystems
Year
2009
IDENTIFYINGCAPABILITESFOR
THEITFUNCTIONTOCREATE
AGILITYININFORMATION
SYSTEMS
GeorgeHobbs

RensScheepers
y

TheUniversityofMelbourne,Australia,gahobbs@pgrad.unimelb.edu.au
y
TheUniversityofMelbourne,Australia,r.scheepers@unimelb.edu.au
ThispaperispostedatAISElectronicLibrary(AISeL).
http://aisel.aisnet.org/pacis2009/20
 IDENTIFYING CAPABILITIES FOR THE IT FUNCTION TO 
CREATE AGILITY IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
George Arthur Hobbs 
Department of Information Systems 

The University of Melbourne 

Victoria 3010 Australia 

gahobbs@pgrad.unimelb.edu.au  
Rens Scheepers 
Associate Professor of Information Systems 

The University of Melbourne 

Victoria 3010 Australia 

r.scheepers@unimelb.edu.au 
 
Abstract  

In this paper, we identify the necessary capabilities of the IT 
function to create agility in existing 
information systems. Agility is the ability to quickly sense and 
respond to environment perturbations. 
We contrast the agility perspective from a widely used industry 
framework with research perspectives 
on agility in the IS literature. We suggest Beer™s Viable System
 Model (VSM) is a useful meta-level 
theory to house agility elements from IS research literature,
 and apply VSM principles to identify the 
capabilities required of the IT function. Indeed, by means of a surve
y of 34 organisations, we confirm 
that the meta-level theory better correlates with reported agi
lity measures than existing practice 
measures do on their own. From a research perspective, the incorporati
on of the VSM mechanism 
helps to explain ‚why™ the IT function is capable of creating agili
ty. From a practical perspective of 
‚how™, the findings point to a new set of capabilities of the IT f
unction for future versions of the 
industry frameworks to enable agility. 

Keywords: Agility, IT function, Viable System Model, COBIT 
 1 INTRODUCTION 
IS practice appears to be subscribing to a common concept of agil
ity. The concept consists of: 
recognition of a business environment that fluctuates quicker th
an conventional planning cycles; the 
need to sense environmental fluctuations; the need to respond using exist
ing information systems; and 
organisational readiness to effect the sensing and response (Luf
tman & McLean, 2004). Gartner 
defines agility ﬁas an organization's ability to sense env
ironmental change and respond efficiently and 
effectively to that changeﬂ (Newman & Logan, 2006 p 3). 

Agility in information systems is a topic of recent intere
st in IT practice. Strategic agility was ranked 
first in a survey of 28 senior IT executives presented with a
 list of 53 issues (Ives & Mandviwalla, 
2004). Agility was ranked fifth amongst 22 management concerns in a s
urvey of 128 respondents 
from the Society of Information Management, representing a broad IT
 practitioner body (Luftman & 
McLean, 2004). The survey™s authors noted that a faster business 
pace demands IT organisations 
respond quickly and effectively. IT activities once measured 
in years now required in months, and the 
ability to sense and respond has become critical. 

This paper extends the theory on agility in information systems
, where the IS literature currently 
focuses on ﬁwhatﬂ agility is, and ﬁdoesﬂ the IT function enable 
the capability. The paper questions 
ﬁwhyﬂ the IT function can enable agility in existing information s
ystems. In doing so, the paper 
contributes to the practice perspective of ﬁhowﬂ to enable agi
lity. This contribution is the result of 
providing a testable theory of agility that both explains and pre
dicts (Gregor, 2006).  The information 
systems in question are IT-conducted business initiatives, and compos
ed of implemented electronic 
processes and networks (Weill et al., 2002). The IT function is the
 IT personnel and their work 
processes that complement the information systems.  

The paper will first review the IS theoretical literature
 and the practice perspectives on agility. The 
claimed best practice of Control Objectives for Informati
on and related Technologies (COBIT) 
provided a practice perspective. Gaps between the IS theoreti
cal and practice perspectives are 
identified. Next, the conceptual study is explained, and a Viable System Mode
l approach to extend the 
IS theoretical perspective justified. A description follows of a
 mailed survey to test empirically the 
research propositions and an analysis of the findings. Last is a di
scussion of the anticipated research 
contribution is to extend best practice frameworks to enable agility. 
 2 REVIEW
 OF THEORETICAL AND PRACTICE PERSPECTIVES 
This section reviews the current theoretical and practice pe
rspectives on agility in information 
systems. First, the IS literature on agility is reviewed a
nd classified into a taxonomy of theory to 
assess how far the theoretical perspective extends. Second, the cur
rent IS practice perspective to 
design and action the IT function for agility is derived from a
 claimed best practice framework. This 
section concludes by identifying the gaps between theoretical and practic
e perspectives on agility. 
2.1
 Theoretical perspectives on agility in information systems 
Agility of information systems and its effect on organisationa
l performance has recently received 
much attention in IS research (Piccoli & Ives, 2005; Sambamurthy et
 al., 2003; Weill et al., 2002). IS 
research discusses a new era where a firm™s performance depends on the IS ca
pability to effect agility, 
and less on identifying strategic IT-enabled initiatives (Pepp
ard & Ward, 2004; Galliers, 2006). This 
IS capability has inter-related competencies, that forms a ba
sic model for agility in information 
systems (see Figure 1). First, the IT function fuses business
 and technical knowledge to sense the 
environment. Second is a competency to sense the current use of in
formation systems. Third, generate 
a portfolio of digital options to adapt existing information sys
tems to forecasted needs (Sambamurthy 
et al., 2003). Last, if a forecasted need materialises, exercis
e a digital option that enables an agile 
response. The response is agile as it adapts existing inform
ation system quicker than conventional 
 planning cycles, due to the initial IT investment in the exercised digital
 option. This is a process of the 
IT function to monitor and improve the value realized from the existing syst
ems (Overby et al., 2006).  
The implication of Sambamurthy et al. (2003) is that digital opti
ons enables agility in information 
systems by responding to an opportunity in less time than making a f
ull IT investment at the time of 
the opportunity™s arrival. The cost is that if the anticipated 
opportunity fails to arrive, the initial IT 
investment in the digital option is foregone. A goal of a port
folio of digital options is that the value of 
opportunities captured from exercised options outweighs the other options tha
t are never exercised. 
  
Figure 1.  A basic model of the IS theoretical perspective of agility 

Gregor (2006) provides a taxonomy of five IS theory types. This taxo
nomy is used to reconcile the 
contributions from the IS theoretical and practice perspectives
 on agility. The first type is theory for 
analysing, which does not extend beyond analysis and description. Anal
ytic theory does not specify 
causal relationships and makes no predictions. The second type i
s theory for explaining, which does 
not intend to predict with any accuracy and has no testable propositions
. Third is theory for predicting 
that provides testable propositions but do not have well-justifie
d causal explanations. The fourth type 
is theory for explaining and predicting that has testable pro
positions and causal explanations. Last is 
theory for design and action that have explicit prescriptions for const
ructing an IT artefact.  
Gregor (2006) draws interrelationships on how these theory types i
nform each other. She notes that 
theories for analysing are required to develop the other theory 
types by providing clear definition of 
constructs. Gregor states that a theory for design and action can 
be developed without a theory for 
explaining and predicting, based on what has worked in practice.  

A survey of the IS literature concerned with agility and the
 IT function suggests most of the 
contributions have been theories for analysing for defining concept
s, or theories for explaining with 
no intent to predict with any accuracy. Theories for analys
ing on agility in the IS literature include the 
following. Agarwal and Sambamurthy (2002) state that IT now plays 
a more prominent role in 
corporate agility. Lyytinen and Rose (2006) view an agility outcome
 of the IT function from an 
organisational learning perspective, and considers exploration and exp
loitation of innovative 
processes. Osborn (1998) analyses an agility paradox to be resolved 
by strategy, control and systems. 
Peppard and Ward (2004) present attributes of an IS capability for ag
ility. Weill et al. (2002) correlate 
strategic agility and IT-infrastructure capability. Argua
bly, some of these papers might be typed as 
theories for explaining, based on varying claims of moderate predictive a
ccuracy. 
Theories for explaining occur in the IS literature on agility
. Galliers (2006) suggests a strategizing 
framework for agile information systems. Overby et al. (2006) 
define enterprise agility and explore 
the underlying capabilities, explain the enabling role of IT, and pr
opose scoring agility based on 
unspecified measures of sensing and responding. Sambamurthy et al.
 (2003) define IT competencies 
 to enable digital options which afford agility. Van Oosterhout
 et al. (2006) define the change factors 
requiring agility, and identify IT as both an enabler and inhibitor
 of agility. These papers have no 
testable propositions, and none can claim as theories for explaining and 
predicting.  
A theory of predicting occurs in Fink and Neumann (2007) e-mail surve
y, which positively correlate 
IT personnel capabilities and IT infrastructure capability, 
and IT infrastructure capability and IT-
dependent organisational agility. The paper does not offer an explanative
 mechanism.  
What is missing from the IS theoretical perspective on agil
ity is a theory for explaining and predicting 
that has testable propositions and causal explanations. Such theor
ies have a strong interrelation with 
theory for design and action required by the IS practice perspective (Gre
gor, 2006). 
2.2
 Practice perspectives on agility in information systems 
The IS practice perspective on how the IT function can enable a
gility has been deduced from a 
claimed ‚best practice™ framework. COBIT is arguably the m
ost appropriate control framework 
available to align information systems and business goals,
 and is increasingly being used by a diverse 
range of organisations throughout the world (Ridley et al., 2004). COBI
T practices represent the 
consensus of experts (IT Governance Institute, 2007 p 5), and the framew
ork this study deduced as 
the dominant design and action theory for agility from the IS pra
ctitioner perspective. This deduction 
recognizes that a design and action theory can build on idiographic studies of what w
orked in the past, 
or known predictive relationships that are not fully understood (Gregor, 
2006). 
Within the COBIT framework is a goal of 
Create IT agility 
linked to four measurable control 
objectives. The linked control objectives are: 
Define the information architecture; Define the IT 
processes, organization and relationships; Manage IT human resources;
 and 
Acquire and maintain 
technology infrastructure
 (IT Governance Institute 2007). COBIT defines agility as re
sponding to 
changing business requirements from the customer perspective, and 
managing business change from 
an internal perspective. This definition reflects COBIT depende
nce on business requirements and 
strategy received by the IT function from business stakeholders.  

2.3
 Gaps between IS theoretical and practice perspectives on agil
ity 
Comparing the IS theoretical perspective on agility, gleaned from
 the research literature, with the IS 
practice perspective on how to create agility, deduced from C
OBIT best practice, has highlighted four 
noteworthy gaps. 

The first gap between the IS theoretical and practice perspe
ctives is differences in the concept of 
agility itself. The COBIT definition of agility is narrow
er than the IS theoretical perspective, as it is 
based on the IT function responding to received business requirements and stra
tegy. The IS theoretical 
perspective observes that deliberate alignment of information s
ystems with a stated business strategy 
has had limited success (Galliers, 2006). The IS theoretical pers
pective on agility has information 
systems being subject to less long-term planning strategies, and more to c
onstant adaptation (Desouza, 
2006; Peppard & Ward, 2004). The COBIT definition of agility is also 
narrower than some other IS 
practice perspectives (Newman & Logan, 2006; Luftman & McLean, 2004)
, which include the IT 
function sensing and responding directly to the business environment. 

The second gap is the capability for the IT function to sense fut
ure needs directly from the 
environment. The IS theoretical perspective emphasizes this forec
asting capability (Sambamurthy et 
al., 2003; Overby et al., 2006; Desouza, 2006). In the IS practice pers
pective, the capability to sense 
environmental change is noted by Gartner (Newman & Logan, 2006 p 3), but 
the COBIT goal of 
Create IT agility
 is not linked to any measurable process for this capabili
ty. That COBIT is silent on 
the IT function directly sensing future needs from the environment,
 is probably the result of the 
COBIT concept of agility being based on responding to a received business strat
egy. 
The third gap between the IS perspectives is concerned with mai
ntaining digital options that can be 
readily implemented. Digital options are a portfolio of initi
al investments without an obligation for 
 full investment. Informed by strategic foresight and systemic i
nsight, the IT function makes an initial 
IT investment, which remains open until an opportunity arrives, at 
which time the IT function makes 
the remaining IT investment to capture the opportunity. This capab
ility is put forward in the IS 
research literature on agility (Weill et al., 2002; Samba
murthy et al., 2003; Overby et al., 2006). The 
IS practice perspective, deduced from the COBIT factors to create agil
ity, is silent on this capability.  
Last, the IT function sensing current use of the information sys
tems is not included in the IS practice 
perspective on agility. There are several references to
 this capability in IS theoretical literature which 
discusses systemic insight (Sambamurthy et al., 2003), effectiv
e use processes (Peppard & Ward, 
2004); and the assessment of unexpected consequences that were ex
perienced in existing activity 
(Galliers, 2006). The stated COBIT enablers for creating agility
 are silent on this capability. 
The IS research literature discusses the extent that 
information system agility
 enables 
enterprise 
agility
. The IS literature also discusses whether the IT function enabl
es information systems agility. 
Based on the assumption that the IT function does enable agility
, the theoretical development is why 
the IT function enables agility in existing information systems. 

3 THEORY DEVELOPMENT 
The review of the IS theoretical and practice perspectives on 
agility has identified gaps in the concept 
of agility, and a lack of any explanation of a mechanism to se
nse and respond to environmental 
fluctuations. This section first discusses a control mechanism
 for sensing and responding from the 
cybernetic framework of Beer™s Viable System Model (VSM) (
Beer, 1970). The VSM was 
conceptually found to apply to the IT function, and used to extend the IS
 theoretical perspectives on 
agility to practice by prescribing capabilities. A descripti
on of the testing of the hypothesis with a 
mailed survey of organizations follows this theory building section.  

3.1
 Cybernetic approach 
The research approach was to draw theoretical parallels bet
ween the IS research into agility in 
information systems, and the VSM. The cybernetic model is justified
 for a number of reasons.  
First, the business issue of agility for sensing and responding 
to perturbations in the environment 
(Overby et al., 2006) is the fundamental problem of adaptation addres
sed by cybernetics (Ashby, 
1956). Second, is the concept that agility of information systems 
requires a requisite knowledge base 
to manage information received from the environment, and to enable ada
ptations of existing IT and 
work processes (Desouza, 2006). This concept is consistent with the 
cybernetic theorem of managing 
environmental perturbations by maintaining a model of operations. The 
model can be less complex 
than the operating process, but must be of requisite variety to contr
ol the process (Conant & Ashby, 
1970).  Last, the IS competencies for agility of externally-f
ocused future planning, and an internally-
focused effective use process (Peppard & Ward, 2004; Desouza, 2006; Ga
lliers, 2006) equates to the 
dynamic that is addressed by the sub-systems of the Viable System Model
 (Beer, 1970). 
The validity of a cybernetic framework for an explaining and pr
edicting theory, to reconcile the IS 
theoretical and practice perspectives, is supported by Gregor (2006)
. Gregor states a commonality of 
cybernetics with general system theory. General system theor
y provides a high-level way of thinking 
about information systems. Systems are in a continuous state of
 exchange with their environment and 
other systems, and modelled with concepts of input, throughput, output, feed
back, boundary and 
environment. Gregor suggests cybernetics as a grand theory for explaining
 and predicting.  
3.2
 The VSM applied to the IT function 
This section describes the Viable System Model (Beer, 1970), and 
equates the IT function to the 
meta-system of the model. The VSM provides a mechanism for sen
sing and responding to 
environmental fluctuations, and answers the research question: w
hy can the IT function enable agility 
in existing information systems?  
 The VSM proposes that any viable system consists of five nece
ssary and sufficient subsystems, which 
are interactively involved in maintaining the system™s iden
tity within a fluctuating environment.  
Viability is the property of a system to maintain its identi
ty separate from others, despite the 
components of the system adapting in basic structure and function ov
er time. This research used the 
terms 
Policy, Intelligence, Control, Coordination 
and
 Operations
 to describe the five subsystems of 
the VSM for a focus on information systems. Beer originally na
med the subsystems System FIVE to 
System ONE, respectively. The adoption of these terms for Bee
r™s subsystems is a liberty often taken 
by interpreters of the VSM.  
 Figure 2.  The VSM applied to the IT function and existing information system
s 
A description of the VSM follows, using the IT function and informa
tion systems as an example. 
Within any viable system are the subsystems of 
Operations
 and 
Coordination
, which
 as a whole
 compose the function of the viable system. The meta-syste
m is the 
Policy
, 
Intelligence
 and 
Control
 subsystems. The meta-system does not exist for itself, but is
 a necessary redundancy to adapt the 
viable system for perturbations from the environment. 

Operations
 occur in many instances in a viable system. Each 
Operation
 is an independent system, and 
their coordinated behaviour composes the identity of the viable 
system. These instantiations of 
electronic processes and networks enable business initiativ
es. The instantiations of the IT can be a 
portfolio of ERP packages or bespoke/legacy systems. 
Operations
 benefit from resources from 
organisations in return for performing at prescribed service l
evels, within the legal obligations and 
corporate rules.  

The function of 
Coordination 
is to dampen oscillations that will arise amongst the instan
ces of 
Operations
 in the viable system. This can be instantiations of System I
ntegration software to stabilize 
applications and the transduction of code-sets. Examples of integra
tion software include Data 
Warehousing and Enterprise Applications Integration (Markus, 2000). An I
T support group is often 
involved to dampen fluctuations not handled electronically. 
Operations
 and 
Coordination 
compose 
the information systems, which is subject to the meta-system of the I
T function. 
The 
Policy
, 
Intelligence
 and 
Control 
meta-system of the information systems is conceptualised as 
the 
IT function. 
Policy
 sets the overall goals of the system, and constrains the pos
sibilities of adaptive 
behaviour provided when coupling 
Intelligence
 and 
Control
. In many enterprises, this role is that of a 
steering committee, with representation by the IT function. The a
im is to encourage desirable 
behaviours in the use of IT (Weill, 2004). 
 Control 
is responsible for the direct ﬁinside and nowﬂ control of 
Operations 
and
 Coordination
. In the 
IT function context, 
Control 
is often the accountability of the Application Management Offic
e, which 
includes a disciplined approach to delivering IT-enabled business init
iatives beyond project 
completion; a single point of application support; and a single contact for op
erational support.  
Intelligence
 spends most of its time looking outside the system and to the f
uture. 
Intelligence
 is 
necessary for the viable system to anticipate change and adjust
 
Operations
 to fit a dynamic 
environment. In the IT function of many organisations, this is the 
accountability of the Strategy and 
Enterprise Architecture office. The accountabilities of the
 office include to align business and IT 
strategies; monitor benefit realisation; translate strate
gy to operational programs; prioritize initiatives 
for delivery; and one-stop communication for strategy stakeholder
s. Deliverables of the office include 
identified IT trends and opportunities; current and target ente
rprise architectures; and transition 
roadmaps. The 
Intelligence
 attribute of building probabilistic models to forecast events 
and how 
Operations 
will react to those events, is consistent with discussion of
 the IS agility as a portfolio of 
digital options that are readily implemented (Weill et al., 2002; Overby et
 al., 2006). 
The theory development suggests the hypothesis: 
The more mature the coupled capabilities of the 
Policy, Intelligence and Control of the IT function (POLINTCON), the
 more frequently digital options 
are exercised (D-OPTIONS). 

POLINTCON is a hierarchical construct and used, in preference 
to the subordinate constructs of 
Policy Intelligence 
and
 Control, 
as it
 occurs at the same level of analysis as D-OPTION, i.e. t
he IT 
function (Wetzels et al., 2009). The subordinate constructs belong to a
 lower level of analysis of the 
offices within the IT function, such as the Application Management Offic
e for 
Control
.  
POLINTCON and D-OPTION are ontologically different. POLINTCO
N is a structure of rules and 
non-human resources persistent in time. In contrast, D-OPTION 
is a sporadic activity of human 
agency enabled by POLINTCON. Exercising digital options is a nec
essary activity for agile responses 
to adapt existing information systems. Applying the VSM to the IT 
function, in the context of the 
basic model of the IS theoretical perspective of agility (Fi
gure 1), suggested the causal relationship 
between POLINTCON and D-OPTION. 

4 METHODOLOGY 
To test the hypothesis, the research conducted a mailed survey. T
he survey tested the correlation of 
latent constructs of the capability maturity of the IT function, a
nd agility outcomes measured by the 
frequency of exercised digital options. The theory development pro
posed causality between these 
latent constructs. The level of analysis is the IT function of org
anisations. 
The survey™s target population is the client base of organisations of Con
sultCo, a pseudonym for an IT 
and business services consultancy. ConsultCo has over 1,300 employees and offi
ces in four Australian 
cities. Its client organisations range from major banks to small ﬁnot
 for profitﬂ bodies.  
The research instrument was a covering letter and a questionna
ire of 48 Likert items. The instrument 
was letter-headed by ConsultCo and the University of Melbourne, but m
ade clear that ConsultCo has 
no access to the individual responses. The mailing addressees were
 contacts known to ConsultCo, and 
included an IT manager and a business stakeholder in each client o
rganisation in most cases. The 
contacts had three weeks to complete the questionnaire, after w
hich non-respondents were mailed a 
follow-up letter and another copy of the questionnaire. The only incentive for respondent
s to complete 
the questionnaire is to receive a summary of the findings. The
 six-page, research instrument is 
available from the authors on request. 

4.1
 Constructs and their measurement 
The following define the measures for the exogenous construct (POLI
NTCON) and the endogenous 
construct (D-OPTIONS) of the hypothesis. Each measure is a Likert i
tem on the questionnaire.  
 Table 1 lists the maturity measures for POLINTCON, and ma
ps their genesis from the VSM (Beer, 
1970) and IS theory on agility (from section 2.1). The first three m
easures equate with the VSM 
attributes of 
Policy
. 
Policy
 governs the behaviour of the total system (MAT37); monitors t
he 
Control
 and 
Intelligence
 couple; supervises their behaviour and mediates conflicts (MA
T38); and thinks about 
what is being produced and why (MAT39). The next five measures 
equate with the VSM attributes of 
Intelligence
 to build probabilistic models to react to forecasted events (MA
T34 MAT36); gather data 
from the environment (MAT40); and
 indicate structural changes that lead to a different config
uration 
of 
Operations 
and
 Coordination 
(MAT43 MAT44). The last four measures equate with the VSM 
attributes of 
Control
. 
Control
 sources the plans, programs and schedules to adapt 
Operations
 (MAT35 
and MAT45); monitors the behaviour of 
Operations
 resulting from the regulatory action of 
Coordination
 (MAT46); and monitors 
Coordination
 (MAT47). 
Based on your experience, which maturity level best
 describes the 
following processes of the IT function 

(non-existent
;  
initial
;  
repeatable
;  
defined
;  
managed;
  
optimized)
 Informed 

by the VSM 
 subsystem 
Supports concepts 

from IS theory on 

agility  
MAT37 
To develop and maintain a set of policies to suppor
t IT 
strategy? This includes policy intent, roles and re
sponsibilities.
 Policy Decision to exercise 
a digital option 
MAT38 
To establish and maintain an optimal co-ordination,
 
communication and liaison structure within the IT f
unction?
   MAT39 
To create a strategic plan that defines how IT goal
s will 
contribute to the company™s strategic objectives?
   MAT34
 To maintain a set of high-level designs for IT-ena
bled 
capabilities, which are options for forecasted  bus
iness initiatives? 
Intelligence
 Sensing future 

needs directly from  
MAT36
 To assess any unexpected operational consequences,
 arising 
from existing information systems, to forecast busi
ness initiatives? 
 environment 
MAT40
 To monitor the business sector, industry, technolo
gy, 
infrastructure, legal & regulatory environment tren
ds? 
  MAT43
 To analyse existing & emerging technologies, & pla
n which 
technological direction to realise the IT strategy?
  
 Creating a portfolio 

of digital options 
MAT44
 To develop a feasibility study that examines the p
ossibility of 
implementing the requirements & alternative courses
 of action? 
  MAT35
 To implement a set of IT-enabled capabilities, whi
ch are 
readily configurable for forecasted business initia
tives?
 Control Sensing current use 
of existing IS 
MAT45 
To acquire and maintain applications in line with I
T strategy 
and IT architecture?
   MAT46 
To continuously monitor specified service level per
formance, 
and report in a format that is meaningful to the st
akeholders?
  Delivers an agile 

response for an 
MAT47 
To report service desk activity to enable managemen
t to 
measure service performance and to identify trends?
  exercised digital 

option 
Table 1.  Measures for POLINTCON 

The questionnaire included the COBIT definitions of the six maturi
ty levels (IT Governance Institute, 
2007). The use of COBIT maturity levels allows the operational
isation of the construct in terms 
recognisable to the survey respondents. All but three measures (M
AT34 MAT35 MAT36) reused 
existing COBIT control objectives, none of which link to the COBIT goal 
of 
Create IT agility
.  
Based on your experience, how often does your compa
ny 
(Very frequently;  Somewhat frequently;  Occasional
ly;  Rarely;  Never)
 FRQ07 
Have existing information systems that are readily 
configurable for a new business initiative?
 FRQ08
 Have existing detailed designs for IT that can be 
used, partially or wholly, for a new business 
initiative? 
FRQ09
 Have existing, high-level designs for IT that can 
be used, partially or wholly, for a new business 
initiative? 
FRQ10
 Have alternative target IT architectures and road-
maps for new business models? 
Table 2.  Measures for D-OPTIONS 

The activity measures for the D-OPTIONS are in Table 2. T
his construct is suggested by the concept 
of digital options in IS literature on agility (Sambamurthy 
et al., 2003), where the IT function 
 maintains a portfolio of digital options. If the forecast need a
rises, the exercising of a digital option 
becomes the agile response to adapt existing information system
s. The frequency of exercising digital 
options observed by the survey respondents is the operationalisation of the concept
. 
4.2
 Data collected 
The survey mailing to 506 IT professionals and business stake
holders occurred in September 2008. 
These potential respondents represent the 257 client organisati
ons of ConsultCo. Insufficient 
addressing, or the contact no longer at the address, caused 169 sur
veys to return undelivered. This left 
a possible 204 organisations with at least one deliverable sur
vey. Thirty-six completed surveys 
returned from 34 organisations gave an organisational response rate
 of 16.75%. 
The activities of the responding organisations were: educati
on (2); electricity, gas and water supply 
(5); financial and insurance (5); manufacturing (3); mining (2); 
telecommunications (1); rental, hiring 
and real estate services (3); retail trade (2); scienti
fic and technical services (2); public administration 
(4); transport (1); other community, social and personal serv
ices (3); and unidentified (1). All were 
large enterprises of 250 or more employees, with a mean of 10,504 and a de
viation of 27,326. 
Respondent individuals classified themselves as business manager
s (2), senior business managers 
(10), IT professionals (1), IT managers (5) and senior IT manager
s (18). The median experience of the 
respondents is one to five years of employment in the organisation
s. A workforce-hire firm and a fire 
service each returned two questionnaires, completed by different i
ndividuals in the organisations.  
5 DATA ANALYSIS 
This section begins with an analysis of the collected data to t
est the research hypothesis. The section 
next analyses the data against an existing practice model for
 comparison with the research model. The 
responses of 34 organisations were analysed using Partial-Least
-Squares (PLS) modelling in support 
of confirmatory research (Marcoulides & Saunders, 2006). The softwar
e used was SmartPLS version 
2.0.M3 (Ringle et al., 2005). Measurement standardisation catered f
or the different ordinal scales. 
Ordinal measures, such as maturity levels, have been used for re
gression analysis in previous IS 
research (e.g. Sledgianowski et al., 2006). 

5.1
 Research model 
The PLS analysis of the completed surveys is show in Figure
 3. The analysis found a large positive 
correlation between the constructs (0.730), which does not fals
ifying the hypothesis. The measure of 
fit of the structural equation is the R-square of the endogenous construc
t (0.534).  
 Cronbach™s Alpha Composite Reliability AVE (square
 root) 
POLINTCON 0.948 0.955 0.639   (0.799) 
D-OPTIONS 0.882 0.881 0.650   (0.806) 
Table 3. Benchmarks for construct validity and reliability  

When an individual construct uses multiple measures, the measures
 must demonstrate reliability and 
validity. A Cronbach's Alpha of 0.7 is a benchmark for 'modest' converg
ent validity (Hulland, 1999).  
The composite construct reliabilities are recommended above a 
0.70 threshold, indicating that the 
specified items sufficiently represented their respective c
onstructs (Fink & Neumann, 2007). The 
benchmarks in Table 3, from the research model in Figure 3, show mor
e than modest convergent 
validity and composite reliability. 

Discriminant validity of the model is sufficient, as the s
quare root of the Average Variance Extracted 
(AVE) for both the constructs is greater than their correl
ation (0.730) (Hulland, 1999). For 
significance testing, the SmartPLS bootstrap procedure was use
d and the two-tailed, 
t-values of all 
measurement weights and the variable correlation were significant at
 
p < 0.0001 for Type I errors. 
 The PLS modelling achieved a level of statistical power of
 0.80, considered by most researchers as 
acceptable to reject a false null hypothesis, i.e. Type II err
ors (Marcoulides & Saunders, 2006). A 
calculation of post-hoc statistical power for multiple regressi
on, using the R-square of 0.534 and the 
p-value of 0.0001, returned a strong statistical power of 0.947 for the sa
mple size of 34 (Soper, 2009). 
 Figure 3.  Research model for the IT function to create agility in 
existing information systems
 5.2
 Existing practice model 
The survey data was also analysed against the existing prac
tice perspective of agility, for the purpose 
of comparison with the research model. The goal of 
Create IT agility
 is explicitly linked in COBIT to 
four measurable control objectives (see section 2.2). The ma
iled questionnaire surveyed the maturity 
of the four control objectives, linked as reflective measure
s to an exogenous construct, and positively 
correlated with D-OPTIONS (0.667). The objective of PLS is
 to maximize the variance explained in 
the endogenous construct. The R-square of D-OPTIONS in the existi
ng practice model (0.458) was 
weaker than that of the research model (0.534). The results are sig
nificant at 
p < 0.0001 
6 DISCUSSION 
The purpose of this study was to identify the capabilities of the I
T function to create agility in existing 
information systems. A contribution is to extend what is known 
in the IS literature to inform IS 
practice, by suggesting improvements to a widely used industry framework
.  
The perspective gaps in section 2.3 illustrate that the IS prac
tice, based on existing COBIT control 
objectives, is uninformed by the IS theoretical perspective. F
urther informed by VSM principles (i.e. 
the VSM meta-system to the IT function) and concepts from 
the IS literature, we can derive a new set 
of objectives that explain more than half of the variance of 
agility in the survey responses (Figure 1). 
The survey analysis suggests the meta-level theory, appli
ed to the IT function, better correlates with 
reported agility outcomes than the existing COBIT linked measur
es do on their own. What are 
missing in COBIT are control objectives to create agilit
y that relate to 
Policy
, 
Intelligence
 and 
Control
 capabilities of the IT function. To reflect those control objec
tives, this research suggests new 
 measures (MAT34 MAT35 MAT36); and recognises COBIT measures 
not previously linked to 
agility. The study recommends the identified measures for future ve
rsions of industry ‚best practices™. 
Of course, one could argue that adding measures to the existing C
OBIT-based model is an obvious 
improvement. The question becomes whether the additional measures 
are necessary, is the new set of 
measures sufficient, and how can this be justified theoretically
? Using the VSM, we offer a pathway 
to answering these fundamental questions, and in so doing point towards a m
ore comprehensive and 
defensible theory on agility.  

6.1
 Limitations  
This section notes a number of biases that may affect the val
idity of the mailed survey. The first bias 
is that the responses of the questionnaire are perceptions of the r
espondents, and not formative 
measurements of the constructs that make up the hypothesis. Second, t
he survey results were subject 
to mailing errors and did not allow all members of the client
 base of ConsultCo to have an equal 
chance of participating. Third, the generalisation of the surv
ey results to other organisations is subject 
to any bias in the profile of the client base of ConsultCo. Las
t, a bias may occur where non-
respondents hide a significant capability for agility. Given 
the high ranking of agility as an issue 
amongst senior IT executives (Luftman & McLean, 2004), it is 
unlikely that non-respondents have a 
high capability of agility.  

A research limitation is the reliance on COBIT as a represe
ntative industry framework. The 
alternative frameworks of ITIL and TOGAF are not explicit 
in creating agility as a goal. Regardless, 
the reliance of COBIT for the IS practice perspective may not refl
ect the reality of design and action. 
7 CONCLUSION 
We demonstrated in this paper that the IS theoretical perspectives on agil
ity can extend to practice. By 
applying the VSM mechanism to the problem area, we address the 
ﬁwhyﬂ behind the IS theoretical 
perspective that the IT function ﬁdoesﬂ enable agility. Conceptu
alising the IT function as a VSM 
meta-system of the existing information systems addressed t
he ﬁwhyﬂ question. In doing so, we 
provided a testable theory that informs IS practice, with mea
surable capabilities, ﬁhowﬂ to enable the 
IT function to create agility. The data analysis of the mai
led survey suggested that the identified 
capabilities in the IT function are a strong determinant of 
agile responses to adapt information 
systems.  

The research fills two gaps identified in IS literature. Fir
st, Fink and Neumann (2007) suggest future 
research to identify the mechanisms underlying IT personnel and infra
structure capabilities that afford 
agility. The theory for agility in information systems exten
ded by this study identifies the VSM as a 
plausible mechanism. Second, the identified measures for the
 IT function to enable agility addresses 
the need for an index of sensing and responding suggested by Overby et 
al. (2006). A final anticipated 
contribution, of applying the VSM meta-system to the IT functi
on, is insights gained from known 
viable system pathologies that pose further IS research.  

References  

Agarwal, R. and Sambamurthy, V. (2002) Principles and models for organizing the IT f
unction. 
MIS 
Quarterly Executive
 1 (1), 1-16. 
Ashby, W. R. (1956) 
An Introduction to Cybernetics. 
Chapman & Hall, London. 
Beer, S. (1970) 
The Heart of Enterprise. 
Wiley, Chichester. 
Chin, W. W., Marcolin, B. L. and Newsted, P. R. (2003) A Partial Least Squares La
tent Variable 
Modeling Approach for Measuring Interaction Effects: Results from a Mon
te Carlo Simulation 
Study and an Electronic-Mail Emotion/Adoption Study. 
Information Systems Research
 14 (2), 
189-217. 
 Conant, R. C. and Ashby, W. R. (1970) Every good regulator of a system must be a model of tha
t 
system. 
International Journal of Systems Science
 1 (2), 89-97. 
Desouza, K. C. (2006) 
Agile Information Systems: Conceptualization, Construction, and 
Management. 
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford. 
Fink, L. and Neumann, S. (2007) Gaining Agility through IT Personnel Capabilities:
 The Mediating 
Role of IT Infrastructure Capabilities. 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems
 8 (8), 
440-462. 
Galliers, R. D. (2006) Strategizing for Agility: Confronting Information Sys
tems Inflexibility. In 
Agile Information Systems: Conceptualization, Construction, and Management 
(Desouza, K. C., 
Ed), Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford. 
Gregor, S. (2006) The nature of theory in information systems. 
MIS Quarterly
 30 (3), 611-642. 
Hulland, J. (1999) Use of Partial Least Squares (PLS) in Strategic 
Management Research: A Review 
of Four Recent Studies. 
Strategic Management Journal
 20 (2), 195-204. 
IT Governance Institute (2007) COBIT 4.1: Framework, Control Objectives, Ma
nagement Guidelines, 
Maturity Models. IT Governance Institute, Rolling Meadows IL. 
Ives, B. and Mandviwalla, M. (2004) Key Issues for IT Management in 2004. Templ
e University. 
Luftman, J. and McLean, E. (2004) Key Issues for IT Executives. 
MIS Quarterly Executive
 3 (2), 89-
104. 
Lyytinen, K. and Rose, G. M. (2006) Information system development agility as orga
nizational 
learning. 
European Journal of Information Systems
 15 (2), 183-199. 
Marcoulides, G. A. and Saunders, C. (2006) PLS: A Silver Bullet? 
MIS Quarterly
 30 (2), iii-ix. 
Markus, M. (2000) Paradigm Shifts-E-Business and Business/Systems Integ
ration. 
Communications 
of the Association for Information Systems
 4 (10), 1-44. 
Newman, D. and Logan, D. (2006) Achieving Agility: How Enterprise Information M
anagement 
Overcomes Information Silos. Gartner. 
Osborn, C. S. (1998) Systems for Sustainable Organizations: Emergent Strate
gies, Interactive 
Controls and Semi-formal Information. 
Journal of Management Studies
 35 (4), 481-509. 
Overby, E., Bharadwaj, A. and Sambamurthy, V. (2006) Enterprise agility and the ena
bling role of 
information technology. 
European Journal of Information Systems
 15 (2), 120-131. 
Peppard, J. and Ward, J. (2004) Beyond strategic information systems: toward
s an IS capability. 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems
 13 (2), 167-194. 
Ridley, G., Young, J. and Carroll, P. (2004) COBIT and its utilization: a framewor
k from the 
literature. In 
37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
, p 8. 
Ringle, C. M., Wende, S. and Will, A. (2005) SmartPLS. University of Hamburg, Hamburg
, 
Germany. 
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A. and Grover, V. (2003) Shaping Agility through Digital O
ptions: 
Reconceptualizing the Role of Information Technology in Contemporary Firms. 
MIS Quarterly
 27 
(2), 237-263. 
Sledgianowski, D., Luftman, J. and Reilly, R. (2006) Development and Validation of
 an Instrument to 
Measure Maturity of IT Business Strategic Alignment Mechanisms. 
Information Resources 
Management Journal
 19 (3), 3-18. 
Soper, D. S. (2009) Post-hoc Statistical Power for Multiple Regression. 
The Free Statistics 
Calculators Website 
www.DanielSoper.com
, Online software. 
van Oosterhout, M., Waarts, E. and van Hillegersberg, J. (2006) Change factors re
quiring agility and 
implications for IT. 
European Journal of Information Systems
 15 (2), 132-145. 
Weill, P. (2004) Don™t Just Lead, Govern: How Top-Performing Firms Gove
rn IT. 
MIS Quarterly 
Executive
 3 (1), 1-17. 
Weill, P., Subramani, M. and Broadbent, M. (2002) Building IT Infrastructure
 for Strategic Agility. 
MIT Sloan Management Review
 44 (1), 57-65. 
Wetzels, M., Odekerken-Schroder, G. and van Oppen, C. (2009) Using PLS Path Modeling f
or 
Assessing Hierarchical Construct Models: Guidelines and Empirical
 Illustration. 
MIS Quarterly
 33 
(1), 177-195. 
