 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Scrum Abandonment in Distributed Teams: ARevelatory CasePaul RalphLancaster UniversityPetr ShportunBloomberg LPPACIS 2013 Proceedings. SCRUM ABANDONMENT IN DISTRIBUTED TEAMS: A 
REVELATORY CASE
Paul Ralph
, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK, 
paul@paulralph.name
Petr Shportun
, Bloomberg LP, London, UK,
 pshportun1@bloomberg.net
 Abstract
The last decade has witnessed substantial growth in the adoption of both Agile and distributed 
software development. However, combining Agile practices, which emphasize regular informal 
communication, with geographically and temporally distributed sites, which hinder regular informal 
communication, presents numerous challenges. Proponents of Agile, especially the Scrum project 
management framework, have published several case studies of successful Scrum implementations in 
distributed environments. However, few empirical studies examine failed or abandoned Scrum 
implementations. Consequently, this paper presents a revelatory case study of a geographically and 
temporally distributed software development team that abandoned its attempted transition to Scrum. 
Two factors associated with the teamÕs decision to abandon Scrum are identified Ð degradation of 
Scrum practices due to distribution and the undermining of the ScrumMasterÕs credibility. Based on 
this analysis the paper proposes that task/team familiarity, group cohesion and transactive memory 
may be combined to understand the relationship between geotemporal distribution, process and 
performance.
Keywords: Information Systems Development, Case Study, Scrum, Agile, Failure.
 1INTRODUCTION
Software development is increasingly distributed and global (Herbsleb et al. 2001b). Distributed work 
takes more time than collocated work (Herbsleb et al. 2001a) as it requires more people (Herbsleb et 
al. 2003) and coordination (Brooks 2010). Furthermore, distributed development is associated with 
lower overall success rates (Ambler 2008; Standish Group 2009). Consequently, how to mitigate the 
productivity impact of distributed work has become a key concern in methods literature (cf., 
Sutherland et al. 2008). Meanwhile, the increasingly popular agile project management framework 
Scrum (Schwaber 2004) is associated with modest gains in developer productivity (Cardozo et al. 
2010). Consequently, Sutherland et al. (2008) advanced Òdistributed ScrumÓ to overcome declining 
productivity in distributed projects. However, non-trivial challenges are evident in applying Scrum, a 
framework based on regular, informal communication, in a distributed environment where physical 
and temporal distance impedes informal communication.
Much of the work on (distributed) Scrum specifically describes cases of successful implementations 
of the framework (e.g., Berczuk 2007; Sutherland et al. 2008). Cases often present some challenges 
faced by the team and describe ways in which they were overcome. For example, Pries-Heje et al. 
(2011) found that ScrumÕs usefulness in distributed projects derives from its effective use of boundary 
objects, boundary spanners, social integration and coordination mechanisms (see below). 
However, the Information Systems Development (ISD) literature appears to lack studies of Scrum 
failure or abandonment, i.e., situations where Scrum practices are dropped after participants explicit 
concede the Scrum adoption initiative. (One exception, discussed below, is Karekar et al., 2011.) 
Operationalizing project failure as a abandonment is helpful as the latter is less ambiguous (Ewusi-
Mensah 2003). Exploring factors associated with abandoning Scrum adoption may provide beneficial 
insights into what can go wrong, how to avoid it, and when Scrum adoption is unlikely to succeed. 
Furthermore, the recent advancement of Òdistributed ScrumÓ despite the obvious challenges of 
adopting Scrum in distributed environments makes research on Scrum adoption in distributed teams 
especially timely. This leads to our primary research question, as follows.
Research Question: 
What factors are associated with abandoning Scrum adoption in distributed 
teams?
To explore this question we begin by reviewing the literature on Scrum, distributed Scrum, 
transitioning to Scrum and the roles of knowledge, power and trust in Agile software development. 
We then describe our research methodology and summarize our findings. Next we discuss the 
theoretical and practical implications of our results. The paper concludes with a summary of its 
contributions and limitations, and suggestions for future research. 
2CONTEMPORARY UNDERSTANDING OF SCRUM
Scrum is a framework for managing software development projects. It can be applied in situations 
characterized by sparse requirements, improvisation and where problem framing and problem solving 
are entangled (Ralph 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a, 2013b). Scrum consists of prescribed roles, rules, 
artifacts, meetings, and assumptions. 
Rather than a conventional project manager, Scrum teams have two management roles Ð a 
ScrumMaster
 who manages the process and a 
Product Owner
 who manages the product. The third 
role, simply 
The Team,
 does the work. The Team may include analysts, programmers and quality 
assurance specialists. The Product owner is a boundary spanner (Levina et al. 2005), i.e., an individual 
who facilitates knowledge sharing between domains, and the focal point for vertical coordination 
(Nidumolu 1995). 
One important rule in Scrum is to 
time-box
 (limit the time of) activities. Scrum development is 
organized into time-boxed iterations, called 
sprints
, which deliver functionality increments. To say a 
sprint is time-boxed means that it ends when the allotted time is up, regardless of whether 
development goals are achieved. Scrum meetings (below) are also time-boxed. 
Scrum uses boundary objects to facilitate coordination and transparency. A boundary object is 
something that is simultaneously adaptable enough to serve different needs in different circumstances 
 and stable enough to maintain a consistent identity. Examples include conceptual models and design 
diagrams. Specifically, Scrum makes extensive uses of structured lists of tasks: 
The Product Backlog is a prioritized list of everything that might be needed in the product. The 
Sprint Backlog is a list of tasks to turn the Product Backlog for one Sprint into an increment of 
potentially shippable product. A burndown is a measure of remaining backlog over time. A 
Release Burndown measures remaining Product Backlog across the time of a release plan. A 
Sprint Burndown measures remaining Sprint Backlog items across the time of a Sprint. 
(Schwaber and Sutherland. 2010, p. 5)
Each sprint comprises development time punctuated by meetings. During the 
planning meeting
, which 
is held immediately before the each sprint, the product owner selects tasks from the product backlog 
while team members estimate the effort required for each task and self-determine who will complete 
each task. Each day of development starts with a time-boxed (15 minute) 
daily scrum
 meeting in 
which team members describe what they have done since the previous Scrum, what they are going to 
do next and any obstacles faced. Daily scrums facilitate development of shared mental models, which 
are crucial for team coordination (Espinosa et al. 2001). Scrum also prescribes review meetings where 
progress is reviewed and retrospective meetings where participants reflect on the Scrum process and 
engage in method engineering (Brinkkemper 1996). 
Scrum is very popular. In a a recent survey (VersionOne 2011) 52% of respondents reported using 
Scrum and 17% reported using Scrum hybrids with no other methodology having more than 3%.  
Meanwhile, Cardozo (2010) found 28 academic studies of Scrum between 2000 and 2009 with a 
Òreasonable level of reliabilityÓ (p. 3). Scrum was initially recommended for collocated teams 
(Schwaber and Beedle 2001), and later extended to distributed teams (Sutherland et al. 2007). 
2.1Distributed Scrum
As (collocated) Scrum is based on constant feedback and intra- and extra-team communication, 
adapting Scrum to distributed environments is a nontrivial challenge. For instance, Abbattista et al. 
(2008) argued that ÒAgile and distributed development practices are so different that, when blended 
together, the key characteristics of the former exacerbate the challenges intrinsic to the latterÓ (p. 47).
Reviewing the literature on distributed Scrum reveals that while collocated Scrum has a de facto 
standard formulation as set out in the official Scrum Guide (Schwaber and Sutherland 2010), 
distributed Scrum is more ambiguous. For the purposes of this paper, Òdistributed ScrumÓ refers to 
any adaptation of Scrum for geographically or temporally distributed teams. Recommended 
adaptations for distributed Scrum include:
¥daily Scrum team meetings of all developers from multiple sites; daily meetings of Product Owner 
team (Sutherland et al. 2007)
¥shorter sprints; greater emphasis on unit and automated tests (Berczuk 2007)
¥shared product backlog but independent sprint backlogs; 
regular travel between sites; perpetual 
tele-conferencing connections (Sutherland et al. 2008)
Moreover, Sutherland et al. (2008) suggests three forms of distributed Scrum. In ÒIsolated Scrums,Ó 
teams in separate locations conduct independent Scrum meetings. In ÒDistributed Scrum of ScrumsÓ 
multiple teams retain independent Scrum meetings but their respective ScrumMasters (or team leaders 
or project managers) have regular face-to-face or virtual meetings. In Òfully distributed ScrumsÓ team 
members at different sites participate in virtual Scrum meetings. 
However, distributed Scrum teams still face serious communication issues (Sutherland et al. 2009; 
Abbattista et al. 2008) including basic communication disruptions due to time differences between 
sites that inhibit work synchronization, daily scrums, sprint planning, and review meetings. For 
example, Vax and Michlaud (2008) found that running daily meetings for all developers across three 
sites becomes nearly impossible due to time zone differences. Similarly, Sutherland et al. (2007; 
2008) found that timing issues forced distributed teams to reduce from Scrum meeting frequency from 
daily to two or three per week. This hindered ScrumÕs primary mechanism for team coordination and 
sharing, the daily meeting (Hossain et al. 2009), which is likely to undermine trust and effectiveness 
(Iacono et al. 1997). Finding time for longer meetings including sprint planning and sprint review 
poses an even greater challenge.
 Finding effective tools to facilitate communication is also challenging. In BerczukÕs (2007) case, the 
team failed to identify a proper tool for communication. They tried Skype video calls, which was not 
perfect due to bandwidth constraints and other, mostly technical issues. Furthermore, team members 
are supposed to stand during Scrum meetings to discourage storytelling, excessive technical detail, 
and exceeding the 15-minute time-box (Yip 2011). Although standing during videoconferences is 
physically possible, without specialized hardware team members tend to sit in front of their 
computers.
Moreover, distributing development teams across countries with different cultures may introduce 
additional difficulties including language- or accent-induced miscommunications (Hossain et al. 
2009) and awkwardness when mixing cultures with different levels of power distance (Sutherland et 
al. 2009). These difficulties may undermine trust and developer satisfaction. Completing an initial 
development phase in a collocated manner before splitting into multiple locations may increase team 
familiarity and therefore have lasting positive effects on team effectiveness (Berczuk 2007; Espinosa 
et al. 2007). Similarly, regular visits of senior team members may help (Hossain et al. 2009). Despite 
the agile principle ÒWorking software over comprehensive documentationÓ (Beck et al. 2001), several 
papers argue that distributed teams require more extensive documentation (e.g., Abbattista et al. 2008; 
Hossain et al. 2009). However, the extensive communication required by large projects is not 
generally reduced by greater documentation (Curtis et al. 1992). 
While our literature review uncovered several case studies of successful implementations of 
distributed Scrum (e.g., Berczuk 2007; Sutherland et al. 2008; Lee and Yong 2010), no cases of failed 
Scrum implementation were found. More generally, Ambler (2010) found that projects using Agile 
processes have higher success rates than projects using traditional or ad hoc processes, while Ambler 
(2008) found that collocated teams have higher success rates than distributed teams. Furthermore, 
adapting Scrum for distributed work appears to depend on 
how geographically, temporally and 
culturally distributed the team is Ð an issue rarely addressed in existing literature. 
2.1Transitioning to Scrum
Another key theme in the Scrum literature concerns challenges and practices associated with adopting 
or transitioning to Scrum, especially from traditional development methods. For example, developers 
may initially perceive Scrum as an attempt at micromanagement (Cohn and Ford 2003) as managers 
take greater interest in each feature, leading to sometimes inadvertent resistance (Nerur et al. 2005). 
Team members may exhibit dissatisfaction with changing roles (Sumrell 2007) including additional 
developer responsibilities and the ScrumMaster / Product Owner split. Suggestions for overcoming 
these challenges include encouraging constant communication and transition support for both 
employees and upper-management (Schatz and Abdelshafi 2005; Lee 2008). Like other change 
projects, Scrum adoption may benefit from a ÒchampionÓ who drives the initiative. Moreover, 
successful transition depends on how Scrum practices are implemented, adapted and followed.
Of course, challenges in transitioning to Scrum may differ depending on what the team is 
transitioning 
from
, e.g., traditional lifecycle or ad hoc development (Fitzgerald, 1997). Lee (2008) 
analyzed a Scrum transition through the lens of Tuckman and JensenÕs (1977) model, which describes 
team formation in terms of Forming, Storming, Norming, Performing stages. During the Forming 
stage, teams tend to follow a managerÕs orders (Hersey et al. 1979). However, during the Storming 
and Norming stages, frequent communication is needed to resolve past issues and friction. In the 
absence of sufficient communication, the team may be unable to proceed past the Forming stage. In 
LeeÕs case, for instance, the team felt it necessary to move to an office space where they could all sit 
within shouting distance of each other.  
2.2Knowledge, Power and Trust in Software Development
Knowledge management, including team knowledge, domain knowledge and knowledge transfer to 
newcomers, is one of the main capabilities that should be supported in development environments 
(Curtis et al. 1988; Chau et al. 2003). Different methodologies prescribe different mechanisms for 
knowledge sharing and retention including documents (Parnas 2009; Parnas et al. 1995), use cases 
(Jacobson et al. 1999), requirements (Royce 1970), responsiveness (Beck et al. 2001), a boundary-
spanning product owner (Schwaber and Beedle 2001), budget and schedule (cf., Brooks 2010), risk 
(Boehm 1988) and interpersonal relationships (Beck 2005). While the problems associated with losing 
 team knowledge through employee attrition, forgetting and miscommunication are obvious, 
documents may quickly become out of date, inconsistent and generally neglected. Therefore, Agile 
processes including Scrum tend to advocate tacit knowledge shared through interpersonal interaction 
and team awareness (Beck 2005; Carstensen and Schmidt 2003). Teams may facilitate informal 
knowledge sharing by sharing physical and virtual spaces (Carsteen and Schmidt 2003) and through a 
variety of technologies including comprehensive bug trackers, wikis and forums (Bowen and Maurer 
2002). More generally, domain familiarity is crucial for designing complex systems (Curtis et al. 1988; 
Espinosa et al. 2007). Scrum practices designed to promote domain familiarity include on-site 
customer, review meetings where customers are invited, regular feedback and the Product Owner role.
A comprehensive understanding of distributed Scrum adoption also involves power and trust issues. 
While a complete review of the extensive literature on change management, group development and 
trust is beyond the scope of this paper, the key point for our purposes is twofold. First, project actors 
may rely on various bases of power including coercive, connection, reward, legitimate, referent, 
information and expert power (Hersey, Blanchard, and Natemeyer 1979). The Product Owner and 
ScrumMaster ideally rely on expert power rather than coercion; therefore, if expert power is 
undermined, the team may lose faith in its leaders, jeopardizing the Scrum adoption effort. Second, 
Agile methods rely on intra-team trust rather than authority to facilitate coordination and on trust 
between the the team and other project stakeholders rather than fixed-price contracts to manage risk. 
Trust generally facilitates information and knowledge sharing (Kramer and Tyler, 1996), while 
Komiak and Benbasat (2006) differentiate between cognitive trust, which may be more important for 
team-stakeholder interactions and emotional trust, which may be more important within teams. As 
distributed teams build trust more slowly than collocated teams (Wilson et al. 2006), the importance 
of trust is enhanced.
2RESEARCH METHOD
Studying failing or abandoned Scrum implementations is challenging as it requires identifying one or 
more organizations having at least the following characteristics: 
1.operates in a distributed environment
2.attempted to transition to distributed Scrum
3.unambiguously failed to transition to distributed Scrum
4.contains informants who are willing to share their experiences of what may be perceived as a 
costly mistake
5.has attempted the transition recently enough that the key actors are still reachable and remember 
what happened
Having previously considered the difficulties of contemporary field research on method abandonment 
and project failure, when we became aware of a research-friendly company in midst of a Scrum 
adoption initiative that appeared to be failing, we took advantage of the opportunity and quickly 
employed a single case study design. 
Yin (2009) argues that single case studies are appropriate where the case is revelatory. ÒRevelatoryÓ 
does 
not
 mean that the case revealed an astonishing discovery; rather, it refers to one where Òthe 
investigator has access to a situation previously inaccessible to scientific observationÓ (p. 43). More 
generally, demanding multiple-case designs by default on the basis that they have greater 
generalizability represents a misapplication of statistical generalizability to non-statistical, non-
sampling research (Lee and Baskerville 2003). Practically speaking, given the restrictiveness of the 
above criteria and the absence of studies of failed Scrum implementation in the literature, we are 
fortunate to have identified a single appropriate organization. 
Our objective was to explore the events leading up to Scrum abandonment and identify factors that 
may have contributed to it. Therefore, we adopted an interpretive case study approach (Eisenhardt, 
1989) within a critical realist ontology. Our approach is interpretive in that we studied the attempted 
 Scrum adoption through the meanings ascribed by participants in interviews and observations, which 
are socially constructed (Myers and Avison 2002). 
2.1The Context
RA is a small software development company with offices in San Mateo, California and St. 
Petersburg, Russia. RA develops and maintains a single product, a data analysis platform for brand 
audience management. The platform creates models of different audiences for online content and 
facilitates use of these models for targeted advertising among other purposes. This product is 
developed by a single team, which is distributed between the two offices. RA was founded in 2009 
with funding from institutional investors and attracted several experienced personnel before being 
acquired by a larger company in December 2011. Our study took place in July 2011. During this time, 
upper management was concentrated in the San Mateo office while development activities were 
concentrated in the St. Petersburg office. 
2.2Data Collection
When data collection began, RA was in the process of dissolving its Scrum adoption initiative. We 
therefore proceeded by examining documents and artifacts from the Scrum initiative period as well as 
interviewing key informants and briefly observing their current practices. All interviews were 
recorded an transcribed for analysis. Interviews conducted in Russian were transcribed into English 
by one of the authors. Observation notes were taken in English. We also photographed the work area 
including all remaining physical artifacts associated with the attempted Scrum implementation.
Semistructured interviews followed the interview guide in the Appendix; however substantial 
deviations from the guide were allowed when interviewees raised unexpected but possibly important 
concerns. Interview questions were selected to understand the team, the evolution of their process 
from before the Scrum initiative to the time of the study, and the factors leadings to Scrum 
abandonment. Questions concerned participantsÕ perceptions of what changes occurred and why, who 
was driving the changes, and the outcomes. The interview guide was subjected to a two-stage 
validation process including review by an expert in Scrum methodology followed by pilot interviews 
with three practitioners from another company. Validation resulted in minor changes to question 
wording and structure. 
All interview transcripts, observation notes, document copies and photographs were organized in a 
case database to facilitate analysis. 
2.3Data Analysis
We applied an iterative open-coding process (Silverman and Marvasti 2008) similar to that used in 
Grounded Theory research (Glaser and Strauss, 1967) to the transcripts, documents and observation 
notes. During open coding, similar codes are grouped into an unspecified number of categories, the 
names of which become the ÒthemesÓ or key findings. We also used mind-mapping (Tattersall et al. 
2007) to consolidate issues and identify dependencies. Mind mapping is especially helpful in 
understanding connections between themes, codes and evidence from the case as well as relating 
evidence to existing literature. As mind maps quickly become too large for print, Figure 1 provides an 
example mind map segment illustrating relationships between risk factors in and recommended 
practices for distributed Scrum. Finally, we shared our analysis with several participants to gauge how 
well it corresponds to their perceptions of the events in question, leading to minor revisions. 
3FINDINGS3.1Background
Beginning in late autumn 2010, RA attempted to transition from their existing ad hoc development 
approach to distributed Scrum. The transition began as a management initiative to improve the 
transparency of the development process. It required various role changes for existing employees 
(summarized in Table 1). In the remainder of the paper we use individualsÕ original titles and Scrum 
role names interchangeably.
 Prior to the Scrum adoption initiative, the team consisted of two architects, three Java developers (one 
of whom was designated a ÒSenior DeveloperÓ), two user interface (UI) developers and three testers. 
The testers acted independently, rather than integrating with the team as is common in Scrum. The 
team was managed by the chief scientist who was directly involved in the development process and 
later assumed the Product Owner role. The chief scientist, architects and one of the UI developers 
were located in San Mateo, California while the remaining team members were located in St. 
Petersburg, Russia. Architect Two left the company during the transition to Scrum.
Figure 1. Example Mind Map Segment
Original title
Scrum role 
Location
Responsibilities and Activities in Practice
Chief scientist
Product Owner
San Mateo
Managing the development and testing teams including 
prioritizing tasks and communicating with clients
Architect One
ScrumMaster
San Mateo
Improving the software architecture and introducing Scrum; 
championing the transition to Scrum
Architect Two
Team Member
San Mateo
Was originally designated an architect but quickly became just 
a developer albeit senior
Senior Developer
Team Member
St. Petersburg
In practice, the Senior developer retained a de facto leadership 
role within the team and made many of key technical 
decisions. Others referred to him as the ÒTechnical LeadÓ
Developers
Team Members
St. Petersburg
Developing product functionality
UI Developers
Team Members
One in each
Developing product interface
Testers
Testers
St. Petersburg
Product quality assurance
Table 1. Actors and Scrum Roles
Our analysis produced two main themes in participantsÕ perceptions of the factors leading to 
abandoning the Scrum adoption project: Scrum practice degradation and the undermining of the 
ScrumMaster. Each of these is described in turn, below. The evidence supporting each theme is 
summarized in Table 2. 
 Theme
Example Codes
Example Evidence
1PDS2Scrum 
Practice 
Degradation
intra-sprint 
requirements 
instability
ÒIt is like this: you start developing a feature and you sort out the 
requirements as you go. And it is all in one sprint, it is not like we fix the 
requirements and everybody knows exactly what to do at the 
start.Ó (Developer One)
The Product Owner Òcontinued working in the way he did before. So if 
everything has changed he calls us and says, everything has changed we 
need to redo the whole thing.Ó (Technical Lead) 
NoScrum 
Practice 
Degradation
Scrum wall 
redundancy
ÒEverybody communicates with each other one way or the other and 
understands the main idea of the work that is being done and there is no 
need for this sort of reporting.Ó (Developer Two)
No one consulted or modified the Scrum Wall during observations.
All interviewees indicated that they had stopped using the Scrum wall 
after a month or so.
Yes
Scrum 
Practice 
Degradation
meeting time 
conflict
Daily Scrum meetings Òwere in place. But everyone was unhappy with 
the time because it was either early in the morning or late in the evening 
and half the company comes early in the morning and the other half late 
during the day. So we could not come to a consensus on this 
question.Ó (Developer One)
Òit was hard to find time for meetings that suited everybody.Ó (Developer 
Two)
Yes
Subversion 
of the 
ScrumMaster
credibility
The ScrumMaster Òstarted to develop the UI back end himself. And 
frankly it didnÕt go well. He was doing it very slowly. There were a lot of 
bugs, well, there were a lot of problems.Ó (Technical Lead)
Developer One made clear that the ScrumMaster, being a newcomer, did 
not fully understand the project.
NoSubversion 
of the 
ScrumMaster
infighting
During the interview it was obvious that Technical Lead was charismatic 
and could manipulate othersÕ opinions. He also spoke quite negatively 
about work that ScrumMaster did. Other interviewees agreed that 
Technical Lead was opposing initiatives of the ScrumMaster. The 
Technical Lead expressed unhappiness that the ScrumMaster had 
assumed some of his responsibilities, including liaising with the Product 
Owner.
NoSubversion 
of the 
ScrumMaster
trust
Several interviewees indicated that the ScrumMaster lost their trust by 
trying to develop part of functionality himself and doing it badly.
Yes
Subversion 
of the 
ScrumMaster
relationships
Òdevelopers and managers on the USA side did not establish good 
communication links with the teamÓ (Technical Lead)
Developer One indicated that the Technical Lead and ScrumMaster were 
unable to establish good communication or a good relationship
Yes
Table 2. Challenges in Adopting Distributed Scrum 
1Quotations translated from Russian with some paraphrasing for clarity 
2Particular to Distributed Projects (or exacerbated by the distribution of participants)
3.2Theme One: Scrum Practice Degradation
Berczuk (2007) recommends that during initial Scrum adoption, practices should be implemented by 
the book, especially when a team has no experience in the process. However, practitioners rarely 
follow methods precisely or even closely (Mathiassen and Purao 2001). RA initially adopted Scrum 
roles, sprints, some meetings including daily Scrums and some artifacts including user stories and 
burndown charts. However, the distributed nature of the team contributed to deterioration of at least 
three Scrum elements. 
First, the daily, time-boxed, stand-up meetings for which Scrum is named are the key facilitator of 
shared mental models, team cohesion and coordination. RA adopted the Òfully distributed ScrumÓ 
model (Sutherland et al. 2008) where team members at different locations participate in virtual Scrum 
meetings. However, the 11-hour time difference between the two sites made it nearly impossible to 
find meeting times that were convenient for everyone. Consequently, many people regularly missed 
the meetings, which undermined their usefulness and increased friction within the team. Although 
Sutherland et al. (2007) report successful daily meetings despite large time zone differences, RAÕs 
developers found the meetings disruptive and irritating. This led to communication and knowledge 
 sharing difficulties (below). Additionally, as meetings were held through Skype, participants tended to 
sit at their desks, which undermines the key benefits of stand-up meetings, namely, discomfort from 
standing helps keep meetings short. Consequently, daily meetings tended to exceed their time-box, 
increasing developersÔ frustrations. 
Second, Scrum calls for a 
Scrum Wall
 or 
sprint burndown chart
, which physically visualizes progress. 
Tasks are written on sticky notes, which are organized by the developer to which the task is assigned.  
In contrast, distributed Scrum teams may rely on a digital Scrum wall to coordinate across sites 
(Sutherland et al. 2007)
. The physical wall, therefore, simply replicates part of the digital version. In 
contrast to BerczukÕs (2007) case where replicating tasks from an online task tracking tool onto a 
physical chart was successful, RAÕs developers perceived the physical version as redundant. One 
developer explained that the Scrum Wall was only used when the ScrumMaster was present. 
Here, the distributed nature of the team necessitated a digital burndown chart, which led to lack of 
interest in maintaining the physical version. However, the physical wall has benefits that the digital 
version lacks including increasing work transparency. With a physical chart, anyone with access to the 
teamÕs premises can see, at a glance, who is working on what and the remaining sprint tasks. ÒTeams 
are more likely to see a big, visible chart than they are to look at Sprint burndown chart in Excel or a 
toolÓ (Schwaber and Sutherland, 2010).
Third, Scrum calls for development sprints of a fixed and consistent duration (e.g., one month) during 
which the sprint backlog is fixed; i.e., the Product Owner is not supposed to change requirements 
during the sprint. However, RAÕs product owner often altered requirements mid-sprint. In response, 
the ScrumMaster altered the sprint duration or delayed the next release, citing the intra-sprint changes 
as justification. The product owner recorded these changes using red sticky notes on the physical 
burndown chart, but often neglected to update the digital burndown chart. This lead to poor 
communication between management (in San Mateo) and development (in St. Petersburg). 
Specifically, the ScrumMasterÕs justifications for schedule changes referred to the disruptions evident 
on the physical burndown chart; however, as management could only see the digital burndown chart, 
delays seemed unwarranted. In this way, the combination of the Product OwnerÕs changes and poor 
communication caused by physical distribution undermined managementÕs confidence in the 
ScrumMaster, which relates to the second major theme. 
3.3Theme Two: Subversion of the ScrumMaster
Prior to adopting Scrum, the St. Petersburg group relied heavily on informal communication to 
facilitate knowledge sharing, with minimal documentation in the form of requirements lists and 
unstructured notes. The ScrumMaster who was working in San Mateo found that combination of 
informal communication norms and geotemporal distance inhibited communication and knowledge 
sharing. Consequently, he transferred to the St. Petersburg office in the third week of the first sprint.
There, the ScrumMaster encountered substantial difficulties in understanding the project, especially 
its architecture. The developers felt that the ScrumMaster did not sufficiently engage with their 
informal knowledge sharing to develop a good understanding of the project. However, having 
previously worked as a software architect, the ScrumMaster made some architectural design 
decisions. Other team members felt that these decisions were misguided and found them difficult to 
maintain.
Meanwhile, the formerly entitled Òlead developerÓ was unhappy with his perceived demotion to 
simply Òteam memberÓ resulting from adopting Scrum. He consequently invented the title ÒTechnical 
Lead,Ó opposed the Scrum initiative and antagonized the ScrumMaster. The team and to some extent 
management perceived the Technical Lead as having greater expertise than the ScrumMaster. The 
Technical LeadÕs agonistic approach and the ScrumMasterÕs poorly perceived architectural revisions 
combined to undermine the ScrumMasterÕs credibility with the developers. Meanwhile, the schedule 
changed discussed in Theme One exacerbated the ScrumMasterÕs problems by similarly undermining 
his credibility with upper management.
The ScrumMaster (and newest member of the team) championed Scrum adoption, i.e., he was the 
intellectual and social force driving the change initiative. When he lost the trust of the development 
team, he lost the ability to maintain the change (Schatz and Abdelshafi 2005; Komiak and Benbasat 
2006). In this way, the Scrum initiative became conflated with the individual advocating it Ð as the 
 ScrumMasterÕs credibility was actively undermined by the Technical Lead, so the whole Scrum 
implementation was undermined. 
4DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Karekar et al. (2011) found that a Scrum adoption initiative was abandoned due to Òlack of firm 
leadership commitment to agile, absence of a clearly defined customer ... failure to provide adequate 
initial or ongoing training and support ... and underestimating the change management 
requirementsÓ (p. 1). This case differs in that the key factors that drove abandonment appear to be 
problems implementing Scrum practices due to the teamÕs geotemporal distribution and a 
conflagration of political infighting, technical errors and resistance to change that undermined the 
ScrumMaster and project championÕs credibility. 
Our results also contrast sharply with existing cases of successful distributed Scrum implementation 
(e.g., Berczuk 2007; Sutherland et al. 2008, 2009; Lee and Yong 2010). More specifically, although 
Sutherland et al. (2007) and Woodward et al. (2010) argue that teleconferencing can overcome 
problems associated with daily meetings across time differences, our results suggest that this requires 
highly motivated participants. Additionally, while some studies (e.g., Sutherland et al. 2008; Hossain 
et al. 2009) found that good tools could overcome communication issues, this case illustrates how the 
limitations of basic teleconferencing tools hindered daily meetings and undermined Scrum adoption. 
Similarly, although Berczuk (2007) found that simply copying information from project management 
software onto a physical Scrum wall was useful, the RA team denigrated the Scrum Wall as 
ridiculous. Finally, this case differs from many existing studies of distributed Scrum implementation 
in that it lacked a charismatic and experienced Scrum guru to champion Scrum adoption.
These results relate to and extend existing theories of familiarity, transactive memory and group 
cohesion. Familiarity may improve performance in software projects in two different ways Ð 
task 
familiarity
 increases performance Òby increasing member abilityÓ while 
team familiarity
 increases 
performance Òby facilitating recognition and utilization of member expertiseÓ (Littlepage et al. 1997, 
p. 133). Here, task familiarity indicates participantsÕ domain knowledge and skill level while team 
familiarity is the extent to which team members are aware of each otherÕs knowledge and expertise. 
Furthermore, while geographic dispersion and team size negatively impact team performance, groups 
with greater team familiarity are more resistant to these negative effects (Espinosa et al. 2007). 
Task/team familiarity are related to the concepts of memory and meta-memory in the Theory of 
Transactive Memory, which posits that individuals encode beliefs in memory and beliefs about beliefs 
in ÒmetamemoryÓ (Wegner 1987). A software development team can therefore be seen as a transactive 
memory system where individuals (specialists) have not only specialist domain knowledge (memory/
task familiarity) but also knowledge of what other team members know (metamemory/team 
familiarity). Team performance therefore depends on not only individual skills but also individualsÕ 
knowing who to ask about topics outside their skills. 
Team familiarity and metamemory also relate to 
Group Cohesion. 
Group cohesion has long been 
considered an important if not the most important variable for understanding the formation and 
performance of small groups (Golembiewski 1962; Lott and Lott 1965). However, ambiguity 
regarding its precise nature remains (Bollen and Hoyle 1990). For example, group cohesion has been 
defined as Òthe tendency for a group to stick together and remain united in the pursuit of its goals and 
objectivesÓ (Carron et al. 1985, p. 124) while perceived cohesion has been defined as Òan individualÕs 
sense of belonging to a particular group and his or her feelings of morale associated with membership 
in groupsÓ (Bollen and Hoyle 1990, p. 482). Here we use team cohesion to indicate the extent to 
which a team acts together as a single agent toward toward shared goals. Team cohesion implies not 
only team familiarity but also shared mental models, shared purpose, trust and camaraderie.
Our analysis suggests a more complex relationship between geotemporal distribution, process and 
performance. Many agile and Scrum practices should strengthen transactive memory and increase 
team familiarity and cohesion. For example, daily meetings facilitate developing shared mental 
models and keep team members current on each otherÕs activities (Schwaber 2004). Similarly, the 
Scrum wall builds trust by increasing process transparency and the Product Owner builds a sense of 
shared purpose by facilitating experience sharing between team members and project stakeholders. 
 Peer programming and peer code reviews should strengthen transactive memory (Schmidt et al. 2012) 
by providing opportunities for knowledge sharing. 
However, geotemporal distribution hinders these practices. Stand-up meetings become inconvenient. 
Scrum walls are virtualized. Stakeholder-team communication is hindered. Programmers can only 
peer with others in the same physical location. Code reviews become forms instead of conversations. 
Team members have fewer opportunities to share expertise and build cohesion through socialization. 
The RA case particularly illustrates how team cohesion was undermined during the transition to 
Scrum. As explained above, the technical lead and ScrumMaster did not share a common purpose: the 
latter sought to transition to Scrum while the former sought to undermine the ScrumMaster and 
transition. When developers complained that the ScrumMaster did not understand the product, they 
imply a problem in their shared mental model. When the ScrumMaster made controversial 
architectural decisions, the team lost trust in him. This lead to a relationship dominated by antagonism 
rather than camaraderie. In other words, during the transition to Scrum, Team Cohesion collapsed, 
hindering not only development performance but also performance of the Scrum transition itself.
In summary, focusing on team familiarity or transactive memory downplays emotion; e.g., knowing 
who can solve your current problem is less helpful if that person refuses to speak to you. Focusing on 
cohesion, meanwhile, downplays cognition; e.g., feeling comfortable enough with your team to admit 
a serious error is less helpful if you have no idea which person has the knowledge to fix the error. This 
motivates further research on distributed team performance, specifically theorizing about team 
performance in terms of familiarity, transactive memory and cohesion.
Based on the above analysis we can make several practical recommendations. First, organizations 
seeking to transition to Scrum should pay careful attention to team memberÕs perceptions of role 
changes. Scrum provides a flat organizational model where all types and levels of developers are 
simply Ôthe teamÕ. Employees accustomed to more hierarchical levels may experience indignation at 
the loss of titles including Òchief architect,Ó Òsenior developer,Ó Òhead of quality assuranceÓ or Ôlead 
designerÓ. Second, organizations should be aware that employees may conflate the benefits of 
adopting Scrum with personality and technical competence of the individual championing Scrum 
adoption. Finally, organizations should be aware that geotemporal distribution is a spectrum where 
practices that empower a team distributed across two offices in neighboring cities may infuriate a 
team distributed across 12 time zones; e.g., while teleconferencing may overcome communication 
barriers, it cannot overcome the irritation of going to work in the middle of the night for a stand-up 
meeting.
These results and recommendation should be interpreted in light of several limitations. First, our 
analysis is specific to this particular case and may not generalize to dissimilar situations. Moreover, 
this is obviously an extreme case with an 11-hour time difference and a disgruntled team member 
actively subverting the Scrum adoption. However, studying outliers is necessary to fully understand a 
phenomenon (Van de Ven 2007) and in many ways existing studies (e.g., Sutherland et al. 2007; 2008) 
are also outliers due to the personal involvement of Scrum co-creator Jeff Sutherland. Second, our 
data collection took place near the end of the Scrum project and is therefore subject to hindsight bias 
and other memory effects (Pohl 2004). Third, with the available data we cannot definitively establish 
causality; therefore, we present ScrumMaster subversion and practice degradation as factors 
associated with Scrum abandonment rather than causes. Finally and less obviously, in this case the 
ScrumMaster was also championing Scrum adoption; therefore we cannot disentangle the two roles, 
i.e., it is unclear whether subversion of the ScrumMaster or subversion of the Scrum champion is the 
critical factor. Common sense suggests neither benefits the transition.
5CONCLUSION
This paper presents a revelatory case study of a distributed software team that abandoned a concerted 
attempted to adopt the popular software project management framework, Scrum. We began with the 
research question, 
what factors are associated with abandoning Scrum adoption in distributed teams? 
Consequently, the paperÕs primary contribution comprises two factors associated with abandoning 
Scrum adoption in distributed teams Ð Scrum practice degradation and subversion of the ScrumMaster 
or Scrum Champion. While the available data and research method cannot establish a definitive causal 
link between these factors and the teamÕs decision to abandon Scrum, practically speaking they are 
 obvious warning signs that the transition is challenged. This contribution is novel in that these factors 
differ from factors identified in previous research on Scrum adoption and abandonment. 
Additionally, the paper makes a secondary contribution concerning theoretical lenses applied to 
understand (software development) team performance. Scrum is explicitly designed to increase team 
performance and substantial evidence indicates that it practically does so (Cardozo et al. 2010). 
Several theoretical lenses provide mechanisms, including team familiarity, group cohesion and 
transactive memory, through which Scrum might increase performance. Our analysis suggests that 
none of these lenses provides a complete picture and that future research may benefit from 
considering not only cognitive aspects (familiarity; transactive memory) but also emotional aspects 
(cohesion) in understanding how Scrum practices affect performance. 
By contrasting with existing cases of successful implementations of Scrum in distributed teams, this 
study highlights the need for more research on not only the adaptations to Scrum practices necessary 
for distributed work but also the antecedents of successful Scrum transition. Our specific results 
question the view (cf. Woodward et al. 2010) that the challenges of distributed Scrum generally can be 
overcome by process modification alone and motivate greater study of the role of team familiarity, 
group cohesion and transactive memory in Scrum adoption and team performance. 
6APPENDIX: INTERVIEW GUIDE
1.What project are you currently working on? What is it about?
2.What is your role in the project?
3.Would you tell me a little about the development process youÕre currently using?
4.Do you have any kind of retrospective meetings about the process? 
5.Have you made any changes to the process lately?
6.How about since the beginning of the project?
7.How did you come to be using your current process?
8.How has the process changed over the course of the project? 
 Probes: Specific example of a change, why it was made, how long it took, whom did it affect?
9.How is the current process working for you? Does it need more changes? If so, what kind?
10.Have there been any political issues surrounding process decisions?
11.How closely do you follow methodology guidance? 
12.Have you ever just make things look like they were done according to the process after the fact, to 
keep management happy?
References
Abbattista, F. et al. (2008). Incorporating social software into distributed agile development 
environments. 23rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering Ð 
Workshops, L'Aquila, Italy, 46-51.
Abrahamsson, P., Salo, O., Ronkainen, J., and Warsta, J. (2002). Agile Software Development 
Methods: Review and Analysis. Espoo: VTT Publications.
Ambler, S. (2010). 2010 Agile Project Success Rates Survey Results. Ambysoft. Available at: 
http://
www.ambysoft.com/surveys/agileSuccess2010.html
 [Accessed September 1, 2011].
Ambler, S. (2008). Agile Adoption Rate Survey Results. Ambysoft. Available at: 
http://
www.ambysoft.com/surveys/agileFebruary2008.html
 [Accessed September 1, 2011].
Beck, K. (2005). Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, 2nd edition. Addison Wesley: 
Boston, MA, USA.
Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., Cunningham, W., Fowler, M., Grenning, J., 
Highsmith, J., Hunt, A., Jeffries, R., Kern, J., Marick, B., Martin, R.C., Mellor, S., Schwaber, K., 
Sutherland, J., and Thomas, D. (2001). Manifesto for Agile Software Development. Available at: 
http://agilemanifesto.org
/ [Accessed September 1, 2011].
 Berczuk, S. (2007). Back to Basics: The Role of Agile Principles in Success with an Distributed 
Scrum Team. In AGILE 2007, 382-388.
Boehm, B. (1988). A Spiral Model of Software Development and Enhancement, IEEE Computer 21 
(5), May, 61-72.
Blackler, F., (1995). Knowledge, Knowledge Work and Organizations: An Overview and 
Interpretation. Organization Studies, 16 (6), 1021-1046.
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (2006). How to Research. Open University Press.
Bollen, K.A., and Hoyle, R.H. (1990). Perceived Cohesion: A Conceptual and Empirical Examination, 
Social Forces 69 (2), 479-504.
Bowen, S. and Maurer, F. (2002). Process support and knowledge management for virtual teams doing 
agile software development. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Computer Software 
and Applications Conference, 1118-1120.
Brinkkemper, S. (1996). Method Engineering: Engineering of Information Systems Development 
Methods and Tools, Information and Software Technology 38 (4), 275-280.
Brooks, F.P. (2010). The Design of Design: Essays from a Computer Scientist. Addison-Wesley 
Professional.
Carron, A.V., Widmeyer, W.N., and Brawley, L.R. (1985). The Development of an Instrument to 
Assess Cohesion in Sport Teams: The Group Environment Questionnaire, Journal of Sport 
Psychology (7), 244-266.
Cardozo, E., Neto, J., Barza, A., Fran“a, A., and da Silva, F. (2010). Scrum and Productivity in 
Software Projects: A Systematic Literature Review. In Proceedings of the 14th International 
Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering, Keele University, UK.
Carstensen, P. and Schmidt, K. (2003). Computer supported cooperative work: New challenges to 
systems design. In Kenji, I., ed. Handbook of Human Factors/Ergonomics. Tokyo: Asakura 
Publishing, 619Ð636. 
Chau, T., Maurer, F. and Melnik, G. (2003). Knowledge sharing: agile methods vs. Tayloristic 
methods. In Proceedings of the Twelfth IEEE International Workshops on Enabling Technologies: 
Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, 302-307.
Cohn, M. and Ford, D. (2003). Introducing an agile process to an organization. Computer, 36 (6), 
74-78.Coplien, J.O., (1994). Borland Software Craftsmanship: A New Look at Process, Quality and 
Productivity. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual Borland International Conference. Orlando, Florida.
Curtis, B., Kellner, M.I., and Over, J. (1992). Process Modeling, Communications of the ACM 35 (9), 
75-90.Curtis, B., Krasner, H. and Iscoe, N., (1988). A field study of the software design process for large 
systems. Communications of the ACM, 31 (11), 1268-1287.
Eisenhardt, K.M., (1989) Building Theories From Case Study Research. The Academy of 
Management Review, 14 (4), 532.
Espinosa, A., Kraut, R., Lerch, J., Slaughter, S., Herbsleb, J., and Mockus, A. (2001). Shared Mental 
Models and Coordination in Large-Scale, Distributed Software Development. In Proceedings of 
ICIS 2001, 513-518.
Espinosa, J.A., Sandra, A.S., Robert, E.K., and James, D.H. (2007). Familiarity, Complexity and Team 
Performance in Geographically Distributed Software Development, Organization Science 18 (4), 
613-630.Ewusi-Mensah, K. (2003). Software Development Failures, Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.
Fitzgerald, B. (1997). The use of systems development methodologies in practice: a field study. 
Information Systems Journal, 7 (3), 201Ð212.
Glaser, BG and Strauss, A., (1967). Discovery of Grounded Theory. Strategies for Qualitative 
Research, Sociology Press.
Golembiewski, R.T. (1962). The Small Group. University of Chicago Press.
Herbsleb, J.D., and Mockus, A. (2003). An Empirical Study of Speed and Communication in Globally 
Distributed Software Development. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 29 (6), 481-494.
Herbsleb, J.D., Mockus, A., Finholt, T.A., and Grinter, R.E. (2001). An Empirical Study of Global 
Software Development: Distance and Speed. In Proceedings of ICSE 2001, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada: IEEE Computer Society, 81-90.
Herbsleb, J.D., and Moitra, D. (2001). Global Software Development, IEEE Software (18:2), 16-20.
Hersey, P., Blanchard, K.H. and Natemeyer, W.E., (1979). Situational Leadership, Perception, and the 
Impact of Power. Group and Organization Management, 4 (4), 418-428.
 Hossain, E., Babar, M.A. and Paik, H.-young (2009). Using Scrum in Global Software Development: 
A Systematic Literature Review. In Proceedings of the Fourth IEEE International Conference on 
Global Software Engineering, 175-184.
Iacono, C.S., and Weisband, S. (1997). Developing Trust in Virtual Teams. In Proceedings of HICCS 
1997, 412-420.Jacobson, I., Booch, G., and Rumbaugh, J. (1999). The Unified Software Development Process. 
Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.
Komiak, S.Y.X. and Benbasat, I. (2006). The effects of personalizaion and familiarity on trust and 
adoption of recommendation agents. MIS Quarterly., 30 (4), 941-960.
Karekar, C., Tarrell, A., and Fruhling, A. (2011) Agile Development at ABCÐWhat Went Wrong?. In 
Proceedings of AMCIS 2011, paper 283.
Kramer, R.M. and Tyler, T.R., (1996). Trust in organizations: frontiers of theory and research, Sage 
Publications.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E., (1991). Situated Learning, Cambridge University Press.
Lee, A.S., and Baskerville, R.L. (2003). Generalizing Generalizability in Information Systems 
Research. Information Systems Research 14 (3), 221-243.
Lee, E.C. (2008). Forming to Performing: Transitioning Large-Scale Project Into Agile. In 
Proceedings of Agile 2008, 106-111.
Lee, S. and Yong, H.-S. (2010). Distributed agile: project management in a global environment. 
Empirical Software Engineering, 15 (2), 204-217.
Levina, N., and Vaast, E. (2005). The Emergence of Boundary Spanning Competence in Practice: 
Implications for Implementation and Use of Information Systems, MIS Quarterly 29 (2), 335-363.
Littlepage, G., Robison, W., and Reddington, K. (1997). Effects of Task Experience and Group 
Experience on Group Performance, Member Ability, and Recognition of Expertise, Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 69 (2), 133-147.
Lott, A.J., and Lott, B.E. (1965). Group Cohesiveness as Interpersonal Attraction: A Review of 
Relationships with Antecedents and Consequent Variables, Psychological Bulletin (64), 259-309.
Myers, M.D., and Avison, D.E. (2002). Qualitative Research in Information Systems: A Reader. Sage.
Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R. and Mangalaraj, G. (2005). Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies. 
Commuications of the ACM, 48 (5), 72-78.
Nidumolu, S. (1995). The Effect of Coordination and Uncertainty on Software Project Performance: 
Residual Performance Risk as an Intervening Variable, Information Systems Research 6 (3), 
191-219.Parnas, D.L. (2009). Document Based Rational Software Development, Knowledge-Based Systems 
22 (3), 132-141.Parnas, D.L., and Madey, J. (1995). Functional Documents for Computer Systems, Science of 
Computer Programming 25 (1), 41-61.
Pries-Heje, L., and Pries-Heje, J. (2011). Agile and Distributed Project Management: A Case Study 
Revealing Why Scrum Is Useful. In Proceedings of ECIS 2011, Helsinki, Finland.
Pohl, R. (ed.) (2004). Cognitive Illusions. East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Ralph, P. (2010). Comparing Two Software Design Process Theories. In R. Winter, J. L. Zhao, & S. 
Aier (Eds.), Proceedings of DESRIST, St. Gallen, Switzerland: Springer LNCS 6105, 139-153.
Ralph, P. (2011). Introducing an Empirical Model of Design. In Proceedings of The 6th Mediterranean 
Conference on Information Systems, Limassol, Cyprus.
Ralph, P. (2012). The Illusion of Requirements in Software Development. Requirements Engineering.
Ralph, P. (2013a). The Two Paradigms of Software Design. arXiv:1303.5938 [cs.SE].
Ralph, P. (2013b). The Sensemaking-Coevolution-Implementation Theory of Software Design. arXiv:
1302.4061 [cs.SE]. 
Rising, L. and Janoff, N.S. (2000). The Scrum software development process for small teams. IEEE 
Software, 17 (4), 26-32.
Royce, W.W. (1970). Managing the Development of Large Software Systems: Concepts and 
Techniques, Proceedings of Wescon.
Schatz, B. and Abdelshafi, I. (2005). Primavera gets agile: a successful transition to agile 
development. IEEE Software, 22 (3), 36-42.
Schmidt, C., Spohrer, K., Kude, T., and Heinzl, A. (2012). The Impact of Peer-Based Software 
Reviews on Team Performance: The Role of Feedback and Transactive Memory Systems. In 
Proceedings of ICIS 2012, Orlando, FL, USA, December.
Schwaber, K. (2004). Agile Project Management with Scrum. Microsoft Press.
 Schwaber, K., and Sutherland, J. (2010). The Scrum Guide. Scrum.org. Available: 
http://
www.scrum.org/scrumguides/
 [Accessed September 1, 2011].
Schwaber, K., and Beedle, M. (2001. Agile Software Development with Scrum. Prentice Hall.
Standish Group (2009). Chaos Summary 2009. Boston, MA, USA. Available at: 
http://
www.standishgroup.com/newsroom/chaos_2009.php
 [Accessed September 1, 2011].
Silverman, D., and Marvasti, A.B. (2008). Doing Qualitative Research : A Comprehensive Guide. 
Thousand Oaks, CA, USA: Sage.
Sumrell, M. (2007). From Waterfall to Agile - How does a QA Team Transition? In Proceedings of 
AGILE 2007, 291-295.
Sutherland, J., Schoonheim, G. and Rijk, M. (2008). Fully Distributed Scrum: Replicating Local 
Productivity and Quality with Offshore Teams. In Proceedings of HICSS 2008.
Sutherland, J., Schoonheim, G., Rustenburg, E., & Rijk, M. (2008). Fully Distributed Scrum: The 
Secret Sauce for Hyperproductive Offshored Development Teams. In Proceedings of Agile 2008, 
339Ð344.Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, J., & Puntikov, N. (2007). Distributed Scrum: Agile Project 
Management with Outsourced Development Teams. In Proceedings of HICSS 2009.
Takeuchi, H. and Nonaka, I., (1986). The new new product development game. Harvard Business 
Review, 64 (1), 137-146.
Tattersall, C., Watts, A. and Vernon, S. (2007). Mind mapping as a tool in qualitative research. 
Nursing Times, 103 (26), 32-33.
Tuckman, B.W. and Jensen, M.A.C., (1977). Stages of Small-Group Development Revisited. Group 
and Organization Management, 2 (4), 419-427.
Vax, M. and Michaud, S. (2008). Distributed Agile: Growing a Practice Together. In Proceedings of 
Agile, 2008, 310-314.
Wegner, D. M. (1987). Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of the group mind, In Theories 
of group behavior, B. Mullen and G. R. Goethals (eds.), New York: Springer, 185Ð208.
Wilson, J.M., Straus, S.G. and McEvily, B. (2006). All in due time: The development of trust in 
computer-mediated and face-to-face teams. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 99 (1), 16-33.
Woodward, E., Surdek, S. and Ganis, M. (2010). A Practical Guide to Distributed Scrum, Prentice 
Hall.Van de Ven, A.H. (2007). Engaged Scholarship: A Guide for Organizational and Social Research. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
VersionOne. (2011). The State of Agile Development. Available at: 
http://www.versionone.com/
state_of_agile_development_survey/11/
 [Accessed September 1, 2011].
Yin, R.K. (2009). Case study research: design and methods, Sage Publications.
Yip, J. (2011). ItÕs Not Just Standing Up: Patterns for Daily Standup Meetings. Available at: 
http://
www.martinfowler.com/articles/itsNotJustStandingUp.html
 [Accessed September 1, 2011].
