  POST-MERGER IT INTEGRATION: A COMPARISON OF TWO CASE STUDIES Peter B. Seddon, Department of Information Syst
ems, The University of
 Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia, p.seddon@unimelb.edu.au 
Peter Reynolds, Department of Information Syst
ems, The University of
 Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia, p.reynolds@unimelb.edu.au 
Leslie P. Willcocks, Information Systems and Innovation Group , Department of 
Management, London School of Economics a
nd Politics, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, United Kingdom, l.p.willcocks@lse.ac.uk
 Abstract This paper contrasts the steps taken
 in integrating the IT functions of two very similar-sized large 
Australian financial institutionsŠnam
ely Suncorp and Promina, follow
ing the takeover of Promina by 
Suncorp in March 2007Šwith the steps taken in inte
grating the IT functions of Sallie Mae and USA 
Group, as documented by Brown et al. (2003). The paper identifies eight similarities and four 
differences between the approaches taken, with the 
four differences being very important. The paper concludes that in merging IT functions, the advice of experts on organizational transformation is 
highly relevant, but that in addition, most key d
ecisions about people, systems, technologies, and their 
locations, remain very complex and highly situationally dependent. 
 Keywords: IT integration, merger
s and acquisitions, Agile development 
  1 INTRODUCTION The IT issues arising from the merger of two firms of similar 
size
, with similar 
product sets, selling to 
much the same 
customers
 in the same 
geographic regions
 (e.g., the integration of IT in the recently 
announced Kraft Foods takeover of Cadbury
1), are very different from those where all four factors are 
different, e.g., when a large company such
 as Cisco absorbs yet another start-up firm
2 (Giacomazzi et 
al., 1997; Henningsson and Carlsson, 2007). With this claim in mind, the purpose of this paper is to 
learn as much as possible from a case study of the integration of the IT functions of two very similar-
sized large Australian financial institutions, namely
 Suncorp and Promina, following the takeover of 
Promina by Suncorp in March 2007. At the time of
 the takeover, the market values of Suncorp and 
Promina were about A$12B and A$8B, respectively. 
Further, both firms were selling similar (mainly 
insurance) products to similar customers in mu
ch the same geographic market.  The acquisition 
almost doubled the size Suncorp, from 8,800 employ
ees in 30 June 2006, to 16,300 by June 2007.  
Post acquisition, Suncorp was the second-largest insu
rance company in Australia (after IAG), and the 
fifth-largest bank, with a total of eight million cust
omers and an expected pre-tax profit of over A$2B 
p.a.  The takeover announcement said that after transition costs of $395M (including A$161M in 
information technology
3), savings of A$225M per year would flow from consolidation of head and 
back offices, information technology, 
business efficiency, and reinsurance
4.  To help achieve these 
cost savings, a new CIO from outside both organizations, Jeff Smith, was appointed to manage the IT 
integration.  As suggested by Mehta and Hirschheim
 (2004), the first challenge for the Smith and his 
team was to help deliver the integration cost savi
ngs that had been promised to the stock market.  
Longer term, their challengeŠas in all IT organiza
tionsŠwas align IT to the needs of the business 
(Luftman and Kempaiah 2008).   
Searching for theories about how post-merger IT inte
grations should be conducted, it was clear that 
the steps in Kotter™s (1996) generic process model 
of organizational transformation (i.e., creating a sense of urgency, forming a powerful coalition, creati
ng a vision, and so on) were likely to be equally 
important in IT mergers
5. However, the arguments of Johnston and Yetton (1996), Giacomazzi et al. 
(1997), Mehta and Hirschheim (2007)
, and Henningsson and Carlsson (2007)
 that mergers in different 
contexts, with different strategic goals, need to be 
handled very differently, were also compelling. We 
therefore decided not to rush to make generalizations
 in this paper about how mergers of IT functions 
in all large organizations should be done, but rather 
to proceed in a more grounded fashion and see if 
we could explain if and why the steps taken at Suncorp made sense.   
In addition, we could see that alt
hough a number of key decisions were
 very different, Brown et al.™s 
(2003) case study of the merger of Sallie Mae, a 3,500-employee student-loan financier in the US, and 
USA Group, a 3,000-employee not-for-profit student-loa
n financier in the US, was similar in many 
respects to this case.  It therefore provided a ve
ry convenient benchmark for identifying both practices 
in common and unusual decisions made
 at Suncorp.  Thus the purpose of this paper is to (a) outline 
and explore the logic behind the decisions made in 
the IT integration in the Suncorp-Promina merger, 
(b) compare actions taken at Suncorp with those 
taken in Sallie Mae in 2000-2001, then (c) draw some conclusions that might be relevant to CIOs
 in similar IT-integration projects in future.  
Consistent with the approach taken by Brown et al. (2003), our goal is not to present or test some 
grand theory of post-merger integration; we don™
t have sufficient knowledge yet for such theorizing. 
Our goal is simply to identify some patterns that
 may contribute to theory formulation in future. 
                                              
 1 http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/
20/business/global/20kraft.html 
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lis
t_of_acquisitions_by_Cisco_Systems 
3 This included implementing organization-
wide e-mail and collaboration systems, 
co-locating all servers at a new A$200M 
datacenter in Springfield, south-west of Brisbane, by mid 2009,
 and identification and conversio
n to best-practice processes 
from the various business units. Target to be 95% complete by June 2009. 
4 http://library.corporate-ir.net/library/14/144
/144033/items/311537/ceo_speech_asia_pacific_2006.pdf 
5 Many of these generic factors are captured in Morsell et al.™s (2009) model of factors affecting IT-integration success.   
  2 METHODOLOGY 
This case study below is based on eleven interviews 
for a total of about ten hours with eight senior IT 
managers from Suncorp and one su
pplier manager, during August 2
008 to March 2009.  Three of 
these interviews were with the CIO.  The other seven 
internal interviews were 
with ex Suncorp and ex 
Promina staff (more from Promina), including direct reports to the CIO and a number of project and 
change managers. All interviewees were positive abou
t the approach Smith had taken in managing the 
IT merger, and in particular, with the Agile initia
tive. Interviews were audio recorded, transcribed, 
and compared to the other sources to assemble and 
organize the information presented below.  Other materials used included investor presentations a
nd annual reports from the Suncorp website, press 
reports, some internal documents, and one compute
r-based training video.  Based on this material, a 
26-page ﬁteaching" case was written up.  Once that 
case study had been reviewed and approved for 
public release by CIO Smith, it became the source 
of the case-study material presented below.  The 
authors are grateful to the nine managers w
ho shared their insights and experiences with us. 
3 SUNCORP IT-INTEGRATION CASE STUDY 
As explained above, integration of the IT system
s and organizations from Suncorp and Promina was 
to be an important part of delivering the synergies promised to the stock market. An outsider to both 

Suncorp and Promina, CIO Jeff Smith, was appointed to 
lead and manage this IT integration.  Prior to 
taking up his appointment, Smith had experience 
with large scale-integration in senior IT 
management roles in Australia and the USA, incl
uding Telstra (as CIO), Toyota, and General Electric 
(GE). According to a 29 March, 2007, press rel
ease from the then CEO of Suncorp (Smith™s new 
boss): ﬁWe expect to achieve significant synergies in th
e IT area and Jeff has the skills and track record 
to deliver these. Technology will be crucial to the merged group so we expect Jeff™s experience 
delivering similar large-scale integrations means 
he will be well placed to deliver a range of 
competitive future platforms 
for the merged group.ﬂ (Suncorp CEO John Mulchay, 2007) 
One year later, by March 2008, after the integr
ation team had had a good opportunity to assess the 
benefits they expected to flow from a range of 
integration projects, the published savings estimate 
from integration was increased by $100M to $325M
 per year. Over 300 ﬁsynergy initiativesﬂ were 
planned6, with the overall integration effort expect
ed to be 95% complete by June 2009.  
3.1 The IT-Integration challenge 
Smith took up his appointment as CIO on 27 March,
 2007, two days before Suncorp assumed control 
of Promina. He inherited two IT organizations, 
each with its own long history of computer-system 
development and two sets of computer systems, including thousands of application systems from both 
Suncorp and Promina
7, many of them legacy and with overlapping functionality
8. 
 There were four 
data centres each with a range of mainframe computers, and approximately 20,000 PCs distributed 
across Australia and New Zealand
9.  With little outsourcing, total IT 
staff numbered over 1,500, plus 
600-700 contractors
10, thus constituting roughly 13% of all Suncorp employees.  Prior to the merger, 
the IT organization at Suncorp had been quite centralized.  It had some experience integrating IT in a 
previous merger with GIO Insurance, in 2002. By 
contrast, IT at Promina had been decentralized.  
                                             
 6 http://www.suncorp.com.au/suncorp/share
holders/_media/pdf/asx/trading_update_010208.pdf
 7 http://www.zdnet.com.au/video/play/22459964 
8 For example, on the Promina side, the AAMI environment was one of IBM mainframes with COBOL, DB2, CICS, and 
3270 terminals.  
9 http://www.zdnet.com.au/news/software/soa/S
uncorp-signs-Symantec-to-protect-20-000-XP-
PCs/0,130061733,339289469,00.htm 
10 http://www.zdnet.com.au/video/play/22459957 
  Promina had independent IT teams in its six diffe
rent business units with little central oversight in terms of architecture or co-development of systems.  
Smith sought to unite the disparate IT organizati
ons with a new common vision: to become ﬁa world-
class IT functionﬂ. His vision was heavily influenced
 by his beliefs that people and processes in 
organizations are the key things to get right, and in the value of (a) Agile system delivery, (b) 
incubating innovation, and (c) open systems.  In addi
tion, he thought that Suncorp™s heavy reliance on 
individual contractors to supplement internal IT cap
ability had led to inefficiency.  Contractors, he 
said, took some months to learn their new roles, then
 took their knowledge with them when they left. 
This had contributed to certain solutions 
being complex and expensive to manage:  
ﬁThe designs were complex because 
there were lots of different individual contractors in different 
areas with no real solid enterprise architecture. Our own people didn™t have the capability. So it 
all came back to a lack of skill and leadership in
ternally. That drove goi
ng out and grabbing 
bodies to come in [as contractors], which in turn drove poor solutions.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
3.2 Application Integration  As noted above, the business case for Suncorp™s Prom
ina takeover was based, in part, on the financial 
analysts™ belief that consolidati
ng IT systems from the two organizations would be value adding. The 
analysts™ plan was to consolidate ev
erything.  But Smith challenged this: 
ﬁThe answer to everything was consolidate– But if there™s no business impact it is not worth 
doing. Let™s say I spent $20m to replace one system with another, but the business doesn™t operate 
any better with no material benefit, why do it? 
Maybe there™s a marginal cost difference to 
operate one compared to both of them, but the 
fact is, there™s a big cost in migration and 
consolidation. Consolidation can be a means to an
 end, but it shouldn™t be the end.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
ﬁPeople use these integrations as excuses to spend 
money, right? So I kept asking, ‚What problem 
are you solving?™ We looked at where is 
a real opportunity for usﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
Since they were merging two very similar businesse
s, Smith found that an effective approach for 
identifying which systems to consolidate was to co
mpare the strengths of systems in the different 
highly comparable business units, as well as to cons
ider ways of improving both.  This approach 
identified three areas that could yield benefits: cl
aims processing, pricing, and the internet. For 
example, in claims processing, Suncorp found 
that although AAMI™s and GIO™s general and 
automobile products were very similar: 
ﬁAAMI™s automobile claims processing was signifi
cantly more efficient per claim than GIO™s, 
and GIO™s pricing engine was much better t
han AAMI™s. Changes in these areas would add huge 
value to the business. This was where Suncorp decided to consolidate.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
However, it was decided that other areas, such as po
licy administration, should
 not be consolidated: 
ﬁWe™ve got three major policy administration systems. Even if I consolidated to one there™s no 
huge business benefit, because all are pretty standar
d and efficiently run. It would be nice to do, but it wouldn™t be on your hit list.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
3.3 IT-Organisational Integration  The merging of separate IT functions is a signi
ficant challenge in any merger of two large 
organizations.  In this case, Suncorp had multiple 
IT functions, each with its own culture, processes, 
and business-domain knowledge. Smith™s approach was 
to paint a vision that offered an attractive 
future for all IT staff.  Whilst many of his peers 
in similar organizations were seeking to accelerate 
their off-shoring and outsourcing plans, Smith propo
sed building a world-class internal IT function 
that would be acknowledged as a key source of compe
titive advantage at Suncorp.  The core of his 
thinking was that, first, people and processes, not
 technology, are the critical IT success factors:  
Most people focus on technology as their differentiating factor. But it™s not. It™s the people and 

the processes for how work gets done.  [CEO
] John [Mulcahy] would say the competitive 
  advantage in our business will be our IT capability. We have to do [IT] stuff better than the best 
people in the world.  Our methods and our pe
ople are our leverage point, not our technology. 
(Smith, 2009) 
and second, Agile developmen
t techniques (see sidebar) (a) are the most effective way to develop new 
IT-based systems, and (b) provided a future vision th
at could enthuse staff from both IT organizations:  
ﬁI was worried about how do you bring six or 
seven cultures together. I mean we are talking about the Suncorp culture, the New Zealand culture
, – Promina was a basket of many cultures. 
Agile gave everyone a new vision. It said ‚let™s go here™. It was not tied to where you were. You 
were not talking about one group taking over the other.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
Agile development has generated enormous inte
rest amongst software designers around the world 
(Beck and Andres 2004; Schwabe and Beedle 2001). 
Proponents of ﬁAgileﬂ (as it is often called) 
argue that it is hard for users to specify the func
tionality they need in advance, and that traditional 
ﬁwaterfallﬂ-model software projects are notorious
 for time and budget overruns (or even failing to 
deliver a useable product). Therefore, they argue, 
software is best produced by programming teams 
that work closely with intended users and that pr
oduce quickly, e.g., in two 
to three weeks, small 
chunks of working functionality that can go into 
production (i.e., normal use) immediately.  
 Sidebar: Agile Development 
Smith argues that Agile methods draw on a deep u
nderstanding of the problems inherent in traditional 
computer-system development, and points to leadi
ng companies, e.g., Cisco, SAP, Apple, Google, 
and Yahoo, that use Agile techniques to deve
lop their software and hardware products: 
ﬁIf you want to look at the differentiating factor in Agile, it is based on visual control systems. 
That™s the difference. If you throw everything else 
out the window, you use a story card versus a 
requirements definition, you do a showcase versus long steering-committee reviews with 
Powerpoints, and so on.  The visual control syst
ems are the ones that work: the velocity charts, 
the burndowns. It™s simple. When you see a velocity chart, you™ll know
 what™s happening. You 
don™t have to be an IT person to use it. The str
ongest advocates for Agile here aren™t me. It™s my peers and the board. They are used to seeing simple
 charts about where projects are. Plus they 
see the demonstrated evidence that projects aren™t failing. What they do see is that projects are 
working, and they are hitting the bene
fits realization.ﬂ  (Smith 2009) 
Based on this thinking, Suncorp Business Technology™s 
(BT™s) strategic plan identified five ﬁstrategic 
leversﬂ to help it deliver ﬁquality systems 
that deliver competitive advantageﬂ as follows: 
1. BT Quality Assured
: Consistent delivery of robust solu
tions that perform to expectations. 
2. Working Agile: Implementing and embedding Agile as the way we operate. 
3. People Development
: Developing our people capability a
nd own our intellectual property. 
4. Partnering: Partnering relationships providing mutual benefit. 
5. Beyond Technology: Greater collaboration and communication across BT and with our 
customers.   
Source: Suncorp Business Technology (BT) Strategic Plan, 2009 
The first three levers reflect Smith™s belief that 
delivering quality solutions, use of Agile development 
methods, and employing highly capable people are the 
keys to the success of any IT organization. The 
fourth lever acknowledges the contribution that suppl
iers can make to an IT organization™s success, 
while the fifth looks for greater contribution by the 
IT function to the business. Key elements of this 
strategic plan discussed in the following sections were: (1) IT lead
ership and rewards, (2) change management and training, (3) careful partnering w
ith key suppliers, and (4) incubating innovation.  
3.3.1 IT Leadership and Rewards 
According to Smith, the key to success in any organi
zation is energizing people, nurturing innovation, 
and encouraging collaboration within an environment of honesty, trust, 
fairness, and respect for others. 
To create an appropriate culture he assesses his IT l
eaders in the three levels of the IT organization 
below him on a quarterly basis. He meets with all 
of them personally, and assesses them in terms of 
  what he calls ﬁthe four Esﬂ and ﬁthe three Lsﬂ. Th
e four Es are: (1) Do they display energy? (2) Do 
they energise others? (3) Do they 
execute? and (4) Do they have edge for making tough decisions?  
The three L™s are: (1) Listening, (2) Learni
ng, and (3) Leverage.  According to Smith: 
ﬁthe single biggest skill that is missing is the lis
tening skills. – The hardest thing is for people to 
leverage other people™s k
nowledge.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) At Suncorp BT, performance is measured using ba
lanced scorecards that identify key result areas 
(KRAs) that are revised annually. KRAs are li
nked to reward systems, and rewards involve: 
ﬁa good chunk of money. We reward the top 30
 people, independent of level. Level of work 1 
could get the highest bonus in the company. He
 or she could get more than a senior manager.ﬂ 
(Smith, 2009) 
3.3.2 Change Management and Training 
Changing the way BT™s 2,000 IT staff go about the fu
ndamentals of their jobs requires a huge cultural 
shift and re-skilling at all levels. Although the in
troduction of Agile has support from the Board of 
Directors, introducing both BT and the business to 
ﬁAgileﬂ has been, and continues to be, a major 
change program at Suncorp. Smith started with a 
small number of Agile projects to demonstrate the 
approach and build credibility. He continues 
to add new projects as knowledge and understanding grows across BT and the business.   
To facilitate the organization™s change to Agile 
methods, Smith has one direct report accountable for 
an extensive Agile training and change manage
ment program. Various Agile coaches have been 
appointed, and about 1% of the operational IT budge
t has been directed toward the Agile program.  
The program has recruited Agile Coaches from specialist consultancy firms:   
ﬁThe Suncorp change program, it™s very methodical. It™s very directly and publicly sponsored by 
the CIO, and the CEO for that matter. So the visibility and the conviction with which they™ve 
undertaken it is remarkable. They have expo
sed every single person to these de-mystification 
sessions Œ starting out with a half-a-day presenta
tion where they learned about Agile Œ and were 
told this is how you will be working in the fu
ture, and these are the principles.ﬂ (Agile Coach) 
In addition, senior IT managers have been on trips 
to India to learn first-hand how major Indian firms 
use Agile techniques. The expectation is that futu
re IT projects will use Agile techniques wherever 
possible, including the way that they work with the business. 
All IT staff have been required to complete Agile training, both live and via computer-based training 
programs, which commenced in late 2007. An Agile 
intranet hub has been set up so that people can 
access courseware. To increase awareness of Agile 
methods, Suncorp™s computer-based training 
(CBT) courseware developed has been provided, free,
 to a local university in Brisbane for them to 
offer Agile training, and to the newly formed Agile Academy (http://www.
agileacademy.com.au).  
The way projects are justified and reported on is now 
different.  The result is a new clarity in project 
management: ﬁBurn charts, I think, are probably the best th
ing I™ve ever seen for actually understanding how 
your rate of progress is going.ﬂ (Senior IT project manager) 
The process of introducing Agile has required changes to the way the business develops and specifies 
their requirements, monitors the progress of the proj
ect, and even gets involved with the development:  
ﬁBy the third iteration, when they, for the first time in their lives, they can actually see the drop 
down list and things get done, they get excited! Th
ey can actually see stuff happening, and they™re 
part of it. Working Agile is fun. It actually works in a way that human beings, socially and 
psychologically, were built to work for survival. So they get hoo
ked! But if you don™t have that 
relationship up front– This is a quandary: How 
do you take the business along for the ride? It™s 
not rocket science; it™s relationships. (BT change manager) 
  3.3.3 Partnering Smith has set out to build up internal IT capabilities 
that allow the Suncorp to build and retain its 
intellectual capital and foster innovatio
n, while still being cost efficient. 
ﬁIf we build our own capability up we have a higher mix of our own talent doing the work, so the 
costs go down. And if we use Agile methods and principles, we use less time and less people. So if 
your mix of your own people goes up Šyour costs come down.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
That said, he still acknowledges the role of partneri
ng with leading local and international firms to 
build and supplement his internal capability: 
ﬁWe are going to partner. But we are really partn
ering with organizations that can bring our own 
capability up. We use Thoughtworks because they know
 Agile as well as we do. They know open 
source better than we do. And we chose a partn
er in data warehousing because they were really 
good in data warehousing. But the goal is to bring the IP in and do the majority of the work 
ourselves. That is something different in strategy
. Most companies are still in this ﬁoutsourcing, 
go offshoreﬂ model. There™s some benefits to it. But 
I think the thing that is missed is that you can 
build the intellectual capital, you can build 
that capability up, in 
house.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) Partnering with a smaller number of closer organi
zations has also helped him address the issues with 
independent contractors. The partner becomes resp
onsible for hiring, training, retaining knowledge, 
and providing career paths for their staff, as well as bringing their IP: 
 ﬁRather than allowing people to go out and body-shop staff, we say ﬁWho is our partner for 
that?ﬂ. So for business intelligence,
 we™ve selected the best compan
y that do business intelligence as our partner. They have their own data wareh
ousing framework. They™ve acquired real competency, as well as assets, in that space.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
3.3.4 Innovation Smith fosters a culture of innovation at Suncorp. He 
argues that organizations do not have to be large 
to be effective: ﬁYou can look back 30 yearsŠI still go back to Microsoft being formed, Sun Microsystems being 

formed, Google, Yahoo, DellŠthey were all formed by students. They were all two-person teams. 
But they had clarity of purpose. And they had phenomenally gifted people, with great passion.ﬂ  
To incubate innovation, Smith has created an ex
tensive graduate progra
mme and support for people 
experimenting:  
ﬁYou have to find those people, and once you get a 
few successes you have to incubate it.  You 
cannot try to do this across the board.  So we had the 23 year old kid in banking that built our 

mobile banking platform, and it is a nice platfo
rm, it™s still the only web based one here in 
Australia and it™s better than [leading competitor] 
because you don™t have to download it on your 
deviceﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
Further, he believes that many organizations choose 
expensive solutions when, with a bit of courage, 
they could develop equally good solutions internally at much lower cost. For example: 
 ﬁ– our business banking [system] didn™t have an 
internet banking capability, very expensive to 
build, so they went out and they looked at who™s the highest rating business banking site in 

Australia and saw what functionality it had and sa
id, well shoot, we can get 80% of it off what 
we™ve already got in the retail banking and we™ll have to build this other 20%. And the net of that 
is on a few weekends over two months, they built 
a business banking system that we had estimated would cost us about $20 million to build. Very smart guys.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
Smith also highlights the potential of leveraging ope
n-source software.  He says that product quality 
and support for open-source software is now so go
od that open source software is often a better value 
proposition than licencing software from major vendor
s. There is a lot of margin in software 
  companies, he says, and even larger margins in main
tenance, that aren™t sustainable in the long term.  
He argues that you have to look at what the best companies are doing, and they using open source: 
ﬁEric Schmidt from Google will tell you for every dollar he spends, his competitor spends seven. And he™s figured out that having a complete open-source stack helps them deliver the lowest cost 
platform. Their development environment is very 
open which allows people to innovate around it 
and that™s why they can bring services so quickly.
 And Apple™s the same way. They use freeBSD 
and that™s why they do so well. They™ve just go
t a huge competitive advantage over Microsoft. So 
I said ‚Let™s model ourselves not after what every 
one of our competitors is doing. Let™s model 
ourselves after what the best companies are doing.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
At Suncorp, an open-source acces
s-management system (OpenSSO) is used extensively in the 
technical domain, for example, using Sun™s Open 
Net Environment for identity management Œ saving 
upwards of $5M plus annual maintenance costs. Fu
rther, Suncorp has plans to create a new platform 
for internet service delivery on a ma
jor new Linux-Intel (Lintel) platform11. In the business 
applications space, Smith argues that open-source softwa
re is often preferable to proprietary solutions. For instance, Suncorp had previously spent over $30
M on a proprietary underwriting engine. Today, it 
is planning to replace that with 
an open-source product called Drools
12: "Even for our underwriting service, we are going to
 be using Drools, which is an open source 
underwriting engine. It is simpler, it is ch
eaper, and it is actually easier to manage."
 13 (Smith ‚09) 
But despite this preference for open-source softwa
re, Smith is happy to use commercial packaged 
software when required, e.g., Suncorp uses the Merc
ury Interactive Software 
testing suite (from HP) 
to support its Agile processes. It also uses Guidew
ire™s ClaimCentre claims engine. The following 
quotation from Guidewire sums up many of the issues surrounding that purchase decision: 
ﬁSuncorp found itself with multiple claims syst
ems following several mergers. Suncorp decided to 
replace these systems with one new web-based syst
em more in-line with its technology vision. 
Preferring not to build its own system, Suncorp und
ertook evaluation of available claims systems. 
Guidewire ClaimCenter was select
ed for overall system ease-of-use
 and configurability, workflow 
functionality, and fit with Sunc
orp's technology direction.ﬂ
14 (Guidewire Corp) Generalizing from such examples, Smith argues th
at IT-system development can ultimately be 
cheaper and more effective if it is done in house 
using creative people, often based on open-source 
resources. 3.4 Aligning IT structure with the business 
Smith has set up organizational structures and pro
cesses that focus on close interaction with the 
business and regular performance evaluation. The new IT organization has the two main elements 
shown in Figure 1.  The first is business-facing Customer Development (CD) centers, each headed by 
a line-of-business CIO reporting to Smith. Each CD is
 also aligned to a business structure, which in 
Australia is run as three businesses, Banking an
d Wealth, Personal Insurance and Commercial 
Insurance in Australia; New Zealand is single in
tegrated business. The CDs include all business-
relationship, business-analyst, and project-management staff. 
The second element of the IT organization structur
e consists of 10-12 technically-oriented Solution 
Delivery (SD) centers, which provide center-of-e
xcellence capabilities around specific processes or 
technologies. To drive accountability, Smith has each 
SD reporting to their primary line-of-business 
CIO, rather than, say, reporting to him, or unde
r a single operations or development manager who 
                                             
 11 And although it currently has 20,000 Windows XP PCs with O
ffice 2007, Suncorp is serious
ly considering moving open 
office at some future stage 
http://www.zdnet.com.au/news/software/s
oa/Suncorp-envisages-Linux-ODF-for-20-000-
desktops/0,130061733,339289679,00.htm?feed=pt_cio
  12 Drools is an open source business rule ma
nagement system and 
rules engine. Source: 
http://www.jboss.org/drools/
 13 http://computerworld.co.nz/news.nsf/news/C7E235E1890BAF73CC2574B3000F8728 
14 http://www.guidewire.com/
our_customers/c/suncorp (viewed May 2010) 
  reports to him. The SD capabilities include process sk
illsets (e.g., Claims, Pricing, Sales & Service) as 
well as technology skills (e.g., front-end web appli
cations, infrastructure, and business intelligence). 
While some SDs are specific to a line of busin
ess, others provide services to multiple CDs. 
ﬁUnderneath that they have their own solution cen
tres for things that are unique to them. But some of them would own solution centres that
 are common across the whole company. Personal insurance is the biggest claims area. Our solutio
n centre for Claims is with Personal Insurance, 
even though it would do solutions on behalf of Commercial Insurance. 
ﬁOn the other hand, Commercial Insurance deals a 
lot with brokers. That™s their major business 
model. So building on-line broker systems would be
 a solutions centre that might be managed out 
of Commercial Insurance. They get very good at 
it. They can build broker systems for anyone in 
the group.ﬂ (Smith, 2009) 
The ratio of CD to SD staff is about 1:2, i.e., ab
out one third of the IT staff are directly business 
facing.  All costs are allocated 
back to the lines of business. Line of 
Business 
CIO 1
Line of 
Business 
CIO 2Line of 
Business 
CIO 3Solution 
Centre 2
Solution 
Centre 3
Developers 
community
Testers 
community
Solution 
Centre 1
Each Solution Centre manager reports to a Line-of-Business CIO (termed an 
Executive General Manager at Suncorp) but delivers services to the group
Architects 
community
Role: Understanding 
problems from the 
business perspective
Role: Building 
solutions
Solution 
Centre 4
Business 
analysts & 
Project 
managers
Business 
analysts & 
Project 
managers
Business 
analysts & 
Project 
managers
Project-
managers 
community
Business-
analyst 
community
Communities 
of Practice
Line of 
Business 
CIO 1
Line of 
Business 
CIO 2Line of 
Business 
CIO 3Solution 
Centre 2
Solution 
Centre 2
Solution 
Centre 3
Solution 
Centre 3
Developers 
community
Testers 
community
Solution 
Centre 1
Solution 
Centre 1
Each Solution Centre manager reports to a Line-of-Business CIO (termed an 

Executive General Manager at Suncorp) but delivers services to the group
Architects 
community
Role: Understanding 
problems from the 
business perspective
Role: Building 
solutions
Solution 
Centre 4
Solution 
Centre 4
Business 
analysts & 
Project 
managers
Business 
analysts & 
Project 
managers
Business 
analysts & 
Project 
managers
Project-
managers 
community
Business-
analyst 
community
Communities 
of Practice
 Figure 1: Customer Development-Solution Delivery (CDSD) model
  Smith draws on the philosophy of open-source collaboration for how the CDs and SDs work with 
each other. Individual CDs and SDs have a single reporting line, but may be distributed in whichever 
city they live in. Similar to the open-source model, they rely on collaboration technologies to 

coordinate their activities across locations.  Smith 
also encourages the development of communities of 
interest within and across CDs and SDs to develo
p the standards within their domain, without the 
need for heavy central direction and overhead. These 
communities of interest operate like Wikipedia: 
ﬁThe community is the authorityﬂ. For example, Ar
chitectural standards are set by the Architecture 
community of practice in what is essentially an
 open-source model of community development. 
Indeed, Suncorp no longer has a central IT archit
ecture function; it has only solution architects.   
3.5 Outcomes A recent national daily newspaper report claims that
 progress on the IT integration of systems from 
Suncorp and Promina at Suncorp has been good: 
ﬁintegration, which now moves into its final p
hase, remains on track and on time from both a 
financial and cultural perspecti
veﬂ (Suncorp News Release, http://media.corporate-ir.net/media_files/
 irol/14/144033/ASX/2_24.pdf, viewed May 2010)
     However it is still too early to make any pronouncem
ent about the success or otherwise of the Agile initiative. Although there was considerable uncertain
ty and confusion, even within IT, about what 
ﬁAgileﬂ meant when it was first announced, and wh
y Agile was considered useful, and although not 
everyone has embraced Agile, Suncorp™s early expe
riences with Agile development seem generally to 
have been positive. For example, 
the change-management manager says: 
ﬁWe™ve not had one instance, where we™ve brought 
Agile to bear, that we™ve not had success. 
Bearing in mind that success is also saying stop.ﬂ (BT change manager) 
Externally, the achievements of Suncorp and Smith have
 been noticed in the industry. For example, in 
2008 Suncorp won the best-implementa
tion award for its anti-money laundering
15 solution implemented using Agile techniques: 
Our collateral and anti money laundering projects a
re some of the most successful Agile projects 
we™ve run and that™s predominately mainframe proj
ects. It™s interesting. It has to do with the 
mindset and the attitude and the culture that you pu
t in place.  We originally budgeted $40M to 
do this. And historically, if you looked at it,
 if we budgeted $40M, we would spend $60M. Well, 
we did it for $16M. And we did it in half the time. (Smith, 2009) 
4 COMPARING THE IT INTEGRATIONS AT SALLIE MAE AND 
SUNCORP As stated in the Introduction, in attempting to dr
aw lessons from this case for other IT-function 
mergers it is helpful to compare the actions at Suncor
p to those in the merger of the IT functions of 
Sallie Mae and USA Group, as documented by Brown et
 al. (2003).  Although there is not sufficient 
space to summarize the Sallie Mae case here, we have
 tried to include sufficient information in the 
comparisons below for the reader to make sense of 
the discussion without having to read Brown et al. 
(2003).  Similarities and differences between the two cases are as follows: 
4.1 Similarities between the Suncorp and Sallie Mae case studies 
1. The financial analysts™ goals for both mergers we
re to integrate IT systems and cut costs.  
Both business cases required reduction in IT staff numbers. 
2. Consistent with Buono and Bowditch (1989) an
d Kotter (1996), in both cases, staff morale 
and knowledge retention were regarded as critical
 to the success of the respective mergers.   
3. Consistent with Robbins and 
Stylianou (1999) and Kotter (1996), both CIOs recognized the 
need to communicate extensively with peopl
e in their organizations, and both did.  
4. In both cases there were questions about where 
IT staff and data centres were to be located, 
and which application systems were to be reta
ined or decommissioned.  Sallie Mae had 1,100 
IT staff in two cities.  Suncorp had 2,000 IT st
aff in six major cities.  Both organizations decided to consolidate data centres. Due to 30% cheaper salary costs in Indianapolis, and the 
extra revenue to be had from leasing out Sallie 
Mae™s old data centre in Reston, Virginia, 
Sallie Mae decided to use USA Group™s data centr
e in Indianapolis. Suncorp decided to build 
a new data centre in its home city, Brisbane
, Australia, for A$200M.  In both cases, many 
servers and applications were then relocated to the new data centres. 
5. Both organizations conducted comparative analyses of similar systems in the two pre-merger 
organizations to decide which should be re
tained and which should be decommissioned. 
6. Both organizations chose to remain substa
ntially in-house service providers, with little 
reliance on outsourcing or offshoring.  
                                             
 15 For an article on the cost of implementing AML legislation in Australia, see 
http://www.australianit.news.co
m.au/story/0,24897,22006090-15306,00.html
, viewed March 2009 
  7. Both CIOs recognized the importance of establis
hed working relationships in existing project 
teams, and of existing IT-business relationshi
ps, for their integration projects™ success. 
8. Both organizations used video conferencing to try to reduce the impact of travelling and to 
facilitate better communications between st
aff in different geographic locations.  
4.2 Differences between the Suncorp and Sallie Mae case studies 
1. The CIO in the Sallie Mae case had been with USA Group (the takeover target) for 20 years 
and had a strong IT team, highly regarded systems, and clear competence in managing IT 
projects.  Unsurprisingly, he was selected as CI
O for the merged entity. By contrast, Suncorp 
decided to employ a highly regarded CIO from 
an outside the organization.  Their new CIO, Jeff Smith, had had experience merging appli
cations whilst CIO at Australia™s largest 
telecommunications company, Telstra, where he ha
d also led a substantial offshoring project.   
2. Sallie Mae asked the 500 IT staff from Reston to
 either move with their families 500 miles 
west, to Indianapolis, or to accept a retrenchment
 package. (Note that even in June 2000, IT 
jobs were plentiful in Reston.)  To retain key staff, Sallie Mae offered generous retention 
packages to staff who agreed to stay until the 
merger was complete. At Suncorp, since asking 
staff to move their families would cause them difficulties, and retrenching staff meant 
considerable loss of systems and organizationa
l knowledge, Smith decided to keep system 
development and support functions close to th
e business in their current six major cities 
across Australia and New Zealand.  His d
ecisions were consistent with Mehta and Hirschheim™s (2007) observation that business structure drove IT structure post merger.  
3. Sallie Mae integrated most of its key systems, in particular, the two biggest systems (student 

loans and PeopleSoft). By contrast, due to high 
data conversion, testing, and retraining costs 
associated with changing IT systems, Suncorp 
chose to keep duplicate (and even triplicate) systems running on their respective hardware pl
atforms unless there were compelling benefits 
from changing.  Again, business structure was a 
key determinant of application structure. 
4. Smith™s passion for Agile system development, open source software, and fostering 

innovation make him different, not just to CIO Clancy at Sallie Mae, but to most other CIOs 

in Australia.  His refreshing, logical approach offers a bold new vision for IT at Suncorp. 
5 CONCLUSION The assumption justifying mergers of organizations
 in similar industries in similar geographic 
locations is usually that there are synergies to be 
gained by combining the operations, including the IT 
systems and organizations, of the two firms.  However,
 after change costs have been factored into the 
analysis, it is not clear that all IT systems should be
 integrated or that all IT operations collocated.  
To explore the choices available in more depth, th
is paper adds to the emerging case-study literature 
on mergers of IT organizations following corpor
ate mergers and acquisitions (Johnston and Yetton 
1996, Brown et al. 2003, Wijhoven et al, 2006, 
Mehta and Hirschheim 2007, Henningsson and 
Carlsson 2007).  It has reviewed and compared th
e IT-integration decisions made following mergers 
of two pairs of similar-sized organizations, with 
both pairs operating in the same geographic markets, 
and selling similar products to similar customers.  The comparison shows that there were many 
similarities (eight are listed above), and some important differences (four are listed above), between 

the decisions made in integrating the IT functions in these two pairs of case-study organizations.  Both 
integrations were described by their respective CI
Os as successful, and both CIOs offer persuasive 
arguments for the very different choices that they 
made.  At Sallie Mae, it was considered important 
to merge all student loans onto the one system as f
ast as possible, and to consolidate all finance and 
HR operations on the one (PeopleSoft) system. Ye
t at SuncorpŠwhich had decided to retain its 
various brandsŠthere was little immediate benefit from merging systems, so Suncorp focused on 
identifying and transferring best-practice processes 
between the two legacy 
organizations only when 
there was clear financial benefit.  Sallie Mae consolidated its IT staff in a single base in Indianapolis. 
Suncorp decided to retain IT staff in six different cities (resulting in a more complex, matrix-like 
  management structure).  At Sallie Mae, there 
was apparently no attempt to change system-
development methodologies. At Suncorp, Agile me
thods were introduced as both a better way of 
building systems, and as a way of unifying the many 
disparate IT cultures that existed pre-merger.  
The findings of this case study reinforce those 
of Mehta and Hirschheim (2007), e.g., see their 
Figure 4, p.167, which say that choices related to the integration of IT service delivery following a 
corporate merger or acquisition are highly contextually dependent.  The one common feature of all 

these mergers is that they involved major orga
nizational change, so the advice of experts on organizational transformation, e.g., Kotter (1996), 
is useful.  However, as shown in the two case 
studies discussed above, as well as in Mehta and Hirschheim (2007), many key decisions about people, 
systems, technologies, and their locations, remain both complex and highly situationally dependent.   
References 
Brown, C., Clancy, G. and Scholer, R. (2003) A post
-Merger IT integration success story: Sallie Mae, 
MIS QuarterlyExecutive
, 2, 1, 15-27. 
Buono, A., and Bowditch, J.L. (1989) 
The human side of mergers and acquisitions: Managing 
collisions between people, cultures and organizations
, Jossey Bass, San Francisco, 59-81. 
Giacomazzi, F., Panella C., Pernici, B. and Sansoni
, M. (1997) Information systems integration in 
mergers and acquisitions: A normative model, 
Information & Management
, 32, 289-302. 
Henningsson, S. and Carlsson, S.A (2007), The Dy
namic Relation Between IS Integration and the 
Merger and Acquisition Process, Proceedings of the 13th Asia
-Pacific Management Conference
, Melbourne, Australia, 1106-1123 
Johnston, K.D. and Yetton, P.W. (1996).  Integr
ating information technology divisions in a bank 
merger: fit, compatibility and models of change, 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems
 5(3): 189-211 
Kotter, J.P. Leading Change
. Cambridge MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1996 
Luftman, J. and Kempaiah, R. (2008). "Key Issues for IT Executives 2007." 
MIS Quarterly Executive 7(2): 99-112. 
Mehta, M. and Hirschheim, R. (2004) A Framew
ork for assessing IT integration decision-making in 
ergers and acquisitions, Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, Waikoloa, Hawaii, 1-11. 
Mehta, M. and Hirschheim, R. (2007). Strategic 
Alignment in Mergers and Acquisitions: Theorizing 
IS Integration Decision making, 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 8(3), 143-174. 
Morsell G.A., Deek, F. and Alok Chakrabarti, A. (2009). Post-Merger Technology Integration 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems
, San Francisco, 
California. Robbins, S. and Stylianou, A. (
1999) Post-merger systems integration: the impact of IS capabilities, 
Information & Management
, 36, 205-212. 
Smith, P. 2008. Suncorp opts for open source cost cuts, 
Computerworld, 29 August, 2008. 
Tindal, S. Suncorp takes 'agile' leaf from 
Apple's book, ZDnet.com.au, 29 February 2008  
Wijnhoven, R., Spil, R., Stegwee, R. and Fa, R. (2006). Post-merger IT integration strategies: An IT 
alignment perspective, Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
 (15:1), pp. 5-28 
