  A CASE STUDY OF HEALTHCARE INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY IMPLEMENTATION: AGILE-INNOVATIVE CAPABILITY DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 
Say Yen Teoh, School of Business Informati
on Technology, RMIT University, Australia, sayyen.teoh@rmit.edu.au 
Shun Cai, Department of Management Science,
 School of Management, Xiamen University, 
China, caishun@xmu.edu.cn 
Brian Corbitt, School of Business Information Technology, RMIT University, Australia, 
brian.corbitt@rmit.edu.au 
Abstract With the advances in Information Technology (IT), th
e potential of IT in enabling enterprise agility has received increasing attention from practitioners 
and the academia in recent years. However, 
despite the recent advance of knowledge on agility 
and IT innovation, the relationship between the 
adoption of IT and enterprise agility is often treated 
as a ﬁblack boxﬂ and empirical validation of the 
relationship between IT and enterprise agility is s
till scare. Moreover, the importance of agility in 
healthcare sector has largely been ignored. Ou
r study proposes a three-stage process model that 
describes and analyzes the ways how agility and innovative capabilities are implemented and 
managed during the innovation of healthcare IT in a 
hospital. Theoretical and practical contributions 
were shared and documented in this paper. 
Keywords: Information Technology in Healthca
re, Agility, Innovative Capabilities and Case Study. 
 1 INTRODUCTION In today™s competitive environment, businesses in all industries, including healthcare are undergoing 
profound changes. With a total spending of more
 than US$4.1 trillion (World Health Organization 
2007b), healthcare industry is known as the singl
e-largest industry worldwide. Recognizing the 
massive size and continuing growth of this industr
y along with its potential of transforming societal 
health-and-wellness quality, the Singapore™s Ministry
 of Health sets the mission to develop the 
world™s most cost-effective healthcare system to he
lp keep Singaporeans, the country™s key resources, 
in an ideal state of health (World Health Organization 2007a). Embarking the ways of exploring the opportunities 
and challenges in the development and use of 
medical informatics in relation to minimal gui
dance and policies drawn from the government, 
Singapore hospital industry leaders are put to th
e challenge. Towards an unknown future, healthcare experts, policymakers, payers and consumers find that computerization and automation of health 
records and processes could critically transform the 
scenarios of healthcare indu
stry (Dwivedi et al. 
2007). To shape the future of the healthcare industry, not only organizations need to be agile to detect 
and size market changes and opportunities (Sambamurt
hy et al. 2003) with significant flexibility and 
response than before (Gould 1997) but also abilit
y to innovate (Lawson & Samson 2001). Hence, the 
agility is critical for organizations to sense and 
respond readily to the future need and innovation 
(Overby et al. 2006).  
With the advances in Information Technology (IT), 
the potential of IT in enabling enterprise agility 
has received increasing attention from practitioners 
and the academia in recent years (Mathiassen & 
Pries-Heje 2006; Overby et al. 2006; Sambamurthy et
 al. 2003; van Oosterhout et al. 2006). However, 
despite the recent advance of knowledge on agility 
and IT innovation, the relationship between the 
adoption of IT and enterprise agility is often treated as a ﬁblack boxﬂ and empirical validation of the 
relationship between IT and enterprise agility is s
till scare (e.g. Overby et al. 2006; Seo & La Paz 
2008). Moreover, the importance of agility in other 
sectors, such as healthcar
e, has largely been 
ignored. In view of this, agility and innovative theo
ry were employed as the theoretical lenses to 
further structure this research. However, the ch
allenge is that, an acceptable, comprehensive and 
systematic framework towards successful innova
tion has yet existed (Lawson & Samson 2001). More 
importantly, the scarcity of studies on innovativ
e change in the servicing industries (Amble & 
Palombarini 1998; Aranda & Molina-Fernandez 2002; Martin & Horne 1993) has add-on the value of 
this research. 
For this reason, we intend to bridge the research gap by conceptualizing the agility-innovative 
development process from a case study based on the stor
y of a private hospital that has successfully 
designed and injected agile and innovative philosophi
es into its healthcare sy
stems. This hospital, which we use ﬁHHﬂ to name it in this paper, was 
once the hospital in Singapore with high patients™ 
complaints and challenged by Singapore Health Mini
ster at that time. However, it has managed to 
develop the agile-innovative capabilities and has b
een crowned as the best in the Singaporean 
Ministry of Health Patient Satisfaction Surveys 
from 2004 to 2008. Thus, there is ground to believe 
that insightful lessons on its agility and innovative 
use of technologies and change in processes and 
service qualities can be gained through this Singapore based research.  
2 THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
2.1 Enterprise Agility  The proposed theoretical conceptualization in 
this study is drawn from agility theory as the 
overarching theory for innovation and capability studies.
 An agile firm is tidily related with firm™s 
resources and capabilities (Nambisan 2002), including 
innovation (Malone et al. 1999). Especially, 
agility is vital to the innovation and competitiv
e performance of firms in contemporary business 
environments (Sambamurthy et al. 2003).  
 Enterprise agility was coined from the histori
cal progression from mass manufacturing to agile 
manufacturing concept (Dove 2001; Sharp et al. 1999)
, then followed by software developing industry 
(Cockburn 2001). The emergence of such concept is 
rooted in the new business era where ﬁchangeﬂ is 
one of its major characteristics (Sharifi & Zhang 
1999). Thus, an agile enterprise would have the 
capability of surviving and prospering in competitiv
e environment of continuous and unpredictable 
change by reactive spontaneously to the market (G
unasekaran 1999). Such definition is further refined 
by Overby, et al. (2006) as the ability to sense e
nvironmental change and respond readily. Agility is 
concerned with economies of scope, rather th
an economies of scale (Dove 2001). Where lean 
operations are usually associated with efficient u
se of resources, agile operations are related to 
effectively responding to a changing environmen
t while at the same time being productive (Mathiassen & Pries-Heje 2006). An agile enterprise 
is not only capable of successfully implementing 
change, but also nimble, capable of responding
 quickly and gracefully to both expected and 
unexpected events in their environment (Mathiassen 
& Pries-Heje 2006). Accordingly, agility is tidily 
related with the firm™s resources and capabilities. 
In other words, agility 
encompasses a firm™s 
capabilities related to customers (Nambisan 2002), in
ternal operations for innovation and competitive 
action (Malone et al. 1999), as well as utilization of
 networks to explore opportunities for innovation 
and competitive actions (Choudhury & Xia 1999). Firm
s that have developed more complex base of 
resources and capabilities will have the higher cap
ability to compete (Ferrier et al. 1999; 
Sambamurthy et al. 2003). 
2.2 IT Innovation in Agile Business Context  The diffusion of IT-based innovations could play a 
crucial role in shaping business agility by enabling 
the sense and responding capabilities of firms (Mathiassen & Pries-Heje 2006; Overby et al. 2006; 
Sambamurthy et al. 2003). According to Overby et 
al. (2006), IT, as a platform, enables agility in two 
ways, directly and indirectly. In certain contexts, a 
firm™s capability would directly relate to enterprise 
agility. With adequate level of IT capability, a fi
rm may be able to anticipate or sense changes 
relevant to their businesses that are brought about 
specifically due to advances in IT. Also, IT 
capability would be critical for responding to opport
unities in IT-driven industries such as financial 
services, retailing, telecommunications, and hardware
/software (Sambamurthy et al. 2003). Indirectly, 
IT is also critical for building enterprise agility by providing the infrastructure on which business 
functions and processes depend. With the help of IT, a firm could build its capability in articulating 
knowledge by enlarging the breath of resources and qua
lity of information. Similarly, IT would help 
firms by extending process research so that firms are 
better integrated internally and with customers 
and partners. These studies share an common underl
ying assumption that ﬁability to quickly change 
the type and flow of information within an 
organization must underlie a rapid and graceful 
reorganizationﬂ (Mathiassen & Pries-Heje 2006) a
nd accordingly, agility in IT adoption/diffusion 
must necessarily lead to en
terprise agility. However, treating the relationship between the 
adoption/diffusion of IT and enterprise agility as a 
ﬁblack boxﬂ could be problematic because even 
though IT has the immense potential for facilitating en
terprise agility, the organizational impact of IT 
per se tends to be limited unless it is aligned with
 strategic objectives and broader capability building 
process of an organization. A special type of IT application is Health Inform
ation System (HIS). The HIS research refers to the 
multidisciplinary body of knowledge related to the 
design, development, implementation and use of 
information-intensive technologies in healthcare 
settings (Chiasson & Davids
on 2004). By adopting a 
Health Information Systems (HIS), we could mo
st probably share some similar concepts and 
situations in normal IS adoption. For example, Kijsanayotin et al. (2009) applied the Unified Theory 
of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) structur
al model to investigate factors that influence 
health IT adoption in community health centers 
in Thailand and validated the UTAUT model in the 
field context of a developing countr
y™s healthcare system (Kijsanayotin et al. 2009). Nevertheless, the 
adoption could be quite different from the generic 
IS approach, given its specific purposes in serving 
the healthcare practice (Chiasson & Davidson 2004). 
In a recent review of HIS development in the 
past two decades, Haux (2006) synthesizes seven li
nes of development in the HIS from the past to 
present, and suggested consequences for HIS in the fu
ture (Haux 2006, for a systematic review). In 
terms of theory development, Heeks™s (2006) pro
posed a ﬁdesign-reality gapﬂ conceptual model 
 which highlighted HIS implementation challenges. 
The seven gaps suggested are: information, 
technology, processes, objectives and values, staffing
 and skills, management systems and structures, 
and other resources (Heeks 2006). In a more rece
nt study, Puri and his colleagues suggested 
developing participatory networks to support the 
design, development and implementation of HIS in 
the context of public healthcare (Puri et al. 2009).  
3 METHODOLOGY 
A case study was carry out to investigate our rese
arch interest, as it provides the researchers to 
explore contemporary events in the case company (W
inter 2003) with the empirical inquiry research 
on ﬁhowﬂ and ﬁwhyﬂ questions (Lazonick & Prencipe 
2005). The main interest of this study is to 
discover how HH hospital innovates in a volatile envi
ronment to set a new healthcare industry model 
for Singapore through development of agility 
and innovative capabilities. Further, since an 
interpretive case study is an appropriate means of empirical inquiry (Lazonick & Prencipe 2005) 
when the phenomena to be studied are complex and 
not easily separated from its original context (Yin 
1994), the scarcity of research in this phenome
non (Amble & Palombarini 1998; Aranda & Molina-
Fernandez 2002; Martin & Horne 1993) has furthe
r substantiated the choice of case study research 
method. This case study is particularly appropriate for the purpose of our study because HH was once 
a hospital which received large amount of patient
 complaints. However, through the agility and 
innovative development, it transformed into a l
eading hospital in Singapore and was labeled as the 
piloting prototyping in leading the future st
andards of the Singapore Healthcare industry.  
3.1 Data Collection 
A total of 19 face-to-face interviews with nine dis
tinct interviewees were conducted over a six month 
period. All interviews were tape-recorded and transcribed, with photos and additional notes taken to 
collect the best possible events of the case. Each 
interview session lasted between 1.5 to 3 hours, with 
informants ranging from nurses, IT specialists, 
doctors and top-manageme
nt personnel having an 
average of three years working experience. We a
dopted a practical way of 
understanding textual data 
that was suggested by Klein and Myers (1999), i.e., 
via personal visits, emails
 and phone contacts to 
foster relationships among researchers and key info
rmants. By doing so, it enables us to understand 
their rich depictions (Yin 1994) underlining the me
anings of their expressions (Hirschheim et al. 1991) 
so as to discover the core-case information that 
is necessary for the comprehending, analyzing and 
evaluating of the case study (Klein & Myers 1999). 
To ensure the quality of data collected, we 
triangulated the data collected with other resources including empirical observations, follow-up email 
clarifications, along with about 230 softco
py documentations and archive records. 
3.2 Data Analysis 
Data analysis was performed in tandem with data
 collection as suggested by Eisenhardt (1989) case 
research methodology style. Based on our agility,
 IT innovation and innovative capability literature, 
we further refined our theoretical lens in guiding for emerging themes of the collected data 
(Eisenhardt 1989).  The data obtained were organized
 and coded according to the set of themes with 
at least two sources of data (Klein & Myers 1999). We addressed the emerged themes based on our 
preconceptions through logical reasoning and via th
e data triangulation method (Klein & Myers 1999) 
to challenged the existing schema 
emerged (Walsham 2006). Data analysis was then being map and 
verified between empirical data, the theoretical lens
, relevant literature to sharpen the constructs 
definitions and raises theoretical level in our model development.  
4 CASE STUDY  
4.1 Case Background  
Health IT has become a priority for the Singapor
e government since 1999. And the call for ﬁExploit 
IT Maximallyﬂ by the Minister of Health has furthe
r encouraged hospitals to improve their Healthcare 
 systems. In-line with government™s 
aim, HH, the hospital with high patients™ complaints at that time 
has decided it is time to improve. For years, HH 
was managed in the traditional hospital settings with 
poor patients™ service and long waiting time. The situa
tion became more apprehensive as the shortage 
of medical staff worsened. Therefore the ground morale of medical staff was low owing to overwork 
under insufficient IT support. Naturally HH loses its 
competitiveness to its rivals in losing patients 
and making loses over the time. In responding to the 
challenge, HH benchmarks itself to become the 
Mayo Clinic of Asia complimenting with the ob
jective to provide patients with the hassle-free 
experience. To counter this crisis heads on, many
 innovative initiatives supported by IT were adopted 
by HH to accomplish its objective before turning the 
tides to becoming the best performing hospital in 
patients™ service since 2004. 4.2 Grounding for an Innovative Breakthrough 
In the search of innovative breakthrough, HH™s 
objectives focused on searching for the fastest and 
most efficient ways in providing a unique patient
-centric service. Pioneering the change with a 
moderate move, HH adopted a special combinati
on approach. First, HH learned from the best 
practices of US-Japanese Medicine/Healthcare syst
ems, integrating them with the Toyota Lean 
manufacturing philosophy from Japan and workshops in Singapore. According to the Director of 
Projects: ﬁYou cannot hang on to the old horse, the 
old technology. You must leapfrog, move 
into a new platform by learning from ot
hers, that™s why we were sent to US and 
Japanﬂ Sensibly and wisely, HH management team expl
oited its strong collaborative culture between 
managerial and clinical staff to influence the releva
nt stakeholders for their intellectual and emotional 
buy-in before kicking off a series of ‚Kaizen™ activities.  
ﬁWe believe in taking small steps in r
apid succession approach, where we test new 
technology and deploy them if 
suitableﬂ Director of Projects Further, HH management team decided to invest
 in IT infrastructure to support the upcoming 
innovation because they believed that a new health 
information system could 1) provide technical 
capabilities and an overall technical base that can be leveraged while developing innovation solutions, 
and 2) enabled quick sharing of information across departments. 
 4.3 Retrofitting for Innovative Idea Integration  
The hospital is filled with synergy to integrat
e various technologies and devices through continual 
experiments in search for more efficient and eff
ective safer-care services to patients. Soon after a 
combination of processes and technologies were sel
ected, the operation team proposed the need to set 
up a common platform with the integrated health
care information systems to the top-management. 
To match the innovation proposal, several intensive mee
tings on costs-and-benefits analysis were held 
by the top-management. Eventually, the top-manageme
nt decided to invite external collaborators for 
strategic partnerships in improving the depart
ment physical layout, business workflow and the 
integrated healthcare information systems. 
The director of operations explained: 
 ﬁWe are a small hospital. So (for) some of the things we implemented, cost is 
important, as we don™t have the financial ar
m to bring in the big software players–ﬂ 
After drafting the emergency department (ED) work
flow requirements, HH sent the proposal to a 
Singapore polytechnic college as an assignment topic 
to reach out for external resources. Within the 
three months, HH received the IS prototype for ED
 from the Singapore polyt
echnic college regarding 
the newly designed system. After a several walk-thr
ough and test-runs based on the prototype, another 
issue was identified. To provide a hassle-free ED vi
sit, patients waiting time for warding must also be 
reduced. Building on to the operation team capab
ility in identifying issues through a series of 
 ﬁkaizenﬂ activities, pull-system was 
suggested as the solution. Accord
ing to the Project Specialist, 
Operations: ﬁWhen you introduce a pull system for beds, it means that you are by providing 
information to the ED staff on which beds 
will be available for disposal rather than 
having the necessity for nurses™ callings to
 look for any available bedﬂ    
In view of the need for the pull-systems, HH extende
d their partnership with three different software 
and hardware companies for support to kick-start 
the systems and its applicability by integrating and 
extending the services from ED to the bed management
. To support and collaborate with external 
parties, the operation team provided conceptual ideas 
gathered from users to assist the pilot test for 
ED and the integration of a wireless device that u
pdates a database which keeps track of the patient™s 
admission and discharge. This concept and technology was tested and rolled out to support the 
operation flow of HH preference. For that, when a pa
tient is supposed to be discharged, the Patient Service Associate (PSA) at the ward will click the system to indicate the ﬁplanned/intended 
dischargedﬂ so that a message will be sent to th
e housekeeper to tidy up the bed within three hours (a 
specific time). Simultaneously, another message will be
 sent to the ED to preparing the patient to be ready for immediate discharge. This synchroniza
tion and integration of activities, workflow and 
processes between departments and nurses were test-run/commissioned for a few months in Ward XI. 
To the management surprise, significant improvement 
had been made with the integrated systems and 
wireless devices in place. Within the span of a few w
eeks, Ward XI topped the list to become the most 
efficient ward with the least turnaround time. 
 4.4 Establishing the Interactive and In
novative Information Technology  
After the successful application of ED and bed management systems, the systems were put in place. 
For the convenience of the interactivity and agility 
of the systems, the physical layout of the 
emergency ward was renovated to ensure the point-to-
point stations were suitably located for effective 
and efficient services. Based on the strengths of the HH staff, the head of ED strategically decided to 
revamp the triage system by allocating a senior doc
tor (an experienced doctor), instead of deploying a 
junior doctor (trainee medical officer) to serve as the 
first point of contact with patients in the initial 
consultation process. Such a move had initially spar
ked some doubt on the wisdom of the decision; 
however it had proven to be a wise move at the end of
 the day. Hence, this has enabled HH to venture 
into a new paradigm of delivery service. 
In sustaining the success of the change, briefings were
 routinely scheduled to up
date the clinical staff 
to provide consistence support to the new arra
ngement. According to the senior nurse manager: 
ﬁ(The revolution) is a journey of improvements; we are still striving for perfection 
through continuous improvement 
and maintaining consistencyﬂ  
Among all, credits must also be given to the operati
ons team in designing a very user-friendly system.  
Within a week after the roll-out, PSA could handle and use the system without any problem.  

Taking a bold move to improve the workflows and 
innovatively develop a better system from scratch 
is an achievement and a great leap forward for HH. The entire innovation service transformation was 
a great success: 1) HH has tremendously improved 
patients™ satisfaction, and also successfully 
expedited patient flow with an average from 22 to 
70 patients attended per ho
ur, 2) Reduced patient 
waiting time by 50%, and 3) the newly designed system
 has contributed to the recording and retention 
of patients™ medical history electronically. With
 such improvements, HH was voted as the best 
hospital in patients™ service since 2004.
 5 DISCUSSION Basing on the innovative activities and processes 
conducted by HH, we developed an Agile-
Innovative Capability Process model (refer to Figure 
1) of how an agility-innovative capability can be 
developed and leveraged from a hospital that has set
 the new hospital industry standard for Singapore. 
 Our model suggests the development and subsequent
 leverage of agility-innovative capability is a 
sprightly complex-helix process of a firm™s sen
sitivity and responsiveness in integrating and 
reconfiguring resources to cope with the change 
within and outside the firm (Eisenhardt & Martin 
2000) for innovation. Given that our model is i
nductively derived from the HH case study data, the 
following discussion provides an explanation of 
how the existing literature corroborates our model 
and how our model contributes back to the existing literature of agility and IT innovation. 
 Process Model of the Agile-Innovative Capability  
Grounding for an Innovative 
Breakthrough 
Retrofitting for Innovative Idea 
Integration  
Establishing the Interactive and 
Innovative IT The Leading Agility Process 
Sensible agility  
Compliant agility 
Interactive agility 
By establishing at a sensible 
position to fulfill external (e.g. 
government) and internal (e.g. 
patients) expectations through the 
exploration of internal operations 
for innovation and competitive 
action   
To fit and match external and 
internal requirements, practices, 
expectations exclusively in 
enriching the patients experience  
To providing interactive and 
service experience to users and 
offering responsive updates to IT 
team for further upgrade and 
improvements. 
The Innovative Capability Process 
Transformative innovation 
capability 
Integrative innovation capability 
Adaptive innovation capability 
Enhanced internal and external 
resources with collaboration 
between managerial and clinical 
staff capability to innovatively 
transform clinical processes based 
on the manufacturing workflow 
By integrating technologies,  
managerial and clinical processes, 
and resources articulated from 
partnerships to develop patient-
centric innovative healthcare 
systems 
By enhancing the adaptability to 
the new healthcare systems through 
aligning new processes 
innovatively to benefit patients 
 Managerial Initiatives 
Prompt review to the 
environmental change  
Provide sensible learning and 
training opportunities 
Cultivate for emotional buy-in  
Nurture and encourage 
collaborations 
Accommodating to new 
suggestions   
Adopt iterative or continues 
improvement in integrating new 
ideas. Offering responsive support to 
users in modifying the system 
Providing continues training to 
users 
Figure 1: Process Model of the Develop
ment of Agile-Innovative Capability  5.1 Phase 1: Grounding for an Innovative Breakthrough 
At the time of grounding for innovative breakthroug
h, HH tactically plan for its innovative changes 
by aligning with the sensible agility and transf
ormative innovation capability. To be sensibly agile, 
HH was 1) sensible towards the compulsion for im
provement, 2) sensible towards organizational 
needs and resources. With the ambition of becoming a leader in the industry, HH took the first mover 
challenge by initiating its sensible agility approach
 to minimize first mover disadvantages (Lieberman 
& Montgomery 1988) by first, screening its external 
(government) and internal (patients) expectation 
before launching for further commitment in tran
sforming the hospital. Sensibly with a fair 
understanding of public expectations, HH then res
ponded by sending management staff to learn from 
the healthcare industry leaders in US and Japan. By
 doing so, they learned from the best of both 
world- Western and Asian healthcare best practices. By learning from the lessons learned overseas 

HH established itself as the first mover with manageab
le IT investment risk (Benaroch 2002), since 
action taken was though agile but also methodically sensible.  
With the strong collaborative and innovative cultura
l background, HH demonstrated its transformative 
innovation capability through the 1) capability to tr
ansform concepts and kn
owledge to practical  improvement, 2) capability to collaborate for tr
ansformation. As evid
ent from the case, HH™s 
managers transformed and extended knowledge and concepts learned from the TPS manufacturing 
workflow to improve the healthcare workflow 
processes. Responding to transform knowledge to 
practice, collaboratively HH managerial and clinical
 staff articulated its operational processes to 
identify bottlenecks and prepare counter measures in
 improving the glitches in the workflow that 
contribute to high patient waiting time. These capa
bilities in aligning transformative innovation refer 
to a manifestation of IT innovative capabilities (Wang & Ahmed 2007). Thus, with sensing agility and 
innovative transformation capabilities, HH has strategically paved itself for a rapid and graceful 
reorganization (Mathiassen & Pries-Heje 2006) and innovative breakthrough. 
5.2 Phase 2: Retrofitting for Innovative Idea Integration  
To retrofit for innovative idea, HH strategically a
ligned with the compliance agility and integrative 
innovation capability in the second phase of healthcare
 IS development. By being agile to-fit and 
match innovative ideas, changes and solutions introduced by external (par
tnership) and internal 
(managerial and clinical staff), HH 1) compelled fl
exibility to accommodate cha
nges, 2) paid attentive 
attention in problem solving, and 3) reacted dyna
mically in confronting issues. Responding with its 
ability to conform, HH demonstrated its strengt
h in leveraging and matching the assets, knowledge, 
competencies from internal and exte
rnal parties; react quickly to th
e expected and unexpected events accurately exploiting any opportunities arises (Mathiassen & Pries-Heje 2006; Sambamurthy et al. 
2003). In other words, the compliant agility woul
d facilitate the user-producer partnership and 
coordination in creating a complex and new-to
-market innovation (Koc
h & Strotmann 2008).  
It is insufficient to be complian
tly agile without the ability to integrate technologies, managerial and 
clinical processes, and resources articulated from part
nerships. To develop such capability, first, the 
HH team focused on integrating conceptual inno
vative ideas to actionable plans. Knowing that external ‚best practices™ might be valuable resources bu
t need to be internalized and ‚localized™ before 
they can play an positive and significant role
, HH organized open discussions among team members 
and non-team member staffs from various functions
 and different levels to evaluate each innovative 
ideas and alternatives. Further, every critical innova
tive idea was implemented through a trial-review-
implement process. As evident in HH, a health IS
 for the department emergency management was 
developed from Singapore polytechnic college before
 extending and improving its development with 
three partnerships. Second, HH developed capability to 
retrofit the systems tacti
cally by identify and 
investigate new avenues (Burgelman & Maidique 19
88) to modify and improve the current processes 
with strong top management support. In which, 
HH demonstrated the capability to deal, process, 
interpret, manipulate and access information to r
esolve complicated problems/issues in a purposeful, 
goal-directed manner so that an organization 
can increase its potential 
to adapt and operate 
strategically (Glynn 1996; Lawson & Samson 2001). 
5.3 Phase 3: Establishing the Interactive and I
nnovative Healthcare Information System  
The success in introducing a groundbreaking healthcar
e information system was achieved by aligning 
interactive agility and adaptive innovation capability. 
To be interactively agile, HH operations team 
was 1) responsive towards user™s feedback, 2) sensitive towards the system interactive and flexible 
mode supported by the system. Throughout the innovative IT system development process, 
organizational intelligence was developed to fac
ilitate HH operations team with responsive and 
interactive ability in fine-tuning technical and 
processes improvement suggested by users before 
introducing the change to all departments. Secondly,
 interactive and flexible mode supported by the 
system has also empowered the agility of the syst
em and its process operation in the hospital. By 
offering responsive updates to IT team, HH was able 
to continuously upgrade and improve the system. 
Consequently, HH was able to prov
ide interactive service experience to
 patients with the support of a 
continuously improved IT system. 
The adaptive innovation capability was developed by e
nhancing the adaptability to the new healthcare 
systems through aligning new business processes to bene
fit patients. It was achieved through a series 
of detailed activities including aligning business processes, smooth and seamless transitions, 
 interactions among users (managerial 
staff and clinical staff), customer
s (patients), and developers (IT staff and service provider) to provide feedbacks a
nd guidance. Two initiatives were demonstrated to 
be critical for the developing of adaptive inno
vation capability 1) developing new skill sets in 
adapting to innovation and 2) encourage open and sharing culture in adopting innovative systems. To 
make the potential benefits of the new processes and systems real, users, no matter clinical staff or 
management staff, have to adopt the new system
 and adapt with the new processes and systems. 
Further, the success of HH™ practice in developi
ng skill capability was also attributed to HH™s 
organizational culture, which was pride of its 
staff as open and supportive towards changes and 
innovations. 
6 CONCLUSIONS The purpose of our paper is to conceptualize on 
the generation of agile-innovative capability derived 
from agility, IT innovative and innovative capability 
literature. This model proposes a process model 
that describes and analyzes the ways how agilit
y and innovative capabilities are implemented and 
managed during the innovation of healthcare IT, in the 
backdrop of a hospital setting, with the aim of initiating a new milestone for the healthcare industry 
in Singapore. As evident in the case, we have 
developed an agile-innovative capability model that
 depicts agility and innovation in a complex 
manner, whereby an organization™s key resources are 
decomposed into three 
phases: (1) grounding for 
an innovative breakthrough, (2) retrofitting for an 
innovative integration, 
and (3) paving to an interactive and innovative hassle-free Information System.  
Our study should provide profound implications for 
researchers and professionals. Theoretically, this 
model proposes and clarifies a series of structured 
activities and systematic processes learned from the 
case study in achieving agile-innovative capability. Based on the study, our model has contributed to 
providing some answers in responding to the lack of innovation studies in service firms (Aranda and 
Molina-Fernandez, 2002) thus serving as the basis for further investigations. 
For professionals, this study contributes three key 
interesting insights for planning, cultivating, 
practicing and managing the agile-innovation capability 
in the healthcare industry. Firstly, managers 
need to be sensible on their goa
ls and plans by establishing emotional-buy in from the medical staff 
before nurturing for internal and external collaborati
ons. Secondly, managers ha
ve to be flexible in providing support to managerial and clinical staff 
in adapting and matching skills with the available technologies. Thirdly, managers are also required to
 be responsive in providing interactive support to 
users with appropriate plans and trainings to align them to the new managerial and clinical processes 
in order to deliver a higher level of services to patients. 
References 
Amble, B. and Palombarini, S. (1998). change and 
incorporated R & D in the service sector. Research 
Policy, 27(7), 655-675. 
Aranda, D. A. and Molina-Fernandez, L. M. 
(2002). Determinants of innovation through a 
knowledge-based theory lens. I
ndustrial Management and data
 Systems, 102(5), 289-296. 
Benaroch, M. (2002). Managing information technology 
investment risk: A real options perspective. 
Journal of Management Inform
ation Systems, 19(2), 43-84. 
Burgelman, R. A. and Maidique, M. A. (1988). St
rategic Management of Technology and Innovation, 
Homewood, Illinois: Irwin. 
Chiasson, M. and Davidson, E. (2004). Pushing 
the contextual envelope: developing and diffusing 
information systems theory for health informati
on systems research. Information and Organization, 
14(3), 155-188. 
Choudhury, V. and Xia, W. (1999). A resource based 
theory of network structures. In Research in 
Strategic Management and Information Technolog
y, (Eds, Venkatraman, N. and Henderson, J.) 
JAI Press, Stanford, CT. 
Cockburn, A. (2001). Agile Software De
velopment, Addison-Wesley: Reading. 
 Dove, R. (2001). Response Ability Œ The Language, St
ructure, and Culture of the Agile Enterprise, 
Wiley, New York, New York. 
Dwivedi, A. N., Bali, R. K. and Naguib, R. N. G. (2007). Telemedicine: the next healthcare delivery 
medium: fad or future? International Journa
l of Healthcare Technology, 8(3-4), 226-249. 
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Agency theory: An
 assessment and review. Academy of Management 
Review, 14(1), 57-74. 
Eisenhardt, K. M. and Martin, J. A. (2000).
 Dynamic capabilities: What are they? Strategic 
Management Journal, 
21(10/11), 1105-1121. 
Ferrier, W. J., Smith, K. G. and Grimm, C. M. (199
9). The role of competitive action in market share 
erosion and industry dethronement: A study of 
industry leaders and challengers. Academy of 
Management Journal, 42(4), 372-388. 
Glynn, M. A. (1996). Innovative genius: A framewo
rk for relating individual and organizational 
intelligences to innovate. Academy of 
Management Review, 21(4), 1081-1111. 
Gould, P. (1997). What is agility. Manufacturing Engineer, 76(1), 28-31. 
Gunasekaran, A. (1999). Agile manufacturing: A framework for research and development. 
International Journal of Produc
tion Economics, 62(1-2), 87-105. 
Haux, P. (2006). Health information systems - past
, present, future. International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, 75(3-4), 268-281. 
Heeks, R. (2006). Health information systems: 
Failure, success and improvisation. International 
Journal of Medical Informatics, 75125-137. 
Hirschheim, R., Klein, H. K. and Newman, M. (1
991). Information Systems Development as Social 
Action: Theoretical Perspective and Practice. Omega, 19(6), 587-608. 
Kijsanayotin, B., Pannarunothai, S. 
and Speedie, S. M. (2009). Factors influencing health information 
technology adoption in Thailand's community health centers: Applying the UTAUT model. 

International Journal of Me
dical Informatics, 78404-416. 
Klein, H. and Myers, M. (1999). A set of principles for conducting and evaluating interpretive field 
studies in information systems. MIS Quarterly, 23(1), 67Œ94. 
Koch, A. and Strotmann, H. (2008). Absorptive cap
acity and innovation in the knowledge intensive 
business service sector. Economics of Innovati
on and New Technology, 17(6), 511-531. 
Lawson, B. and Samson, D. (2001). Developing In
novation Capability in Organizations: A Dynamic 
Capabilities Approach. International Journal 
of Innovation Management, 5(3), 377-400. 
Lazonick, W. and Prencipe, A. (2005). Dynamic 
capabilities and sustained innovation: strategic control and financial commitment at Rolls-Royce 
Plc. Industrial and Corporate Change, 14(3), 
501-542. 
Lieberman, M. and Montgomery, D. (1988). First m
over advantages. Strategi
c Management Journal, 9(1), 41-58. 
Malone, T. W., Crowston, K., Lee, J. and Pentla
nd, B. (1999). Tools for inventing organizations: 
toward a handbook of organizational processe
s. Management Science, 45(3), 425-443. 
Martin, C. R. and Horne, D. A. (1993). Service innovation: successful versus unsuccessful firms. 
International Journal of Service 
Industry Management, 4(1), 49-65. 
Mathiassen, L. and Pries-Heje, J. (2006). Business 
agility and diffusion of information technology. 
European Journal of Information Systems, 15(2), 116-119. 
Nambisan, S. (2002). Software firm evolution and 
innovation-orientation. Journal of Engineering & 
Technology Management, 19(2), 141-165. 
Overby, E., Bharadwaj, A. and Sambamurthy, V. (2
006). Enterprise agility and the enabling role of 
information technology. European Journa
l of Information Systems, 15120-131. 
Puri, S. K., Sahay, S. and Lewis, J. (2009). Bu
ilding participatory HIS networks: A case study from 
Kerala, India. Information 
and Organization, 1963-83. 
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A. and Grover, V.
 (2003). Shaping agility through digital options: 
reconceptualizing the role of information technol
ogy in contemporary firms. MIS Quarterly, 27(2), 
237-263. 
Seo, D. and La Paz, A. I. (2008). Exploring the da
rk side of IS in achieving organizational agility. 
Communications of the ACM, 51(11), 136-139. 
Sharifi, H. and Zhang, Z. (1999). A methodology fo
r achieving agility in manufacturing organizations: 
An introduction. International Journa
l of Production Economics, 62(1-2), 7-22. 
 Sharp, J. M., Irani, Z. and Desai, S. (1999). Working towards agile manufacturing in the UK industry. 
International Journal of Productio
n Economics, 62(1-2), 155-169. 
van Oosterhout, M., Waarts, E. and van Hillegersberg
, J. (2006). Change factors requiring agility and 
implications for IT. European Journal of Information Systems, 15132-145. 
Walsham, G. (2006). Doing Interpretive Research
: Nature and Method. European Journal of 
Information Systems Research, 15320-330. 
Wang, C. L. and Ahmed, P. K. (2007). Dynami
c capabilities: A review and research agenda. International Journal of Mana
gement Reviews, 9(1), 31Œ51. 
Winter, S. G. (2003). Understanding dynamic capabili
ties. Strategic Management Journal, 24(10), 
991-995. 
World Health Organization (2007a). Country 
Health Information Profiles, Singapore, 
http://www.wpro.who.int/countries/sin/health_situation.htm 
World Health Organization (2007b). Sp
ending on health: a global overview, 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs319/en/index.html 
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case Study Research: Design a
nd Methods, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks. 
