 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)School of Business Information Technology and Logistics, the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT University),Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaSchool of Business Information Technology and Logistics, the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT University),Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaSchool of Business Information Technology and Logistics, the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT University),Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaPACIS 2012 Proceedings. ENTERPRISE SYSTEM-ENABLED ORGANIZATIONAL 
AGILITY CAPABILITY: A CONSTRUCT AND MEASUREMENT 
INSTRUMENTThao Trinh-Phuong, School of Business Information Technologyand Logistics, the Royal 
Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT University), Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 
phuongthao.trinh@rmit.edu.auAlemayehu Molla, School of Business Information Technologyand Logistics, the Royal 
Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT University), Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 
alemayehu.molla@rmit.edu.auKonrad Peszynski,School of Business Information Technologyand Logistics, the Royal 
Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT University), Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 
konrad.peszynski@rmit.edu.auAbstractIn the turbulent and highly competitive environment, organizational agility (OA that is the ability of 
organizations to quickly sense and respond to environmental changes, is an important determinant of 
organization success. Pervasiveness of enterprise system (ES) implementation (e.g. CRM, ERP, SCM, 
etc.) which aims to integrate information resources in particular and organizational resources in 
general has raised the questions on its link to organizational agility. Using insights from dynamic 
capability theory, this paper refers to the capabilities that organizations can leverage from their ES in 
supporting to organizational agility as the ES-enabled Organizational Agility (ESEOA), and develops 
a set of variables to measure this construct. The measures were tested for content and construct 
validity and reliability based on data from 180 medium and large Australian and New Zealand 
organizations that have implemented and used ES. The research is significant to provide researchers 
the metrics as part of nomological network of factors to explain the post-implementation impacts of 
ES on organizational performance. It at the same time provides practitioners feasible tools in 
analyzingthe ES capabilities in their organizations.  
Keywords: Enterprise System Competence, Information Systems,OrganizationalAgility, Dynamic 
Capability Theory.
 1INTRODUCTIONOrganizational agility (OA) which refers to organizations™ ability to thrive by sensing and responding 
to environmental changes has become critically important nowadays when the business environment 
is getting highly competitive and turbulent. Being regarded as a key business factor and a potential 
enabler to organization™s competitiveness (Mathiassen and Pries-Heje 2006), it has become the topic 
of interest of both academics and practitioners in recent years.  Nineout of ten executives ranked OA 
as both critical to business success and growing in importance over time in a McKinsey & Company 
survey (Sull 2009).Research on OA is particularly emerging in  information systems field (Izza et al. 
2008; Sambamurthy et al.2003)due to the extensively reliance of contemporary organization on 
information in general and its information system in particular (Mathiassen and Pries-Heje 2006). 
Although there are a number of studies on the relationship between IS and OA, two gaps have been 
identified from the existing IS literature. Firstly, IS literature has emphasized on IS and its capabilities 
as the means to obtain organizational agility. However, the literature in regard to how IScontribute to 
OAis either not conceptually transparent and rather treats the process that connects IS and OA 
as a
ﬁblack boxﬂor has not been validated with empirical evidence (Overby et al. 2006; Seo and Paz 
2008). Among the limited number of empirical studies on agility such as the research examining the 
relationship amongtechnical IT capability, managerialIT capabilityand businessprocess agility in 
the context of environmental dynamism (Tallon 2008), the research investigating the effect of an 
organization™s IT infrastructure capabilities on enabling IT-dependent organizational agility (Fink and 
Neumann 2009; Raschke and David 2005),majority of themadopt a factor-oriented approach that 
overlooks upon the mechanism by which the IT/IS capabilities can be achieved. Other studies 
although have proposed the framework suggesting how IT-enabled organizational agility capabilities 
are generated are either conceptual in nature (Sambamurthy et al. 2003)and not supported by 
empirical evidence (Overby et al. 2006).Recent  research on the process of IS development suggests a 
roadmap that organizations can deploy their IS to be capable in enabling organizational agility (Tan et 
al. 2010). Although some guidelinesin regard to achieving OA from IS perspective can be derived 
from the research, however, the focus of these studies is on the agile development of IS rather than the 
role of IS itself. As such, there is a need for a theoretical framework to explicate how IS-enabled 
organizational agility can be achieved. Secondly, much of the IS and OA literature uses broad and 
overly abstract theoretical IT-related constructs as the antecedents of OA such as digital options 
(Sambamurthy et al. 2003), IT usage and IT acceptance (Zain et al. 2005). These studies either lack 
attention to the attributes ofspecific types of information systemsor use various anecdotal examples 
that might support the use of the technology or the methodology the studies suggest, thus providing 
less specific indications for practical action (Orlikowski and Iacono 2001).
The above two gaps in IS 
literature drive this research which is particularly concerned about one set of information systems, 
Enterprise Systems (ES), and their relationship to OA. ES refers to an integrated IS that uses both 
technology and management capabilities of that technology to manage information flow in an 
organization(Davenport 1998). ES are different from other types of IS by the scope and depth of 
information they manage. ES covers not only internal business units but also interrelationship with 
business partners. Information managed by ES is at all the levelsfrom operational to strategic level. 
ES inherit some of the IS characteristics but have unique features such as standardization, integration, 
process oriented and best practice (Goodhue et al. 2009; Lengnick-Hall et al. 2004)which results in 
distinctive contribution towards the organization performance in comparison with othertypes of IS
such as decision support system, or transaction processing system. ES such as Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP), Customer Relationship Management (CRM), and Supply Chain Management (SCM) 
harness the power of contemporary IT and are pervasively used in most large organizations 
(Davenport 1998).
Although most of IS researchers studying on organizational agility have earlier referred to IS with 
implication of enterprise system, or taking ES as an example of IS, the lack of theories specifically 
about IS artifacts(its context, effects, capabilities) in those studies limits the research contributionto 
the understanding of IS roles in organization agility (Orlikowski and Iacono 2001). Therefore, 
 research on the role of ES on the organizational agility is expected to fill the above gaps from the 
literature. Despite the pervasiveness of ES and the importance of OA, the relationship between ES and OA 
remains under researched. We conducted a thirteen-year (1998-2010) review of papers published in 
the top 10 IS journals. The finding reveals that there are only five academically published papers on 
ES and OA (Davis 2005; Gattiker et al. 2005; Ignatiadis and Nandhakumar 2007; MacKinnon et al. 
2008; Seethamraju and Seethamraju 2009). Given the trends that most large organizations are moving 
towards ESand are investing heavily on ES architectureand the increasing demand for an agile 
organization, lack of research on ES and OA is a critical oversight. Further analysis and syntheses of 
the previous ES, IS and OA literature identified additional gaps. Firstly, most ES research focuses on 
the implementation issues of ES and not how it either inhibits or limits OA (Moon 2007). The 
exceptions are the works of (Davis 2005; Gattiker et al. 2005; Ignatiadis and Nandhakumar 2007;
MacKinnon et al. 2008; Seethamraju and Seethamraju 2009). However, in these studies organizational 
agility is not a dependent variable. Instead, they research on the influence of ES on business process 
agility (Seethamraju and Seethamraju 2009), system agility (Davis 2005), and organizational 
resilience (Ignatiadis and Nandhakumar 2007). Furthermore, the majority of the research is 
conceptual research, and among the empirical research, the majority employs qualitative research 
methodology (Seethamraju and Seethamraju 2009). Some published papers are working papers and 
both their conceptual framework and findings are yet to be confirmed (Davis 2005). Secondly, there 
is contradiction in the role of ES and OA from the limited available research. Some authors claim that 
ES has a negative impact on agility because of tight integration to make any process change (Newell 
et al. 2007), lack of functional fit with business requirement (Ni et al. 2002).Conversely,(Gattiker et 
al. 2005)state that EScontain some mechanisms such as built-in flexibility, process integration, data 
integration, and availability of ﬁadd-onﬂ software applications by which to support agility. Thirdly, 
the recent introduction of new ES technologies such as SOA and web services have altered the ES 
infrastructures which lead to the changes in ES capabilities  (High et al. 2008; Macvittie 2006). The 
aforementioned gaps provide justifications for conducting a study that aims to investigate the impact 
of ES onorganizational agility. 
Drawingfrom dynamic capability theoryand process based theory, our previous research(Trinh-
Phuong et al. 2010)proposed a conceptual framework to explain how ES enables organizational 
agility(Figure 1).In that framework, ES competences do not directly impact on agility level. Instead, 
through the process of assimilating ES in organizations™ activities, ES competence is leveraged to 
developed dynamic capabilities which we referas enterprise system-enabled organizational agility
capability(ESEOA). ESEOA in turns is embedded in the two fundamental business environment 
sensing and responding processes of organizational agility. Hence, ESEOA isthe missing link 
between ES competenceand OA. 
Figure 1. Framework explaining how ES competence enables organizational agility
The current research, which is successive to that research, reports the results of a study that further 
examines the theoretical meaning, structure and dimensionality and reliability and validity of 
construct enterprise system-enabled organizational agility (ESEOA). The paper is expected to provide 
potential measurements indicators of ESEOA, thus, it helps to advance a further step in validating the 
framework thatwe propose earlier in explaining how ES impacts on OA. The rest of the paper is 
structured in the following sessions: Section 2 discusses on the relevant literature; Section 3 presents 
the methodology pursued to develop the measurement instrument and how we operationalize the 
methodology in developing the measurement instrument. Section 4 provides a brief discussion of the 
results of the exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis. Finally section 5 discusses the theoretical 
and practical implication of the findings together with limitation and future research possibilities.
 2CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND
The conceptual foundation of enterprise system enabled organizational agility (ESEOA) is derived 
from three research domains:organizational agility, dynamic capability theory,enterprise system and 
information system competence. While the dynamic capability theory helps us understand the 
transformation of ESresources into ES capabilities in the unstable business environment, the OA
literature identifiesthe processes that EScan be used in enhancing the OAlevel and the literature on 
ES competence help to identify what ES competence are relevant to be leveraged in supporting OA.
2.1Organizational Agility
The concept of OAis derived from performance characteristics of an agile organization and is rooted 
in two related concepts-ﬁorganizational adaptabilityﬂ and ﬁorganizational flexibilityﬂ (Sherehiy et al. 
2007). Organizational adaptability focuses on how an organization™s form, structure, and degree of 
formalization influence its ability to quickly adapt to its business environment (Sherehiy et al. 2007). 
Organizational flexibility represents an organization™s capacity toadjust its internal structures and 
processes in a predetermined response tochanges in the environment. Adaptability underlies the fit of 
organizational operations to their environment while flexibility emphasizes the readiness of 
organizational resources and the ease of resource mobilization. The ﬁagilityﬂ concept encompasses 
both flexibility and adaptability (Christopher and Towill 2001). An agile organization is not only 
ﬁflexibleﬂ to cater for predictable changes but also is able to respond and adapt to unpredictable 
changes quickly and efficiently (Oosterhout et al. 2006).  Therefore, OAcan be viewed as the state of 
organizational performance in terms of flexibility and adaptability and is attainable through 
organization™sactivities. In particular, from the process-based perspective, OAis a set of processes 
that allow an organization to sense changes and respond efficiently and effectively in timely and cost-
effective manner in the internal and external environments(Seo and Paz 2008).Sensing refers to an 
organization™sability to 
detect, capture
and interpretorganizational opportunities (Oosterhout et al. 
2006; Seo and Paz 2008). Responding represents an organizational ability tomobilize and transform 
resources to react to the opportunities that it senses (Gattiker et al. 2005; Oosterhout et al. 2006). 
These two capabilities must be aligned to optimally obtain OA(Overby et al. 2006). Organizations 
which have high level of sensing but low level of responding will not be able to take the opportunities 
for better performance while organizations which have higher level of responding capabilities but low 
level of sensing capabilities would waste theirresources. Any impact upon the environment sensing 
and responding capabilities of an organization would consequently affect the OAlevel. 
2.2Perspective of Information System and Enterprise System impacts on Organizational 
agilityIS literature agrees upon the general benefits of enterprise systems including (1) integrating data and 
applications, implementing generic business model based on the ﬁbest practicesﬂ, (2) providing 
standardized solutions of the business problems, (3) building on modularized structure, and allowing 
customizations for the specific business process  (David et al. 2003; Lorincz 2007).  These general 
benefitswere further analyzedfrom organizational performance perspectives and acknowledged in 5 
areas: operational, managerial, strategic, IT infrastructure and organizational benefits (Shang and 
Seddon 2002). Although OAare highly correlated to the business performance, the literature is 
divided in three distinctive views Œ
facilitating, inhibiting and neutral views
-in regard to the impact 
of IS in general and ES in particular on OA. Some authors claim that ES has a negative impact on 
agility because of tight integration to make any process change and lack of functional fit with business 
requirement (Ni et al. 2002)
.Customization in ES, which results from the lack of fit between 
organizationally owned business processes with standard processes provided by ES vendors, brings in 
complexity which may reduce OA (Davis 2005). Conversely, other research suggests a positive 
impact of ESon OA. An increase in OA is one of the benefits brought about by ES implementations 
(Davenport 1998). Firstly, due to the advancement of modern IT, the impacts of ESon OAcan be 
identified  in three areas including speeding up activities; providing intelligent and autonomous 
 decision-making processes; and enabling distributed operations with collaboration which enable 
agility (Huang and Nof 1999). Secondly, ES contain mechanisms such as built-in flexibility, process 
integration, data integration, and availability of ﬁadd-onﬂ applications to support agility (Gattiker et al. 
2005; Goodhue et al. 2009). Vertical integration which is resulted by ES implementation enhances the 
visibility, accessibility and control and decision support capability, thus enables top management to 
comprehend better the critical need for changes in supporting agility (Seethamraju 2009). (Huang and 
Nof 1999)also argue that if the definition of agilityis concerned with an ESwhich consists of 
multiple, inflexible but cooperative subsystems, the whole system may still provide high agility. 
Through the availability of built-in and add-on functionalities,which are developed to serve special 
requirements, ESprovide more options for responses to meet agility challenges that do not require 
changing the backbone of tightly integrated program code (Goodhue et al. 2009). Hence, built-in and 
add-ons solutions can be viewed as one sources of agility provided by ES. Moreover, ES vendors are 
reflecting on the market™s demand to innovate their software products by providing new version of ES 
systems (for example SAP™s ERP systemhasevolvedfrom R3, through ECC6 to business suite 7.0).  
This is an incremental and continuous development without radical modification on the basic concept 
of ES. At present, the ES eco-system is undergoing through a paradigm shift. On the business side, 
agility and flexibility are becoming essential features of modern day organizations. On the technology 
(IT) side, two architectures have emerged emerging: the web based SOA (service oriented 
architecture) and BPMS (business process management suites) (Lorincz 2007). The introduction of 
new ES technologies such as SOA, business process management (BPM) and web services have 
altered ES infrastructures, which lead to changes in ES capabilities (Moitra and Ganesh 2005). Loose 
coupling which is the fundamental technique of SOA has been embedded into the development of the 
most recent ES, hence, making ES better agility-enabling applications (Chen et al. 2007). Lastly, 
some researchers have introduced a neutral conclusion on the roles of ES on organizational agility. 
The introduction of an EScreates power differentials, which serves to increase control in the 
organization. This results in increased rigidity, and a possible decrease in organizational flexibility 
and resilience. On the other hand, ES can also cause drift, resulting from the unexpected 
consequences of this power differential, as well as from the role of perceptions of people in solving a 
problem within the ES. This reduction in control may serve in some circumstances as an enabler of 
organizational resilience (Ignatiadis and Nandhakumar 2007). 
We argue that the contradictory conclusions on the relationship between ES and OA in the existing 
literature are due to the lack of mechanism that explains the impact of ES on OA. The previous 
studies mostly look into IS in general and ES in particular as resource providers. However, as (Shang 
and Seddon 2002)suggest that ES benefits are indirectly linked with business benefits through the use 
of information, rather than ES itself, ES mismanagementis the main reason that negatively influences 
OA (Overby et al. 2006).
2.3Dynamic capability theory
The DCT regards firms™ ability to constantly adapt, renew and reconfigure their capabilities and 
competences as the major source of performance(Teece 2007). Dynamic capabilities are ﬁthe 
organizational and strategic routines by which firms achieve new resource configurations as markets 
emerge, collide, split, evolve, and dieﬂ(Eisenhardt and Martin 2000). While RBV emphasizesthe 
appropriate selection of resources, DCT emphasizesthe evolvement of resources (Teece 2007), which 
is signified by two processes: resource-picking and capability-building in the organization-learning 
loop. Hence, from the DCT perspective, organizational resources need to be adaptive, renewable and 
reconfigurable to provide sustainable competitive advantage (Teece 2007). Dynamic capabilities are 
commonly associated with dynamic environment where an organization needs to keepchanging its 
resources to suit the organization strategy at a particular circumstance (O'Connor 2008). Under 
different conditions of business environment, different types of dynamic capabilities are needed. The 
DCT provides a relevant theoretical lens to conceptualizethe link between ES and OA.ES can 
represent valuable and arguably rare resources. They provide the essential platform; can be key 
sources of organizational capabilities and can potentially, albeit indirectly, contribute to OA 
(Sambamurthy et al. 2003). However, ES resources are not static or ultimately superior in enabling 
 OA. Instead, ES resources need to be carefully selected, configured and combined with other non-ES 
organizational resources to generateES-enabled organizational agility capability for OA.Since 
sensing and responding capabilities are two fundamental capabilities of an agile organization, thus,
ES-enabled organizational agility capability is a dynamic capability and reflected by the extent of ES-
enabled sensing capability and ES-enabled responding capability. 
Table 1 specifies the construct domains and relevant concepts extracted from the literature that the 
ESEOA can be conceptualized from.
ConceptDefinitionRelevance to the current re
search
Organizational 
agility
The performance of an organization to excel in 
utilizing its resources in order to quickly sense 
changes from its business environment and 
respond to those changes appropriately. 
Identify ES capabilities enabling sensing 
andresponding changes
Sensing capability
Organization™s  ability to detect, capture and 
interpret organizational opportunities
Identify ES capabilities that supports 
organizations in capturing, interpreting, 
and providing business intelligence
Responding 
capability
Organizational ability to mobilize and transform 
resources to react to the opportunities that it 
sensesIdentify ES capabilities that supports 
organization  in mobilizing resources, 
and taking actions
Dynamic 
Capability 
Theory
Organizational resources need to be adaptive, 
renewable and reconfigurable 
to provide 
sustainable competitive advantage
Help identifying ES capabilities that are 
adaptive, renewable, and reconfigurable
Table 1. Summary Definition of Key Concepts
3SCALE DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDITY
There is an alarming lack of effort in validating instruments (Straub et al. 2004)address a relative 
paucity of replication in MIS.To avoid the unstructured construct define, the research applies the 
three-stage construct development proposed by (Lewis et al. 2005). 
3.1Stage 1: Domain definition of the ﬁEnterprise System-enabled organizational agility 
capability ESEOAﬂ
The first state is to establish the domain of the idea whereby the purpose and/or importance of the 
construct, the conceptual definition, and the list of dimensions which represent the elements of the 
constructs are specified. The concept ES-enabled organizational agility (ESEOA) is drawn upon the 
concepts of ES competence transformation into capabilities fromDCT perspective. This study argues
that ESEOA is generated when ES competence is leveraged in the process that organization senses 
and responds to business changes. Thus, ESEOA are derived from sensing and responding capability. 
Since changes happen in business environment unpredictably, the leveraging of ES competence in 
enabling organizational sensing and responding capabilities,which results in the generation of 
ESEOA,is a continuous process. Based on the review of enterprise system literature and dynamic 
capability theory, the ESEOA is defined as:
ﬁorganization™s capability to deploy its ES resources and 
embed them in the organization™s activities to quickly and efficiently sense and respond to changesﬂ. 
Hence, ESEOA is a higher order concept composed of two constructs ES-enabled sensing capability 
(ESESC) and ES-enabled responding capability (ESERC) (Figure 2).
Figure 2.ES-enabled Organizational Agility
 3.1.1ES-enabled Sensing capability
Sensing capability focuses on a firms™ ability to gather and make sense of externally generated 
knowledge to manage disruptive changes (Overby et al. 2006). Sensing capability not only indicates 
the ability of an organization to sense current changes but also to develop market foresight to 
anticipate changes inthe future. Organizations that are able to anticipate changes in their business 
environment can quickly devise their responding actions in advance of their competitors. There are 
various ways of building sensing capability. (Neill et al. 2007)argued that organizations that perform 
a better capability to 
communicate
relevant information among members of the decision making team, 
interpret
their environment in amultidimensional way and analyzethe information simultaneously by 
incorporating multiple perspectives will have higher sensing capability and eventually become more 
agile. Furthermore, 
anticipatory capability
, which refers to the ability to predict the way that market is 
moving can be an essential dimension of sensing capabilities (Day 1994). Overall, the development of 
sensing capability requiresorganizations to scan the business environment and capture business 
insights beyond the usual sources. Such capability can be developed by organizational technologies, 
processes, values and norms that together generate knowledge about the future condition
(Sambamurthy et al. 2003).Based on the above logic, we postulate that ES, as valuable resources, can 
be deployed as a source of capability building mechanisms to either directly or indirectly enable 
sensing capability. We name this construct as 
ES-enabled sensing capability
and define it as ﬁ
ES-enabled sensing capability refers tothe ability of an organization to quickly and efficiently utilize its 
ES to digitize the process of sensing and develop a strategic market foresight about its business 
environmentﬂ
. The sensing process includes capturing, interpreting and analyzingchange signals from 
business environment. ES functionalities can digitize the sensingprocess.
3.1.2ES-Enabled Responding Capability 
While sensing capability generates knowledge of the business environment, responsive capability 
effectively transforms that knowledge into action (Gattiker et al. 2005). Response capability is thus 
reflected by the change-enabling capabilities that are embedded in organizational processes (Li et al.
2008). (Christopher et al. 2004)suggest responsiveness to be characterized by a short time-to-market, 
the ability to scale up (or down) quickly and the rapid incorporation of consumer preferences into the 
design process. Response acts are the result of a range of operating and strategy capabilities that 
organizations develop. (Overby et al. 2006)suggest four fundamental strategic capabilities: (1) 
production development capabilities
to facilitate a firm™s ability to embark on new ventures; (2) 
systems development capabilities
to quickly and efficiently implement change to existing systems 
such as reusable service, SOA; (3) 
supply-chain and production capabilities
to adjust existing 
ventures by shifting production to match a pending change in demand such as high supply chain 
visibility; and (4) 
flexible resource utilization 
to shift resources to areas of need to  embark on new 
ventures or adjust existing ventures. Based on the above understanding of responding capability, we 
postulate that ES as valuable resources can be deployed asa source of responding capability building 
mechanisms. We name this construct as ES-enabled responding capability and define it as following 
with table fivesummarizing the concept matrix:ﬁ
ES-enabled responding capability refers to an 
organization™s capability to deploy its ES resources and embed them in its production development, 
systems development, supply chain and production and flexible resource utilization strategies and 
processes to quickly and efficiently respond to changesﬂ. 
Based on the above definitions, content analysis to draw inferences from text to address the domain 
specified above from the literature and the discussion with two domain experts, 25 items including 9 
items (ESS1-9) to measure ES-enabled Sensing capability (ESESC) and 16 items (ESR1-16) to 
measure ES-enabled responding capability(ESERC) were generated (Table 2). These items are 
measured on 5-point Likert scale.
 ConstructIDItemsESESCESS1Capture business intelligence from various sources ( customer, competitor, suppl
ier) ESS2Generate knowledge about the market (
market trend, competitors™ actions, regulation 
changes, cultural shifts, technology developments, etc
)ESS3Interpret business intelligence for different management levels
ESS4Analyse business intelligence in different formats ( text, audio, video)
ESS5Prioritise the most important changes in the business environment
ESS6Provide business intelligence to decision makers of different functional units across the 
organization
ESS7Develop real time visibility of demand in your supply chain
ESS8Develop alertness about the business environment
ESS9Develop rich industry foresight 
ESS10Examine trends in the data for the industry foresight
ESERCESR1Quickly bring new products/services to market
ESR2Quickly add more feature (s) to existing products/services
ESR3Introduce new product/service faster than other competitors
ESR4Easily adjust the production volume of products/services 
ESR5Create a high degree of process interconnectivity with trading partners
ESR6Simultaneously work on the same data with trading partners
ESR7Collaboratively plan with trading partners
ESR8Allow trading partners to work on your real data
ESR9Increase the accuracy of the data used by trading partners
ESR10Simultaneously develop information systems with several supply chain partners
ESR11Simultaneously design business processes with several supply chain partners
ESR12Increase the accuracy of information used by top management in making strategic 
decisions ESR13Create a high degree of intra
-organization
al business process interconnectivity 
ESR14Adapt to radical market changes
ESR15Empower end-users for taking actions in business operation
ESR16Resilient to radical changes
ESR17Generate new business strategies
Table 2.Initial items for ES-enabled Organizational Agility Capability
3.2Stage 2: Instrument purification
To purify the instrument and establish content validity, these measurement indicators are tested 
through pretesting and pilot testing. The pretesting was conducted with a panel of experts comprised 
of 15 professors who have published researched on agility and its closely related concept such as 
flexibility, adaptability in high ranking IS journals. The panel of expert were asked to complete the 
questionnaires and rate on the degree of relevance of each items on measuring the underlying 
constructs on the scale from 1 to 5 with 1 is ﬁnot relevantﬂ and 5 is ﬁhighly relevantﬂ, as well as to 
provide additional comments on every aspect of the instrument such as format, content, 
comprehensiveness and ease of completion. To assess the consistency among different experts, the 
inter-rater correlation was calculated. At p=0.01, all of the inter-rater were significant, thus supporting 
the reliability of the experts judgment. Items with a mean relevance score of less than 3.5 were 
dropped. Items ESS4, ESS8, ESS9 of ESESCand items ESR2, ESR3, ESR6, ESR8, ESR11, ESR14, 
ESR16 of ESERCwere deleted due to that criterion. Item ESS5 from ESESCand items ESR1, ESR7, 
ESR12 were changed in wording. Two items ESS10 "Examine trends in the data for the industry 
foresight" and ESR17 ﬁGenerate new business strategiesﬂ were added after being suggested from the 
panel of experts and the literaturereview. 
After the modification of the questionnaire was done based on the review of the feedback from the 
panel of experts, questionnaire was further tested by a pilot testing. Three respondents were chosen 
from the same population from which data would be collected. They were asked to complete the 
survey questionnaire and give suggestion for improvement on the survey. The pilot study aimed to 
ensure the comprehensiveness of the items, the appropriateness of scale used in measuring items and 
 the contextual appropriateness of language.  Changes on the wordings of the items were made after 
the pilot test. The steps taken in stage one and two ensure the content validity of the instrument. The 
survey questionnaire after stage two is the final draft of the instrument which we would bring to stage 
three. ESESCwere measured by 7 items and ESERCwere measured by 10 items. 
3.3Stage 3: Data collection
In the third stage, we conducted a survey on medium to large Australian and New Zealand 
organizations that have implemented and used enterprise systems for at least 1 year. We focused on 
three main enterprise systems: ERP, CRM and SCM. The invitation to take part in to the survey were 
sent to 1400 CIOs (or equivalently high ranking IT manager) of organizations that wererandomly 
selected and providedby specialist data provider and gather from a variety of industry sectors to make 
the result generalisable. 
There were a total of 275 emails bounced back and 139 respondents requested to be excluded in the 
research. The reason for the bounce back email was either wrong address, or the respondents have 
moved or changed their post. This made a final sample size of 986 respondents. Out of 224 responses 
received which made a response rate of 22.7%, 180 responses were included in the final dataset and 
retained as usable for this research after excluding 44 incomplete responsesin a meticulous data 
cleaning process. This response rate is in line with the response rate for studies on senior IT managers 
in large organizations in literature. 
4DATA ANALYSIS
A preliminary data analysis was undertaken to examine the psychometric properties of the scales via 
measures of central tendency,correlation reliability estimates, exploratory factor analysis and 
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) that we will discuss in the following sessions.
4.1Nonresponse biasand Common method bias
The wave analysis (Armstrong and Overton 1977)is applied to test the nonresponse bias by 
comparing the responses from pre-deadline survey with the late responders on actual survey variables. 
This method assumes that people who respond in later waves to have responded because of the 
increasedstimulus and are expected to be similar to non-respondents. Therefore, if the late 
respondents are differentfrom respondents, it most likely suggeststhat some level of bias exist. We 
tested for statistically significant differencein the responses of the 72 late respondents to the earlier 
on all the variables using a one-sample t test. The result indicates the significant values were all larger 
than 0.05. Thus, even if non-response bias cannot be excluded, itis not statistically significant. 
Common method bias may occur from data that is collected only via one method or only at one point 
of time(Straub et al. 2004). Among several methods to test common method bias, this research 
applies Harman™s single factor test which is most widely used(Podsakoff et al. 2003). An exploratory 
factor analysis was conducted upon the full data set. If a substantial amount of common method 
variance is present either (a) one factor accounts for the majority of the covariance between the 
measures or (b) a single factor will emerge from the factor analysis (Podsakoff et al. 2003). The 
unrotated factor solution results in two factors with no general factor accounting for the majority of 
the variance. 
4.2Unidirectional Validity with Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA)
Since, the ESEOA construct was hypothesizedas the higher-order construct composed of two 
constructs ESESCand ESERC, hence, EFA is used to derive the initial set of factors for the construct 
(Lewis et al. 2005). An important concern in EFA is sample adequacy. (Hair et al. 2010)suggested a 
case-to-variable ratio of 5:1 to guarantee a reliable EFA procedure. The measurement contained 17 
 variables with a sample size of 180. Therefore the sample adequacy criterion was met.
In order to 
verify that the data are meant to factor analysis, two tests should be executed: the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin 
(KMO) test and the Bartlett sphericity test. The value of KMO is 0.917 which is larger than the 
acceptable value of 0.5. The significant value(p <0.001) indicates that thecorrelation matrix 
generated from the data is different from the identity matrix. Therefore, the factor analysis is 
appropriate in thisresearch. 
In EFA, Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Varimax rotation method, and minimum Eigen value 
of 1were chosenas the condition for factor to be extracted. The threshold of item loading for EFA 
used in IS construct development studies are 0.5 (Lewis et al. 2005). Items that have no loadings 
exceeding the threshold should be dropped fromfurther analysis. As the result, two factors were 
identified (Table 3). This result is consistent with the hypothesis that ESEOA is composed of two 
constructs ESESCand ESERC. EFA was conducted with several rotation techniques to reach the best 
factor solution based on the judgmenton the simplicity, interpretability and the percent of variance 
explained by the set of designated factors. The results yielded the same numbers of factors as well as 
the component variables. With reference to the item with largest loading and the overall nature of the 
items that loaded on the factors, these two factors were labeledas ES-enabled Sensing Capability 
(ESESC) and ES-enabled Responding Capability (ESERC) respectively. Item ESR13 ﬁCreate a high 
degree of intra-organizational business process interconnectivityﬂ was dropped because of cross-
loading. Three items (ESR12, ESR15, ESR17) that are theorized to measure responding capability 
loaded with sensing capability. These items refer to increasing access to information and empowering 
decision makers to take strategic actions. Respondents might have considered this as part of their 
sensing process. The two factor model account for 58.4% of the total variance to be explained. 
ESESCESERCESS3.865ESS6.823ESS5.775ESS2.715ESS10.709ESR12.696ESS1.695ESR17.611ESS7.586ESR15.562ESR10.824ESR5.819ESR7.762ESR9.635ESR4.631ESR1.505Table 3. Factor structure afterExploratory Factor Analysis
4.3Construct validity with Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA)
The construct validity is conducted investigate if the instrument items selected for a given construct 
are a reasonable operationalization of the construct (Straub et al. 2004). The validity of the 
measurement model of ESEOA was tested using CFA using AMOS. The univariate normality test 
was conducted on each of the variables to confirm the multivariate normality requirement for CFA.  
The CFA was conducted in theorder of (a) measurement properties of each factor separately, then (b) 
full factor measurement model (first-order and second-order) of the ESEOA construct to assess 
overall fit and (c) construct validity. 
 4.3.1UnidimensionalityFirstly, each of the factors identified from the EFA were independently evaluated in a measurement 
model CFA totest if it fitsthe data (Figure 3a-3b). In the process of fitting the first order models, four 
items  were dropped from the ESESCbecause of poor convergent validity. These are all the three 
items  (ESR12, ESR15, ESR17) that were supposed to measure the ESERCbut that loaded to ESESC
in the EFA,and ESS7.  In addition, one item (ESR7) was dropped from the the first order model of 
the ESERCbecause of poor convergent validity.The Goodness-of-Fit (GOF) shows that the two 
measurement models satisfy construct validity and fit the data reasonably.
a: ES-Enabled Sensing Capapbility (ESESC) model
b: ES-Enabled Responding Capability (ESERC) model
Model Fit Statistics 
Construct Absolute fit indices
Incremental fit indices 
Parsimony fit index
2dfpRMSEA2/dfGFI
CFITLINFIAGFIESESC4.4254.352.0241.106.990.999.998.991.091ESERC6.2994.178.0571.575.986.994.984.983.948Figure 3a-3b.Factor models of the ESEOA construct
4.3.2Full-measurement model of the ESEOA construct
Oncethe unidimensionality of each of the factors of ESEOA construct was set up, the entire 
measurement model of the ESEOA construct was evaluated if it fits the data.  The full first order then 
the second order measurement model was tested along with the validity indices of the constructs-
convergent validity and discriminant validity.  The full first order model for ESEOA is a two-factor-
eight-item model. Once the first order model is derived we proceeded to establishing if ES-enabled 
sensing and responding capabilities share the same domain and fall within the nomological net of the 
ESEOA througha second order model of ESEOA. The result (See figure4a-4b) shows the CFA 
output of the full first-order and second-order measurement model respectively. The GOF indices 
indicate that the propose model fit the data reasonably. Reviewing the modification indices (MIs) and 
regression weight suggest no problemwith the models. 
4.3.3Construct validity
Once the GOF of the proposed measurementmodel for ESEOA is established, the construct validity is 
assessed. Construct validity is the extent to which a set of measured items actually reflects the 
theoretical constructthose items are assigned to measure (Hair et al. 2010). For this study, convergent 
and discriminant validity and reliabilityfor the final measurement model are estimated basedon the 
factor loadings, SMC, AVE andConstruct Reliability. Convergent validity assesses if the indicators 
of a specific construct shouldconverge or share a high proportionof variance in common. Table 4 
summarizes the results of the convergent validity evaluation. The results were all higher than the 
threshold value which indicates that there is convergent validity of the ESEOA construct.
 2= 29.086Df =20P=0.086RMSEA=0.502/df= 1.454GFI =.962CFI =.988 TLI=.983NFI =.962AGFI=.9322= 29.086Df =20P=0.086RMSEA=0.502/df= 1.454GFI =.962CFI =.988 TLI=.983NFI =.962AGFI=.932a. First orderb. Second order
Figure 4:  Final full first-order and second-order measurement models
Variable Item SFL SMCAVEConstruct Reliability 
Cronbach™s Alpha 
ESESCESS3.781.6090.6040.80.872ESS6.778.606ESS5.802.643ESS1747.558ESERCESR9.791.6250.6160.60.841ESR7.835.697ESR5.738.545ESR10.772.596CR(.6 or higher), AVE (.5 or higher), SFL (.5 or higher) SMC (threshold .3 or higher)
Table 4:Validity and Reliability Analysis of Measurement Model  
The discriminant validity measures the extent to which a construct is truly distinct from other 
construct. It is assessed through the comparison of the AVE tointer-constructsquared correlation 
estimates associated with that factor (Hair et al. 2010). The result (Table 5) showsthe AVE values are 
greater than their respective square correlation which indicates a good evidence of discriminant 
validity.  ESESCESERCESESC.604.498**ESERC.498**.616**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level. Diagonal elements (value in bold font) = AVE, off-diagonal 
elements = squared inter-construct correlations.  
Table5: 
Discriminant validity of the two factors (ESESC, ESERC) of the ESEOA construct
5DISCUSSIONSAlthough several studies have tried to link ESwith OA, they mostly stop at identifying potential 
enterprise system competence that can impact on the agility level. None of these papers give a 
rigorous explanation of how the impact caused by ES-associated resources is performed. This paper, 
by developing ESEOA concept from DCTperspective addresses the gap. ESEOA is defined as a 
 higher order construct composed of ESESCand ESERCsubconstructs. The paper also developed an 
8-item measurement instrument to assess ESEOA with each 4 items to measures ESESCand ESERC
respectively. ESESC is measured by ESS1, ESS3, ESS5, ESS6 suggesting that organizations which 
excel in using ES in capturingbusiness intelligence from various sources, interpreting itfor different 
management levels, and providingitto decision makers of different functional units across the 
organizationwhile prioritizingthe most important changes in the business environmentwill be able to 
quickly sense the changes from business environment.Likewise, ESERC is measured by ESR5, 
ESR7, ESR9, ESR10 indicating that organizations would be able to quickly respond to change if they 
can use their ES to create a high degree of process interconnectivity with trading partners, 
collaboratively plan with them while at the same time increase the accuracy of the data used by 
trading partnersand simultaneously develop information systems with them. The measurement of 
ESESC and ESESC suggeststhat while ES enable sensing capability of organization in allextents ES
only supportresponding capabilitythrough enhancing the relationship with its partnersand not via its 
contributions to the organization™s internal activities. Thus, ES that focuses in internal organizational 
operation like ERP would only contribute to organizational agility in terms of supporting sensing 
capability while it supports organizationagility limitedly interms of responding capability. In order to 
achieve organizational agility from ES, organizations are required to expand their ESbeyond the 
organization scope. 
The measurement model measurement scale demonstratesacceptable psychometric properties and fit 
the data.The ESEOA construct wasdevelopedby following strictly and systematically instrument 
design guideline suggested by (Lewis et al. 2005). The content validity was ensured by following the 
a rigorous process of item development based on theoretically grounded definition of ESEOA, 
comprehensive literature review, consultation with panel of experts survey and pilot testing. The 
construct validity was ensured by following a systematic test of factorial validity, convergent validity 
and discriminant validity. The measurement model demonstrates adequate psychometric properties 
and fit the data which indicates that the instrument is ready for use in empirical researchto represent 
the dynamic capabilities that an organization can make out of its ESin sensing and responding to 
changes. 
Some initial items were dropped through out the construct development process (only 8 items in the 
final measurement model instead of 26 items initially). While this result isunderstandable since there 
is paucity of rigorous constructs in the literature that relates to ESEOA, future research should 
continue to further improve the measurement of the ESEOA construct. 
6CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
The objective of this paper is to develop and validate instrument of measuring ES-enabled 
Organizational Agility capability (ESEOA). The construct is developed by following the 3-stage 
instrument development methodology by (Lewis et al. 2005). The domain of construct was defined to 
anchor the initial construct dimensionsand items that operationalize the construct from the relevant 
literature. The instrument was later purified through consultation with panel of experts and pilot 
testing. The revived instrument was used to collect data from 180 Australian medium and large 
organizationsin various industries which have implemented and used ES. The EFA and CFA on the 
data were conducted to develop ESEOA constructs thatarecomposed of two subconstructs ESESC
and ESERC. The construct validity of the measurement model wastested using CFA factors. The 
results showed that the measurement model is valid and reliable both empirically and theoretically. 
The study makes a number of contributions to research and practice. Firstly, the current missing link 
on the mechanism that IS in general and ES in particular impact on OA can be explained by the 
development of ES-enabled OA construct. While theexisting research on theimpact of IS onOAis 
mainly conceptual(Overby et al. 2006; Seo and Paz 2008), this research is one of the few earliest 
studies that attempt to test the relationship between IS and OA empirically.Furthermore, the 
measurement instrument of ESEOA constructcan be applied in various different and similar contexts 
to explore the capability of ES in organizational performance, particularly in enabling the ability of 
organizations to thrive in dynamic business environment. Secondly, this construct also providesan 
 effective dimension to empirical studies in measuring the post-implementation benefits of ES which 
are still less researched(Moon 2007). Thirdly, the study adds empirical support to the application of 
DCT in measuring ES capabilities while majority of the current research only looksat ES from RBV 
as a source of resources.Fourthly, through the development of two subconstructs ES-enabled sensing 
capability (ESESC) and ES-enabled responding capability (ESERC), thestudy not only contributes to 
the current body of knowledge on how the adoptionand assimilation of ES in business processes (i.e. 
sensing and responding) could generate dynamic capabilities that support OA,but also provides 
practitioners specifically what ES-enabled organizational agility capabilities are so that organizations 
could manage their enterprise systems better. Lastly, the study provides practitioners a different view 
on their ES resources and a benchmark against which they can assess their use of ES in leveraging the 
OA level. Furthermore, the research findings suggest that in order to develop organizational agility 
out of their ES resources, organizations should implement ES that support their relationship with the 
external business partners such as CRM, SCM, etc. 
Despite the above contributions, the study has some limitationsthat need to be taken into 
consideration and open for future research. The measurement instrument developed in this study has 
only tailored to organizations in Australia and New Zealand. Thus, testing the instrument in different 
geographical areas may suggest different result. To the best of the researcher™sknowledge, this is first 
research attempt to quantitatively measure ESEOA, different studies in this area would provide more 
rigorous theoretical background and solidify the instrument.   
ReferencesArmstrong, J.S., and Overton, T.S. 1977. "Estimating Nonresponse Bias in Mail Surveys," 
Journal of Marketing Research
(14:3), pp 396-402.Chen, M., Zhang, D., and Zhou, L. 2007. "Empowering Collaborative Commerce with Web Services 
Enabled Business Process Management Systems," 
Decision Support Systems
(43:2), pp 530-546.Christopher, M., Lowson, R., and Peck, H. 2004. "Creating Agile Supply Chains in the Fashion 
Industry," 
International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management
(32:8), pp 367-376.
Christopher, M., and Towill, D. 2001. "An Integrated Model for the Designof Agile Supply Chains," 
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management
(31:4), pp 235 -246.
Davenport, T.H. 1998. "Putting the Enterprise into the Enterprise System," 
Harvard Business Review
(July-August), pp 121-131.
David, J.S.,McCarthy, W.E., and Sommer, B.S. 2003. "Agility -the Key to Survival of the Fittest in 
the Software Market," 
Communications of the Acm
(46:5), pp 65-69.Davis, A. 2005. "Erp Customization Impacts on Strategic Alignment and System Agility," 
Pro-ceedings of the 2005 Southern Association of Information Systems Conference
, pp. 249-255.Day, G.S. 1994. "The Capabilities of Market-Driven Organizations," 
The Journal of Marketing
(58:4), pp 37-52.Eisenhardt, K.M., and Martin, J.A. 2000. "Dynamic Capabilities: What Are They?," 
Strategic Management Journal
(21:10/11), pp 1105-1121.
Fink, L., and Neumann, S. 2009. "Exploring the Perceived Business Value of the Flexibility Enabled 
by Information Technology Infrastructure," 
Information & Management
(46:2), pp 90-99.
Gattiker, T.F., Chen, D., and Goodhue, D.L. 2005. "Agility through Standardization: A Crm/ Erp 
Application," in: Strategic Erp Extension and Use,
F.R. Jacobs and B. E. (eds.). Stanford Business 
Books, pp. 87-96.
Goodhue, D.L., Chen, D.Q., Boudreau, M.C., Davis, A., and Cochran, J.D. 2009. "Addressing 
Business Agility Challenges with Enterprise Systems," 
MIS Quarterly Executive
(8:2), pp 73-87.
Hair, J.F., Black, W.c., Babin, B.K., and Anderson, R.E. 2010. "Multivariate Data Analysis," 
Pearson(7th Edition).High, R., Krishnan, G., and Sanchez, M. 2008. "Creating and Maintaining Coherency in Loosely 
Coupled Systems," 
Ibm Systems Journal
(47:3), pp 357-376.
Huang, C.-Y., and Nof, S.Y. 1999. "Enterprise Agility: A View from the Prism Lab," 
International Journal of Agile Management Systems
(1:1), pp 51-59.
 Ignatiadis, I., and Nandhakumar, J. 2007. "The Impact of Enterprise Systems on Organizational 
Resilience," 
Journal of Information Technology 
(Vol.  22), pp 36-43.
Izza, S., Imache, R., Vincent, L., and Lounis, Y. 2008. "An Approach for the Evaluation of the Agility 
in the Context of Enterprise Interoperability," 
Enterprise Interoperability III
), pp 3-14.
Lengnick-Hall, C.A., Lengnick-Hall, M.L., and Abdinnour-Helm, S. 2004. "The Role of Social and 
Intellectual Capital in Achieving Competitive Advantage through Enterprise Resource Planning 
(Erp) Systems," 
Journal of Engineering and Technology Management
(21:4), pp 307-330.
Lewis, B.R., Templeton, G.F., and Byrd, T.A. 2005. "A Methodology for Construct Development in 
Mis Research," 
European Journal of Information Systems
(14), pp 388-400.Li, X., Chung, C., Goldsby, T.J., and Holsapple, C.W. 2008. "A Unified Model of Supply Chain 
Agility: The Work-Design Perspective," 
The International Journal of Logistics Management
(19:3), pp 408-435.Lorincz, P. 2007. "Evolution of Enterprise Systems," 
International Symposium on Logistrics and 
Industrial Informatics
).MacKinnon, W., Grant, G., and Cray, D. 2008. "Enterprise Information Systems and Strategic 
Flexibility," Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
).Macvittie, L. 2006. "Control and Agility," 
Network Computing
(17:15), pp 26-+.
Mathiassen, L., and Pries-Heje, J. 2006. "Business Agility and Diffusion of Information Technology," 
European Journal of Information Systems
(15), pp 116Œ119.Moitra, D., and Ganesh, J. 2005. "Web Services and Flexible Business Processes: Towards the 
Adaptive Enterprise," 
Information & Management
(42), pp 921-933.Moon, Y.B. 2007. "Enterprise Resource Planning (Erp): A Review of the Literature," 
International Journal of Management and Enterprise Development 
(4:3), pp 235 -264.
Neill, S., McKee, D., and Rose, G.M. 2007. "Developing the Organization's Sensemaking Capability: 
Precursor to an Adaptive Strategic Marketing Response," 
Industrial Marketing Management
(36:6), pp 731-744.Newell, s., Wagner, E.L., and David, G. 2007. "Clumsy Information Systems: A Critical Review of 
Enterprise System," in: 
Agile Informaiton Systems: Conceptualization, Construction and 
Management,K.C. Desouza (ed.). Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 163-177.
Ni, Y., Kawalek, P., and Ran, H. 2002. "Understanding the Flexibility of Enterprise Systems: A Case 
Study Ccount," in: 
9th European Conference on IT evaluation
.O'Connor, G.C. 2008. "Major Innovation as a Dynamic Capability: A Systems Approach," 
Journal of Product Innovation Management
(25:4), Jul, pp 313-330.
Oosterhout, M.v., Waarts, E., and van Hillegersberg, J. 2006. "Change Factors Requiring Agility and 
Implications for It," 
EuropeanJournal of Information Systems
(15:2), pp 132-145.
Orlikowski, W.J., and Iacono, C.S. 2001. "Research Commentary: Desperately Seeking the" It" in It 
Research-a Call to Theorizing the It Artifact," 
Information Systems Research
(12:2), pp 121-134.Overby, E., Bharadwaj, A., and Sambamurthy, V. 2006. "Enterprise Agility and the Enabling Role of 
Information Technology," 
European Journal of Information Systems
(15), pp 120Œ131.Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S., Lee, J.Y., and Podsakoff, N.P. 2003. "Biases in Behavioral 
Research: A Critical Review of the Literature and Recommended Remedies," 
Journal of Applied 
Psychology(88:5), pp 879-903.
Raschke, R.L., and David, J.S. 2005. "Business Process Agility," 
AMCIS 2005 Proceedings
).Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A., and Grover, V. 2003. "Shaping Agility through Digital Options: 
Reconceptualizing the Role of Information Technology in Contemporary Firms," 
MIS quarterly
(27:2), pp 237-263.Seethamraju, R. 2009. "Effects of Es-Enabled Standardization and Integration on Business Process 
Agility," in: Pacic Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS) PACIS 2009 Proceedings
.Seethamraju, R., and Seethamraju, J. 2009. "Enterprise Systems and Business Process Agility -a Case 
Study," in: Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
. IEEE Computer Society.
Seo, D., and Paz, A.I.L. 2008. "Exploring the Dark Side of Is in Achieving Organizational Agility," 
Communication of the ACM
(51:11), pp 136-139.
Shang, S., and Seddon, P.B. 2002. "Assessing and Managing the Benefits of Enterprise Systems: The 
Business Manager™s Perspective," 
Information Systems Journal
(12), pp 271-299. Sherehiy, B., Karwowski, W., and Layer, J.K. 2007. "A Review of Enterprise Agility: Concepts, 
Frameworks, and Attributes," 
International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics
(37:5), pp 445-460.Straub, D., Boudreau, M.-C., and Gefen, D. 2004. "Validation Guidelines for Is Positivist Research," 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems
(13:24), pp 380-427.
Sull, D. 2009. "How to Thrive in Turbulent Markets," 
Harvard Business Review
(87:2), pp 78-88.
Tallon, P.P. 2008. "Inside the Adaptive Enterprise: An Information Technology Capabilities 
Perspective on Business Process Agility," 
Journal of Information Technology Management
(Vol. ), pp pp. 21Œ36.Tan, B., Pan, S.L., Chou, T.-C., and Huang, J.-Y. 2010. "Enabling Agility through Routinized 
Improvisation in It Deployment: The Case of Chang Chun Petrochemicals," in: 
ICIS 2010 Proceedings.Teece, D.J. 2007. "Explicating Dynamic Capabilities: The Nature and Microfoundations of 
(Sustainable) Enterprise Performance," 
Strategic Management Journal
(28:13), pp 1319-1350.
Trinh-Phuong, T., Molla, A., and Peszynski, K. 2010. "Enterprise Systems and Organisational Agility: 
Conceptualizing the Link," 
21st Australasian Conference on Information Systems (ACIS 2010)
, Brisbane, Australia.
Zain, M., Rose, R.C., Abdullah, I., and Masrom, M. 2005. "The Relationship between Information 
Technology Acceptance and Organizational Agility in Malaysia," 
Information & Management
(42:6), pp 829-839.