 International Journal of Information Management 32 (2012) 17– 23Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International
 Journal of Information Management
j our nal ho me p age: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgtRethinking XML-enabled agile supply chainsHyung Jun Ahna,Paul
 Childerhouseb,Gottfried
 Vossenc,Habin
 Leed,aCollege of Business Administration, Hongik University, 94, Wausan-ro, Mapo-gu, Seoul 121-791, Republic of KoreabWaikato Management School, University of Waikato, Hamilton 3240, New ZealandcDept. of Information Systems, School of Business Administration and Economics, University of Muenster, 48149 Muenster, GermanydBrunel Business School, Brunel University, Kingston Lane, Uxbridge, Middlesex Ub8 3PH, UKa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Available online 16 July 2011Keywords:
Agile supply chainSupply chainXML
Business to businessebXML
RosettaNet
Web Servicesa b s t r a c tThis paper critically discusses the use of Extensible Markup Language (XML) for agile supply chains andproposes practical guidelines and future research directions for the ﬁeld. XML has been identiﬁed bymany as a prominent technology for enabling electronic supply chain integration, but the adoption of itin the industry has been rather slow and limited. This paper discusses the factors that enable agility insupply chains, and explains why XML is the best candidate for facilitating such factors. Then the majorXML-based integration initiatives such as ebXML, RosettaNet, and Web Services are diagnosed in termsof their pros and cons for supply chain agility, as well as the reasons for their slow diffusion. Based onthe discussion, this paper proposes that: the integration efforts need to ﬁrst focus on the industries thatneed agility; stringent business process standards are necessary; and implementation should be mademuch easier and more affordable for small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Further research issues arealso suggested based on the discussion.© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionThe term supply chain management seems to be everywhere atthe moment (Davenport & Brooks, 2004; Hassini, 2008). During thelast decade, businesses have seized upon this concept to increasecompetitiveness. If asked what technology would be most promis-ing for revolutionizing traditional supply chains, many wouldrecommend Extensible Markup Language (XML) which allowsseamless exchange of data among heterogeneous information sys-tems of collaborating organizations (Nurmilaakso & Kotinurmi,2004; Power, 2005).However, it appears that the adoption of the major XML-basedintegration initiatives such as ebXML (Naujok & Huemer, 2008),RosettaNet (Boh, Soh, & Yeo, 2007), and Web services (Yan & Klein,2007) has been rather slow or limited contrary to the expectations(Kanakamedala, King, & Ramsdell, 2003; Liegl, Zapletal, Pichler, &Strommer, 2010; Naujok & Huemer, 2008; Rawlins, 2006; Wilson,2000). The implementation of them has been mostly by large orga-nizations or their major partners, and the threshold remains stillhigh for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) (Nurmilaakso, 2009;Power, 2008).This article introduces agile supply chain management, arguablyone of the most advanced forms of supply chain management (Lee,Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 18952 67414.E-mail address: Habin.Lee@brunel.ac.uk (H. Lee).2004), where such technological initiatives can make the greatestcontribution (Christopher, 2000). By discussing the possible bene-ﬁts and the current limitations of the technologies in the contextof agile supply chains, this article explores future development andresearch directions for the technology so that its potential capabil-ities can better enable the next generation of agile supply chains.This article is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 introducethe concept of supply chain agility and a sample case. Section 4introduces XML and the major integration initiatives based on XML.Section 5 presents the main issues and suggestions for the futuredevelopment. Section 6 concludes with future research directions.2. Supply chain agilityThe term supply chain management was ﬁrst coined in the early1980s but supply chains themselves have existed for as long asman has produced and traded goods. They are quite simply thechain of people or organizations that transform earth’s resourcesinto consumer products and services. The management of thistransformation process is, however, not simple but in many casesinvolves multiple organizations from multiple countries and con-tains multiple production and distribution points around the globe.The objective of supply chain management is to perform this trans-formation process as efﬁciently as possible and deliver what the endconsumer wants as effectively as possible (Christopher, 2011).Supply chain management really came to the forefront in the1990s when it was originally seen as an approach to gain efﬁcien-0268-4012/$ – see front matter©  2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2011.06.002 18H.J. Ahn et al. / International Journal of Information Management 32 (2012) 17– 23Table 1Functional vs. fashionable products (Fisher, 2003).Functional FashionableProduct life cycle Long: 2–20+ years Short: 2–6 months (1season)Product variety Low: 1–5 High: 100s+Forecasting errorLow:
 10% High: 50–200%End of season markdown Rare: 1–5% Commonplace: 10–25%Major supply chain costs Physical: production,delivery and storageMarketability:obsolescence and stockoutOrder winnerPriceAvailability
Supply chain strategyLean
 Agilecies in ever-tightening markets. Aligned to this has been the uptakeof lean thinking which originated from Toyota’s Just-In-Time (JIT)production that mainly emphasizes removing non-value addingmuda (a Japanese word for waste), achieving efﬁciency and lowprice (Womack & Jones, 2003). There is, however, a practical limitto the leanness when the market is volatile and meeting short timewindows is more critical. A typical example is the carpet indus-try (Johansson, McHugh, Pendlebury, & Wheeler, 1993), where thetraditional supply chain required about 16 weeks from raw mate-rial supply to the carpet being ﬁtted in the consumers’ residence.Although the lean principle can reduce this cycle time to 4 weeks,it hardly helps carpet manufacturers operate in the much moreresponsive mode needed to satisfy the consumer-imposed timewindow which can be as short as 1 week. In order to achievethis, production processes were totally re-engineered to be agileso that manufacturing was completed in just 3 days through theinvention of a new process called Solution Dried Nylon. Table 1 fur-ther highlights this need to match supply chain strategy to marketrequirements.Functional products have relatively stable demand and longproduct life cycles. For functional products, consumers do notrequire excessive choice but they rather purchase primarily basedon price. As a result, the costs for this type of supply chain aremainly the production and delivery of the product to the market-place. In these circumstances, the lean strategy is most appropriateas the focus is on efﬁciency. At the other extreme are the fashion-able products that are short-lived, often only popular for a singleseason, and are inherently difﬁcult to forecast. Consumers wantchoice, customization, and the latest version, and hence the majorsupply chain costs relate to servicing this volatile market and also toobsolescence and stockout risks. A lean supply chain would under-serve this market, and this is where agility is required with quickturn around times and ﬂexible processes.In order to achieve agility and thrive in volatile markets, supplychains need strategies and practices that can be characterized byalignment and ﬂexibility in both physical collaboration and infor-mation systems (Fig. 1).First, alignment is needed so that a whole supply chain can oper-ate in harmony quickly responding to the changes in the market.A close eye needs to be kept on the market so, when the fash-ion changes, the news is instantly utilized by decision makers toadjust plans and move with the times. Suppliers and manufac-turers often need to co-design products from the very beginningto enable ﬂexible manufacturing and logistics. Information sys-tems play a critical role in this alignment where supply chain-wideinformation should be shared for demand, inventory, and produc-tion information, enabling supply chains to advance from beingforecast-driven with often distorted and delayed information tomarket-driven based upon shared real-time demand.Next, ﬂexibility is needed so that supply chains can react andreconﬁgure quickly to changing market signals. On the physicalside, manufacturers often need the capability to switch betweendifferent types of products. Companies should also utilize post-ponement where the ﬁnal stage of manufacturing is delayed tomeet the latest market demands. A well-known example is Dellwhere they design common main boards so that they can bepackaged for many different options meeting different demands.Companies also need to form ﬂexible partnerships quickly, recon-ﬁguring the supply network for different products and demandcharacteristics. Information systems again play a very importantrole, especially for the ﬂexible formation of electronic networks inaccordance with physical reconﬁgurations. The establishment ofelectronic partnership should be much quicker than, for example,traditional Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) systems which maytake months or even years for implementation.In short, the material ﬂow of agile supply chains is both ﬂexibleand responsive to real time volatile markets. Advanced informationsystems can enable these supply chains to quickly match supplyand demand from their virtual networks.3. A case – complexity in real world supply chainsMany of today’s supply chains are under increasing pressureto become agile, making supply chain management more complexaccordingly. This can be illustrated through a real-world case. ThePhysical
Collabo rationProcess
  Int
 egrationSeamless
  material flow
Design for 
 supply chain 
Management
Co-locati
 onNetwork Based
Flexible manufacturing systems
Cycle ti
 me compress
 ionPurchased capacity in reserve
Informati
 onSystems 
Market Sensitivity
Shared market 
 Information
Shared inventory information
Collaborative forecasting and 
pla nning
Vir
 tualMultiple  links waiting for 
acti vation
Quick establish
 ment 
 of IS 
integration
Real time dynamic
  scheduling
Align
 ment
Flexibil
 ityFig. 1. Factors that make a supply chain agile.Adapted from Christopher (2000). H.J. Ahn et al. / International Journal of Information Management 32 (2012) 17– 2319Make to order
from ready-stoc
 ked
raw mat
 erialPurchase andmake to order
AgilityMake to stock and 
deliv er to order
HighLo
 wMedi
 umCust omer Respo
 nsi
 venes
 s Requirements
Fashion
Functional
DemandChara cte
 ristics
Fig. 2. Matching demand and supply for the global food company of the sample case.case was developed using Quick Scan (Naim, Childerhouse, Disney,& Towill, 2002) which is a proven method of auditing the healthof supply chains. The supply chain is of a Fortune 500 global com-pany producing condiments, sauces, meals, and snacks, holding topmarket positions in more than 50 countries. The company has sofar focused on traditional, staple foods with stable demand overan extended period. As a result, the company could remain com-petitive by mainly focusing on leanness – efﬁciency and low price.However, the global food producer is now moving into more fash-ionable product types such as ready-made meals and new typesof condiments, which have volatile demand characteristics, unliketraditional staple foods. This has led to a more diverse range ofproducts which requires a mix of strategies to match supply anddemand as depicted in Fig. 2.The customer responsiveness requirements on the horizontalaxis represent how short the lead time needs to be to meet cus-tomer expectation. The demand characteristics have been dividedinto functional versus fashionable on the vertical axis. For prod-ucts with low lead time requirements, there is enough time forthe company to purchase, make, and deliver to speciﬁc orders,even if the product is fashionable. If the customer responsivenessrequirements are reduced to a medium level, the supply chainonly has time to make and deliver from previously purchasedraw materials. When customer lead times are short, for the func-tional products, the company can produce products to forecastas efﬁciently as possible and deliver to the market on request.This, however, is not appropriate for the more fashionable prod-ucts because the stockpile of ﬁnished products is very risky as thedemand may not materialize or, alternatively, the demand mayboom and result in a stock-out situation with large numbers ofunsatisﬁed customers. It is in this situation when agility is mostneeded.This case suggests two important points. First, as companiesinnovate with new products and globalize into new markets,there is increased uncertainty and volatility that needs to bemanaged by agile practices. Second, many companies often pro-duce a range of products that needs multiple supply chainstrategies together such as leanness, agility, or hybrids. Thecomplexity can further increase when there are a large num-ber of heterogeneous trading partners with different relationshiprequirements.This complexity often requires the use of multiple heteroge-neous inter-organizational information systems. Fig. 3 providesan intuitive understanding for this where different types of e-partnering options are located along the two dimensions of agility,alignment and ﬂexibility. We can see that, for example, traditionalor Internet-based EDI can be used for transaction-oriented andlong-term stable relationships, while tightly integrated virtual net-works can be used for highly aligned and ﬂexible relationships. It isobvious that the options located at the upper-right corner of Fig. 3can better serve agile supply chains, while the systems located onthe left hand side of the ﬁgure often can be adopted by lean supplychains. Hence, ideally, many companies in the supply chains, suchas that of the case study, require a mix of multiple online partneringFlexi
 bil ity of
Relati
 ons hip
Virtual
Organ
 ization
Market-based
Lon
 g-term
Stable
Level of
Ali
 gnmentVerti
 cal
Integrati
 onTransacti
 onInformation
sharing 
 and
Transacti
 ons
Tightly
Integrated
Virtual 
 Network
Loo
 sely
Integrated
Virtual 
 Network
Sup
 plyChain
Portal
Extr
 anet,EDI,  Web-EDI
E-Procurement 
                    E-Fulfillm
 ent 
                    B2BExchanges &
Auct ions,
Catalogu
 e agg
 regators
Fig. 3. Alternative online collaboration scenarios (see Mahadevan, 2003 for brief introduction of the e-partnering options in the diagram). 20H.J. Ahn et al. / International Journal of Information Management 32 (2012) 17– 23Table 2Comparison of major XML-based initiatives for supply chain integration – compiled from various sources (Alonso et al., 2004; Damodaran, 2004; Gibb & Damodaran, 2002).ebXML RosettaNet Web services1. Brief history Initiated in 1999. First suite ofspeciﬁcations released in May 2001.Founded in 1998. First PartnershipInterface Process (PIP) implementationin 1999.Key speciﬁcations such as SimpleObject Access Protocol (SOAP),Universal Description, Discovery andIntegration (UDDI), and Web ServicesDescription Language (WSDL) ﬁrstreleased around 1998–2002.2. Industry focus Cross-industry. Focusing on electronic components, IT,and semiconductor manufacturingindustries so far.Cross-industry.3. Standard bodies OASIS and UN/CEFACT RosettaNet Mainly World Wide Web Consortium(W3C), OASIS, and Web ServicesInteroperability (WS-I).4. Key speciﬁcations ebXML Collaborative Partner ProﬁleAgreement (CPPA), ebXML MessagingService (MS), ebXML RegistryInformation Model (RIM), ebXMLRegistry Services (RS), etc.Multiple Messaging Services (MMS),PIPs, RosettaNet ImplementationFramework (RNIF), Dictionaries, etc.SOAP, WSDL, UDDI, WS-Coordination,WS-Transaction, Web Services FlowLanguage (WSFL), Business ProcessExecution Language (BPEL), WebServices Choreography DescriptionLanguage (WS-CDL), etc.5. Standard businessprocesses and vocabularyCross-industry speciﬁcations thatinclude Catalog of Common BusinessProcesses and Core ComponentsDictionary.PIPs and Dictionaries for speciﬁcbusiness processes and vocabulary.BPEL for specifying executablebusiness processes. Speciﬁc businessprocesses need to be developed byindustries and users.6. Adoption by SMEs forsupply chain integrationNo strong evidence of wide adoptionby SMEs. Adoption cases are mainlylimited to public sector organizationssuch as National Health Service (NHS)in UK or Centers for Disease Controland Prevention (CDC) in US.Relatively successful in the focus area.However, no strong evidence of wideadoption by SMEs. Implementationcases mainly limited to largecompanies and their key partners.Despite its popularity as a generalService-Oriented Architecture (SOA)framework, no strong evidence ofSMEs widely adopting it for supplychain integration.7. Key challenges Slow adoption. Implementation stillexpensive for SMEs. Lack of speciﬁcstandard business processes forimplementation.Slow adoption. Implementation stillexpensive for SMEs. Case-by-case andlengthy implementations.More popular as a general SOAframework. Speciﬁc business processesneed to be developed for industries.Overhead in protocol stack.options to support different strategies with many trading partnersand products. However, this is impractical for many SMEs in thesupply chain.4. XML – a key enabler of supply chain integrationXML, the Extensible Mark-up Language, is a World Wide WebConsortium (W3C) recommendation for a general-purpose mark-up language that supports a wide variety of applications, inparticular in information integration scenarios, and allows usersto introduce application-speciﬁc tags and deﬁne new mark-up lan-guages. The basic strength of XML for business-to-business (B2B)communication comes from its extensibility, Internet-based open-ness, and machine-readable structure (Nurmilaakso & Kotinurmi,2004). The extensibility of XML allows the modeling and creationof virtually any business document or process; the openness ofXML enables inexpensive exchange of XML-based data on the Inter-net; and its well-deﬁned structure makes the interpretation ofXML documents by computer programs easy. These properties areall essential for seamless B2B integration that requires automatedtransactions and information sharing.XML, however, is a low-level technology that needs moreelaboration at a higher level for actual supply chain integration.For this high-level business integration, there have been manyapproaches to establishing standards for business documents, busi-ness processes, and related services. Among them, the three mostwidely known are the ebXML and RosettaNet initiatives as wellas the development of Web services (see Table 2 for summary)(Nurmilaakso & Kotinurmi, 2004; Papazoglou & Ribbers, 2006).ebXML is a joint effort by Organization for the Advancement ofStructured Information Standards (OASIS) and The United NationsCentre for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business (UN/CEFACT),and focuses on the development of cross-industry infrastructureand speciﬁcations for supply chain integration (Gibb & Damodaran,2002). RosettaNet, initiated by a consortium of industry membersand technology vendors, is focused on creating speciﬁcations forbusiness documents and processes for speciﬁc areas such as elec-tronic components and semiconductor manufacturing industries(Damodaran, 2004). Web services enable businesses to communi-cate and integrate through invoking services of each other basedon the concept of Service Orientation (Alonso, Casati, Kuno, &Machiraju, 2004). Web services are supported by a suite of spec-iﬁcations for message formats, service interfaces, and businessprocesses.Although there are differences among the initiatives, they allhave strong potential for supply chain integration, especially incomparison with EDI. Together with the basic strengths of XML,the initiatives are aimed at enabling low cost and ﬂexible imple-mentation of online partnerships based on the standards andinfrastructure. Different from the simple transactions and docu-ment exchanges typical of older technologies, the initiatives canalso support sophisticated forms of supply chain coordination suchas collaborative forecasting and collaborative design. They alsoprovide directory services for online partnering options so thatcompanies can quickly search for and establish ﬂexible relation-ships. Overall, all the above provide strong advantages suitable forenabling the alignment and ﬂexibility much needed by agile supplychains.5. Suggestions for future developmentIn spite of many advantages, the adoption of the major XML-based integration initiatives so far has been quite limited to largecompanies and their partners in speciﬁc industry sectors, publicsector organizations, or deployment of simple services that are farfrom being business process-level integration (Table 2) (Naujok& Huemer, 2008; Nurmilaakso, 2008, 2009; Rawlins, 2006; Yan &Klein, 2007). Although it might be too early to judge their success H.J. Ahn et al. / International Journal of Information Management 32 (2012) 17– 2321Table 3Factors affecting the success of Internet-based B2B integration (Chatterjee et al.,2006; Dai & Kauffman, 2002).CategoryFactors
1. Technology issues Technical complexityLack of standards and use of proprietary formatsIntegration with other information systemsSecurity
High cost of implementation and maintenance2. Shared vision forbeneﬁtsLack of beneﬁt sharing models; exploitation bystrong playersThreat to existing supply chain relationshipsFitting market characteristicsTrust in partnership3. Organizational issues Willingness to changeTop management support for changesor failure for supply chain integration at this stage, this adoptionpattern is very different from what has been expected of them.Therefore, considering that it has already been more than 10 yearssince the inception of the initiatives, it is time that we raised con-cerns about the adoption and suggested a direction for their futuredevelopment.Apart from some case studies highlighting mainly successfulaspects of implementations, rigorous empirical investigation on thefactors of their adoption is yet to be conducted. Nonetheless, wecan utilize abundant studies on the adoption of earlier Internet-based B2B or EDI systems for the discussion of the challenges.Table 3 summarizes key factors to the success of B2B systems andInternet-based EDI found from literature categorized into threegroups: technology issues, vision for shared beneﬁts, and organiza-tional issues (Chatterjee, Segars, & Watson, 2006; Dai & Kauffman,2002). Based on the factors in the table combined with our ear-lier discussion regarding the advancement of agile supply chainmanagement, we next discuss the reasons for their slow adoptionstatus and present development directions for the success of theinitiatives in the future.5.1. Focus on the areas that need agilityAs we have seen in Section 2, there are some areas where agilityis needed more than others and, hence, will be under greater pres-sure to adopt the XML-based initiatives. Supply chains for onlyfunctional and commodity products will enjoy long term and sta-ble relationships with lean principles, having little incentive fortaking the high risks of making huge investment in new tech-nologies, and potentially harming existing relationships with theirpartners by introducing unnecessary ﬂexibility. For this reason, itis observed that many companies that have been using EDI for along time are not very willing to switch to XML, especially thosewith lean supply chains, having no immediate additional bene-ﬁts (Nurmilaakso, 2008, 2009). In contrast, for sectors operatingin volatile markets, e.g. ready-made meals or new condimentsexploring new markets in our case study of Section 3, agility willbecome more and more a matter of survival. Companies oper-ating in the areas will have clearer motivation to employ thetechnologies that can directly help them to win competition overnon-agile rivals. So far, much of the efforts in the initiatives havebeen led by consortiums of big technology companies or indus-try organizations without any special focus on agile supply chains(Liegl et al., 2010; Naujok & Huemer, 2008; Yan & Klein, 2007).As such, focusing on those areas that need agility ﬁrst can helpthe XML-based initiatives take off successfully, effectively over-coming many of the barriers, such as the organizational issuesand lack of shared vision in the second and third categories ofTable 3.5.2. Create stringent business process standardsAnother critical issue that impedes the supply chain-wide adop-tion of the technologies is lack of stringent, vendor-independentbusiness process standards. Without them, implementations canremain costly and incompatible, making a critical barrier toachieving the high level alignment and ﬂexibility for agile sup-ply chains. Although the standards are relatively stringent at theinfrastructure-level such as with SOAP and WSDL in the Web Ser-vices area, Messaging Services (MS) of ebXML, and RosettaNetImplementation Framework (RNIF) of RosettaNet, there is a seriousgap at the higher level for speciﬁc business processes that are essen-tial to achieve the plug-and-play style interoperability (see the ﬁfthrow of Table 2). Unless the standards are provided for business pro-cesses, many heterogeneous processes can be developed for eachtransaction type, which will inevitably lead to complex and costlyimplementations and incompatibility, impeding the adoption. Theabsence of speciﬁc process standards also sets the initial thresholdhigh for companies and technology vendors, because they need tomake extra investment ﬁrst for developing the processes.ebXML has so far mainly focused on infrastructure-level speciﬁ-cations, leaving actual business process speciﬁcations to individualimplementers, which has led to proprietary and incompatiblebusiness processes (Rawlins, 2006). In contrast, RosettaNet doesprovide speciﬁc business process speciﬁcations known as Part-nership Interface Processes (PIPs) to which RosettaNet’s relativesuccess can be largely attributed (Boh et al., 2007; Damodaran,2004). However, the PIPs are mainly for the electronics and semi-conductor industries, and other industries have to newly developPIPs to use RosettaNet. PIPs are also known to allow too muchcustomizability which can often result in lengthy case-by-caseincompatible implementations (Olson & Willams, 2001). WebServices has gained its position as a popular and general Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) framework. Nevertheless, becauseWeb Services is not generally regarded as a tool specialized forsupply chain integration, not much effort has been devoted to thedevelopment and standardization of business processes exclusivelyfor Web Services, leaving the responsibility to individual indus-tries and companies adopting it (Papazoglou, Traverso, Dustdar, &Leymann, 2008). Hence, in order to successfully kick start the adop-tion of the initiatives, it is imperative for the initiatives to workwith industries and put more efforts into developing speciﬁc andstringent business processes ﬁrst.5.3. Make implementation easy for SMEsIn order to achieve the high level of alignment for agility, itis essential that the technologies are accepted not only by largecompanies and key partners, but also by small partners on the sup-ply chain. Although XML is an open technology working on theInternet, the technologies can still be expensive for SMEs consid-ering the costs of implementation, maintenance, and required ITskill (Harland, Caldwell, Powell, & Zheng, 2007; Nurmilaakso, 2009;Vaaland & Heide, 2007). Furthermore, management of an onlinerelationship for each SME can be very complicated due to a widevariety of partnering options that might be required, a large numberof trading partners, product diversity, and strategic diversity, as hasbeen shown in Fig. 3. This often creates unmanageable complexityfor SMEs so that it is not surprising to see many companies, includ-ing many small partners of the global food company in our earliercase, still relying on email, fax, or telephones for order processing(Harland et al., 2007).Therefore, the cost of implementation needs to be signiﬁ-cantly reduced for SMEs, for which there might be many usefulapproaches. For example, XML-based business process standardsand messaging infrastructure can be embedded in small applica- 22H.J. Ahn et al. / International Journal of Information Management 32 (2012) 17– 23tions such as e-fulﬁllment systems or order processing systemsfor SMEs. Currently, more efforts are focused on implementinga lower level infrastructure for high-end servers or case-by-caseimplementations, which is largely due to the lack of stringent spec-iﬁcations of business processes and limited market sizes. Anotherpossible approach is to provide business process integration asa form of online service using the Application Service Providers(ASPs) model or the Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) paradigm (Vossen& Hagemann, 2007) so that SMEs can use them with minimumIT overhead. We can also borrow the concept of agile softwaredevelopment, which is widely adopted in the context of Web 2.0applications, where empowerment of developers and interactionwith customers are emphasized over strict and lengthy devel-opment process, especially for digital products (Agile Manifesto,2001; Kappel, Proll, & Reich, 2006; Vossen & Hagemann, 2007).One remarkable program addressing this adoption problem forSMEs is RosettaNet Automated Enablement (RAE) in RosettaNetwhich aims at providing simpliﬁed and affordable solutions to SMEs(RosettaNet, 2007). These approaches, together with stringent busi-ness processes, can help SMEs overcome the technology barriers(the ﬁrst category of Table 3) effectively.6. Conclusion and future research directionsConsumer’s expectations are constantly increasing. In order tokeep up with ever-changing market requirements and shorteninglead times, more businesses are developing agile supply chains.This new strategy requires live market knowledge and virtual cor-porations, both of which can only be enabled through advancedinformation systems. It is here where we see the opportunity forXML-based initiatives to link together all the supply chain mem-bers through information enrichment. This article has presented atimely discussion for the further development of the initiatives byidentifying their potential for agile supply chains as well as ana-lyzing their current limitations. In line with the discussion, thispaper concludes by suggesting a couple of future academic researchdirections.First, as much argued in this paper, academic studies are neededalong with practical efforts to create affordable and practical stan-dards for SMEs so that the XML-based integration can achieveholistic alignment. The standards need to be simple and robust sothat both implementation and maintenance costs can be minimizedfor SMEs.Second, another stream of research required is analyzing theexpected costs and beneﬁts of adopting XML for various ways ofsupply chain integration. It was discussed that there are manyoverlooked obstacles in adopting the technology that may increasecosts and even make the adoption unviable. Also, individual imple-mentation choices of XML-based integration can vary resulting indifferent styles and strengths of partnership, and different levelsof complexity in business processes. Therefore, the assessment ofthe overall costs and beneﬁts can help companies make appro-priate design decisions and invest in the technology with moreconﬁdence. Simulation is possibly a good method for the analy-sis considering the complexity of the problem and the diversity ofthe variables involved (Marquez, 2010).Third, XML needs to be combined with many intelligent systemstechnologies. While XML provides a way of seamless data exchange,intelligent systems can further boost the beneﬁts of XML by sup-porting or automating the complex decision makings required formanaging supply chain resources and relationships in an agile way.For example, business intelligence (BI) and data mining can be usedto detect changes in the market and help companies proactivelyadapt to the changes (Watson & Wixom, 2007). Another exam-ple is the multi-agent technology which can be used for efﬁcientlyand autonomously managing the distributed and heterogeneoussupply chain resources (Ahn & Lee, 2004). That is, by employingthe intelligent systems technology and combining it with XMLproperly, we can expect to decrease the difﬁculty of XML-basedintegration, and therefore make it more affordable for agile supplychains.Although we may still have a rough road ahead, with moreattention paid as well to other important issues such as buildingtrust among partners and creating beneﬁt-sharing models, theauthors believe the suggestions and discussions in this paper willhelp the XML-based initiatives become successful enablers of agilesupply chains.ReferencesAgile Manifesto (2001). Manifesto for Agile Software Development.http://agilemanifesto.org/.Ahn, H., & Lee, H. (2004). An agent-based dynamic information network for supplychain management. BT Technology Journal, 22, 18–27.Alonso, G., Casati, F., Kuno, H., & Machiraju, V. (2004). Web Services: Concepts, archi-tectures, and applications. Berlin: Springer Verlag.Boh, W. F., Soh, C., & Yeo, S. (2007). Standards development and diffusion: A casestudy of RosettaNet. Communications of the ACM, 50, 57–62.Chatterjee, D., Segars, A. H., & Watson, R. T. (2006). Realizing the promise of E-Business: Developing and leveraging electronic partnering options. CaliforniaManagement Review, 48, 60–83.Christopher, M. (2000). The agile supply chain: Competing in volatile markets. Indus-trial Marketing Management, 29, 37–44.Christopher, M. (2011). Logistics and supply chain management (4th edition). FT Press.Dai, Q., & Kauffman, R. J. (2002). B2B E-commerce revisited: Leading perspectives onthe key issues and research directions. Electronic Markets, 12, 67–83.Damodaran, S. (2004). B2B integration over the Internet with XML: RosettaNetsuccesses and challenges. In 13th International World Wide Web conference –Alternate track papers & posters (pp. 188–195). New York: ACM Press.Davenport, T. H., & Brooks, J. D. (2004). Enterprise systems and the supply chain.Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 17, 8–19.Fisher, M. L. (2003). What is the right supply chain for your product? OperationsManagement: Critical Perspectives on Business and Management, 105, 73.Gibb, B. K., & Damodaran, S. (2002). ebXML: Concepts and application. New York, NY,USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.Harland, C. M., Caldwell, N. D., Powell, P., & Zheng, J. (2007). Barriers to supply chaininformation integration: SMEs adrift of eLands. Journal of Operations Manage-ment, 25, 1234–1254.Hassini, E. (2008). Building competitive enterprises through supply chain manage-ment. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 21, 341–344.Johansson, H. J., McHugh, P., Pendlebury, A. J., & Wheeler, W. A. (1993). Businessprocess reengineering: Breakpoint strategies for market dominance. Chichester:John Wiley & Sons.Kanakamedala, K., King, J., & Ramsdell, G. (2003). The truth about XML. McKinseyQuarterly, 3, 9–12.Kappel, G., Proll, B., & Reich, S. (2006). Web engineering: The discipline of systematicdevelopment of web applications. New York: John Wiley & Sons.Lee, H. (2004). The Triple-A Supply Chain. Harvard Business Review, 82, 102–112.Liegl, P., Zapletal, M., Pichler, C., & Strommer, M. (2010). State-of-the-art in businessdocument standards. In 8th IEEE international conference on industrial informatics(pp. 234–241). Osaka, Japan: IEEE.Mahadevan, B. (2003). Making sense of emerging market structures in B2B e-commerce. California Management Review, 46, 86–100.Marquez, A. C. (2010). Dynamic modelling for supply chain management: Dealing withfront-end, back-end and integration issues. Springer Verlag.Naim, M. M., Childerhouse, P., Disney, S. M., & Towill, D. R. (2002). A supply chaindiagnostic methodology: Determining the vector of change. Computers andIndustrial Engineering, 43, 135–157.Naujok, K., & Huemer, C. (2008). Designing ebXML – The Work of UN/CEFACT. InOntologies-based business integration. Springer., pp. 79–93Nurmilaakso, J.-M. (2008). EDI, XML and e-business frameworks: A survey. Comput-ers in Industry, 59, 370–379.Nurmilaakso, J.-M. (2009). EDI-based and XML-based business-to-business integra-tion: A statistical analysis. International Journal of Business Information Systems,4, 639–654.Nurmilaakso, J.-M., & Kotinurmi, P. (2004). A review of XML-based supply chainintegration. Production Planning & Control, 15, 608–621.Olson, E. G., & Willams, P. R. (2001). E-commerce with web-based standards: A casestudy in implementing RosettaNet process standards at Avnet, Inc. RosettaNet.Papazoglou, M. P., & Ribbers, P. (2006). e-Business: Organizational and technical foun-dations. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.Papazoglou, M. P., Traverso, P., Dustdar, S., & Leymann, F. (2008). Service-orientedcomputing: A research roadmap. International Journal of Cooperative InformationSystems, 17, 223–255.Power, D. (2005). Supply chain management integration and implementation: A lit-erature review. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 10, 252–263. H.J. Ahn et al. / International Journal of Information Management 32 (2012) 17– 2323Power, D. (2008). Adoption of supply chain management enabling technologies:Comparing small, medium and larger organizations. Operations and Supply ChainManagement, 1, 31–42.Rawlins, M. (2006). ebXML – A critical analysis. Last retrieved on March 9, 2011from: http://www.rawlinsecconsulting.com/ebXML/.RosettaNet. (2007). RosettaNet automated enablement. Last retrieved on March 9,2011 from: http://www.rosettanet.org/dnn rose/tabid/383/Default.aspx.Vaaland, T. I., & Heide, M. (2007). Can the SME survive the supply chainchallenges? Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 12,20–31.Vossen, G., & Hagemann, S. (2007). Unleashing Web 2.0: From concepts to creativity.San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.Watson, H. J., & Wixom, B. H. (2007). The current state of business intelligence.Computer, 40, 96–99.Wilson, T. (2000). EDI is alive and kicking, study says. InternetWeek, 801, 15.Womack, J., & Jones, D. (2003). Lean thinking: Banish waste and create wealth in yourcorporation, revised and updated. Free Press.Yan, Y., & Klein, M. (2007). Web Services vs. ebXML: An evaluation of Web Ser-vices and ebXML for e-Business applications. In R. G. Qiu (Ed.), Enterprise servicecomputing: from concept to deployment. Idea Group Publishing.