 International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International
 Journal of Information Management
journal h om epa ge : www.elsevier.com/l ocate/ijinfomgtA review and future direction of agile, business intelligence, analyticsand data scienceDeanne Larsona, Victor Changb,aLarson & Associates, LLC, USAbXi’an Jiaotong Liverpool University, Suzhou, Chinaa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 15 April 2016Received in revised form 16 April 2016Accepted 16 April 2016Keywords:
Agile methodologiesBusiness intelligence (BI)Analytics and big dataLifecycle for BI and Big Dataa b s t r a c tAgile methodologies were introduced in 2001. Since this time, practitioners have applied Agile method-ologies to many delivery disciplines. This article explores the application of Agile methodologies andprinciples to business intelligence delivery and how Agile has changed with the evolution of businessintelligence. Business intelligence has evolved because the amount of data generated through the internetand smart devices has grown exponentially altering how organizations and individuals use information.The practice of business intelligence delivery with an Agile methodology has matured; however, busi-ness intelligence has evolved altering the use of Agile principles and practices. The Big Data phenomenon,the volume, variety, and velocity of data, has impacted business intelligence and the use of information.New trends such as fast analytics and data science have emerged as part of business intelligence. Thispaper addresses how Agile principles and practices have evolved with business intelligence, as well asits challenges and future directions.© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionThe manifesto and principles for Agile Software Development(ASD) were published in 2001, and since then, the objectives andprinciples have been interpreted and applied to Business Intelli-gence (BI). The application to BI is natural, because of the iterativeand incremental nature of BI development. The intent of this articleis to provide practitioners an understanding of how the Agile prin-ciples can be applied to BI delivery, fast analytics, and data science.Beck et al. (2001) outlined the core ideals of the manifesto: individ-uals and interactions over processes and tools; working softwareover comprehensive documentation; customer collaboration overcontract negotiation; and responding to change over following aplan. The result of following these ideals, software developmentbecomes less formal, more dynamic, and customer focused.Information Technology (IT) departments are faced with main-taining a competitive edge, which, in turn, increases pressure todeliver high quality technology solutions faster. Under these cir-cumstances, the value of technology efforts are determined basedon how soon payback and return on investment occur. BI initiativesrequire signiﬁcant upfront and ongoing investment to maintainCorresponding author.E-mail addresses: larsonelink@aol.com (D. Larson), ic.victor.chang@gmail.com(V. Chang).value, inviting constant scrutiny on whether business value occurs.Measuring BI value continues to be a struggle for organizations,mainly due to the challenge of directly attributing return to theinvestment in BI. BI plays the role of an enabler – enabling theorganization to become smarter, work smarter, and make betterdecisions through the use of information. The enabler role makes itdifﬁcult to directly attribute a return on investment and over time,the use of information becomes routine and expected.The information value chain is the process used to derive valuefrom information and information from data; BI delivery is cen-tered on the information value chain. Collecting raw data is theﬁrst step in the value chain; applying logic and business context tothe data creates information; information is then consumed by BIusers; decisions and actions are a result of the consumption of data;resulting in decisions and actions that provide business value.The information value chain is an important concept in under-standing the beneﬁts of Agile principles applied to BI delivery.BI delivery is not accomplished via traditional waterfall softwaredevelopment (although some organizations attempt this); it ismore focused on data discovery and understanding how informa-tion is going to be used. This perspective drives how Agile principlesshould be applied to BI delivery – less focus on software devel-opment and more focus on information use. The need to deliveryfaster has increased over the last 5 years due to the demand of real-time data analysis (Halpern, 2015). The Internet of Things (IoT),http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.04.0130268-4012/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710 701where data collection is embedded into devices, contributes to thisdemand for fresher data. Monitoring equipment failures, for exam-ple, will be possible with data that is seconds old versus data thatis hours or days old (Halpern, 2015).The objectives of this article are fourfold. First, revisit the align-ment between Agile principles and BI delivery, fast analytics, anddata science. Second, analyze Agile methodologies and how theyhave been applied with BI and are emerging with Big Data. Third,review the components and best practices of Agile BI delivery con-sidering the impact of Big Data. Last, propose an Agile frameworkfor BI delivery, fast analytics, and data science; fast analytics anddata science are the emerging data analysis trends due to Big Data(Fig. 1).2. BackgroundBusiness Intelligence (BI) is deﬁned by literature and scholarsin similar ways. Noble (2006) deﬁnes BI as the ability to providethe business an information advantage; business doing what ithas always done, but more efﬁcient. Singer (2001) described BI asthe value proposition that helps organizations tap into decision-making information that regular reporting does not provide. Singeroutlined that BI requires tools, applications, and technologiesfocused on enhanced decision-making and is commonly used insupply chain, sales, ﬁnance, and marketing. Negash and Gray (2008)outlined BI more comprehensively. BI is a data driven process thatcombines data storage and gathering with knowledge manage-ment to provide input into the business decision making process.BI enables organizations to enhance the decision making processand requires processes, skills, technology, and data. More recently,Gartner (2013) and Halpern (2015) have extended BI to be anumbrella term which includes applications, tools, infrastructure,and practices to enable access and analysis of information to opti-mize performance and decision-making.The challenges In BI delivery include business and IT collabo-ration that results in data become information. Delivery of BI isaccomplished via a methodology. Creswell (2005) outlined that amethodology is set of processes, methods, and rules applied withina discipline. Successful BI methodology should focus on the infor-mation value chain and less on the development of software as isthe focus of traditional information technology (IT) development.Research has demonstrated that waterfall lifecycles and traditionalsoftware development practices are not successful in BI. Softwareand hardware do not provide organizations value pertaining to BI;it is the use of information (Larson, 2009).Common stumbling blocks traditionally experienced in BIprojects included: fuzzy requirements; lacking an understandingabout how data is created and used; data quality is not measuredor known; source system constraints dictate design and servicelevels; developing based on perceptions of data; results are notdemonstrated in a timely manner; and working with a lack of trustbetween IT and business stakeholders (TDWI, 2009). While thesechallenges still remain, the need to have information sooner hasbeen inﬂuenced by the phenomenon of “Big Data”. Big Data is abroad term used to describe data sets that are large, complex, andcannot be addressed by traditional IT methodologies and applica-tions (Davenport, 2013).2.1. Big dataTraditional data processing has transformed because how datais generated today has transformed (Davenport, 2013). HistoricallyIT departments managed transaction processing systems. Businesswas about transactions – orders, sales, shipments, inventory, andaccounting, to list a few examples. Transactional data is structured,stable, and understood by organizations. Structured data is format-ted in rows and columns. Transactional data is primarily used fordecision support. The differentiating points between transactionaldata and Big Data are volume, variety, and velocity. Volume refersto the amount of data, variety is based on the types of data sources,and the velocity represents the age of data. Volume, variety, andvelocity are referred to as the “3 V’s” (Davenport, 2014). Trans-actional data is structured, well understood, and volume is tensof terabytes or less (Davenport, 2014). Transactional data is usedin decision support analysis. Decision support analysis focuses on“what has happened” or retrospective analysis.Volume for Big Data is measured in excess of 100 TB or petabytes(although research in this threshold varies). Big Data is character-ized by data types considered unstructured – not predeﬁned orknown – thus a high degree of variety. Velocity of Big Data can bemeasured in less than a few minutes. Big Data is used in machinelearning and predictive analysis where organizations focus on“what will happen” versus “what has happened” (Davenport, 2014).The emergence of Big Data has changed the face of BI.2.2. AnalyticsAnalytics have been around since the 1950s and are not a newidea (Davenport, 2014). Analytics started with a limited number ofdata sources which came from internal systems and data was storedin a repository such as a data mart or data warehouse—deﬁned astraditional BI. Most analysis was descriptive and BI consisted pri-marily of reporting. In 2003, Big Data started emerging when hightechnology ﬁrms such as Google and Yahoo began using Big Datafor internal analytics and customer-focused processes. The veloc-ity of Big Data changed traditional BI as data had to be stored andprocessed quickly. Predictive and prescriptive analytics started toemerge, but visual analytics of descriptive data was still the promi-nent form of analytics (Davenport, 2014). Big Data became “bigger”– more volume, variety, and velocity – and organizations beganfocusing on the data-driven economy. Organizations of all types aredeveloping data-based offerings to remain competitive (Davenport,2014).With the advent of Big Data and analytics evolving, BI deliveryhas been impacted. Data has to be turned into information quicklyfor analysis. Organizations are focusing more on prescriptive andpredictive analysis that utilize machine learning as well as fast ana-lytics through visualization. Fast analytics refers to the ability toacquire and visualize data quickly (Halpern, 2015; Jarr, 2015). Thevelocity increase in data has accelerated the need for IT depart-ments to acquire data and transform it into information. Table 1illustrates the characteristic differences between traditional BI andfast analytics with Big Data.3. Application of agile to BI and Big DataAgile ideals and principles were published by Beck et al. (2001)and since this time, practitioners have focused on applying anAgile approach to BI. The challenges that BI projects face make theAgile approach an attractive answer due to the parallels that existbetween them. By using an Agile approach, means the methodologyis less formal, more dynamic, and customer focused. The dynam-ics required in BI delivery make Agile approach a good ﬁt withBI; however, practice with Agile methodologies have resulted inadjustments to the well-known Agile methodologies to focus on theutility of information versus primarily software development. Agilemethodologies align well also with Big Data where little time isspent deﬁning requirements up front and the emphasis is on devel-oping small projects quickly. Agile methodologies will align well 702 D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710Fig. 1. Proposed agile delivery framework.with iterative discovery and validation which support prescriptiveand predictive analytics (Ambler & Lines, 2016).3.1. Agile principlesAnalyzing the Agile principles provides an understanding of howusing an Agile approach matches well with BI delivery. To reit-erate the principles: individuals and interactions over processesand tools; working software over comprehensive documentation;customer collaboration over contract negotiation; and respondingto change over following a plan. Beck et al. (2001) outlined thatan Agile approach focuses more on the left side of the principle;however, the right side is not ignored.3.2. Individuals and interactions over processes and toolsExperienced individuals working together are more effectiveand build better systems than less experienced individuals usingstructured process and tools (Ambler, 2006). With BI, the systemincludes multiple components such as source systems, Extract,Transformation, and Load (ETL) processes, databases, and front-endtools. The infrastructure of a BI system is the enabler to gainingvalue from organizational data. BI is less about the process andtools and more about the utility of information. Although the idealdiscussed here emphasizes individuals and interactions over pro-cesses and tools, processes and tools are not eliminated from anAgile approach.Faster analytics that have emerged with Big Data are needed toalign with faster technology. Analysis that may take hours or days D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710 703with transactional data and descriptive approaches are done in sec-onds with Big Data technology. New roles such as the data scientisthave emerged to use machine learning algorithms. Machine learn-ing processes rely on processes like Agile where frequent deliveryof information to stakeholders are required (Davenport, 2014).The challenge is adapting Agile approaches to match the speed ofthe new technologies. The process to deliver faster analytics alsoemphasizes the Agile principle of individuals and interactions overprocess and tools. Faster analytics and machine learning focus ondiscovery and iteration up front which means more interaction andcollaboration is required for discovery and insight.3.3. Working software over comprehensive documentationDocumentation is valuable; however, the value is not theissue. Documentation has an inherent problem – usability. Doc-umentation has been a dreaded aspect of traditional developmentmethodologies. Documentation takes too much time to complete,tends to be out-of-date, and is rarely used after the initial deploy-ment. Creating comprehensive documentation does not allow forquick delivery; however, not producing documentation can bemore detrimental. For Agile, documentation needs be usable andadd value. Documentation should less textual and more visible.Development artifacts in BI such as source to target mappings, dia-grams, and models, are examples of valuable artifacts that are easyto use and maintain. Diagrams can provide a level of documentationthat is adequate to support requirements, design, and developmentand are easy to maintain. A picture is worth a thousand words(Larson, 2009).Documentation with faster analytics and Big Data aligns withAgile principles and comprehensive documentation is not thenorm. Documentation is a lower priority and the priority with fasteranalytics is insight from information. Due to the speed of data avail-ability, documentation is primarily ignored (Adamson, 2015).3.4. Customer collaboration over contract negotiationPracticing ongoing collaboration throughout any process addsvalue – communication is increased, expectations are consis-tently reafﬁrmed, and ownership of the end product is shared.Collaboration is emphasized in “interaction and individuals overprocess and tools” and fundamental to the success of Agile.Without pre-determined expectations, contracts can frame expec-tations but allow reﬁnement and change. The details surroundingrequirements are not often known in enough detail to document.Collaboration between stakeholders addresses this via delivery bydetermining what the expectations are and increasing communi-cation between stakeholders (Larson, 2009).Faster analytics places an urgency on collaboration betweentechnical and customer resources. To facilitate discovery, technicalresources such as the data scientist and developers work togetherto determine the data sources to work with. As a data scientistprocesses data and produces interim results, constant interactionwith stakeholders is needed to validate results and direction. Visualanalytics used by analysts requires an understanding of multipledata sources in different formats to produce charts and diagrams.Collaboration continues to be a priority in BI whether focusing ondescriptive analysis or faster analytics (Davenport, 2014; Schutt &O’Neil, 2013).3.5. Responding to change over following a planA change in project requirements means a change in scope,which impacts time, resources, and budget, the foundationalaspects of project management. The traditional approach to manag-ing a project is to follow the plan and discourage change. Change intraditional methodology is the exception and not the rule (Larson,2009). One of the objectives of Agile principles is removing bureau-cracy from delivery of working software. With Agile, the approachis to be prepared for change and respond accordingly.Change is inherent in BI and the use of Big Data. The primaryresource used in both is data. Data is organic and constantly chang-ing and with Big Data sources, even more so as data is unstructuredand undeﬁned. Responding to change continues to be a need in BIand Big Data development processes (Davenport, 2014).3.6. Agile methodologiesThe manifesto and principles for Agile Software Development(ASD) were published in 2001, and since then, the objectives andprinciples have been interpreted and applied to new Agile method-ologies. The popular approaches from which the manifesto andprinciples were derived – Extreme Programming (XP) and Scrum– are in practice today with success and are considered standarddevelopment methodologies (Hsieh & Chen, 2015). Agile principleshave been applied to other disciplines such as project manage-ment with success (Kaleshovska, Josimovski, Pulevska-Ivanovska,Postolov, & Janevski, 2015). Success with Agile methodologiesinclude reduced cycle time, higher quality, increased require-ments clarify, increased ﬂexibility, and a higher overall stakeholdersatisfaction rate when compared to similar projects using dif-ferent project or software development methodologies (Hsieh &Chen, 2015; Kaleshovska et al., 2015). The core practices of Agilemethodologies include: small, short releases; stakeholders phys-ically located together; and a time-boxed project cycle (typically60–90 days, although the cycle may be shorter depending on thedeliverable) (Kendall & Kendall, 2004). These practices continue tocontribute to the success of Agile projects (Hsieh & Chen, 2015;Kaleshovska et al., 2015).3.7. Agile and business intelligenceThe primary goal of a BI project is to enable the use of informa-tion. If the primary goal of BI is enabling the use of information, thenscope of the BI project focuses on turning data into information.Software development is part of the data to information process;however, software development in BI is less about creating a work-ing program and more about application of business context to data.Software used in BI includes database management systems, datacleansing, data transformation, and analytical systems. The scopeof development in BI includes more conﬁguration and applicationof logic versus programmatic coding. In order to understand how toapply logic and conﬁgure the software, IT will need to comprehendthe business use of data (Larson, 2009). Big Data technology hasincludes the scope of software and hardware used in BI (Davenport,2014).BI delivery tends to be a process where customer expectationsare a cycle of discovery and reﬁnement, hence the problem of fuzzyrequirements. Turning data into information is not a simple pro-cess nor are requirements easy to determine even with the use ofsubject matter experts. BI begins with some key questions: Whatbusiness questions need to be answered? What data sources qual-ify as the system of record? How will data be used? These questionsare addressed through a discovery process that examines how datais created and how data is becomes information. BI systems includemultiple components such as source systems, ETL, databases, andfront-end tools. The infrastructure of a BI system is the enabler togaining value from organizational data. “Individuals over interac-tions over processes and tools” support discovery (Larson, 2009).The real requirements are discovered through the sharing of knowl-edge versus relying solely on stakeholders’ experience to deﬁnerequirements (Larson, 2009). Collaboration is a success require- 704 D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710Table 1Comparison of traditional business intelligence systems and fast analytics with big data.Criteria Traditional Business Intelligence Fast Analytics with Big DataAnalytics Type Descriptive, Predictive Predictive, PrescriptiveAnalytics ObjectiveDecision
 Support, Performance ManagementDrive
 the BusinessData Type Structured and Deﬁned Unstructured, UndeﬁnedData Age >24 h <Minment for implementing BI which is emphasized in the ideal of“interaction and individuals over process and tools”.As mentioned prior, BI requires a discovery process wherecustomer expectations are determined. Without pre-determinedexpectations, using contracts in BI would be challenging. BI projectsneed a framework of expectations which allow reﬁnement andchange. The objective is to focus more on collaboration versusspending time completing a detailed plan. Detailed plans areoften difﬁcult to create since only high-level planning informa-tion is known. Collaboration helps resolve this through determiningwhat the expectations are and increasing communication betweenstakeholders. The Agile principles of “customer collaboration overcontract negotiation” and “responding to change over followinga plan” address challenges of BI systems. Fast analytics projectsalign with these same Agile principles as the initial scope of theseprojects is quick data acquisition to be used for discovery; the valueof information is yet to be determined (Davenport, 2014).The most popular Agile development methodologies for BI areAgile Data Warehousing, Extreme Scoping, and Scrum (Muntean &Surcel, 2013). Agile Data Warehousing and Extreme Scoping workwell with BI if a data warehouse is involved. Data warehouses arecentral to a BI architecture providing a central repository with inte-grated data for analysis.Extreme Scoping is an Agile methodology speciﬁcally focusedon the data integration aspect of BI projects. Data integration, theacquisition and transformation of data sources into the data ware-house, primarily focuses on data management activities. The focusof development activities is acquiring and understanding data fromdata sources, data cleansing, data modeling, and preparing the datafor loading. Extreme Scoping is “data-centric” and includes all datamanagement activities (Powell, 2014). Extreme scoping is brokendown into seven steps where the ﬁrst step identiﬁes data deliver-ables, the second step breaks the deliverables into small releases,and in the remaining steps focus on the business value of the deliv-erables, the effort, identifying new technology, and deﬁning thevarious data development tracks and resources to complete thework (Powell, 2014). Small releases then are planned to deliver theproject.Agile Data Warehousing is a broader category where severalsimilar methodologies are present. One example methodologycontains and end-to-end approach to Agile data warehouse deliv-ery (Hughes, 2013) and another contains Agile approaches forevery aspect of BI delivery including a speciﬁc Agile approach fordata modeling (Amble & Lines, 2016). The commonalities of thesemethodologies include architecture vision, model and prototypethe data throughout the project, expect multiple deﬁnitions fordata, organize work by requirements, and stakeholder involvement(Hughes, 2013; Ambler & Lines, 2016). Agile Data Warehousing usesmany of the same concepts as Scrum for BI project delivery.Scrum, while not limited to BI, is the most popular Agileapproach used in Agile software development and BI (Muntean &Surcel, 2013). The concepts of Scrum primarily used in the BI are theuser story, sprint backlog, product backlog, the sprint, and the dailyscrum. BI requirements are divided into small stories which thenare packaged into a collection of stories to comprise a BI project.Each story is designed, developed, tested, and released. A sprintlasts from one to two weeks and contains a cycle requirements,analysis, design, development, and end user testing. Stories can beeither grouped into product or sprint backlog. Sprint backlog refersto the work the development team completes during the spring.Product backlog is a list of all stories ordered by priority to be con-sidered for the next spring. Users are involved in all of the sprintsteps. Daily meetings which are less than 15 min are held to reviewstatus (Muntean & Surcel, 2013).While recent research shows that applying Agile methodologiesto BI projects can increase quality, reduce cycle time, and improvestakeholder satisfaction, 60–70% of BI projects (including Big Data)still fail (Gartner, 2015). While some success of Agile has increasedits adoption in BI, Agile has become more of a focus with Big Dataand the increased focus on analytics.3.8. Agile and Big DataBig Data is a phrase coined to describe the changing technologylandscape that resulted in large volumes of data, continuous ﬂow ofdata, multiple data sources, and multiple data formats (Davenport,2014). The input to a BI project is data and the output is information.With the data landscape changing so rapidly, BI projects and themethodologies used are also changing.Big Data is a fairly new phenomenon, thus research is limited.Some research suggest Big Data is a media term or vendor termused to describe hardware, software, and analysis connected withnon-traditional data sources (Davenport, 2014). Several analysistrends have emerged (in some cases re-emerged) such as predic-tive and prescriptive analysis. Data science, which is deﬁned as aninterdisciplinary ﬁeld focusing on extracting insights from data invarious forms, is the next generation of data analysis ﬁelds suchas statistics and data mining. With Data Science, analysis is com-pleted using statistics and machine learning algorithms to producedata products or models that perform descriptive, predictive, orprescriptive analysis (Schutt & O’Neil, 2013). As the 3 V’s describ-ing Big Data suggest, data freshness, data variety, and the speedof analysis have changed how BI projects have traditionally beenapproached.Fast analytics and data science principles exasperate some of theAgile principles to the point where the results of an Agile method-ology need to be produced as if “on steroids”. Fast analytics anddata science use unstructured data that is acquired quickly andstored for analysis, eliminating the traditional steps required fordesign. Discovery, completed as part of design and development, ismoved to the front of the development cycle where data analysisstarts as soon as data is acquired. Visualization of data occurs inter-actively and iteratively to support the discovery of insights. Littleresearch exists on application of Agile principles in this manner;however, the research available suggests that Agile would alignwell but would need to be “short-cycle Agile” suggesting fasterresults are needed (Davenport, 2014).4. Business intelligence delivery, analytics, and Big Data4.1. Goals of BI deliveryYeoh and Koronios (2010) posited that a BI system is not a con-ventional IT system (i.e. transactional system); however, BI systems D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710 705have similar characteristics to enterprise systems or infrastructureprojects. BI system implementation is a complex activity involvinghardware, software, and resources over the life of the system. Thecomplexity of the BI system infrastructure increases with the scope.An enterprise BI system can include a data warehouse, integrateddata structures, source systems, and large data volumes.BI success focuses on a few main Critical Success Factors (CSF)categorized by organization, process, and technology (Yeoh &Koronios, 2010). Organizational CSFs consists of establishing avision, outlining a business case for BI, and gaining leadership sup-port for BI as a priority. Process CSFs focus on managing BI as anevolving ongoing program. Process CSFs include having a dedi-cated, skilled BI team for technical delivery as well as ongoingprogram and change management that focus on aligning BI withbusiness goals. The technical category centers on two areas – dataand infrastructure. Data and infrastructure CSFs consist of manyfactors related to stability and quality since these two areas are themajor technical components of the BI systems (Yeoh & Koronios,2010).Mungree, Rudra and Morien (2013) completed a 15-year reviewon BI CSFs which included the research by Yeoh and Koronios(2010). Mungree et al., identiﬁed the following top ten BI CSFs: com-mitted management; appropriate team skills, appropriate technicalframework and resources; align BI projects with business strategy;clear vision and requirements; user-oriented change manage-ment; effective data management; committed executive sponsor;project scope management. The results have commonality withthe research by Yeoh and Koronios and reinforce that BI projectsrequire alignment with business strategy, collaboration with busi-ness users, require ﬂexibility, and should be of manageable scope.Analyzing the success factors deﬁnes the goals of BI delivery.BI delivery consists of practices, methods, skills, and competenciesrequired to create, implement, and sustain BI systems. The suc-cess factors guide best practices in BI delivery. In simpler terms, BIdelivery needs to support organic and evolutionary change, drivenby the constant evaluation of information and user feedback. BIsystems would be constantly optimized and improved based onan ongoing feedback loop. Kenney (2015) provided a link betweenCSFs and Agile methodology where several of the success factorsaligned with best practices in BI Agile projects. Best practices out-lined included: small projects to see value quickly, involvement ofa dedicated sponsor, and close collaboration between developmentand user teams (Kenney, 2015; Couture, 2013).Fast analytics and data science projects align with Agile princi-ples in that the shorter the scope and cycle, the faster results. Littleresearch exists at this time to highlight the results of using Agilemethodologies with fast analytics and data science projects; how-ever, some cases studies infer that short-cycle Agile approaches areused due to the success of Agile methodologies in BI (Davenport,2014). Short-cycle Agile refers to faster and more ﬂexible sprints.4.2. Iteration and incrementalOne of the synergies that Agile has with BI is the short,small release and experts’ recommendation that BI, fast analyt-ics, and data science projects work best delivered in increments(Davenport, 2014; Yoeh & Koronios, 2010; Mungree, Rudra, &Morien (2013)). This incremental approach supports that fact thatbusinesses and technology change quickly and want to evaluate theimpact of these changes. An incremental approach allows for man-agement of risk, allows for more control, and enables customers tosee tangible results.Correct use of increments and iterations in BI begins with under-standing that these concepts are not the same. Both concepts applyto BI delivery but in a different way. BI literature tends to use theseconcepts interchangeably. Iteration refers to the cyclic process ofTable 2Comparison of the business intelligence lifecycle and fast analytics/data scienceproject lifecycle.Business Intelligence LifecycleFast
 Analytics/Data Science LifecycleDiscovery ScopeDesign Data Acquisition/DiscoveryDevelopment Analyze/VisualizeTest Model/Design/DevelopmentDeploy ValidateSupport DeploymentValue Support/Feedbackreﬁnement to get to the best solution. Incremental is a stagingand scheduling strategy where the scope of delivery is adjustedas necessary (Cockburn, 2008).Increments deal with the staging and scheduling of deliverableswhich may occur at different rates. Iterations are cycles to reviseand improve the deliverable. Increments are scheduled as part of aroadmap or release plan tied to an overall BI strategy that outlineswhat information capabilities are needed and when. Iterations willhappen within the increment. Increments are time-boxed, there-fore the results can be less or more than expected. If less thanexpected is delivered, increments are adjusted accordingly. Sim-ply, increments manage the scope of the delivery and iterations areused to reﬁne the quality of the deliverable. Deliverables can becode, models, diagrams, or any artifact created as part of the cycle.4.3. The BI and fast analytics lifecycleA lifecycle is the progression of something from conception toend of life or when something no longer provides value. Lifecy-cles have phases that comprise the progression of conception toend; the BI lifecycle is no different. The BI lifecycle parallels theSDLC with similar phases and is centered on the utility of informa-tion versus the development of software. Fast analytics and datascience projects take on a different approach due to the speed oftechnology and the acquisition of data. In BI, discovery focuseson requirements, design on deﬁning and working with structureddata, development on creating code and databases, testing on vali-dating development, deployment to production, then support andvalue measurement. With fast analytics and data science, designis encapsulated into development, because data is acquired tooquickly to analyze and it is unstructured and dynamic. Fast ana-lytics can involve iteration and visualization of data to understandand deﬁne. Data science involves iterative development of analyt-ical models where models are created, validated, and altered untilthe desired results are achieved (Schutt & O’Neil, 2013). Table 2compares the two different lifecycles.4.4. BI lifecycle4.4.1. DiscoveryDuring the discovery phase, the expectations of BI projects arenot initially clear to stakeholders. Business users begin with theknowledge that information and analysis capabilities are needed,and IT professionals are ready to take down requirements with-out a clear starting point. For these reasons, the ﬁrst phase isthe discovery phase where stakeholders determine informationrequirements. Information requirements begin with deﬁning busi-ness questions which provide insight into data sources, dimensions,and facts needed.4.4.2. DesignDesign in BI focuses heavily on modeling, but may start withestablishing the architecture of the system. Architecture in BI ismore than hardware infrastructure. BI architecture includes busi- 706 D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710ness, technical, process, data, and project components. BI businessarchitecture centers on deﬁning the drivers, goals, and strategy ofthe organization that drive information needs. BI project archi-tecture describes the incremental methodology used for short,small releases. Process architecture includes the framework fordata acquisition to data presentation. Data architecture addresshow data will be structured in data repositories, such as a datamart or warehouse. BI technology architecture includes hardware,BI software, and networks required to deliver BI projects. If theBI architecture is established, design will center on modeling dataand processes to support information needs. Models created in thisphase could include conceptual, logical, and physical data modelsas well as process models for ETL.4.4.3. DevelopmentBI development may include a wide array of activities. The pri-mary focus of the development phase is to produce a workingsystem that applies business context to data and presents infor-mation in a way that enables end users to analyze actionableinformation. Activities could include coding ETL, conﬁguring log-ical layers in a BI tool, or scripting scheduling jobs. The scope ofdevelopment can involve data acquisition to staging, staging topresentation, and presentation to the access and delivery of infor-mation.4.4.4. DeployBI systems tend to be complex for many reasons. One reasonfor complexity is that BI systems have many independent compo-nents that require integration. Another reason is BI systems areimpacted by continuous change. Because of this complexity, the BIdeployment phase is formal and controlled. Activities in this phasefocus on integration of new functionality and capability into pro-duction, and regression testing to verify that previously workingfunctionality is not impacted. Deployment focuses on introductionof new components and maintaining the stability of the productionBI system.4.4.5. Value deliveryThe value delivery phase includes stabilization, maintenance,change management, and end user feedback. Successful BI sys-tems generally have a long life and require program managementto address change and maintain ongoing value. Due to continu-ous change and the dynamic uses of information, BI system valuerequires constant attention. Change impacting a BI system can ini-tiate from source systems, business processes, software upgrades,new data integration, and organizational strategy. End user feed-back provides an understanding of how information is used and theoverall value gained from the BI system.4.5. Fast analytics/data science lifecycle4.5.1. ScopeFast analytics and data science emergence is due to Big Data;however, it is important to point out that forms of fast analyt-ics and data science have existed for some time. Visual analyticsis considered synonymous with fast analytics and data mining isalso used synonymously with data science. Both fast analytics anddata science are newer versions of known data analysis methods(Davenport, 2014; Jarr, 2015; Kiem, Kohlhammer, & Ellis, 2010;Schutt & O’Neil, 2013). Visual analytics and data mining becamecomplementary techniques where visualization was used duringthe discovery phase of data mining (Kiem et al., 2010). As Big Datawas used more in analysis, visualization tools were used to exploreraw data to support exploratory data analysis in the data scienceprocess. New tools emerged in the BI industry for visualization thatincluded new functionality such as complex graphs and charts andthe ability to connect to many different data sources (Davenport,2014).The scope of fast analytics and data science is to acquire dataquickly to analyze. Fast analytics is more about discovery and datascience uses fast analytics as part of its process. As a result of thedata science process, a data product such as a prediction engine,a classiﬁer, or recommendation engine is created (Schutt & O’Neil,2013). The scope of fast analytics and data science will depend onthe problem statement of the analysis. Many data sources could beincluded in the scope of analysis. Data sources may not be limitedto unstructured data. Here BI program management can have valueas a charter for the analytical model can deﬁne the problem state-ment and objectives as well as include operating boundaries andexpectations.4.5.2. Data Acquisition/DiscoveryNew technologies have made it possible to acquire data withouta full understanding of its structure or meaning which is the oppo-site of what occurs in the BI lifecycle where data is proﬁled andanalyzed to understand its meaning before loaded into a data repos-itory for use. Hadoop or the Hadoop File System (HDFS) originatedat Google and is now used in an open-source format by organiza-tions to land data without the need for data modeling (Davenport,2014). Analysts use fast analytics to access, assess, and visualizeto discover the value and use of data sources. New data repos-itories such as the “Data Lake” have emerged where technologyenables storage and processing power to support analyzing largeunstructured data sets (Davenport, 2014).4.5.3. Analyze/VisualizeFor both fast analytics and data science, analysis and visualiza-tion are an iterative process. With fast analytics the primary goalis visual analytics to support analysis. Fast analytics can producenew knowledge that creates a reﬁnement of the visual product. Fastanalytic can iteratively produce new dashboards or scorecards tobe used in ongoing BI or produce one-time analysis tools to sup-port new knowledge gain. With data science, fast analytics andvisualization is completed as part of the exploratory data analysisphase where descriptive analysis is used to highlight variable rela-tionships and identify parameters to be used in analytical models(Schutt & O’Neil, 2013). If fast analytics and visualization producesa BI product such a dashboard or scorecard, the BI product is thenvalidated. It is possible that fast analytics is primarily focused ondiscover, and a BI product is not produced.4.5.4. Model/Design/DevelopmentModeling is used two ways in this phase: analytical model-ing in data science and data modeling to describe data used infast analytics. Analytical modeling include descriptive, predictive,and prescriptive analysis using machine learning algorithms suchas regression, clustering, or classiﬁcation (Schutt & O’Neil, 2013).In fast analytics, data is modeled after analysis to document datastructures and association for future use (Adamson, 2015).4.5.5. ValidateThe validation phase is representing the data science processof validating the analytic model iteratively to the point where theerror of the modeling is minimalized. This process is referred toas “ﬁtting” the model. Additionally, fast analytics can be used toidentify new parameters to incorporate into the analytical model-ing process (Schutt & O’Neil, 2013). In this phase, new data sourcesmay also be incorporated.4.5.6. DeploymentAs with BI products and systems, analytical models, dashboards,scorecards and other visualization tools have little value unless they D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710 707are used. These analytical products are added to the productionenvironment to provide new functionality to the environment, justlike the BI deployment.4.5.7. Support/feedbackAnalytical products need to be supported and revised as theorganizational environment changes. The life cycle of an analyti-cal model depends on the rate of change in the organization andthe industry the organization operates within. Analytical modelslose value an applicability over time and ongoing feedback fromusers and analysis determines how the analytical models shouldbe adjusted.4.5.8. Synthesis of the fast analytics/data science lifecycle andagileThree phases of the BI Lifecycle have characteristics where usingan Agile approach ﬁts. The discovery, design, and developmentphases beneﬁt from iterative cycles, stakeholder collaboration,small time-boxed increments, and co-located resources (Ambler &Lines, 2016; Hughes, 2013; Muntean & Surcel, 2013; Powell, 2014).Fast analytics and data science are more ﬂuid and iterativethan BI due to the discovery involved in investigating a problemstatement. Fast analytics and data science are inherently agile aseach follows iterations, use small teams, and require collaborationbetween business subject matter experts and technical resources.Time-boxed increments can be applied, but may or may not beused as both processes are focused on discovery and data sciencehas the objective of creating an analytical model that produces thebest results (Mohanty, Jagadeesh, & Srivatsa, 2013; Schutt & O’Neil,2013).4.5.9. Agile delivery framework for BI, fast analytics and datascienceThis author compiled a BI Delivery Framework based onresearch and experience, which synthesized Agile practices withBI delivery practices (Larson, 2012). Since the development ofthis framework, additional research has been published that sup-ports the value of using Agile methodologies with BI projects.Fast analytics and data science has become prominent practicesin data analysis due to the emergence of Big Data. Organizationsare expanded competencies in the BI ﬁeld to include data scientists(Davenport, 2014; Schutt & O’Neil, 2013;Mohanty et al., 2013).4.6. Valuable practices from agile principles4.6.1. DiscoveryThe expectations of BI projects are not always clear to stakehold-ers. End users know they need information and analysis capabilitiesand IT knows they need to deliver something. This phase is wherediscovery is highlighted the most. Outlining business questions area best practice in gathering BI requirements. These questions imme-diately provide insight into data sources, dimensions, and factsneeded.Most of what can and cannot be delivered is determined by dataquality and availability. Once data sources have been identiﬁed,the next step requires gaining an understanding of the data. Dataproﬁling focuses on two phases − values analysis and structureanalysis. Data proﬁling provides data demographics and descrip-tive statistics such as: frequency distribution, high and low values,blank attributes and records, exceptions to domain values, depen-dencies between attributes, unknown constraints, mean, median,mode, and standard deviation. The knowledge gained from analyz-ing data demographics provides the basis for data quality metricsand can be used later in the lifecycle for modeling, development,and testing. Most importantly, assumptions about the data andinformation capabilities are removed. With this knowledge, infor-mation needs can be prioritized and increments planned (Larson,2009).With fast analytics and data science, exploratory data analysis isa required process to review data demographics, explore variablerelationships such as linearity, and select parameters to be consid-ered in an analytical model. Data proﬁling ﬁts well here as summarydemographics provide a data scientist a comprehensive view ofdata. The fast analytics and data science phases of scope, data acqui-sition/discovery, and analyze/visualize align with this phase of BIDelivery.4.6.2. ArchitectureAt the beginning of a BI program, the architecture needs to beestablished. Creating a ﬂexible, scalable architecture is essential tosupporting growth. Envisioning the architecture is the ﬁrst step inAgile BI (Ambler, 2006). As mentioned in the BI lifecycle section,BI architecture includes the business, technical, process, data, andproject architecture.Envisioning the architecture begins with diagramming. Dia-grams work well in Agile as they are easily altered and maintainedversus text-based documents. Diagrams include data models, dataﬂows, process ﬂows, and infrastructure diagrams. With technicalarchitecture, the deliverable can be a diagram outlining the differ-ent technologies required. A conceptual subject-level model can bethe beginnings of the data architecture.Diagrams are a beginning, but they do not prove out the architec-tural vision. Architecture decisions are ones that cannot be easilyreversed once implemented. The approach of a reference imple-mentation works well in the Agile paradigm. Like a prototype,a reference implementation is a working model but focuses onproving out the architecture. Reference implementations for ETLarchitecture, for example can demonstrate if service levels are pos-sible and remove assumptions about the technology. A proof ofconcept (POC) is also another approach used in validating archi-tectural decisions. POCs are often used in BI due to organizationsusing the best of breed approach. The best of breed approach isdeﬁned as organizations choosing independent tools, such as ETLand databases, which need to be integrated as part of the techni-cal architecture. Although reference implementations and POCs areused in traditional software development, in Agile BI they becomethe rule (Larson, 2009).Architecture for fast analytics and data science primarily focuseson technical architecture. Technical architecture trends includeopen-source options like Hadoop and R for analytical modeling(Davenport, 2014; Schutt & O’Neil, 2013). Hadoop is considered thebest practice for Data Lake environments due to high volumes ofunstructured data. BI technical architecture and Data Lake architec-ture have to integrate and share data. Reference implementationsand POCs are applicable for fast analytics and data science.4.6.3. DesignThe activities completed in the design phase of the BI frame-work are modeling and mapping. These activities are iterative innature and use the output of the discovery phase. Data proﬁlinganalysis and high-level architectural diagrams provide the contextfor design.Modeling in this framework is focused on prioritized require-ments, data demographics, and a stable scope for the increment.Business questions provide an understanding of how data willbe used and data demographics assist the modeler in identifyingbusiness transactions, uniqueness, and primary/foreign key rela-tionships. The modeling iteration is shortened through the use ofdata discovery early in the project. The modeling iteration mayinclude a completed logical or physical model; however, due tothe iterative cycles, the models may be a ﬁrst pass. At a minimum, 708 D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710models will demonstrate behavioral and informational semantics.Models can represent sources and targets.Mapping the data between source and target is an essentialdesign activity. The source to target mapping will be evolutionarywithin the scope of the increment. The exercise of mapping con-ﬁrms data understanding and discovers business, transformation,and cleansing rules.By having models and source to target mappings, develop-ment on ETL and end user capabilities can begin. Reﬁnements tothe design can occur via development iterations. Subject matterexperts from the business and IT collaborate to clarify and reﬁnedesign throughout the increment.As outlined, in fast analytics and data science, data is not mod-eled before used in analysis. Iterations are completed as part ofdiscovery to further analysis and understand data and determinewhat data products are to be created (Davenport, 2014; Schutt &O’Neil, 2013). Design activities are ﬂuid and very informal. Datamodels if created are done at the conceptual level due to unstruc-tured data (Adamson, 2015).4.6.4. DevelopmentIn an Agile environment, the goal of development is to deliverworking software regularly. In BI, development deliverables caninclude ETL processes, analysis, or reporting capabilities. Differentapproaches to ETL exist such as Enterprise Application Integra-tion (EAI), Enterprise Information Integration (EII), and Extract,Load, and Transform (ELT) which are out of scope for this research.Regardless of ETL approach, BI development includes an ETL deliv-erable.Development iterations focus on the delivery of requirements;however, the requirements are not delivered the ﬁrst cycle.Throughout the requirements and design iterations, stakeholdersare working with the data to conﬁrm understanding and removeassumptions. Development will produce software that enriches thedata. The development iteration reﬁnes requirements and designthrough stakeholder collaboration. Stakeholders can conﬁrm infor-mation results through validation of business rules and veriﬁcationof output to alternate sources. Through development iterations,the scope that can be delivered in the allotted timeframe becomesclear. At the conclusion of the development phase, requirementsand design are concluded for the increment and the developmentdeliverables are ready to be tested.Fast analytics and data science are farther removed fromtraditional development and producing software than BI. Theproducts that come from fast analytics and data science can beone-time visualizations or analytical models. Data munging, theprocess of parsing, scraping, and formatting data, requires develop-ment; however, development is not focused on meeting customerrequirements (Davenport, 2014; Schutt & O’Neil, 2013). Analyticalmodels require development, but often utilize packaged functionsto apply machine learning algorithms. The fast analytics and datascience phase of model/design/development aligns with the devel-opment phase of BI.4.6.5. TestWith an Agile approach, testing occurs constantly throughthe interactions of stakeholders. Collaboration with stakeholdersensures results are veriﬁed during the lifecycle to produce higherquality results. Since BI systems tend to be complex, a formalchange control process is recommended. Additionally, a regressiontest suite for the BI system is essential. With the fuzzy nature ofinformation, it is possible to impact prior working functionality andnot see the impact until after deployment.Testing for fast analytics and data science is included in themodel/design/development phase and is not separated out. Analyt-ical models go through the ﬁtting process where models are reﬁnedand tuned to minimize overall error (Davenport, 2014; Schutt &O’Neil, 2013).4.6.6. DeployComplex BI systems require formal support and maintenanceprocedures to ensure the overall health of the system. This iswhere the ﬂexible nature of Agile ends. New increments need aformal process to ensure existing operations and service levelsare not impacted. Without a formal process, the risk of failureincreases. Using an incremental approach allows a gradual andcontrolled deployment. In addition, introducing new functionalitysooner allows stakeholders to recognize value and lessens the com-plexity of deployment. Formal support and feedback procedures areneeded for analytical models that are deployed. Analytical modelslose effectiveness due to environmental change (Davenport, 2014;Schutt & O’Neil, 2013).5. Summary of the agile delivery framework for BI, fastanalytics, and data scienceThe basis for the framework has been established through theanalysis and synthesis of Agile principles with BI, fast analytics anddata science. Agile practices have been adopted by BI practition-ers and recent research has supported success in this area. BI hasbeen impacted by Big Data and analysis has shifted from descrip-tive analysis to predictive and prescriptive analysis. Based on thesechanges, additional content has been added to extend the frame-work to include the new analysis trends – fast analytics and datascience.The following diagram depicts the framework for Agile BI deliv-ery, fast analytics and data science. There are two layers of strategictasks that go hand in hand in the Agile BI Delivery Framework. Thetop layer includes BI Delivery and the bottom layer includes FastAnalytics/Data Science. In the top layer, there are ﬁve sequentialsteps involved: Discovery, Design, Development, Deploy and ValueDelivery. In each step, there are speciﬁc tasks to be completed andare related to the goals of achieving business and IT stakeholder col-laboration. The bottom layer includes six sequential steps: Scope,Data Acquisition/Discover, Analyze/Visualize, Validate and Deploy-ment. Similarly, all these steps work towards successful businessand IT stakeholder collaboration. The alignment, integration andstreamlining both layers can ensure the execution and manage-ment for the Agile BI Delivery Framework.6. DiscussionThe scope of this paper focused on an Agile delivery frameworkaddressing the inﬂuence of Big Data on Business Intelligence. Fastanalytics and data science are not the only emerging trends thatshould be considered in Business Intelligence and Big Data adop-tion. Emerging trends that warrant further research not addressedin the scope of the paper include Emerging Services and Analytics,cloud delivery and storage models, and security implications withBig Data.BIaaS is a Software as a Service (SaaS) approach to BI whereapplications are offered as a service where computing occurs in apublic or a private cloud (Chang, 2014). BIaaS emerged after appli-cations began migrating to the cloud; however, BIaaS has takingtime to become mainstream. Organizations take advantage of BIaaSprimarily to lessen the delivery time of analytics. Improving timeto value and minimizing the cost of implementation and infras-tructure are the primary drivers for organizations to move to BIaaS(Chang, 2014). Everything as a Service (EaaS) approaches are stillevolving and it is not clear on how Big Data will inﬂuence BIaaS.Similarly, Newman et al. (2016) explain that the use of Business D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710 709Data Science (BDS) approach can enhance business performance.Since there are no clear guidelines in BDS, they focus on the intro-duction of their system design and experimental approach to alloworganizations to consider adopting their proposal.BIaaS is only one area that is emerging as a service. Chang (2016)introduces Emerging Services and Analytics where services aredelivered using a combination of Platform as a Service (PaaS) andSaaS. Emerging Services and Analytics are presented as one inte-grated service which merges different technologies to work easilywith users who use the service. Emerging Services and Analyticsinclude merging technologies such as the data warehouse, machinelearning, visualization, analytical models, software, and Big Data(Chang, 2016). Visualization, while not a new concept, is a key com-ponent of fast analytics. Visualization as a part of a service allowsusers to quickly understand complex data sets created from sta-tistical analysis or analytical models. Big Data is often deﬁned notonly by velocity, variety, and volume, but also by validity, veracity,value, and visibility – implying the importance of visualization.At the heart of services is cloud computing. Cloud computingprovides shared processing resources as a service to organizationsand individuals. Services utilize cloud computing and Big Data isan area that is being researched due to MapReduce, which is aframework used to process Big Data quickly (Chang & Wills, 2016).MapReduce maps and categorizes data together, thereby reducingthe data to be processed. Big Data in the cloud offers opportu-nities for data scientists and other communities to process andanalyze data quickly using terabytes of data and many differentdata types including images. Both cloud and non-cloud solutionsare still being researched as to which is the best option. Chang andWillis (2016) used Organizational Sustainability Modeling (OSM)to measure performance between cloud and non-cloud platforms.They proposed that non-cloud solutions may be best for secure andprivate data, but may not provide the most consistent performanceand that cloud solutions provide the most consistent performance.Other considerations with Big Data adoption include disasterrecovery and security. Privacy and security are concerns for orga-nizations that use cloud computing as processing platforms areoutside the realm of control. Big Data is a concern due to new cate-gories of sensitive data used for analysis including biomedical dataand new forms of personal identiﬁable information (PII). CombineBig Data with cloud computing and security and privacy concernsincrease. Chang, Kuo, & Ramachandran, 2016 outline that securityand privacy are challenges for organizations that use cloud com-puting and Big Data. Challenges include ensuring current securitypractices are applied as part of the system development. Addi-tionally, they recommend a risk-based approach to ensure data ismaintained with integrity and conﬁdentiality. Approaches such asCloud Computing Adoption Framework (CCAF) are being developedto provide greater security in the cloud. CCAF is multi-layered secu-rity framework that includes identity management, ﬁrewall, andencryption (Chang et al., 2016). Since security for businesses posechallenges for growing numbers of organizations, ethical hackingand large scale penetration testing will be essential to test therobustness of secure systems. Chang and Ramachandran (2016)use their CCAF framework to test with 10,000 known viruses andtrojans in 2013 and results showed that their work can block andkill more than 99% of viruses and trojans that has been injectedevery hour. In the event of having the data centers compromised,they identiﬁed that all rescued and recovery should be completedwithin 125 h. They also tested with 10 petabytes of data to verifythe robustness of resiliency of their approaches. In summary, BI ser-vices and platforms should be resilient to all types of attacks andcan provide a guarantee of secure services as close as to 100%.As part of security, data integrity is also a concern. Veracity andvalue of Big Data can be impacted if a solid disaster recovery processis not in place. There is much focus on security and privacy of BigData, but not much research on disaster recovery solutions for BigData. Chang (2015) outlines that Big Data poses a disaster recoverychallenge because of the quantity, size and complexity of the data.Chang (2015) outlines challenges with backing up virtual machines,using multiple sites, and replication. Issues with Big Data since asdata ownership and governance also contribute to disaster recoverychallenges.7. ConclusionThis paper focused on the recent developments in adoption ofAgile principles to BI delivery and how Agile has changed with theface of BI. Fast analytics and data science have been included underthe umbrella of BI. Agile ideals ﬁt well into the BI world and researchon successful application has emerged. Agile addresses many ofthe common problems found in BI projects by promoting interac-tion and collaboration between stakeholders. Close collaborationbetween parties ensures clearer requirements, an understand-ing of data, joint accountability, and higher quality results. Lesstime is spent attempting to determine information requirements,and more time is devoted to discovering what is possible. Futureresearch opportunities are abundant as the landscape of BI and dataanalysis is transforming with Big Data. Topics in discussion haveaddressed the current challenges and future directions for adopt-ing business intelligence platforms, applications and services for alltypes of organizations.Keywords and deﬁnitionsAnalytics is the information gained from the systematic analysis of data andstatistics.
Business Intelligence is a data driven process that combines data storage andgathering with knowledge management to provide input into the businessdecision making process. Business Intelligence enables organizations toenhance the decision making process.The Cloud or Cloud computing, also on-demand computing, is a kind ofInternet-based computing that provides shared processing resources and datato computers and other devices on demandData Warehouse is an integrated, subject-oriented, non-volatile, time-variantdata store. A data warehouse can also be considered a union of all data marts.Data warehouses are used to support business intelligenceExtract, Transformation, and Load is the process used to capture data fromsources, apply transformation rules (ﬁlter, select, derive, translate, convert),and load data into a target data store.Information Technology is the use of software, hardware, and infrastructure tomanage and deliver information. Organizations have information technologydepartments that focus on managing information as an asset. Informationtechnology departments manage the infrastructure used to deliver informationInformation Utility is the process of using information for decision making,knowledge extraction, or for other management activities.Metadata are all the information that is used to deﬁne and describe contents,deﬁnitions, operations, and structures within an organization’s systemarchitecture. Metadata are required by users to understand data meaning andcontext. Metadata can be categorized into business, technical, and processmetadata.
Proof of Concept (POC) is demonstration in principle, whose purpose is toverify that a concept or theory is feasible.ReferencesAdamson, C. (2015). The age of big data modeling. www.tdwi.orgAmbler, S. (2006). Agile database techniques: effective strategies for the agiledeveloper. John Wiley & Sons.Ambler, S. W., & Lines, M. (2016). The Disciplined Agile Process DecisionFramework.Beck, K., Beedle, M., Van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., Cunningham, W., Fowler, M.,et al. (2001). Manifesto for agile software development.. Available on: http://agilemanifesto.org/Chang, V. (2014). The business intelligence as a service in the cloud. FutureGeneration Computer Systems, 37(July), 512–514.Chang, V. (2015). Towards a big data system disaster recovery in a private cloud.Ad Hoc Networks, 35, 65–82.Chang, V. (2016). An overview, examples and impacts offered by EmergingServices and Analytics in Cloud Computing. International Journal of InformationManagement, in press. 710 D. Larson, V. Chang / International Journal of Information Management 36 (2016) 700–710Chang, V., Kuo, Y., & Ramachandran, M. (2016). Cloud Computing AdoptionFramework—a security framework for business clouds. Future GenerationComputer Systems, 57, 24–41.Chang, V., & Ramachandran, M. (2016). Towards achieving data security with thecloud computing adoption framework. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,9(1), 138–151.Chang, V., & Wills, G. (2016). A model to compare cloud and non-Cloud storage ofbig data. Future Generation Computer Systems, 57, 56–76.Cockburn, A. (2008). Using both incremental and iterative development. TheJournal of Defense Software Engineering.Couture, N. (2013). Best practices for adopting agile methodologies for datawarehouse development. Business Intelligence Journal, 18(2), 8–17.Creswell, J. W. (2005). Educational research: planning, conducting, and evaluatingquantitative and qualitative research (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: PrenticeHall.Davenport, T. H. (2013). Analytics 3.0. Harvard Business Review, 91(12), 64–72.Davenport, T. H. (2014). Big data @ work: dispelling the myths, uncovering theopportunities. Harvard Business Review Press.Gartner IT Glossary. (2013). Deﬁnition of business intelligence.. Retrieved from:http://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/business-intelligence-bi/ (accessed on15.04.16.)Gartner Research. (2015). Gartner says business intelligence and analytics leadersmust focus on mindsets and culture to kick start advanced analytics. Gartnerbusiness intelligence & analytics summit 2015.Halpern, F. (2015). Next-generation analytics and platforms for business success:tDWI research report. Available on: www.tdwi.orgHsieh, C. Y., & Chen, C. T. (2015). Patterns for continuous integration builds incross-platform agile software development. Journal of Information Science &Engineering, 31(3), 897–924.Hughes, R. (2013). Agile data warehousing project management: business intelligencesystems using Scrum and XP. Waltham, MA: Morgan Kaufmann.Jarr, S. (2015). Fast data and the new enterprise data architecture. O’Reilly Publishing.Kaleshovska, N., Josimovski, S., Pulevska-Ivanovska, L., Postolov, K., & Janevski, Z.(2015). The contribution of scrum in managing successful softwaredevelopment projects. Economic Development/Ekonomiski Razvoj, 17(1/2),175–194.Kenney, T. (2015). How to achieve Agile business intelligence success. CIO, 1(13284045).Kendall, J. E., & Kendall, K. E. (2004). Agile methodologies and the lone systemsanalyst: when individual creativity and organizational goals collide in theglobal IT environment. Journal of Individual Employment Rights, 11(4), 333–347.Kiem, D., Kohlhammer, J., & Ellis, G. (2010). Mastering the information age: solvingproblems with visual analytics. Eurographics Association.Larson, D. (2009). BI principles for agile development: keeping focused. BusinessIntelligence Journal, 14(4), 36–41. Retrieved from Business Source Completedatabase.Mohanty, S., Jagadeesh, M., & Srivatsa, H. (2013). Big data imperatives: enterprisebig data warehouse. BI Implementations and Analytics.Muntean, M., & Surcel, T. (2013). Agile BI—the future of BI. Informatica Economica,17(3), 114–124. http://dx.doi.org/10.12948/issn14531305/17.3.2013.10Mungree, D., Rudra, A., & Morien, D. (2013). Proceedings of the Nineteenth AmericasConference on Information Systems.Negash, S., & Gray, P. (2008). Business intelligence. In F. Burstein, & C. W. Holsapple(Eds.), Handbook on decision support systems 2 (pp. 175–193). Berlin,Heidelberg: Springer.Newman, R., Chang, V., Walters, R. J., & Wills, G. B. (2016). Model and experimentaldevelopment for business data science. International Journal of InformationManagement, 36(4), 607–617.Noble, J. (2006). The core of IT. pp. 15–17. CIO Insight.Powell, J. (2014). BI this week: agile basics and best practices.. Available on: www.tdwi.orgSchutt, R., & O’Neil, C. (2013). Doing data science: straight talk from the frontline.O’Reilly Media, Inc.Singer, T. (2001). Information engineering: the search for business intelligence.Plant Engineering, 34–36.The Data Warehouse Institute. (2009). TDWI requirements gathering: getting correctand complete requirements for BI systems. The Data Warehouse Institute.www.tdwi.orgYeoh, W., & Koronios, A. (2010). Critical succes factors for business inteligencesystems. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 50(3), 23–32. Retrievedfrom: Business Source Complete database.Futher readingAbrahamsson, P., Salo, J., & Ronkainen, J. (2008). Agile software developmentmethods: review and analysis. VTT Technical Report.Davenport, T. H., & Harris, J. G. (2007). Competing on analytics: the new science ofwinning. Boston: Mass Harvard Business School Press.Dyba, T., & Dingsøyr, T. (2008). Empirical studies of agile software development: asystematic review. Information and Software Technology, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2008.01.006Hedgebeth, D. (2007). Data-driven decision making for the enterprise: an overviewof business intelligence applications. VINE, 37(4), 414–420. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/03055720710838498Mayer-Sch¨onberger, V., & Cukier, K. (2013). Big data: a revolution that will transformhow we live, work and think. John Murray: London.Marr, B. (2015). Big data: Using smart big data, analytics and metrics to makebetter decisions and improve performance.Sriram, R. S. (2008). Business intelligence in context of global environment. Journalof Global Information Technology Management, 11(2), 1.Wang, Xiaofeng, Lane, Michael, Conboy, Kieran, & Pikkarainen, Minna. (2009).Where agile research goes: starting from a 7-year retrospective (report onagile research workshop at XP2009). SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes,34(October (5)), 28–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1598732.1598755 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1598732.1598755