 International Journal of Information Management 34 (2014) 406–415Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International
 Journal of Information Management
journal h om epa ge : www.elsevier.com/l ocate/ijinfomgtService strategies of small cloud service providers: A case study of asmall cloud service provider and its clients in TaiwanFeng-Kwei Wanga, Wu Heb,aMedia and Digital Design Program, Chinese Culture University, TaiwanbDepartment of Information Technology & Decision Sciences, College of Business and Public Administration, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529,United Statesa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Available online 20 February 2014Keywords:
Cloud computingSmall enterprisesCloud-based serviceCloud adoptionE-learninga b s t r a c tSmall enterprises play an important role in the technology innovation and economic development ofmost countries all over the world, particularly in Taiwan. Due to a lack of ﬁnancial resources and exper-tise, small enterprises tend to ﬁnd novel ways to utilize IT resources in order to reduce IT adoptioncosts, to achieve better ﬂexibility, business agility and scalability, and to react faster to market demands.Whereas Taiwan has been promoting cloud computing to help Taiwanese enterprises adopt more effec-tive information technologies, we found that the service strategies of small cloud service providers areindividually differentiated in order to survive in the competitive cloud computing market. This paperreports a case study of a small e-learning service provider and its four clients in Taiwan. Some novelinsights are revealed through this case study and recommendations are provided accordingly.© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionCloud computing has provided enterprises with many advan-tages such as ﬂexibility, scalability, business agility, and pay-as-you-go cost structure (Venters & Whitley, 2012; Sultan, 2011;Benlian & Hess, 2011; Iyer & Henderson, 2010; Buyya, Yeo,Venugopal, Broberg, & Brandic, 2009). As a result, small andmedium enterprises (SMEs)1 2are increasingly adopting cloudcomputing to deliver their business services and products onlineto extend their business markets (Repschlaeger, Erek, & Zarnekow,2013; Perrons & Hems, 2013; Xu, Xu, & Basl, 2012). A recent reportfrom KPMG (2012) indicates that the growth of the cloud comput-ing industry in 2012 is mainly driven by SMEs. To boost the adoptionof cloud computing, Taiwan’s government has poured tremendousresources into transforming this ICT island into a cloud village (Leeet al., 2012). Because nearly 98% of enterprises in Taiwan are SMEs,the government often pays more attention to the special needs ofSMEs in IT adoption. The size of enterprises in terms of employeesis a determinant for the adoption decisions of IT services in Taiwan.Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 757 683 5008; fax: +1 757 683 5639.E-mail addresses: fkwang@sce.pccu.edu.tw (F.-K. Wang), whe@odu.edu (W. He).1In Taiwan, SMEs are classiﬁed as those enterprises with less than 200 regularemployees in the manufacturing, construction, mining, and quarrying industries andthose enterprises with less than 100 regular employees in other industries. Microenterprises refer to SMEs with fewer than 5 regular employees.2The deﬁnition of small enterprises varies in different countries. We deﬁne thoseenterprises with less than 50 regular employees as small enterprises in view of thisresearch context.Also, IT adoption strategies vary considerably depending on the ITresources of an enterprise as a result of the company size. Therefore,the fact that size matters has a signiﬁcant implication for the com-petitiveness of IT service providers, particularly small cloud serviceproviders. In Taiwan, many small IT service providers jump on thecloud bandwagon by porting existing IT service to the cloud plat-form only. Fundamentally, they are still struggling with competingwith larger cloud service providers. In this research, we are inter-ested in exploring how small cloud service providers are able tocompete in the ﬁercely competitive cloud market. To explore theservice strategies of small cloud service providers in Taiwan, weinvestigate why and how small enterprises adopt cloud services asa ﬁrst step.On the one hand, in addition to using the popular SaaS (Softwareas a Service) by SMEs, an increasing number of small enterprises arealso adopting PaaS (Platform as a Service) and IaaS (Infrastructureas a Service) (Sultan, 2011; Tao, Zhang, Venkatesh, Luo, & Cheng,2011; Li et al., 2013). On the other hand, due to the intensive compe-tition in the cloud computing market, many cloud service providersare providing tailored and ﬂexible services to meet the speciﬁcneeds and requirements of their SME clients. Therefore, to under-stand the competition of cloud computing in small enterprises,there is a strong need to explore the beneﬁts and risks (Brender& Markov, 2013) involved in the service and adoption strategies ofcloud-based services from both the perspectives of cloud serviceproviders and cloud service clients (Marston, Li, Bandyopadhyay,Zhang, & Ghalsasi, 2011). We chose the e-learning industry as our“case” for this study because most of the e-learning providers andtheir clients are small enterprises and because, like many other0268-4012/$ – see front matter © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2014.01.007 F.-K. Wang, W. He / International Journal of Information Management 34 (2014) 406–415 407IT service industries, the majority of e-learning services in Taiwanhave been shifting to cloud-based information services. By study-ing a small e-learning provider and four of its clients, we hope togain some insights into service strategies that a small cloud serviceprovider could use to compete with larger providers.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 pro-vides some background information associated with the adoptionof cloud computing in small enterprises. Section 3 compares dif-ferent types of cloud services based on their purposes rather thantechnical details. Section 4 presents a case study with an e-learningcloud service provider and its four clients. These research sub-jects in our case study are all small enterprises in nature. Section5 discusses the ﬁndings, managerial implications, and insights forcloud-based services in small enterprises. Finally, conclusions, lim-itations and suggestions for future studies are addressed.2. Background: cloud computing for small enterprisesIn practice, small enterprises face many issues in adopting newinformation technologies. As most small enterprises have limitedhuman and ﬁnancial resources, their IT adoption is often differentfrom that of larger business with more resources (Sarosa & Zowghi,2003; Lawson, Alcock, Cooper, & Burgess, 2003; Tan, Chong, Lin, &Eze, 2010; Alshamaila, Papagiannidis, & Li, 2013). Below is a briefoverview of the main issues that small enterprises have to resolvefor IT adoption.2.1. Limited ﬁnancial resourcesThe adoption of new information technology often requires aconsiderable investment of ﬁnancial resources. Compared to largerenterprises, small enterprises have much less ﬁnancial resourcesto access in adopting various technologies (Umble, Haft, & Umble,2003). For example, many small enterprises cannot afford to pur-chase an ERP system (Rao, 2000; Olson and Staley, 2012), which isusually expensive. As a result, small enterprises have to be very pru-dent with the spending of their ﬁnancial resources in IT investmentand often choose less sophisticated substitute systems or software,which may cause small enterprises to compete less effectively withlarger competitors. Furthermore, Sarosa and Zowghi (2003) warnedthat a bad IT investment decision could negatively inﬂuence theproﬁtability of small enterprises.2.2. Limited IT staff & expertiseSmall enterprises are less likely to have dedicated in-houseservices and IT staff than larger enterprises. For example, smallenterprises are usually not able to afford readily available in-housesecurity experts to address potential security issues (Armbrustet al., 2010). Small enterprises are also less likely to have partic-ular IT staff to train other employees to use new technologies on aregular basis (Lawson et al., 2003). Furthermore, the limited IT staffin small enterprises are typically busy supporting and maintainingexisting IT infrastructure and do not have much time for devel-oping innovative solutions to address changing business demandsefﬁciently (He, Cernusca & Abdous, 2011).2.3. Limited IT infrastructureCompared with larger enterprises small enterprises havelimited IT infrastructure to support application development. Forexample, small enterprises are less likely to afford dedicated, scal-able, and state-of-the-art in-house computing resources such ashigh performance servers and storage devices. Consequently, ITstaff members in small enterprises are often unable to develop andimplement the business applications to meet enterprise needs dueto the insufﬁcient support of a reliable and sufﬁcient IT infrastruc-ture (Umble, Haft, & Umble, 2003; Wang, He & Wang, 2012).Because of the above issues, cloud computing frequentlybecomes a seemingly attractive and commercially viable solutionfor small enterprises (Voas & Zhang, 2009; Gupta, Seetharaman, &Raj, 2013). Several beneﬁts of cloud computing to small enterprisesare apparent (Ghormley, 2012; Sultan, 2011). First, a distinctivebeneﬁt is that cloud computing allows small enterprises to accesshigh-end applications such as SAP software, Microsoft SharePoint,data mining, and business intelligence tools at a much lower cost(Voas & Zhang, 2009; Sultan, 2012). Second, the on-demand andpay-as-you-go cost structure of cloud computing permits smallenterprises to reduce IT investment and to pay for only the softwarethey need. Third, new applications or services can be quickly addedby cloud service providers with much lower up-front costs to smallenterprises. Fourth, cloud computing also lets small enterprisesfocus on their core business, react more quickly to changes, and toscale up and down as needed (He, Cernusca & Abdous, 2011). Fifth,cloud computing is also valuable for IT staff in small enterprisesbecause it reduces their burden of installing, conﬁguring, upgradingand maintaining software and applications (Leavitt, 2009). Cur-rently, in view of these beneﬁts, many cloud service providers suchas Amazon, Cisco, and Microsoft are offering on-demand cloud ser-vices to small enterprises commercially.Although cloud computing promises signiﬁcant beneﬁts, cloudcomputing also poses some challenges and risks (Armbrust et al.,2010; He, Cernusca & Abdous, 2011; Trigueros-Preciado, Pérez-González, & Solana-González, 2013). Common concerns withclouds (particularly public clouds) include:(1) Security (Rittinghouse & Ransome, 2009). Is the data in thecloud safe? Can we back it up and restore it easily?(2) Privacy (Fromholz, 2000). How can we be sure that our data isprivate in the cloud? Can we control how our information maybe used by the vendor?(3) Vendor lock-in/dependency (Armbrust et al., 2010).Vendor dependency or vendor changes (bankrupt-cies/shutdowns/acquisitions and their consequences) arecritical in IT decision including the ability to continue businessoperations if the vendor shuts down unexpectedly. Howsustainable is a potential cloud service provider? How hard isit to move applications and data to another service provider?and(4) Legal/regulatory/information policy consequences (Jaeger, Lin& Grimes, 2008). Different compliance standards regulate dataprivacy and information security in different nations andregions. How does the use of a cloud service impact our abilityto comply with various legal requirements and regulations?3. Different cloud-based services for small enterprisesThe competitive strategies of a company are primarily builtupon the cost and the differentiation of the company’s offerings(Porter, 1985). As such, the service strategies of a cloud serviceprovider can be developed based on its service cost or service dif-ferentiation, which mostly depends on the needs of its customers(Lin & Chen, 2012; Wu, Lan, & Lee, 2011; Low, Chen, & Wu, 2011).However, there are numerous small enterprises in the world. Dif-ferent small enterprises have distinctive needs, requirements, andconsiderations in terms of cloud adoption. Therefore, cloud serviceproviders for small enterprises should stand in the shoes of smallenterprises to address the speciﬁc needs of their clients if they wantto succeed in this highly competitive market. The conventional dis-tinction of cloud-based services based on technical implementationsuch as SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS is not the focus of this study. Rather, 