 A Case Study of Customer Communication in Globally Distributed Software
Product Development
Mikko Korkala
VTT Technical Research Centre of
Finland
P.O.Box 1100, FIN-90571, Oulu, Finland
mikko.korkala@vtt.fi
Minna Pikkarainen
VTT Technical Research Centre of
Finland
P.O.Box 1100, FIN-90571, Oulu, Finland
minna.pikkarainen@vtt.fi
Kieran Conboy
National University of Ireland
Galway
Newcastle Rd., Galway, Ireland.
kieran.conboy@nuigalway.ie
ABSTRACT
Agile methodologies emphasize the importance of customer and
highlight that communication with the customer is seen as a

central tenet. Despite the prevalence and benefits associated with
globally distributed software development, communication can
be much more challenging in such environments due to temporal,
geographical and cultural distances. This paper describes results

from a case study of customer communication in a globally
distributed product development program applying both
traditional and agile app
roaches. Based on the study, the
frequency of communication, the content of that communication
and engagement with the customer along with a support for rapid
decision making among the development teams and the customer

groups are important success factors in distributed agile
development.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D 2.9 [
Software Engineering
]: Management –
software process
models.
General Terms
Management, Measurement, Documentation, Performance,
Design, Human Factors
Keywords
Distributed software development, agile software development,

customer communication.
1.INTRODUCTION
Effective communication is often considered as one of the most
important contributors to the success of software development [1,
2]. Communication is further emphasized in Agile Software
Development (ASD), and is one of the primary motivations
underpinning many agile practices such as co-location, stand up
meetings and on-site customers [1, 3]. Globally distributed
software development (GSD)is establish
ing itself as a
commonplace approach in the industry e.g. [4, 5] as a trend
driven by a number of potential benefits explained e.g. in [5, 6]
In this study, the customer is defined as a “
the source of
information relevant for software development team(s) in order
to successfully implement the software product
”. Since effective
customer communication and continuous feedback are crucial in
agile software development (e.g. [1]), the challenges related to
customer communication in a globally distributed agile program

can be considered extremely important and so several solutions
have been proposed, e.g. [7, 8]. In our previous work we
discussed the challenges related to the distributed customer
communication between traditional and agile development
organizations [9, 10]. These challenges were related to restrictive
organizational environment resulting in deliberate information

hiding by the traditional customer organization, inadequate
involvement and support of the customer from the traditional
organization, and to the differences between traditional and agile
development approaches [9, 10]. However, the previous study

focused on only one customer communication aspect of the large
ASD program. In this study from the same context reported in [9,
10] the goal is to answer the research questions on
how the
customer communication vary between the previously analyzed
Irish – US organizations and the other Irish- India and
collocated Irish development units
 and
why customer
communication was more successful within these units than in
the environment reported in
[9]
. In order to answer to the
research questions, we conducted a case study in which the data

was collected in several semi-structured interviews, workshops

and regular meetings during the years 2007-2009. This paper is
organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the background of the
study. The research context is presented in section 3. Section 4
presents the results of the study.
2.BACKGROUND
Software development can be characterized as collaborative,
cooperative and complex work that involves a multitude of skills,
knowledge and roles. Therefore, efficient communication plays a
significant role in any software development practice and it can
be considered as one of the most important factors in determining
software development success [1, 2]. ASD encourages effective
informal communication, fostering physical proximity which is
essential for informal communication [1, 11]. One of the
characteristics that often distinguish traditional and agile

methods is the more detached role of the customer. While agile
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are

not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific

permission and/or a fee.
Conference’10
, Month 1–2, 2010, City, State, Country.
Copyright 2010 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0010…$10.00.
43 relies on informal active face to face communication with the
customer, traditional methods approach customer communication

from “as needed” basis [12, 13]. According to Misra et al. [14]
successful agile teams should be let of their own allowing them
to make their own decisions. The customer needs to be involved
in the meetings in order to enable fast decision making (for

example about the product backlog items and user stories).
However, an agile project team may not always have the luxury
of constant or even active customer participation for several
reasons, e.g. [15, 16].
Corporate culture is also considered as a success factor for agile
development [14]. A successful agile organization should have a
culture that supports rapid communication, trust between people,
and obtaining quick feedback from the customers [14].
Therefore, abureaucratic slowly moving organization can be
identified as a challenging environment for ASD [17]. One of the
most significant barriers to the success seems to lie in changing
the whole organization, as opposed to the particular development

team in question [12, 18]. This change should be made without
compromising both corporate and agile process culture, as stated
by Grossman et al. [18].
3.RESEARCH DESIGN
A longitudinal case study was conducted [19] in a large GSD

organization. A case study approach was selected because it is an
appropriate in situations when actors of the case are important
and the context of the case organization is critical [20]. We
analysed the use of different communication media using Media
Richness Theory (MRT) [21, 22], which proposes that different

media are more efficient conveying different information and the
selection of the medium should be aligned with the needs of the
task. In addition, we used the categorization of communication
media by Cockburn [3] to supplement MRT. The analysis
framework was similar to the framework presented in [9]. The
unit of analysis in this study consists of three different units of
the case organization: two Irish collocated development teams
(Unit 1), one development team and customer organization in the
U.S. (Unit 2) and the development team in Ireland and the
quality engineering group in India (Unit 3). Unit 2 has been

previously analysed in [9, 10]. The project organization and
customer communication environment including the introduced
units of the case project is presented in figure 1.
Figure 1.The project organization and customer
communication environment of the case project.
The analyzed software development program made both front-
end and back-end systems. The front-end was implemented in
the U.S while the Irish development groups were responsible for
the implementation of the back-end. The Unit 1 consisted of two
separate collocated development teams (main development team
and sub development team). The five developers in the main
development team were responsible for implementing the
important parts of the back-end while the sub-team, consisting of
four junior developers implemented simpler tasks. The Irish
architect together with the project manager and developers from
the Irish main development team formed an onsite customer
group for the Irish sub development team. The U.S. organization
in Unit 2 including the business analyst and user group formed
the customer group for the Irish Main development team,

providing them with software requirements. The U.S. customer
organization followed traditional waterfall development
approach, while agility was adopted only by the Irish and Indian
sites (Unit 1 and Unit 3).  In Unit 3, two testers from India were
working continuously together with the representatives of the
Irish main team, architect and project managers.
The use of agile practices within the Irish teams included all
Scrum practices and some selected XP practices such as 40 hour
week, simple design, collective code ownership and refactoring

were used. More detailed description of the applied practices can
be found from [10]. Agile practices were not used in the interface
between the U.S. customer and Irish main development team.
The Indian QA organization was using an agile approach, but the
actual practices are unknown due to the lack of detailed
information from this context. However, the Indian organization
was integrated to the Irish development organization through
agile planning, release and daily meetings. The main sources for
the analysis were five recorded interviews made with a project
manager, architect, and seven developers from Irish main and

sub development teams. These interviews followed semi-
structure approach with a set of questions which aimed to
identify the communication media used in customer

communication, what topics were discussed using those media
and how often the media was used. These questions were derived
from existing literature. Furthermore, the interview framework
44 included questions related to the challenges encountered in
customer communication. The interviews were transcribed and

then analysed against the propositions of MRT. Additional
source for the analysis were previously made four interviews and
observations that were regularly made in seven meetings and six
workshops with the case company representatives during the

years 2007-2009.
4.FINDINGS
This section analyses two aspects: how the customer
communication was conducted between the different units in the
case context, and what were the reasons why customer
communication was according to the developers observed to be

more successful within Unit 1 and Unit 3 than in the Unit 2

reported in [9].  In addition, practical guidelines are presented

based on the findings.
Face to face
 communication occurred only between the two
collocated Irish teams (Unit 1). The sub development team had
an on-site customer who also was bringing prioritized list of the
requirements to the sprint planning meetings. “
We have one
business sponsor who basically funds all the work that we do. He
is providing facilities to a number of different business (-) and
they may have different requirements and different priorities, so
we’d work in a group consensus as to what we would do next.”
(Developer).After each sprint, the team also presented the
results to the on-site customer in order to get feedback about the
work that they have done
“once we have something available we
also do a demo for the users [on-site customer] so that we know

that we are on the right track”
. (Developer). This finding
indicates that the customer was involved in the development
process and was providing necessary feedback for the teams.  It
was relatively easy for the developers of the Irish sub
development team to access relevant information when ever
needed: “
What was easy about the communication is I can just
walk down the corridor and speak to somebody”
(Developer).
Apparently, there was no information hiding described in [9]
present in the context of Unit 1. In addition to face to face
communication, also
wiki
and
email
were actively used.
Our observations support the argument that the agile practices
are the most successful in the environments where
rapid
communication
is enabled. The idea is that rapid
communication is likely to cut down the amount of time spent on
major decisions. In the Unit 2 the U.S. customer group was
involved in the decision making only in the beginning of the
project when the goal was to define fixed up-front requirements
for the overall product
. After the first round of requirements
definition, the customer group did not participate to regular
iteration planning activities or daily meetings. This led into the
situation in which the requirements had to be refined by the Irish
main team in isolation based upon what they believed that the
customer needed.
However, the
regular agile meetings
(Sprint planning, release,
and daily meetings) were held within Unit 1 and between Unit 1
and Unit 3:
“So it’s a phone call meeting, one person in India
calling in as well”
. In those frequent meetings, the purpose was
to decide on the goal and contents of the iteration. Altogether, the
customer groups from Units 1 and 3 were involved in most of the
agile meetings helping the development teams to make rapid
decisions about the goals and user stories that would be
developed during the next iteration. All these meetings between
Ireland and India were held through
telephone
. In addition,
wiki
and
email
were actively used for exchanging information within
the Unit 3. Naturally, the practice of having an on-site customer
can be seen as a key element in active customer participation.
However, the Irish architect worked as a customer also for the

Indian QA unit (Unit 3). We did not found out major challenges,
such as information hiding and lack of customer involvement, in
the communication between the Indian QA organization and the

Irish main team. In this case agile meetings increased the
transparency of the work and enabled information sharing
between India and Ireland. Agile meetings can be seen as a
means to increase transparency and visibility between the
stakeholders, so the involvement of customer in the context of
Unit 3 was significantly better than in the case of Unit 2 where it
was virtually non-existent [9].
Videoconferencing
 was only
occasionally used. Figure 2 presents the customer communication
channels and their usage in the case project. The dotted line
between U.S. and IRE indicates that this communication
relationship has already been analyzed in [9, 10].
Figure 2.
The communication channels and their usage
in the case project.
5.CONCLUSIONS
The answer to the first research question is that there were no
major differences between the activeness of customer

communication in the context of Unit 1 and Unit 3 when
compared to Unit 2. In all three cases the customer
communication was active and similar communication channels
varying in their capability of conveying different kinds of
information were used. The only difference in communication
media between the
distributed
units was the use of
videoconferencing within Unit 2 that was lacking from Unit 3.
The collocated Irish teams were able to utilize face to face
communication. The most interesting comparison is thus between
the units 2 and 3. Unit 3 was following an agile approach and the
members of Unit 3 were integrated to the development process
through regular planning, release and daily meetings, despite the

time-zone differences. In addition, there were no indications of
information hiding and the lack of customer involvement in the
45 relationship between the Indian QA organization and Irish
development organization.
Compared to Units 1 and 3, the culture of the U.S. customer
group in Unit 2 can be considered bureaucratic and also slower
in reacting partially due to the transition from traditional to agile

approach. [10]. The main challenges realized in form of an
uninvolved customer and information hiding which significantly
hindered customer communication in the context of Unit 2. Thus,
rapid communication
, regular agile meetings
and
involved
customer
can be seen as factors contributing to the more
successful communication between the Unit 1 and Unit 3 when
compared to the Unit 2. These findings answer the second
research question of this paper.
Based on our case study we revealed some customer
communication related lessons that the industry could take into
consideration when adopting an agile approach in the globally
distributed context. For instance it seems that 1) the agile
development process should be taken into account at the program

level approach instead of using it only between some
organizational units, 2) customer responsibilities in the context
of applying both traditional and agile development approaches
should be more carefully defined, the company should assure that
3) the roles in the defined customer group are clear and that 4) at
least some representatives from the customer group is always
involved in the agile meetings. This study has its limitations. We
were not able to interview stakeholders from either the U.S. or
Indian organizations. Thus, the results are drawn from the
perspective of the Irish stakeholders alone which creates a

narrower and more limited view to the phenomenon observed. In
addition, due to the confidentiality reasons access to more precise
data such as email conversations and project wiki was not given.

Even though all the possible information sources could not be
accessed, as many of them as possible under the given
circumstances were utilized and the obtained data was analysed

by all the participating researchers. Thus,
data triangulation
and
investigator triangulation
 as introduced by Stake [23] were used
in order to increase the validity of the results.
6.REFERENCES
[1] Beck, K.
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace
Change.
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Addison-Wesley,
(2000).
[2] Edstrom, A."User Influence and the Success of MIS Projects:
A Contingency Approach"
Human Relations,
vol. 30, pp. 580-
607, (1997).
[3] Cockburn, A.
Agile Software Development.
Indianapolis:
Addison-Wesley, (2002).
[4] Herbsleb, J. and D. Moitra, D. "Global software
development"
IEEE Software,
vol. 18, pp. 16-20, (2001).
[5] Komi-Sirviö, S. and Tihinen, M. "Lessons Learned by
Participants of Distributed Software Development"
Knowledge and Process Management,
vol. 12, pp. 108-122,
(2005).
[6] Ebert, C. and De Neve, P."Surviving Global Software
Development"
IEEE Software,
vol. 18, pp. 62-69, (2001).
[7] Kircher, M., Jain, P., Corsaro, A. and Levine, D.: Distributed
eXtreme programming. In: XP2001, pp. 66-71 (2001).
[8] Layman, L., Williams, L., Damian, D. and Bures, H.
“Essential communication practices for Extreme Programming
in a global software development team.”
Information and
Software Technology,
vol. Volume 48, pp. 781-794  (2006).
[9] Korkala, M., Pikkarainen, M and Conboy, K. Distributed
Agile Development: A Case Study of Customer
Communication Challenges. XP 2009, Sardinia, Italy, (2009).
[10] Korkala, M., Pikkarainen, M. and Conboy, K. "Combining
Agile and Traditional: Customer Communication in
Distributed Environment" in
Agility Across Time and Space
P. Åkerfalk  J. and D. Smite, Eds. Springer, (2010).
In Press.
[11] Kraut, R., Egido, C. and Galegher, J. “Patterns of contact
and communication in scientific research collaboration”.
Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer-

supported cooperative work. Portland, Oregon, United States.

(1988).
[12] Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R.K., and Mangalaraj, G. “Challenges
of migrating to agile methodologies”.
Commun ACM 48(5),
pp. 72-78. (2005).
[13] Boehm, B.W., and Turner, R.
Balancing Agility and
Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed.
(2003)
[14] Misra, S. C., Kumar, V. and Kumar, U. “Identifying some
important success factors in adopting agile software
development practices”.
J. Syst. Software 82(11),
pp. 1869-
1890. (2009)
[15] Nöteberg, A., Benford, T. L. and Hunton, J. E. “Matching
electronic communication media and audit tasks”.

International Journal of Accounting Information Systems

4(1),
pp. 27-55. (2003).
[16] Farell, C., Narang, R., Kapitan, S., and Webber, H,
"Towards an effective onsite customer practice" in
XP2002,
pp. 52-55. (2002)
[17]
Berger, H. “Agile development in a bureaucratic arena—A
case study experience”.
Int. J. Inf. Manage.
 27(6), pp. 386-
396. (2007).
[18] Grossman, F., Bergin, J., Leip, D., Merritt, S., and Gotel, O.
“One XP experience: Introducing agile (XP) software
development into a culture that is willing but not ready”. In
the proceedings of the 2004 Conference of the Centre for
Advanced Studies on Collaborative Research. (2004)
[19] Yin, R. K.
Case Study Research Design and Methods.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, (1994).
[20] Benbasat, I., Goldstein, D. K., and Mead, M. “The case
research strategy in studies of information systems”.
MISQuarterly 11(3),
pp. 369-386. (1987).
[21] Daft, R.L. and Lengel, R. J.: “Organizational Information
Requirements, Media Richness and Structural Design”.
Manage. Sci.
,vol. 32, pp. 554-571 (1986).
 [22] Daft, R.L., Lengel, R. and Trevino, L. K.: “Message
Equivocality, Media Selection, and Manager Performance:

Implications for Information Support Systems”.
MISQuarterly
,vol. 11, pp. 355-366 (1987).
 [23] Stake, R.
The art of case research.
 Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications (1995).
46