 An Agile Requirements Elicitation Approach based on NFRs and Business Process Models for Micro-Businesses  RJ Macasaet1,2 1Pentathlon Systems Resources In
corporated, Department of Software Research and Development 
Cityland Pioneer, Pioneer Street, Mandaluyong City, 1550 Metro Manila, Philippines 
2University of Granada, Departamento 
de Lenguajes y Sistemas Informáticos 
Calle Periodista Daniel Saucedo Aranda S/N, 18071 Granada, España   
rjmacasaet@pentathlonsystems.com, rjmacasaet@ugr.es  Lawrence Chung University of Texas at Dallas,  
Department of Computer Science,  
Richardson, Texas 75083, U.S.A
.   chung@utdallas.edu  
 Manuel Noguera University of Granada, Dpt. de Lenguajes y 
Sistemas Informáticos, C/ Pdta. Saucedo Aranda 
S/N, 18071 Granada, España   
mnoguera@ugr.es  José Luis Garrido University of Granada, Dpt. de Lenguajes y 
Sistemas Informáticos, C/ Pdta. Saucedo Aranda 
S/N, 18071 Granada, España   
jgarrido@ugr.es  María Luisa Rodríguez University of Granada, Dpt. de Lenguajes y 
Sistemas Informáticos, C/ Pdta. Saucedo Aranda 
S/N, 18071 Granada, España   
mlra@ugr.esABSTRACT 
Software empowers micro-businesses to be more competitive - 
be it accounting software, point
-of-sales software, e-commerce 
software, and the like. Before having such software, micro-

businesses must express their 
requirements properly to the 
software developers first. 
Since micro-businesses have restrictions with their budget, manpower, and technical 
exposure to software, some trade-
offs must be addressed. In 
such case, a practical requirements approach must be used. 

This approach must be inexpensive, non-technical, and must 
not involve too much manpower. 
This paper will show how a software development company, Pentathlon Systems 

Resources Incorporated, has applied an agile requirements 
elicitation approach to a micro-business, an amusement arcade. 
This paper will demonstrate how several models and techniques such as goals, busin
ess process models, patterns, 
and non-functional requirements, 
have helped in defining the 
software requirements of 
the micro-business.   
 Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.1 [Software Engineering
]: Requirements Specifications - 
Methodologies 
 General Terms 
Documentation 
 Keywords 
Goals, Business Process 
Modeling, Non-Functional Requirements, Patterns, Requirements Engineering 
 1. INTRODUCTION Micro-businesses will find it essen
tial to have some sort of 
software Œ be it accounting soft
ware, point-of-sales software, 
e-commerce software, and the like. Software simply makes 

them more competitive. Hence, they must take advantage of 
these software solutions. 
For micro-businesses - the smallest of businesses that operate Œ 
the software that they would require need not be complex as 
compared to those of mature, multi-national corporations. 
There could be hundreds of users or just one user but the kind 
of software that is used for th
eir business could be made with 
just a few software modules or lines of code. Moreover, these 

micro-businesses usually have ve
ry small software budgets in 
comparison to large firms (See Figure 1). Hence, they cannot 
afford to employ a large te
am of software programmers, requirements engineers, and soft
ware architects to design and 
implement the perfect software for their business. 
Most of the requirements modeling techniques available 
nowadays are made for larger, more mature firms. "Many 
people feel that the approach th
at is used on medium and large 
projects is an inappropriate gu
ide for small projects Œ that the 
practices, policies, mechanis
ms, methods, techniques, and 
tools can™t be applied" [1]. Fo
r instance, KAOS [2], one of the 
most popular requirements mode
ling approaches nowadays, 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Profes '11, June 20 - June 22 20
11, TORRE CANNE (BR), Italy 
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0783-3/11/06–$10.00. 
 50 has been used in large industrial projects like hospital 
emergency service management systems, large-scale drug 
delivery management systems, and large-scale information 

systems for daily newspaper firm
s [3]. Albeit useful for large 
projects, ﬁa KAOS-like requirements study is worth the effort 

as soon as the project man power is more than 100 man daysﬂ 
[2]. This means that for a fo
ur-man software development 
team, this project would last for more than five weeks. A 

significant amount of micro-businesses do not require this 
much man days to implement 
software for their business. 
Be it a large industrial software 
project or a software project for a micro-business, ﬁa requirem
ents process is required for a 
project of any size" [1]. Given the budget and manpower 

constraints of the micro-business owner, a certain kind of 
approach must be used in order to describe the requirements of 
the micro-business to the software developer with the least 
resources expended possible. Wi
th constraints on the technical 
exposure of micro-business owners, the approach must not use 

too much technical jargon as well. Stakeholder requirements 
are best described in a non-tech
nical and realistic manner [4]. 
The micro-business owners are those who know their 
businesses best and if they are empowered in expressing their 
requirements in their own language then the requirements 
document should turn out to be
 better. ﬁThe requirements 
process need not be complic
ated or expensiveﬂ [1]. 
  Figure 1. Firm size and their respective software budgets 
 This paper will show how an 
agile requirements elicitation 
approach based on non-functional requirements ﬁNFRsﬂ and 
business process models has been used in a micro-business. It is an efficient, practical, and intuitive way of acquiring 

software requireme
nts from micro-busin
esses. Pentathlon 
Systems Resources Incorporated ﬁPSRIﬂ has continuously 

been using and developing this approach 
  
 
 
 2. MOTIVATION The agile requirements elicitation approach aims to address the 
need of micro-businesses in defining their software 
requirements. Given their budg
et, manpower, and technical 
constraints, the approach uses 
practical techniques and models 
(See Figure 2) that do not demand a huge amount of resources 
both from the micro-business an
d the software developer. 
Initially, the approach focuses on the problem domain. It is the 

domain in which a system is goi
ng to be used. It is important 
to focus on the problem domain so that the micro-business 

owner does not stray and attemp
t to come up with premature 
software solutions on his own.
 If the business owner defines 
his problem properly, without 
any premature implementation 
or solution biases, the software developer will have more 

liberty in coming up with software solutions later on. With an 
open solution space for systems engineers and architects, their 
ingenuity and creativity are fully
 harnessed, resulting in better 
project outcomes [4].  

During the first part of the approach, the micro-business owner 
enumerates his goals [3]. These are what the micro-business 
wants to achieve in a business sense. Next, the approach uses 
the business process modeling notation ﬁBPMNﬂ [5]. BPMN 
aims ﬁto provide a notation that is readily understandable by 

all business users, from the business analysts that create the 
initial drafts of the processes, to the technical developers 
responsible for implementing the technology that will perform 
those processes, and finally, 
to the business people who will 
manage and monitor those proce
ssesﬂ [5]. BPMN becomes the 
common illustration medium between the software developer 
and the micro-business owner. To speed up the definition of 
the micro-business processes even more, patterns are used. 
They ﬁprovide a common form for the transport of 
experiencesﬂ [6]. Finally, the concepts of functional and non-
functional requirements [1] [7] are used to help both the 
software developer and micro-business owner agree on a 

requirements document. 
  Figure 2. Overview of the Agile Requirements Elicitation 
Approach 
   
 
 51 3. THE APPROACH
 This section will illustrate, step by step, how the agile 
requirements elicitation approach has been applied in a micro-
business. The approach can be seen in Figure 3. 
   Figure 3. The Agile Requirements Elicitation Approach 
  
3.1 Preparation The starting point of the agile requirements elicitation 
approach is the need for software. In this case, the micro-
business sampled is an amusement arcade. It sells tokens to its 
customers for use in its amusements. The arcade is having 
difficulty managing the queues of customers and the micro-
business owner believes that a software system would be able 
to aid in managing these queues. 
The micro-business owner begins 
the approach by enumerating 
his business goals. (Refer to Step 1 in Figure 3). Goals capture 
the various objectives the syst
em under consideration should 
achieve. They may be formulat
ed at different levels of 
abstraction, ranging from high-le
vel, strategic concerns (such 
as ﬁserve more passengersﬂ for a 
train transportation system or 
ﬁprovide ubiquitous cash serviceﬂ for an ATM network 
system) to low-level, technical concerns (such as ﬁacceleration 

command delivered on timeﬂ for a train transportation system 
or ﬁcard kept after 3 wrong password entriesﬂ for an ATM system) [3]. In the case of micro-business application systems, 
goals may be used to relate the software-to-be to 
organizational and business contex
ts [8]. A transcription of 
business goals made by the 
micro-business owner is as 
follows.    List of Business Goals (Step 1) 
1. Increase revenue of the arcade through token sales 
2. Improve customer satisfaction 
3. Reduce the build-up of queues 
4. Speed up transactions at the sales counter 
5. Train sales personnel 
6. Allot monthly training se
ssions for sales personnel 
7. Purchase new computer hardware 

8. Keep track of sales Œ da
ily, weekly, monthly, etc. 
9. Manage the availability 
of tokens in the inventory 
10. Manage the forms of payment at the sales counter Œ cash or 
credit 
 The next step of the approach is the diagramming of the 
business process by the micro-business owner (Refer to Step 2 
in Figure 3). Every micro-business could have their own 
unique way of diagramming their processes. There are an 
infinite number of ways. Despite this ambiguity, these 
diagrams will aid in business process pattern recognition and 
business process definition in the succeeding stages of the 
approach. Therefore, these diagrams are essential to the 
approach. If a micro-business does not already have a business 
diagram of their own, they ou
ght to express their business process in a diagram using their own means of illustration. An 
internal company diagram of the micro-business process is 
shown in Figure 4. 
 Figure 4. Business Process Diagram of the Amusement 
Arcade Token Purchase (Step 2) 
 3.2 Requirements Definition Meeting Once the micro-business owners have enumerated their 
business goals and diagrammed their business processes, they 
may proceed with a requirements definition meeting (Refer to 
Step 3 in Figure 3) with the software developer. 
The next step of the approach is to compare the business 
process diagrams of the micro-business and find similar 
existing business process patterns in the pattern repository 
(Refer to Step 4 in Figure 3) or find existing business process 
patterns that can be of use. 
An example of a similar business process pattern is shown in figur
e 5 and an example of a useful 
business process pattern is shown in Figure 6. 
52  Figure 5. Cash Substitution Pattern Œ A Business Process Pattern
 in the Pattern Repository that is similar to the Micro-
Business Process (Step 4)
  Figure 6. A Credit Card Payment Process Œ A Useful Business Process Pattern in the Pattern Repository (Step 4)
  After finding similar business 
process patterns and useful 
patterns in the pattern repository, the software developer and 
the micro-business owner proceed to defining the business 
process (Refer to Step 5 in Figure 3).  
Using BPMN, the software developer and the micro-business 
owner collaborate on defining the 
business process. Tools such 
as the Bonita Studio [9] or the eBPMN Designer [10] can be 

used. In this case, the software developer and the micro-
business owner used the Bonita Studio to illustrate the business 
process. A unison of Figure 5 and a ﬁ+ﬂ symbol below the 
ﬁCredit Paymentﬂ Activity repres
enting Figure 6 can be seen in 
the business process definition in Figure 7. 
  Figure 7. Business Process Definition of the Amusement Arcade Token Purchase Process as Agreed Upon by the Micro-
business Owner and Software Developer (Step 5) 
53 The next step of the approach is to define the functional and 
non-functional requirements of 
the micro-business. It is 
important to keep in mind that there is no clear distinction 

between functional and non-functional requirements. The 
distinction depends on the level of detail of the requirements 
document or the degree of trust between the micro-business 
owner and the software developer. Moreover, stakeholders 
may have vague goals that ca
nnot be expressed precisely. 
These vague and imprecise requirements included in a 
requirements document can caus
e problems both for the micro-business owner and the software developer [11]. 

ﬁExperience shows that user non-acceptance originates more 
often from inadequate non-functi
onal requirements more than 
from problems with functional requirementsﬂ [12]. Therefore, 

in order to significantly increase the chances of user-
acceptance, it is imperative to 
define both functional and non-
functional requirements, with 
an emphasis on the latter. In 
order to address the problems of ambiguity and vagueness of 
non-functional requirements, 
non-functional requirements 
must satisfy two attributes. First, they must be objective. This 

means that the non-functional re
quirement does not express a 
wish, a goal, or a personal opinion. Second, they must be 
testable. There must be some process by which the 
requirement can be tested [13]
 [14]. If a software project™s 
functional and non-functional requirements are defined clearly, 

the software developer merely has to ﬁsatisficeﬂ them, i.e., 
satisfying at some level a variet
y of needs, without necessarily 
optimizing results [7]. With the open solution space [4] of the 

software developer, chance
s of ﬁsatisficingﬂ these 
requirements is higher, which even
tually would result in higher 
user acceptance rates upon
 project completion. 
Table 1 shows a list of functional and non-functional 

requirements that the software developer and the micro-
business owner have agreed to.  
 Table 1. A List of Functional and Non-
Functional Requirements that the Softwar
e Developer and the Micro-busniess Owner 
have agreed on (Step 6) 
Functional RequirementsNon-Functional Requirements
"what the system can do"
"ability of the system to do it"
Record both cash and credit salescash transactions should take
at the counter
less than 10 seconds
credit transactions should take
less than 30 seconds
Notify clerks when token
clerk is notified immediately 
inventory is low
through PA system when
token inventory reaches 15%
Display sales data
information must be shown on
the screen in less than three seconds
Has its own Graphical User Interface"GUI" must have the company's colors
and must display company logo
Has a back-up database
daily data can be backed-up
on the server in less than one hour
Must be cross-platform
system can be installed on
Windows and Linux OS
  All the non-functional requirements are both objective and 
testable.
 With the collaborated 
documents on hand, the software developer and the micro-business owner can either 

agree to proceed with software development or not. This 
agreed requirements document provides the basis for planning 
the development of a system and accepting it on completion. 
The ability to arrive at a 
requirements document where all 
stakeholders of the software system are in agreement is a 
critical point. Without
 reaching this point
, a project would 
never be able to commence [4]. If the parties agree to develop 

the software, the business proce
ss diagrams may be added to 
the repository (Refer to Step 7 in Figure 3) for future 

reference. If the parties do not agree to develop the software, 
both parties may re-evaluate. 
  54 4. EVALUATION In this example, the software developer and the micro-business 
owner have agreed to proceed 
with the development of the 
software. As a quick and simple evaluation of the approach, 
five software devel
opers from PSRI were asked to classify the 
resulting requirements documents. All five software developers have at least three years of experience in 
developing software systems for micro-businesses. Their 
opinion about the resulting requir
ements documents is solely 
based on how they will be of use when actual software 

development takes place. From their foresight, the resulting 
requirements documents 
have been classified under these three 
categories: 

 1) SUFFICIENT Œ The documents are sufficient 

enough to produce the software required 
2) INTUITIVE Œ There is lacking information in the 

documents but some degree of intuition and 
creativity from the devel
opers could produce the 
software required 
3) INSUFFICIENT Œ The documents are insufficient 
and some other requireme
nts gathering method 
should have been used. It is highly unlikely that the 

developers can produce the software required 
 
Three out of the five software
 developers said that the 
requirements documents produced were sufficient enough to 

produce the software required. Tw
o out of the five software developers said that the requirements documents produced 

were intuitive enough to produce the software required. 
 5. CONCLUSION
 The agile requirements elicitatio
n approach has demonstrated 
several benefits. First, it has al
lowed better self-expression on 
the part of the micro-business owner. The tools and techniques 
used Œ goals, business process 
models, and NFRs - are highly 
intuitive for the micro-business owner. Technical jargon has 
not impeded the micro-business owner in expressing his 
software requirements.
 Second, the focus of the approach on 
the problem domain Œ the definition of the micro-business 
owner™s problem or software requirements Œ permits the 
software developer to use hi
s creativity and ingenuity in 
software implementation later on
 (in the solution domain [4]). 
Third, requirements documents have been produced quickly 
without serious compromises. Th
e use of the pattern repository 
has made the production of re
quirements documents faster. Later on, during software implementation, pre-existing 
modules that correspond to previous patterns can be used for 

faster software implementation as well. 
The agile requirements elicitation approach is an attempt to 
advance and specialize the field of requirements engineering 
[15] by focusing on the needs of micro-businesses. Moving 
forward, the authors of the appr
oach and software developers 
from PSRI are continuing to develop the pattern repository. As 

more and more patterns are added to the repository, a more 
efficient search-and-recognize te
chnique for the patterns must 
be put into place. Moreover, enhanced visual representations 

of the relationship between functional and non-functional 
matters are under development as well. 
  
 6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
 This research has been funded by the Ministry of Science and 
Innovation of the Spanish Government through Projects TIN 
2008-05995/TSI, TIN 2007-60199, and by Pentathlon Systems 
Resources Incorporated. 
 7. REFERENCES
 [1] Young, R. 2004. Requirements Engineering Handbook. 
Artech House, Incorporated, Norwood, Massachusetts. 
[2] Respect-IT. 2007. KAOS Tuto
rial Version 1.0. URL = 
http://www.objectiver.com/f
ileadmin/download/documents/KaosTutorial.pdf (Last 
accessed on March 10, 2011) 
[3] Lamsweerde, A. 2001. Goal Oriented Requirements 

Engineering: A Guided Tour. 
Invited mini-tutorial paper 
which appeared in Requi
rements Engineering, 

International Symposium on Toronto, August 2001, 249-
263. Proceedings RE™01 5th IEEE
. Ding, W. and 

Marchionini, G. 1997. 
A Study on Video Browsing 
Strategies. Technical Report. University of Maryland at 
College Park. 
[4] Dick, J., Jackson, K., and Hull, E. 2002. Requirements 
Engineering. Springer Verlag London Limited, Great 
Britain. 
[5] Object Management Group, 
Inc. 2008. Business Process 
Modeling Notation Version 1.1. URL = 

http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/1.1/PDF (Last accessed on March 10, 2011) 
[6] Gröne, B. 2006. Conceptual Patterns. 
Proceedings of the 
13th Annual IEEE International Symposium and 
Workshop on Engineering of Computer Based Systems
. (Potsdam, Germany, March 27-30, 2006). 
[7] Chung, L., Mylopoulos, J., Nixon, B., Yu, E. 2000. Non-
Functional Requirements in
 Software Engineering. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, Dordrecht, 

London. [8] Yu, E.S.K. 1993. Modeling Orga
nizations for Information 
Systems Requirements Engineer
ing. Proceedings of the 
1st IEEE International Symposium on Requirements 
Engineering. [9] Bonitasoft S.A.. 2010. 
Bonita Studio. URL = http://www.bonitasoft.com/products/BPM_download.php (Last accessed on March 10, 2011) 
[10] Soyatec Open Solution Company. 2010. eBPMN 

Designer. URL = 
http://www.soyatec.com/e
bpmn/download.html (Last 
accessed on March 10, 2011) 
[11] Kotonya, G., Sommerville, I. 2003. Requirements 

Engineering: Processes and 
Techniques. John Wiley and 
Sons Limited, England. [12] Doerr, J., Marhold, C., Rohleder, C., and Salinesi, C. 
2009. Clarifying Non-Functional Requirements to 
Improve User Acceptance Œ Experience at Siemens. 
Proceedings of the 15
th REFSQ International Working 
Conference on Requirements Engineering: Foundation 

for Software Quality
 (Amsterdam, The Netherlands, June 8-9, 2009). 
 55 [13] Sommerville, I. 1996. Software Engineering. Addison-
Wesley, England. 
[14] Deutsch, M.S., Willis, R.R. 1998. Software Quality 
Engineering. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey. 
[15] Nuseibeh, B., and Easterbrook, S. 2000. Requirements 

Engineering: A Roadmap. 
Proceeding of the ICSE '00 
Conference on Software Engineering
. (Limerick, Ireland, 
June 4-11, 2000) 
 56