 Assessment of Agility in Software Organizations with 
a Web-Based Agility Assessment Tool* 
 
 
Onat Ege Adal

 
Information Systems, 
TU/e 
Eindhoven, Netherlands 
o.e.adali@tue.nl  
 
Özden Özcan-Top 
 
Regulated Software Research 
Centre and Lero, DKIT 
Dundalk, Ireland 
ozden.ozcantop@dkit.ie 
 
Onur Demirörs 
Information Systems Dept., 
METU & UNSW 
Ankara, Turkey & Sydney, 
Australia 
demirors@metu.edu.tr
 
 
Abstract
Š Agile software development approaches have 
emerged to overcome the inherent challenges of the traditional 
software development methodologies. With that in mind, they 
offer a set of simple yet effective practices based on the values and 
supporting principles of the Agile Manifesto. Today, more and 
more organizations are practicing Agile but transitioning to Agile 
is not as straightforward as it might seem.  The benefits afforded 
by the agile values, principles and practices are not fully obtained 
and adapters struggle to become more mature; i.e. increase their 
Agility. For, adapters to address this problem, agility assessments 
have been designed to be aware of the situation of their transition 
and make sure that they are heading in the right direction. 
However, these assessments still require significant amount of time 
and effort to apply. To overcome this problem, we have developed 
a web-based agility assessment tool which is a part of an integrated 
agility assessment approach. The approach consists of a structured 
and comprehensive agility assessment model (AgilityMod), an 
exemplar agility assessment process and a web based agility 
assessment tool (AssessAgility). This research focuses on the final 
component of the approach: AssessAgility tool and presents a 
multiple case study that was conducted to evaluate tool™s 
capabilities in terms of providing guidance, automation and 
reducing the effort spent on the assessments. 
KeywordsŠagility assessment; agile software development; tool; 
automated; web-based 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
According to the 10
th
 Annual State of the Agile Survey [1] 95% 
of the total of 3880 respondents said that their organizations 
practice ﬁAgileﬂ in software development. The survey also 
states that ﬁagile software development has grown increasingly 
popular over the last decadeﬂ. Agile Methods offer a set of 
practices based on the four Agile values and twelve supporting 
principles defined in the Agile Manifesto [2]  and they provide 
the flexibility to adapt these principles and practices, based on 
the culture, values, and needs of an organization or a team [3].  
However, agile adaptation within an organization is not easy 
and straightforward. The challenges in relation to adaptation 
include misinterpretation of Agile concepts, focusing only on 
implementing agile practices while ignoring agile values and 
principles (
doing agile vs being agile
), and sticking to 
implementing a not well suited practice rather than quickly 
trying, observing and discarding that practice and performing 
the adaptation in a continuous way. In addition to these, ﬁAgileﬂ 
could be used as an excuse for being undisciplined. 
Agility assessment, which is a crucial instrument to understand 
the status of an adapted Agile Method in an organization, enable 
adopters to find out if the applied methodology has met its 
intended purpose and to determine improvement areas for 
improved agility.  
The approach we propose for agility assessment include three 
components: a structured and method-independent 
agility 
assessment reference model
 
(AgilityMod)
 [4], 
an exemplar 
agility assessment process
 having the  definitions and guidance 
to conduct assessments with AgilityMod and 
a tool
 
(AssessAgility)
 that automates and guides the assessment 
process based on the exemplar assessment process.  
In this study, we focus on presenting the third component of the 
approach; the web based agility assessment tool. We have 
performed a multiple case study to evaluate the tool™s 
capabilities in terms of providing guidance, automation and 
reducing the effort spent on the assessments. 
The 
AssessAgility tool
 has been developed to improve the 
efficiency in agility assessments performed with AgilityMod 
with its superior functions compared to existing agility 
assessment tools. The tool supported approach proposed in this 
study is able to provide guidance and automation in planning, 
conducting, and reporting stages.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we 
present the study that was performed to specify and evaluate the 
existing agility assessment tools, the minimum criteria that 
should be in an assessment tool and related research on agility 
assessment. In Section III, the AssessAgility: Web Based 
Agility Assessment Tool is presented. In section IV, we present 
the multiple case study that we have conducted to evaluate our 
* This research is partially supported by Science Foundation Irelan
d
Research Centres Programme, through Lero - the Irish Software
Research Centre (http://www.lero.ie), grant 10/CE/I1855 &
13/RC/2094 and partially supported by the Scientific an
d
Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜB

TAK), grant numbe
r
113E528. 
2017 43rd Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-1-5386-2141-7/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2017.6188 approach. In section V, we provide the conclusion and finally 
in section VI we provide directions for the future research.  
II.
 
L
ITERATURE 
R
EVIEW
 
A.
 
Agility Assessment Tools and Evaluation 
Agility assessment tools exist in the literature could be classified 
into templates and software programs that are developed with 
the purpose of automating and guiding the agility assessment 
process. The main intent for the development of these tools is to 
measure to what extent a software company has succeeded to 
adapt these agile methods in its software development process 
[5].  In our previous study [6], we have identified 46 agility 
assessment tools exist in the literature. That study included 
evaluation of 14 of the 46 tools which met the inclusion criteria 
with a multiple case study based on nine criteria. These nine 
criteria which should be in an agility assessment tool, were 
deducted based on the set of prominent features of the currently 
available agility assessment tools and the opinions of the 
experts. The criteria were: coverage, availability, guidance 
capability, assessment recording, automated reporting, 
comparability, different modes of usage, different scopes and 
extensibility. The brief description of each criterion is given 
below: 
•
 
Coverage: Ability to investigate and cover 12 Agile 
Principles stated in the Agile Manifesto [2]. 
•
 
Availability: Ability to be universally reachable for 
researchers and practitioners. 
•
 
Guidance Capability: Ability to provide guidance to 
users before, during and after the assessment.
 
•
 
Assessment Recording: Ability to record agility 
assessment findings and the resulting reports for 
further modifications, analysis, and comparison. 
 
•
 
Automated Reporting: Ability to automatically 
generate reports for the presentation of the results of 
the performed assessments. 
 
•
 
Comparability: Ability to provide comparison 
between the reports of previously performed 
assessments.
 
•
 
Different Modes of Usage: Ability to support different 
usage mods for individuals, multiple users, and 
parallel assessments. 
 
•
 
Different Scopes: Ability to perform assessments on 
project, team, and/or organizational levels.
 
•
 
Extensibility: Ability to provide extensibility to meet 
emerging needs of different types of assessment 
contexts. 
The purpose of the multiple case study was to identify 
sufficiency of the current agility assessment tools to meet the 
expected criteria. We have evaluated these tools by 
implementing them in a software development organization that 
employs an established agile software development method, 
namely Scrum. Fig. 6 below shows the results of the multiple 
case study. Some criteria were rated by using a four-point 
ordinal (NA: Not Achieved-PA: Partially Achieved - LA: 
Largely Achieved Œ FA: Fully Achieved) scale and some rated 
by using a dichotomous (yes/no) scale.  
The details of this study could be found at [6]. Another 
observation of the study was that the tools™ lack of support for 
the important steps of the assessment process such as planning 
and data validation. We also observed that the majority of the 
tools do not provide levels of agility or issues and possible 
improvement areas to achieve agility better. Our final 
observation shows that these tools rely on specific set of agile 
practices (such as daily stand-up meetings, pair programming 
etc.) to indicate agile adoption. While these practices are crucial 
for implementation of specific agile methods, the mere absence 
or presence of these practices are not sufficient to indicate the 
success of the agile adoption. All in all, the literature review and 
evaluation of the agility assessment tools revealed the need for 
an agility assessment tool that is capable of meeting the 
specified criteria above, provides guidance in agility 
assessment and automation for the assessment process as a 
whole. It™s expected that such a tool provides assessment results 
that includes an indication of agility levels, the possible 
improvement areas towards agility by relying on a 
comprehensive agility assessment model rather than a limited 
set of agile practices. 
B.
 
Related Research on Agility Assessment Tools 
It was observed that only a few studies have been conducted on 
comparison of the agility assessment tools. Below we also 
included studies in relation to agile maturity models. 
There are about forty models related to agile maturity, 
published in academic journals and conferences and on web 
pages [7, 8]. Schweigert 
et al.
 [7] argue that these models do 
not quantify the real agility and support guidance. Instead, they 
check for the implementation of some specific agile practices. 
In one of our previous studies [9] five of the most frequently 
referenced agile maturity models were applied in an 
organization and evaluated based upon the six quality criteria: 
fitness for purpose, completeness, definition of agile levels, 
objectivity, correctness and consistency
. The results of the 
study indicated that none of these models satisfies all the 
expected criteria and is needed to be improved in terms of 
scope, definitions of agility levels and objectivity.  
Soundararajan and Arthur [5] have reviewed Comparative 
Agility [6], and Thoughtworks Agile Assessment [7] tools. 
They compared the tools according to their ability to measure 
agility. Soundararajan and Arthur concluded that these agility 
assessment tools ﬁprimarily focus on the presence or absence of 
practicesﬂ and they have stated that presence or absence of 
practices is not sufficient to ﬁindicate an organization™s ability 
to implement an agile method or the effectiveness of an agile 
methodﬂ [5]. 
In another study [8] Gandomani and Nafchi again reviewed 
Comparative Agility and Thoughtworks Agile Assessment 
Tools. They have agreed on the findings of Soundararajan and 
Arthur on Comparative Agility and they added that the 
Thoughtworks Assessment Tool does not include the 
identification of effectiveness of the Agile methods and twenty 
practices included in the tool are not sufficient. 
89 III.
 
A
SSESS
A
GILITY
:
 
W
EB 
B
ASED 
A
GILITY 
A
SSESSMENT 
T
OOL
 
The tool AssessAgility is built to provide automation and 
guidance for the AgilityMod by adapting the accompanying 
exemplar agility assessment process. The main objective of the 
tool is to reduce the amount of time spent for the assessment 
process. The initial requirements of the tool are based on the 
nine expected criteria that is described in Section II. 
Before delving into the details of the AssessAgility, we briefly 
present the agility assessment reference model, AgilityMod.  
A.
 
AgilityMod--An Agil

ty Assessment Reference Model 
The web based agility assessment tool and the exemplar 
assessment process described in this paper have built upon the 
Agility Assessment Reference Model: AgilityMod that was 
developed by two of the authors previously [4].  
AgilityMod enables assessment of a project™s agility based on 
defined specific practices and agility practices. It™s meta-model 
structure is defined in accordance with ISO/IEC 15504-Process 
Assessment Model [10-12].  
The model mainly consists of two dimensions: Aspect 
dimension and Agility Dimension which can be seen in Fig. 1. 
Aspects are defined as ﬁExploration, Construction, Transition 
and Managementﬂ which are derived from agile processes and 
practices. In the other dimension, agility of an aspect is 
measured with a-four-point ordinal scale which enables the 
agility to be assessed at ﬁNot Implementedﬂ, ﬁAd-Hocﬂ, ﬁLeanﬂ 
and ﬁEffectiveﬂ levels. The Aspects are modularization of agile 
processes and practices that are integrated under meaningful 
and agile compatible abstract definitions. When an aspect 
progresses from the bottom level: ﬁNot Implementedﬂ to the top 
level: ﬁEffectiveﬂ, its conformance to agile values and 
principles increases. Details on AgilityMod could be found in 
[13]. 
B.
 
The Design and Features of the Tool 
The tool is designed as a web based cloud application and 
developed within four two-week long time-boxed iterations. 
We employed use case based modelling for the elaboration of 
the requirements and used Model View Controller (MVC) 
pattern for the architecture of the tool. The development 
language for the application was mainly C#. The Microsoft 
Visual Studio was used as an Integrated Development 
Environment (IDE). Furthermore, Javascript, Bootstrap 
Framework, and SQL Server Compact (SQL CE) technologies 
were used for the development. The tool is publicly available 
and can be seen at assessagility.azurewebsites.net. 
In terms of the graphical user interface the tool provides distinct 
sections for each role and responsibility specified in the 
exemplar agility assessment process. The sections include 
pages for users to perform actions and guidance facilities such 
as notes, information buttons and suggestions are also included 
in the pages.  
For the Lead Assessors, tool provides facilities for the 
management of teams, assignments, assessments and reports. 
With the tool, Lead Assessors can create teams, make 
assessment plans, assign assessments to the teams, observe the 
progress of the assignments, and generate reports. 
For the Assessors, tool provides facilities to perform the 
assessments, take notes, and upload objective evidences. 
During the performance of the assessments, tool enables the 
assessors to record the data that they have collected to specific 
fields, match the collected data with objective evidences and 
view the progress and results of the assessments in real time.  
IV.
 
M
ULTIPLE 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY
 
The multiple case study was designed with the objectives of 
determining whether or not the tool meets the expected criteria 
we have defined, is able to guide and automate the exemplar 
agility assessment process as a whole and is able to provide 
efficient usage for performing agility assessments. In addition 
to that, we requested from the assessment team to evaluate its 
efficiency and report the strengths and weaknesses that they 
have identified while performing the assessments. 
A.
 
Design of the Case Study 
In the light of the objectives given above, we have defined the 
following research questions: 
RQ1:
 To what extent is the tool sufficient to meet the expected 
criteria determined after the literature review of this study? 
RQ2:
 To what extent is the tool able to automate and guide the 
agility assessment process? 
RQ3:
 How efficient is the tool for the assessment process? 
RQ4:
 What are the strengths and weaknesses of the tool? 
To increase the reliability of our validation, we have planned to 
conduct a multiple case study including three cases. Each case 
study was planned to be conducted on a different project from 
different business domains and from different types and sizes 
of organizations. The only strict requirement for projects was 
that they should be carried out in an Agile setting. In the scope 
of the case studies we planned to conduct an agility assessment 
covering 4 aspects defined in the reference model for each 
project. Each assessment was planned to be performed in 
conformance with the exemplar assessment process defined in 
the Section IV. To perform the assessments, we aimed to form 
an assessment team that consists of two assessors and one 
assessment leader. These experts were planned to be assigned 
to relevant roles, according to their experience in the field. We 
also planned to pick software process improvement experts to 
increase objectivity.  
 
Fig. 1. AgilityMod™s Structure. 
90 1)
 
Data Collection Strategy: 
In the Data Collection phase 
of the assessment process we planned to conduct structured 
interviews with the aspect owners of the projects. The aspect 
owners that were planned to be interviewed include at least one 
requirements engineer, one product owner, one developer, one 
tester and one configuration manager. The main reason behind 
conducting interviews with different roles was to get direct 
responses from relevant practitioners. The responses given in 
the interviews were recorded to the related fields provided in 
the tool and in a database located on a cloud server.
 
2)
 
Validation Strategy: 
The generated reports were 
discussed with the assessment team members to discuss the 
results of the assessment.
 
B.
 
Conduct 
As stated in the case study design we performed three case 
studies on three projects in different business domains and from 
different types and sizes of organizations. An assessment team 
was formed with an assessment leader who has 5 years of 
experience as an SPI expert and two assessors one of them 
having one and a half years of experience and the other one 
having one year of experience as an SPI consultant. Before the 
conduct of the case studies, each team member in the 
assessment team completed a manual assessment without the 
tool to be able to grasp the reference model and the exemplar 
agility assessment process. The total time for each assessor to 
complete the manual assessment was tracked and recorded to 
compare with the assessments performed with the tool. The 
team followed the steps of the exemplar assessment process 
given in the Fig. 3 by using the tool. Then, an assessment report 
for each case was obtained and discussed with the assessment 
participants and their teams for validation. The details and 
findings of each case are given in the next section. After the 
interviews, we also asked assessors to answer the following 
questions. 
TABLE I. 
 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY 
E
VALUATION 
F
ORM
 
ID Question 
Related 
RQ 
Q1 Please rate the tool with the evaluation questionnaire 
provided. 
RQ1 
Q2 Does the tool cover the assessment process as a whole? If 
not, please describe the missing parts of the process. 
RQ2 
Q3 Does the tool guide the assessment process as a whole? If 
you required additional guidance about the assessment 
process, please describe the parts where you needed 
guidance? 
RQ2 
Q4 Please rate the usability of the tool with the questionnaire 
provided. 
RQ3 
Q5 Does the tool reduce the effort spent for performing 
assessments? Could you please describe the difference? 
RQ3 
Q6 Could you please describe the strengths and weaknesses of 
the tool? 
RQ4 
 
For question 1 we have used Evaluation Questionnaire, for 
question 2 we have used USE Questionnaire: Usefulness, 
Satisfaction, and Ease of Use based on [16]. 
1)
 
Case Study 1: 
In the scope of the Case Study 1, the assessment is performed 
through a total of three-hour interview session with two team 
leaders. Each team leader is interviewed by one assessor and 
whole interview is completed within total of 12 person-hours. 
The details of the case study are given in the table below: 
TABLE II. 
 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY 
I
 
B
IO
 
Organization ID:
Organization GS 
Size of the 
Organization: 
Medium SME (100-250 Employees)  
Agile Experience:
>3 Years 
Organization Bio:
Organization GS is data analytics service provider 
which offers various SAAS based web applications for 
its customers. Currently it has 20 customers constantly 
using their various services such as data visualization, 
data processing, decision support, social network 
analysis, marketing analytics and customer behavior 
analysis. 
The organization decided to transit to Agile about four 
years ago with the main objectives of reducing time to 
market and enhancing software maintainability. All the 
current projects are applying Agile and Scrum is used 
throughout the projects with some customizations.  
Project ID:
Project 1 
Project Bio:
The project assessed in the scope of the study was a new 
development project which involves development of an 
SNA Module for an existing web service framework. It 
has several interfaces to other modules such as data 
visualization, forecasting, and prediction. 
The framework which the developed SNA Module will 
be a part of is a group of web application services which 
provides continuous service delivery, data protection, 
and prediction. 
Project Team Bio:
The project was carried out by 2 separate teams with a 
total of 20 team members. The distribution of the roles 
is given below: 
•
 
2 Team Leaders 
•
 
7 Software Developers 
•
 
2 Software Architects 
•
 
2 Data Visualization Analysts 
•
 
5 Data Analysts 
•
 
2 Testers 
 
2)
 
Case Study 2: 
The assessment for the Case Study 2 is performed through a 
total of five-hour interview session with a business analyst and 
a software developer. Each person is interviewed by one 
assessor and the whole interview is completed within a total of 
15 person-hours. The details of the Case Study 2 are given in 
the table below: 
TABLE III. 
 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY 
II
 
B
IO
 
Organization ID:
Organization TX 
Size of the 
Organization: 
Small SME (25-100 Employees) 
Agile Experience:
1,5 Years 
Organization Bio:
Organization TX is an IT firm that mostly provides 
customizable IOT services for on-site business users. 
Their customer portfolio mainly consists of rent-a-car 
firms, event holders, fair and conference venues, 
universities, shopping malls, art galleries and museums. 
Their current services include indoor localization 
services that are based on iBeacons, vehicle tracking, 
and remote device management. 
The organization decided to adopt Agile methodologies 
2 years ago and since then they are applying a Scrum 
XP Hybrid for all of their projects. 
Project ID:
Project 2 
Project Bio:
The project assessed in the scope of the study was an 
existing solution implementation case which involved 
usage of an existing platform. It involved the 
91 implementation of remote device management and 
communication services to a manufacturing factory.  
Project Team Bio: 
The project was carried out by a team that consists of 11 
members. The distribution of the roles is given below: 
•
 
2 Business Analysts 
•
 
1 Business Owner 
•
 
2 Electrical Engineers 
•
 
5 Software Developers 
•
 
1 Tester 
3)
 
Case Study 3: 
The assessment for the Case Study 3 is performed through a 
total of 2,5-hour interview session with the game leader and a 
software developer. Each person is interviewed by one of the 
assessor sand whole interview is completed within total of 10 
person-hours. The details of the Case Study 3 are given in the 
table below: 
TABLE IV. 
 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY 
III
 
B
IO
 
Organization ID: 
Organization BV 
Size of the 
Organization: 
Small SME (25-100 Employees) 
Agile Experience: 
2 Years 
Organization Bio: 
Organization BV is an indie game development studio 
that develops cross platform game applications. In total 
the studio has released 18 mobile games in different 
genres for Android and iOS mobile platforms.  
The Agile is the agreed software development method 
for the studio since the beginning and a Kanban based 
customized method is used for the projects. 
Project ID: 
Project 3 
Project Bio: 
The project assessed in the scope of the study was a new 
development project that involves development of a 
third person action adventure game. The game is based 
on the neural network AI technologies and has the 
ability to adapt the main scenario to player™s gaming 
style. The project was developed with the Unity Game 
Engine.  
Project Team Bio: 
The project was carried out by a team that consists of 9 
members. The distribution of the roles is given below: 
•
 
1 Game Leader 
•
 
1 3D Storyboard Artist 
•
 
2 Graphic Designers 
•
 
3 Software Developers 
•
 
1 Voice Engineer 
 
C.
 
Findings of the Case Study 
The findings on the tool and agility levels of the organizations 
are discussed below. 
1)
 
Findings on RQ1: To what ext
ent is the tool sufficient to 
meet the expected criteria? 
The ratings given by assessors and the lead assessor are given 
in the table below. Considering the ratings given, it can be said 
that the AssessAgility has fully complied with the 8 out of 9 
expected criteria: Coverage, Availability, Guidance Capability, 
Assessment Recording, Automated Reporting, Comparability, 
and Extensibility. The only criterion that could not be fully 
complied was Different Scopes. 
TABLE V. 
 
F
INDINGS ON 
RQ1 
Criteria Lead 
Assessor 
Assessor 1 Assessor 2 
Coverage F
A
 F
A
 F
A
 
Availability Web-Based Web-Based Web-Based
Guidance Capability F
A
 F
A
 F
A
 
Assessment 
Recording 
Yes Yes Yes 
Automated 
Reporting 
Yes Yes Yes 
ComparabilityYes
Yes Yes
Different Scopes
LA LA LA 
Extensibility
Yes
Yes Yes
 
2)
 
Findings on RQ2: To what extent is the tool able to 
automate and guide the assessment process? 
For the RQ2, we request from assessment team members to rate 
the automation (facilitation of the execution of the assessment 
steps) and guidance capability of the tool for each phase of the 
exemplar assessment process.  
TABLE VI. 
 
F
INDINGS ON 
RQ2 
Phase
Lead Assessor Assessor 1Assessor 2
Automation 
Guidance 
Automation 
Guidance 
Automation 
Guidance 
Planning
F
A
F
A
 F
A
 F
A
F
A
F
A
Data CollectionF
A
F
A
 F
A
 F
A
F
A
F
A
Validation and Agility
Level Determination 
F
A
F
A
 F
A
 F
A
F
A
F
A
Reporting
F
A
F
A
 F
A
 F
A
F
A
F
A
 
3)
 
Findings on RQ3: How efficient is the tool for the 
assessment process? 
As shown in the Table I, for the RQ3 we asked questions: Q4, 
and Q5 to the assessors. The findings on each question are given 
below: 
a)
 
Q4: Please rate the usability of the tool with the 
questionnaire provided. 
TABLE VII. 
 
The ratings given by each team member for each 
area of the questionnaire is given below:
 
TABLE VIII. 
 
L
EAD 
A
SSESSOR 
USE
 
Q
UESTIONNAIRE 
R
ATINGS
 
Usefulness: 
53
/
56
Ease of Use: 
75/77
Easeof Learning: 
28/28 
Satisfaction: 
49/49 
TABLE IX. 
 
A
SSESSOR 
1
 
USE
 
Q
UESTIONNAIRE 
R
ATINGS
 
Usefulness: 
54
/
56
Ease of Use: 
72/77
Easeof Learning: 
27/28 
Satisfaction: 
49/49 
TABLE X. 
 
A
SSESSOR 
2
 
USE
 
Q
UESTIONNAIRE 
R
ATINGS
 
Usefulness: 
55
/
56
Ease of Use: 
77/77
Easeof Learning: 
28/28 
Satisfaction: 
49/49 
 
The questions in the USE questionnaire are constructed as 
seven-point Likert rating scale, a rating of seven means strong 
agreement and a rating of zero means strong disagreement. The 
ratings suggest that assessment team strongly agrees to the 
positive statements in the questionnaire therefore according to 
92 the USE Questionnaire, AssessAgility™s usability is high in 
terms of the questionnaire™s three dimensions: Usefulness, 
Satisfaction, and Ease of Use. 
b)
 
Q5: Does the tool reduce the effort spent for 
performing assessments? Could you please describe the 
difference? 
For this question, we requested from the assessment team 
members to perform a manual assessment for a pilot case and 
we wanted them to record the effort that they have spent for the 
manual assessment and compare it to the average effort that 
they have spent for the assessments performed for each case in 
the multiple case study. The comparison was made on the effort 
spent by each team member for the phases that they were 
responsible for. The comparison is given in the Fig. 2.  
The combined average effort decrease for the three team 
members is 40%. 
4)
 
Findings on RQ4: What are the strengths and 
weaknesses of the tool? 
The answers from all three team members are given below: 
a)
 
Strengths: 
•
 
Ease of management of assessments 
•
 
Ease of assessment performance 
•
 
Ease of use and understanding 
•
 
Clear, responsive, and useful user interface 
•
 
Guidance for the assessment process 
•
 
Automated reports 
•
 
Support for parallel and distributed assessments 
•
 
Easy data and evidence collection 
b)
 
Weaknesses: 
•
 
Tool requires an instant messaging facility which 
could ease the coordination between distributed team 
members 
•
 
Notification feature to let users about the assignments 
and their status 
D.
 
Findings on the Agility Levels of the Organizations 
1)
 
Organization 1 
We assessed the Organization GS over the Project 1 which is a 
new development project that involves development of an SNA 
Module for an existing web service framework. The achieved 
agility levels for the project can be seen on the Fig. 3 below: 
The results show that all aspects are at the Level 3: Effective 
however our findings about the practices suggested that for 
Construction and Transition Aspects, specific training 
mechanisms can be employed to encourage people to learn. 
And again, for the Transition Aspect, we proposed analysis of 
collected metrics for improvement of the aspect.   
2)
 
Organization 2 
We assessed the Organization TX over the Project 2 which is 
an existing solution implementation case that involved usage 
of an existing platform. The achieved agility levels for the 
project can be seen on the Fig. 4 below: 
The results show that Exploration and Transition Aspects are at 
the Level 2: Lean and Construction and Management Aspects 
are at Level: 1 Ad-Hoc. Our findings about the practices 
suggested that Agile focused learning mechanisms were 
missing that will help to train people on the Exploration and 
Transition Aspects. For the Con
struction Aspect, we observed 
that developer level tests were not consistent and for the 
Management Aspect we observed some traditional project 
management approaches such as command and control 
approach that were not aligned with Agile Methodologies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Achieved Agility Levels of Project 1 
Fig. 4. Achieved Agility Levels of Project 2 
 
Fig. 2. The Comparison of Efforts Spent by Team Members for the Manual and 
Tool Supported Assessments. 
93 3)
 
Organization 3 
We assessed the Organization BV over the Project 3 which new 
development project that involves development of a third 
person action adventure game. The achieved agility levels for 
the project can be seen on Fig. 5 the below: 
The results show that Exploration Aspect is at the Level 3: 
Effective and Construction, Transition, and Management 
Aspects are at Level: 0 Not Implemented. The findings on the 
Exploration Aspect revealed that the requirements for the game 
applications were developed in-house by the project teams and 
these teams were perfectly capable of managing the conflicts on 
requirements. For the Construction Aspect, our findings on the 
practices suggested that metrics were not collected. For the 
Transition Aspect, we observed that the deployment was 
randomly done and correctness of the software was not ensured. 
Finally, for the Management Aspect our findings suggested 
that, project plans were not adapted to change and risk 
mitigation was not performed.  
V
ALIDITY 
T
HREATS
 
Due to the fact that multiple case study approach employs 
qualitative data, it™s prone to validity threads. According to Yin 
[17]; the quality of case studies can be evaluated by four tests: 
construct validity, internal validity, external validity and 
reliability. Below, the techniques employed to address each test 
is given with details: 
Construct validity concerns with how well an experiment aligns 
to its claims. For ensuring construct validity, we gathered 
evidences from multiple sources: documentation, interviews 
and participant observation. These sources are three of the total 
of six sources that Yin [17] suggested. Furthermore, the 
evidence was stored with the assessment reports in the database 
to ensure the construct validity by storing and then we gave 
access to experts to get feedback about the validity of the case 
study.  
Internal validity concerns with the achievement of casual 
conclusion by minimizing the systematic error or bias.  In order 
to ensure internal validity, we employed explanation building 
technique suggested by Yin [17].We discussed the assessment 
results within reviews held with the attendance of every team 
member in the assessed projects. We presented evidence and 
explained the relationship between each evidence and the 
obtained practice rating. Each rating and evidence was 
discussed with team members to avoid any bias in the results. 
External validity concerns with the generalization of results to 
other contexts. In order to ensure external validity, we 
performed assessments with three different organizations 
working in three different business domains, and developing 
three different types of software. (See Tables II, III, and IV for 
the information on cases.) Furthermore, for each assessment 
two assessors gathered separate evidences and these evidences 
are reviewed by lead assessor. Therefore, the tool was used in 
three different settings with three different people and we 
believe that this will increase the generalizability. 
Reliability concerns with the repeatability of the study by 
eliminating errors and biases. To ensure reliability we 
employed multiple case study approach and we replicated the 
results by performing assessments on same project (or same 
setting) with two different assessors. 
V.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
The main purpose of this research was to develop an agility 
assessment tool which will reduce the amount of time and effort 
spent for agility assessments for organizations to continuously 
evaluate their Agile Adoptions to increase their Agile Maturity. 
To evaluate the tool against this purpose, we designed a 
multiple case study. The objectives of the multiple case study 
were to evaluate the tool™s ability to meet the expected criteria 
and to learn whether or not it has the ability to reduce the effort 
and time spent for the agility assessment process by fully 
automating and guiding it. 
In terms of meeting the expected criteria, Analysis of the case 
study results, revealed that the tool is able to fully achieve 8 out 
of 9 expected criteria. The comparison of the tool™s evaluation 
against other available tools is given in the Fig. 6.  
In terms of providing guidance and automation for the process, 
the tool proved to be covering every phase of the exemplar 
assessment process. On the efficiency, the tool proved to reduce 
the effort spent on the assessment on average of 30% in contrast 
to the manual assessment. Finally, the weaknesses and the 
strengths of the tool are given in the previous section. 
Fig. 5.
 
Achieved Agility Levels of Project 3 
 
Fig. 6.
 
The results of the evaluation. 
94 In conclusion, this study resulted in development of a web-
based online agility assessment tool that has the ability to guide 
and automate the agility assessment process; including 
planning, conducting, and reporting phases of the agility 
assessment process and provides a comprehensive way of 
assessing Agility without relying on a specific Agile 
Methodology, an implementation, or a limited set of practices. 
VI.
 
F
UTURE 
W
ORK
 
For future work, we plan to evaluate the sufficiency of our 
integrated agility assessment approach as a whole in a series of 
case studies. 
R
EFERENCES
 
 
[1] VersionOne, "10th Annual State of AgileŽ Report," 2015. 
[2] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. van Bennekum, A. Cockburn, W. 
Cunningham, M. Fowler
, et al.
, "The Agile Manifesto," 2001. 
[3] S. S. a. J. D. Arthur, "A Structured Framework for Assessing the 
ﬁGoodnessﬂ of Agile Methods," presented at the 18th IEEE 
International Conference and Workshops on Engineering of 
Computer-Based Systems, 2011. 
[4] O. Ozcan-Top, "A Reference Model for Software Agility 
Assessment: AgilityMod " PhD, Middle East Technical University, 
2014. 
[5] H. Z. Mina Ziaei Nafchi, Taghi Javdani Gandomani, "On The 
Current Agile Assessment Methods and Approaches," presented at 
the Malaysian Software Engineering Conference (MySEC), 2014. 
[6] Ö. Ö.-T. Onat Ege Adal

, Onur Demirörs, "Evaluation of Agility 
Assessment Tools: A Multiple Case Study," presented at the 16th 
International SPICE Conference (SPICE 2016), Dublin, Ireland, 
2016. 
[7] T. Schweigert, D. Vohwinkel, M. Korsaa, R. Nevalainen, and M. 
Biro, "Agile Maturity Model: A Synopsis as a First Step to 
Synthesis," in 
Systems, Software and Services Process 
Improvement
, ed: Springer, 2013, pp. 214-227. 
[8] T. Schweigert, D. Vohwinkel, M. Korsaa, R. Nevalainen, and M. 
Biro, "Agile maturity model: analysing agile maturity 
characteristics from the SPICE perspective," 
Journal Of Software: 
Evolution And Process, 
2013. 
[9] Ö. Özcan Top  and O. Demirörs, "Assessment of Agile Maturity 
Models: A Multiple Case Study," in 
Software Process Improvement 
and Capability Determination
, Bremen, Germany, 2013, pp. 130-
141. 
[10] I. O. f. Standardization and I. E. Commission, "ISO/IEC 15504-
2:2003 Information technology -- Process assessment -- Part 2: 
Performing an assessment," ed, 2003. 
[11] "ISO/IEC 15504-5:2012 Information technology -- Process 
assessment -- Part 5: An exemplar software life cycle process 
assessment model," ed, 2012. 
[12] I. O. f. S. I. a. I. E. C. (IEC), "ISO/IEC 15504-5:2012 Information 
technology -- Process assessment -- Part 5: An exemplar software 
life cycle process assessment model," ed, 2012. 
[13] O. Ozcan-Top and O. Demirörs, "A Reference Model for Software 
Agility Assessment: AgilityMod," in 
Software Process 
Improvement and Capability Determination
. vol. 526, T. Rout, R. 
V. O™Connor, and A. Dorling, Eds., ed: Springer International 
Publishing, 2015, pp. 145-158. 
[14] I. O. f. S. I. a. I. E. C. (IEC), "ISO/IEC 15504-3, 2004. ISO/IEC 
15504-3:2004 - information technology - process assessment - part 
3: guidance on performing an assessment," ed, 2004. 
[15] "Standard CMMI® Appraisal Method for Process Improvement 
(SCAMPISM) A, Version 1.3: Method Definition Document," 
Software Engineering Institute2011. 
[16] A. M. Lund, "Measuring Usability with the USE Questionnaire," 
STC Usability SIG Newsletter, 
2001. 
[17] R. K. Yin, 
Case Study Research: Design and Methods
, Fifth Edition 
ed.: SAGE Publications, 2014. 
 
95