 Kanban in software development:
A systematic lite
rature review
Muhammad Ovais Ahmad, Jouni Markkula and Markku Ovio 
Department of Information Processing Science  
University of Oulu  
Finland 
E-mail:{Muhammad.Ahmad, Jouni.Markkula, Markku.Oivo}@oulu.fi
Abstract
—
 Using of Kanban in software development is an 
emerging topic. This systematic literature review was 
conducted in order to analyze the current trend of Kanban 
usage in software development and to identify the obtained 
benefits and involved challenges. The search strategy resulted 
in 492 papers, of which 19 were identified as primary studies 
relevant to our research. The main reported benefits of using 
the Kanban method were improved lead time to deliver 
software, improved quality of software, improved 
communication and coordination, increased consistency of 
delivery, and decreased customer reported defects. The 
reported challenges included lack of knowledge and specialized 
training as well as various organizational issues. Additionally, 
suggested practices were extracted from the primary studies 
and summarized for guiding the practitioners interested in 
adopting Kanban. The findings of this literature review are 
intended for helping researchers and practitioners to gain a 
better understanding of the current state of Kanban usage in 
software development. 
Keywords- kanban; software development; lean approach; 
systematic literature review 
I.I
NTRODUCTION
In today’s dynamic business an
d technology 
environment, organisations are continuously adapting their 
structures, strategies and policies in response to new 
demands. Operational costs are reduced and time-to-market 
is made shorter by increasing productivity. The increasingly
important questionsare, how to develop better and cheaper 
software and deliver it faster to fulfil continuously changing 
customer requirements. In ex
isting literature, a number of 
approaches have been suggested for achieving these goals. 
Agile methods (AM) have been 
one of the solutions, which 
have gained popularity among the software industry. They 
have been considered as viable solutions for problems that 
appear to be hard to handle 
in traditional plan driven 
software engineering approaches.During the last decade, the 
Lean approach has had a major impact on the 
competitiveness of organizations through improvements in 
their process efficiency, and a reduction in their operational 
waste. Today, Lean is used in most global industries and 
virtually in all organizational sectors including the software 
industry. Lean software engineering approach has been 
derived from the lean manufa
cturing. Lean approach was 
developed and found to be successful in the car 
manufacturing industry [1]. Now it is among the fastest 
growing approaches used by the software development 
professionals. The key trait of lean is to eliminate all kinds of 
waste from the development. In order to eliminate and 
manage waste Poppendieck and Poppendieck [1] have 
proposed a set of principles, which are: build quality in,
create knowledge, defer commitment, deliver fast, respect 
people and optimise the whole. In software development, all 
of those things that do notproduce value for the customer are 
considered “
to be 
waste”. Furthermore
, partially completed 
work, extra processes, extra features, task switching and 
defects are also considered to be waste [1]. 
One of the presented Lean tools is the Kanban approach 
to managing production operations [2]. In recent years, 
Kanban has become more popular in software development.
Kanban approach is the most recent addition to the agile and 
Lean software development research area.A strong 
practitioner-driven movement 
supporting the idea of using 
Kanban in software engineering has emerged [3,4]. Despite 
recently increasing interest in Kanban among practitioners,
existing scientific literature seems to address it quite 
infrequently in the context of software development.Only a 
few studies on Kanban usage, how it is carried out in practice 
and what are its effects in software development, have been 
published. This motivates us to investigate the status of 
Kanban in software development, in terms of its presence in 
existing literature.This study is 
the first step to explore the 
Kanban approach in software engineering through a
systematic literature review. This systematic literature 
review encompasses the current knowledge, gained benefits, 
and faced challenges while using Kanban in software 
development, and also identifies the needs and opportunities 
for future research in the area. This review will be highly 
important for practitioners who want to stay up to date with 
the state of research. On the other hand, it can provide new 
research areas and opportunities to be explored. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
describes the background and motivation of the study. 
Sections III discusses the methods used in this study.
Section IV reports the findings of the review, along with the 
implications of the resear
ch. Section V provides a
conclusion,with recommendations for further research.  
2013 39th Euromicro Conference Series on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-5091-6/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2013.289 II.K
ANBAN IN SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
Lean and Kanban approaches were introduced in the 
Japanese manufacturing industry in the 1950s. Kanban is a 
Japanese word meaning a signboard, and it is used in 
manufacturing as a scheduling system.It is a flow control 
mechanism for pull-driven Just-In-Time production,in 
which the upstream processing activities are triggered by the 
downstream process demand signals[2, S9].Itwas 
successfullyused in practice byToyota. The basic idea 
behind Kanban usage isto execute the Lean thinking in 
practice; however Lean is more than Kanban [5,6,7].
The Kanban method in software development was 
originated in 2004, when David J. Anderson [9]was 
assistinga small IT teamat Microsoft that wasoperating 
poorly.The Kanban methodinsoftware developmentdrives 
project teams to visualise the workflow, limit work in 
progress (WIP) at each workfl
ow stage, and measure cycle 
time [8]. The Kanban board provides visibility to the 
software process, because it shows assigned work of each 
developer,clearly communicates prioritiesand highlights 
bottlenecks. Additionally,itsgoal is to minimize WIP, i.e.
develop onlythose items which are requested.This produces
constant flow of released work itemsto the customers, as the
developers focus only on those few items at given time.
Kanban methodaimsto quickly adapt the process by using
shorterfeedbacks loops. The key impetus for the usage of 
Kanban’s is
focus on flow and the absence of obligatory 
iterations.
The current understanding of Lean software development 
is largely driven by practitioners
’
 books [1, 9]. Maintaining 
the core aim of Lean approach, various Lean principles for 
software development have been
 presented and the situation 
is constantly evolving.Table Ishowsthe Lean software 
development principles[1]and Kanban principles [9],
which are known totheagile community.TheLean and 
Kanban principles appear to be largely overlapping,which
reflects the same grounding.
TABLE I. L
EAN AND KANBAN PRINCIPLES
Leansoftware development
principles[1]
Kanban Principles [9]
Eliminate waste
Build quality in
Create knowledge
Defer commi
tment
Deliver fast
Respect people
Optimise the whole
Visualis
e the workflow
Limit W
ork InProgress
M
easure and manage flow
Make process policies e
xplicit
Improve collaboratively (u
sing
models and the scientific method)
Theresultsof applyingKanban method in software 
developmentare expected to be highlypositive, 
correspondingto the achieved advantages in the 
manufacturingindustry.Due to thisexpectation, theadoption 
of Kanban methodin the software development has gained
strong practitioner-driven support.This expectation isbased 
onKanban
’s
characteristics of adaptability (welcomes 
changes inrequirements)andvisualization (eases 
management by visualisingthe progress),aswellas the 
prerequisites for its successful use (driving team members to 
cooperateand communicate) [8].  
The applicationof Kanban method in software processes
is expected to yield certain positive results, which are 
explained by Anderson [9]. Kanban limitswork in progress 
according toteam capacity,whichbalancesdemand against 
the throughput of team delivered work.Ithelps to visualise
process problems, decreasedefects and maintainasteady
flow. Bylimitingwork in progress a sustainable pace of 
development is achieved,yieldinghigher qualityproducts
and greater team performance.Thecombination of improved 
flow and higherqualitysoftwarehelps to shorten lead time, 
leadingto regular releases thathelp in buildingtrust among
the customers. 
In the past few years, a growing number of diverse teams 
and organizations using Kanban method have reported in 
various blogs and various discussionboards on the Internet.
The proliferation boomed even more after first books on 
Kanban methodin software engi
neering were published [9,
10]. One of these books is David J. Anderson
’s“Kanban”
[9], where he introducedthe concept of Kanban in systems 
and software development. Anotherpopular bookis
“Scrumban” wri
tten by Corey Ladas [10],where he 
discusses the fusion of scrum and Kanban.It suggests that 
eligibility to use the Kanban approach insoftware 
development depends on the satisfaction of thefollowing 
two axioms.

It is possibleto dividework into small value-adding 
increments that can be independently scheduled.

It is possibleto developvalue-adding incrementsin a 
continuous flow,from requirement to deployment. 
As we have mentioned above, the growing interest in 
Kanban in software engineering has been demonstrated by 
the recent publication of several books on this area. 
Successful histories of the manufacturing industry has 
convinced the software engineering professionals and 
researchers to adopt this approach. The next section presents 
the systematic literature review method adopted for this 
research and highlights the extentof Kanban in software 
development undertaken during the past decade journals and 
conferences.
III.R
ESEARCH METHOD
We designedthis systematic literature reviewby 
followingthe guidelines given by Kitchenham [11].
According to theseguidelines,review processes consist of 
several phasesincluding thedevel
opment of review protocol, 
identification and selection of primary studies, data 
extraction and synthesis and reporting ofresults. For this 
study,the review protocol was developedjointly bythe 
authorsof this paper while the corresponding author carried 
out the identification and selection of the primary studies 
following the specified protocol.All of the steps of the 
protocol are described below in this section.The objective of 
the review wasto answer the following research questions:
10 
RQ1. What has been reported about Kanban in 
software development in the existing scientific 
literature?

RQ2. Whatare the obtained benefitsand challenges
involved inKanban usagein software development?

RQ3. What are the suggested practices inexisting 
Kanban studies? 
A.Data sources and search strategies 
The literature sources selectedfor the reviewincluded 
the following key electronic databases in the field:

ACM Digital Library  

ABI/Inform (ProQuest) 

Science Direct (Elsevier) 

Springer Link (LNCS) 

Web of Science (ISI) 

IEEE Xplore - IEEE/IEE Electronic Library 
Relevantstudies were searched inthe databases by using 
the following search strings:
1.Kanban AND software engineering  
2.Kanban AND software development 
3.Kanban AND challenges 
4.Kanban AND software industry 
5.Kanban AND software design 
All of these search strings werecombined by using the 
Boolean “OR” operator
,which meantthat an paperonly had 
to includeone of the stringsto be retrieved. The structure of 
the search querieswas the following:
1 OR 2 OR 3 OR 4 OR 5 
B.Selection process 
According to protocol, the papers were defined as
eligible for inclusion in the review if theyfocusedon Kanban 
usage in software engineering or software development. The 
inclusion criteria stipulated that the papershad to be
published between the years 2000-2011,written in English,
peer-reviewed andelectronically available.Studies were 
excluded if their focus, or m
ain focus, was not Kanban in 
software development.Additionally
, ‘‘lessons learned” 
papers (papers without a research question) and papers 
merely based onexpert opinionswere also excluded.
In assessing the quality of studies, we developed a 
checklistoutlining the major quality criteria expected from 
theprimary studies. We built the list based on quality criteria
adapted from Kitchenhem et al. [11].Fig 1 presentsthe 
systematic reviewprocess,whichwas carried out by the
corresponding author of this paper toidentify the primary 
studies,as well as the number of papers identified at each 
stage.
Initially,Step 0of the search resulted in total of 1,828 
papers.InStep1,the titles ofthe obtained studieswere read,
in orderto examine their relevance to ourreview. The papers
withtitles clearly showingthat they wereoutside the focus of 
this studywere excluded in this stage. For example,our 
search strategy includedthe term 
‘
Kanban
’
,which resulted 
in several hits on papersabout Kanban in the manufacturing 
industry. Thosepaperswere excluded, as the manufacturing 
industry isoutside the focus of our study. Nevertheless,
excluding decisionswerenot in al
l cases basedonly on titles,
assome of the titles did notrevealthe contentsof the papers
clearly enough. In these casesthe paperswereincluded for 
reviewin the next step. 
Fig. 1. Steps of the study selection process 
In Step 2, the titles, abstracts and keywords of the 
remaining 492 papers were examined with regard to their 
relevance to our literature review. All of the papers not 
focusing on the Kanban method
 of software development 
were excluded in this step. We found that some of the 
abstracts appeared to be misleading, or revealed very little 
about the contents of the full papers. In such cases, the 
papers were included in the next step. This resulted in a total 
of 79 papers.   
In Step 3, each of the rem
aining papers wasassessed with 
regard to its quality and relevance to our study. The 
evaluation was done based on the following criteria: 
objective of the study, context description, research design, 
data collection and analysis, justification of findings, result 
applicability and use of references. Of the evaluated 79 
studies 19 were finally accepted and included as the primary 
studies for our research. The rest of the papers were excluded 
because they did not pass the minimum quality threshold.  
IV.R
ESULTS
In this section we present the analysis and outcomes of 
our systematic literature review. Our intention is to elaborate 
on the extracted data and to answer the research questions 
described in section III.
A.RQ1:What has been reported about Kanban in software 
development in theexistingscientific literature?
We identified 19 primary studies on Kanban method to
software development (see Appendix A). From the year 2000 
to 2007, no studies dealing specifically with Kanban in 
software development were identified.  Even though the 
search brought up some studies published during that time 
about using Kanban, they were related to integrated circuit 
Step 0 (n=1828)
Papers obtain from the electronic databases  
Step 1 (n=492)
Relevant studies identification based on the defined criteria 
(read title)
Step 2 (n=79)
Relevant st
udies identification based on defined criteria 
(read title, abstract, keywords)
Step 3 (n = 19)
Primary studies afterquality assessment
11 manufacturing systems and related manufacturing areas. The 
number of papers on Kanban in the software development 
context appears to have increased over the past few years,
which can be seen from Table II. 
TABLE II. 
PRIMARY PAPERS PUBLISHED 
A
NNUALLY
Year
2000-07
2008
2009
2010
2011
Total
Papers
-
1
2
6
10
19
Percentage
-
5%
10%
32%
53%
100%
The major portion (53%) of Kanban studies on software 
development were published in
 year 2011. This trend can be
considered an indicator of practitioners
’
 and researchers
’
growing interest in using Kanban method in software 
development and reporting about it.
Furthermore, a high percentage of primary studies were 
published in conference papers, most of which are 
experienced based and qualitative studies. Table III shows 
the distribution of primary studies according to publication 
channel. 
TABLE III. 
PAPER DISTRIBUTION ACCORDING TO PUBLICATION
CHANNEL AND OCCURRENCE
Source
Type
No. of 
papers
Percentage
XP 20XX
Conference
6
32%
Agile 200X
Conference
632%
LESS 20XX
Conference
3
16%
IEEE TEM 20XX
Journal
1
5%
IEEE ICECCS 20XX
Conference
15%
Euromicro SEAA 20XX
Conference
1
5%
ICSSP 20XX
Conference
15%
Total
19
100%
The number of publications also varies according to 
study type. Of the studies, 47% were classified as experience 
reports, 10% were simulation studies, 32% were qualitative 
studies, and the remaining 11% were quantitative studies. 
Based on this, we can say that the major portion of published 
research consists of experience studies reported in recent 
conferences. 
With respect to context, 84% of the studies were related 
to co-located projects, and in the remaining 16%, the 
contexts were not clearly defined in the papers. This 
indicates that the majority of the primary studies were 
conducted in co-located team settings. Additionally no study 
reports Kanban usage in distributed settings.  
The studies include also a few simulation studies [S1] 
[S2],in whichthe strengths of Kanban have been compared 
withthewaterfall model and Scrum. The results showthat
the Kanban workflow was managed through an effective 
control mechanism to limit the work in progress and 
minimize the lead time. The advantage of this approach is 
that the work is better controlled, so that the effects of errors
are kept limited [S1]. On the other hand, in the waterfall 
model often projects fail to complete due to the difficulty in
correctingerrors, including er
rors in requirement [S1].By
using the Kanban method, simultaneous work in progress is 
reduced, which leads to easier balancing of the overall 
production flow. Additionally, Kanban is a pull system for 
visualising work,improvingflow, reducing waste, and 
maximising customer value. It uses the rate of demand to 
control the rate of production, andpasses demand from the 
end customer up through the chain of customer store 
processes.The simplicity of Kanban motivates the people 
and controls the project activities more efficiently [S6].
B.RQ2. What are the obtained benefits and challenges 
involved inKanban usagein software development?
Generally, primary studies report a great number of 
benefits of Kanban usage in software development, which 
correspond the benefits presented by Anderson [9]. The core 
principles that are mostly used in primary studies are the 
visualising of work and limiting of work in progress, which 
help in the prioritisation of tasks and management of flow. 
Table IV shows the benefits achieved by using the Kanban 
method, as reported in primary studies.
TABLE IV. K
ANBAN BENEFITS
The main benefits of using Kanban are abetter 
understanding of the whole process, improved quality and 
Overall benefits of Kanban
Primary studies
Better understanding of whole 
processes
S3,
S4,S6,S12,S14,S15,
S7
Improved 
software quality
S3, S11, S13, S14, S16, S17
Improved meeting ofcustomer needs
and customer satisfaction
S3, S4,S6, S10,S13, S19
Increased motivation of engineers
S3,S6,S7,S12, S17, S19
Improved communication/
coordination between stakeholders/ 
in team
S6,S12,S13,S14, S18
Bugs were fixed more quickly, WIP 
ma
de it easierto handle blocking 
in 
work
S3, S6, S8, S12,S15
Increased software productivity
S3,S10,S12,S17
Problem solving (easy detectionand 
removal ofbugs)
S6,
S10,S18
Reducedbatch size 
S3, S10,S12
Decreased
time to delivery
S10,S16
Increased
release frequency
S3,S
10
Efficientlycontrolledsoftware 
projects
S6,S12
Changestorequirementsmade 
welcome
S3,S6
Early feedback on features,without 
delays 
S6
No massive documents (limited to
customer request)
Task approval from management not 
needed
–
approval gotten from 
customer in demos
12 better coverage of customer s
atisfaction. Due to its granular 
nature and the visualisation principle, it helps in 
understanding the whole work of the team and reduces batch 
size. One successful example is that of BBC Worldwide 
[S10], where the lead time to deliver software was improved 
by 37%, the consistency of delivery rose by 47%, and 
defects reported by customers fell 24% compared to the 
previous adopted agile meth
od. As a result the overall 
performance of the development team was improved. 
The simplicity of Kanban motivates teams to learn and, 
due to its lightweight process, increases team control over 
activities [S6]. Additionally, team communication and 
coordination with stakeholde
rs is improved [S3,S6, S7] 
[S12]. The other team motivation factor is that more and 
more single tasks are decided on by low-level teams. The 
team itself creates approval and moves tasks in columns. The 
developers can approve each other’s tasks, which is a sign of 
aself-organised and motivated team.  
The visualisation of taskswith Kanban makes it clearer 
for developers to understand the overall directionof work,
and helps them to manage the flow. This collective 
understanding of work motivates team members, which leads 
to more efficient work. It makes it easier to control bugs and 
see blocked tasks. When a task is blocking the flow of work, 
team members help each other to complete the task and
move forward. This helps to improve team communication 
and coordination[S6, S12, S13, S14, S18].
The ‘l
imit work in progress
’
 principle of the Kanban 
method minimises context switching and lead time. Each 
member of the team works on assigned tasks and focuses
only on these, which allows him or her to control individual 
work better and makes it easier to handle or avoid blocking 
tasks. It makes delivery faster and improvesquality of work, 
reduces batch size and, at the same time, increases release 
frequency.  
In limitingwork in progress, prioritisation practice 
guideswhich work item should be pulled nextin order to 
optimise value. Primary studies [S3, S6, S14, S10, S13]
show that the prioritisation of tasks makes customer more 
satisfied. Changedrequests concerningrequirements are 
welcome, which also helps in getting earlier feedback,
resultingin the minimisation of the delay of important 
features. Additionally, low-levelteam members decide on
task management and prioritisation, which savestime. 
Furthermore, this helps to take decisionsonsmall tasksto
the team level, instead of waiting for top-level management 
approval. As Kanban does not involveany fixedplans, it 
helps in the avoidanceof requirement cramming. 
All of the primary studies reported various benefits 
gained by using the Kanban method. The studies that 
reported the most successful transitions were [S7, S10, S13, 
S14, S16]. The most prominent studies were [S10] and 
[S13], in which the following of Kanban practices as defined 
by Anderson [9] was shown to lead to success. 
The Kanban method is relatively new in the field of 
software development. New innovation usually brings 
benefits, but at the same time, the adoption of new 
approaches introduces new challenges. Table V shows the 
challenges faced in the usage 
of the Kanban method, as 
reported in the primary studies. 
TABLE V. C
HALLENGES IN USING KANBAN APPROACH IN SOFTWARE 
DEVELOPMENT
Challenges
Primary Studies
Kanban can’t work alone 
but 
requiressupporting practices 
S6, S7, S10,S12,
S13, S17, 
S18
Hard to change organisational 
culture and philosophy
S3,S7,S15,S16,
S17
Lack of specialised skills and 
training
S3, S4, S7,
S16,S18
Collaboration and communication
issues
S4, S8, S18
Motivating staff to use new 
practices
S4,S17,S18
Integration ofKanban projects 
with existing environments and 
processes
S3, S4
Hard to manage WIP
S4, S17
Hard to find a balance between 
the enforcing and caring roles
S3,S7
Kanban doesnot eliminate all 
waste
S5,S9
Hard to convince the top level 
m
anagementfor theusage of
new Kanban method
S7
Hard to select tasksaccording 
to priority 
S4
Knowledge sharing
Misunderstanding of project goals
Need forguidelines forunderstand 
the process as a whole
S6
Kanban may not fit well with 
existing corporate standards
S10
The primary studies reveal that amixed approach is often 
used in the adoption of the Kanban method. Kanban cannot 
be used alone, and requires supporting practices (e.g. agile 
practices).  
In many studies, such as [S4] and [S17], Kanban was 
used along with other agile practices, and this mixed
approach was problematic for many teams. For example,
some found it hard to manage work in progress and faced 
difficulties in the prioritisation of tasks. 
Motivating staff members to use Kanban was also 
challenging, because of organisational culture and the 
stickiness of other software 
development methodologies, as 
in [S3, S4, S7, S15, S16, S17,S18]. The lack of specialised 
skills and training, and the misunderstanding of core 
principles were some of the reasons for not adopting Kanban 
methods, as in [S3, S4, S7, S16,S18]. A lack of knowledge 
and skills was found to make collaboration and 
communication between Kanban team members and with 
other related stakeholders difficu
lt in [S4], [S6] and [S18]. 
Moreover, limiting WIP was found to be problematic in [S4] 
and [S17], and waste was created instead of eliminated in 
[S5] and [S9]. This means that the necessary knowledge, 
training and support should be given, in order to overcome 
resistance, compatibility issues and knowledge sharing 
13 problems.Convincing top-level management to use the 
Kanban method and limitations in budgets for process 
improvement e.g. sufficient budgets were needed for 
practices that changed systems, such as budgets to support 
the testing environment) were ot
her challenges.  as reported 
in [S7].  
In the primary studies addressed in this paper,a number 
of other limitations of Kanban were also reported. For 
example, in [S4], physical 
distances and human language 
differences were found to lead
 to waste in the process of 
software development. Other issues were related to team 
learning and lack of standards [S10]. Although the Kanban 
approach is widely used in other fields, in software 
engineering it is relatively new. Therefore there is a need for 
guidelines for understanding overall processes [S6]. 
C.RQ3. What are the s
uggested practices inexisting 
Kanban studies?
The primary studies suggest that the Kanban method 
needs to be implemented gradually in software development. 
It incrementally changes the way how work is done in an 
organisation. Patience throughout the process, which is very 
challenging for organisations, is essential.
According to [S6], visualisation alone does not guarantee 
success; Kanban is a basic controlling tool that needs to be 
supported with additional practices. In all of the primary 
studies, we see that there is a mixture of different agile 
practices used with the Kanban method. Hybrid models, 
integrating conventional agile practise with Kanban, are 
suggested for use.Mixtures of agile practices and Kanban 
principles were used in the primary studies, which showed
incremental improvements in processes. The Kanban method 
should be used as a 
‘
plug-in
’
 with existing methods, rather 
than a replacement. Based on
 existing literature the 
following good practices can be summarised: 

Protect teams from external tasks during the actions 
phase. 

Consider ways of limiting work in progress. 

Create a culture for collaboration on solving tasks 
and problems. 

Use a visual board to make low team orientation 
visible and improve the shared mental model.  

Encourage team members to provide feedback to 
each other. 

In order to create value, note that all non-value 
added work is not waste, and that some non-value 
added waste is necessary.  

Have senior managers constantly work on value 
creation for the organisation, allotting time to teach 
and solve technical problem with teams. In short, 
provide technical leadership. 

Provide a clear vision for the whole team. 
V.C
ONCLUSION
The aim of this study was to analysethe current usage of 
Kanban in software engineering, along with its benefits and 
challenges. There appears to be a lack of reported scientific 
research addressing Kanban usage in software engineering, 
but this study summarises the current knowledge in existing 
literature through a systematic literature review. Its results 
provide valuable information for future empirical studies on 
Kanban in software engineering, in both academic and 
industrial settings.
The literature review revealed that Kanban usage has 
been reported mainly at an ab
stract level. No studies were 
found that could clearly and deeply demonstrate Kanban 
method,and how they should be used in software 
development. The main findings 
of this study were classified 
into following categories, as presented below:

The key motivation factors for adopting Kanban 
were simplicity, focus on the flow of work and no 
obligatory iterations. The primary studies 
demonstrate atrend of usage, transitionand
acceptance,from traditional software development 
methodologies to the Kanban method.

The achieved benefits of using Kanban included
customer satisfaction, improved software quality and 
lead time delivery, earlier feedback and reduction in 
customer defect reporting, improved communication 
between stakeholdersandincreased developer 
motivation. However, in most of the studies,these 
benefits were reported at the general level.

Thereare meaningful differences between agile and 
Kanban, many teams foundthat blending the two 
approaches can create significantvalue for their 
organization.Typically Kanban was mixed with 
other agile practices by organisations. However, 
many studies reportedthat it was difficult to use 
such hybrid approaches. Educating people about 
Kanban methodand changing organisational culture 
were some of the challenges revealed by the 
literature review.

Incremental transition is recommended, starting with 
the basic idea of Kanban. So far, there is no unified 
method for deploying the Kanban approach, but the 
current literature suggests
 an incremental and mixed
approach, involving other agile methods and proper 
team mentoring. Daily meetings were found to play 
an important role in information flow. During daily 
stand-up meetings, disturbances should be avoided,
while leaving in the middle of daily stand up 
meeting should not be permitted. Educating staff 
about new approaches through specialised training is 
essential. 
This paper identified agreater number of studies on 
Kanban method in software development have been 
published in recent years. The recent publication trend (see 
Table II) indicates that Kanban is gaining momentum in the 
software engineering domain
. Ahigh percentage of the 
primary studies appear to be experience reports (47%); and 
most of the studies involved pilot or small-scale projects, or 
recent transitions to the Kanban approach. Based on this, 
there appears to be a dema
nd for more extensive and 
rigorous scientific research on Kanban in software 
engineering.
14 The review shows that a range of research methods have 
been applied. We need to employ both flexible and fixed 
research designs if we are to gain a deeper understanding of 
Kanban method.  In fixed designs, the design is specified 
early in the research process, whereas in flexible designs, it 
is allowed to evolve during the research [14]. Both 
qualitative and quantitative data may be used in both fixed 
and flexible designs [14]. Edmondson and McManus [12], 
explained that a research design 
needs to fit the current state 
of research domain, and should go through three stages as 
shown in Table VI.  
TABLE VI. C
ATEGORIES OF METHODOLOGICAL FIT IN FIELD 
RESEARCH
State of prior 
theory and 
research
Nascent
Intermediate
Mature
Research 
questions
Open-
ended 
inquiry about a 
phenomenon of 
interest
Proposed 
relationships 
between new  
and est
ablished 
constructs
Focused 
questions
and/ 
or
hypotheses 
relating existing 
constructs
Type of data 
collected
Qualitative, 
initially open-
ended data that 
need to be 
interpreted for 
meaning
Hybrid (both 
qualitative 
and
quantitative)
Quantitative 
data: focu
sed 
measures where 
extent or 
amount is 
meaningful
Theoretical 
contribution
A suggestive 
theory, often an 
invitation for 
further work on 
the issue or set 
of issues 
opened up by 
the study
A provisional 
theory, often one 
that 
integrates 
previously 
separate 
bodies 
of work
A supported 
theory that may 
addspecificity, 
new
mechanismsor 
new
b
oundaries 
to existing 
theories
With regard to the Kanban method in software 
development, it is currently nascent and helps to reveal 
themes and issues that need further exploration. The 
immature nature of Kanban in software engineering results 
in exploratory qualitative studies having more open ended 
inquiries. Furthermore, they are needed to be explored in 
order for the unknown issues to emerge.More interest in the 
area will arise from such unexpected findings.
Based on currently available literature, the depth of 
Kanban usage and its impact cannot be reliably assessed, but 
there is an indication of apositive tendency toward using the 
Kanban method. As current knowledge on Kanban is limited, 
qualitative and quantitative studies
 in different environments 
and projects would be valuable. They would reveal the real 
strengths of the Kanban meth
od in software development.
Detailed guidelines related to Kanban usage in software 
engineering are required, as is more rigorous research on the 
core principles of the Kanban method (i.e. visualisation of 
workflow, limiting work in progress, measuring and 
managing flow) and its relationship to different dimensions 
of organisation (i.e. organisational culture, team leadership, 
self-managing teams, mechanis
ms for team learning and 
team motivation).  
Furthermore, replications of some of the primary studies 
in various environments would be needed for validating their 
results. This would also allow cross-comparison, and 
strengthen the generalizability of the findings. It would be 
valuable to conduct research in real software development 
environments, in collaboration with academic organizations 
and companies. The usage of the Kanban method in various 
industry settings or different software development types 
could also be an interesting area for future research.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is based on the work carried out in the Cloud Software 
Program. Cloud Software is a project by Tivit plc., one of the 
Finnish strategic centres for Science, Technology and Innovation 
(SHOK), and is funded by the Finnish Funding Agency for 
Technology and Innovation (Tekes). 
R
EFERENCES
[1]
Poppendieck, M. and Poppendieck, T, “Lean software development: 
An agile toolk
it”, A
ddison Wesley, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 
2003. 
[2]Liker.J
, “The Toyota Way”, McGraw
-Hill, USA, 2004. 
[3]
Hiranabe, K, “Kanban applied to software development: From agile 
to lean” 2008, R
etrieved on 4 May 2012, via:   
http://www.infoq.com/articles/hiranabe-lean-agile-Kanban. 
[4]
Shalloway, A., Beaver, G., and Trott, J. R, “Lean
-agile software 
development: Achieving enterprise agility”, Pearson Education, Inc. / 
Addison-Wesley, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 2009. 
[5]Becker, M.; Szczerbicka, H., "Modeling and optimization of kanban 
controlled manufacturing systems with GSPN including 
QN," Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1998. 1998 IEEE International 
Conference,  pp. 570- 575, 1998. 
[6]Chai, L., "e-based inter-enterprise supply chain Kanban for demand 
and order fulfilment management," Emerging Technologies and 
Factory Automation, 2008. IEEE International Conference,  pp.33-35, 
2008. 
[7]Ikonen.M, and P. Abrahamsson, "Anticipating Success of a Business-
Critical Software Project: A Comparative Case Study of Waterfall 
and Agile Approaches", in Proc. ICSOB, pp.187-192 .2010. 
[8]
Kniberg, H, “Kanban vs Scrum –how to make the most of both”, 
Retrieved on 19 July 2012, via: www.crisp.se/file-uploads/Kanban-
vs-Scrum.pdf. 
[9]David. J, Anderson
, “Kanban: Successful Evolutionary Change for 
Your Technology Busi
ness”. Sequim, WA: Blue Hole Press, 2010
. 
[10]
Ladas Corey, “Scrumban: Essays on Kanban Systems for Lean 
software development”, S
eattle, WA, USA: Modus Cooperandi Press, 
2009. 
[11]Kitchenham. B
, S. Charters, “Guidelines for Performing Systematic 
Literature Re
views in Software Engineering” EBSE Technical 
Report, EBSE-2007-01, 2007. 
[12]
A.C. Edmondson, S.E. Mcmanus, “Methodological fit in management 
field research, Acad
emy of Management Review,” The Academy of 
Management Review, Volume: 32 Issue: 4, pp.1155-1179, 2007. 
[13]
Anderson, D. J, “Business drivers for Kanban adoption”, In Lean 
Software & Systems Conference, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 2010. 
[14]Vigdis By Kampenes, Bente Anda, and Tore Dybå. 
“
Flexibility in 
research designs in empirical software engineering
”
. In Proceedings 
of the 12th international conference on Evaluation and Assessment in 
Software Engineering (EASE'08), British Computer Society, 
Swinton, UK, 49-57, 2008. 
A
PPENDIX 
A.P
RIMARY STUDIES
[S1]D. Anderson, G. Concas, M.I. Lunesu, and M. Marchesi,   "Studying 
Lean-Kanban Approach Using Software Process Simulation", in Proc. 
XP, pp.12-26,  2011.  
15 [S2]Cocco. L, K. Mannaro, G. Concas, and M. Marchesi,   "Simulating 
Kanban and Scrum vs. Waterfall with System Dynamics", in Proc. 
XP, pp.117-131, 2011. 
[S3]Senapathi. M, P. Middleton, and G. Evans, "Factors Affecting 
Effectiveness of Agile Usage - Insights from the BBC Worldwide 
Case Study" ;in Proc. XP, pp.132-145, 2011. 
[S4]Stray.V.G, N.B. Moe, and T. Dingsøyr, "Challenges to Teamwork: A 
Multiple Case Study of Two Agile Teams", in Proc. XP,  pp.146-161, 
2011. 
[S5]Kettunen.P, "A Tentative Framework for Lean Software Enterprise 
Research and Development", In Proc. LESS, pp.60-71, 2010. 
[S6]Ikonen.M, E. Pirinen, F. Fagerholm, P. Kettunen,  and P. 
Abrahamsson, "On the Impact of Kanban on Software Project Work: 
An Empirical Case Study Investigation", In Proc. ICECCS, pp.305-
314, 2011. 
[S7]Nikitina.N and M. Kajko-Mattsson, "Developer-driven big-bang 
process transition from Scrum to Kanban", in Proc. ICSSP, pp.159-
168, 2011.
[S8]Ikonen.M, "Leadership in Kanban Software Development Projects: A 
Quasi-controlled Experiment", in Proc. LESS, pp.85-98, 2010. 
[S9]Ikonen.M, P. Kettunen, N.V. Oza,  and P. Abrahamsson,   "Exploring 
the Sources of Waste in Kanban Software Development Projects", In 
Proc.EUROMICRO-SEAA, pp.376-381, 2010. 
[S10] Middleton, P.; Joyce, D., "Lean Software Management: BBC 
Worldwide Case Study," Engineering Management, IEEE 
Transactions, vol.59, no.1, pp.20-32, 2010.
[S11] Wijewardena, T., "Do You Dare to Ask Your HR Manager to 
Practice KANBAN? The Experience Report of an Offshore Software 
Company in Sri Lanka Introducing Agile Practices into its Human 
Resource (HR) Department," Agile Conference (AGILE), pp.161-
167, 2011.
[S12] Polk, R., "Agile and Kanban in Coordination," Agile Conference 
(AGILE), pp.263-268, 2011. 
[S13] Greaves, K., "Taming the Customer Support Queue: A Kanban 
Experience Report," Agile Conference (AGILE), pp.154-160, 2011. 
[S14] Rutherford.K, P. Shannon, C. Judson,  and N. Kidd,   "From Chaos 
to Kanban, via Scrum",  in Proc. XP, pp.344-352, 2010.   
[S15] Birkeland.J.O,   "From a Timebox Tangle to a More Flexible Flow", 
in Proc. XP, 2010, pp.325-334, 2010.
[S16]Taipale.M,   "Huitale - A Story of a Finnish Lean Startup", in Proc. 
LESS, 2010, pp.111-114, 2010.   
[S17]Willeke, E.R., "The Inkubook Experience: A Tale of Five  
Processes," Agile Conference, pp.156-161, 2009. 
[S18]Shinkle, C.M., "Applying the Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition to 
the Adoption of Kanban Systems at Software Engineering 
Professionals (SEP)," Agile Conference, pp.186-191, 2009. 
[S19]Kinoshita, F., "Practices of an Agile Team," Agile Conference, 
pp.373-377,  2008.
16