 A Lean Approach to Estimate the Functional Size of Operating Applications 
 
 
Filomena Ferrucci, Carmine Gravino 
DISTRA(MIT) 
University of Salerno 
Fisciano (SA), Italy 
{fferrucci, gravino}@unisa.it 
Guido Moretto  
InfoCamere  
Corso Stati Uniti 14, 35127 
Padova, Italy 
guido.moretto@infocamere.it
 
 
Abstract
—Functional size measures have been gaining 
increasing acceptance not only for project estimation and 
productivity comparisons but also for the evaluation of the 
company assets concerning with operating applications. 
However, functional sizing 
operating applications can 
represent a complex task (they could be developed in past 
projects, in some cases by others, with long standing 
technologies, and without useful documentation supporting 
them). Thus, companies require cheaper strategies to estimate 
functional size of these applicatio
ns. To this end, we proposed 
some measurement approaches concerning with the number of 
physical tables and the number of read and read/written tables 
that can be easily collected from the database schema and the 
application interfaces. We assessed the effectiveness of the 
proposals performing an empirical study based on 17 
applications of an Italian comp
any. The results highlight that 
the proposed approaches allowed to obtain accurate functional 
size estimations, thus turning out 
to be suitable for the involved 
company. 
Keywords- Software functional 
size measurement, Function 
Points, Physical tables, Operating applications  
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Software sizing is crucial during the whole software 
development process since it supports other project 
management activities (e.g., es
timating, allocating, or 
tracking) [15]. Among the 
measurement approaches 
proposed in the literature, Functional Size Measurement 
(FSM) is widely employed to measure the size of Users 
Functional Requirements [20]. The first FSM method was 
Function Point Analysis (FPA
) proposed by Albrecht [2]. 
Function Points are widely adopted since they are 
independent from the non-func
tional technical and quality 
requirements [48]. Furthermore, 
it is an ISO standardized 
technique [24] and some organi
zations (e.g. IFPUG [22] and 
NESMA [41]) works around the world to improve and 
promote the application of the approach.  
Measuring the size of operating software applications is 
also crucial for companies when they want to have a clear 
“quantification” of the company software applications stock 
for several purposes, e.g., to 
support the decisions of the 
board of directors, to provide 
attestations with stakeholders, 
etc… This measurement is considered a complex task since 
the company stock can contain applications developed in 
several past projects that e
volved several times, possibly 
with several development processes, in many cases 
developed by others, with l
ong standing technologies, and 
without useful documentation 
supporting them. Thus, it is 
often hard to find people of the company that have a 
complete view of the whole a
pplication. As a consequence, 
to carry out the measurem
ent, it is necessary to 
contact/interview several people to get information and 
partial and inconsistent answers could be obtained. As a 
result an undefined level of uncertainty is introduced in the 
measurement that is based just on the information specified 
by the involved people. 
Furthermore, 
the measurement of 
operating applications can also be very expensive since the 
companies have to involve experts of the specific functional 
size measurement method.  
Thus, it could be very useful to identify an approach able 
to estimate the functional size of operating applications 
using specific technical compone
nts, easily available to a 
project manager without empl
oying further resources. It 
could be argued that the most 
simple way to do this might 
be to count the number of Lines Of Code (LOC) and then 
use a backfiring approach [26] to derive an estimation of the 
functional size of the application. Nevertheless, how 
highlighted by the practitioners of the software company 
involved in our study and how it is also reported in the 
literature [14] LOC and backfiring present several 
drawbacks due to the use of different platforms and 
programming languages and the lack of a standard way to 
do the counting. 
Thus, in this paper we present simple sizing approaches 
to be applied on operating applications based on specific 
software components, such as 
the number of physical tables 
and the number of read and read/written tables that can be 
obtained by the technical responsible of the software 
application by exploiting the database schema and the 
application interfaces. This information is that employed by 
measurers to determine the 
Base Functional Components 
(BFCs) when a functional size measurement method, like 
IFPUG Function Points or COSMIC, is applied to determine 
the size of an application. Th
e idea motivating our research 
is similar to the one behind investigations proposing the use 
2013 39th Euromicro Conference Series on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-5091-6/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2013.40284 of single BFCs to provide
 estimates of software 
development effort 
as soon as possible during the first 
phases of the software life cycle (e.g., [8][9][19]).
 
Then, we carried out an em
pirical study to assess the 
proposed approaches for estimating the functional size of 
operating applications given 
in terms of IFPUG Function 
Points [22].  
In particular, the research questions addressed in this 
paper are:  
RQ1: 
Can the number of physical tables be exploited to 
predict the application size (in terms of Function Points)?
 
RQ2: 
Can the number of read and read/written tables be 
exploited to predict the application size (in terms of Function 
Points)?
 
To perform the empirical analysis we have exploited data 
from 17 applications managed by an Italian company. As for 
the technique, we employed linear
 regression analysis using 
a leave-one-out cross validation. In order to assess the 
accuracy of the obtained size es
timations we have employed 
summary measures like MMRE, MdMRE, and Pred(25), 
which are widely used evaluation criteria. Boxplot of 
residuals and statistical test have been also used to compare 
the accuracy of the estimations achieved with the different 
prediction models.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses 
related work while Section 3 introduces the research method 
used in this paper. Section 4 presents and discusses the 
results from the statistical analysis carried out on the 
employed industrial sample. Sec
tion 5 discusses threats to 
validity while Section 6 provides conclusions of the current 
work and suggests future research directions. 
II.
 
R
ELATED WORK
 
To the best of our knowledge no previous work has exploited 
information on physical tables and the number of read and 
written tables to estimate functional size of applications. The 
works proposing the backfiring approach can be considered 
related to our investigation since the motivations underlying 
the two researches are quite close, e.g., lack of time and 
budget to count Function Points and few (or no) 
documentation available on software requirements to apply 
Function Points Analysis [14]. Since the initial proposal of 
Kaper Jones [26], the backfiring approach has been widely 
applied in practice (e.g., [21][27][37]). However, some 
papers have highlighted issues in the application of 
backfiring, mainly related to the LOC and due to the 
difficulties rising from the use 
of different platforms and 
programming languages for the applications to be measured 
and the lack of a standard way to do the counting 
[14][43][50].  
Other researches that can be related to our work are those 
proposing and/or investigating 
the use of approximate or 
simplified sizing approaches 
and those about the use of 
single Base Functional Component
s (BFCs) to provide a size 
estimation of the 
application under development as soon as 
possible during the first phases 
of the software life cycle. 
 
Two widely known approaches for simplifying the 
application of Function Points Analysis are the “Early & 
Quick Function Points (EQFP)” 
[46] and simplified version 
of NESMA [41]. The idea behind the application of EQFP is 
based on the fact that some estimates are required before the 
requirements analysis is completed. Thus, some information 
is not available to fully apply FPA and EQFP relaxes the 
application of the FP met
hod by not considering some 
details. The method can also be applied when a complete 
requirements documentation is available but the managers 
intend to complete the measurement in less time and with a 
lower cost (i.e., admitting a trade-off between a correct 
measurement and time and budget 
available). In particular, 
data and processes of an application are classified in several 
groups according to a hierarch
y [46], where some groups 
contain the BFCs of FPA and 
other groups are aggregation 
of Base Functional Processes (e.g., Macro Process, General 
Process) or Data Groups (e.g., Multiple Data Group). The 
idea of the approach is that different parts of the software can 
be measured at the different level of details. Thus, exploiting 
functional components more coarse-grained than the BFCs 
of FPA, EQFP approach produces an approximation of the 
size in terms of Function Points.  
The first approximation s
uggested by NESMA (named 
Indicative NESMA) is based on the identification of Internal 
Logical Files (ILF) and Extern
al Interface Files (EIF), i.e., 
without exploiting the cont
ribution of Transactions 
Functions (i.e., EI, EQ, a
nd EO) of FPA, and applying 
predefined weights [3]. Th
e second approximation proposed 
by NESMA (named Estimated NESMA) exploits all the 
BFCs of FPA, but the complexity of the identified 
components are not determined. By default, a low 
complexity is associated to ILF and EIF elements while a 
medium complexity is considered for EI, EQ, and EO.   
The above approaches have been applied in [3], where a 
model based measurement is combined with the application 
of the NESMA simplified measurement processes. In 
particular, the software to be 
measured is first specified in 
terms of UML documents providing guidelines that allow 
designer to model all the info
rmation required to apply FPA. 
Then, the proposed measuremen
t method allows to map the 
UML elements on the BFCs of FPA and obtain the 
approximate size.  
EQFP and the two simplified NESMA have been also 
applied to size both “traditional”
 and real-time applications 
for evaluating their accuracy 
with respect to FPA [34]. 
The
 
results of the performed analysis show that EQFP was more 
accurate in size estimation of non real-time applications, 
while NESMA approaches turned out to be quite good for 
both applications types.  
An initial proposal, very close to EQFP has been 
presented in [36], where 
the Early Function Points (EFP) and 
Extended Function Points (XFP) methods have been 
presented with the purpose 
of obtaining the amount of 
Function Points in the early phases of a software 
development life cycle reducing time and cost.
 EFP just 
suggests to apply FPA with 
the available information 
obtaining estimations that are compatible with 
IFPUG 4.0 
Function Points. XFP extends EFP by applying correction 
285 factors, based on the level of 
reuse and on a classification of 
algorithms in terms of their complexity. EXP is not 
compatible with 
IFPUG 4.0 Function Points but in the study 
carried out 
in [36] was able to produce better size estimates 
than EFP. 
In [42] two size metrics ba
sed on information obtained 
from use cases (i.e., transactions and entity objects) are 
presented and used for effort
 estimation in two empirical 
studies. The first study is base
d on information coming from 
four academic projects, while the second one employs data 
from four industrial projects.
 The goal of the performed 
analysis was to compare the es
timations obtained with these 
two metrics. The results show the use of transactions as a 
size metric can provide better effort estimation than those 
obtained with entity objects.  
Some studies have analyzed 
the different contribution of 
BFCs against the overall ‘fsu’ value (e.g., UFP for IFPUG 
[24] or CFP for COSMIC [
11]) in estimating software 
development effort. In particular, two empirical studies 
based on ISBSG samples [23] showed that linear regression 
models employing two or more 
BFCs (e.g., EI, EO, EQ, ILF, 
EIF for the IFPUG method and Entry, eXit, and Read, Write 
for the COSMIC method) as inde
pendent variables instead of 
the whole single fsu value (e.g., UFP for the IFPUG method 
or CFP for the COSMIC method) were characterized by 
more accurate estimations [8], [19]. The study presented in 
[17] and its replication described in [9] are further 
applications of the idea proposed
 in [8], [19], by exploiting a 
data set of Web applications developed by a single company 
operating in Italy. The results
 of the performed empirical 
analysis confirmed that the use of combinations of two or 
more BFCs can provide better estimation of development 
effort. 
III.
 
R
ESEARCH METHOD
 
In the following, a description of the industrial data set 
used in this study as well as the analysis procedure 
performed to assess our research questions are presented. 
A.
 
Data set description 
In our analysis we employed a data set provided by 
Infocamere
1
, the ICT consortium company responsible for 
the design and management of the network of the Italian 
Chambers of Commerce nationwid
e. Its statutory mandate is 
the management of its key financial registers (register of 
companies, register of non pa
yments, statements of accounts 
etc.). The customer base consis
ts of 105 Italian Chambers of 
Commerce, professional associations, trade associations, 
local and central public administrations, business and 
economic information agencies. 
In particular, InfoCamere 
has developed and manages the national system of data 
transmission connecting the 105 Chambers of Commerce 
and their 300 branch offices via a high speed, high security 
network. It is also the nati
onal certifying Authority issuing 
digital certificates for Tachograph Cards. The company 
designs, develops and delivers services via a Management 
                                                             
1
 www.infocamere.it 
System that complies with ISO 9001, having initially been 
certified in 1997 (ISO 9001:1994), then approved for Vision 
2000 (ISO 9001:2000) and finally extended to the latest 
version (ISO 9001:2008) in March 2009.  
The company provided us information on a set of 17 
applications consisting of ma
nagement information systems 
(50%) and applications mainly characterized by query and 
reporting systems (50%). These applications were 
developed between 2005 and 2010 and can be considered 
quite homogeneous in terms of adopted technologies (Java, 
Asp, PL/SQL), and development 
teams. No selection of the 
applications was done.  
The information we exploited 
in our empirical analysis 
are: application size, in term
s of number of Function Points, 
the number of physical tables, a
nd the number of read tables 
and the number of read/written tables. The number of 
Function Points refers to the result of the application of 
IFPUG measurement method to the deployed software 
product. This measurement task 
is included in the software 
life cycle for each project developed by the company. This 
information contributes to th
e productivity database of the 
company, together with the 
information on the development 
effort, and it is exploited for internal benchmarking 
purposes (to verify the company trend year by year) and by 
project managers for providing initial estimates for new 
projects. The number of physical
 tables has been obtained 
from the database schema and the application interfaces of 
the considered operating applications. The available 
documentation allowed us to collect the number of read 
tables and the number of read/written tables. We did not use 
all the three measures together since the number of read 
tables and the number of read/written tables are obtained by 
further classifying the physical tables.
 
Data collection was 
made by the same person of the company to improve 
consistency among measurements. 
Table I reports the descriptive statistics of the variables 
FP, denoting the application size in terms of number of 
Function Points; T, denoting the number of physical tables; 
R, denoting the number of tables that are read; and R/W, 
denoting the number of tables that are read and written, for 
the applications considered in our study
2
. 
TABLE I. 
 
D
ESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE EMPLOYED DATA SET
 
 Entity Obs Min Max Mean Median Std.Dev 
 FP 17 78 710 234.7 150 182.42 
 T 17 7 69 24.94 17 18.98 
 R 17 3 56 19.18 8 19.68 
 R/W 17 3 21 0.82 8 5.78 
 
B.
 
Analysis procedure 
The goal of our study is to veri
fy whether or not the number 
of physical tables (and the number of read and written 
                                                             
2
 For confidentiality reasons, it’s not possible to provide details 
from the projects but only the high-level figures. 
286 tables) can be exploited to predict the application size (in 
terms of Function Points). To this end, we first verified the 
strength of the relationship between FP and T and between 
FP and R and R/W. In particular, we exploited Linear 
Regression (LR) and Manual Stepwise Regression (SWR). 
LR is one of the most commonl
y used statistical techniques 
for exploring the relationship between a dependent variable 
and one or more independent
 variables, providing a 
prediction model described by an equation [35]:  
y = b
1
x
1
 + b
2
x
2
 + ... + b
n
x
n
 + c   
(1) 
where 
y
 is the dependent variable (the size), 
x
1
, 
x
2
, ..., 
x
n 
are 
the independent variables (the 
predictors) with coefficient 
b
i
, and 
c
 is the intercept. In our empirical study we have 
exploited LR to obtain linear regression models that use FP 
as dependent variable and T as independent variable.  
For R and R/W, we applied SWR that allows us to 
obtain estimation models by 
adding, at each step, the 
independent variable with the highest association to the 
dependent variable, taking into account all the variables 
(i.e., R and R/W) currently in the model. To select the 
variables to be added in the model a Manual SWR (MSWR) 
can be applied, using the technique proposed by 
Kitchenham in [28]. The idea underlying this procedure is to 
find the set of independent vari
ables that better explain the 
variation in the dependent variable, and then to use linear 
regression to obtain the final model.  
To evaluate the goodness of fit of a regression model, 
several indicators can be 
considered. Among them, the 
square of the linear correlation coefficient, R
2
, shows the 
amount of the variance of the dependent variable explained 
by the model related to the independent variable. Other 
useful indicators are the F value and the corresponding p-
value (denoted by Sign F), which high and low values, 
respectively, denote a high degree of confidence for the 
prediction. We have also considered the p-values and t-
values for the corresponding coefficients and the intercept. 
The p-values give an insight into the accuracy of the 
coefficients and the intercept, whereas their t-values allow 
us to evaluate their importa
nce for the built model. In 
particular, p-values less than 0.05 are considered an 
acceptable threshold, meaning that the variables are 
significant predictors with a confidence of 5%. As for the t-
value, a variable is significant if its value is greater than 1.5. 
It is worth noting that wh
enever variables are highly 
skewed they can be transformed before being used in the 
linear regression. This is done to satisfy the assumptions 
underlying linear regression anal
ysis [35]. A widely used 
transformation is the one considering the natural log (Ln), 
which makes larger values smaller and brings the data 
values closer to each other [35]. In addition, whenever a 
variable needed to be transformed but had zero values, the 
natural logarithmic transformation was applied to the 
variables value after adding 1 as done in [38]. Moreover, the 
stability of each model built using linear regression should 
be verified. In order to accomplish this step, we can use a 
residual plot showing residuals vs. fitted values to 
investigate if the residuals are randomly and normally 
distributed [35]. Then, Cook's di
stance values can be used to 
identify the influential data points. As suggested in [38] 
each point having distances higher than 3 
×
 (4/n), where n 
represents the total number of
 projects, ar
e immediately 
removed from the data analys
is. On the other hand, the 
points having distances higher th
an 4/n but smaller than (3 
×
 
(4/n)) are removed and the stability of model is tested by 
analyzing the effect of their removal on the model. If the 
goodness of fit improves (i.e., a higher R
2
 is obtained and 
the coefficients of the mode
l remain stable then the 
influential data points are not excluded from the analysis. 
Moreover, to validate the accuracy of the obtained size 
estimation models (i.e., to verify whether or not the 
predicted sizes were useful estimations of the actual sizes) 
we exploited a leave-one-out cr
oss validation. It is widely 
used in empirical studies when
 dealing with small data sets 
[4]. In particular, to apply the technique, the original data set 
is divided into N different subsets (where N is the size of the 
original data set) of training and validation sets, where each 
validation set has one data point. Then, N steps are 
performed and at each step, the training set is used to 
determine the estimation model and the validation set to 
assess the obtained estimates. The accuracy of the obtained 
estimations is assessed by using summary measures MMRE, 
MdMRE and Pred(l) [10], which have been widely used in 
empirical studies to assess 
the accuracy of software 
development effort estimation models (see e.g., [5], [13], 
[16], [25], [29], [38], [39], [45]). We have calculated 
summary measures as describe in the following. The 
Magnitude of Relative Error can be defined as: 
MRE = |SIZEreal — SIZEpred | / SIZEreal  
(2) 
where SIZEreal and SIZEpred are the actual and the 
predicted sizes, respectively. MRE has been calculated for 
each point in the data set. All the MRE values were 
aggregated across all the data points using the mean and the 
median, giving rise to the Mean of MRE (MMRE) and the 
Median MRE (MdMRE). 
The prediction at level 
l
 [10], defined as:  
Pred(l) = k /N     
(3) 
where 
k
 is the number of data points whose MRE is less 
than or equal to 
l
, and N is the total number of data points. 
Pred(
l
) is a quantification of the percentage of predictions 
whose error is less than 
l
%. In the context of effort 
estimation, where these measures were proposed [10], 
l
 is 
widely set to 0.25 and a good 
estimation model should have 
a MMR
estimation error should be less than 25%, and at least 75% 
of the estimated values shoul
d fall within 25% of their 
actual values [10]. In the current study, which can be 
considered a preliminary investigation, we decided to use 
l
=0.25. In the future, we will 
further analyze this point.  
287 Since MMRE and Pred(0.25) could fail in fully 
representing a phenomenon as argued in [31], [32], we 
complemented these indicators 
with the analysis of the 
boxplots of absolute residuals. Boxplots are widely 
employed in exploratory data an
alysis since they provide a 
quick visual representation to summarize the data, using five 
values: median, upper and lower quartiles, minimum and 
maximum values, and outliers [32]. We used boxplots to 
graphically render the spread 
of the absolute residuals, 
calculated as |SIZEreal – SIZEp
red|. Moreover, we tested 
the statistical significance of the obtained results, by using 
Wilcoxon test on absolute residuals, in order to establish if 
one of employed estimation models provided better results 
than the others [32], [46]. In particular, we verified the 
following null hypothesis: “the 
two considered populations 
have identical distributions”. Th
is kind of test is used to 
verify the hypothesis that the mean of the differences in the 
pairs is zero. In all the performed statistical tests we 
decided, as usual, to accept a probability of 5% of 
committing a Type-I-Error [49], i.e., of rejecting the null 
hypothesis when it is actually true. 
IV.
 
R
ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
 
A.
 
Relationship between FP and T 
In order to apply LR we first verified the normality of 
distributions (i.e., FP and T). In particular, we applied to the 
Shapiro test [44], by considering as null hypothesis the 
normality of the distributions. The test results revealed that 
FP and T distributions were not
 normally distributed since 
the p-values were less than 0.05 for almost all the considered 
data sets (see Table II). So, as usual for this kind of study 
(see e.g., [5], [6], [30]), 
we decided to apply a Log 
transformation of the variables.  
Moreover, the application of LR requires the verification 
of the following assumptions: lin
earity (i.e., the existence of 
a linear relationship between the independent variable and 
the dependent variable); homos
cedasticity (i.e., the constant 
variance of the error terms for all the values of the 
independent variable); and residual normality (i.e., the 
normal distribution of the error terms).  
TABLE II. 
 
N
ORMALITY OF DISTRIBUTIONS
 
SHAPIRO  
TEST 
 
FP T 
t-statistic 0.745 0.832 
p-value <0.01 <0.01 
 
Linearity
. The Pearson's correlation test revealed that there 
was a linear relationship between the dependent (FP) and 
the independent variables (T) involved in the model (p-
value = <0.01) [18]. 
Homoscedasticity
. We investigated the homoscedasticity 
assumption by performing a Breush
-Pagan Test [1], with the 
homoscedasticity of the error 
terms as null hypothesis. The 
assumption can be considered to be verified since the p-
values (0.349) was greater than 0.05 and thus the null 
hypothesis cannot be rejected. 
Residual normality
. To verify the normality assumption, we 
used the Shapiro-Wilk Test, by considering as null 
hypothesis the normality of error terms. The results of the 
test revealed that the assumption can be considered to be 
verified since the p-value (0.
321) was greater than 0.05 and 
thus the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. 
It is worth noting that we al
so verified the presence of 
extreme values that might 
unduly influence the models 
obtained from the regression analysis. As designed in 
Section III.B, we used Cook's 
distance to identify possible 
influential data points. In par
ticular, the data points with a 
Cook's distance higher than 0.
24 (= 4/17, where 17 is the 
number of data points) were removed from the 
corresponding training set in order to test the model stability. 
The analysis of outliers revealed that data point 17 (Cook's 
distance = 0.31), 2 (Cook's di
stance = 0.46), and 7 (Cook's 
distance = 0.68) may be influe
ntial data points. New models 
were generated without these data points. In the new models 
the independent variable (i.e., T) remained significant, the R
2
 
improved a little, and the coefficients present similar value to 
the ones in the previous models. Thus, these data points were 
not removed [38]. 
Table III presents the results
 of the LR analysis with 
statistics on useful indicators to verify the quality of the 
obtained models. 
TABLE III. 
 
T
HE RESULTS OF THE 
LR
 ANALYSIS USING 
T
 AS 
INDEPENDENT VARIABLE
 
 Value Std.Err t-value p-value 
Intercept 2.715 0.238 11.39 <0.01 
Coefficient of T 0.850 0.078 10.88 <0.01 
 R
2
 Std.Err F Sign F 
 0.888 0.222 118.5 <0.01 
 
We can observe that the linear regression analysis was 
successfully applied. Indeed, the obtained model is 
characterized by a high R
2
 value (89%), that is the amount 
of the variance of the dependent variable FP that is 
explained by the model related to the variable T. 
Furthermore, a high F value 
(118.5) and a low p-value 
(<0.01) are obtained, indica
ting that the prediction is 
possible with a high degree of confidence. The t-values and 
p-values for the coefficient and the intercept are greater than 
1.5 and less than 0.05, respectively, meaning that T is a 
significant predictor with a confidence of 95%.  
The Equation as read from 
the final model’s output is: 
LnFP
 = 0.850 
·
 
LnT
 + 2.715  (1a) 
which, when transformed back 
to the raw data scale, is: 
FP
 = 15.105 
·
 
T
0.850
  (1b) 
As designed in Section III.B, to evaluate the size 
estimation accuracy we performed a leave-one-out cross 
validation, whose results are 
reported in Table IV. We can 
288 conclude that T is a good indicat
or of functional size, when 
used in combination with LR, since MMRE and MdMRE 
values are less than 0.25. Pred(0.25) value is quite close to 
0.75. These results suggest that the software company 
involved in our study coul
d obtain application size 
estimations just exploiting in
formation on physical tables, 
with an error of about 21%. 
TABLE IV. 
 
A
CCURACY RESULTS FOR 
T
 BASED MODEL
 
MMRE MdMRE 
Pred(0.25) 
0.21 0.18 0.71 
 
B.
 
Relationship between FP and R and R/W 
In this section we report on the analysis performed to 
investigate the contribution of 
R and R/W to functional size. 
Similar to the analysis performed in the previous section, 
before applying linear regression we carried out a Log 
transformation since the Shapiro 
test revealed that FP, R, 
and R/W distributions were 
not normally distributed.  
We first verified the linear regression assumptions, i.e., 
linearity, homoscedasticity, and residual normality. The 
Pearson's correlation test re
vealed a linear relationship 
between FP and R (p-value = <0.01), while for R/W the 
correlation was not so strong (p-value = 0.07). As for 
homoscedasticity, we applied the Breush-Pagan Test [1]. 
The results revealed that the assumption can be considered 
to be verified (p-value = 0.973). The residual normality 
assumption was confirmed by the Shapiro-Wilk Test (p-
value = 0.994). The analysis of outliers revealed the 
presence of influential data points (extreme values that 
unduly affected the estimation 
model), which were removed 
from the dataset.  
It is worth to point out that the application of MSWR 
revealed that the best fitting model was the one including 
both R and R/W as independent variables.  
Table V presents the results of LR and MSWR with 
statistics on useful indicators to verify the quality of the 
obtained model. We can observe that the model is 
characterized by a high R
2
 since about 94% is the amount of 
the variance of the dependent variable FP that is explained 
by the model related to the variables R and R/W. Moreover, 
the coefficients of R and R/W were characterized by a p-
value less than 0.05 and a t-value greater than 1.5, meaning 
that they are significant pred
ictors with a confidence of 
95%. 
The Equation as read from the final model’s output is: 
LnFP = 
3.048
 + 
0.486
 · LNR + 
0.534
 · Ln R/W 
(2a) 
which, when transformed back to the raw data scale, is: 
FP = 
21.073
 · R
0.486
 · R/W
0.534  
(2b) 
The leave-one-out cross validation performed to evaluate 
the size estimation accuracy produced MMRE = 0.11, 
MdMRE = 0.12, and Pred(0.25) 
= 0.73 (Table VI). We can 
conclude that also R and R/W 
can be profitably exploited to 
estimate the functional size, when used in combination with 
linear regression, since MMRE and MdMRE values are less 
than 0.25. Furthermore, Pred(25)
 value is quite close to 0.75. 
In particular, the software company involved in our study 
could obtain application size 
estimations that should be 
characterized by an error less than 12% just exploiting 
information on the number of read and read/written tables. 
TABLE V. 
 
T
HE RESULTS OF THE 
LR
 ANALYSIS USING 
R
 AND 
R/W
 AS 
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
 
 Value Std.Err t-value p-value 
Intercept 3.048 0.209 14.563 <0.01 
Coefficient of Log R 0.486 0.048 10.563 <0.01 
Coefficient of Log 
R/W 
0.534 0.084 6.371 <0.01 
 R
2
 Std.Err F Sign F 
 0.939 0.172 77.71 <0.01 
 
TABLE VI. 
 
A
CCURACY RESULTS FOR 
R
AND 
R/W
 BASED MODEL
 
MMRE MdMRE 
Pred(0.25) 
0.11 0.12 0.73 
 
C.
 
Comparison of the obtained models 
The analysis has revealed that
 T, R, and R/W are significant 
predictors of functional size and the estimation models are 
characterized by an MMRE less than 21% in the worst case. 
Thus, we can positively answer our research questions, i.e., 
RQ1 and RQ2.  
We can also observe that the higher R
2
 and the lower 
MMRE were obtained with R and R/W. However, the 
results of T are close. The an
alysis of boxplots in Figure 1 
also suggests that the distribu
tions of the two models are 
quite similar since the box length and tails of the two 
boxplots are quite similar and both have an outlier. 
However, we can note that the median of the boxplot for the 
R and R/W based model is more close to zero.  
 
Figure 1. 
 
Fig. 1. Boxplot of absolute residuals 
This is confirmed by the comparison between the obtained 
models performed through the 
analysis of the absolute 
residuals, looking for statistically significant differences 
289 [32], [46]. The results of the Wilcoxon test revealed that 
there was no significant difference between the absolute 
residuals obtained with the tw
o models (p-value = 0.643). 
V.
 
THREATS
 
TO
 
VALIDITY 
The collection of the information to determine size 
measures represents a crucial aspect and can bias the 
construct validity. The measurement task (of development 
effort and functional size) is included in the software life 
cycle for each project devel
oped by the company involved 
in our study. Thus, we are sure that the collection of 
information is performed in a uniform fashion. Reliability of 
the data and lack of standardization should be taken into 
account for the internal validity [32][33][39]. The 
questionnaires used to collect the information on the 
employed measures were the sam
e for all the applications 
and the project managers were instructed to correctly 
provide the required information.
 Instrumentation effects in 
general did not occur in this kind of studies. As for the 
conclusion validity, we carefully applied the estimation 
method and the statistical test
s, verifying all the required 
assumptions. With regard to the external validity, it is 
recognized that the results obtained in an industrial context 
might not hold in other contexts [7]. 
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS
 
We have presented an empirical study performed to assess 
whether the number of physical tables and the number of 
read and read/written tables can be exploited to estimate the 
functional size of applications. We have employed 17 
applications from InfoCamere, an Italian company, and 
exploited linear regression to build the estimation models.  
The results revealed that both the T based model and the 
R and R/W based model provided good estimations of the 
functional size of the 17 appli
cations involved in the study. 
Indeed, the models are characterized by an MMRE of 21% 
and 12%, respectively. 
The results are considered interesting by the company 
providing the data since the asset of the software 
applications stock can be estim
ated just looking at specific 
components easy to obtain. I
ndeed, the main goal was to 
find a cheap approach to be employed as support for 
decisions of the board of directors and for attestations with 
stakeholders. Just to give an idea of the possible benefits, 
the Italian software company involved in our study needs 
about 4-6 hours to size a medi
um application by applying 
the traditional IFPUG Function Points Analysis (without 
considering the time spent to interview the people for 
searching the relevant information). On the other hand, the 
proposed approach based on the use of tables required about 
30 minutes. It is important to 
observe that, before applying 
the proposed method based on physical tables, InfoCamere 
tried to apply the LOC based backfiring approach [26]. 
However it was considered not feasible by project managers 
due to several managerial issues, e.g., several programming 
languages were used to develop the operating software 
applications and the tool em
ployed for one language could 
not be employed for another one; a developer of the 
application to be measured had to be involved; and the 
source code of a complex application turned out to be hard 
to analyze.  
Since replications of a stud
y, in different settings and 
with larger data sets, are always required, as future work, we 
also plan to collect and analyze data from the same 
company as well as from others. Moreover, we would like 
to investigate if the proposed approach can be used also to 
estimate the size expressed in terms of other Functional Size 
Measurement methods, such as COSMIC. 
Furthermore, we intend to compare our approach with 
more sophisticated ones, such
 as Indicative and Estimated 
NEMSA, and the four types of
 approximations proposed for 
COSMIC, i.e., Average Functional Process, Fixed Size 
Classification, Equal Size Bands, and Average Use Case 
[12]. Although they have been proposed with different 
goals, namely for estimating the size in the early phase of 
the development, they share with 
us the need to allow for an 
estimation of the functional si
ze using a few information. 
Thus, we would like to analyze pros and cons of the 
different approaches not only w
ith respect to the accuracy of 
the estimation but also with respect to the information 
required to apply the methods and then the time needed to 
carry out the measurement. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Breush, T., Pagan, A.: A simple test for heteroscedasticity and 
random coefficient variation. Econometrica 47 (1992) 1287-
1294.  
[2]
 
A. Albrecht, “Measuring Application Development Produc- 
tivity,” in Procss of the Joint SHARE/GUIDE/IBM Ap- 
plication Development Symposium, 1979, pp. 83–92. 
[3]
 
Bianco, V and Lavazza, L. and Morasca, “A Proposal for 
Simplified Model-Based Cost Estimation Models”; in Procs. 
of Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7343, 2012, pp 59-73 
[4]
 
Briand, L., Wieczorek, I.: Software Resource Estimation. In: 
Encyclopaedia of Softw. Engi
neering (2002), pp. 1160–1196.  
[5]
 
Briand, L., Langley, T., Wiek
zorek, I.: A Replicated 
Assessment and Comparison of Common Software Cost 
Modeling Techniques. Proc. of International Conference on 
Software Engineering, I
EEE press, 2000, pp. 377–386. 
[6]
 
Briand, L., El. Emam, K., Surmann, D., Wiekzorek, I., 
Maxwell, K.: An Assessment and Comparison of Common 
Software Cost Estimation Modeling Techniques. Proc. of 
International Conference on Software Engineering, IEEE 
press, 1999, pp. 313-322. 
[7]
 
L. Briand and J. Wust, “Modeling development effort in 
Object-Oriented systems using design properties,” IEEE 
Trans. on Softw. Eng., vol. 
27, no. 11, pp. 936–986, 2001. 
[8]
 
Buglione, L., Gencel, C.:Impact of Base Functional 
Component Types on Software Functional Size Based Effort 
Estimation. Proc. of PROFES, 2008, pp. 75-89. 
[9]
 
Buglione, L., Ferrucci, F., Gencel
, C., Gravino, C., Sarro, F.: 
Which COSMIC Base Functional Components are Significant 
in Estimating Web Application Development? - A Case 
Study. Proc. of the IWSM/MetriKon/Mensura 2010, pp. 205-
224, Shaker Verlag, ISBN 978-3-8322-9618-6. A. Abran, G. 
Büren, J- J. Cuadrado-Gallego, R. Dumke (eds). 
290 [10]
 
Conte D., Dunsmore H.E:, Shen V.Y.: Software engineering 
metrics and models. The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing 
Company, Inc., 1986.   
[11]
 
COSMICa, COSMIC v.3.0.1,
 Measurement Manual, 2009, 
Common Software Measurement International Consortium, 
URL: www.cosmicon.com  
[12]
 
COSMICb, COSMIC Method 
v3.0 Advanced & Related 
Topics,” 2008. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.cosmicon.com/dl manager4. asp?id=60  
[13]
 
Costagliola G., Di Martino S., Ferrucci F., Gravino C., 
Tortora G., Vitiello G.: A COSM
IC-FFP: Approach to Predict 
Web Application Development Effort. J. of Web Engineering 
5(2), 2006, pp. 93-120. 
[14]
 
Dekkers, C., Gunter, I.,  “Using ''Backfiring'' to Accurately 
Size Software More Wishful Thinking than Science? IT 
Metrics Strategies, VI(11) (Nov. 2000) pp. 1-8. 
[15]
 
Ebert, C., Dumke, R., Bundsc
huh, M., Schmietendorf, A., 
Dumke, R.: Best Practices in Software Measurement. 
Springer Berlin Heildelberg New York, ISBN: 3-540-20867-4  
[16]
 
Ferrucci, F., Gravino, C., Di Martino, S..: Estimating Web 
Application Development Effort Using Web-COBRA and 
COSMIC: An Empirical Study. Proc. of Software 
Engineering and Advanced A
pplications (SEAA2009), pp. 
306-312. 
[17]
 
Ferrucci, F., Gravino, C., Buglione, L.: Estimating Web 
Application Development Effort
 using COSMIC: Impact of 
the Base Functional Component Types. Proc. of the Software 
Measurement European Forum (SMEF 2010), Roma (Italy), 
ISBN 978-88-6301-033-6, pp. 103-116. Ton Dekkers (eds.) 
[18]
 
Freund, J..: Mathematical Statistics, Prentice-Hall, Upper 
Saddle River, 1084 NJ, 1992. 
[19]
 
Gencel, C., Buglione, L.,: Do Base Functional Component 
Types Affect the Relationship between Software Functional 
Size and Effort? Proc. of IWSM/Mensura 2007, pp. 72-85. 
[20]
 
Gencel, Ç., Demirörs, O.: Functional size measurement 
revisited. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 17(3), 2008. 
[21]
 
Houston, K.T., “Evolving Standards in Function Point/Lines 
of Code Ratios”, International Forum on COCOMO and 
Software Modeling, 2003. 
[22]
 
IFPUG, International Function Point Users Group. Function 
Point Counting Practices Manual - Release 4.3.1 (2010) 
http://www.ifpug.org/ 
[23]
 
ISBSG, ISBSG Data Repository r10, January 2007, URL: 
www.isbsg.org  
[24]
 
ISO/IEC Funct. Size Measurement stand. 14143 Parts 1 to 6. 
[25]
 
Jeffery, D. R., Ruhe, M., Wieczorek, I.:A comparative study 
of two software development cost modeling techniques using 
multi-organizational and company-specific data. Information 
& Software Technology 42(14), pp. 1009-1016 (2000) 
[26]
 
Jones, C. “Backfiring: Conver
ting Lines-of-Code to Function 
Points”, IEEE Computer vol
ume 28(11), 1995, pp. 87—88 
[27]
 
Jones, C., “Estimating Software Costs”, 2nd Edition, , 
McGraw-Hill, 2007. ISBN 978-0-07-148300-1. 
[28]
 
Kitchenham, B. A.: A Procedure for Analyzing Unbalanced 
Datasets. IEEE Trans. Software Eng., 24(4), 1998, 278-301. 
[29]
 
Kitchenham, B. A., Mendes, E.: Software Productivity 
Measurement Using Multiple Size Measures. IEEE Trans. 
Software Eng. 30(12), pp. 1023-1035 (2004) 
[30]
 
Kitchenham, B., Mendes, E., Travassos, G.: Cross versus 
Within-Company Cost Estimation Studies: A systematic 
Review. IEEE Trans. on Softw. 
Engin. 33 (5) (2007) 316-329. 
[31]
 
Kitchenham, B., Foss, T., Stensrud, E., Myrtveit, I.: A 
simulation study of the model evaluation criterion MMRE. 
IEEE Trans. on Softw. Engin.
 29(11) (2003), pp. 985–995. 
[32]
 
Kitchenham, B., Pickard, L. M., MacDonell, S. G., Shepperd, 
M. J.: What accuracy statistics really measure. IEE 
Proceedings Software 148(3) (2001), pp. 81–85. 
[33]
 
B. Kitchenham, L. Pickard, and 
S. Pfleeger, “Case studies for 
method and tool evaluation,” I
EEE Software, vol. 12, no. 4, 
pp. 52–62, 1995. 
[34]
 
Lavazza, L. Liu, G., “ Report on Using Simplified Function 
Point Measurement Processes”, in International Conference 
on Software Engineering 
Advances; 2012, pp. 367-372 
[35]
 
Maxwell, K. Applied Statistics for Software Managers. 
Software Quality Institute Series, Prentice Hall, 2002, ISBN 
0130417890 
[36]
 
Meli, R., “Early and extended Function Point: A new method 
for Function Points estimation”, in Procs of the IFPUG-Fall 
Conference, 1997. 
[37]
 
Meli, R., Santillo, L., “Function Point Estimation Methods: A 
Comparative overview”, European Software Measurement 
Conference (FESMA'99), Ottobre 1999. 
[38]
 
Mendes E., Kitchenham B.:Further Comparison of Cross-
company and Within-company Effort Estimation Models for 
Web Applications. Proc. of International Software Metrics 
Symposium (METRICS’04), 2004, pp. 348-357. 
[39]
 
Mendes E., Counsell S., Mosley N., Triggs C., Watson I.: A 
Comparative Study of Cost Estimation Models for Web 
Hypermedia Applications. Empi
rical Software Engineering 
8(2), 2003, pp. 163-196. 
[40]
 
Menzies, T., Chen, Z., Hihn, J., Lum, K.: Selecting Best 
Practices for Effort Estimation. IEEE Trans. Software Eng., 
32(11), November 2006, pp. 883-895. 
[41]
 
NESMA. "Definitions and counting guidelines for the 
application of function point analysis",  (November 2004), 
140 pages, ISBN 978-90-
76258-19-5. www.nesma.org. 
[42]
 
Robiolo, G. and Orosco, R.
, “Employing use cases to early 
estimate effort with simpler metrics”, Innovations Syst. 
Softw. Eng., vol. 4, 2008. 
[43]
 
Rollo, A., “Functional Size m
easurement and COCMO – A 
synergic approach”, In Procs. Of Software Measurement 
European Forum, (2006), pp. 259-267. 
[44]
 
Royston, P.: An extension of Shapiro and Wilk's W test for 
normality to large samples. Applied Statistics 31 (2) (1982) 
115{124. 
[45]
 
Ruhe, M., Jeffery, R., Wieczorek,
 I.: Cost estimation for Web 
applications. Proc. of International Conference on Software 
Engineering (ICSE’03)
, 2003, pp. 285–294. 
[46]
 
Santillo, L., Conte, M., Meli, 
R., “Early & Quick function 
point: sizing more with less”, IEEE International Symposium 
on Software Metrics, September 2005. 
[47]
 
Stensrud, E., Myrtveit, I.: Human Performance Estimating 
with Analogy and Regression Models: an Empirical 
Validation. Proc. of International Software Metrics 
Symposium, IEEE press, 1996, pp. 205–213. 
[48]
 
Total Metrics: How to Decide
 which Method to Use. Method 
for Software Sizing, Copyright Total Metrics URL: 
http://www.totalmetrics.com/function-point-
resources/downloads/R185_Why-use-Function-Points.pdf 
[49]
 
Wohlin, C., Runeson, P., Host, M. Ohlsson, M. C., Regnell, 
B., Wesslen, A.: Experimentation in Software Engineering - 
An Introduction. Kluwer, 2000. 
[50]
 
Wong, J. Ho, D., Capretz, L.
 F., “Calibrating Function Point 
Backfiring Conversion Ratios Using Neuro-Fuzzy 
Technique”, in Procs of International Journal of Uncertainty, 
Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems 16(6), (2008), pp. 
847-862.  
 
 
291