 Facilitating Task Breakdown in Sprint Planning 
Meeting 2 with an Interaction Room 
An Experience Report 
 
Simon Grapenthin 
paluno 
–
 The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology 
University of Duisburg-Essen 
45127 Essen, Germany 
simon.grapenthin@paluno.uni-due.de 
Steven Poggel 
adesso AG 
Stockholmer Allee 24 
44269 Dortmund, Germany 
steven.poggel@adesso.de 
 
Matthias Book 
paluno 
–
 The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology 
University of Duisburg-Essen 
45127 Essen, Germany 
matthias.book@paluno.uni-due.de 
Volker Gruhn 
paluno 
–
 The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology 
University of Duisburg-Essen 
45127 Essen, Germany 
volker.gruhn@paluno.uni-due.de 
Abstract
—
 In a large industry project that followed an agile 
approach based on the Scrum method, we found that the team 
often struggled with breaking coarse product backlog items down 
into the detailed tasks that had to be completed in a sprint. The 
team’s understanding of the backlog items’ business and 
technical implications and dependencies seemed not deep enough 
to identify all necessary tasks, so in addition to the tasks defined 
in the sprint planning meeting prescribed by Scrum, an average 
of 26% of additional tasks was identified later over the course of 
each sprint, making any attempt at progress estimation or risk 
management very difficult. To counter this effect and support the 
team’s understanding of 
backlog items right from the beginning 
of each sprint, we introduced a pragmatic method to analyze 
backlog items more comprehensively and thus support a more 
complete and reliable task breakdown. We consequently found 
that the effectiveness and precision of task breakdowns has 
improved significantly in the project.
 
Keywords
—
 Scrum, Task Breakdown, Interaction Room  
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
Scrum is the most popular agile software process model 
[1]. It structures a project into a series of iterations that last 
from one to four weeks. Each iteration comprises the steps of 
iteration planning (in the 
sprint planning meeting
), 
implementing and testing a certain product increment (in a 
sprint
), presenting the results to stakeholders (in the 
sprint 
review
) and reflecting on o
ne’s work in order to optimize 
future sprints (in the 
sprint retrospective
) [2, 3]. Scrum defines 
three roles that together form the so-called Scrum team: The 
product owner
 is responsible for managing the product, 
defining and prioritizing produc
t requirements [4, 5]. The 
Scrum master
 manages the process. He oder she protects the 
team from interferences, identifies and eliminates impediments 
and advocates Scrum within the organization [4, 5]. The 
development team
 consists of particular roles needed for the 
development (e.g. developer, tester and architect). The 
development team (henceforth: 
“
team
”
) is a proper subset of 
the Scrum team, excluding the Scrum master and the product 
owner. The development team members manage themselves in 
terms of how they complete the work to be done in a 
sprint [4, 5]. The definition of this work occurs in the sprint 
planning meeting that takes place at the beginning of each 
sprint. It is divided into two separate meetings: In sprint 
planning meeting 1, the team gathers all information needed to 
estimate and commit to the implementation of a set of 
prioritized 
backlog items
. A backlog item (or item for short) is 
a functional requirement defined by the product owner. In 
sprint planning meeting 2, the team is then supposed to define 
all 
tasks
 that need to be performed in order to design, 
implement and test the backlog items selected for the sprint. 
Tasks describe the team’s planned activities that are necessary 
in order to fulfill the functional requirements. For each sprint, 
the team commits to a limited number of backlog items, based 
on the estimates of the items’ complexity and the team’s 
velocity (i.e. the number of work units that can be handled by 
the team in a sprint). The velocity is a measurement that 
becomes more precise the more iterations a team completes, 
because its members gain experience in estimating the 
system’s complexity and their own performance [6]. 
 
Deriving tasks from backlog items is a complex task, 
however. The team needs to have detailed knowledge about a 
variety of business and technical aspects of the information 
system under construction, as well as an understanding of the 
process and component landscape it is being integrated into, 
and the data structures it should rely on. Often, slicing tasks out 
of a backlog item is not straightforward. For example, if the 
specification of a backlog item is written from a user’s 
perspective, as is often the case, the team additionally has to 
make the transfer from the user perspective to the technical 
perspective. A tea
m’s inability to identify all tasks initially 
at 
the time of sprint planning meeting 2 therefore not only means 
that some tasks are simply recognized later in the course of the 
2014 40th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-1-4799-5795-8/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2014.711 sprint, but also that the initial tasks may not be properly 
understood, and that they certainly do not take into account any 
dependencies with late-identified tasks. Besides the challenge 
of creating a clean overall system design under these 
circumstances, it is also difficult to measure the progress within 
a sprint, since the number of completed tasks (the 
burndown
) 
cannot be used as a reliable metric to ensure that the work 
planned for a sprint gets done in its allotted timebox [7]. 
In this paper, we report on an industry project conducted at 
a medium-sized software company, where a Scrum team felt 
that their task breakdown was not as effective as it should be 
because many tasks were only identified over the course of the 
sprint, and not (as desired) in the initial sprint planning meeting 
2. We therefore introduced the team to the so-called Interaction 
Room (an approach described in detail in [8, 9]) to support a 
more in-depth item analysis and task breakdown during sprint 
planning meeting 2. In the following sections, we give an 
overview of the project situation we initially encountered (Sect. 
II), describe the new approach we introduced (Sect. III), and 
report on the improvements we observed after applying it in 
the project (Sect. IV). 
II.
 
P
ROJECT 
E
XPERIENCE
 
The reported experiences stem from a team within a large-
scale software project in which an inventory maintenance 
system for health insurances is being developed. The system 
contains over 3000 user interface views covering a large 
variety of insurance cases. A number of project teams are 
simultaneously working on different components of this 
inventory system. The team we observed is a Scrum team of 
five developers on the development team, one Scrum master 
and one product owner. This team is both developing new 
modules for the system, and implementing change requests for 
existing modules. Each sub-project spans about three months. 
At the time of our research, the team was working on a 
component for the automated receipt, remodeling, storage and 
dispatching of insurance data from external partners of the 
insurance company. The individual features of this new 
component were set forth in backlog items that served as a 
basis for the team’s implementation work. From the backlog 
items, the team sliced individual tasks to plan each sprint. 
In Scrum theory, this slicing should  all take place in the 
sprint planning meeting 2. Nonetheless, Schwaber predicts that 
only 
60% of a sprint’s tasks will be defined in 
this meeting, 
and assumes that 40% of the tasks will become apparent later 
during the sprint [2]. In our industry project, even less 
–
 about 
20-30% of the tasks 
–
 were added later during the sprint. 
However, we believe this is still an undesirably high number of 
late-identified tasks: If the team has a deep understanding of 
the backlog items, it should be able to decompose them into 
virtually all the tasks necessary to deliver the required 
functionality. Nevertheless, if the team is unable to identify all 
tasks early, it is probably lacking information about the 
backlog items. In consequence, the team would be committing 
to backlog items it has not fully understood. 
In the project we observed, the team was indeed trying to 
carve useful tasks out of backlog items largely by intuitive “gut 
feeling” rather than by
 a concrete methodical approach. As a 
consequence, many tasks were not identified in the sprint 
planning meeting 2, but only became obvious later in the 
course of the sprint. We suspect that many Scrum teams are 
struggling with this problem when identifying concrete tasks 
from backlog items, which prompted us to come up with a 
more structured 
–
 but still pragmatic and agile 
–
 method. 
Before we introduced our approach, the team had 
performed the sprint planning meeting 2 in separate groups 
(which actually de
viates from Scrum practice “by the book”)
: 
The six developers formed three groups with two developers 
each. Each pair took backlog items from the issue tracking 
software to identify tasks for them, and noted these tasks on 
cards. The tasks on the cards were not discussed further with 
the rest of the team, but just put on a bulletin board as a 
reminder. Thus, two thirds of the team members did not know 
any details about the tasks for completing a particular backlog 
item, as they had not worked on identifying them. Tasks were 
formulated as short notes such as “create database table for 
medical service”, so only the developers who created the task 
knew exactly how to create the database table (e.g. which 
attributes, primary key, relations to other tables etc. it should 
have). For the other developers, most tasks needed clarification 
before they could work on them. In a few extreme cases 
towards the end of the sprint, none of the team members could 
remember what a certain task meant and how it was necessary 
for the completion of a particular backlog item. This indicates a 
clear lack of thorough understanding of the backlog items. 
Another critical aspect was the expertise of the team 
members. The team we observed had a good distribution of 
knowledge and expertise among the team members. However, 
there were certainly some areas where one team member had 
stronger knowledge and more experience than another (e.g. in 
user interface design). Since items were framed vertically [6, 7] 
(every item involved the data, logic and presentation layer) but 
the two developers who sliced a backlog item into tasks might 
not have expertise in all those layers, the task breakdown did 
not benefit from many developers’ expertise, and the set of 
identified tasks remained incomplete.  
The challenges that this incomplete task breakdown posed 
in practice can best be illustrated by looking at the burndown 
charts the team produced over a number of sprints. A 
burndown chart measures progress during a sprint by showing 
the remaining effort (in terms of story points or number of 
tasks) on the vertical axis, while the horizontal axis shows the 
time elapsed in the sprint [7]. Since the developers did not 
manage to identify all tasks at the beginning of the sprint, it 
became inevitable that additional tasks had to be added during 
the sprint to really complete the backlog items. That rendered 
the burndown chart less meaningful and therefore less 
valuable. This effect can be seen in Fig. 1 where the total 
number of known tasks 
increases
 over the course of the sprint 
to exceed the number of initially identified tasks, instead of 
remaining constant. (Note that this does not constitute a 
violation of the requirements freeze that Scrum mandates 
during a sprint: The additional tasks do not represent 
commitments to new requirements (i.e. backlog items), but 
represent previously unrecognized work that turned out 
necessary in order to complete the backlog items in the sprint 
backlog.) 
2  
Fig. 1. Task burndown chart showing new tasks being identified over the course of the sprint. 
If too many tasks are added subsequently during the sprint, 
it becomes much harder for the Scrum master (who is 
responsible for identifying and eliminating impediments to the 
team’s work) to track progress based on the chart and to 
recognize and deal with projects risks, as Fig. 2 illustrates. 
In this figure, the burndown charts of two sprints depict the 
situation before the introduction of our method. On the left of 
Fig. 2 is a burndown chart where 41 tasks were identified in 
sprint planning meeting 2, but another 16 tasks were identified 
over the course of the sprint, so 28% of tasks were added 
during the sprint. In the sprint charted on the right of Fig. 2, 38 
tasks were initially identified in sprint planning meeting 2, but 
12 more tasks were identified over the course of the sprint, so 
24% of the tasks were added late. The total number of tasks 
increased steadily here as the team gained a deeper 
understanding of the backlog items and resulting tasks every 
day. On average, 26% of the tasks 
in this project’s sprints were 
identified late in the sprints, instead of in sprint planning 
meeting 2 already. 
These observations lead us to the conclusion that the team 
had difficulty with the derivation of tasks from backlog items. 
Thus, we looked for a method to support the team members
’
 
understanding of the backlog items without introducing a 
heavyweight design step into the agile process model. 
III.
 
S
PRINT 
P
LANNING 
2
 IN THE 
I
NTERACTION 
R
OOM
 
In order to provide the team with a more structured, yet 
pragmatic approach to derive tasks from backlog items, we 
suggested that the complete team should work together on each 
item instead of forming pairs. Further, we encouraged the team 
to examine backlog items explicitly from four different 
perspectives that focus on static and dynamic, user- and 
system-focused aspects of each component and thus help the 
team to gain a comprehensive understanding of the system: 
Firstly, since the main purpose of information systems is to 
support business processes, a backlog item should be described 
from a 
business process
 perspective. Secondly, as an 
information system is “an integrated set of components for 
collecting, storing, and processing data” [10], the second 
important perspective is the 
data
 perspective. Thirdly, an 
information system is usually highly integrated into an 
application landscape and the system communicates with other 
systems through interfaces. Thus, the third perspective is an 
integration
 perspective. Besides, an information system is also 
a socio-technical system, so the team needs to consider backlog 
items from an 
interaction
 perspective. For each of these 
perspectives, we encouraged the team to examine backlog 
items and model the core process, data, integration and 
interaction aspects they entail. To facilitate this pragmatic, 
multi-perspective design sketching, we employed a so-called 
Interaction Room whose layout reflects the four perspectives 
[8, 9]. This can be a dedicated conference room or (as in our 
case) a section of the team room equipped with large 
whiteboards. Every whiteboard is dedicated to the 
representation of one perspective, as shown in Fig. 3: 

 
The 
backlog
 is adopted from agile practices [3]. It is used 
to manage the project’s requirements
 (backlog items).  

 
The 
process map
 describes the sequence of business 
activities to execute the functionality described by a 
backlog item. It shows alternative and concurrent activity 
flows and relevant constraints. 
 
Fig. 2. Task burndown charts before the Interaction Room was introduced. 
3  
Fig. 3. Basic layout of an Interaction Room. 

 
The 
object map
 describes the internal data structure of the 
system, showing data objects on a high level of 
abstraction. It also shows relationships between data 
entities. The object landscape remains on a business level, 
so implementation details, such as composition 
dependencies, are left out. 

 
The 
integration map
 shows the interfaces of the system 
under development to other systems. Incoming and 
outgoing interfaces show the exchanged data and possibly 
the communication protocols.  

 
The 
interaction map
 describes the user interaction on 
different levels of abstraction. A navigation overview 
highlights the menu structure and underlying dialog 
flows. Additionally, the graphical user interface can be 
sketched as a storyboard. 
The model sketches in these maps remain deliberately 
abstract, informal and incomplete, as they are not intended to 
replace formal system specifications. Rather, they should serve 
as a catalyst for the discussion and mutual understanding of a 
project and its possible pitfalls. We deliberately talk about 
“maps” instead of “models” to 
emphasize their main goal: 
empowering users to understand and discuss the crucial parts 
of a system, and use the model sketches as maps to orient 
themselves in the project. For this purpose, we also do not 
prescribe particular modeling languages for the various maps, 
but let teams choose a notation that all stakeholders 
understand. This is in accordance with Cohn, who states that 
there should be some kind of design in sprint planning meeting 
2, but recalls that he has 
“never been in an iteration planning 
meeting where it’s become necessary to draw [a] class diagram 
or similar model” [7]
. 
The sprint planning meeting 2 was timeboxed between one 
and four hours (depending on the sprint length). Thus, the team 
had limited time to make an item design explicit and to identify 
the tasks to implement and test it. We therefore discouraged 
team members from attempting to create an explicit, complete 
technical design model for each backlog item in this short 
timeframe, but rather recommended that they focus on 
understanding the subject matter through model sketches and 
getting a more solid impression of the technical steps required 
to implement a particular item. Fig. 4 depicts the coarse 
methodical guideline for examining backlog items and deriving 
tasks from them. 
 
Fig. 4. Guideline for designing backlog items from different perspectives in order to identify tasks. 
gg
ygg
4 To discuss these perspectives in sprint planning meeting 2, 
we let the whole Scrum team gather together, not just (as 
previously done) the developers. This way, the product owner 
could work with the development team and provide feedback 
and information about the backlog items as required. The 
Scrum master moderated the meeting and encouraged the team 
members to participate in the discussion about the backlog 
items and the tasks (the Scrum master was chosen to moderate 
the meeting so the product owner would be on a level field 
with the developers). The developers discussed each backlog 
item based on its content: The team first decided if a backlog 
item would be triggered by a user or a system event. This 
decision was made by discussing the item between the 
development team members. For a user-triggered item, the 
team modeled the corresponding user interface views and 
sketched prototypes for them. For system-triggered items, the 
team modeled the event that triggers the business process. The 
Scrum master as the moderator was in charge of documenting 
the model sketches for later reference, but any team member 
was encouraged to actively join the design process. 
Afterwards, the team decomposed the functionality of each 
item into its atomic functions. Once the atomic functions were 
identified, the team sketched a design for them by performing 
the following steps iteratively until the whole item was 
designed:  

 
Determine and model input data of the function 

 
Design function from a business process perspective 

 
Determine and model output data of the function 
In case the input data would be provided by the user, the 
team modeled the user interaction and designed the data 
structures to store the provided data. On the other hand, if the 
input data would be provided by an outside system or 
component, the team designed the respective component 
interface. Since the output data could be stored as part of the 
internal data warehouse or written to a component or user 
interface, the team also sketched the respective data structures 
or interfaces in the Interaction Room. 
The team repeated these steps of sketching designs from the 
data, process, integration and interaction perspective 
–
 not until 
they arrived at a complete specification, which would 
contradict the agile approach, but until all team members had 
gathered the necessary knowledge from the coarse sketches to 
understand the required functionality and its dependencies 
across the perspectives. With this knowledge, they could 
determine the tasks that would have to be performed in order to 
implement and test a backlog item. That way, the team should 
be much more likely to identify a more complete set of tasks 
for each item. 
We believe that the task breakdown process cannot be 
described more formally because it is highly dependent on the 
nature of each backlog item. However, making the design of an 
item explicit by collaborating among all team members helps 
raising issues that could be overlooked if the design was made 
in small groups, or if there was no explicit consideration of the 
various design aspects in the sprint planning meeting at all.  
By encouraging the Scrum team to examine the backlog 
items explicitly from the four perspectives described above, 
and visualizing the “big picture” relationships between 
multiple backlog items across these perspectives, we believe 
we can enable a Scrum team to perform their sprint planning 
meeting 2 in a more structured way. Instead of just extracting 
some tasks from backlog items with little comprehension of a 
backlog item’s details, they can gather information about all 
backlog items from different perspectives. That way, they gain 
a better understanding of each item’s technical implications. 
Based on the deeper insight , the team can identify tasks based 
on more solid ground of how to design, implement and test an 
item in the larger context of the overall system. In the 
following sections, we provide a short example to illustrate 
how the team worked with the Interaction Room, and report on 
the overall results of applying this approach in the project. 
IV.
 
I
NTERACTION 
R
OOM 
U
SAGE 
E
XAMPLE
 
Figure 5 shows an example of a process map and object 
map that were sketched by the team. The process map 
describes an automated process for sending a certain type of 
notification to customers of public health insurance companies. 
The level of abstraction in this top-level sketch was quite 
high, as indicated by labels such as 
“
s
earching for data”, 
“
mapping of 
attributes to output structure”, “
creation of output 
files
”, “
change of 
status” 
etc. After sketching the process map, 
the team went on sketching the corresponding object map. 
They went through the individual process steps and determined 
which data needed to be processed in each particular step. In 
sketching the object map, the team focused on the business 
objects that are processed in the software module, e
.g. “
bank 
a
ccount”, “
a
pplication”, “
insured person
” 
etc. The team paid 
special attention to designing the maps in such a way that each 
entity shown on the object map was manipulated by some 
activity on the process map, and each entity known to be 
manipulated in the course of an activity on the process map 
was also noted on the object map. 
With the understanding and knowledge gained from this 
modeling process, the team was convinced they knew enough 
about the module to be built in order to understand and 
estimate some of the backlog items. The team then went into 
greater detail and modeled the missing process steps on the 
process map, added missing objects to the object map and 
designed the user interface on the interaction map (not shown 
here for brevity). The integration map reflecting the technical 
implications of the process in this case comprised only one call 
to a particular service in a different software component. 
After this, creating the individual tasks that were necessary 
to fulfill the acceptance criteria of a backlog item was 
astonishingly easy, compared to how the team had difficulty 
defining all the right tasks earlier. Because the whole process, 
its data structures, user interfaces and integration implications 
were now understood very well, the necessary tasks were clear 
to everyone, and just had to be documented on cards for the 
Scrum board. 
5  
Fig. 5. Example of process and object map in the Interaction Room. 
V.
 
I
MPACT IN 
P
RACTICE
 
After introducing the Interaction Room to the Scrum team, 
we observed their performance over the course of three sprints 
to assess the impact of our approach. As an indicator for its 
benefits, we tracked the tasks that were added late during each 
sprint. In the three sprints, 19 backlog items were 
implemented. These items were broken down into 155 tasks, of 
which 145 tasks were derived in sprint planning 2 meetings 
and 10 tasks were added subsequently. Thus, in total only 6.8% 
of the tasks were added late during a sprint. Fig. 6 shows the 
burndown charts of the three observed sprints. 
As can be seen in these charts, the top lines (i.e. the number 
of identified tasks) remain relatively level for most of the sprint 
duration, and rise only slightly on occasion (in contrast to the 
strongly rising top lines in the charts in Fig. 2). In the first 
sprint, the team committed to implement six backlog items. In 
sprint planning meeting 2, 48 tasks were identified for these, 
and seven tasks were added during the sprint, i.e. 12% of tasks 
were added subsequently. In the second iteration, seven 
backlog items were implemented, for which 53 tasks were 
derived during sprint planning meeting 2. Just one task was 
added later during the sprint, i.e. 2% of the tasks were added 
subsequently. In the third iteration, six backlog items were 
committed to, for which 44 tasks were derived during sprint 
planning meeting 2. Two additional tasks were added during 
the sprint, i.e. 5% of the tasks were added late here (Table I). 
Our observations of the sprints before and after the 
introduction of the Interaction Room show that the percentage 
of late-identified tasks fell from the previous average of 26% to 
less than 6.8% on average after the new approach had been 
introduced 
–
 much less than the 40% late-identified tasks that 
even Schwaber considered inevitable [2]. We hypothesize that 
this is due to the more comprehensive examination of each 
backlog item from the four perspectives of the Interaction 
Room, and in particular the discussion sparked among the team 
members 
while considering and modeling a backlog item’s 
structural and functional implications in the overall system. 
TABLE I. 
 
T
ASK 
B
REAKDOWN 
R
ESULTS 
I
N 
T
HE 
I
NTERACTION 
R
OOM
 
Sprint 
total number of 
identified tasks 
late-
identified 
tasks 
percentage of late-
identified tasks 
1
 
48 7 
12% 
2
 
53 1 
2% 
3
 
44 2 
5% 
From the experience with three sprints in this project alone, 
we obviously cannot claim with certainty that the observed 
improvement in task breakdown efficiency was caused solely 
by the introduction of the Interaction Room 
–
 two other 
potentially contributing factors that one could think of would 
be 
the team members’ 
increasing familiarity with the project 
matter, as well as varying 
complexity of the sprints’ tasks.
 
However, the general level of task complexity was quite 
homogeneously high across the various sprints, and the sharp 
drop to just about a quarter of the previous number of late-
identified tasks seems inconsistent with a gradual 
familiarization process. 
We can also rule out an “observer 
effect” (i.e. the team trying particularly hard to identify all 
relevant tasks because if they know the task number to be a 
performance metric), since the team members were not aware 
that the number of late-identified tasks would be evaluated by 
us after introduction of the new method. 
6  
Fig. 6. Task burndown charts of the sprints after the Interaction Room was introduced. 
Two additional side benefits of the approach are 
noteworthy: Firstly, since the team identified almost all tasks 
already in sprint planning meeting 2, it was possible to measure 
the sprint velocity much more reliably, since the number of 
tasks in the burndown chart remained largely stable, so the 
team members had a more realistic impression of the progress 
they actually made. Secondly, when using the Interaction 
Room, the whole team collaborated on the design sketches and 
the task decomposition, so every team member became able to 
understand or (with less extra study) even perform every task, 
whereas the relevant knowledge about individual tasks had 
been much more compartmentalized before.  
In addition to the quantitative results, we also asked the 
team members to give us their informal opinion about the new 
approach. They responded that previously, they had sometimes 
felt uncertain why and how to perform a task during a sprint, 
but now felt that the new collaborative design fostered joint 
understanding about the backlog items, derived tasks and their 
rationales. This was particularly important in this project, since 
every backlog item was designed separately instead of in 
context of the whole system (and thus other backlog items). 
We believe that we could achieve further improvements in the 
completeness of the identified tasks if the relationships 
between various backlog items were taken into account, as 
these can be quite easily visualized in the Interaction Room. 
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSION AND 
O
UTLOOK
 
In summary, our observation of a large Scrum-based 
industry project showed that about a quarter of all tasks was 
originally not identified in sprint planning meeting 2, but only 
became apparent later during the course of the sprint, 
indicating that the team members were having difficulty 
deriving 
all necessary tasks from a sprint’s backlog items 
without any methodical support. This meant that the initially 
identified tasks were probably not well thought through, and 
that measuring sprint progress could not be accurate as the 
number of sprints per task was not stable. Also, the team faced 
considerably more obstacles in the execution of the sprint due 
to the insufficient sprint planning. 
We therefore encouraged team members to analyze backlog 
items and their resulting tasks from four different perspectives 
(business processes, data structures, integration and interaction) 
in an Interaction Room that facilitated pragmatic sketching and 
discussion of designs to obtain a high-level overview of the 
system. Using this approach, the whole team could arrive at a 
more comprehensive overview of the system, and identify the 
tasks necessary to implement and test individual backlog items 
significantly more confidently and completely 
–
 less than 7% 
of tasks were now added late during a sprint on average.  
In our ongoing research, we are continuing to observe 
further sprints in this project to obtain further data on the 
impact of our approach on task breakdown. We will also adopt 
the Interaction Room in other Scrum-based projects as well, in 
order to obtain more data that will help us to generalize our 
findings and identify the methodical elements that are 
primarily responsible for the observed improvements. 
Furthermore, we will also investigate if there could be a 
complexity measure for backlog items that suggests when a 
more in-depth analysis in the Interaction Room is advisable. 
 
[1]
 
Schwaber, C., Leganza, G., D'Silva, D.: The Truth About Agile 
Processes. Forrester Research (2007) 
[2]
 
Schwaber, K.: Agile project management with Scrum. Microsoft Press, 
Redmond, WA (2004) 
[3]
 
Schwaber, K., Beedle, M.: Agile Software Development with Scrum, 1st 
edn. Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA (2002) 
[4]
 
Rubin, K.S.: Essential Scrum. A practical guide to the most popular 
agile process. The Addison-Wesley signature series. Addison-Wesley, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ (2013) 
[5]
 
Cohn, M.: Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum. 
Pearson Education (2009) 
[6]
 
Cohn, M.: User Stories Applied: For Agile Software Development. 
Addison Wesley (2004) 
[7]
 
Cohn, M.: Agile Estimating and Planning. Prentice Hall PTR, Upper 
Saddle River, NJ, USA (2006) 
7 [8]
 
Grapenthin, S., Book, M., Gruhn, V., Schneider, C., Völker, K.: 
Reducing Complexity Using an Interaction Room: An Experience 
Report. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on 
Design of Communication, pp. 71
–
76. ACM, New York, NY, USA 
(2013) 
[9]
 
Book, M., Grapenthin, S., Gruhn, V.: Seeing the forest and the trees: 
focusing team interaction on value and effort drivers. In: Proceedings of 
the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium on the Foundations 
of Software Engineering, pp. 30:1

30:4. ACM, New York, NY, USA 
(2012).  
[10]
 
Encyclopædia Britannica: Definition: information system (2013) 
 
8