 Agile Procurement and Dynamic Value for Money to Facilitate Agile 
Software Projects  
Diane Jamieson 
Curtin Business School 
Curtin University of Technology 
Perth, Australia 
Diane.Jamieson@cbs.curtin.edu.au
Kevin Vinsen 
ADI Limited 
Perth, Australia 
Kevin.Vinsen@adi-
limited.com
Guy Callender 
Curtin Business School 
Curtin University of Technology 
Perth, Australia 
Guy.Callender@cbs.curtin.edu.au
Abstract
In situations where software systems are developed 
under formal contractual arrangements it is common 
for the buyer and supplier to dispute whether value for 
money is being delivered, even though it is unlikely 
that either party will be capable of measuring this 

outcome. 
This problem is exacerbated by a basic 
incompatibility between the buyer’s linear or 

sequential procurement process and the supplier’s 
agile software development methodology. At the 

commencement of a software development contract it 

is probable that a supplier will have accepted terms 

and conditions relating to scope and price that are 

philosophically in opposition to agile principles, 

particularly in respect of an iterative elaboration of 
requirements. A range of suboptimal project 
outcomes, including budget and schedule blowouts, 

typically result in these situations. 
This paper proposes an agile procurement process 
that can operate in conjunction with an agile software 

development methodology to improve many aspects of 

software project delivery. This process is supported by 

a mechanism designed to give the buyer and supplier 

the ability to define and agree the value for money 

proposition at various milestones within the project – 

dynamic value for money. 
1.Introduction 
A review of studies of software project problems by 
Moløkken and Jørgensen’s [1] supports the view 
expressed in the Chaos Report [2] that a number of 
specific problems are routinely identified. These 
include: poor requirements specification, inadequate 

user involvement, changing requirements, lack of 
executive sponsorship, poor project management and 
inaccurate cost estimates. Some of these problems 

(such as executive sponsorship and user involvement) 
stem from the relationship between the customer and 
supplier. Other problems arise when decisions are 
made using imperfect information and with poor 
definition of final desired outcomes [3]. 
Large software development projects are frequently 
undertaken within a competitive tendering and 

contracting (procurement) process that creates a 

formal contractual relationship between separate buyer 

and supplier organizations, subsequent to the supplier 

being chosen as being most likely to deliver value for 

money (VfM). To complicate matters the end user of 

the software system may even be found in a third 

organization. 
The typical procurement process is linear or 
sequential in nature (often described as a waterfall 

approach), with the supplier being engaged after 

several of the process steps have been completed. The 

waterfall process forces decisions to be made on scope 

and budget early in the process, when information is 

limited. In this situation, the accuracy and 

appropriateness of the VfM decision is also highly 

dependent upon the ability of the potential suppliers to 

formulate a solution in an environment in which 

probity constraints, particularly for government, 

minimise the interaction that can occur to confirm the 
requirements. A range of cost estimation 
methodologies has evolved to assist in the 

understanding of requirements and their costs. 

However software projects regularly exceed budget 

expectations and it is likely that VfM decisions are 

made using flawed assumptions, even if the price 
estimation has been accurate. Certainly there is no 

generally available means of measuring VfM within a 

project. 
Software development practitioners have embraced 
agile and iterative techniques in an endeavour to 
minimise problems associated with the specification of 
requirements and scope creep [4]. However the current 

waterfall procurement process prevents suppliers from 

being formally engaged at early decision points. As a 
 result the power of an agile development methodology 
cannot be fully realised. 
This paper proposes an agile procurement process 
that formalises greater interaction between a buyer and 
potential suppliers early in the procurement process, 

and is compatible with an agile software development 
approach. This agile procurement process can also 
provide the basis upon which to build a Dynamic VfM 

model for determining and measuring VfM outcomes 
at various stages in a project. 
2.Issues with Waterfall Procurement 
2.1.A Range of Disclipines 
The procurement of software development involves 
a number of different disciplines (such as accounting, 
finance, law, management and Information 
Technology) and associated methodologies in the 
early phases, before the winning supplier has been 

engaged. This leads to a range of ongoing difficulties. 

Those areas most likely to be associated with 
improved software project outcomes within an agile 
procurement process are discussed below. 
2.2.The Procurement Process 
Figure 1 shows a general representation of the 
waterfall procurement process [5], which has been 
previously described in detail [6]. 
Figure 1 In the early phases of a software development 
project strict probity rules, which dictate how a buyer 

and potential suppliers should communicate during the 
tendering process, often restrict the opportunity for an 
extensive dialogue which otherwise would uncover the 

full extent of the project. The buyer’s VfM decision is 

based upon the tenderers interpretation of the 

requirements and the winning tenderer is unlikely to 
have an appreciable understanding of the task ahead 
by the contract award phase. Thus the resulting 

contract will contain terms and conditions that 

inappropriately reflect the outcomes that will 

eventually required to be delivered. 
2.3.Software Cost Estimation and the 
Winner’s Curse 
One effect of the significant proportion of software 
projects that have cost overruns [1] is the frequently 
expressed view that software cost estimation is over 
optimistic [7]. However anecdotal evidence would 
suggest that even when the predicted cost proves to be 
fairly accurate, competing budget priorities frequently 

encourage customers to allocate insufficient budget. 
The procurement process inherently contributes to 
this problem through encouraging suppliers to be 
optimistic in their price estimates in order to win the 

tendering competition [8]. Even though most procurers 

profess to use some form of VfM evaluation, rather 

than lowest price, it is rare for a supplier in a higher 

price band to win. Buyers instinctively use 

competition as a price reduction strategy (as 
exemplified by early experiences of e-auctions). The 
resulting supplier optimism or “winner’s curse” [8] 

has frequently been known to cause low or negative 

supplier profits [9], [8] and can also harm the buyer 

[8]. 
2.4.Requirements Specification 
Consultants are often used in the early phases to 
help produce a requirements specification to be 
supplied with the tender documentation. However a 
consultant’s view, which is a form of expert opinion 
and is provided before the development process has 

begun, may not address all the potential complexities 

that will be uncovered by the vendor organization 

which is eventually required to deliver the system. The 

iterative and agile model often applied to 
contemporary software development recognises that 

requirements will continue to evolve and be 

discovered during the development phase and that 

continual reprioritising of requirements will lead to 
greater customer satisfaction for a lower price [4]. 
Project management practice is also moving 
towards more agile approaches [10], with one driver 
being more effective requirements elicitation, and to 

support this shift in practice a similar change in the 

procurement process would be helpful. 
 2.5.The Value for Money Decision 
The Commonwealth of Australia [11] describes 
VfM as the core principle underpinning procurement 
and “requires a comparative analysis of 
all
 relevant 
costs and benefits of each proposal through the whole 
procurement cycle (whole of life costing)”. It should 

include consideration for “
the maturity of the market 
for the property or service sought; the performance 

history of each prospective supplier; the relative risk 

of each proposal; the flexibility to adapt to possible 
change over the lifecycle of the property or service; 

financial considerations including all relevant direct 

and indirect benefits and costs over the whole 

procurement cycle; the anticipated price that could be 
obtained, or cost that may be incurred, at the point of 
disposal; and the evaluation of contract options (for 
example, contract extension options)”.  
This description, which is very subjective, includes 
elements relating to the type of procurement process to 
be undertaken, the type of good or service to be 

sourced, and the type of supplier to be selected. It is a 

multi-phase activity, and the choice of the winning 

tenderer is the principal VfM decision acknowledged 

in the process. There is often no reference to the 

continuing evaluation of VfM during the contract, 

although Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) represent 
a common, though often imperfect, contract 
management tool and imply that some element of VfM 

assessment is being undertaken. 
For software development procurement the VfM 
decision that selects the winning tenderer traditionally 

includes an estimation of the potential management 

and technical capability of the supplier, the technical 

and implementation solutions offered, and the price. 

The VfM decision usually results from an examination 

of the ranking of the suppliers in relation to these 

qualitative criteria and a separate ranking of their 
normalised prices. The subjective nature of the process 
means that the result may not be reproducible with 

different evaluators, an outcome that creates 

significant uncertainty about the reliability of the 

decision process. 
2.6.Value for Money Measurement 
The subjective nature of a typical VfM decision 
creates a common area of contention between buyers 
and suppliers during the contract management phases 
of the procurement. Buyers are likely to believe that 
suppliers are not delivering VfM and suppliers are 

potentially frustrated by the buyer’ freedom to contest 

the VfM received from the supplier even though there 

are no generally agreed means to monitor VfM. 
Furthermore, although VfM is frequently described 
[11] it is not defined in terms of generally applicable 

principles [6]. This lack of general principles means 

that during a software development contract there will 

be an absence of a regular evaluation of VfM. Project 

management techniques, such as earned value 
management, can be used to monitor performance and 
KPIs are typically used in the implementation phases 

of systems, although they are difficult to define and 

measure at any stage of the development phases. 
3.An Agile Procurement Process is 
Necessary 
A research project being undertaken in Australia by 
the authors is aimed at 
optimising VfM in software 
development through standardised cost metrics in the 
procurement, development and project management 
phases
.It is becoming increasingly clear that a significant 
revamp of the procurement process is one way to 

contribute to this objective. However, there are still 

significant problems with software cost estimation, as 
highlighted by Gruschke and Jørgensen [12], who 

believe that software cost estimation results have not 

improved in twenty years despite extensive 

developments in formal estimation methodologies. It 

seems as though methodologies cannot adapt as 

quickly as new issues arise. Thus a new procurement 
process that reduces the impact of inaccuracies in 
software cost estimation is one way of approaching 
this challenge. This will have the added benefit of 
facilitating the requirements engineering and cost 

estimation processes. 
Secondly a technique for measuring VfM at many 
stages in a project, not only at the commencement, is 

highly desirable. However this approach is difficult to 

incorporate in the current procurement process, 

particularly because project budgets are constrained by 

traditions relating to the setting of “whole of project” 

cost estimates and the matching of costs to financial 

reporting principles. Nevertheless, the merits of an 
agile procurement process, designed to match the agile 
methodologies increasingly associated with software 

development and project management are worth 

serious consideration. 
4.Agile Procurement to Support 
Dynamic VfM 
4.1.A Proposed Agile Model 
The search for a mechanism for monitoring 
Dynamic VfM has resulted in a preliminary approach 
 that anticipates the adoption of an agile procurement 
model, and incorporates a modified approach to 

software cost estimation and facilitation of 
requirements engineering activities. Figure 2 below 
depicts the modified procurement process in which a 

dynamic VFM model could operate. 
Figure 2 The solid boxes in Figure 2 show a simplified 
representation of the typical waterfall procurement 
process for software development being generally 
undertaken by a significant proportion of 
organizations (and adapted from Figure 1). The 

Concept Enhancement box represents an additional 

step being proposed by the authors to improve the 

understanding of the requirements by both the 
customer and potential suppliers, and to also 

determine the milestone content for each Dynamic 

VfM determination. Versions of this step already 
operate in some jurisdictions, many informally. 
However this paper documents the incorporation of 

some of these, and potentially new, principles. The 

proposed Dynamic VfM model discussed in Section 5 
would operate in the existing contract management 
and system development phases. 
Capability Description in Figure 2 represents the 
formal identification of the proposed capability and its 

broad expected cost. 
Initial Gate
 is the term used by 
the UK Government [13] to represent approval to 

procure and 
Main Gate
 signifies approval to contract 
with the winning tenderer.  
4.2.Current Concept Enhancement 
Approaches 
Currently procurers have a number of techniques 
operating as forms of “Concept Enhancement”, three 
of which are discussed below. 
Expression of Interest (EOI) [14] is a method of 
obtaining feedback from industry on proposed 
activities. 
One of the authors was employed in the 1990s on a 
large Project Definition Study (PDS) for the UK 
Ministry of Defence in which two suppliers were paid 

to develop complex technological solutions to a 

certain point before a Best and Final Offer (BAFO) 

process determined the supplier chosen to deliver the 
final system. The best concepts from both solutions 
developed in the PDS were available for inclusion in 

the final design. 
A recent Australian Government Request for 
Tender (RFT) document [15] proposed three possible 

outcomes from the tender process: 
•The tender process is terminated, 
•A contract is entered into with the preferred 
tenderer to develop the detailed design 

specification, which will be used in a subsequent 

tender process, or 
•Contracts are entered into with two or more 

competing suppliers to develop the detailed design 

specification and then one of these suppliers is 

chosen to develop the final system without any 

further tender process. 
The second possible outcome above represents the 
use of potential suppliers, rather than consultants, to 

develop the specification and documentation for the 

Tender Activity Phase shown in Figure 2. The third 

possible outcome above is equivalent to a PDS. Both 

of these methods involve expenditure of part of the 

project budget as a “Concept Enhancement” type 
activity, which is called a “Design Contest” in the 
above mentioned RFT. 
4.3.Derisking Using Concept Enhancement 
In 2005 the UK Ministry of Defence [13, p. 33] “set 
a target figure for 15% of the total procurement costs 
to be invested pre-Main Gate and the bulk of this 
would be spent on derisking”. In Australia the Defence 
Procurement Review 2003 [16] recommended a 
similar approach, which it considered to be useful for 

most organizations sourcing complex services. 

Concept Enhancement in Figure 2 represents a key 

activity that could occur after the preferred 
procurement option has been defined and agreed at 

Initial Gate and consume a proportion of the 15% of 

total procurement costs with activities that involve 

potential suppliers, rather than consultants. 
The Unified Process (UP) [4] offers a potential 
model for adaptation for this purpose. UP suggests 
running projects in two contract phases, with the first 
phase being a relatively short fixed-term and fixed-

price contract. The goal of this first step is to complete 

the first few iterations of the project, undertake 

evolutionary requirements analysis and produce 
 preliminary software to be provided to tenderers for a 
phase two fixed-price contract. The evolutionary 

refinement of specifications and code in phase one 
provides higher quality data for phase two estimators. 
However UP tends to be used by suppliers, not by 

procurers, and large single phase projects remain the 
norm. 
4.4.A Potential Concept Enhancement Activity 
A potential alternative model offered by the authors 
for the Concept Enhancement phase could be an 
interim tender activity to identify suppliers to better 
define the requirements and estimate the cost of the 
required system, and create a shortlist of suppliers 
from which the final selection would be made. 
Tenderers would need to provide an indication of their 

general capacity to build the final system and would 

subsequently be advised that the final tender would 
only be released to suppliers chosen from this Concept 

Enhancement shortlist (of perhaps three or four 

suppliers). Suppliers would be paid to develop items 

such as a proof of concept, preliminary design, 

preliminary requirements documentation and Dynamic 

VfM milestones. 
The proposed Concept Enhancement phase would 
combine a number of current procurement options into 
a new format that should improve the understanding of 
requirements and their costs and define the interim 

project milestones for inclusion in the tender 

documentation. Traditional supplier hesitation in 

sharing IP should be minimised because the suppliers 

would be paid for the service, with the most capable 

supplier having its concepts incorporated in the tender 

documentation, and less capable suppliers would have 

the opportunity to learn from the process. This would 

assist in improving general capability in the supplier 

community, which should, in turn, benefit the 
customer community. 
4.5.Changes to Cost Estimation Practices with 
Agile Procurement 
Jørgensen [17] claims that expert judgment is the 
most common cost estimation approach currently in 
use and that there is no substantial empirical evidence 
favouring formal estimation techniques. The 
budgeting approach and structure of contract described 

above may reduce the criticality of accurate long term 

cost estimates and instead may create a structured 

environment for more effectively applying a wide-

band Delphi type approach to cost estimation, 
including expert judgment, using customer and 

supplier representatives. 
5.The Search for a Dynamic VfM Model 
A traditional VfM analysis represents the 
customer’s perception of the capability of the supplier 
to deliver particular outcomes of value to the buyer 
measured against a number of quantitative and 
qualitative criteria. The determination of VfM within a 

project requires a more balanced approach, since at 

any stage in a project the ability of the supplier to 

deliver is also influenced by the capability and 
responsiveness of the customer. The studies discussed 

in Section 1 have recognised that customer 

sponsorship (especially at the executive management 
level) and end-user involvement are crucial to project 
success. As a consequence it can be argued that any 

VfM analysis that does not take account of these 

factors would be incomplete and potentially unfair on 
the supplier (and also the buyer). This was one of the 
first principles to be considered in the model, termed 

“Dynamic VfM” shown in Figure 3 below. This 

concept has a number of key components – an 

evolving Dynamic VfM analysis that incorporates 

both customer and supplier factors, Dynamic VfM 

decision points (gates) at previously agreed 
milestones, and an iterative approach to the 
determination of content and price for each contract 

phase. This model requires input from an agile 

procurement process such as that described in Figure 

2. 
Figure 3 Dynamic VfM is believed to be a term specific to 
the procurement discipline. However it implies some 
outcomes that are common to some of the techniques 
used in other fields, particularly project management. 
The project management discipline continues to 

grapple with issues such as success criteria and critical 

success factors [18], which are also important in 

procurement projects. 
 A detailed discussion of the construction of VFM
Sn,VFMCn and VFMD
n as shown in Figure 3 is reserved 
for another paper. 
5.1.Dynamic VfM Components 
Although space prevents full elaboration of the 
VfM model, basic principles can be briefly described. 
Two VfM factors are crucial in a Dynamic VfM 
decision within a contract: the performance of the 
supplier (VFM
S) and the performance of the customer 
(VFM
C).  
VFMS0 is the overall score the supplier received as 
a result of the tender evaluation process. The VFM
S0,the evaluation criteria, and the supplier’s score should 
all be available for every contract resulting from a 
competitive tendering and contracting procurement 
process. VFM
C0 is not likely to exist, but could 
possibly be inferred from information on prior VfM 
decisions in the procurement process and the type of 
qualitative selection criteria included by the customer. 
VFMS1 and VFM
C1 will need to be explicitly defined 
as one of the first tasks of the initial project iteration. 
VFMSn and VFM
Cn can then be evolved from VFM
S1 
and VFM
C1 through incorporation of other relevant 
factors, such as the critical success factors relevant to 

each “n”. The ability to manage changing 
requirements and to continue to deliver business value 
within the project is crucial. “Scoring” or “measuring” 

in this process is likely to remain subjective. However, 

provided there is prior agreement between the parties 

on the factors to be included in the scoring this process 

has the potential to become a more rigorous contract 
management tool than those currently applied. 
A key advantage of a dynamic VfM process would 
be the ability to make appropriate changes to improve 

the performance of a software development contract or 

the required business outcomes on an agreed basis at 
agreed times. This would replace the typical 
adversarial problems that arise over what has been 
delivered under a traditional software development 

contract, and how much it has cost (in project 

management terminology this is the earned value [19], 

and it is extremely difficult to calculate for incomplete 

software). However in extreme cases it may also allow 

the customer to terminate the contract and move to 

another supplier. Providing the procurement policy 

process was adapted to include this step, the supplier 

who originally received the second top VfM score 

could be approached. 
5.2.Determining the Gates 
A key issue in a Dynamic VfM model is at what 
points, or gates, would major VfM determinations be 
undertaken. One approach would be to use project 
milestones, although these would need to give the 
customer a discrete and useful deliverable, not just be 

milestones that suited the supplier for payment 

purposes. The Concept Enhancement phase of the 

agile procurement process described in Section 4 

defines a mechanism for determining these gates. 
In the manner of UP the specification for the first 
iteration would be most tightly defined, with more 
flexibility built into future phases. The customer 

would own the deliverables and associated intellectual 
property (IP) from this concept enhancement phase 
and would feed the most acceptable concepts, 
including the milestone content of the gates, into the 
tender documentation for the Tender Activity phase. 

The Tender Activity phase would result in a fixed 

price agreement up to the first gate and an agreement 

to define further fixed prices at each successive gate. 
The term “gates” has been adapted from the UK 
Government’s OGC Gateway Process (OGC) [20], 

which recommends a series of reviews of a 

procurement activity at five key decisions points. The 

gates in Figure 3 do not in any way reflect the OGC’s 
gates and will be project specific, rather than the 
generic procurement phases of the Gateway Process. 

Nevertheless, the principles have some similarities. 
5.3.Content of the Contract 
Cost overruns in software development projects 
partially arise from an inability to accurately estimate 
the cost of these projects. However, those responsible 
for collating budget data appear to input these figures 
into their budget estimates with reasonable confidence, 

even when evidence shows that this confidence is 

misplaced. The agile procurement model described 

above could be expected to reduce the need for 

accurate long term estimates, as long as it was 
accepted that the broad estimates defined at the 

beginning could be progressively enhanced, not only 

before supplier selection, but also during the course of 

the contract. 
For example, for the contract shown in Figure 2 the 
length of contract would be the maximum expected 
time for the development, implementation and 
maintenance of the system. The budget for this 

contract would be broadly specified with the most 

timely information available at the tender phase. 

However even though the supplier could expect to be 

retained for the full length of the contract there would 
 be a guarantee only until Gate 1, at which time a VfM 
decision would be undertaken on whether to continue. 

At this stage a fixed price agreement would be 
determined for Gate 2. This process would be 
repeatable for further gates. 
6.Case Study 
A key data source for the Australian study is a 
regulatory system that comprises an essential link 
between the community and government. This 
AUD$32m system, with 134 use cases and four major 
releases, was developed over five years for a 
government department, and contains interfaces to five 
major systems in other organizations. Although this 

project did not attempt Dynamic VfM determinations 

it did undertake a number of the elements described in 
this paper. 
To varying degrees, this project suffered most of 
the normal project problems, including inadequate 

user involvement and changing requirements, however 

the public sector procurement process itself also 

contributed problems that an agile approach would 
have addressed. 
The agency undertook a sophisticated and sensible 
approach to the procurement activity within the 
constraints imposed and had a mature relationship 

with the supplier. There was a steering committee with 

representation from a range of customer and supplier 

business areas, which on a monthly basis recorded 

risks, problems and potential solutions. These monthly 

steering committee minutes and the monthly project 

status reports, along with the results of the original 

evaluation process, contain a wealth of information for 

building and testing VFM
Sn, VFM
Cn and VFM
Dn for 
this project. 
The four major releases acted as opportunities to 
review deliverables and costs and provided break 
points with tangible and useable deliverables that 

could still be implemented even if budget or 

organizational reasons forced delays or even the 

abandonment of the project. These releases were 

defined during the period between the selection of the 
preferred supplier and the formal signing of the 

contract. During this period the suppler and customer 

exchanged further information on the requirements, 

conducted some work to prove the viability of the 
solution proposed by the supplier and refined the 
contract to support the staged delivery approach. 
Suppliers frequently contribute to project outcomes in 
this manner outside of a contractual relationship in an 

attempt to reduce delays in project schedule. However 

this will always leave a supplier at risk until a contract 

is executed. 
The releases were structured with both fixed price 
and schedule of rates components. In general the 

application development components were included in 

the fixed price component and system integration and 

work on interfaces were completed on a schedule of 

rates basis. This dual approach was chosen because the 
mitigation of the application development risk was 
considered to be under the control of the supplier 

whereas much of the risk for the system integration 

and interface work was considered to be under the 

control of the customer. It was the customer which 

was also responsible for the negotiation of the 

interfaces with its partner organisation and the 

specification of the hardware and software 

environment for the application. 
The work to be included in both the fixed price and 
scheduled components of each release was defined in 

a work breakdown structure. The work breakdown 
structure was formally signed off for the first release 
prior to the commencement of the contract and a 

process was put into place to formally review the work 

breakdown structure prior to the commencement of 

each subsequent release. The intention was that where 

changes to the scope of the fixed price components 

were identified these were to be costed as variations 

using the schedule of rates and added into the fixed 

price component. 
The project, which provides a rich source of data 
for contract costing and operational analysis, is now 
complete and the system is fully functioning. 
7.Conclusion 
The proposed agile procurement process and 
Dynamic VfM model have more complexities than can 
be adequately described in the space available. 
Additionally, the concepts have not been formally 
tested. However it is anticipated that adoption of the 

agile procurement principles outlined in this paper 

should lead to projects that meet stakeholder 

expectations more comprehensively. 
Discussions with a range of buyer organizations in 
Australia, including the organization involved in the 
project comprising the Case Study described above, 

and suppliers capable of delivering these systems, 

have identified strong support for the proposed 

models. One of the largest impediments envisaged in 
implementing agile procurement across public and 
private sector organizations is resistance to significant 
change to existing financial estimations presented by 

the agile procurement process, and a perception of 

increased contracting risk, especially amongst those 

responsible for allocating budgets. 
 The data is available in the Australian research 
project to allow agile procurement principles to be 
tested on a number of large, complete system 
development procurement projects and permission has 
been obtained for evaluating projects that are yet to 

commence. As a consequence there remains much 
data collection and analysis to be undertaken and hard 
evidence is some time away. Nevertheless, early 

trends suggest some amendments to the traditional 
procurement process will provide significant benefits, 

especially in relation to large, complex, software 

development projects. 
Indeed, it is safe to say that is will not be possible 
to resolve all the uncertainties from software 

development that may arise between any potential 
buyer and seller. The procurement procedure outlined 
in this paper is designed to reduce the scale of that 

uncertainty rather than provide a permanent solution to 
the problems of software cost and value for money 
estimations. As the content of the paper reveals, that is 

a task for another day. 
8.References 
[1] K. Moløkken and M. Jørgensen, "A review of 
surveys on software effort estimation," 
Proceedings of International Symposium on 

Empirical Software Engineering (ISESE'03)
,  pp. 
223-230, 2003. 
[2] The Standish Group, "The CHAOS Report," 
http://www.standishgroup.com/sample_research/P
DFpages/chaos1994.pdf
, 1995. 
[3] Auditor-General of Victoria, "Implementation of 
RMIT University's Academic Management 

System," Report on Public Sector Agencies, 

Melbourne 2003. 
[4] C. Larman, 
Agile & iterative development: a 
manager's guide
. Boston, MA: Pearson Education, 
Inc, 2004. 
[5] State Supply Commission, "Procurement users' 
guide," 
http://www.ssc.wa.gov.au/procurement04disp.asp?
id=1
, 2006. 
[6] D. Jamieson, K. Vinsen, and G. Callender, "Agile 
procurement: new acquisition approach to agile 
software development," 
Proceedings of 31st 
Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering 
and Advanced Applications
, Porto, Portugal,  pp. 
266-273, 2005. 
[7] D. V. Ferens, "The conundrum of software 
estimation models," in 
Aerospace and Electronic 
Systems Magazine, IEEE
, vol. 14, 1999, pp. 23-29. 
[8] M. Jørgensen and S. Grimstad, "Over-optimism in 
software development projects: "the winner's 

curse"," 
Proceedings of 15th International 
Conference on Electronics, Communications and 
Computers (CONIELECOMP 2005)
,  pp. 280-285, 
2005. 
[9] R. L. Glass, 
Software Runaways: Monumental 
Software Disasters
: Prentice Hall PTR, 1997. 
[10] D. DeCarlo, 
eXtreme project management: using 
leadership, principles, and tools to deliver value in 
the face of volatility
. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass, 2004. 
[11] Department of Finance and Administration, 
"Commonwealth procurement guidelines: the 

principle of value for money," 

http://www.finance.
gov.au/ctc/principle_of_value_
for_money.html
, 2005. 
[12] T. Gruschke and M. Jørgensen, "Assessing 
uncertainty of software development effort 
estimates: the learning from outcome feedback," 

Proceedings of 11th IEEE International Metrics 
Symposium (METRICS 2005)
,  pp. 4-13, 2005. 
[13] Ministry of Defence, "The acquisition handbook, 
edition 6 - October 2005," 

http://www.ams.mod.uk/ams/content/handbook/fro
nt.htm
, 2005. 
[14] Department of Finance and Administration, 
"Commonwealth procurement guidelines," 
http://www.finance.
gov.au/ctc/
, 2005. 
[15] Australian Customs Service, "Request For Tender 
(RFT) number 05/1094: development of detailed 

design specification and program management 

plan for the JOPC Australian Maritime 
Identification System," 2006. 
[16] M. Kinnaird, "Defence Procurement Review 
2003," 
http://www.defence.
gov.au/publications/dpr18090
3.pdf
, 2003. 
[17] M. Jørgensen, "Practical guidelines for expert-
judgment-based software effort estimation," 
IEEE 
Software
, vol. 22, iss. 3, pp. 57-63, 2005. 
[18] D. Baccarini, "The logical framework method for 
defining project success," 
Project Management 
Journal
, vol. 30, iss. 4, pp. 25-31, 1999. 
[19] J. R. Meredith and S. J. Mantel, 
Project 
management: a managerial approach
, 5th ed. 
New York, NW: John Wiley & Sons, 2002. 
[20] Office of Government Commerce, "OGC Gateway 
Process," 
www.ogc.gov.uk
, 2006. 
