 Agile Procurement: New Acquisition Approach to Agile Software 
Development  
Diane Jamieson 
Curtin Business School 
Curtin University of Technology 
Perth, Australia 
Diane.Jamieson@Curtin.edu.au
Kevin Vinsen 
ADI Limited 
Perth, Australia 
Kevin.Vinsen@adi-
limited.com
Guy Callender 
Curtin Business School 
Curtin University of Technology 
Perth, Australia 
Guy.Callender@cbs.curtin.edu.au
Abstract
Contemporary software is increasingly developed 
using an agile development approach, yet the supplier 
is generally selected as a result of a waterfall-style 
competitive tendering and contracting process. The 
procurement activity may be incompatible with an 
agile elaboration of requirements and development of 
functionality, and lead to sub-optimal outcomes. 
This paper examines the interaction of the 
procurement and software development lifecycles, 
explores potential causes of project or system failures 
and suggests some improvements based on a 

successful 10 year project between ADI Limited and 
the Australian Department of Defence. 
1.Introduction 
Software can be developed in-house but is more 
often obtained from vendors either as a package or 

through bespoke software development services. High 
value software development services are typically 

delivered as a result of a competitive tendering and 
contracting (procurement) process that is intended to 
select the external supplier offering the best value for 
money solution to the customer. 
The procurement process, in association with 
traditional organisational budgeting processes, 

encourages the expectation that a suitable software 

system will be delivered for the contracted or 
budgeted price. Theoretically, this requires a procurer 
to have a good understanding of the scope of a 

software development project and its likely final cost 
before releasing a tender to the market, to ensure that 

the allocated budget will be sufficient to fund the full 
project. However although the success of IT projects is 
improving [1], cost overruns still represent major 

causes of concern. 
Information about requirements and their costs is 
crucial in the early procurement phases. If the software 
being sought is extensive or complex a significant 
level of requirements engineering or business process 
analysis will be required to support the budgeting 

process and to provide a basis upon which suppliers 
can prepare a proposal and price estimate. Subsequent 
to a contract being signed a further requirements 

engineering or business process analysis activity 
would usually be undertaken by the winning tenderer 

as development of the system is commenced. 
It seems however, that requirements gathering 
methodologies frequently do not acknowledge the 
impact of the procurement process in separating the 
activity into two distinct phases: pre-contract award 

and post-contract award. These phases are probably 
undertaken by different parties and almost certainly 
using different approaches. Similarly contemporary 

agile methods of software development do not appear 
to consider the role of the procurement process in 
influencing success, although the agile Unified 
Process (UP) [2] recommends running projects in two 
contract phases, each of multiple timeboxed iterations. 
UP recommends that phase one is a relatively short 
fixed-time and fixed-price contract. Its goal is to 
complete the first few iterations of the project, 

undertake evolutionary requirements analysis and 
produce preliminary software. Phase one outputs, 
including the software, are shared with the tenderers 
for a phase two fixed-price contract. The evolutionary 
refinement of specifications and code in phase one 
provides higher quality data for phase two estimators. 
However UP tends to be used by suppliers, not by 
procurers, and large single phase projects are common. 
Budget estimation for large software development 
projects is, in practise, often inaccurate, and the 
determination of value for money is fraught with 
problems. In theory, a value for money decision, 
incorporates factors such as supplier track record, 
suitability of the technical approach and the whole of 
life costs associated with that solution. However the 
concepts of value for money and life cycle costing for 

software development are described, but poorly 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 defined, in the practitioner and scholarly literatures. 
There is extensive anecdotal evidence to suggest that 
procurers often equate “best value” with lowest price 
and rarely revisit this decision at the completion of a 

project. If the winning supplier has misunderstood or 
misrepresented the costs and the customer is 
insufficiently skilled to identify the problems and 

risks, it is quite likely that an alternative supplier 
would have been preferable. 
Prior to signing a contract the winning supplier will 
have had little opportunity to confirm or fully 

determine all requirements. There are likely to be 
hidden requirements, implicit to the procurer but not 
articulated to the supplier, which will increase the final 
cost but cannot readily be quantified. In fixed price 

contracts the primary role of contingency allowances 
is to anticipate, in an unsophisticated way, the risk of 

changes occurring in unforeseen circumstances [3]. 
Agile methods recognise that change is an inevitable 
outcome of the iterative software development 

process, as requirements are refined and elaborated 
and the hidden implicit requirements discovered. 
Changing requirements must be accepted as normal in 
software development projects yet will add costs and 
increase budget pressures. 
This paper discusses the interaction between 
traditional acquisition approaches and agile software 
development methodologies. An agile procurement 
approach, which aims to reduce the need for predictive 
planning and harmonise the acquisition and software 

development, is proposed. 
2.The Procurement Process 
2.1.Overview 
A competitive tendering and contracting process 
through which outsourced software development is 
purchased is typically represented by a 12-step process 
[4] that covers the phases of contract planning, 
formation and management. The process is strictly 

waterfall and each step can only commence when the 
previous step is completed. During contract planning 
the organisational need is identified, the broad scope 

determined and the budget is estimated and sourced. In 
contract formation a tender is prepared and released by 
the customer. Suppliers respond and the winning 
tender is selected subsequent to an evaluation activity. 
In the contract management phase the software 

development is delivered under the contract.  
A sophisticated procurement organisation will 
apply a project management methodology across the 

procurement process, although there is evidence that 
this approach is not typical in many organisations. 
2.2.Contract Planning 
During contract planning a business case is 
produced to justify the project and its budget. 

Subsequently, a procurement plan will formalise the 
allocated expenditure, scope, management 
mechanisms and other necessary details. Typically, the 
procurement plan creates the rules by which the 

procurement process and resulting contract are to be 
managed. The expenditure over the life of the project, 
identified within an approved procurement plan, 
represents the budget that has been allocated and the 
“not-to-exceed” value. Herein lies one key problem 

encountered in outsourced software development: the 
budget and broad scope are usually defined long 

before there can be an adequate understanding of the 
detailed requirements and therefore the true costs. 
Jacobson [5] acknowledges that the true cost of 

software cannot be determined until the design is 
complete, and although estimation techniques have 
evolved to create more reliable early estimates, it is 
apparent from the evidence outlined below, that more 
information and more sophisticated methodologies are 
required to both perform elaborate software costing 
and match procurement processes to the needs of 
complex costing situations.  
For the majority of software development projects 
it is unlikely the procurer will be able to appropriately 

understand the requirements before allocating the 

budget. Other product development domains 
encourage the practice of adaptive planning [6] over 
the predictive planning used in software development. 
From the software estimation perspective, 
McConnell [7] suggests that the “cone of uncertainty” 

is reduced over time when agile development 
principles are followed. Frequently, as more 

information becomes available during software 
development the scope is increased, usually resulting 
in a need for more budget. Traditionally, many 

financial policies and procedures require any budget 
not identified in the procurement plan to initiate an 
entirely new procurement process. This formal 
procurement process usually causes significant 
expense, delays and management problems in a 
software development project. 
2.3.Contract Formation 
Ideally, during contract formation, some degree of 
business process analysis or requirements engineering 
could be expected to be undertaken by the customer or 
a specialist contractor, to create the requirements 
specification documentation to be included with the 
tender. Tender documentation, typically, contains: 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 any technical/technology requirements, such as the 
customer’s IT infrastructure and preferred software 
technologies; 
details of any complex third party interfaces; and 
pricing requirements, being fixed price, time and 
materials or a combination of both. 
There is anecdotal evidence that greater 
understanding of the inevitability of change has 
reduced the prevalence of large fixed price contracts in 
the public sector. Public sector purchasers have 

become increasingly aware of the embarrassment 
caused when large expensive, public funded projects 

fail or are cancelled and the details are published in 
the media or released in the wake of a review by an 
Auditor-General. This evidence suggests that the 

public sector has embraced the principles in the 
CHAOS Report [8], favouring small projects that 

build on one another. Time and materials contracts 
place a greater onus on the purchaser to achieve 
organisational outcomes within the allocated budget. 

They work well for suppliers that produce only what 
can be paid for, but the purchaser frequently runs out 
of money before the systems are complete. If an agile 
development process has been adopted, at the end of 
the final iteration the purchaser will have software that 
provides them with some value and achieves some of 
their functional requirements.  
2.4.Post-Award Contract Management 
The contract formed at the end of this phase creates 
the rules upon which the supplier must deliver the 

system. Frequently in the post-contract contract 
management phase the supplier will be dealing with 

the procurer’s contract manager who:  
had no role in the preceding procurement activity;  
has little or no knowledge of the requirements of 
the project; and 
works for a different part of the customer 
organisation to that which managed the preparation 
of the request documents. 
This contract manager may or may not have any 
knowledge of requirements engineering and in all 

likelihood will have no formalised contract 
management methodology [9]. These deficiencies 

have the potential to create an adversarial relationship 
between the buyer and supplier. 
3.Evolutionary Acquisition 
A system designed to provide a more effective 
procurement outcome in situations of high product 
uncertainty was implemented by the US Department 

of Defense (US DoD) in 2001. This preferred strategy 
for the procurement of operational systems was called 

Evolutionary Acquisition (EA), and is: 
an acquisition strategy that defines, 
develops, produces or acquires, and fields an 

initial hardware or software increment of 
operationally useful capability [10]. 
Note that EA is a strategy (although it is also 
referred to as a policy [10]) that encourages buying in 
increments according to affordability, urgency of need 
and evolving threat, and availability of technology 
[11]. Spiral development is used in each of the 
increments of an EA strategy although as a process, 
EA appears to be incompletely defined. Sylvester & 
Ferrara [10] define spiral development as “an iterative 
process for developing a defined set of capabilities”. 
There have been attempts to diagrammatically 
represent EA using increments and spirals [12], 

however EA the strategy does not seem to have an 
associated EA procurement process, although it is 
likely that it based on the procurement process 

described above. It is interesting that although the 
development approach incorporated into EA had been 
around for some time Sylvester & Ferrara [10] note 
that it had “not much practical implementation outside 
of the software development community”. 
However, so concerned was the US DoD, that even 
though “there was scant experience with implementing 
EA for major system development”[10], EA was 
recommended to improve the situation in defense 
acquisition where “defense acquisition programs cost 
too much and take too long to deliver”[10]. 
EA has also been adopted by the Australian 
Department of Defence (Australian DoD). 
4.Software Cost Estimation 
The scope of research into software cost estimation 
methodologies provides some challenges, as different 
terminologies are seemingly applied to describe the 
process, according to the discipline area of the 
researchers. However, a classification has been 
developed by Snell [13] which, although lacking any 
organisational learning classification, does provide a 
preliminary basis upon which to better understand 
software cost estimation categories: algorithmic 
models (the most researched); expert judgement; and 
machine learning. As machine learning appears to be 
of limited practical application at this point it has been 
omitted from this discussion.  
4.1.Algorithmic Cost Models 
The most pervasive algorithmic cost models that 
have evolved over the last 20 years measure:  
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 source lines of code (SLOC), such as COCOMO 
[14];  
function points [15], such as IFPUG or COSMIC 
FFP;  
or use case points [16].  
The quality of estimates using these methods is 
heavily dependent upon:  
the experience of the person undertaking the 
estimation;  
the amount of money and time allocated to the 
estimation process; 
the extent of requirements engineering undertaken; 
and 
the availability of historical data on similar 
projects that allow the model to be calibrated.  
There is evidence to suggest that when preparing 
tenders, customers frequently produce budget 
projections that reflect the availability of money rather 
than a predicted cost, and/or have insufficient time or 

ability to undertake formal algorithmic cost 
estimation. In addition most tender documentation 
contains insufficient information to permit suppliers to 
undertake extensive formal algorithmic methods to 
compute their tendered prices. Even when both 

suppliers and the customer do use algorithmic methods 
they are likely to be applying different methods and 
will certainly have different skill levels in using these 

methods. 
The SouthernSCOPE methodology [17] is one 
software development procurement process that 
includes a cost estimation methodology. However, it 
appears that this methodology is generally only 

applied to small or simple development projects. 
4.2.Expert Judgement 
Some comparatively early research by Heemstra 
[18] found that 62% of estimators and organisations in 

a Dutch study used expert judgement, making this 
technique the most widely applied. The findings of 
this research has been reinforced by the experience of 
the authors, having seen this approach applied with 
varying degrees of success on a number of projects 

over the last 20 years. Certainly, considering the 
amount of effort required in using expert opinion 
compared with algorithmic methods, in the hands of 
experienced personnel it can be relatively effective 
and create a positive value for money proposition – 
that is, produce a result that is good enough to work 
with for a cost level that is relatively insignificant. 
However to become experienced, estimators would 
probably have spent many years examining and 
evaluating algorithmic methods, would have costed 
many projects using a number of methods and would 
have been able to calibrate their own expert judgement 
through seeing the success or otherwise of their 
previous estimations. 
An important consideration when evaluating the 
success of expert judgement is that there should also 

be an appropriate level of expert judgement applied to 
all of the associated activities. As a general guide, 
buyers contracting with suppliers of unique software 
should:  
anticipate and incorporate change in the 
contracting process; 
set a realistic time schedule; 
manage stakeholder expectations; 
choose the best supplier using appropriate 
evaluation methods; and 
undertake supplier relationship management. 
Conversely, suppliers should:  
use suitable development methodologies; 
supply suitable personnel; and  
undertake customer relationship management.  
The major challenge is to convert these generic 
contracting principles into operational tools and 

activities. 
5.Agile Software Development 
Contemporary software development techniques 
and methodologies have become increasingly agile; 
although agile development is not a new concept. 
Larman [2] has traced the history of iterative and agile 
development projects going back to the late 1950’s.  
Research has shown that the more complex the 
system the more inevitable is change. Boehm and 
Papaccio [19] found that a typical software project 
experienced 25% change in requirements. Jones [20] 
shows that projects in excess of 10,000 function points 
could expect as much as 35% change in requirements.  
This is because every iteration of a project may 
uncover hidden requirements and discover new 
requirements, as a result of process improvement, as 
the potential of the system is incrementally explored, 
and as the functionality is better understood. 
As discussed in section 2.2, during the first 
iterations estimates can be highly inaccurate [2] and it 
is only after the first few iterations have occurred, 
when additional requirements engineering has been 

performed, that the true scope of the project can be 
understood. After these few iterations a customer can 
also have some meaningful software to examine and 
explore. This will allow the customer to focus upon 
further requirements as the capability of the new 

software system is explored and the requirements 
clarified.  
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 In 2001 the Agile Alliance was formed to promote 
12 principles for agile software development. A 
number of methodologies, mostly developed before 
the Agile Alliance was formed, are becoming popular 

in mainstream software development. Most of these 
methodologies recommend that the supplier develops 
the high risk items first to give the customer 

confidence in the more complex software components. 
The agile principles, as defined by the Agile 
Alliance [21] are: 

1.Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer 
through early and continuous delivery of 

valuable software. 
2.Welcome changing requirements, even late in 
development. Agile processes harness change 
for the customer’s competitive advantage. 
3.Deliver working software frequently, from a 
couple of weeks to a couple of months, with a 
preference to the shorter timescale. 
4.Business people and developers must work 
together daily throughout the project. 
5.Build projects around motivated individuals. 
Give them the environment and support they 

need, and trust them to get the job done. 
6.The most efficient and effective method of 
conveying information to and within a 

development team is face-to-face conversation. 
7.Working software is the primary measure of 
progress. 
8.Agile processes promote sustainable 
development. The sponsors, developers, and 
users should be able to maintain a constant 
pace indefinitely. 
9.Continuous attention to technical excellence 
and good design enhances agility. 
10.Simplicity – the art of maximizing the amount 
of work not done – is essential. 
11.The best architectures, requirements, and 
designs emerge from self-organizing teams. 
12.At regular intervals, the team reflects on how to 
become more effective, then tunes and adjusts 
its behaviour accordingly. 
These principles have been reproduced in full as 
they demonstrate the scope of this approach to 
software development yet represent key ideas that are 
not consistently embraced by procurers, viz: 
Anticipate and manage for change (principle 2); 
Continually review business needs (principle 10); 
Have reasonable work expectations of both 
customer and supplier personnel (principles 5, 8); 
Embrace interim deliveries (principles 1, 3, 7) 
Have suitable communications channels (principles 

4, 6); and 
Maintain positive relationships with suppliers 
(principles 2, 4, 5, 6, 12). 
The next challenge is to link these principles to an 
appropriate procurement methodology. 
6.The Harmonisation of Procurement 
and Agile Methodologies 
Agile methods show a high degree of sophistication 
in accepting the inevitability of change in software 

projects; and mandating customer collaboration. Agile 
methods incorporate the use of timeboxed iterative 

development [2], which involves fixing the iteration 
end date and not allowing it to change. If, during the 
course of an iteration, it becomes clear that the scope 
for the iteration cannot be met within the timeframe, 
the scope is reduced. The partial growing system 
always ends in a stable and tested state on the original 
planned end date.  
At the beginning of each iteration the customer and 
supplier must negotiate what is achievable from the 
“to do” list given the available resources. Any new 
requirements discovered during an iteration can be 
added to the “to do” list and any high value items can 
be implemented in a subsequent iteration. New 
requirements are not implemented in the iteration in 
which they are discovered because this will cause the 
timebox to fail. Agile methods allow the customer to 
compute a measure of value for money at the 
beginning of each iteration, (principles 1, 3 and 7) and 
to calculate earned value at the end of each iteration. 
Principle 2 aims to ensure that new requirements do 
not produce confrontational contract change 

negotiations. The requirements can be scheduled for 
subsequent iterations. 
However, to be fully effective in an outsourced 
development, it would be valuable if agile methods 
could be associated with an agile procurement process, 
along the lines of the EA philosophy. This would 
allow budgets to be more accurately estimated 
incrementally, scope to be incrementally explored, the 
scale of budget variances to be reduced, and customer-
supplier relationships to be improved. Taken to the 
extreme an agile procurement process could give a 
customer much greater control over software 
development, including the potential choice of 

different suppliers for different components. 
Furthermore, procurement policies, guidelines and 

processes, and the capabilities of procurement 

specialists and decision makers involved in purchasing 
software development would need radical reappraisal 

before this would be possible, as an agile procurement 
process would challenge existing budgetary protocols. 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 Using an agile timeboxed development approach, 
the supplier would be able to guarantee the delivery 
date of each iteration. As the staffing levels would be 
agreed at the beginning of the iteration when the 

supplier and procurer agree the functionality to be 
produced in that iteration, the procurer would have an 
accurate estimate of the cost of the iteration. After the 

first few iterations are completed, the supplier and 
procurer would also be able to estimate more reliably 

the total number of iterations required to complete the 
project. As the cost of each of the previous iterations 
would be known, the procurer and supplier would 
have a frame of reference for the subsequent estimate 
of the total cost of the project. Because any new 
requirements would be prioritised by the procurer and 

supplier, the procurer would be able to adapt the total 
budget required by the project. Equally, the procurer 

could decide not to implement functionality if the 
incremental cost seemed to be too high for the value 
that that would be gained within the existing 

technology platform. 
If the selection of requirements to be implemented 
at the beginning of each iteration were managed using 
a more sophisticated value for money proposition, any 
requirements that had not been completed by the end 

of the project should be in the low priority category. 
As a study by Johnson [22] has shown that only 45% 

of features are used, any remaining requirements 
should be unimportant. 
Using a fusion of agile development and agile 
procurement, the procurer would be able to revisit 

their original contract planning, budget estimates, 
contract models, and contract management plans. 
Should additional funds be required this will be 
highlighted early in the development process. 
Agile principles 2, 4 and 6 aim to ensure that the 
procurer and the supplier do not have to engage in 

confrontational negotiations over requirements 

changes and the scope of the system. The supplier is 
expected to be pleased to accept changing 
requirements, the procurer is actively involved in the 

development of the system and a free and open dialog 
should exist between the two organisations. 
7.Case Study 
Since 1994 the Australian DoD has contracted ADI 
Limited (ADI) to supply software development 
services for the Joint Command Support System 
(JCSS), a successful ongoing project that uses an EA 

approach. Although it does not fully implement 
adaptive budgeting or agile development it does 
embrace and demonstrate many principles described in 

this paper. 
7.1.Joint Command Support System 
In 1994 the Commonwealth of Australia awarded a 
two-year contract to ADI to supply a Joint Command 
Support System. Since then the JCSS has become the 
core operational management system for the 
Australian Defence Forces and the project is now in its 
seventh phase and is valued at over $US58 million 

(including a substantial operational infrastructure). 
Using an EA approach, technology changes and 
product enhancements have been implemented as part 
of a through life support and development contract. 
The JCSS uses a Wide Area Network and is 
installed on over 140 servers and 2000 desktops in two 
dozen locations around Australia. ADI continues to be 

involved as a major contractor in the development and 
implementation of JCSS. JCSS provides the desktop 
tools for Defence Force commanders. These consist of 

integrated developed and standard desktop (mainly 
Microsoft) applications. The main developed 
components are the Common Operating Picture and 
Defence Messaging applications. The Common 
Operating Picture is a geographical display of all 
information of interest to the Defence Force. The 
picture is synchronised and sanitised so that all 
commanders are operating from the same information. 

Drill-down facilities are provided on an object of 
interest, to give access to all reported and stored 
information. In support of this picture various tools are 

provided to allow: 
Overlays - of additional information such as map 
data, satellite data/images, zones of interest (no-go, 
firing range, movement corridors, etc), router 
planning, boundaries of interest, text for pre and 
post briefings, etc; 
Analysis - of the data presented; 
Filtering - of displayed objects; 
Algorithms - various predictive and navigational 
algorithms; 
Planning tools; 
Presentation/briefings tools; and 
Message Management - the Defence Messaging 
application provides tools to assist in formatting 
standard defence messages (situation reports, 
intelligence reports, operational orders etc) and for 
managing reliable distribution and 
acknowledgment of the messages over the secure 
defence network. 
7.2.Procurement Method 
JCSS has an ongoing task list of required features 
and enhancements. A fixed budget is allocated at the 
beginning of each year by Australian DoD and the 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 year is divided into two releases of six months each. 
At the start of each six month release cycle, 
representatives of the Australian DoD procurement 
agency and the operational user community meet to 

decide what tasks will be undertaken. Each task is a 
self-contained project that is developed using an 
iterative development approach which embraces many 

of the principles listed by the Agile Alliance, although 
ADI does not claim it to be an agile methodology. The 

iterations are usually 2-4 weeks in duration, with 
active involvement from the customer. As this is a 
military project the degree of ceremony is higher than 
is usually associated with more “mainstream” agile 
approaches. Prototypes are delivered to the customer, 
but a formal delivery of working software is not done 

until the end of the task. 
ADI estimates the work effort when provided with 
the task list by the Australian DoD. For simple tasks a 
fixed price estimate is produced, but for high risk or 
complex tasks, the estimate is performed in two phases 

similar to the method recommended by UP. During the 
first phase there is a detailed analysis of the task, 
development of the requirements and production of 
basic working software. At the end of this first phase a 
detailed fixed price estimate, based upon time to 

complete the task, is given to the Australian DoD, 
which makes a value for money decision on whether 

to proceed with the task. All the fixed price estimates 
are “not to exceed” figures so if the work is completed 
sooner than estimated the Australian DoD only pays 

for the time used rather than the estimated time. 
Figure 1 shows the percentage over-run or under-
run on the last 14 development tasks in 2004 on one 
element of the JCSS program. As per principles 9, 10 
& 11 the JCSS tasking model encourages excellence 
in the developed software, but as an added advantage 

passes the financial benefits to the procurer. 
Figure 1: Development Task Performance 
This approach has evolved over the last 10 years 
between the supplier and procurer, to produce a model 
that contains many of the elements proposed in this 
paper. The supplier and procurer have recently 

celebrated 10 years of partnership, highlighting the 
success of these arrangements. 
JCSS does not demonstrate a truly agile software 
development however it does follow iterative 
approaches to both the development and acquisition 
roles. This represents a well-defined and successful 
process for the estimation and development of tasks.  
8.Conclusion 
An agile procurement methodology that is able to 
be harmonised with agile software development is 
likely to lead to more successful procurement 

outcomes for large software systems. This potential 
has been demonstrated by the success of the JCSS 
project outlined in this paper. The experience suggests 

that the application of a traditional waterfall 
procurement process to an agile software development 

model is not in the best interests of the procurer or the 
supplier. Although the Standish Group has reported 
improvements in software development projects since 

1995, budget excesses remain a serious concern and 
the contribution of the procurement process to these 

problems appears to be poorly understood. The 
Standish Group recommended that project size be kept 
small. Projects that have successfully applied agile 

methods are now appearing in the literature,and on the 
Agile Alliance website [23]. These outcomes support 
the notion of combining an agile procurement model 
with an agile software development methodology. 
Using this method, the procurer would be able, in 
each iteration, to negotiate the elements that provide 

the highest value for money at that time. Furthermore, 
the agile principles aim to ensure that working 

software that delivers functionality will emerge from 
every iteration. The application of agile principles 
ensures that the procurer would have a provisional 

budget, as well as a loose, global estimate of the total 
project, that will become more tightly defined as each 
iteration of the software development is completed. 
The experiences emerging from the first few iterations 
will lead to more accurate estimates allowing the 

procurer the time to revise the procurement planning 
and secure any additional funding.  
Using an agile method and agile procurement, a 
procurer would be able to add and remove 

requirements from a “to-do” list, giving them an 

ongoing ability to redefine requirements. This would 
encourage the supplier to accept change as normal, 

thus producing a system that meets the most recently 
understood needs of the customer rather than those 
specified in the past. 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 All through the project the procurer could be fully 
involved in the specifying, developing and testing of 
the new system. This would allow the procurer to 
continually view progress and evaluate the developed 

functionality for “fitness” for purpose. The outcome is 
summarised in Table 1 below: 
Table 1: Benefits of Agile Procurement 
Procurer Benefits Supplier Benefits 
Successful software 
development 
procurement outcomes. 
Successful delivery of 
software projects to 
satisfied customers. 
Delivery of software that 
satisfies the requirements, 

even if the requirements 
are dynamic and have 
changed. 
Ability to negotiate 

requirements and their 
implementation with the 
customer. 
A managed budget with 
the ability to forward 

plan and adapt. 
The ability to forward 

plan development, 

staffing and cash flow. 
Ability to change 
requirements as the 
business focus of the 
organisation changes. 
Acceptance of changing 

requirements without 
having to manage high 
risk. 
The agile procurement approach introduced in this 
paper represents a new direction in procurement 
planning and contract management. Its strength is its 
capacity to match some major challenges in software 

development with an agile procurement process that 
overcomes the traditional waterfall and whole-of-life 
contracting approach which has, on too many 
occasions, led to unacceptable cost and time variances 

in software project outcomes. Such an approach does 
not provide a comprehensive solution to the problem 
of software development costing, however it does 
enable the buyer and the supplier to move towards a 
collaborative rather than adversarial contracting 

experience in conditions of high uncertainty. 
9.References 
[1] The Standish Group, Latest Standish Group 
CHAOS Report shows project success rates have 
improved by 50%. 
http://www.standishgroup.co
m/press/article.php?id
=2. 2003. [2] C. Larman, 
Agile & iterative development: a 
manager's guide
. Boston, MA: Pearson Education, 
Inc, 2004. 
[3] K. Vinsen, D. Jamieson, and G. Callender, "Use 
case estimation - the devil is in the detail," 
presented at IEEE Joint International 
Requirements Engineering Conference RE'04, 
Kyoto, Japan, 2004. 
[4] State Supply Commission, 
The Contract Process
:Government of Western Australia, 2002. 
[5] I. Jacobson, 
Object-oriented software engineering 
- a use case driven approach
. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley Publishing, 1992. 
[6] J. Highsmith, 
Agile project management: creating 
innovative products
. Boston, MA: Addison 
Wesley Professional, 2004. 
[7] S. McConnell, 
Software project survival guide
.Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 1998. 
[8] The Standish Group, Extreme CHAOS. 
http://www.standishgroup.com/sample_research/P
DFpages/extreme_chaos.pdf
. 2001. 
[9] D. Jamieson, "Contract management - what is it 
exactly," 
Contract Management in Practice
, vol. 
1, pp. 93-97, 2004. 
[10] R. K. Sylvester and J. Ferrara, A., "Conflict and 
ambiguity: implementing evolutionary 
acquisition," in Acquisition Review Quarterly
, vol. 
Winter, 2003, pp. 3-27. 
[11] Director Operational Test & Evaluation, 
Evolutionary acquisition: key factors. 

http://www.dote.osd.mil/presentations/Coyle20001
102/sld007.htm
. 2000. [12] K. Farkas and P. Thurston, "Evolutionary 
acquisition strategies and spiral development 
processes: delivering affordable, sustainable 
capability to the warfighters," in 
Program 
Manager
, vol. July-August, 2003, pp. 10-14. 
[13] D. Snell, SCEW. 
http://www.ecfc.u-
net.com/cost/index.htm
. 1997. [14] B. W. Boehm, 
Software engineering economics
.Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1981. 
[15] A. J. Albrecht, "Measuring application 
development productivity," presented at IBM 
Application Development Symposium, Monterey, 
CA, 1979. [16] G. Karner, "Use case points - resource estimation 
for objectory projects," Objective Systems SF AB, 
1993.[17] Multimedia Victoria, SouthernSCOPE. 
http://www.mmv.vic.gov.au/southernscope
. 2003. 
[18] F. J. Heemstra, "Software cost estimation," 
Information and Software Technology
, vol. 34, pp. 
627-639, 1992. 
[19] B. W. Boehm and P. N. Papaccio, "Understanding 
and controlling software costs," 
IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering
, vol. 14, 
pp. 1462-1477, 1988. 
[20] C. Jones, 
Applied software measurement:assuring 
productivity and quality
, 2nd ed. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill, 1997. 
[21] Agile Alliance, Principles behind the agile 
manifesto. 
http://www.agilemanifesto.
org/principles.html
.2001.[22] J. Johnson, "Keynote Speech," presented at XP 
2002, Sardinia, Italy, 2002. 
[23] Agile Alliance, Case Study. 
http://www.agilealliance.org/articles/searchResults
?topic=Case+Study
. 2004. 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
