 Synthesizing a Comprehensive Framework for Lean Software Development 
Henrik Jonsson 
Technical System Development 
Etteplan Oyj 
Västerås, Sweden 
henrik.jonsson@etteplan.com 
Stig Larsson, Sasikumar Punnekkat 
School of Innovation, design and engineering 
Mälardalen University 
Västerås, Sweden 
{stig.larsson,sasikumar.punnekkat}@mdh.se
Abstract
Š Lean principles, originating from Japanese 
automotive industry, are anticipated to be useful to improve 
software development processes. Albeit its popularity there is 
still no generally accepted, clear and detailed definition of what 
lean software development actually means. This makes it 
difficult to perform research on the effects of lean software 
development and determine its usefulness in various contexts. 
To fill in that research gap this paper analyzes the state of the 
art based on twenty key Lean concepts derived from nine 
seminal sources identified in a systematic literature review. 
The original explanations of the key concepts have been 
elaborated further and synthesized into a framework for lean 
software development consisting of a set of goals, 
recommended activities and practices. The detailed results for 
the key concept Value are reported. The proposed framework 
is expected to serve as a basis for further research and for 
Lean assessment of organizations. 
(Abstract)
Keywords-Lean Software Development; Systematic Literature 
Review; State of the art, Software Process Improvement, (key 
words) 
I.I
NTRODUCTION
 ‚Lean™ principles derived from Toyota car production 
are now spreading into many other domains, with 
expectations of radically improved process performance in 
those domains as well. Software development is not an 
exception and the interest for how to apply the lean 
principles to development of software has grown rapidly. 
However, the very basic question of what lean software 
development means is still not clearly answered [8]. As long 
as no unified definition of what lean software development is 
exists, it is difficult to perform re
search on it and relate it to 
agile and other streams of influences in the software process 
improvement domain. From practioners™ point of view there 
is also valuable to see what Lean can means more concretely 
for software development.  As many organizations are 
adopting Lean in other areas, either on the manufacturing 
floor only, or to the enterprise as a whole there is a need for 
more concrete guidance of what Lean means for the software 
development departments in particular. 
To make it easier to perform 
research in this area and to 
provide more concrete guidance to organizations, we have 
derived a framework for Lean Software Development from 
multiple recognized sources. The starting point for this 
framework was a systematic literature review (SLR) 
identifying nine seminal sources for Lean Software 
Development and 44 different Lean principle statements 
(Section IV). Based on their descriptions, 20 key Lean 
concepts were compiled. Furthermore, specific goals, 
recommended activities and examples of practices for each 
key concept were extracted and synthesized in a traceable 
manner (Section V). Section II relates this study to others 
work and section III presents the details about the research 
method applied. Section VI discusses the findings and 
section VII concludes the paper. 
II.B
ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The term ‚lean production™ was coined by researchers 
from Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (MIT) assigned 
to study why Japanese automotive companies, mainly 
Toyota, had managed to increase their productivity and 
steadily taking market shares from the American ones [25]. 
What they found was a production philosophy and set of 
principles, collectively called L
ean. In Japan this is primarily 
known as ‚The Toyota Way™ [19].   While many major 
automotive industries now have
 integrated large parts of 
these ideas into production to
 remain competitive, those 
ideas have now been spread to other industrial domains. As 
shown in this paper, the idea
s to apply the Lean ideas to 
software development has roots back to the MIT research 
group coining the term [16]
, but it has mostly been 
popularized by the books by the Poppendiecks [21],[22],[23] 
as shown in this study.   
Previous reviews [3],[14] of applications of Lean 
principles to software development have summarized the 
genealogy of lean software development. A recent paper [10] 
compiled principles from selected
 sources in order to identify 
common high level values for lean soft development 
analogous to the agile valu
es expressed in the Agile 
manifesto (www.agilemanifesto.org). However, none of 
these studies was reported to be based on a systematically 
performed literature review as 
the one reported in this paper. 
And none of these has attempted to synthesize a detailed 
description of what a software development organization 
should do to be Lean. 
Extensive work to describe the general taxonomy of Lean 
has been performed by MIT in 
the Lean Aerospace Initiative 
(LAI) and an assessment tool for guiding organizations to 
adopt lean on an enterprise level has been developed [18]. 
This LAI Self Assessment Tool (LESAT) has recently been 
extended for software development, mainly by adding 
2013 39th Euromicro Conference Series on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-5091-6/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2013.641 common references to the agile manifesto and the 
Poppendiecks™ [21] popular interpretation of lean software 
development [7].  Since the focus 
is still on enterprise level, 
the framework does not provide so much concrete guidance 
for software development organizations.  
III.R
ESEARCH METHOD
The overall approach to synthesize a framework for Lean 
Software Development starting from a systematic literature 
review is summarized in Figure 1. 
Figure 1. Research workflow 
This study began with a systematic literature review with 
an approach and a protocol according to the guidelines given 
by Kitchenham [9] (part I). The research question relevant to 
this part of the study was 
which sources the primary papers 
refer to when explaining Lean
. Initial primary papers were 
searched (step 1) using the EBSCO Discovery Service 
including the databases ABI Inform, ACM Digital Library, 
SpringerLink and ScienceDirect and IEEE Xplorer, October 
11, 2012. The exact search terms were the combination of 
ﬁleanﬂ and ﬁsoftwareﬂ in all metadata fields, with subject 
terms "computer software development", "software 
engineering", "software process" or "computer science". 
Only peer reviewed sources in English were included. In an 
initial screening, papers only 
mentioning lean in some other 
context in the abstract or authors field (like Mr. Lean) were 
excluded. When in doubt, the full paper was reviewed to 
determine whether it should be 
included or not. To extract 
seminal sources, defined as what the authors of the primary 
papers refers to when explaining lean (step 2, Table I), the 
full paper text and reference sections in each included paper 
was read. The total number of references to each source was 
then calculated. To cross-ch
eck the results the number of 
citations to the identified seminal sources reported by Google 
Scholar was also obtained (October 25, 2012).  
The second part of the study was a content analysis of the 
identified seminal sources (all books), with the goal to 
identify important Lean concepts, recommended activities 
and practices for software development. First, the seminal 
sources were studied to identify sets of principle statements 
summarizing Lean (step 3, Table II). The principle 
statements were analyzed for recurring keywords to identify 
a common set of key concepts (Table III). In case of doubt, 
the extended descriptions of 
the principles by the seminal 
authors were used to guide the mapping of principles into 
common concepts. For selected concept areas, each of the 
seminal authors™ description of the concept was 
systematically scrutinized to identify and extract quotations 
with page references to descript
ions of the actually meaning, 
motivation and recommended practices for organizations 
developing software. The table of contents and the index 
sections guided the search. The seminal authors™ views were 
then compared to find similarities and discrepancies, 
resulting in a synthesized background description for each 
selected concept area. Based on that synthesis a number of 
proposed general activities were formulated for each key 
concept area. Any associated recommended concrete 
methods or practices from the seminal authors were also 
recorded. Finally, overall concept area goals were formulated 
to summarize the seminal authors view.  
IV.S
YSTEMATIC 
L
ITERATURE 
R
EVIEW 
R
ESULTS 
As part of a systematic literature study the sources that 
have been used in the academic computer science was 
identified. These recognized sources were later used as the 
basis for building a framework for lean software 
development as described in section V.
A.Seminal sources identified 
In the first database lookup 140 hits were found, 
including six duplicates. After reading through the abstracts 
(and full paper when in doubt) 30 peer-reviewed journal 
papers remained. By looking at which references those 30 
primary papers made when explaining lean and lean software 
development, nine seminal sources (all books) were 
identified. Table I summarizes the number of references to 
each of the identified seminal source. The seminal sources 
were divided into those that refer to descriptions mainly 
concerning ‚lean production™ (manufacturing), those that 
describe Lean product development in general (not only 
software) and those applied to software development in 
particular. Total number of references to these sources in 
Google Scholar is also reported
. Note that the latter includes 
references from other sources than peer-reviewed papers as 
well as references not focusing on software development.  
1.Search primary papers 
2.Extract seminal sources 
3.Identify Lean principles 
statements
4.Aggregate into key Lean 
conce
p
t areas
5. Extract meaning and 
proposals for software 
develo
p
ment or
g
anizations. 
6. Formulate goals, activities 
and recommended 
p
ractices
Part I: 
Systematic 
Literature 
Review 
(
section IV
)
Part II: 
Content 
analysis and 
synthesizing a 
Lean Software 
Development 
Framework 
(section V) 
2   
Most of the found primary papers™ authors refer to 
Womack and Jones™ books [26],[27] when explaining Lean 
thinking  in general. However, both Womack and Jones, and 
Liker refer back to Ohno [19] and other Japanese sources 
who initially invented the Toyota production system. 
 When it comes to interpretation of lean in software 
development, the Poppendiecks were the far most cited 
source, with three books in the area [21],[22],[23]. More 
recently, Andersson has also beco
me popular, mainly for his 
work on the software Kanban project management method 
[2]. Middleton and Sutton are less cited but provide more 
concrete guidance on how to apply lean concepts in 
embedded software development. In addition, Middleton et 
al. also provides some empirical study reports [12],[13],[14] 
identified as primary papers in the systematic literature part. 
Coplien and Bjornvig [5] also give some concrete guidance 
to software, but with main fo
cus on effective functional 
specifications and software architecture. Morgan™s master 
thesis from 1998 was the oldest reference seminal paper 
found, but the work of Ayoyama [4], identified as a primary 
paper, shows that lean principles in software has even older 
roots from the Japanese industry
, even before the term Lean 
was introduced. 
A third category of seminal sources identified by 
studying the primary papers was the one about lean product 
development (LPD), not particularly focusing on 
development of software. Morgan and Liker™s book [17] 
mainly describing the product development environment at 
Toyota was the only source in this group referred to by the 
primary papers. This and other LPD sources, for instance 
Ward [25], were also referred to by a few of the seminal lean 
software development sources described above. As many of 
the challenges of product development is not unique to the 
development of software, software engineering practitioners 
and researchers can at least partly be helped in their Lean 
journeys by studying the LPD literature more carefully. This 
study includes content from Morgan and Liker™s book [17].  
B. Lean principles identified 
After identifying the seminal sources as described above, 
these were examined in more 
detail in order to extract 
summarizing key principles for Lean in general and lean 
software development in particular. This section and Table II 
summarize those principles and puts them side by side. 
Principles from the Lean Production seminal sources 
Liker™s [10] starting point for explaining the ‚The Toyota 
way™ is the 4P™s: Philosophy, Process, People/Partners and 
Problem Solving. The main Philo
sophy is to work for adding 
value to customers and society to enable economic and social 
growth. The Process parts emphasizes that we have to take 
the right process path to reach our goals efficiently and to 
have a long-term perspective. The People and Partner part, 
also known as ﬁrespect for humanityﬂ, emphasizes that 
production and development is a learning and challenging 
human environment, and that we have to work closely with 
both customers and suppliers, helping both to improve their 
businesses. Finally, the Problem solving part stresses the 
importance to continuously solve root problems and 
continuously learn. Beside
s these key pillars, Liker 
summarizes Lean with 14 principles mostly from a 
production perspective including process, organization as 
well as technological issues (see Table II).
Womack and Jones [27] condense Lean Thinking into 
five important concepts, namely
 Value, Value stream, Flow, 
Pull and Perfection. In contrast 
to Liker [11] these are mainly 
process oriented. 
While both Liker™s [11] and Womack and Jones™ [27]  
descriptions mostly stem from the production floor, the view 
of Lean is extended Morgan and Liker [17] who describes 
the Toyota product development system. Although there are 
much common overlap, the principles stated by Morgan and 
Liker [17] extends the view of Lean when it comes to 
product development, more closely related to software 
development than pure production. The way of front-loading 
the development process and considering many options (set-
based engineering) are examples of process-related aspects 
unique to production development. The way of aligning and 
boosting the development organization using functional 
expertise groups working in integrated product teams lead by 
a chief engineer is also unique features to the lean product 
development discussion.
Principles from lean softwar
e development seminal authors
Whereas the above principles are for lean production and 
development in general, this
 subsection presents and 
analyses how the seminal sources interpret them for software 
development. The exact formulation and short explanations 
of Poppendiecks™ principles for Lean Software Development 
(www.poppendieck.com) seems still to be floating, making it 
difficult to analyze them definitely. A deeper analysis below 
(see Table III) showed that Poppendiecks™ principles in 
general much overlap with the Lean production and 
development principles discussed above when it comes to 
process-related issues. Organizational and technical issues 
TABLE I. S
EMINAL SOURCES FOR 
L
EAN 
S
OFTWARE 
D
EVELOPMENT 
IDENTIFIED THROUGH A SYSTEMATIC LITTERATURE REVIEW
Author Ref.+ 
Year 
References 
from 
primary 
papers 
Google Scholar 
references 
Lean Production 
Womack and Jones [26] 1991 
[27] 2003 
15 
8942 
3694 
Liker [11] 
2004 5 1723 
Ohno [19] 
1998 2 2588 
Lean Software Development 
Poppendieck [21] 
2003 
[22] 2006 
[23] 2010 
13 
525 
183 
27 
Andersson 
[2]   2010 6 
58 
Middleton and Sutton [15] 2005 3 
33 
Coplien and Bjornvig [5]   2010 1 
27 
Morgan [16] 
1998 2 4 
Lean Software Development 
Morgan and Liker [17] 2006 1 
373 
3 are less covered in the way the principles summarized by the 
Poppendiecks. 
Andersson states five princi
ples for his software Kanban 
method [2]. Compared to Poppendiecks™ principles these are 
more practice-oriented, mostly focused on the project 
management issues.  
Coplien and Bjornvig [5] summarize the lean principles 
as the rule of thumb 
ﬁeverybody, all together, from early 
onﬂ. 
In itself this does not give so much concrete guidance 
but could help practitioners already trained in Lean thinking 
to keep aligned with it. 
Middleton and Sutton [15] do not try to create an own 
definition, but discusses the imp
lications of the lean concepts 
defined by Womack and Jones when applied to software 
development. This was valuable
 input the detailed analysis 
of what Lean means to software development presented 
below. 
V.S
YNTHESIS OF A 
L
EAN 
S
OFTWARE 
D
EVELOPMENT 
F
RAMEWORK
Based on the findings from the literature review results 
presented above, a framework for lean software development 
was constructed. At the highest level Lean concepts were 
identified from keywords used in the principle statements 
formulated by the seminal authors. Their view of each 
concept and the implications for software development 
organizations were then systematically analyzed and 
synthesized into a number of activities to perform and 
overall goals to strive for in order to be Lean according to 
these sources. 
TABLE II. 





Author Principles 
Liker [11] L1. Base your management decisions on a long-term philosophy, even at the expense of short-term financial goals.  
L2. Create a continuous process flow to bring problems to the surface.  
L3. Use ﬁpullﬂ systems to avoid overproduction  
L4. Level out the workload (heijunka).   
L5. Build a culture of stopping to fix problems, to get quality right the first time.  
L6. Standardized tasks and processes are the foundation for continuous improvement and employee empowerment.  
L7. Use visual control so no problems are hidden.  
L8. Use only reliable, thoroughly tested technology that serves your people and processes.  
L9. Grow leaders who thoroughly understand the work, live the philosophy, and teach it to others.  
L10. Develop exceptional people and teams who follow your company™s philosophy.  
L11. Respect your extended network of partners and suppliers by challenging them and helping them improve.  
L12. Go and see for yourself to thoroughly understand the situation (genchi genbutsu).  
L13. Make decisions slowly by consensus, thoroughly considering all options; implement decisions rapidly (nemawashi).  
L14. Become a learning organization through relentless reflection (hansei) and continuous improvement (kaizen). 
Womack and 
Jones [27] 
W1. Value: First identify what really matters to the customer  
W2. Value Stream: Ensure every activity adds customer value  
W3. Flow: Eliminate discontinuities in the value stream  
W4. Pull: Production is initiated by demand  
W5. Perfection: Retaining integrity via Jidoka and Poka-Yoke 
Poppendiecks 
(www. 
poppendieck. 
com) 
P1. Optimize the whole (Focus on entire value stream; Deliver a complete product; Think long term)  
P2. Eliminate waste (Build right thing; Learn; Eliminate trashing)  
P3. Build quality in (Mistake-proof process; Break architectural dependencies)  
P4. Learn constantly (Predictable performance is driven by feedback; maintain options, last responsible moment)  
P5. Deliver fast (Rapid delivery; High quality, low cost are fully compatible; Queuing Theory applies, Managing workflow is eas
ier 
than managing schedules)  
P6. Engage everyone (Use semi-autonomous teams; provide challenges and feedback; work for a purpose)  
P7. Keep getting better (Failure is a learning opportunity; Standards exist to be challenged and improved; use the scientific m
ethod) 
Andersson [2] A1. Visualize the workflow  
A2. Limit work in progress  
A3. Manage flow 
A4. Make process policies explicit  
A5. Improve collaboratively (using models and the scientific method) 
Morgan and 
Liker [17] 
M1. Establish customer-defined value to separate value-added from waste. 
M2. Front-load the product development process to explore thoroughly alternative solutions while there is maximum design space.
 
M3. Create a level product development process flow. 
M4. Utilize rigorous standardization to reduce variation, and create flexibility and predictable outcomes.  
M5: Develop a chief engineer system to integrate development from start to finish.  
M6. Organize to balance functional expertise and cross-functional integration.  
M7. Develop towering competence in all engineers. 
M8. Fully integrate suppliers into the product development system.  
M9. Build in learning and continuous improvement.  
M10. Build a culture to support excellence and relentless improvement.  
M11. Adapt technologies to fit your people and process.  
M12. Align your organization through simple visual communication. 
M13. Use powerful tools for standardization and organizational learning. 
4 A.Synthesis of Lean concepts  
By analyzing the principles from the above sources 20 
key concepts for Lean were identified and mapped back to 
principles of the individual seminal sources (Table III). From 
this analysis it is clea
r that no author covers all the aspects of 
Lean in their own set of specified principles. While the lean 
software development seminal authors cover the process-
oriented concepts well, their set of principles has lower 
coverage when it comes to organizational and technical 
features to support the process. It is however important to 
note that these results are solely based on how the main Lean 
principles were stated by the seminal authors. Further 
discussions related to the missing concepts were occasionally 
found when analyzing the seminal papers further as 
described below. 
B.Implications for softwar
e development organizations 
After identifying Lean key concepts as described above 
the views of the different semi
nal authors about each of the 
concept were analyzed in more details in a structured 
manner, with the goal to create a comprehensive framework 
for Lean Software Development traceable back to seminal 
sources. First all seminal sources were searched for 
definitions of the concept (what is it?). Based on that, a 
general summary of the concept was formulated. Secondly, 
statements about what a software development organization 
should think of and do to be
 lean were extracted from the 
authors™ more detailed description of the phenomena. 
Recommended practices and methods mentions were also 
extracted. All this information was recorded in a spreadsheet, 
one per key Lean concept, with references to source and 
page numbers. By comparing and aggregating the various 
seminal sources™ views, a number of activities and goals 
were formulated for each concept area.  
The result of this work is
 exemplified below. Due to 
space limitations, only the deta
ils for the Value concept area 
are reported.  Value was chosen because it is an essential 
starting point according to Womack and Jones™ principles 
(W1) [27] . 
C.Summary for the Value concept area
  
Several aspects of the value term as used in Lean are 
discussed by the seminal authors, but a strong common 
theme as that it is
 the value for the ultimate customer that 
must be in the focus all the ti
me.  Several seminal authors 
claim that this focus is ea
sily lost in a development 
organization, when (1) starting to focus too much on project 
scope (and not product) time and cost issues [22], (2) too 
soon turning to discussing financial numbers with upper 
management [17] or (3) engineers™ own interest in new, 
fancy technology, occasionally developed to overly 
perfection, takes precedents over the overall goal of creating 
a good balance of customer needs in the product [27]. To 
TABLE III. L
EAN KEY CONCEPTS SYNTHESIZED FROM SEMINAL SOURCES
Concept 
Liker  Morgan & Liker Womack &Jones Poppendiecks Andersson 
Main Philosophy 
Long-term decisions 
L1 
P1 
System thinking 
P1 
Continuous Improvement 
L14 
M9 
W5 
P7 
A5 
Process
Value  
M1 
W1 
P2 
Value stream 
W2 
P1 
Flow L2 
M3 
W3 
P5 
A2-3 
Pull L3 W4 
Mistake-proof  process 
L5 
W5 
P3 
Waste L4 
M1 P2 
Set-based engineering 
L13 
M2 
P4 
Standardized work 
L6 
M4 
P7 
A4 
People
Go see (genchi genbutsu) 
L12 
 Mentorship leadership 
L10 
M10 
 Supplier integration 
L11 
M8 
Chief engineer 
M5 
P6 
Integrated functional expertice 
M6 
  
T-competence L10 
M7 P6 
Technology
Visualization L7 
M12 
A1 
  
Adapt tools to humans 
L8 
M11 
Powerful tools 
M13 
5 avoid the latter it is important 
to ﬁkeep the customer values 
in front of the technical people making detailed designed 
decisionsﬂ [21]. 
Middleton and Sutton summarize value as the collection 
of all the wants and needs of your customer [15], and point 
out that value does not just encompass functionality and 
usability, but also non-functional properties and pricing. 
Similarly, Morgan and Liker [17] emphasize that both 
quantitative and qualitative aspects of customer value, 
including performance, cost and quality, must be addressed.  
In terms of waste, a well-designed product shall help the 
ultimate customer to avoid wast
e in their own value stream 
[15]. Besides providing exactl
y the right functionality and 
nothing more, a Lean software development organization 
must work hard to minimizing the failure demand (for 
instance bugs) that annoys and disturbs the customer and 
creates waste both in the customer™s business and in the 
developing organization [23]. In other words, a well-
designed product shall provide a hassle-free customer 
experience [27].  
D.Activities for the Value concept area 
Further analysis of the extracted quotations from the 
seminal sources resulted in the formulation of a number of 
activities proposed by the seminal authors to be performed 
by a software development organization in order to be Lean. 
Associated concrete practices or methods recommended 
were also captured. Although these can provide some more 
guidance, they must be evaluated based on the particular 
organizational context and how they fit together with upper-
stream and lower-stream activities. In the spirit of Lean™s 
continuous improvement thinking, other existing modified or 
novel practices should be considered at all times. The 
activities themselves should also
 critically be considered in 
the continuous im
provement work. 
The resulting activities for th
e Value concept area are 
presented above, starting with a synthesized activity 
statement including a motivation followed by a description 
summarizing and giving further references to the seminal 
sources. 
V1. To create the right product and avoid rework, all 
customers need to be identified taking into consideration 
customer™s customer and any party that can affect the sales 
and the business benefit of the product. 
The very first step is to identify all important customer 
stakeholders. Understanding who the customers are is central 
in Lean thinking and to understand value, but not all seminal 
authors elaborate on how customers are defined and 
identified. According to the Poppendiecks, customers are 
anyone who pays for, uses, supports or derives value from 
the product [23]. Product managers and product owners are 
not customers [23], but are the ones mainly responsible of 
transferring customer™s need to the developing organization. 
Sometimes the direct customer is
 within the same enterprise, 
for instance for software supporting the production line. In 
such cases and other, it is anyway useful to identify and 
understand the needs of your customer™s customers [15]. 
Merely identifying the end users is not sufficient. Instead all 
parties that can influence the 
ability to sale the product, 
including government regulators, customer™s management 
and general public must be taken into consideration [15]. For 
product development, production and service personnel are 
also important stakeholders in this context. Often, but not 
always, the actual production (deployment) effort for 
software is comparably easy. Anyhow it is important to 
identify those functions that manage installation and 
maintenance of the software product, which affects the 
overall business benefit. One recommended practice to 
identify customers is 
Brainstorming
 taking into 
consideration all those that can affect the purchasing decision 
[16].  
V2. To be able to identify actual customer needs, the 
engineering lead and other representatives from the 
development organization need to visit the (typical) customer 
home turfs to meet, study and interview the customer.
A crucial step is to early get access to ‚gemba™, that is a 
home place for the end user where the product is intended to 
be used in the end. Ideally, a chief engineer [17] (also known 
as ™champion™ [21]) should do this early, then formulate a 
vision statement and channel this into an effective value 
stream and to the rest of the organization. Preferably several 
representatives from the software development organization, 
not only top management, shall visit this place and observe 
the customers in their real-world context. This shall be 
complemented by customer meetings and interviews, 
explicitly excluding sales personnel [15]. 
V3. To be able to create a product with well-balanced 
feature set, all customers™ wants and needs, including 
performance and cost, need to be systematically captured, 
analyzed and categorized. 
Within this activity implicit and unrecognized needs shall 
be captured for each customer. To find real customer 
problems to be solved the 
Five Why
 method, central in Lean, 
can be useful [15] and analyzing the customer™s own value 
stream [21]. Besides the requirement to capture functional 
wants and needs, important non-functional wishes must be 
identified, including usability and what the customer are 
willing to pay [15].  
Several seminal authors [15], [21] refer to the 
Kano 
model
 to categorize customer needs into must-be, 
performance and attractive features.  When there are 
differences in customers and their environment the 
organization must identify general kinds of activities all 
customers are performing [15]. Identifying things that the 
customer specifically wants to avoid can also be useful input 
the requirements work and testing. 
V4. To maximize the business profit-to-risk ratio, 
customer values and the implementation of these need to be 
prioritized, balancing different customer needs with the need 
for risk reduction.
Simple prioritization into 
shall
 or 
should
 requirements is 
not sufficient according to the seminal Lean authors. More 
systematic and dynamic sche
mes to prioritize between 
different customers and values should be considered. 
Examples of such methods are 
Affinity Diagramming
, 
Three-
pile method
, self-rated importance questionnaires and 
Scrum-style product backlogs with user stories [15] . The 
6 Poppendiecks [21] emphasizes the importance of resolving 
needs into 
when
 particular features are needed to maximize 
the overall business performance (profit). Middleton and 
Sutton adds that determining the right order must be a 
balance between technical risk reduction and providing 
sufficient hard features and emotional values for each release 
[15]. In this process it can also be useful to think ahead on 
how the customer will react, change behavior and wants after 
a specific feature has been deployed to them [15]. 
V5. To be able to develop a distinguishable and 
profitable product, the organization needs to analyze 
competitors™ products™ features and their actual usage. 
The value resolution process 
should include analysis of 
competitors target customers, values and solution in order to 
create a distinguishable and needed product [17]. Visiting 
and studying customers who use competing product is 
recommended [15]. 
V6. To enable an effective development value stream, 
requirements need to be captured in a customer-centered 
format, easy to verify and possible to easily map to 
implementation and verification. 
  Customer values shall be captured in a customer-
oriented language, using their own terminology, explaining 
the goals to be achieved and the reason why, avoiding 
talking about the solution space (how?). Ideally the 
specification of value should be in the language of the 
customer, easy to understand by both the customer and the 
developer, be unambiguous, has evident completeness and 
separate what from how [15]. From an ideal requirement 
specification it should also be possible to define a clear 
mapping to how and where to implement the feature and 
how to verify it in the end. To facilitate the latter a test-
driven approach (i.e. writing requirements as tests or at least 
writing test cases before implementation, preferably 
automated) can be a step forward in line with Lean thinking 
[21]. For simple products and when a customer 
representative is present, 
User Stories
 may be sufficient to 
capture the values in a condensed and effective way, at least 
when there is no need for more formal specifications 
according to legal and/or maintenance requirements. For 
more complex systems expressing the behavior 
systematically in the language of the user, 
use case diagrams 
and scenarios
 are practices stated to be well in line with 
Lean thinking [5],[21]. Another method claimed to 
appropriate for lean software development is the 
Software 
Cost Reduction (SCR)
 method, at least for real-time systems 
[15]. 
Several of the seminal authors [5],[15],[21] stress the 
importance of using domain modeling to both model and 
understand the customer environments and to use that to 
create a software architecture that reflects this model as 
closely as possible, creating maintainable product with high 
user-perceived integrity [21]. 
E.Formulating a goal for the Value concept area 
The result of the review of seminal sources view of the 
Value concept presented above the following overall goal 
was formulated for this area: 
ﬁThe software development organization shall work hard 
to, and have a systematic way of, identifying and prioritizing 
customers and their needs, and also use effective means to 
let those permeate the development team and the design of 
the software.ﬂ  
with the motivation 
ﬁStrong focus on creating value for the customer and 
society is central to create 
a profitable company by fulfilling 
important needs of the customer and to be able to separate 
waste from value-adding activities.ﬂ 
Similar high level goals, recommended activities and 
practices have been formulated for the other concepts in 
order to create a comprehensive framework for lean software 
development. 
VI.D
ISCUSSION
The literature review identified only a few (30) primary 
papers about lean software de
velopment indicating that this 
is a relatively new research area. A limitation of this study 
was that not all conference papers were included in 
Discovery indexing service used. 
In this way there is a risk 
that some seminal paper referred to in the scientific literature 
could have been missed. Some useful literature could also 
have been missed due to the fact that no author of peer-
reviewed papers has yet referred to it.  
Although care has been taken to map key concepts and 
recommended activities based on careful encoding, there is 
always a room for misinterpretations. Nevertheless, the 
framework is it built up in a very extensible and traceable 
manner to easily accommodate corrections and extensions 
based on new insights and expe
riences. In line with Lean 
thinking, this framework serves merely as a basis for 
standardization, and is expected to continuously change as 
new insights are gained.     
When comparing the goal and activity statements 
obtained in this framework on
e by one with currently known 
‚best practices™ for software development expressed in for 
instance capability models such as Capability Maturity 
Model Integration [24] or just as ‚common sense™, Lean 
Software Development may not seem to provide much new 
insights to the software engineering area. However, it is the 
focus on improvement of the whole sociotechnical 
organizational system and the value streams within it, not 
individual process areas, which is the major important Lean 
concern [17]. In this way, the Lean Software Development 
framework developed has a potential to complement the 
view of other models. It is however important to stress that 
the purpose of the framework is guide researchers and 
practitioners to what lean soft
ware development actually is. 
Until evidence of use is provided it is not possible to claim 
7 that this will lead to
 actual improvements 
of some aspect of 
software development. 
VII.C
ONCLUSIONS AND 
F
URTHER WORK
This paper summarized the results from a literature 
survey identifying nine seminal sources and 20 key concepts 
for Lean software development. Based on those it was 
demonstrated how these results could be transformed to a 
comprehensive framework. Through the example Value, we 
demonstrate the potential that such framework has to guide 
researchers and practitioners in how to apply Lean thinking 
to software development. The natural next step is to develop 
this into a Lean a
ssessment instrument to be validated and 
developed iteratively in pilot studies in various contexts.  
The framework may also help to contrast Lean and agile 
software development. The terms Lean and agile are often 
used synonymously, but by doing this study we have noticed 
differences. These differences should be further investigated. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the Knowledge Foundation 
(KKS) through ITS-EASY, an Industrial Research School in 
Embedded Software and Systems, affiliated with Mälardalen 
University, Sweden. 
R
EFERENCES
[1]P. Abrahamsson, N. Oza and M. T. Siponen, ﬁAgile software 
development methods: A comparative reviewﬂ, 2010, in 
ﬁAgile software development: Current research and future 
directionsﬂ, Springer, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-12575-1 
[2]D.J. Andersson, ﬂKanbanﬂ, 2010, Blue Hole Press 
[3]D.J. Andersson, ﬁLean software developmentﬂ, Microsoft 
Development Network, 2012, http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/vstudio/hh533841.aspx, accessed April 10, 2013    
[4]M. Aoyama, ﬁBeyond software factories: concurrent-
development process and an evolution of software process 
technology in Japan.ﬂ, Information and Software 
Technology, 1996, vol. 38, pp. 133Œ143 
[5]J. Coplien and G. Bjornvig, ﬁLean architecture: for agile 
software developmentﬂ, 2010, John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
[6]C., Ebert, C., P. Abrahamsson and N. Oza, ﬁLean software 
developmentﬂ. IEEE Software, 2012, vol. 29(5), pp. 22-25, 
doi: 10.1109/MS.2012.116 
[7]T. Karvonen, P. Rodriguez, P. Kuvaja, K. Mikkonen, and M. 
Oivo, ﬁAdapting the lean enterprise self-assessment tool for 
the software development domainﬂ, Sep. 
2012, 38th 
Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and 
Advanced Applications
, pp. 266Œ273, doi: 
10.1109/SEAA.2012.51 
[8]P. Kettunen, ﬁA tentative framework for lean software 
enterprise research and developmentﬂ, Lean Enterprise 
Software and Systems (LESS2010), Lecture Notes in 
Business Information Processing, 2010, vol. 65, pp. 60-71, 
Springer Berlin, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-16416-3_11 
[9]B. Kitchenham, ﬁProcedures for performing systematic 
reviews.ﬂ, 2004, Keele University Technical Report TR/SE-
0401 
[10]M. Lane, B. Fitzgerald and P. Agerfalk, ﬁIdentifying lean 
software development valuesﬂ, European Conference on 
Information Systems (ECIS), 2012. 
[11]J.K. Liker, ﬁThe Toyota way: 14 management principles 
from the world™s greatest manufacturerﬂ, 2004, McGraw-Hill 
[12]P. Middleton, ﬁLean software processﬂ. Journal of Computer 
Information Systems, 2001. vol. 42, no. 1, p. 21 
[13]P. Middleton, A. Flaxel and A. Cookson, ﬁLean software 
management case study: Timberline Inc.ﬂ, Extreme 
Programming And Agile Processes In Software Engineering, 
Proceedings, 2005, vol. 3556, pp. 1-9 
[14]P. Middleton and D. Joyce. ﬁLean Software Management: 
BBC Worldwide Case Studyﬂ, IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Management, 2012, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 20-32, 
doi: 10.1109/TEM.2010.2081675 
[15]P. Middleton and T. Sutton, ﬁLean software strategies: 
Proven techniques for managers and developersﬂ, 2005, 
Productivity Press 
[16]T. Morgan, "Lean manufacturing techniques applied to 
software development", 1998, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, MSc. Thesis 
[17]J.M. Morgan and J.K. Liker, ﬁThe Toyota product 
development systemﬂ, 2006, Productivity Press. 
[18]D. Nightingale and J. Mize, ﬁDevelopment of a lean 
enterprise transformation maturity model,ﬂ 
Information, 
Knowledge, Systems Management
, vol. 3, pp. 15Œ30, 2002. 
[19]T. Ohno, ﬁToyota production system: Beyond large scale 
productionﬂ, 1998,  Productivity Press. 
[20]K. Petersen, ﬁIs lean agile and agile lean?: a comparison 
between two software development paradigmsﬂ in Modern 
Software Engineering Concepts and Practices: Advanced 
Approaches, IGI Global, 2010, pp. 19-46, doi: 10.4018/978-
1-60960-215-4.ch002 
[21]M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, ﬁLean software 
development: An agile toolkitﬂ, 2003, Addison-Wesley 
[22]M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, ﬁImplementing lean 
software development: From concept to cashﬂ, 2006, 
Addison-Wesley 
[23]M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, ﬁLeading lean software 
developmentﬂ, 2010, Addison-Wesley 
[24]CMMI Product Team, ﬁCMMI for development, version 
1.3,ﬂ Software Engineering 
Institute, Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Technical Report 
CMU/SEI-2010-TR-033, 2010. 
[25]A.C. Ward, ﬁLean product and process developmentﬂ, 
2007,The Lean Enterprise Institute Inc 
[26]J.P. Womack and D.T. Jones, D. Roos, ﬁThe machine that 
changed the worldﬂ, 2007, 2
nd
 ed., Simon & Schuster UK. 
[27]J.P. Womack and D.T. Jones, ﬂLean thinking: Banish waste 
and create wealth in your corporationﬂ, 2003, Free Press, 
New York. 
8