 Adapting the Lean Enterprise Self-Assessment Tool for the Software Development 
Domain 
Teemu Karvonen
1
, Pilar Rodríguez
1
, Pasi Kuvaja
1
, Kirsi Mikkonen
2
, Markku Oivo
1
 
1
Department of Information Processing Sc
ience, University of Oulu, Finland 
2 
Ericsson R&D Center Finl
and, Jorvas, Finland 
e-mail: teka@iki.fi, pilar.rodriquez@oulu.fi, pasi.kuvaja
@oulu.fi, kirsi.mikkonen@eric
sson.com, markku.oivo@oulu.fi
 
 
Abstract
 Lean principles have attracted the attention of 
software development companies 
due to their potential to 
improve competitiveness.  However, the application of such 
principles in the software domain is still in its infancy.  This 
paper presents a proposal for adapting the Lean Enterprise 
Self-Assessment Tool (LESAT) to 
guide the transformation of 
software development companies toward Lean.  LESAT, 
developed by the Lean Advancement Initiative (LAI) at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), has been widely 
used in other domains.  In th
is study, concepts and expressions 
of LESAT were analyzed and mapped to software development 
following the ISO/IEC 12207 standard.  Seven assessment 
items concerning life-cycle processes were modified from the 
original LESAT.  The modified LESAT for software was 
compared with a lean assessment approach called “
Lean 
amplifier,
” which has been developed and successfully used in 
practice by Ericsson R&D in Finl
and.  The results indicated 
that LESAT may complement lean assessment in the software 
domain at enterprise level, involving the entire value stream.  
Moreover, they clearly emphasized the role of leadership in the 
transformation. 
Keywords: 
lean; lean software development; lean 
transformation; assessment; LESAT; enterprise; software 
engineering 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Ever since lean principles we
re first used in elucidating 
the characteristics of the T
oyota Production System (TPS) 
[1], [2], [3], they have fascinated enterprises and researchers 
around the world.  The concept of “lean” has evolved and 
expanded since the groundbreaking results of the 
International Motor Vehicle Program (IMVP) [3].  Lean 
software development (LSD) is the adaptation of lean for 
software development companies [4], [5].  LSD is often 
associated with agile methods 
[6].  However, whereas agile 
methods mainly focus on team level development activities, 
lean is often viewed as a platform upon which to scale agile 
methods because it focuses on the whole 
value stream 
and 
on enterprise-level processes and behavior.  According to 
Sutherland “
lean software developmen
t views all agile 
methods as valid, proven appl
ications of Lean thinking to 
software
” [5, p. xvii]. However, how to proceed when 
adopting lean in software development companies is still not 
well understood [7], [8].  Moreover, no structured 
assessment framework exis
ts that supports the 
transformation toward LSD, at 
least in the public domain.  
In this paper, we present a study for adapting the Lean 
Enterprise Self-Assessment Tool
 (LESAT) [9] for use in 
software-development organizations.  LESAT was 
developed by the Lean Advancem
ent Initiative (LAI) at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) [10].  LESAT 
aims to guide companies im
plementing lean by assessing 
their current status based on lean capabilities, as well as 
setting targets for future st
eps.  LESAT, originally 
developed in cooperation with the aerospace defense 
industry, has been used in other domains such as health care 
and government organizations.  We think that the 
assumptions underlying LESAT th
at are based on the MIT’s 
extensive knowledge and experience of lean could also be 
suitable for gauging software development companies’ 
progress toward lean. 
In this study, underlying assumptions from product 
manufacturing are reviewed, in addition to the language of 
LESAT, and translated into a domain language and 
processes more appropriate to software.  Seven assessment 
items in LESAT’s life-cycle processes section were 
modified.  The items were mapped to ISO/IEC 12207 
standard, and concepts and expressions for lean and agile in 
relation to software development were constructed. Finally, 
LESAT for software was evaluated by comparing it with an 
approach designed by Ericsson to assess its own lean 
transformation called 
Lean Amplifier
.  Twelve core 
principles of lean were applied in the evaluation.  The 
results indicated that LESAT for software could 
complement LSD organizations’ assessments, especially at 
the enterprise level.  They al
so clearly emphasized the role 
of leadership as a key enabler of the lean enterprise 
transformation.  However, the life-cycle processes section of 
LESAT still requires in-depth modifications to adapt it to 
the characteristics of the so
ftware-development domain. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section II 
presents related work.  Section III introduces the 
architecture and the main feat
ures of LESAT.  Section IV 
presents the adaptation of LESAT for software, including 
some examples clarifying how the adaptation was 
undertaken.  Section V presents the evaluation of LESAT 
for software, and section VI discusses the implications of 
this study.  Finally, section V
II presents the conclusions, 
limitations of the study and s
uggestions for future work. 
2012 38th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-4790-9/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2012.51266 II.
 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK
 
A.
 
Lean and lean software development 
Toyota is perhaps the most well-known company to 
apply lean in its TPS [2].  However, even Toyota cannot be 
considered to have completely mastered lean [1].  Lean 
principles, as introduced by Womack and Jones [12], 
include 
value
, 
value stream
, 
flow
, 
pull,
 and 
perfection
.  
Accordingly, lean seeks the 
most efficient methods on the 
basis of maximizing value,
 minimizing waste, and 
embracing a continuous improvement mentality.  According 
to lean, value is defined as everything for which a customer 
is willing to pay, and waste refers to everything that absorbs 
resources but yields no value.
  Value stream seeks an 
optimized end-to-end collection 
of actions for bringing the 
product to the customer.  Flow 
refers to the organization of 
activities as a continuous flow by eliminating discontinuities 
and unnecessary steps (waste) in
 the value stream.  Finally, 
pull implies producing only what is really needed by 
making the customer’s needs th
e primary decision driver. 
The application of lean has spread and today is widely 
applied in different domains such as the retail clothing 
industry [13], health care [14], and the aerospace industry 
[15].  Zara, the Spanish fashion company, has considerably 
reduced lead time via a business model based on collecting 
and sharing input from cust
omers daily and using lean 
inventories [13].  In the dom
ain of heath care, Young and 
McClean have reported improve
ments when applying lean, 
“
especially in the areas of safety, delay and cost-effective 
delivery of care
” [14, p. 383].  As early as the 1990s [16], 
researchers began exploring the potential of lean to make 
software-development processe
s innovative, responsive to 
business changes, and economically efficient.  LSD has 
began to attract attention again more recently [5], [17], [18], 
primarily due to the expanding industry need for scaling 
agile software development. 
LSD has been mainly promoted by the agile community, 
being initially considered just another agile method.  
However, today LSD is acquiring its own identity [7].  
Poppendieck considered lean as a “
platform upon which to 
build agile software 
development practices
” [19, p. 1].  
Coplien and Bjornwig argued that although agile and lean 
have fundamental differences, they also complement each 
other [20].  Although lean, as 
contemporarily understood, is 
a new topic in software de
velopment, there is already 
evidence of the industry’s interest in adopting this approach 
[21], [7]. 
While lean principles [12] are under debate in a 
knowledge activity as software 
development [22], the seven 
principles compiled by Poppendieck and Poppendieck [5] 
are widely acknowledged.  
These principles are 1) 
eliminate 
waste
, doing only what adds custom
er value without delays; 
2) 
amplify learning
 using frequent feedback loops; 3) 
delay 
commitment
, deciding as late as possible; 4) 
deliver as fast 
as possible
, responding to real customers’ needs; 5) 
empower the team
, providing an expert workforce and 
delegating responsibility to workers; 6) 
build integrity in
, 
focusing on quality from the start and avoiding having to 
correct defects by testing the product at the end of the 
development process, and 7) 
see the whole
, focusing on 
achieving an overall goal. 
This work utilizes the definitions and views of Womack 
and Jones [12] on lean, and Poppendieck and Poppendieck’s 
perspectives of LSD [5] for adapting and evaluating LESAT 
for software. 
B.
 
Lean transformation and assessment 
Organizational change refers to “
the process by which 
organizations move from their present state to some desired 
future state to increase their effectiveness
” [23, p. 88].  
Changes in organizations can happen at different levels, 
from automating manual tasks to rethinking the nature of 
the organization and defining new business models.  
Evidently, risks associated with organizational change 
increase as the scope of the transformation broadens.  Lean 
highlights the importance of considering the whole 
enterprise in the transformatio
n.  Thus, a lean enterprise 
uses lean not just in some areas
 but in everything it does [3].  
Consequently, adopting lean is often part or the 
organization’s strategy [24], lead
ing to transformation of the 
enterprise and impacting disciplines such as sales, human 
resources, etc.  
Assessments have been identified as essential when 
transforming toward lean [10].  Evaluating the enterprise’s 
performance or its operational efficiency is not enough for 
guiding the lean transformation.  Assessment approaches 
that reflect internal organizational capabilities and provide 
practical information for improving the organization’s 
internal processes are also c
onsidered necessary.  Doolen 
and Hacker [24] previously reviewed the existing 
assessment methods for guiding
 lean transformation.  
However, identified assessment methods focus on specific 
practices in a manufacturing 
environment and cannot be 
directly applicable to softwa
re development organizations.  
In the software engineeri
ng domain, CMMI-DEV [25] 
and ISO/IEC 15504 [26] have become a standard way to 
assess an organization and its capabilities.  CMMI-DEV 
V1.3 also includes support for agile methods.  However, 
they have not been designed for conducting lean 
transformations and are hard
ly applicable.  Assessment 
methods closer to LSD have
 emerged during recent years 
for evaluating the agile transformation of software-
development organizations [
27], [28], [29], and [30].  
However, again, these methods did not explicitly consider 
lean aspects. 
This study aims to help fill the knowledge gap on 
approaches for assessing the transformation toward lean in 
software-development organi
zations.  Considering the 
research efforts of the LAI 
(http://lean.mit.edu/) of the MIT, 
we propose the adaptation of one of its models, LESAT, for 
software development.  
267 The LAI at the MIT proposed a holistic approach 
composed of a Lean Enterprise Model (LEM) [31], the 
enterprise Transition-To-Lean (TTL) roadmap [32], and the 
LESAT [9].  LEM is a general framework that provides an 
overall vision of lean.  The TTL roadmap provides a 
practical framework for assis
ting organizations in their 
effort to transform into l
ean.In the domain of LSD, LAI-
MIT’s TTL roadmap has inspired the recent work of 
Kuusela and Koivuluoma [8], who presented a lean 
transformation framework for software-intensive 
companies.  Kuusela and Ko
ivuluoma stressed that “
At 
intervals, lean assessments are useful to get a picture how 
lean transformation is progressing.
  From time to time it is 
vital to check if corrective actions are needed, major or 
minor ones
.” [8, p. 4].  LESAT is the LAI-MIT’s solution
for assessing the leanness of an enterprise and its capacity to 
change according to lean principles.  We believe that 
LESAT, originally designed in the domain of the aerospace 
industry and adapted to other 
domains such as government 
organizations [33] and health 
care [34], can also provide the 
foundations for assessing lean transformations of software 
development companies. 
III.LESAT
INA
N
UTSHELL
The purpose of LESAT is to assess an enterprise’s
current status in terms of lean (capability), as well as to set
targets for a desired future 
state.  LESAT focuses not only 
onlean characteristics, but al
so on lean behavior and, 
especially, leadership for initia
ting and fostering the journey 
of transforming into a lean enterprise.  LESAT is composed 
of assessment matrices that c
ontain those aspects that are 
important in lean transform
ation.The capability maturity 
model (CMM) [25], which was developed by the Software 
Engineering Institute, was considered in the design of
LESAT [10].  However, “w
hereas the CMM/CMMI models 
focus on systems and softw
are development, LESAT 
considers all processes of an 
enterprise, encompassing all 
enterprise practices with 
an emphasis on leadership and 
integrative management processes
” [10, p. 19].  LESAT is 
organized into three assessment sections as follows:  
1) A 
lean transformation/leadership section
, which
contains processes and leader
ship attributes nurturing the 
transformation toward lean principles and practices. 
2) A 
life-cycle processes section
, whichfocuses on 
processes responsible for product creation from conception 
to post-delivery support.
 
3) An e
nabling infrastructure section
, which assesses 
those processes that provide and manage the resources for 
enabling enterprise operations. 
Fig. 1 illustrates the LAI’s view on the lean enterprise,
as well as the relationship between the processes.  The 
enterprise leadership processes provide the basis on which 
the enabling infrastructure pr
ocesses and finally the life-
cycle processes are built on.   
Figure 1. Process architecture view of lean enterprise [10] 
 
Fig. 2 shows LESAT’s maturity matrices. LESAT 
assesses 54 lean practices (items).  Each item contains a 
description of the lean practice,
 in addition to lean indicators 
and descriptions of five capability levels for guiding the 
assessment.  The capability levels range from least capable 
(Level 1) to world class (Level 5).   
 
 
 Organization of LESAT Maturity Matrices
 
Section I –Lean transformation/leadership
I.A Enterprise’s strategic planning (three lean practices) 
I.B Adopt a lean paradigm (four lean practices) 
I.C Focus on the value stream (four lean practices) 
I.D Develop a lean structure and 
behavior (seven lean practices) 
I.E Create and refine a transformation plan (three lean practices) 
I.F Implement lean initiatives (two lean practices) 
I.G Focus on continuous improvement (five lean practices) 
Section II – Life-cycle processes 
II.A Business acquisition and program 
management (four lean practices) 
II.B Requirements definition (two lean practices) 
II.C Develop product and process (three lean practices) 
II.D Manage the supply chain (three lean practices) 
II.E Produce the product (two lean practices) 
II.F Distribute and service the product (four lean practices) 
Section III –Enabling infrastructure processes
III.A Lean organizational enablers (five lean practices) 
III.B Lean process enablers (three lean practices) 
 
Figure 2. Organization of LESAT’s maturity matrices [10] 
 
An example of LESAT’s lean practice is presented in 
Fig. 4.  This example assesses the enterprise’s lean 
capability to provide customer support to become an 
integrated part of the customer’s business network (in 
accordance with the principle of considering the whole 
value stream).  The most appropriate capability level is 
decided upon by using lean i
ndicators and capability-level 
descriptions for the specific practice.  The C checkbox is 
marked with the current stat
e of enterprise capability, and 
the D checkbox is marked with the desired future state.  The 
gap between the current and the desired states can be 
calculated and presented in a numerical/graphical form and 

•


•


•


•


•


•




•


•


•


•


•


•




•


•


•


•


•


•


268 exploited for planning and implementing process-
improvement initiatives. 
IV.
 
A
DAPTATION OF 
LESAT
 FOR 
S
OFTWARE
 
This study is based on LESAT version 1.0, which was 
publicly available at the time of initiating this study [35]
1
.  
First, the concepts underlying 
LESAT and lean principles 
were analyzed.  Then, LESAT was adapted to the software 
development domain, including the addition of comments 
and mapping for ISO/IEC 12207 processes [11] and lean 
and agile software-development practices and principles.  
Finally, LESAT for software was evaluated as described in 
section V. 
A.
 
Conceptual analysis of LESAT 
When analyzing the original version of LESAT, the 
following four key concepts were identified as the most 
frequently cited terms: a) 
extended enterprise, b) value 
stream, c) stakeholder, and d) suppliers (supplier chain, 
supplier network, and key suppliers).  Therefore, we 
investigated whether the same concepts apply in the 
software domain. 
Leveraging extended enterprise emphasizes the 
capability to extend lean to c
over the entire value stream.  
LESAT’s glossary [9] defines an extended enterprise as “
all 
businesses along the value stream that contribute to 
providing value to a customer
,” and value stream as “
the 
specific activities required to design, order, and provide a 
specific product, from concept to launch, order to delivery, 
and raw materials into the hands of the customer
”. Closely 
related to the extended enterprise, the concept of an 
ecosystem
 seems to be quite popular in contemporary 
software business language [37, 38].  An extended 
enterprise can be also defined as consisting of a regular 
business-to-business chain of suppliers and customers.  
Value stream has a very specific meaning in the lean 
literature (e.g., Womack & Jones’s lean principles [12]).  
However, the implementation of 
the value stream is always 
context specific.  In the software domain, Messerschmitt 
and Szyperski [38] defined the software value chain as 
consisting of the followi
ng types of organizations: 
application software provider, 
application service provider, 
infrastructure service provider,
 system integrator, business 
consultant, industry consultant, infrastructure software 
supplier, end-user organization, and information content 
supplier.  All of the aforemen
tioned types of organizations 
may be seen as potential organizations in the extended 
enterprise in the software industry. 
LESAT’s glossary defines stakeholders as “
all those 
who have an interest in an organization, its activities, and 
its achievements.  These may in
clude customers, partners, 
employees, shareholders, owners, government, and 
regulators.
”  The definition of stakeholders can again vary 
                                                             
1
Recently, the LAI published LESAT 2.0, which is only available to 
the LAI’s community members [36].
 
depending on the context.  Rajala, Rossi, and Tuunainen 
[39] listed typical stakeholders in the software business as 
development partners, distribut
ors, employees, financiers, 
management, shareholders, subcontractors and suppliers.  
Overall, these key concepts are also commonly applied 
in the software domain literatu
re.  However, some content 
and terminology needed to be 
revised to adapt LESAT from 
the aerospace to the software-industry context as described 
in the next section. 
B.
 
LESAT’s adaptation 
Based on the original LESAT, the review of the 
literature, and the ISO/IEC 12207 standard, the adaption of 
LESAT to the software domain required the following 
actions:
 
1) Seven of the 54 assessment items in the original 
LESAT were modified to 
conform to terminology and 
processes in the software domain (i.e., 87% of assessment 
items remained the same as the original LESAT since they 
were considered suitable for software development).  The 
changes mainly affected the life-cycle processes section of 
LESAT due to the major differences (production and 
manufacturing processes) be
tween the aerospace industry 
and the product-development characteristics of the software 
industry.  The sections lean 
transformation/leadership and 
enabling infrastructure were almost directly applicable to 
the domain of software development. 
2) The life-cycle processes section was mapped to 
ISO/IEC 12207 (software life-cycle processes) [11].  The 
ISO/IEC 12207 standard was applied because it is a widely 
used standard in the software-engineering domain.  Each 
assessment item in LESAT was revised using the ISO/IEC 
12207 standard definitions and mapped to the appropriate 
software process terminology.  Thus, production and 
manufacturing processes were 
translated to software 
implementation processes as described in clauses 7.1.1 
(Software Implementation Pro
cesses) to 7.1.7 (Software 
Qualification Testing Process).  
3) Several comments for the software industry and for 
lean and agile software development methods were added to 
clarify the assessment of lean practices, indicators, and 
capability levels from a software development point of 
view.  For example, Scrum was presented in the LESAT 
section I.D as an optional way 
to develop a lean structure 
and behavior in a software organization. 
Fig. 3 presents an example 
of the modification of an 
assessment item and its mapping to ISO/IEC 12207.  The 
purpose of this assessment item was to evaluate the 
enterprise’s capability to u
tilize the lean principle of 
continuous learning and pe
rfection in production and 
manufacturing processes.  For its adaptation to the software-
development domain, softwa
re-implementation knowledge 
and processes were introduced to demonstrate 
corresponding lean behavior. 
 
269 Process Enterprise’s 
practice 
Enterprise’s 
characteristics 
 
II.E 
Produce 
product
 
II.E.1 Utilize 
production 
knowledge
 and 
capabilities for 
competitive 
advantage 
Strategic 
leveraging of 
manufacturing
 
capability 

II.E.2 Establish and 
maintain a lean 
p
roduction s
y
stem
 
Defect-free 
production
 pulled 
b
y
 the customer 

ADAPTATION 

 
II.E 
Implement 
software
 
II.E.1 Utilize 
software-
implementation 
knowledge
 and 
capabilities for 
competitive 
advanta
g
e 
Strategic 
leveraging of 
software-
implementation
 
capability 
 
ISO/IEC12207: 
Clause 7.1.1 - 7.1.7 
II.E.2 Establish and 
maintain lean 
software-
implementation 
processes
 
 
 
Defect-free 
development
 
pulled by the 
customer 
 
ISO/IEC12207: 
Clause 7.1.1 - 7.1.7 
Figure 3. Example of LESAT modification and mapping 
 
An example of the modificati
ons made in the assessment 
of the enterprise’s capability levels is presented in Fig. 4 
(original LESAT) and Fig. 5 (
LESAT for software).  This 
example shows how post-delivery services must be 
considered when adapting LESAT to the software domain. 
The term “
spares
” did not fit in the terminology of 
immaterial software products.  It was replaced with the term 
“proactive maintenance approach,” i.e., improved released 
product quality and reduction of dedicated resources for 
maintenance work, as a corresponding indicator for the lean 
behavior of an enterprise.  
 
Lean 
practice 
II.F.4 Provide Post Delivery Service, Support, and 
Sustainability.  
Providin
g
 customer solutions 
Lean 
Indicators  
(Examples) 
• Customer feedback is proactively maintained and used 
to predict any emerging service issues and enhance 
future designs. 
• Spares levels are reduced in line with short predicable 
lead times for replacement spares. 
Level 1 


C 

D 
High level of spares necessary because of unknown 
failure rates and long lead times for spare replenishment. 
Level 2 


C 

D 
Collection of data on failure trends permits both 
determination of service interval points for preventative 
maintenance and a reduction of s
p
are 
p
art levels.  
Level 3 


C 

D 
The enterprise is increasingly involved in addressing 
customer maintenance solutions.  Spare levels are 
reduced through common platforms; root cause 
analyses, are fed back into product design.  
Level 4 


C 

D 
The enterprise is part of the customer’s maintenance 
solution by ensuring availability through replacement of 
critical components before failure. 
Level 5 


C 

D 
The enterprise has become part of customer’s business 
solution via warranting of product performance. 
Figure 4. Example of original LESAT version 1.0 
Lean 
practice 
II.F.4 Provide Post Delivery Service, Support and 
Sustainability. 
Providin
g
 customer solutions. 
Lean 
Indicators  
(Examples) 
• Customer feedback is proactively maintained and used 
to predict any emerging service issues and enhance 
future designs. 
• Dedicated resources (reserve buffer) for postdelivery 
support are reduced in line with short predicable lead 
times for responding customer requests. 
Level 1 


C 

D 
Resources for maintenance work are kept high or new 
product development is constantly interrupted because 
of unexpected errors in released product. 
Level 2 


C 

D 
Error history data is collected and used for more 
accurately estimating need for dedicated maintenance 
and error correction resources. 
Level 3 


C 

D 
The enterprise is increasingly involved in addressing 
customer maintenance solutions. Resources dedicated 
for maintenance can be reduced by root cause analyses, 
ada
p
tive desi
g
n, and common 
p
latform solutions. 
Level 4 


C 

D 
The enterprise is part of the customer maintenance 
solution by ensuring availability through updating 
critical com
p
onents before failure. 
Level 5 


C 

D 
The enterprise has become part of customer’s business 
solution via warranting of product performance. 
Figure 5. Example of modified LESAT for software version 
 
The complete version of LESAT for software, including 
all changes made in the adaptation, can be downloaded via 
the following link: http://goo.g
l/9Odqv.  Furthermore, the 
summary sheets to facilitate the assessment and record the 
current and the desired capability level for each lean 
practice contained in the LESAT
 matrices are available for 
download via http://goo.gl/Iis5k. 
V.
 
E
VALUATION OF 
LESAT
 FOR 
S
OFTWARE
 
To evaluate its suitability
, LESAT for software was 
compared with the approach used by Ericsson for guiding 
its lean transformation.  Ericsson is a multinational 
telecommunications company in the middle of transforming 
its processes according to l
ean principles. Therefore, 
Ericsson can be considered as an early adopter of LSD.  
Ericsson’s lean amplifier
 was internally designed for 
gaining insights into how team
s are evolving in Ericsson’s 
agile and lean ways of work
ing.  Although Ericsson’s lean 
amplifier has been specifically designed to meet Ericsson’s 
needs, it was selected as a practical benchmark for the 
software domain due to its 
strong background in applying 
lean principles in a real 
software-development context. 
A.
 
Comparison 
The objective of the evaluation was twofold: a) to 
evaluate how LESAT can support 
the lean transformation of 
software-development companies and b) to gather insights 
for further development of LESAT for software.  Table 1 
summarizes the main characteristics of both approaches. 
 
 
 
 
270 Table 1. Comparison of LESAT for software and Ericsson’s lean amplifier  
 LESAT for software Ericsson’s lean am
p
lifier 
Assessment 
method 
Capability maturity 
model 
Self-assessment by the 
leadership of an 
enterprise 
Assessmentbased ona set of 
statements discussed in focus 
groups 
Individual or in-group completion 
of  questionnaires (statements) 
Design 
objective 
Assess current capability 
and set target for desired 
state. 
Continual improvement 
in the capability of the 
enterprise to meet its lean 
objectives 
Identify strengths and weaknesses 
to agree on improvement areas and 
to help build a growth plan for 
individual roles, teams, and the 
organization and build a 
continuous improvement mindset 
at all levels and foster a learning 
organization
 
Evaluation 
scale 
Tailored maturity 
definitions (five levels 
from one to five) 
Fixed evaluation definitions (five 
levels, from zero to four) 
Structure 
Divided in three sections 
based on 
p
rocesses 
Divided into eight amplifiers 
based on roles and units 
To further compare LESAT for software and Ericsson’s 
lean amplifier, the number of
 their respective assessment 
items by main sections was analyzed. 28 from 54 
assessment items in LESAT assess lean transformation and 
leadership processes (see Fig. 6). This represents a 52% of 
the assessment items of the whole assessment tool.  
 
Figure 6. LESAT for software.  Number of items in the main sections 
 
As Fig. 7 illustrates, Ericsson’s team amplifier,
composed by 167 assessment items, takes a more detailed 
and narrower scope in software-development processes and 
organizational roles derived from Scrum. 
 
 
Figure 7. Ericsson’s lean amplifier.  Number of  items in main sections 
 
Although the team and organi
zation amplifiers indicate 
that the enterprise-level aspect in adopting lean and agile 
behavior is also considered in the approach of Ericsson, 
overall the results of the evaluation showed that LESAT for 
software has an enterprise-wide process scope.   Of note, the 
manager amplifier contains th
e least number of assessment 
items in Ericsson’s lean amplifier, and LESAT for software 
has the most assessment items in the leadership/lean 
transformation section. 
B.
 
Distribution of lean principles  
LESAT for software and Ericsson’s lean amplifier were 
also compared by mapping each assessment item in both 
approaches to lean principles as described by Womack and 
Jones [12] and LSD principl
es as defined by Poppendieck 
and Poppendieck [5]. Table 2 shows the degree of coverage 
of each lean principle in both approaches.  
 
Table 2. Lean principles mapping distribution in LESAT for software 
and Ericsson’s lean amplifier. 
 
Lean principle
LESAT for 
software 
Ericsson’s lean 
amplifier 
 
#
2
 %
3
 #
2
 %
3
 
Womack 
and Jones’s 
principles 
1Value713.0%116.6%
2 Value stream 9 16.7% 16 9.6% 
3 Flow 9 16.7% 66 39.5% 
4 Pull 3 5.6% 3 1.8% 
5 Perfection 2 3.7% 39 23.4% 
Poppendieck and 
Poppendieck’s 
principles 
6 Eliminate waste 1 1.9% 8 4.8% 
7 Build quality in 0 0.0% 26 15.6% 
8 Create knowled
g
e 0 0.0% 31 18.6% 
9 Defer commitment  0 0.0% 5 3.0% 
10 Deliver fast 0 0.0% 17 10.2% 
11 Res
p
ect 
p
eo
p
le 1 1.9% 23 13.8% 
12 Optimize the whole 14 25.9% 13 7.8% 
 
The comparison of LESAT for software and Ericsson’s 
lean amplifier with regard to 
the five lean principles of 
Womack and Jones showed that they differ in the weighting 
of the principles “value” and th
e “value stream.”  Most of 
Ericsson’s lean amplifier items were identified as either 
evaluating “flow” or “perfection” principles.  These 
principles can be mapped to e
ither individual or teamwork 
methods, building a mentality for continuous improvement 
or challenging the current way of working.  Only very few 
principles were identified for 
the principle of pull in both 
approaches.   
Considering the seven lean principles according to 
Poppendieck and Poppendieck [5
], it is noteworthy that 
several principles could not be identified at all in LESAT 
for software.  This is expected since LESAT was not 
originally designed for software development and for 
meeting Poppendieck and Poppendieck’s views of LSD. 
                                                             
2
Number of assessment items considering each lean principle.  One 
assessment item can be mapped to one or more lean principles. 
3
Percentage from the total number of assessment items considering 
each lean principles.
 














Lean transformation / 
leadership 
Lifecycle Enabling infrastructure 














Scrum Master or Team Coach 
Product Owner 
Developer 
Team 
Agile Coach 
Organization 
Manager 
Release and Portfolio Management 
271 However, this also reveals  the clear need of further analysis 
of LSD principles for improvement of LESAT for software.   
Overall, this analysis revealed the weaknesses and 
strengths of LESAT for software.  The weaknesses are 
clearly in assessing LSD aspect
s as defined by authors such 
as Poppendieck and Poppendieck [5], impacting largely on 
LESAT’s life-cycle processes section.  The strengths are in 
a more focused approach for defining value and optimizing 
the whole enterprise value stream. 
VI.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
Although LESAT was designed to
 meet the needs of the 
aerospace industry, it has evolved and been successfully 
used for guiding the lean transformation of companies from 
different domains [34].  LES
AT’s design addressed three 
requirements: “
to assess the degree of leanness of an 
enterprise and all its core processes,
” “
to provide feedback 
for improvement and gui
dance for next steps,
” and “
to be 
data driven, based on documentable evidence
” [10, p. 5].  It 
is reasonable to consider that, appropriately adapted, 
LESAT, which exploits LAI-MIT’s extensive knowledge 
about lean transformation, 
can also support the lean 
transformation of software-development companies. 
When analyzing the three sections of LESAT, it is 
remarkable that the sections—enabling infrastructure and 
enterprise leadership—on which the life-cycle processes are 
built were almost domain independent in the assessment.  
Consequently, assessment items 
such as those designed for 
assessing 
strategic planning
, 
strategic partnering
, 
transformation management
, or 
human resources 
were 
retained as they appear in the original LESAT.  However, 
the life-cycle processes section, which includes processes 
that directly determine the value provided to customers [10], 
required in-depth modifications. 
 In this work, we adapted 
LESAT for software according to the ISO/IEC 12207 
standard and what is currently known about LSD.  
One interesting aspect is the strong focus of LESAT on 
assessing how value and the value stream are managed.  
This is important because lean is mainly about how to make 
organizations deliver as much
 customer value as possible 
[40].  Value-Based Software Engineering (VBSE) 
recognizes the difficulty and challenges on defining value in 
the software-engineering context [41].  Nowadays, 
understanding value in software is a much-debated topic 
with ongoing studies.  Devising a definition of value for 
software development is beyond the scope of this work.  
Therefore, in LESAT for software, the concept of value 
conforms to that in LESAT’s glossary: “
Value
 - 
A product 
or service’s capability provided to a customer at the right 
time, at an appropriate price, as defined in each case by the 
customer” 
[9, p. 75].  Assessment items related to value and 
the value stream will continue evolve over time as the 
definition of value and the concept of lean continue to be 
expanded upon in the software domain. 
It should be stressed that lean assessments should 
include both tactical and stra
tegic components [24].  LESAT 
highlights the importance of considering the whole value 
stream when transforming toward lean and includes 
assessment items for all busin
ess along the value stream.  
Thus, LESAT for software can guide the transformation of 
the whole enterprise towards a lean enterprise and not just 
some areas of the organiza
tion. The comparison provided 
evidence that Ericsson’s lean amplifier has been specifically 
designed for identifying strengths and weakness in LSD as 
nowadays understood.  Thus, Er
icsson’s approach broadly 
encompasses all of the principles of LSD as described by 
Poppendieck and Poppendieck [5] but has a narrower scope, 
mainly focusing on software-dev
elopment processes.  In the 
case of LESAT, as it was not designed for the specific 
context of software, Poppendieck and Poppendieck’s 
principles are hardly enclosed.  
Finally, LESAT for software emphasizes the role of 
leadership.  Leadership is e
ssential because it provides the 
resources needed to eliminate waste and achieve a flowing 
value stream.  Moreover, work
 on lean transformation has 
emphasized that the evolution 
toward a lean enterprise 
needs both top-down and bottom-up management strategies 
[8].  The leadership/lean transformation section of LESAT 
for software can help to 
initiate and to foster the 
transformation into a lean
 software enterprise. 
VII.
 
C
ONCLUSION
,
 
L
IMITATIONS
,
 AND 
F
UTURE 
W
ORK
 
This paper presented a preliminary study of the 
adaptation of LESAT, designed for the purposes of the 
aerospace industry, to guide 
the lean transformation of 
software-development companies.  The modifications 
followed the ISO/IEC 12207 standard.  In addition, agile 
and lean software development principles were 
incorporated.  LESAT for software was compared with the 
contents of the assessment approach that Ericsson designed 
to guide its lean transformation.  The results revealed 
differences in the content and the scope of both approaches. 
Although LESAT for software required comprehensive 
modifications, especially in the life-cycle processes section, 
its focus on leadership and on integrative management 
processes may enable and prom
ote the lean transformation 
of software enterprises considering the whole value stream. 
In particular, its scope at the enterprise level and leadership 
processes, including strategic 
planning and infrastructure 
processes, can potentially complement lean assessments in 
the software domain.    
This paper presents an initial proposal for adapting 
LESAT for software.  However, existing evaluation is still 
limited and more empirical studies, in which LESAT for 
software is applied in individual company cases, are needed 
to validate the tool and make a more comprehensive 
analysis of its utility.    Moreover, further development of 
LESAT for software, especially for adapting its life-cycle 
processes section to LSD, where lean is frequently 
intertwined with foundations derived from agile methods, is 
considered necessary. Therefore, it is expected that LESAT 
for software will continue evolving in both content and 
272 process, as a natural result of its continuous usage and a 
deeper understanding of the phenomenon of LSD and the 
concept of value in software development.   
A
CKNOWLEDGEMENT
 
This article is based on work carried out in the ICT 
SHOK Cloud Software program financed by the Finnish 
Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (Tekes) 
and Tivit OY.  The graduate school on Software Systems 
and Engineering (SoSE), funded by the Ministry of 
Education and the Academy of Finland, also supported the 
work. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
T. Ohno, Toyota production system : Beyond large-scale production. 
Cambridge (Mass.): Productivity Press, 1988.  
[2]
 
J. K. Liker, The Toyota Way: 14 
Management Principles from the 
World’s Greatest Manufacturer. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2004. 
[3]
 
J. Womack, D. Roos and D. Jones, The machine that changed the 
world, New York, NY: Rawson and Associates, 1990. 
[4]
 
T. Dybå, and T. Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile software 
development: A systematic review.”
 
Information and Software 
Technology, Jan. 2008
, 
50(9-10), pp. 833-859. 
[5]
 
M. Poppendieck, and T. Poppendieck
, 
Implementing Lean Software 
Development. Addison-Wesley Professional; 1 edition, 2006.  
[6]
 
J. Highsmith, Agile Software Development Ecosystems, Addison-
Wesley, Boston, 2002. 
[7]
 
X. Wang, K. Conboy and O. 
Cawley, “Leagile” software 
development: An experience report analysis of the application of lean 
approaches in agile software development, J. Syst. Software, 2012. 
[8]
 
R.  Kuusela and M. Koivuluoma, 
"Lean transformation framework for 
software intensive companies: responding to challenges created by 
the cloud,"  Proc. 37th EUROMICRO Conference on Software 
Engineering and Advanced Applications, pp. 378-382, 2011. 
[9]
 
Lean enterprise self-assessment tool – Version 1.0. Cambridge, MA: 
Lean Aerospace Initiative, MIT, 2001. 
[10]
 
D. J. Nightingale and J. H. Mize,
 “Development of a lean enterprise 
transformation maturity model”, Information Knowledge Systems 
Management, vol. 3, 2002, no. 1, pp. 15-30. 
[11]
 
ISO/IEC. (2008). Standard for systems and software engineering - 
software life cycle processes. IS
O/IEC/IEEE Standard 12207-2008. 
[12]
 
J. P. Womack and D. T. Jones, 
Lean thinking. Simon and Schuster, 
New York, 1996 
[13]
 
N. Tokatli, “Global sourcing: in
sights from the global clothing 
industry—the case of Zara, a fast fashion retailer”, Journal of 
Economic Geography, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-38, 2007. 
[14]
 
T. P. Young, and S. I. McClean, “A 
critical look at Lean Thinking in 
healthcare”, Qual Saf Health Care , vol. 17, pp. 382-386, 2008. 
[15]
 
T. R. Browning and R. D. Ral
ph, “Reconceptualizing the effects of 
lean on production costs with evidence from the F-22 program”, 
Journal of Operations Managemen
t, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 23-44, 2009. 
[16]
 
P. Freeman, “Lean concepts in software engineering”, IPSS-Europe 
International Conference on Lean Software Development, Stuttgart, 
Germany, pp. 1-8, 1992. 
[17]
 
 P. Middleton and J. Sutton. Lean software strategies: proven 
techniques for managers and developers. New York, N.Y.: 
Productivity Press, cop. 2005.  
[18]
 
S. W. Ambler. “Scaling agile software development through lean 
governance”, Proc. International Conference on Software Engineering 
2009 ICSE Workshop on Software Development Governance, 2009.  
[19]
 
M. Poppendieck, “Principles of lean thinking”, 
http://www.leanessays.com/2002/11/p
rinciples-of-lean-thinking.html 
(last accessed June, 28, 2012) 
[20]
 
J. Coplien and G. Bjornwig, Lean architecture for agile software 
development. West Sussex, UK, 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 2010 
[21]
 
P. Rodriguez, J. Markkula, M. Oi
vo and J. Garbajosa, “Analyzing the 
drivers of the combination of lean and agile in software development 
companies”, Proc. 13
th
 International Conference on Product-Focused 
Software Development and Process Improvement, PROFES 2012. 
[22]
 
B. Staats, D. Brunner, and D. Upton,
 “Lean Principles, Learning, and 
Knowledge Work: Evi-dence from a Software Services Provider”, 
Journal of Operations Management, vol. 29, no 5, pp.376-390, 2011. 
[23]
 
G. R. Jones, Organizational theory, design and change. Pearson 
Prentice Hall, London, 2004. 
[24]
 
T. L. Doolen and M. E. Hacker, “A review of lean assessment in 
organizations: an exploratory st
udy of lean practices by electronics 
manufacturers”, J. of Manufacturi
ng Systems, vol. 24, no. 1, 2005. 
[25]
 
CMMI for Development Version 1.3,
 Carnegie Mellon, Software 
Engineering Institute, Pittsburgh, PA. 
[26]
 
ISO/IEC, 2003–2006. ISO/IEC 
15504 Information Technology – 
Process Assessment (Parts 1–5). 
[27]
 
A. Sidky and J. Arthur, “A disciplined approach to adopting agile 
practices: The agile adoption framework”, Innovations in Systems 
and Software Engineering, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 203-216, 2007. 
[28]
 
A. Qumer and B. Henderson-Sellers, “A framework to support the 
evaluation, adoption and improvement of agile methods in practice”, 
Journal of Systems and Software, vol 81, no. 11, pp.1899-1919, 2008. 
[29]
 
K. Sureshchandra and J. Shrinivasavadhani, “Adopting agile in 
distributed development”,. Proc. of the 2008 IEEE International 
Conference on Global Software Engineering, pp. 217-221, 2008. 
[30]
 
P. Kettunen, “Systematizing Software Development Agility: Towards 
an Enterprise Capability Improvement Framework”, in press. 
[31]
 
Lean enterprise model. Cambridge, MA: Lean Aerospace Initiative, 
MIT. 
[32]
 
Transitioning to a lean enterprise: a guide for leaders – Volume I: 
Executive overview. Cambridge, MA: Lean Aerospace Initiative, 
MIT. 2000. 
[33]
 
Government lean enterprise sel
f-assessment tool – Version 1.0, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2005. 
[34]
 
C. L. Hernandez, “Adapting the Lean Enterprise Self Assessment 
Tool for health care”, Thesis (S.M. in Engineering and Management), 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Engineering Systems 
Division, 2010. 
[35]
 
T. Karvonen, “Adaptating the Lean Enterprise Self-Assessment Tool 
for Software Domain”, Thesis (M.Sc in Information Processing 
Science), University of Oulu, 2011. 
[36]
 
LAI releases, LESAT 2.0. Retrieved 4/8, 
http://lean.mit.edu/news/1096-lai-releases-final-version-of-lesat-20, 
2012 
[37]
 
J. Bosch, “Software ecosystems taking software development beyond 
the boundaries of the organization.” The Journal of Systems and 
Software, doi:10.1016/j.jss.2012.03.039, 2010. 
[38]
 
D. G., Messerschmitt and C. Szyperski, Software ecosystem 
: understanding an indispensable t
echnology and industry. Cambridge 
(Mass.): MIT Press, 2003. 
[39]
 
R., Rajala, M., Rossi, and V. K. Tuunainen. “A framework for 
analyzing software business models.” Proceedings of the European 
Conference on Information Systems 2003 
[40]
 
V., Mandic, M., Oivo, P., Rodriguez, P., Kuvaja, H., Kaikkonen H. 
and B., Turhan, “What is Flowing 
in Lean Software Development?”, 
Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Lean Enterprise 
Software and Systems (LESS), pp.72-84, 2010.  
[41]
 
S., Biffl, A., Aurum, B., Boehm, H., Erdogmus, P., Grünbacher, 
Value-Based Software Engineering, Springer, 2006. 
273