 An Empirical Study on the Requirements Engineering Practices for Agile Software 
Development
 
Mohamad Kassab 
Engineering Division 
The Pennsylvania State University 
Malvern, PA, U.S.A 
muk36@psu.edu 
 
 
Abstract
— Collecting, understanding, and managing 
requirements are critical aspects in all development methods 
including agile methods as well. Nevertheless, little 
contemporary data exists for document actual practices of 
software professionals for software requirements engineering 
activities in agile environments. To remedy this deficiency and 
provide useful data to other researchers we conducted a survey 
study that drew participants from wide range of professions, 
industries and geographic locations. We filtered the survey 
responses according to the Software Development Life Cycle; 
then we analyzed how agile processes (compared to traditional 
waterfall model) deal with a paradox of requirements 
engineering. In this paper, we present this 
exploratory survey and its quantitative results. 
Keywords- Requirements Engineering; agile development; 
common practices; software devel
opment industry; software 
professionals. 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Increasing competition and complex business processes 
are pushing IT firms gain competitive advantage by 
squeezing delivery timelines [1].  Companies are thus 
increasingly seeking ways to become more responsive and 
flexible in their methodology and requirements. Agile 
development practices have become widely accepted as an 
effective class of approaches to project management in order 
to have rapid delivery of high-quality software [2]. Usually 
the work of the teams adopting an agile methodology is 
flexible and changeable. In comparison to traditional 
software processes, agile development is less document-
centric and more code-oriented, adaptive rather than 
predictive, and people-oriented rather than process-oriented 
[3].  
Nevertheless, requirements engineering (RE) discipline 
was challenged under the agile umbrella. This is basically 
true because “doing requirements” requires spending more 
time studying the business and application world and less 
time programming. Doing requirements takes time—time 
that could be spent writing code—and users often feel better 
if they think that people are “working” (that is, coding) on 
their problems [4].  In fact, ever since agile first emerged in 
the 1990s, there has been debate about what role, RE can 
play for agile practitioners and their customers [5]. Williams 
discusses in [6] some of the shortcomings in using agile 
methodologies with respect to RE. 
Little contemporary data exists for document actual 
practices of software professionals for software RE activities 
in agile environments. To remedy this deficiency and 
provide useful data to other researchers we conducted a 
survey study on the current RE state of practice.  The survey 
was created as a web-based survey using the web-based 
QuestionPro survey tool (www.QuestionPro.com); and 
survey data was collected through April and July 2013. The 
survey consisted of 32 questions; and a summary of the 
survey questions may be viewed through the link: 
goo.gl/HzMO7U 
Participants of the survey were drawn from multiple 
sources: 1) A database of former students in the Masters of 
Software Engineering degree program at the Penn State 
Great Valley School of Graduate Professional Studies 
(PSGV). PSGV caters primarily to working professionals; 2) 
Subscribers to the IEEE Reliability Society newsletter, 
which has a circulation of >3000 professional members; 3) 
Members of the following Linked-In professional groups: 
Requirements Engineering Specialist Group (RESG), 
Computing Reviews Reviewers, CSIAC Software Intensive 
Systems Engineering (formerly DACS), DAMA (data 
managers association)/Philadelphia region, DAMA (data 
managers association)/International, IEEE Computer Society 
members, Software Engineering, IEEE –USA.  
The survey drew 247 participants from 23 countries (with 
a completion rate of 48%). The survey responses captured a 
diverse mix of industries, job roles, project domains and RE 
practices. Respondents were asked to base all their project 
responses on one project only that they were either currently 
involved with or had taken part in during the past five years. 
In this paper we filtered the responses according to the 
Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) that was followed 
in the participants’ projects; then we focused on analyzing 
how agile processes (compared to the traditional waterfall 
processes) deals with a paradox of requirements engineering.  
It is important to make a distinction between RE for agile 
methodologies and “agile RE”. Agile RE means, generally, 
any ad hoc RE approach purported to be more flexible than 
“traditional” RE. This definition not be confused with 
specific practices for RE in agile methodologies; which is the 
scope of this paper. 
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II provides the background on the survey participants 
and the characteristics of the surveyed projects. Section III 
presents the results on RE practices in agile projects 
2014 40th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-1-4799-5795-8/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2014.77254 compared to the traditional waterfall projects. Section IV 
discusses related work and finally, Section V concludes the 
paper. 
II.
 
S
URVEY 
P
ARTICIPANTS AND 
P
ROJECTS
’
 
C
HARACTERISTICS
 
In order to understand the types of characteristics of 
respondents, a number of questions regarding 
“Organizational Characteristics” were asked. 
Overall, survey participants reflected a diverse range of 
positions describing themselves as programmers / 
developers, software / system engineers, or testers 61% of 
the time. Architects, project / product managers, analysts, 
and consultants comprised the remaining 39% of 
respondents. Respondents also reported a wide range of 
project experience. When asked how many projects they had 
worked on in the last five years answers ranged from 2 to 
more than 50. The mean experience level in this survey in 
terms of number of projects in the last five years is 22.57; 
and the median experience level is 17.5. The standard 
deviation of 16.25 is indicative the broad spectrum of 
experience levels reported. Nevertheless; and in order to 
ensure consistency; respondents were asked to base all their 
project responses on one project only that they were either 
currently involved with or had taken part in during the past 
five years. Several questions asked respondents then to 
classify and categorize the relevant project. 
Overall, 46% of respondents indicated that they used an 
agile methodology (e.g. SCRUM, Extreme Programming, 
Feature Driven Development, Lean) as SDLC for their 
project making agile the most popular SDLC (Figure 1). The 
usage of agile is almost doubled since 2008 when a similar 
survey was conducted [7]. 
 
 
Figure 1. 
 
Software Development Lifecycle employed 
Further analysis linked this question’s response to both 
the respondent’s type of industry and geographic location. 
We observed that the agile development is more used than 
the waterfall model in all industries except in the "finance / 
banking/ insurance" industry where the waterfall 
methodology is still slightly more practiced (see Figure 2). In 
some particular industries like gaming and sales, agile 
practice was the dominant practice. We also observed that 
waterfall model was barely used in medical and 
telecommunications industries. 
 
 
Figure 2. 
 
Software Development Lifecycle employed across industries 
As for the linkage to the geographic location, we noticed 
that the practice of the waterfall model outside the United 
States is lower than its usage in the United States in general. 
We also noticed that agile practice is more prevalent than the 
waterfall practice in every region in the United States except 
of the “Northeast”, where agile and waterfall are equally 
popular (see Figure 3). Given the banking and insurance 
hubs in New York and Delaware, This might also account 
for the apparent prevalence of waterfall development in the 
Northeast. 
 
 
Figure 3. 
 
Software Development Lifecycle  employed across geographic 
locations 
With respect to project’s schedules, the majority of the 
projects (59%) were a year or less in duration. Another 21% 
took between 1 to 2 years to complete and only 19% of the 
reported projects took more than 2 years to complete. For 
255 those projects that followed an agile development method, 
43% of these projects took less than 10 iteration to complete, 
14% took between 11 to 20 iterations to complete, and only 
9% of these projects took more than 20 iterations to 
complete. On average each iteration spanned 22 business 
days. 
Technical debt is a metaphor referring to the eventual 
consequences of poor software architecture and software 
development within a codebase. Ward Cunningham coined 
the metaphor back in 1992 [8]. The debt can be thought of as 
work that needs to be done before a particular job can be 
considered complete. When asked how much technical debt 
on average was carried from one iteration or sprint to the 
next, 91% of the respondents reported carrying some level of 
technical debt but the majority of the participants (84%) 
reported that this level is below 25% on average. In other 
words, for this majority of participants, when a new iteration 
or sprint started; there was on average 25% of a work still to 
be completed from previous iterations or sprints. 
Fifty six percent of projects comprised 50,000 LOC or 
less, which we would characterize as small to medium in 
scale. Remembering that agile projects focuses on small and 
medium size projects [9], it was a surprise to find that for the 
reported responses on large projects in this survey (> 50,000 
LOC), agile practices outstripped the waterfall model (26% 
compared to 14%). 
III.
 
R
EQUIREMENTS 
E
NGINEERING 
P
RACTICES IN AGILE 
VS
.
 
W
ATERFALL
 
In varying form, it is common belief that agile methods 
use high-level and low-ceremony requirements practices [6]. 
Customers are constantly involved in requirements discovery 
and refinement in agile methods. All systems developers are 
involved in the RE activity and each can and should have 
regular interaction with customers. In traditional approaches, 
the customers has less involvement once the requirements 
specification has been written and approved, and typically, 
the involvement is often with the systems developers. 
Presumably, the agile approach to RE is much more 
invulnerable to changes throughout the process than in 
traditional software engineering. 
In this section, we explore and present selected data on 
RE practices in agile environments from the survey, along 
 
with comparison with the reported RE practices in the 
waterfall environments. The RE focus areas of this section 
are: elicitation, analysis and presentation, management, 
effort estimation, and tools. 
A.
 
 Requirements Elicitations 
Requirements elicitation tries to discover requirements 
and identify system boundaries by consulting stakeholders 
(e.g., clients, developers, users). There are several 
requirement techniques available for requirements gathering. 
We presented an extensive list of known RE elicitation 
techniques; participants could select all that applied for the 
reported projects. Respondents reported using, on average, 
2.26 requirements gathering techniques. The data (see Figure 
4) revealed that “Brainstorming” was the most common 
approach for both agile and waterfall projects. Brainstorming 
consists of informal sessions with customers and other 
stakeholders to generate overarching goals for the systems. 
“User Stories” ranked second most popular technique for 
agile projects.  A user story represents a feature customers 
want in the software [10]. User stories are written by a 
customer, maybe with the assistance of the developers. 
In [1], the authors suggested that the project using agile 
should learn from various interviewing techniques that have 
been in use in the RE of waterfall. We indeed observe that 
for agile projects, Interviews was a common elicitation 
technique as for the waterfall projects as well (ranked third 
for agile and second for waterfall). 
While in a past survey, “Scenarios” was the most popular 
method employed overall (at 50% in 2002) [11], we observe 
that the usage of “Scenarios” is declining (34% reported its 
usage in this survey; dropping down to the 6th position 
overall). Scenarios are informal descriptions of the system in 
use that provide a high-level description of system operation, 
classes of users, and exceptional situations. In agile projects 
“Scenarios” was less used than in the waterfall projects. 
Scenarios were ranked the 3rd most used technique in 
waterfall projects while it ranked 7th in the agile projects. 
The dominance of agile methodological use reported in this 
survey likely explains the decline of the “Scenarios” 
technique from the one presented in 2002 when waterfall 
dominated [11]. 
 
 
Figure 4. 
 
Requirements gathering techniques used across agile vs. waterfall 
256 B.
 
Requirements Analysis 
and Representation 
Requirements Analysis checks requirements for necessity 
(the need for the requirement), consistency (requirements 
should not be contradictory), completeness (no service or 
constraint is missing), and feasibility (requirements are 
feasible in the context of the budget and schedule available 
for the system development). Conflicts in requirements are 
resolved through prioritization and negotiation with 
stakeholders [12].  
As Object Oriented (OO) Analysis is a technique often 
applies along with the use of “Scenarios”; and with the 
decline of “Scenarios” we expected a lower proportion using 
OO analysis techniques compared to last survey (30% in 
2002) [11]. The participants’ responses surprisingly revealed 
that 38% of this survey population reported using OO 
analysis. In fact, OO analysis was the most popular 
technique employed in both waterfall and agile projects (See 
Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5. 
 
Requirements analysis techniques used across agile vs. waterfall 
When asked “how satisfied were with the requirements 
analysis and modeling efforts”; 60% of agile projects 
reported a level of satisfaction – compared to 36% for the 
waterfall.  
An interesting corollary to the requirements modeling 
and analysis is the requirements representation’s degree of 
formality. The majority of users (61.16%) still report that 
requirements are expressed in terms of natural language. 
Natural language was the dominant technique for both agile 
and waterfall projects (See Figure 6).  We see that only 33% 
of users reported utilizing semi-formal notations such as 
UML. When we filtered this number across waterfall vs. 
agile projects; we observed that 37% of agile projects used 
UML notations (comparing to only 21% for waterfall 
projects). This is consistent with the number of respondents 
who reported using OO analysis techniques. It is also of 
interest that formal specifications techniques are still not 
commonly utilized. 
 
 
Figure 6. 
 
Requirements Formalisims used across agile vs. waterfall 
C.
 
Requirements Management 
An interesting corollary to the formality discussion is the 
requirements review and inspection effort. We found that the 
majority of respondents are performing requirements 
inspections. (67% of agile projects comparing to 54% of 
waterfall). That group of respondents employed, on average, 
2.29 techniques with team review as the most common 
technique for both agile and waterfall. In fact, both agile and 
waterfall were close in their preferences for inspection 
techniques. Ad hoc walk-throughs ranked second while 
Checklist ranked third for both approaches (see Figure 7). 
We also found that the variance with the level of satisfaction 
with requirements validation efforts between agile and 
waterfall was not big (56% for agile comparing to 52% for 
waterfall). Automated requirements inspection using tools 
remain unpopular for both agile and waterfall projects. 
Requirements traceability is another sub-discipline 
of requirements management which is concerned with 
documenting the life of a requirement and providing bi-
directional traceability between various associated 
requirements. We observed that 85% of the agile respondents 
reported a satisfaction with the efforts to maintain proper 
requirements traceability during their projects; comparing to 
68% for the waterfall projects. 
 
 
Figure 7. 
 
Requirements inspection techniques used across agile vs. 
waterfall 
257 D.
 
Requirements Effort Estimation 
Out of the 60% of those who reported on performing 
estimation for the size of requirements or the effort of 
building them, 62% reported on taking into account the Non-
Functional Requirements (NFRs) during the size / effort 
estimation. 
When we broke these numbers down across the SDLC 
practices; we found that 67% of agile projects reported on 
performing estimation (comparing to 45% for waterfall); and 
then 68% of this population considered NFRs during the 
estimation (comparing to 40% for waterfall). This was a 
surprising finding; as there is a common belief that agile 
methodologies deal less with NFRs compared to waterfall 
[6]. One reason for this belief is that NFRs are not always 
apparent when dealing with requirements functionality only 
(through user stories). 
In general, for those who conducted estimation for the 
size/ effort, “Expert Judgments” was the most popular 
technique (24%). Expert judgment was the dominant 
technique for waterfall projects. While it was still popular for 
agile projects (ranked second for these projects), we see an 
emerge of “Group estimation” techniques (e.g. planning 
poker, wideband Delphi) (see Figure 8). 
We also see an emerge of “story points” in agile projects 
(ranked third) compared to their usage in waterfall projects 
(ranked 5th). Function points and COCOMO are not popular 
techniques in both waterfall and agile projects.  
 
 
Figure 8. 
 
Effort estimation techniques used across agile vs. waterfall 
We further linked the question of estimation techniques 
to whether the duration of the project was within schedule 
(see Figure 9). Considering the results from this linkage and 
since waterfall projects reported more reliance on experts 
judgment and analogy based approaches compared to the 
agile projects that reported more reliance on Group 
estimation and Story Points; we believe this may be an 
important factor explaining our other finding on agile 
outperforming (compared to waterfall) in project’s duration 
and budget estimation. 
 
Figure 9. 
 
Link between the effort estimation technique and the  statement: 
“The duration of the project was within schedule” 
E.
 
Tools 
A concept closely related to SDLC is Application 
Lifecycle Management (ALM). Tools are capable of 
managing ALM activities from initial concept, through 
requirements analysis, development, and testing. Software 
Engineering literature, as well as industry advertisement, 
indicates that adoption of ALM tools improve the quality of 
the RE effort and enforce the usage of SDLC methodologies 
[13].  This same literature proposes that the application of 
these methodologies coincide with a greater rate of project 
success.  In terms of RE, these tools are coded to apply 
certain RE techniques; the techniques applied vary by 
product. 
Overall, 64% of respondents reported that an ALM 
application was used. We observed that the usage of ALM 
tools in agile projects was 140% greater than in the waterfall 
projects. This was an interesting finding considering that 
agile and ALM may appear incompatible [14]. While both 
involve the management of processes, their approaches differ 
in many ways. Agile emphasizes flexibility and quick 
response to change, whereas ALM is based on tightly 
controlled processes that do not adapt well to changing 
business requirements and needs.  
 
 
Figure 10. 
 
ALM tools usage across agile vs. waterfall 
258 About third of the overall respondents in this survey who 
adopted an ALM, used Microsoft Visual Studio, and about 
20% of them used JIRA. Other responses included 
“Bugzilla” and “Home Grown”. It makes a perfect sense to 
see that “VerizonOne”; which is a project management tool 
that was designed for eXtreme Programming and Scrum, is 
almost only used in the agile projects (See Figure 10).  
F.
 
Software Quality and Productivity 
Respondents were asked a series of questions meant to 
assess the level of quality and productivity the project 
achieved.  
 Seventy four percent of respondents agreed that 
capabilities of the finished product fitted well with customer  
 
or user needs. However the majority of respondents also 
indicated that the projects represented in this study took 
longer than the respondents had expected to deliver (52%) 
and with over budget (55%). Interestingly, 55% of 
respondents also indicated that the project couldn’t have 
been completed any faster, even if that would have meant a 
compromised product quality. 
Overall, agile projects outperformed the waterfall 
projects in maintaining the project within the schedule and 
budget (see Figure 11). On the other hand, the variance 
between the impact of the two SDLCs on the final product’s 
capabilities and quality was not significant. 
 
 
 
Figure 11. 
 
Reported level of satisfaction on the productivity and final product’s capabil
ities, qualities 
IV.
 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK
 
In [12], the authors compare traditional requirements 
engineering approaches and agile software development. 
They analyzed commonalities and differences of both 
approaches. Their findings were that the RE  phases  is  not  
very  clear  in  agile:  they  are merged  and repeated  in  each 
iteration. Also, documentation is a main difference between 
the RE process and agile methods: There is a lack of 
documentation in agile.  Changes being traceable are 
regarded important in RE, and agile methods also manage 
the requirements well with index cards. Traditional RE does 
not have a good way of stakeholder involvement as agile 
methods: customers are only involved in early stages in RE 
while they are involved during the whole process under 
agile. The authors then recommended that a minimum of 
documentation should be ensured in an agile environment as 
a possible way for the agile to benefit from the RE methods. 
Scott Ambler [15] suggests a set of best practices for RE 
using agile methods. Many of the practices follow directly 
from the principles behind the agile Manifesto. Ambler also  
 
suggests using such artifacts as CRCs, acceptance tests, 
business rule definitions, change cases, dataflow diagrams, 
user interfaces, use cases, prototypes, features and scenarios, 
use case diagrams, and user stories to model requirements. 
These elements can be added to the software requirements 
specification document along with the user stories. For 
requirements elicitation he suggests using interviews, focus 
groups, JAD, legacy code analysis, ethnographic observation 
domain analysis, and having the customer on site at all times. 
Bose, Kurhekar and Ghoshal [1] suggested that agile 
requirements are effective to get continuous feedback from 
customers while the limits of agile methods are still not 
defined well. They suggested that the requirements 
management should be adopted to ensure the traceability, 
which is important when the requirements are likely to be 
changed in an agile method. The verification of early 
requirements descriptions being included are also proposed. 
The literature is rich with other survey studies on RE 
practices, development needs, and preferred ways that target 
259 local geographic location (e.g. Finland [16], Chile [17], and 
Malaysia [18]). 
In [11] the authors (Neill and Laplante) presented results 
of a comprehensive survey that was conducted in 2002 
showing requirements engineering practices across a broad 
range of industries and projects types. The results were 
surprising in that they indicated, among other things, that the 
waterfall model was still widely used and that various 
techniques associated with agile development were not 
widely employed. Unpublished results from a similar survey 
in 2008 [7] indicated that the findings from 2002 had 
remained largely unchanged. The 2002 survey results were 
highly cited (181 times via Google Scholar), and seemed to 
provide a template for more focused requirements surveys. 
For example Khurum et al [19] conducted a brief survey to 
uncover challenges in organizations to effective requirements 
engineering, Chernak surveyed a small group of companies 
to determine the prevalence of requirements reuse and 
Verner et al [20] sought to uncover specific issues with 
respect to requirements management. But since 2002 and 
again in 2008 the results of no other comprehensive surveys 
of requirements engineering practices were published. To 
remedy this deficiency, and provide useful data to other 
researchers, we updated and reprised the 2002 and 2008 
surveys. The present survey discussed in this paper includes 
responses from a broader geographic base including 
international participants. In a related paper [21] we reported 
on comparing the results from this survey with the ones from 
2002 and 2008. 
V.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
Throughout this paper we have reported on the current 
landscape of practice in requirements elicitation, analysis and 
presentation, management, effort estimation and tools with 
respect to agile methodologies in comparison with the 
traditional waterfall. The comparison has revealed some 
interesting trends including the continued rise of agile 
methods and their accompanying practices. More revealing, 
however, is that some techniques and paradigms have still 
not risen to dominance as we would expect. Object-oriented 
analysis and design and the UML, for example, are 
reportedly far less common than we anticipated, which could 
be considered disappointing given the improvements in end-
product capability and ease of use that such techniques 
reportedly provide. Some other salient observations that 
emerge from this survey are: 
-A number of RE practices show no significant 
difference between agile and waterfall (e.g. Requirements 
validation).  
- A number of practices were surprising findings 
considering the background on agile (e.g. usage of ALM, 
OO analysis, considering NFRs in effort estimation). 
- Even though some techniques were developed 
specifically for a particular SDLC methodology (e.g. user 
stories for agile); it is interesting to see these techniques 
finding their way to the other SDLC methodologies (e.g. user 
stories in waterfall). 
- Overall respondents expressed greater satisfaction with 
regards to the efforts of RE practices applied in their agile 
projects compared to the waterfall projects (see Figure 12). 
Our hope is that researchers will use this data to 
corroborate their own research and to motivate follow-up 
research studies. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. 
 
Reported level of satisfaction in RE practices across agile vs. waterfall 
260 R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
S. Bose, M. Kurhekar, and G. Joydip, “agile methodology in 
Requirements Engineering”, SETLabs Briefings Online, 
http://www.infosys.com/infosys-labs/publications/Documents/agile-
requirements-engineering.pdf, last accessed: February 2014. 
[2]
 
T. Huston, “, what is software testing? A Brief Overview of the agile 
Approach to Software Development and Testing”, 
http://smartbear.com/products/qa-tools/what-is-agile-testing/, last 
accessed: February 2014. 
[3]
 
agile Manifesto,  http://agilemanifesto.org/, last accessed: February 
2014. 
[4]
 
K. Orr, “agile Requirements: Opportunity or Oxymoron?”, IEEE 
Software, Volume:21 ,  Issue: 3, May 2004. 
[5]
 
E. Letier, J. Araujo, R. Gacitua, and P. Sawyer, “First International 
Workshop on agile Requirements Engineering”, In conjunction with 
the European Conference on Object Oriented Programming 
(ECOOP), Lancaster, UK, July 2011. 
[6]
 
L. Williams, “agile Requirements Elicitation”, 
http://agile.csc.ncsu.edu/SEMaterials/agileRE.pdf, last accesses: 
February 2014. 
[7]
 
V. Marinelli, “An Analysis of Current Trends in Requirements 
Engineering Practice,” Master of Software Engineering Professional 
Paper, Penn State University, Great Valley School of Graduate 
Professional Studies, Malvern, PA, 2008.  
[8]
 
W. Cunningham, “The WyCash Portfolio Management System”, 
technical report in Conference on Object-Oriented Programming 
Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA'92), Seventh 
Annual Conference, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, October 
18-22, 1992. 
[9]
 
A. Sillitti and G. Succi, “Requirements Engineering for agile 
methods”, Engineering and Managing Software Requirements, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp 309-326, 2005. 
[10]
 
 K. Beck and M. Fowler, “Planning Extreme Programming”, Boston, 
MA: Addison Wesley, 2001. 
[11]
 
N. Colin and P.Laplante, "Requirements Engineering: The State of 
the Practice",  Software, vol. 20, no. 6, , pp. 40-46, November 2003. 
[12]
 
F. Paetsch, A. Eberlein, and F. Maurer, “Requirements Engineering 
and Agile Software Development”, Proceedings of the IEEE 
International Workshops on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for 
Collaborative Enterprises, page 308--313. Linz, Austria,2003. 
[13]
 
D. West, “Integrated ALM Tools Are Fundamental to Success”, 
http://www.infoq.com/articles/Integrated-ALM; last accesses: 
February 2014. 
[14]
 
G. Owen, "agile and ALM: A marriage made in heaven?" 
http://searchsoftwarequality.techtarget.com/tip/agile-and-ALM-A-
marriage-made-in-heaven, last accesses : February 2014. 
[15]
 
S. Ambler, “Agile Requirements Changement Management”, 
http://agilemodeling.com/essays/changeManagement.htm, last 
accesses February 2014. 
[16]
 
U. Nikula, J. Sajaniemi, and H. Kälviäinen, “A State-of-the-Practice 
Survey on Requirements Engineering in Small- and Medium-Sized 
Enterprises”, Research report, Telecom Business Research Center 
Lappeenranta, 2000. 
[17]
 
A. Quispe, M. Marques, L. Silvestre; S.F. Ochoa, R. Robbes,” 
Requirements Engineering Practices in Very Small Software 
Enterprises: A Diagnostic Study”, CCC 2010, Proceedings of the 
XXIX International Conference of the Chilean Computer Science 
Society, Antofagasta, Chile, 15-19 November 2010. 
[18]
 
B. Solemon, S. Sahibuddin, A. A. Abd Ghani, “Requirements 
Engineering Problems and Practices in Software Companies: An 
Industrial Survey”, Advances in Software Engineering 
Communications in Computer and Information Science Volume 
59, 2009, pp 70-77. 
[19]
 
M. Khurum, N. Uppalapati, and R.C Veeramachaneni, "Software 
Requirements Triage and Selection: State-of-the-Art and State-of-
Practice", Software Engineering Conference (APSEC), 2012 19th 
Asia-Pacific , vol.1, no., pp.416,421, 4-7 Dec. 2012. 
[20]
 
J. Verner, K. Cox, S. Bleistein, and N. Cerpa, “Requirements 
engineering and software project success: an industrial survey in 
A
ustralia and the US,” Australasian Journal of Information 
Systems, 2007, 13(1). 
[21]
 
M. Kassab, C. Neill, and P. Laplante, “State of practice in 
r
equirements engineering: contemporary data”, Innovation in Systems 
and Software Engineering: A NASA journal, 2014, DOI: 
10.1007/s11334-014-0232-. 
261