 Overcoming Challenges
in Agile User Experience Work
Cross-Case Analysis of Two Large Software Organizations
Kati Kuusinen
Department of Pervasive Computing
Tampere University of Technology
Tampere, Finland
kati.kuusinen@tut.fi
Abstract
—User experience (UX) has become an increasingly
important factor in the success or failure of software systems.
However, established agile practices for ensuring desired UX of
the software under development are largely missing.
Consequently, companies are facing problems in conducting UX
work in agile development. This paper contributes towards
understanding those problems and developing means to
overcome them. We present results from a cross-case analysis of
survey data from two large international software companies in
this paper. Altogether, we surveyed 128 practitioners regarding
challenges in agile UX work, the actual and desired contribution
of UX specialists, and means to improve the current situation.
For tighter integration between the disciplines, we suggest
including the UX specialist in the development team itself.
Keywords—Agile software development; user experience work;
process improvement
I.I
NTRODUCTION
Agile [5] development methodologies have become a norm
in software development [3]. Simultaneously, user experience
(UX) has become a significant competitive advantage in
software markets (e.g. [2]). However, agile methodologies do
not give guidance on how to conduct UX work as part of agile
software development practices: They do not recognize the role
of UX specialist (UXS) nor guide developers in the work
related to UX. In spite of attempts to integrate UX work with
agile practices, researchers are reporting problems in
conducting UX work in agile software development [9].
We consider UX as a person’s perception of the value that
results from the use or anticipated use of software in a certain
context of use [6]. ByUX workwe refer to activities that aim
at developing software that is usable, fulfills user needs, and
provides desired UX. Most of the research on agile UX work
suggests conducting some upfront design before starting agile
development iterations [1]. During the implementation phase,
current approaches on agile UX work understand UX work as a
stream separate from development work [1]. Despite the
increasing utilization of these approaches in companies,
researchers are reporting problems in agile UX work [9]. Thus,
we argue that UX work is not sufficiently integrated into agile
development practices with the current approaches of separate
early design phase before the agile implementation and
separate UX stream during the software implementation.
Therefore, other approaches are needed.
In this paper we report a study conducted in two large
software companies with UX teams and established UX work
and agile development practices. We report results from cross-
case analysis of survey data collected from 128 practitioners in
those companies. The majority of participants were software
developers, R&D managers or product owners (PO). Despite
the established ways of working in the companies, participants
reported several challenging issues related to agile UX work in
their practices. We also identified a gap between the current
contribution from UXSs and the desired one. In order to
overcome the challenges, participants suggested more
collaborative practices between developers and UXSs.
II.M
ETHODS AND
D
ESCRIPTION OF
P
ARTICIPANTS
Our research goal was to gain understanding of common
challenges in established agile UX work in order to enable
improving the situation. We selected multiple exploratory case
study with cross-case analysis as the research approach [12].
Thus, we selected participant companies to offer rich, holistic
data that is comparable to reveal patterns in similarities and
dissimilarities in cross-case analysis. As cases, we selected two
large multinational companies utilizing agile software
development practices and having established UX resources
and practices. The methodology including sampling and
analysis methods is described in [7, 8].
A.Studied Companies
At the time of the study, Company A was developing
specialized software systems and tools for both business and
consumer users. The main product of the company was a
software system with massive yearly releases. Large
multinational customer companies were dominant when
deciding of the feature content for the next release. Company A
had about 800 employees worldwide and a centralized UX
team with about 15 members and a few distributed UXSs.
Company A was advanced in agile development utilizing their
own Scrum-based [10] process model in their development.
Company B operated in information technology service
business with around 18 000 employees worldwide. It
2015 41st Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-1-4673-7585-6/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2015.38454 developed mainly customer-ordered enterprise software
including both large IT systems and mobile enterprise
applications. It utilized mainly customers’ process models in
the development work but had also own product development.
Company B had a centralized UX team with about 25 members
and numerous distributed UXSs across business lines.
B.Survey Contents
We asked the participants the following open-ended
questions in a web-survey:
General situation in the company:

What are the three most challenging issues in agile UX
work at the moment?

When is the cooperation with UXSs unsuccessful or
frustrating, why?

How would you improve the current situation?
Ongoing or previous project:

Describe the work contribution of UXSs during the last
project you were involved in?

What would have been the most desirable work
contribution from UXSs?
In addition, we asked demographic information of the
participant and the development methodologies the participant
used in their work. We defined UX work in the survey as
activities that aim at developing software that is usable, fulfills
user needs and provides desired user UX. We added that we do
not limit the work by work roles such as work conducted by
UXSs only: anyone can contribute. We did not define agile
development but welcomed everyone who considered that they
worked with agile methodologies to participate.
C.Description of Participants
We got valid responses from 71 respondents working in
R&D related roles in Company A. Of those 60.5% were from
Finland, 15.5% from France, 8.5% from Malaysia, and 4.2%
from Russia, 11.3% did not provide a country. Mean age of the
respondents was 35 years (standard deviation (SD) 7.0). They
had 12.8 years (SD = 4.4) of total working experience, of
which 5.7 years (SD = 4.1) in Company A. Of the respondents,
32.4% were software developers or architects, 31.0% worked
in R&D related managerial roles excluding project
management, 11.3% were POs, scrum masters or project
managers, 7.0% were UXSs, 4.2% were testers, 5.6% worked
in other roles, and 8.5% did not provide their work role. The
most used development methodologies included Scrum (65.3%
of the respondents used it), and incremental model (26.4%). Of
the respondents, 16.7% utilized no development methodologies
in their work.
We received valid responses from 57 respondents in
Company B. Of those respondents 64.9% were from Finland,
14.0% from Sweden, 7.0% from Czech Republic, 3.5% from
India and 1.8% from Lithuania. 8.8% did not provide a
country. Mean age of respondents from Company B was 37
years (SD = 7.0). They had 15.4 years (SD = 6.8) of total work
experience of which 9.5 years (SD = 5.5) in Company B. Of
the respondents 52.6% worked mainly as developers or
architects, 17.5% as managers, 12.3% as product owners,
scrum masters or project managers, 8.8% were UXSs, 5.3%
worked in other roles, and 3.5% did not provide an answer.
The majority (73.0%) utilized Scrum in their work. Other
common methodologies included waterfall or stage-gate
development (33.3%) and incremental model (29.9%).
III.R
ESULTS
A.Most Challenging Issues in Agile UX Work
Altogether, we included 195 individual items in the final
analysis of the most challenging issues in agile UX work (each
respondent (N=102) enlisted one to three issues). Those issues
were categorized into 41 themes which were arranged under 11
upper categories during the content analysis (Table 1). The
most often reported problems included understanding and
fulfilling user needs, managing the big picture of the project,
and differences in working practices of developers and UXSs.
Issues related to user needs included acquiring the needed
understanding, deciding on the implementation scope,
communicating the user need in implementable form and
deciding on implementation details. Challenges related to the
product vision included different conceptions of the project
focus and separated architectural and UX design. Differences
in work practices included that developers considered that
UXSs did not work following agile practices.
T
ABLE
1.T
HE MOST CHALLENGING ISSUES IN AGILE
UX
 WORK IN
C
OMPANIES
A
 AND
B.T
OTAL
N=102(
N
=60
 IN
C
OMPANY
A,
 AND N
=
42
 IN
C
OMPANY
B).
1. Understanding and fulfilling customer and user needs
3
0
1.
1
Understanding user needs and the context of us
e
8
1.
2
Overcoming(technical) limitation
s
6
1.
3
Feature numbe
r
vs. quality and fulfilling actual user need
s
5
1.
4
Communicatinguserneeds as impl
ementable items
5
1.
5
Fulfilling user nee
d
s3
1.
6
Fulfilling conflicting user need
s
3
2. Managing the big pictur
e
2
9
2.
1
Separate UX and architecture work (mismatches
)
9
2.
2
Lacking common focus on the project leve
l
7
2.
3
Inconsistenc
y
b
etween products and platforms (UX architect)5
2.
4
Fra
g
mented UX work prevents creating an overall picture
(designing essential features)
5
2.
5
Inadequate understanding of own product
s
3
3. Differences in work practices
2
8
3.
1
UX work is not iterative / incremental / agil
e
7
3.
2
Expectations and understanding of UX, and attitude towards
UX work
7
3.
3
Transformation from waterfall practices to agil
e
6
3.
4
Task allocation between UX specialists and developers
3
3.
5
Ways of working should be improve
d
3
455 3.
6
Separate design upfront phas
e
2
4. Getting parti
c
ipants and user feedbac
k
2
0
4.
1
Getting early user feedback
5
4.
2
Getting user feedback
4
4.
3
Getting real, representative user
s
3
4.
4
Usability testing
3
4.
5
Involving the custome
r
5
5. Lack of cooperation
1
8
5.
1
Separate UX and development teams
8
5.
2
Lack of cooperatio
n
8
5.
3
Marketing / product management and R&D/UX no
t
communicating
2
6. Too late UX work / no time for UX wor
k
17
6.
1
Too late UX work
5
6.
2
Too little time for designing UX
5
6.
3
Developers do not get UX design in tim
e
5
6.
4
Other issues constrict UX (because of late UX work
)
2
7. Unfit processes and business models
15
7.
1
Hindering business and sales models in UX
4
7.
2
Good UX costs mor
e
for the custome
r
4
7.
3
Schedule
s
4
7.
4
Proces
s
3
8. Welcomin
g
 late chan
ge
12
8.
1
Late changes slow down development (rework and refactoring)6
8.
2
UXdesign version control, communicating changes in desig
n
5
8.
3
Handling a
d
-hoc UX task
s
1
9. Lack of competenc
e
11
9.
1
Lack of UX competence (in teams
)
8
9.
2
Lack of competence (notspecified
)
3
10. Quality assuranc
e
1
0
10.1Ensuring quality of the implementation
6
10.2Lacking ‘attention to details’ (follo
w
style guides, standards
etc.)
4
11. Development should be prototyp
e
-drive
n
5
11.1Pr
ototype-driven development5
B.Different Roles’ Perceptions of Challenging Issues
There were differences in how different roles considered
the problematic areas (Fig. 1). Developers were most
concerned of their ability to fulfill user needs and to maintain
the big picture of the project. Managers, in contrast, saw
biggest challenges in getting user feedback and adopting agile
practices. Developers were rarely in direct contact with users
although they were responsible of the actual realization of
responding to user needs by implementing the system. Thus,
developers often were not aware of possible user problems
with the system, or even the actual user need behind a feature
request. On the other hand, UX specialists were the most
concerned of managing the big picture of the project and
adopting agile practices. UXSs often saw their role holistic,
and they considered that they are the ones who are responsible
of the overall quality. They were also often working outside the
development teams who had been using agile methods usually
for some years. In contrast, UXSs were often working closer to
product management who used plan-driven approaches with
holistic long-term focus. Thus, they were in between two
organizations utilizing both agile and plan-driven approaches.
Fig. 1.The most common challenges in agile UX work by respondent role.
N = 102. Legend: Y-axis is the number of respondents. Dev = developers,
Mgmt = managers, UX = UX specialists, PO/SM = product owners, scrum
masters, and project managers, Other = other roles.
C.Unsuccessful UX Work
Reasons for unsuccessful UX work and their consequences
included the following issues:

Problem: Not having allocated money, time, or process
for the UX work (5.7% of the respondents mentioned
this reason).

 Impossible to have a meaningful impact on the
outcome by UX work, “
only selecting nice colors or
rounding corners of the UI
” (UXS, Company B).

Problem: Starting cooperation too late: making
decisions without involving all relevant parties
(business, UX, and technical people) (17.9%).

Bad overall decisions and sub-optimization.

Problem: Unclear allocation of responsibilities between
persons and roles in the project (7.5%).

Poor commitment and power struggles “
a know-all
person started ‘mastering’ the UX design
”
(manager, Company B).

Problem: Not negotiating UX design decisions with
developers (17.9%).

Poorly implementable UX design.
456 
Problem: Poor reasoning behind UX design decisions
(14.2%).

Developers making bad implementation decisions
because they misunderstood the user need behind
the UX design solution.
In addition to above listed problems, 18.9% of respondents
only mentioned that UX work is unsuccessful when there is no
or too little cooperation.
D.UX Specialists’ Contribution
The contribution of UXSs varied significantly between
respondents. A major part (33.7%) of respondents reported that
there was no contribution from a UXS in their latest project. In
some projects (15.8% of respondents), UXS had consulted the
team few times regarding design decisions the team had made
or reviewed the implemented UI designed by software
developers. In a large part of projects (23.2% of respondents), a
UXS had designed the user flow and communicated it via
wireframe images to the team; in some cases the UXS had also
designed graphics. In few cases respondents reported that a
UXS had conducted user studies or tests (4.2% of respondents).
In a couple of cases in Company B UXSs had conducted
implementation of the user interface (2.1% of respondents).
There were some differences in the desired contribution
from UXSs between Company A and B. In Company A,
participants wished particularly for tighter cooperation; 46.7%
of the respondents in Company A mentioned cooperation in
their answer. The desire for cooperation was not as outstanding
in Company B (16.2%). Respondents in Company A especially
wished that planning activities such as product vision and
feature planning would be conducted in cooperation with a
UXS; 17.8% of the respondents in Company A mentioned
cooperative planning. Of those (in Company A) who
mentioned planning activities, 66.7% desired that it would be
done cooperatively. Respondents in Company A also wished
for more collaborative UX design activities; 41.7% of
respondents who mentioned UX design, stated that it should be
done in collaboration together with UX designers and
developers. In contrast, quality issues were mentioned more
often in Company B responses. Of the respondents in
Company B, 29.7% mentioned issues such as better clarity or
implementability of the UX design, or that if they had had
UXS in the project, the UI design would have been better.  In
Company A, only 6.8% of respondents mentioned such issues.
Of the total respondents (Company A and B), 22.0%
described that UXSs should have participated to user needs
clarification and creating the product vision. In addition, 26.8%
desired that a UXS would have created the user intera
ction
design whereas 11.0% described that UXSs should have
guided developers and provided feedback on the UI design
created by developers. Also, 11.0% mentioned testing and
evaluation practices.
In general, it seems that there was a large gap between the
actual contribution from UXSs and the desired one. UXSs
mainly concentrated on delivering the UX design for
development whereas respondents desired for more
comprehensive and communicative contribution. In the ideal
state, there would be a UXS involved from early on throughout
the project regardless of the desired amount of input from the
UXS: Some of the respondents desired for significant impact
from the UXS including understanding the user need, creating
the product vision, delivering the design and evaluating the
outcome whereas others wanted continuous feedback and
guidance from the specialist throughout the project.
E.Means to Improve the Situation
The most often mentioned suggestion to improve the
situation was to
include UXSs in development or project teams
:
26.8% of the respondents suggested it (Fig. 2). In Company A,
especially developers proposed this whereas in Company B,
there were no differences between respondent groups. The
second popular suggestion was
closer collaboration
 between
UXSs and other development-related roles, 17.5% of the
respondents mentioned it as a means to improve agile UX
work. 9.3% suggested
improving knowledge
 in UX issues.
Several developers and UXSs were concerned of developers’
ability to understand UX issues and they mentioned that the
cooperation would be more fluent if developers were more
knowledgeable in UX work. Also, especially in Company B,
respondents suggested that managers should be more
knowledgeable in UX issues since they have the most power of
decision to impact UX on organization level. 15.6%, all from
Company B, suggested
changes in the process
 to ensure tighter
integration of UX work with agile development practices. In
contrast, only respondents from Company A (7.2%) suggested
starting UX work earlier
 or allocating more time for UX work.
Fig. 2. Means to improve the current situation of agile UX work in the case
companies. Y-axis is the number of respondents. N = 97 (N = 58 in Company
A and N = 39 in Company B).
Other commonly mentioned suggestions included
increasing the number of UXSs so that one could be allocated
to each project. Indeed, to be able to ensure sufficient UX work
in all projects necessitates more UXSs in both companies;
currently of the total staff, 1.8% were UXSs in Company A and
we estimate that less than 1% of the staff in Company B were
UXSs or working in such roles.
F.Summary of Results
There were challenges in the fundamental aspects of agile
UX work. The most challenging issues included understanding
and meeting user needs, maintaining the project vision, and
457 conducting UX work in agile manner. Lack of cooperation
between developers and UXS led to several problems such as
difficultly implementable UX design. There was a noticeable
gap between the actual and desired contribution from UXSs.
UXSs mainly concentrated on delivering the user interaction
design for developers to implement whereas participants
desired for a more holistic contribution throughout the project
and especially during planning activities. In order to improve
the situation, participants suggested for more collaborative
approach and to include UXSs in development teams. In
addition, changes in processes and increasing developers’ and
managers’ knowledge in UX issues were suggested.
IV.D
ISCUSSION
There is contradictory evidence in the earlier research on
whether the software development team and UX team should
operate separately or in cross-functional teams [1].
Frameworks for agile UX work have primarily suggested
utilizing approaches where a UXS works on their own track,
such as in [11]. However, e.g. Ferreira et al. [4] suggest that
cross-functional teams including a UXS are more efficient than
those operating with a separated UXS. Our study strongly
supports the latter approach of cross-functional teams: one of
the most common suggestions on how to improve the current
situation in agile UX work was to include a UXS in the
development team. In fact, respondents saw separate UX teams
as a hindering issue in agile UX work. Problems related to
separate teams were weakened communication, differences in
timing of tasks, and differences in work practices.
Our study suggests that ensuring good UX for end users
necessitates teamwork between different disciplines. In
addition to understanding the user need and designing fluent
user flow, the team needs to consider various issues related to
UX development. Such issues include considering technical
limitations and cost of different design possibilities, balancing
between the feature number and development quality, and
means to fulfill conflicting user needs. Also, understanding of
when the implementation corresponds to the UX design closely
enough (implementation quality) requires knowledge both on
UX and software design issues.
Problems regarding separate UX and development work
include that projects operating without a UXS need to be able
to recognize the limit of their own incompetence; they should
be able to identify the point when they need help from a UXS
early enough. In addition, when they consider they need a
UXS, they need to know whom to contact. Usually, UX teams
are busy and they cannot allocate resources immediately on
demand which means waiting time for the development team.
In addition, it requires some time to examine the project
content before the UXS will be able to help the development
team. Thus, we conclude that on-demand UX work requires
considerable facilitation, flexibility and orchestration in order
to be efficient.
Based on our results, we suggest allocating a UXS in agile
development teams. In projects where UX is less critical, for
instance when user needs are well understood or in projects
where no major new user features are designed, a UXS should
be available to guide and provide feedback for the development
team. In more UX-critical projects, a UXS (or several when
needed) should be participating in the daily development work
from the beginning. Clarifying the user need and creating the
product vision should be collaborative activity in the team.
Also, user interaction design ought to be created together with
developers in order to ensure implementability. However, more
research is needed on the actual daily work of these cross-
functional teams in order to develop better methods and ways
of working for such teams.
V.C
ONCLUSION
This paper presents results of a multiple case study in two
large software organizations. In total, 128 persons working in
various roles related to agile development activities responded
to our web survey. We studied the most challenging issues in
agile UX work, the gap between the actual and desired
contribution of UXSs, and means to improve the current
situation in the companies. We found various challenging
issues related to, for example, the ability to respond to users’
needs, managing the product vision, and reconciling divergent
working practices. There was a significant gap between the
desired and actual contribution of UXSs: UXSs mainly
contributed on the UI design whereas the participants wished
for more holistic contribution throughout the project. Our
results indicate that development organizations would benefit
from tighter cooperation between UXSs and developers. Thus,
we argue for including a UXS in the development team.
R
EFERENCES
[1]Brhel, M., Meth, H., Maedche, A., Werder, C. Exploring principles of
user-centered agile software development: A literature review.
Information and Software Technology,
 61, 2015.  pp. 163-181
[2]Cyr, D., Head, M., & Ivanov, A. Design aesthetics leading to m-loyalty
in mobile commerce. Information & Management, 43(8), 2006, 950-963
[3]Dingsøyr, T., Nerur, S., Balijepally, V. Moe, N. B. A decade of agile
methodologies: Towards explaining agile software development, Journal
of
Systems and Software
, 85(6), 2012, pp 1213-1221, Elsevier
[4]Ferreira, J., Sharp, H., Robinson, H. User experience design and agile
development: managing cooperation through articulation work.
Software: Practice and Experience
 41(9), 2011, John Wiley & Sons,
963-974
[5]Highsmith, J., Cockburm, A. Agile software development: the business
of innovation. Computer, 34(9),  2001. IEEE
[6]ISO 9241-210:2010. Ergonomics of human-system interaction. Part 210:
Human-centered design for interactive systems. 2010
[7]Kuusinen, K., Mikkonen, T., Pakarinen, S. Agile user experience
development in a large software organization: Good expertise but
limited impact. In: Human-Centered Software Engineering (HCSE’12),
LNCS 7623, Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg (2012), pp. 94–111
[8]Kuusinen, K., Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, K. How to make agile UX
work more efficient: management and sales perspectives. Proc. 7th
Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense
through Design (NordiCHI '12). ACM, 139-148. 2012.
[9]Salah, D., Paige, R. and Cairns, P. A systematic literature review on
agile development processes and user centred design integration.
Proc.
18th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in
Software Engineering (EASE’14)
. ACM, (2014). Article 5, 10 p.
[10]Schwaber, K. Agile project management with Scrum (Microsoft
professional), 1st. ed., Microsoft Press. 2004.
[11]Sy, D. Adapting usability investigations for Agile user-centered design.
Journal of Usability Studies
 2, 3 (2007), 112–132
[12]Yin, R. K., Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 3
rd
 ed. 2003
SAGE Publications.
458