 Lean Transformation Framework for Software 
Intensive Companies 
Responding to Challenges Created by the Cloud 
 
Raija Kuusela 
Senior Research Scientist 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
Oulu, Finland 
Email: raija.kuusela@vtt.fi 
Mika Koivuluoma 
Project Manager 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
Email: mika.koivuluoma@oulu.fi
 
 
Abstract
ŠToday, the cloud phenomenon is challenging 
companies™ business and revenue models. Many enterprises are 
starting a fundamental change in order to benefit from the 
opportunities and to respond to the challenges that the cloud 
brings. At the same time, interest in lean thinking has grown in 
industries and research communities. Lean paradigm is assessed 
as a potential means to help companies pursue efficiency. This 
paper builds on premise that in order to succeed, software 
intensive enterprise™s cloud transformation should have lean 
thinking woven in Œ we talk about lean transformation. This 
paper extends the current available lean related literature that, 
however, is mainly intended to manufacturing industries. This 
paper proposes a lean transformation framework, which 
highlights the significance of learning, iterative execution and 
holistic approach involving the whole enterprise in the 
transformation. First experiences of using the proposed lean 
transformation framework in a large IT service company are 
described as well. 
Keywords-Lean Paradigm; Transformation; Cloud 
Phenomenon 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
ﬁCloudﬂ and ﬁleanﬂ are contemporary paradigms. 
Prevailing definitions of cloud / cloud computing have been 
studied, but conclusion is that clouds do not have a clear and 
complete definition [1]. However, a proposal for the definition 
of clouds is: clouds are a large pool of easily usable and 
accessible resources, which can be dynamically re-configured 
[1]. In this paper, cloud phenomenon is thought to have an 
impact also on other areas of businesses and brings changes to 
the external business environment. These changes will present 
both opportunities and threats, with some possessing the 
potential to radically alter how an Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) company conducts its 
business.  In general, ﬁcloud forcesﬂ are beyond the direct 
control of an organisation. Instead, companies must recognise 
the cloud as something to be prepared for and responded to. 
Utilising opportunities of the cloud is especially useful 
when composing new services. Service science is the study of 
service systems (e.g. [2]), which comprise people and 
technologies that adaptively compute and adjust to a system's 
changing value of knowledge [3]. Service science combines 
organisation and human understanding with business and 
technological understanding in order to explain the origins and 
growth of service systems, to solve fundamental problems, and 
to produce unique service professionals and service scientists 
[2]. Service science is grounded in the cross-functional issues 
of business and its operating processes, and its theoretical roots 
extend to engineering, technology, and the social sciences [4]. 
Goals towards efficiency, cost-effectiveness, good quality 
and superior user experience are on the agenda of 
contemporary ICT firms. Since the mid 1990s, agile methods 
have been in use in software intensive companies to achieve 
these goals (e.g. [5], [6]). However, agile methods are not 
sufficient, and moreover, the cloud brings along new 
challenges. Lean thinking (e.g. [7]) that has been introduced in 
several industries, also in software development [8], [9], is 
anticipated to help companies in the challenges described 
above. 
One of the lean principles highlights the importance of 
optimising the whole (e.g. [9]) and when adopted in enterprise 
level, the sought-for result is lean enterprise. According to 
several authors (see e.g. [10], [11]) evolution of an enterprise 
towards a lean enterprise cannot be managed with a top-down 
development strategy, but also a bottom-up approach is needed. 
Despite the existing frameworks and guidelines for 
organisational lean transformation (e.g. [7], [10], [12]), further 
studies are needed to revise the frameworks to better apply in 
the contemporary companies Œ especially in software intensive 
companies.  
The research questions of this paper are:  
•
 
What steps an organisation needs to take in order to 
transform to lean? 
•
 
What viewpoints shall be considered in the 
transformation process? 
The purpose of this paper is to propose a lean 
transformation framework for software intensive companies, 
who aim to utilise the opportunities created by the cloud. The 
proposed framework is based on the existing models ([7], [10], 
and [13]) that are intended mainly to manufacturing industries, 
2011 37th EUROMICRO Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-4488-5/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2011.744502011 37th EUROMICRO Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-4488-5/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2011.744502011 37th EUROMICRO Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-4488-5/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2011.74378 though. First experiences on using the proposed lean 
transformation framework are presented as well. This study 
points out the importance of a transformation framework, 
which has a holistic view and works as a roadmap for the 
change in question. This study utilises definitions and views of 
the lean paradigm (e.g. [7], [8], and [9]).  
This study follows the paradigm of the design science [14], 
which pursues knowledge and understanding of a problem 
domain and its solution by building and applying of the 
designed artefact. The evaluation of the artefact provides 
feedback information and a better understanding of the 
problem in order to improve both the artefact and the design 
process. In this research the artefact is the transformation 
framework.  
Section II of this paper presents the background for this 
study. In section III the proposed framework is presented and 
explained in details. Experiences of using the framework are 
presented in section IV. The last two sections conclude the 
paper with some observations on the limitations of the study 
and an outline of avenues for future research. 
II.
 
T
HEORETICAL 
B
ASIS FOR 
T
RANSFORMATION 
F
RAMEWORKS
 
A.
 
Setting the Scene 
Enterprise transformation concerns a fundamental change 
that can involve new or old value propositions in terms of 
products and services, how they are delivered and supported, 
and how the organisation is built to provide these offerings. 
Transformation is driven by value deficiencies and involves 
examining and changing work processes. Transformation needs 
both strategy-oriented (i.e. initiatives driven by external 
factors) and operations-oriented (i.e. initiatives driven by 
internal factors) approaches.  [15].  
Conclusions from case studies of the ways how 
transformation has been implemented are described ([15], [16]) 
by perspectives of 
goal
, 
approach
, and the 
scope
. 
The goal or 
ends
 of transformation can range from cost efficiencies to 
fundamental changes in markets, 
the approach or means
 of 
transformation can range from upgrading people™s skills to 
major changes in strategy, and 
the scope
 of transformation can 
range from work activities to the enterprise as a whole. The 
ends and means influence the scope of transformation. The 
costs and risks of transformation increase when moving 
towards wider scope [16]. 
B.
 
Lean Transformation 
Lean thinking stems from automotive industry, and later it 
has been adopted in other manufacturing industries and further 
to lean enterprise [7] more generally. Within the last decade, 
software development challenges and the applicability of lean 
principles to software development have been studied [17]. The 
five lean principles, i.e. identify value, map the value stream, 
create flow, establish pull, and seek perfection, were applied to 
software development [17]. It is argued that the software 
industry is the most suited of all the industries to transform to 
the lean production [17], and e.g.  Poppendieck & Poppendieck 
[8], [9] concluded with the following seven principles of lean 
software development: 1) eliminate waste, 2) build quality in, 
3) create knowledge, 4) defer commitment, 5) fast delivery, 6) 
respect people, and 7) optimise the whole.  
The lean principles listed above are more as a philosophy 
than practical guidelines. Applying them in an organisation 
most evidently needs a big change. Thus, if a company has 
decided to apply lean thinking, the transformation towards lean 
needs a comprehensive approach, and the result will be a lean 
enterprise. Lean transformation is a long-term activity which 
requires even years to be completed. An emergent strategy can 
be guided by an overall umbrella strategy, where the 
management sets out the vision and the broad guidelines for a 
strategy; detailed specifics can be created at lower levels in the 
organisation [10], [11]. A transformation needs both strategy-
oriented and operations-oriented approaches [15].  
MIT researchers [13] have created the ﬁTransition-to-Lean 
Roadmapﬂ, which is aimed at assisting firms in their efforts to 
transform into lean. The framework includes the steps 
necessary to initiate, sustain, and continuously refine an 
enterprise transformation based upon lean principles and 
practices. This model was developed from an enterprise 
perspective and is illustrated in Fig. 1. 
III.
 
T
OWARDS A 
N
EW 
F
RAMEWORK FOR 
L
EAN 
T
RANSFORMATION
 
Despite the fact that lean paradigm has been enhanced also 
to software industry the current literature does not provide 
proper lean transformation frameworks for software  
companies; the existing frameworks are intended mainly to 
manufacturing industries. Additionally, the turbulent business 
environment is a remarkable driver for software companies to 
transform, and the cloud adds challenges ever more. The 
capacity of an organisation to benefit from the opportunities 
created by external factors, e.g. the cloud, depends on its ability 
to adapt the entire organisation to the change. The missing lean 
transformation framework for software companies and the 
challenges created by the cloud led us to create an appropriate 
lean transformation framework for software intensive 
companies. Based on the frameworks presented ([7], [10], [12], 
and [13]) we created a revised framework that is shown in Fig. 
2. The proposed lean transformation framework includes three 
cycles i.e. Strategic alignment cycle, Organisational and 
business alignment cycle, and Lean implementation cycle. 
 
Figure 1. 
 
A framework for lean transformation (modified from [13]). 
451451379                     
 
Figure 2. A new framework for lean transformation. 
A.
 
Strategic Alignment Cycle 
The transformation cycle requiring the longest running time 
in the lean transformation is called Strategic alignment cycle, 
which corresponds to MIT [13] roadmap™s Entry/Re-entry 
cycle (Fig. 1). This cycle concerns the highest organisational 
level of the enterprise, where strategic planning takes place. As 
lean paradigm focuses on the whole enterprise, lean thinking 
shall be intertwined to the strategic planning; not to be 
understood as a discrete element that can be added later on top 
of the plan. As well, lean thinking highlights the importance of 
customer values.  
Stakeholders™ values shall be contextualised in an early 
phase of transformation and the values shall yield through the 
whole transformation. Strategic alignment cycle considers 
external factors, i.e. drivers such as customer needs, business 
drivers, and especially the cloud. In MIT™s [13] ﬁTransition-to-
Lean Roadmapﬂ, the researchers highlight the importance of 
adopting lean paradigm including tasks like build vision, 
convey urgency, foster lean learning, make the commitment, 
and obtain senior managers buy-in. All this is seen important 
also in our framework. However, our framework foregrounds 
also all stakeholders™ values.  
TABLE I. 
 
A
CTIVITIES IN 
S
TRATEGIC 
A
LIGNMENT 
C
YCLE
 
Activity Description 
Strategic 
planning 
An enterprise™s strategy is a response to the challenges 
created by external factors (e.g.cloud) in order to gain or 
maintain the competitive advantage of the enterprise. 
Lean paradigm shall be intertwined in the strategy.  
Commitment of senior managers is a vital enabler of 
successful implementation of the strategy. 
Contextualising 
values 
The foundation of lean thinking is on creating value for 
stakeholders. The enterprise shall be able to understand 
and capture the values that will be pursued. 
 
B.
 
Organisational and Business Alignment Cycle 
As soon as the main strategic goals of the organisation have 
been agreed, activities of Organisational and business 
alignment cycle has sufficient inputs to start. This cycle 
corresponds to MIT [13] roadmap™s Long term cycle (Fig. 1). 
In this cycle, both business and organisational development 
related things shall be planned and deployed.  
MIT researchers [13] highlight the importance of value 
stream by proposing value stream mapping, creating a vision of  
 
TABLE II. 
 
A
CTIVITIES IN 
O
RGANISATIONAL AND 
B
USINESS 
A
LIGNMENT 
C
YCLE
 
Activity Description 
Focus on value 
stream 
Lean thinking focuses on value creation for 
stakeholders. Mapping the value stream shall start from 
customers and move inwards to the enterprise processes. 
The enterprise™s revenue models shall be studied and 
market forecasts shall be considered, and further, 
different business cases shall be analysed. 
Cultural and 
organisational 
development 
Lean transformation requires aligning the whole 
organisation to support it. The enterprise™s processes 
and practices shall be aligned with lean principles. The 
enterprise culture should support lean philosophy by 
encouraging and making possible to create initiatives 
and innovations. 
Planning lean 
implementation 
Planning lean implementation needs a roadmap, 
including rough estimate of schedule and resources. 
Trainings at all levels of the company are vital. These 
trainings also help in changing the enterprise culture. 
Current state 
analysis (lean) 
Current state analyses help focus on the most urgent 
process areas or units of the organisation. These 
analyses are conducted using lean principles as the 
framework of the activity. 
452452380 how customers pull value from the value stream, and by 
involving stakeholders in the transformation. We agree, and 
additionally, we propose further examining customer values, 
value networks, business case analyses and revenue models. 
This is extremely important in the current turbulent business 
environment.  
Organisational structure shall support the business plan 
deployment, too. And still, in order to properly implement the 
lean transformation the enterprise shall consider cultural 
aspects. This is aligned with MIT™s [13] roadmap. MIT 
researchers propose horizontal focus in organisational 
structure, empowering change agents and aligning incentives to 
support lean implementation.  
In MIT™s [13] roadmap (Fig. 1), creating lean 
implementation plan is located in the Short-term cycle. 
However, they say that lean implementation framework is a 
kind of transition element between Long-term and Short-term 
cycles. MIT [13] roadmap includes transitioning between 
roadmap cycles, and the researchers say that although the flow 
pattern suggests strict linearity, some of the activities may be 
performed in parallel. Thus, interpretation of the roadmap may 
have different views.   
 
We propose creation of lean implementation plan at 
enterprise level belonging to Organisational and business 
alignment cycle, i.e. long-term cycle, as well as analysing the 
current state of selected processes or functions. 
C.
 
Lean Implementation Cycle 
Lean implementation cycle can start, when main strategic, 
organisational and business alignment decisions have been 
made and current status of operational mode is defined. This 
cycle corresponds to MIT [13] roadmap™s Short term cycle 
(Fig. 1). Lean implementation represents shorter term activities 
and focuses on continuous improvement at team or unit level. 
At intervals, lean assessments are useful to get a picture how 
lean transformation is progressing. From time to time it is vital 
to check if corrective actions are needed, major or minor ones. 
Even though strategic planning aims at longer term plans, it is 
useful to check if the enterprise™s strategic plans should be 
revisited and updated to respond to so far unforeseeable 
changes. 
In most (large) companies, there are own departments or 
units for different functions, e.g. research and development, 
human resources, accounting, marketing etc. This is illustrated  
TABLE III. 
 
A
CTIVITIES IN 
L
EAN 
I
MPLEMENTATION 
C
YCLE
 
Activity Description 
Implementing 
lean initiatives 
Based on the enterprise level implementation plan, more 
detailed plans shall be created and their implementation  
shall start.  
Continuous 
improvement 
In this short-term cycle focus is on continuous 
improvement i.e. Kaizen. 
Lean 
assessment 
In order to get information of the progress of realisation 
of the implementation initiatives, lean assessments will 
be conducted when appropriate. 
 
by several instances of Lean implementation cycle in Fig. 2. 
Lean implementation takes place side by side in several places 
of the organisation. Our Lean implementation cycle and MIT 
[13] roadmap™s short term cycle are pretty well aligned with 
each other.  
 
IV.
 
A
PPLICABILITY OF THE 
N
EW 
F
RAMEWORK
 
In this chapter, applicability of the framework for a 
software company is discussed. The software company in 
question is a large service integrator company Sintco 
(pseudonym), who started a systematic Cloud transformation at 
the end of the first decade of 2000. Company has almost 20000 
employees in 20+ countries, most of them in Northern and 
Central Europe, Russia, India and China. Most of the 
employees are located in Finland and sales come from 
Scandinavian countries.  
Sintco™s cloud transformation is all-embracing initiative 
that touches almost all business units in one way or another. 
Big part of Sintco™s business is coming from the IT operations 
and application management and in there the impact and 
emergence of the new cloud-based services is understandably 
biggest.  
At the same time with the enterprise-level cloud 
transformation Sintco started to actively map and analyse its 
existing operations, especially their ﬁcloudabilityﬂ. One of the 
services that was seen to have very good potential to be full 
blown cloud service, was one of the Sintco™s sustainability 
related service and its development; Susde (pseudonym). In the 
following chapters, applicability of the framework is discussed 
in the context of Susde™s attempt to adopt lean way of working 
in their cloud-based service development and how it would 
match with the overall framework. This means, that the cloud 
transformation of Sintco is seen to be at the background, and 
the framework is mapped on top of that via operations of 
Susde. 
With Susde, the iterative nature of the framework was all 
the time present in their transformation. It should be noted 
though that in Susde™s case, first step (1. Enterprise strategic 
planning including lean thinking philosophy) did not include so 
much enterprise™s 
own
 articulated lean thinking as such, but 
focus was more on ﬁtext bookﬂ approach for the applying lean 
and agile way of working.  
Regarding the next steps of the framework, the Susde™s 
development team followed rather meticulously, but again, 
with their own business interest being the basic principle and 
criteria for the selection of improvement actions. In practice 
that meant, that Susde™s development team selected their 
requirement management process to be their first improvement 
area, and their lean related activities like value stream mapping, 
customer value identification, etc. were first targeted to that 
specific area of their business, since it was felt to bring biggest 
value for their business.  
453453381 V.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
This paper proposes the lean transformation framework for 
software intensive companies (Fig. 2) based on the lean 
principles and the related frameworks of the current literature. 
Our framework validates pretty well the ﬁTransition-to-Lean 
Roadmapﬂ of MIT [13], which is primarily intended to 
manufacturing companies, though. 
The Poppendiecks [9] propose a roadmap for lean software 
development with ten steps. Table IV that links them to our 
framework indicates that all the steps of the roadmap [9] are 
covered in our framework. Additionally, our framework 
proposes to consider the organisational structure when 
transforming to lean. As well, the proposed framework 
suggests to study the whole value stream, not just customer 
values, and to consider revenue models and market forecast, 
and to conduct business case analyses. Our framework covers 
wider perspective than the Poppendiecks™ roadmap [9], which 
can be interpreted to cover only the organisation™s internal 
environment; we propose a wider view. 
What comes to the 
scope
 of the transformation, the 
proposed framework considers at the end the whole enterprise. 
However, at the time when writing this paper, most practical 
and concrete initiatives have been taken in a more concise 
context, i.e. in research and development functions and their 
activities. This applies also to the 
means
 of the transformation. 
Still, this is understandable as the transformation in the case 
company is in its early phases of a long journey. 
TABLE IV. 
 
M
APPING 
S
TEPS OF THE 
R
OADMAP OF THE 
P
OPPENDIECKS 
[9]
 
TO THE 
P
ROPOSED 
L
EAN 
T
RANSFORMATION 
F
RAMEWORK
 
The Roadmap of the 
Poppendiecks [9] 
The Proposed Lean Transformation 
Framework (Fig. 2) 
1. As a starting point consider 
how to create value and make a 
profit. 
Strategic alignment cycle; 
- Enterprise strategic planning including 
lean thinking philosophy 
2. Think what is the biggest 
problem limiting ability to create 
value and make a profit. 
Strategic alignment cycle;  
- Analyse stakeholder values, 
contextualise values 
3. Find out what is the biggest 
threat to ability to create value 
and make a profit over the long-
term. 
Organisational and business alignment 
cycle;  
- Focus on value stream, identify 
customer values; 
- Current state analyses 
4. Evaluate the culture. 
Organisational and business alignment 
cycle; 
- Develop lean structure and culture 
5. Train people. 
Organisational and business alignment 
cycle;  
- Create and refine implementation plan 
6. Solve the biggest problem, 
turn the biggest constraint over 
to work teams. 
Organisational and business alignment 
cycle / Lean implementation cycle 
7. Change rules in order to solve 
the problems and to remove 
constraints. 
Lean implementation cycle; 
- Implement lean initiatives 
- Focus on continuous improvement 
8. Measure to see the progress. Lean implementation cycle; Lean 
assessment 
9. Adopt changes supported by 
results. 
Lean implementation cycle; Focus on 
continuous improvement 
10. Repeat the cycle, start again 
from step 1. 
Feedback loops of the framework 
 
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS AND 
F
URTHER 
W
ORK
 
This paper has outlined a lean transformation framework, 
which was created in the context of the cloud. However, one 
has to keep in mind that the cloud is only one possible driver 
for big changes in contemporary companies. The case company 
is just taking their early steps in the transformation; thus, this 
framework is very much a work in progress, as well the 
transformation will take several years until firm evidence is 
available. However, experiences so far show very promising. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
This work was supported by TEKES as a part of the Cloud 
Software program of Tivit (Finnish Strategic Centre of 
Science, Technology and Innovation in the field of ICT). 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
L.M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner,  ﬁA 
Break in the Clouds: Toward a Cloud Definitionﬂ, ACM SIGCOMM 
Computer Communication Review, vol. 39, no. 1, 2009. 
[2]
 
P.P. Maglio and J. Spohrer, J., ﬁFundamentals of service scienceﬂ, 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 36, no. 1, pp.  18-20, 
2008. 
[3]
 
J. Spohrer, P.P. Maglio, J. Bailey, and D. Gruhl, "Steps Toward a 
Science of Service Systems," Computer, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 71-77, 2007. 
[4]
 
I.R. Bardhan, H. Demirkan, P.K. Kannan, R.J. Kauffman, and R. 
Sougstad, ﬁAn Interdisciplinary Perspective on IT Services Management 
and Service Scienceﬂ, Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 
26, no. 4, pp. 13Œ64, 2010. 
[5]
 
P. Abrahamsson, O. Salo, J. Ronkainen, and J. Warsta, Agile Software 
Development Methods: Review and Analysis. VTT Electronics 408, 
Espoo, 2002. 
[6]
 
T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, ﬁEmpirical Studies of Agile Software 
Development: A Systematic Reviewﬂ, Information and Software 
Technology, vol. 50, no. 9-10, pp. 833-859, 2008. 
[7]
 
J.P. Womack and D.T. Jones, Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create 
Wealth in Your Corporation. Free Press, 2003. 
[8]
 
M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, Lean Software Development: An 
Agile Toolkit.  Addison-Wesley,  Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2003. 
[9]
 
M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck., Implementing Lean Software 
Development: From Concept to Cash. Addison-Wesley, 2007. 
[10]
 
R. Smeds, ﬁManaging Change towards Lean Enterprisesﬂ, International 
Journal of Operations & Production Management, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 66-
82, 1994. 
[11]
 
H.T. Johnson, Relevance regained: From top-down control to bottom-up 
empowerment. Free Press, 1992. 
[12]
 
P. Hines, M. Holweg, and N. Rich, ﬁLearning to evolve. A review of 
contemporary lean thinkingﬂ, International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management, vol. 24, no. 10,  pp. 994-1011, 2004. 
[13]
 
MIT. [Online]. ﬁTransitioning to a Lean Enterprise: A Guide for 
Leaders: Volume I, Volume II, Volume IIIﬂ. Available: 
http://lean.mit.edu/index.php?option=com_docman&Itemid=776
. 
[14]
 
A.R. Hevner, S.T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, ﬁDesign Science in 
Information Systems Researchﬂ, MIS Quarterly, vol. 28, no. 1,  pp. 75-
105, 2004. 
[15]
 
W.B. Rouse, ﬁA Theory of Enterprise Transformationﬂ, in Systems, Man 
and Cybernetics, 2005 IEEE International Conference, 2005. 
[16]
 
W.B. Rouse, ﬁEnterprises as Systems: Essential Challenges and 
Approaches to Transformationﬂ, Systems Engineering, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 
138-150, 2005. 
[17]
 
P. Middleton and J. Sutton, Lean Software Strategies. Proven 
Techniques for Managers and Developers. Productivity Press, New 
York, USA, 2005.. 
454454382