 Architecture Technical Debt: Understanding Causes 
and a Qualitative Model  
 
Antonio Martini, Jan Bosch, Michel Chaudron  
Computer Science and Engineer
ing, Software Engineering 
Chalmers University of Technology | Gothenburg University 
Göteborg, Sweden 
{antonio.martini, jan.bosch}@chalme
rs.se, michel.chaudron@cse.gu.se
 
 
Abstract 
— A known problem in large software companies is 
to balance the prioritization of short-term with long-term 
responsiveness. Specifically, archit
ecture violations (Architecture 
Technical Debt) taken to deliver 
fast might hinder future feature 
development, which would hinder agility. We conducted a 
multiple-case embedded case study in 7 sites at 5 large companies 
in order to shed light on the 
current causes for the accumulation 
of Architectural Technical Debt that causes effort. We provide a 
taxonomy of the factors and their influence in the accumulation 
of debt, and we provide a qualitat
ive model of how the debt is 
accumulated and recovered over time. 
Keywords—architectural technical debt, agile software 
development, development speed, so
ftware life-cycle, influencing 
factors, qualitative model, Grounded Theory 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Large software industries strive to make their development 
processes fast and more responsive, minimizing the time 
between the identification of a 
customer need and the delivery 
of a solution. The trend in the last decade has been the 
employment of Agile Software De
velopment (ASD) [1]. At the 
same time, the responsiveness 
in the short-term deliveries 
should not lead to less responsiveness in the long run. To 
illustrate such a phenomenon, a financial metaphor has been 
coined, which relates taking sub-optimal decisions in order to 
meet short-term goals to taking 
a financial debt, which has to 
be repaid with interests in th
e long term. Such a concept is 
referred as Technical Debt (TD), and recently it has been 
recognized as a useful basis for the development of theoretical 
and practical frameworks [2]. To
m et al. [3] have explored the 
TD metaphor and outlined a first framework in 2013. Part of 
the overall TD is to be related to architecture sub-optimal 
decisions, and it’s regarded as
 Architecture Technical Debt 
(ADT). ATD is regarded as violations in the code towards an 
intended architecture. An exam
ple of ATD is the presence of 
not allowed dependencies that cause propagation of 
refactoring, as studied in a case study by Nord et al. [4]. 
ATD has been recognized as pa
rt of TD, but the specific 
phenomenon of accumulation of ATD and its recovery to avoid 
the later payment of interest (i
n terms of effort) due to ATD 
has not been tackled yet. The study of such subject would also 
compensate the lack, in ASD 
frameworks, of activities for 
enhancing agility in the task of developing and maintaining 
software architecture in large projects [5].   
In the context of large-scale ASD, the research questions 
that we want to inform are: 
RQ1: What factors cause the accumulation of ATD? 
RQ2: What are the current trends in practice in the 
accumulation and recovery of ATD over time? 
In this paper we have employed a 1-year multiple-case 
embedded case-study involving 7 different sites in 5 large 
Scandinavian companies in order to shed light on the 
phenomenon of accumulation and recovery of ATD. We have 
analyzed the qualitative data coming from more than 30 hours 
of focus group interview using a combination of inductive and 
deductive approach proper of Grounded Theory. We have 
qualitatively developed and validated a taxonomy of the factors 
to inform RQ1 and a set of models to inform RQ2.  
The main contributions of the papers are therefore:  
•
 
A taxonomy of the causes for ATD: we provide the 
factors for the explanation of the phenomena such as 
accumulation and recovery 
of ATD. These factors 
might be studied and treated separately, and offer a 
better understanding of the overall phenomenon.  
•
 
A qualitative model of the trends in accumulation and 
recovery of ATD over time. Such model: 
o
 
Shows the strictly increasing trend of ATD 
accumulation and how it eventually reaches a crisis 
point. We connect such phenomenon to the different 
factors and their influence on such accumulation.  
o
 
Helps identifying problem 
areas and points in time 
for the development of practices that would 1) avoid 
accumulation of ATD and/or 2) ease the recovery of 
ATD. Such practices would 
be aimed at delaying the 
crisis point. 
II.
 
R
ESEARCH 
D
ESIGN
 
We planned a multiple-case embedded case study involving 
7 sites in 5 large software development companies. For 
confidentiality reasons, we will call the companies A, B, C, D 
and E. Companies A-D had extensive in-house embedded 
2014 40th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-1-4799-5795-8/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2014.6585 software development, while company E was developing 
general purpose software. The choice for including company E 
was to compare the results 
with non-embedded software 
development. We involved 3 di
fferent units within the same 
company, C, and we will refer to them as C
1
, C
2
 and C
3
. We 
used this approach in order to assess the variance within the 
same company. The companies studied were to have some 
years of experience of ASD. The companies chosen were 
situated in the same geographi
cal area (Scandinavia), but were 
active on different international markets.  
A.
 
Case Description 
Company A is involved in the 
automotive industry. Part of 
the development is carried out by suppliers, some by in-house 
teams following Scrum. The su
rrounding organization follows 
a stage-gate release model for product development. Business 
is driven by products for mass cu
stomization. The specific unit 
studied provides a software pl
atform for different products. 
Company B is a manufacturer 
of recording devices. Teams 
work in parallel in projects: some of the projects are more 
hardware oriented while others are related to the 
implementation of features developed on top of a specific 
Linux distribution. The so
ftware involves in house 
development with the integrati
on of a substantial amount of 
open source components. Despite the Agile set up of the 
organization, the iterations are qu
ite long compared to the other 
companies involved in the study. 
Company C is a manufactur
er of telecommunication 
system product lines. Their cust
omers receive a platform and 
pay to unlock new features. The organization is split in 
different units and then in cr
oss-functional teams, most of 
which with feature development roles. Most of the teams use 
their preferred variant of ASD (often Scrum). Features were 
developed on top of a reference architecture, and the main 
process consisted of a pre-study 
followed by few (ca. 3) sprint 
iterations. The embedded cases studied slightly differed: C3 
involved globally distributed t
eams (Europe) while the other 
units (C1 and C2) teams were co-located in the same city. 
Company D is a manufacturer of a product line of devices 
for the control of urban infrastructure. The organization is 
divided in teams working in pa
rallel. The organization has also 
adopted principles of software
 product line engineering, such 
as the employment of a reference architecture.  
Company E is a company developing software for 
calculating optimized solutions. The software is not deployed 
in embedded systems. The company has employed ASD with 
teams working in parallel. The 
product is structured in a 
platform entirely developed by E 
and a layer of customizable 
assets for the customers to configure. E supports also a set of 
APIs for allowing development on top of their software. 
All the companies have adopted a component based 
software architecture, where so
me components or even entire 
platforms are re-used in different products. The language that 
is mainly used is C and C++, with some parts of the system 
developed in Java and Python.
 Company A uses a Domain 
Specific Language (DSL) to generate C code, while company 
E uses a DSL for specifying rules to be converted into libraries. 
The development at C3 involves extensive XML. 
B.
 
Data collection 
The research design is outlined in Fig. 1.  
 
Fig. 1.
 
Our research design 
We planned a 2-phaseinvestigation of the ATD 
accumulation and recovery problem. We started with a 
preliminary study involving 3 of 
the abovementioned cases, in 
particular A, C1, and C2, in which we explored the needs and 
challenges of developing and maintaining architecture in an 
Agile environment in the current companies. We organized 
three workshops at the different sites involving several roles. 
The workshops were to last 4 hours and were to involve 
developers, testers, architects responsible for different levels of 
architecture (from low level patterns to high level components) 
and product managers. In total we collected 12 hours of 
interactive workshop discu
ssions involving 25 employees. The 
results from the first iteration were validated and discussed in a 
final one-day workshop involving 40 representatives from all 
the 7 cases, divided into two plen
ary discussions and a more in 
depth group discussion 
for specific topics.  
The preliminary study showed a major challenge in 
managing Architectural Technical Debt (ATD) and its 
economical implications related to
 costs and time. In particular, 
we developed the crisis point model explained in III.B.1).  
The second phase involved 7 workshops of 2 hours, one for 
each company. We involved developers, architects and in 4 
cases a product owner. The total amount of data is 14 hours of 
interactive group interviews
 involving 25 employees. The 
formal interviews were also 
complemented with the study of 
the various architecture documentations and several hours of 
individual and more informal 
meetings with the architects 
responsible for the documentation.  
The workshop followed a process to identify important 
inconsistencies that needed to be tracked because of their 
impact in decreasing developing 
time (ATD). We started with 
a brief introduction of what ATD is, using references from 
several sources included in this paper (e.g. the purpose of 
tracking ATD, [7]),  which were also provided to the 
informants in advance. We t
ook a retrospective approach, in 
order to identify real cases happened in the recent past rather 
than rely on speculations about what could happen in the 
future: 
 
 
86 •
 
we asked about major refactorings and high effort 
perceived during feature de
velopment or maintenance 
work leading to architecture inconsistencies 
•
 
we investigated the causes for the identified 
inconsistencies (ATD).  
•
 
we asked to explain the current process of identification 
of architecture inconsistency  
•
 
we asked how the ATD recovery was prioritized  
The strength of this technique relies on finding the relevant 
inconsistencies (ATD) by starting from their causes instead of 
investigating a pool of all the possible inconsistencies and then 
selecting the relevant ones. 
The second phase included a final one-day workshop were 
15 representatives attended from all the various companies, 
providing validation of the results and follow-up discussions. 
C.
 
Data analysis 
The workshops were recorded and transcribed. The analysis 
was done following an approach based on Grounded Theory 
[8] and using a tool for qualitative analysis, to keep track of the 
links between the codes and the quotations they were grounded 
to. The analysis followed the steps highlighted in Fig. 1. 
Open Coding – First we analyzed the data in search for 
emergent concepts following ope
n coding, which would bring 
novel insights on the analyzed issue. Then we applied a 
deductive approach using the taxonomies developed during the 
pre-study. The taxonomies were then updated with the newly 
found categories. For example, among the “causes” we added a 
new category called “non-complet
ed refactoring”, which was 
not identified in the pre-study. The results of such analysis led 
to the factors outlined in section III.A.  
Axial Coding – The codes and categories were compared 
through axial coding in order to highlight connections 
orthogonal to the previous devel
oped categories. Since ATD is 
strictly connected with time, we
 have used the time as axis for 
axial coding. This step showed the presence of patterns that 
were used to represent models 
as well as for causality and other 
kinds of relationships among the various inconsistencies. In our 
case, such analysis produced the model for accumulation and 
recovery of ATD explained in section III.B.  
Deductive Approach – Finally, 
the factors and the model 
were deductively checked against the overall model of crisis 
point, developed and validated during the first phase of the 
research in order to understand if detailed models could fit and 
explain the overall one. This last analysis step showed the 
results in III.B.2). 
D.
 
Factors and models validation 
As explained in Fig. 1, we 
had two step validation. The 
crisis point model (outlined in
 III.B.1) was developed during 
phase I. It was qualitatively validated during phase II, where 
all
 
the informants recognized the m
odel as representing the facts 
in their company. As secondary validation data, we have had 
several informal interviews where we have showed the model 
and it has always been recognized as valid. 
The models for accumulation and recovery of ATD were 
developed in phase II and took as input the deductive model 
about the crisis point develope
d and validated previously. The 
new models were then validated during the second validation 
workshop of phase II.  
III.
 
A
CCUMULATION AND 
R
ECOVERY OF 
A
RCHITECTURE 
T
ECHNICAL 
D
EBT 
 
We have divided the results in 
two parts: first we highlight 
the causes for ATD accumulation (factors). Then we use such 
factors to describe a model for accumulation and recovery of 
ATD over time. 
A.
 
Causes of ATD accumulation (factors) 
1)
 
Business factors 
a)
 
Uncertainty of use cases in the beginning 
The previous point a) also suggests the difficulty in 
defining a design and architecture that has to take in 
consideration a lot of unknown upcoming variability. 
Consequently, the accumulation of inconsistencies towards a 
“fuzzy” desired design/architecture is more likely to take place 
in the beginning of the developm
ent (for example, during the 
first sprint).  
b)
 
Business evolution creates ATD 
The amount of customizations and new features offered by 
the products brings new requireme
nts to be satisfied. Whenever 
a decision is taken to develop 
a new feature or to create an 
offer for a new customer, instantaneously the desired 
architecture changes and the ATD is automatically created. 
This is especially happening in the current  The number of 
configurations that the studied companies need to offer 
simultaneously seems to be 
growing steadily.  If for each 
augmentation of the product some ATD is automatically 
accumulated when the decision is taken, the same trend of 
having more configurations over time implies that the 
corresponding ATD is also automatically accumulated faster. 
c)
 
Time pressure: deadlines with penalties 
Constraints in the contracts with the customers such as 
heavy penalties for delayed deliveries make the attention to 
manage ATD less of a priority. The approaching of a deadline 
with a high penalty causes both the accumulation of 
inconsistencies due to shortcuts and the down-prioritization of 
the necessary refactoring for keeping ATD low. The urgency 
given by the deadline increases with its approaching, which 
also increases the amount of inconsistencies accumulated. 
d)
 
Priority of features over product 
The prioritization that takes place before the start of the 
feature development tends to be mainly feature oriented. Small 
refactorings necessary for the f
eature are carried out within the 
feature development by the team
, but long-term refactorings, 
which are needed to develop “architectural features” for future 
development, are not considered necessary for the release. 
Moreover, broad refactorings are not likely to be completed in 
the time a feature is developed (e.g. few weeks). Consequently, 
the part of ATD that is not directly related to the development 
of the feature at hand is more likely to be postponed 
87 e)
 
Split of budget in Project budget and Maintenance 
budget boosts the accumulation of debt. 
According to the informants
, the responsibility associated 
only with the project budget duri
ng the development creates a 
psychological effect: the teams tend to accumulate ATD and to 
push it to the responsible for the maintenance after release, 
which rely on a different budget.  
2)
 
Design and Architecture documentation: lack of 
specification/emphasis on critical
 architectural requirements 
Some of the architectural requirements are not explicitly 
mentioned in the documentation. This causes the 
misinterpretation by the developers implementing code that is 
implicitly supposed to match su
ch requirement. According to 
the informants, this is also th
reatening the refactoring activity 
and its estimation: the refactor
ing of a portion of code for 
which requirements were not written (but the code was “just 
working”, implicitly satisfying them) might cause the lack of 
such requirements satisfaction.  
As an example, three cases have mentioned temporal-
related properties of shared resources. A concrete instance of 
such a problem is a database, 
and the design constraint of 
making only synchronous calls to it from different modules. If 
such requirement is not specified, it may happen that the 
developers would ignore such a constraint. In one example 
made by the informants, the constraint was violated in order to 
meet a performance requirement 
important for the customer. 
This is also connected with the previous point 1.d. 
3)
 
Reuse of Legacy / third party / open source 
Software that was not included when the initial desired 
architecture was developed cont
ains ATD that needs to be 
fixed and/or dealt with. Examples included open source 
systems, third party software
 and software previously 
developed and reused. In the former two cases, the 
inconsistencies between the in-house developed architecture 
and the external one(s) might pop up after the evolution of the 
external software.  
4)
 
Parallel development 
Development teams working in parallel automatically 
accumulate some differences in their design and architecture. 
The Agile related empowerment of the teams in terms of 
design seems to amplify this phe
nomenon. An example of such 
phenomenon mentioned as causing efforts by the informants 
are the naming policy. A name policy is not always explicitly 
and formally expressed, which a
llows the teams to diverge or 
interpret the constraint. Anot
her example is the presence of 
different patterns for the same solution, e.g. for the 
communication between two diffe
rent components. When a 
team needs to work on something developed by another team, 
this non-uniformity causes extra time. 
5)
 
Effects Uncertainty  
ATD is not necessary something limited to a well-defined 
area of the software. Changing part of the software in order to 
improve some design or architect
ure issues might cause ripple 
effects on other parts of the software depending on the changed 
code. Isolating ATD items to be refactored is difficult, and 
especially calculating all the possible effects is a challenge. 
Part of the problem is the lack of awareness about the 
dependencies that connect some ATD to other parts of the 
software. Consequently, there exist some ATD that remains 
unknown
. 
6)
 
Non-completed Refactoring  
When refactoring is decided,
 it’s aimed at eliminating 
ATD. However, if the refactoring goal is not completed, this 
not only will leave part of the ATD, but it will actually create 
new ATD. The concept might be counter-intuitive, so we will 
explain with an example. A 
possible refactoring objective 
might be to have 
a 
new API for a component. However, what 
might happen is that the new API 
is added but the previous one 
cannot be removed, for example because of unforeseen 
backw
ard compatibility with another version of the product. 
This factor is related to other two: time pressure might be the 
actual cause for this phenomenon, when the planned 
refactoring needs to be rushed due to deadlines with penalties 
(see 1.c) and the effects uncertainty (see 5), which causes a 
planned refactoring to take mo
re time than estimated because 
of effects that have been overlooked when the refactoring was 
prioritized.  
7)
 
Technology evolution 
The technology employed for th
e software system might 
become obsolete over time, both for pure software (e.g. new 
versions of the programming language) and for hardware that 
needs to be replaced together w
ith the specific software that 
needs to run on it. The (re-)use of legacy components, third 
party software and open sour
ce systems might require the 
employment of a new or old t
echnology that is not optimal 
with the rest of the system. 
8)
 
Human factor 
Software engineering is also an individual activity and the 
causes for ATD accumulation can also be related to sub-
optimal decision due to inexpe
rience, careless, ignorance, 
error-prone situations and so 
on. A recurrent statement from 
the informant is that having documentation is not enough to 
avoid inconsistencies.  
B.
 
ATD accumulation and recovery models 
Using the previously listed factors for ATD accumulation 
and the data on refactoring prioritization, we modeled the 
evolution of ATD over time with 
respect to the overall speed of 
adding features and to one specifi
c release. The values in the 
pictures are only aimed at visu
alizing the trends perceived by 
the informants, and they don’t represent any exact values. We 
have chosen the “function” format since it would explain the 
results in a more visual way. 
1)
 
Crisis-based ATD management 
The current management of ATD is driven by a crisis. The 
informants explain that the ATD usually grows (black 
continuous line in the picture) until the effect makes adding 
new business value so slow (dashed line in the picture) that it 
becomes necessary to conduct a big refactoring or even 
rebuilding a platform from scratc
h. The usual approach is to 
wait for such an event with 
limited monitoring and limited 
88 reduction ATD growth during deve
lopment. In fact, the long-
term improvement is considered risky invested time. 
 
Fig. 2.
 
ATD accumulation until the reach of a crisis point when a big 
refactoring is needed 
2)
 
ATD accumulation and recovery trends during feature 
development 
In Fig. 3 we can see the various phases of ATD 
accumulation over time, on the left part of the graph, and the 
hyopthetical recovery (“complete refactory”) of ATD on the 
right, divided by different kinds of identified ATD.  
 
Fig. 3.
 
Factors of constantly accumulated ATD, phases and kinds of 
refactorings 
a)
 
Constant ATD accumulation 
From the analysis of the factors, we understood that part of 
the ATD is constantly accumulated over a release (grey area in 
Fig. 3). Such part is composed by several components 
described previously in section III.A: business evolution, 
parallel development and project budget are the one that are 
most connected with the compan
ies’ direct decisions, whilst 
other factors are external to the company (for example, the 
change of an Open Source module developed by third party or 
the tecnhology evolution). Some of
 them might be considered 
more as a “multiplier” for the other kinds of ATD, but for 
simplicity we treat is as a constant in the graph. 
b)
 
Phases of ATD accumulation 
According to the informants, 
when the feature development 
starts there is a certain degree of uncertainty that tends to 
decrease over time. Since ATD is created when there is 
uncertainty (see section III.A.1)a) and III.A.5)), the curve on 
the graph representing ATD accumulation tends to raise in the 
beginning until the team has a more clear understanding of the 
requirements, desired design and desired architecture 
altogether. At this point, the hypothesis is that ATD 
accumulation slows down. The AT
D starts being accumulated 
abundantly when the urgency fo
r meeting the deadline shows 
up in the team. Urgency seems to
 grow constantly with the 
deadline approaching, causing the level of ATD to grow 
accordingly. We don’t know exactly from the data when 
uncertainty stops and urgency starts and if the two phases 
overlap. Some informants me
ntion a time window when the 
team recovers part of the ATD needed to deliver the feature, 
but it’s unlikely that all the accumulated ATD is recovered 
during this phase (especially the constant one). However, this 
seems to be a good opportunity in the process when the team 
might decide to take care of th
e ATD before the release. The 
Project Budget factor might ha
ve a negative impact on such 
practice though. 
c)
 
Refactoring and its prioritization 
Once the feature is released, there is ATD left in the 
system. The ideal case is that the ATD is completely removed 
by the system. However, this is not done or even possible 
according to our data, for two main reasons: part of the ATD is 
currently not known (see “effects uncertainty” in section 
III.A.5)) and the refactoring is usually only partially 
prioritized.  
Prioritization of the refactor
ing depends usually on the kind 
of refactoring: the refactoring 
needed for easing (or especially 
allowing) the short-term release of features is usually 
prioritized and performed by th
e team. This is possible both 
because of the immediate need of it and because such ATD is 
possible to be recovered in quick time and therefore can just be 
included in the successive feature development. These 
characteristics are represented in the graph by the steep slope in 
the curve in correspondence to “s
hort term effects”. As for the 
“long term effects” refactoring, usually it’s represented by 
some extensibility or maintainability mechanism at a more 
higher level of abstraction th
at has not been implemented 
during the development of the feature. To introduce such 
mechanism the needed time is us
ually substantial compared to 
the feature development time: for 
example, if the refactoring is 
estimated to be 2 months and a new feature is supposed to take 
the same amount of time to be developed, it doesn’t make 
sense to include it into the feature as a story. Also, such task 
would probably influence other parts of the software, which 
might cause interruptions on other teams’ work. For such 
reasons, such ATD is usually down-prioritized in favor to 
feature release (as explained in section III.A.1)d)). 
In Fig. 4 is represented the case in which short term and long 
term ATD is recovered. We can see how the constant ATD and 
the delay effect from the unknown ATD are continuously 
accumulated even in the case all the possible ATD is 
recovered.  
In Fig. 5 we show the case in which there is no refactoring 
performed before the feature is started. Even though the feature 
might be released earlier with respect to the previous case, 
when all possible refactoring was performed, the delay caused 
 
 
89 by the ATD grows because of the addition of the unknown and 
the short-term ATD.  
 
Fig. 4.
 
Some unknown ATD is always accumulated and impacts next 
development: total recovery is ideal, the best option is partial recovery. 
 
Fig. 5.
 
No recovery is affected by short term and unknown ATD, even if the 
feature might be released earlier than with partial recovery. 
In Fig. 6 we have represented the increasing in the delay 
caused by the ATD with “long term 
effect” with respect to the 
time for the partial recovery function. 
We have projected the same trend for three features and the 
result is shown in Fig. 7. At a certain point in time, the number 
of released features for the two functions “No recovery” and 
“Partial recovery” will be the same but in case of “No 
recovery” there is more ATD accumulated. This means that 
such ATD either needs to be 
partially eliminated (which 
requires time) in order to reach the same status of “Partial 
recovery”, or the delays will continue to grow. In the latter case 
“Partial Recovery” would become constantly more convenient. 
Notice that the number of features released before the crisis 
point might vary according to th
e magnitude of the variables 
involved. However, the trend would remain the same. 
 
Fig. 6.
 
After a number of features released the long term ATD starts to have 
an impact. 
 
Fig. 7.
 
Given the trend of ATD accumulation, after some feature released, 
the time elapsed will be the same but th
e ATD present in the system will be 
more. 
IV.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
The results are meant to show the current factors and trends 
shaping the phenomena of ATD accumulation and recovery. 
The results are not meant to substitute precise models derived 
by quantitative data, but rather to
 facilitate their creation. For 
example, the magnitude and the proportions represented in the 
graphs are qualitatively formulated and may vary from context 
to context. They are not supposed to be used for precise 
estimation as they are in this paper, but might be used to drive 
the collection of key data in order to build a more exact model. 
In the field of software metric
s, the creation of measurement 
systems and the collection of mean
ingful data need to follow a 
previously developed quality model.  
The provided qualitative representation shows factors and 
trends that reveal, in our opinion,
 important implications in the 
light of the recently emerging 
practice of ATD management. 
One very important variable to be taken into consideration is 
time, and we have done a first step in order to explain the 
relationship between such impacting variable and the 
phenomena of ATD accumulation and recovery. In the 
followings we therefore discuss a number of implications 
(expressed in the form of propositions) that can be inferred by 
our results. They represent hypotheses qualitatively tested 
through a substantial number of 
experts from similar domains, 
 
 
 
90 but that need to be quantitativ
e complemented and assessed in 
the future. 
a)
 
Implications (propositions) for research and practice 
It’s not realistic to think 
that the accumulation of ATD 
might be completely recovered. The best option is to reduce it. 
As we can see from Fig. 3 there is a constant accumulation 
of ATD for several reasons, some of which are also external to 
the company. In conjunction with this, part of the ATD 
remains unknown. These two factors together lead to the 
consequence that each iteration brings a quantity of ATD in the 
system, and that part of it will remain. Even if the magnitude of 
such accumulation is not yet clear, the function over time is 
obviously monotone. This fact is 
also confirmed by the crisis 
model (Fig. 2): a point of non-s
ustainable development, where 
the ATD accumulated is high, is constantly reached by the 
companies, which confirms the monotonicity of the trend. 
 
Fig. 8.
 
Given the trend of inevitable accumulation of ATD, a crisis point will 
eventually be reached. The gain for the company is to reduce the number of 
crisis and therefore the number of costly refactorings. 
The goal of partially recoveri
ng ATD is that the company 
can gain time before the crisis point.  
Fig. 8 shows how the goal of
 managing ATD is not to 
avoid crisis but rather to gain time. The objective is still 
relevant, since platform crea
tion and/or huge architectural 
refactorings are long and costly activities. However, the main 
goal for a software company cannot be to avoid such activity 
completely and aiming at having an “eternal” system, but 
rather to reduce the number of tim
es such activity is repeated 
before the retirement of the 
product. This means that the 
company needs to proactively plan
 the activity as part of the 
product development. 
Decreasing the amount of unknown ATD is necessary to 
make effective the best option in
 terms of ATD reduction (what 
we have called “Partial recovery”) 
As we can see in Fig. 4 the quantity of unknown ATD 
influences the ability to recover and therefore to keep the ATD 
as low as possible. This would 
delay the eventual crisis point. 
It’s therefore of utmost importance for the company to 
establish a practice for iterative ATD discovery and to maintain 
ATD as a visible quality through some kind of artifact (for 
example (for example, as expl
ained by Guo and Seaman, [9]). 
By reducing (creating) disin
centives (incentives) we can 
reduce (increase) the constant ATD accumulation.  
Some of the factors have a disincentive (or incentive) effect 
on ATD accumulation, which we interpret as a tendency or 
probability to lead to have more ATD. In the view of ATD 
accumulation as a function, such tendency would represent a 
constant that increases the steepness of the function. Such 
steepness would make the approach of the crisis point faster (or 
slower). The known disincentives are mainly the ones 
described in section III.A.1) and related to business factors, 
such as having too much focus on features with respect to the 
product, having a split budget for project and maintenance and 
having high penalties on deadlines. To our current knowledge, 
such disincentives don’t influe
nce some specific ATD issues. 
However, future studies coul
d increase the understanding on 
such matter. Incentives for avoiding accumulation are for 
example having described temporal properties in the 
documentation. Incentives to recover ATD are the 
prioritization of refactorings 
(especially missing currently are 
the long-term ones) and the employment of a window for 
creating opportunities for refactoring approximately in the 
middle of the feature development 
Fig. 3, when the refactoring 
seems to have more sense, and after release, as recommended 
also by Agile practices. 
Agile software development brings advantages and 
disadvantages to ATD accumulation 
The employment of Agile Soft
ware Development seems to 
bring both advantages and disa
dvantages to the phenomenon of 
ATD accumulation. Such influences are related to the 
incentives and disincentives previously mentioned. For 
example, the Agile process and 
principles favor the focus on 
the features over the product and boosts the accumulation of 
ATD, relying on a mandatory subse
quent refactoring that is not 
always recognized from the mana
gement point of view. On the 
other hand, Agile provides an iterative process for gradually 
taking care of uncertainty and would allow to iteratively keep 
track of the ATD. Therefore, a 
set of lightweight practices for 
ATD management is needed and would benefit from the Agile 
iterative process if well embedded. We are currently studying 
such practice development by em
ploying action research at the 
companies involved in the results. 
b)
 
Future work 
Some open issues that require further investigation are: 
•
 
It remains unclear when is b
est to conduct a refactoring. 
The unknown effects of combining the refactoring with 
uncertainty and urgency suggest further investigation. 
•
 
We have studied principally the delays that the ATD 
have on long term development. What needs to be more 
investigated are the short-term
 benefits that are gained 
by the accumulated ATD.  
c)
 
Lim
itations 
The graphs in this paper are not meant to represent precise 
data coming from a measurem
ent system. Therefore the 
steepness of the curves and the pr
ojections might vary in real 
context. The magnitude for the contribution of each factor is 
also to be further assessed. However, we offer the recognition 
 
91 of factors that are not necessar
ily possible to be measured and 
therefore discovered by quantitative analysis, such as urgency 
and uncertainty. The results are qualitatively developed 
through a thorough research proc
ess and using a wide amount 
of qualitative data coming from more than 30 informants from 
7 sites and with different roles, which allowed as to compare 
and test statements among 
themselves. Furthermore, 
architecture documentation has been evaluated as well as 
secondary data. This has allowed us to apply source 
triangulation [10]. 
d)
 
Related Work 
Lehman et al. [11] propose a 
formal approach for process 
modeling. The paper emphasizes
 the usefulness of formal 
models (e.g. functions) for effort prediction. We have 
developed the crisis model (Fig. 2), which can be considered 
the abstract model, and we have done a first calibration by 
finding the factors that are needed to describe the formal 
function (as parameters of the function). Our approach can be 
considered as a first necessary 
step towards the formalization 
and the precise prediction of the process, which needs more 
quantitative data. An empirical model of debt and interest is 
described by Nugroho et al. [12]
. However, such method only 
focuses on the interest paid during maintenance and it’s not 
focused on finding the causes for the accumulation of debt. The 
business factors that we have 
found are missing in the study of 
ATD as also reported from a 
single case study [13]. Sindhgatta 
et al. [14] have studied the software evolution in an Agile 
project, where some of the Lehman laws were tested through 
project sprints. Some of the re
sults suggest a confirmation of 
the trends that we have identified. For example, the laws of 
(continuous) change and growth show the monotonicity of 
system growth and the necessity 
for the system to adapt to the 
business environment, which are rec
ognized also in our factors. 
However, the results are not directly connected with ATD.  
In summary, the only aggregation of information provided 
by different sources is the pape
r by Tom et al.[3], where ATD 
was just discovered as part of the TD while the other studies 
are related to single case studies. Most of the studies don’t 
either consider generic TD and not ATD or don’t focus on 
finding the causes for ATD accumulation.  
V.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS
 
Decisions on short term and long term prioritization of 
architecture improvements need to be balanced and need to 
rely on the knowledge of the underlying phenomenon of ATD. 
The reaching of a crisis point when the ATD is hindering the 
responsiveness in providing new cu
stomer value, as required in 
ASD, has shown to be a releva
nt problem that many companies 
struggle with. Such crisis point 
seems to be inevitable given the 
continuous accumulation of ATD and the impossibility to 
recover all of it. However, the act of slowing down the ATD 
accumulation would reduce, in 
the long term, the number of 
crisis points when a huge costly
 refactoring or the replacement 
of the whole system need to be conducted. We have shown 
such accumulation and recovery trends over time in order to 
inform RQ1. We have shown what are the causes of the 
accumulation of ATD, and we outline, through the recognition 
of different influencing factors, clear objectives that can be 
treated or further studied in 
order to avoid or mitigate the 
accumulation of ATD, which informs RQ2. An important goal 
in research and industry is to improve the practices to uncover 
ATD present in the system. It’s also important to identify the 
best points in time for perfor
ming refactoring and therefore 
repaying the debt that is going to generate more interest effort 
later on. Such practices need to complement the current Agile 
process in place, in order to keep responsiveness stable through 
the whole software development process. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
We thank the companies that are partners of the Software 
Center and participating in the 
project run by the research team 
composed by the authors of this 
article. We are also extremely 
grateful for the work done by Lars Pareto, member of the team 
and participating in the project until 2013. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1] T. Dingsøyr, S. Nerur, V. Balijepally, and N. B. Moe, “A decade of agile 
methodologies: Towards explaining agile software development,” 
J. Syst. 
Softw.
, vol. 85, no. 6, pp. 1213–1221, Jun. 2012. 
[2] P. Kruchten, R. L. Nord, and I. Ozkaya, “Technical Debt: From Metaphor 
to Theory and Practice,” 
IEEE Softw.
, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 18–21, 2012. 
[3] E. Tom, A. Aurum, and R. Vidgen,
 “An exploration of technical debt,” 
J. 
Syst. Softw.
, vol. 86, no. 6, pp. 1498–1516, Jun. 2013. 
[4] R. L. Nord, I. Ozkaya, P. Kruchten,
 and M. Gonzalez-Rojas, “In Search of 
a Metric for Managing Architectural Technical Debt,” in 
2012 Joint 
Working IEEE/IFIP WICSA and ECSA
, 2012, pp. 91–100. 
[5] M. Daneva, E. van der Veen, C. Am
rit, S. Ghaisas, K. Sikkel, R. Kumar, 
N. Ajmeri, U. Ramteerthkar, and 
R. Wieringa, “Agile requirements 
prioritization in large-scale outsourced
 system projects: An empirical 
study,” 
J. Syst. Softw.
, vol. 86, no. 5, pp. 1333–1353, May 2013. 
[6] U. Eklund and J. Bosch, “Applying Agile Development in Mass-Produced 
Embedded Systems,” in 
Agile Processes in Software Engineering and 
Extreme Programming
, Springer, 2012, pp. 31–46. 
[7] C. Seaman, Y. Guo, N. Zazworka, F.
 Shull, C. Izurieta, Y. Cai, and A. 
Vetro, “Using technical debt data 
in decision making: Potential decision 
approaches,” in 
2012 Third International Workshop on Managing 
Technical Debt (MTD)
, 2012, pp. 45–48. 
[8] A. Strauss and J. M. Corbin, 
Grounded Theory in Practice
. SAGE, 1997. 
[9] Y. Guo and C. Seaman, “A Portfolio Approach to Technical Debt 
Management,” in 
Proceedings of the 2Nd Workshop on Managing 
Technical Debt
, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 31–34. 
[10] P. Runeson and M. Höst, “Guidelines for conducting and reporting case 
study research in software engineering,” 
Empir. Softw. Eng.
, vol. 14, no. 
2, pp. 131–164, Dec. 2008. 
[11] M. M. Lehman, G. Kahen, and J. F. Ramil, “Behavioural Modelling of 
Long-lived Evolution Processes: Some Issues and an Example,” 
J. Softw. 
Maint.
, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 335–351, Sep. 2002. 
[12] A. Nugroho, J. Visser, and T. Kuip
ers, “An empirical model of technical 
debt and interest,” in 
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Managing 
Technical Debt
, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 1–8. 
[13] Y. Guo, C. Seaman, R. Gomes, A. 
Cavalcanti, G. Tonin, F. Q. Da Silva, 
A. L. M. Santos, and C. Sieb
ra, “Tracking technical debt—An 
exploratory case study,” in 
Software Maintenance (ICSM), 2011 27th 
IEEE International Conference on
, 2011, pp. 528–531. 
[14] R. Sindhgatta, N. C. Narendra, and B. Sengupta, “Software Evolution in 
Agile Development: A Case Study,” in 
Proceedings of the ACM 
International Conference Companion 
on Object Oriented Programming 
Systems Languages and Applications Companion
, New York, NY, USA, 
2010, pp. 105–114. 
 
 
 
92