 Developers motivation in agile teams  
 
Claudia de O. Melo 
Department of Computer Science 
University of São Paulo 
São Paulo, Brazil 
claudia@ime.usp.br 
 
Célio Santana 
Informatics Center 
Federal University of Pernambuco 
Recife, Brazil 
casj@cin.ufpe.br
 
Fabio Kon 
Department of Computer Science 
University of São Paulo 
São Paulo, Brazil 
fabio.kon@ime.usp.br 
 
 
 
 
Abstract
— A motivated individual is one of the cornerstones of 
agile software development. Although motivation has been 
recognized and studied in the so
ftware development field, little 
research has examined motivation in agile teams. Our study 
aims to provide a better understanding of what motivates 
software developers in agile environments. We conducted a 
systematic review of motivators in the agile context, classifying 
the results using the MOCC model of software engineers’ 
motivation. Additionally, we performed three case studies in 
agile companies to both confirm our findings and gather new 
motivators. Our results suggest that motivation in the agile 
context is slightly different from the overall view of motivation 
in software development in general. 
Keywords: Motivation, Agile
 software development, human 
factors, Systematic literatu
re review, Multiple-case study 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
Motivation is one of the most frequently cited causes of 
software development project failure [9]. In Software 
Engineering, motivation is reported to have the single largest 
impact on practitioner productivity and software quality 
management, and continues to be ‘undermined’ and 
problematic to manage [6]. The outcomes of motivated 
software developers are high quality work performance, 
retention,  improvements in project delivery time, adherence 
to budget, and improved project success [23]. 
A motivated individual is one of the cornerstones of agile 
software development [8], explicitly mentioned as one of the 
twelve principles in the agile ma
nifesto. This principle states: 
“Build projects around motivated 
individuals. Give them the 
environment and support they need
, and trust them to get the 
job done” [1]. Therefore, mana
ging and fostering motivation 
is critical for maintaining such agile methodology premise. 
Although motivation has been recognized and studied in 
the software development field, little research has examined 
motivation in agile team members. Since agile development 
has become mainstream in software development [26], an 
understanding of motivators could help manage agile teams 
more effectively. 
Our study aims to provide a better understanding of what 
motivates developers in agile teams to perform better. To 
answer this question, we divide
d our research into two parts: 
(1) we systemically analyzed 
studies on software developer’s 
motivation in the agile methods context, providing a 
comprehensive literature review and (2) we conducted an 
multiple-case study in three agile companies,  both exploring 
and confirming motivators.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the 
theoretical model we used to describe and analyze data 
throughout or research. Section III describes the overall 
research design. Section IV presents the results of the 
systematic literature review on motivation in agile teams and 
the results from case studies, and Section V discusses the 
main findings and implications
. The last section concludes 
the paper and describes future work. 
 
II.
 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK
 
Motivation refers to the initiation, direction, intensity, and 
persistence of behavior [23]. It is a soft factor, hard to 
quantify and it “often takes a back seat to other factors that 
might be less important but are easier to measure” [15].  
Over the last 30 years, there have been several research 
efforts to understand and model motivation in software 
engineering [23]. However, much of this work has been 
isolated from classical motivati
on theory, leading to different 
nomenclatures and hampering 
the synthesis of existing 
findings. 
To this end, 
Sharp
 et al. [23] present the MOCC model 
(Motivators, Outcomes, Characteristics and Context) to 
organize the knowledge about motivation in Software 
Engineering. The model was 
constructed from previous 
empirical evidence generated 
in Beecham’s systematic 
review on motivators in soft
ware engineering. Figure 1 
presents the MOCC model
. 
Motivators can be intrinsic (derived from the pleasure of 
doing the work itself) or extrinsic (related to factors external 
to the job, such as working conditions) [13], as shown in 
Figure 1. The motivators inhere
nt to software engineering 
are all intrinsic factors as they
 solely relate to software 
engineering [23]. Software 
engineer’s characteristics 
orientate the individual toward
s certain motivation factors, 
while motivators themselves influence the strength of 
individual characteristics. Ch
aracteristics of software 
engineers are influenced by 
contextual factors, most 
specifically the individual’s pe
rsonality and the environment 
in which they are practicing. Finally, there are many possible 
external signs or outcomes of 
motivated software engineers, 
such as productivity, adherence to budgets, low absenteeism 
and improved project success. 
 
2012 38th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-4790-9/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2012.45376 Figure 1. 
 
Motivators, Outcomes, Characteristics and Context (M
OCC) of motivation in Software Engineering [23]
III.
 
R
ESEARCH 
M
ETHOD
. 
We aim to answer the research question (RQ): 
“What 
(de)motivates Software Enginee
rs in agile environments to 
be more (less) productive?”
.  To answer our RQ, we divided
our study into two phases
1
.  
Phase I
 aimed to identify motivators and demotivators in
agile teams from the literature. We had to make a choice 
between perform a new systematic
 review or use results from 
available systematics reviews carried out by other 
researchers. We decided to 
reuse information from two
systematic literature reviews on general software engineering 
motivators [6,10]. The last one is already an extension of the 
first, conducted by Beecham. T
ogether, they answer the 
following research question: “What (de)motivates Software 
Engineers to be more (less) productive?”, based on papers 
from 1980 to August 2010. We 
followed the same protocol, 
searching for studies from August, 2010 to August, 2011. 
Since we were interested only in agile teams (de)motivators,
we thus added one more exclusion criterion removing all 
studies that were not conducted in agile environments.  
Considering the results of those two systematic reviews, 
our data collection was performed in four steps: 
•
 
Filtering the results from Beecham [6] and França et al. 
[10] considering our new exclusion criterion
2
; 
•
 
Extension of the Beecham’s Protocol [4,6] to add our 
new exclusion criterion, covering the period from August 
2010 to August 2011; 
•
 
Performing backward snowball from the selected papers, 
searching for additional references on agile motivators. 
                                                             
1
The detailed protocol is available at 
www.ime.usp.br/~claudia/motivation 
2
 One of us (Santana, C.) also worked on the first extension 
of Beecham’s system
atic review [10]. 
The amount of papers found was small enough to allow 
this snowballing process. 
•
 
Extraction of motivators and demotivators from the final 
list of papers.  
After the data collection, we 
classified each motivator or 
demotivator according to the intrinsic or extrinsic categories 
provided by the MOCC model (Figure 1). This process 
ensured the use of a common language to describe the 
motivators, since there are many terms and synonyms to 
describe them.  
Phase II
 aimed to gather data regarding general 
motivators of agile team me
mbers in industry and also 
specific motivators related to the use of agile methods. We 
thus conducted a multiple-case study [28] in the Brazilian IT 
industry. This phase of our study is part of a broader study 
on performance factors in agile teams Throughout the 
research, we monitored key motivators and de-motivators in 
agile teams. 
Our goals in this phase were three-fold: (1) to provide 
more empirical evidence on mo
tivators in agile teams from 
industry; (2) to validate the MOCC model usefulness to 
analyze empirical data from cas
e studies; and (3) to provide 
comparable results of motiv
ators between the literature 
review we have provided in Phase I and the multiple-case 
study results. 
The criteria for case selection included the following: (1) 
companies using agile methods (XP [3] or Scrum [24]) for at 
least two years; (2) companies in different business 
segments, geographical location, 
size, structure, and culture; 
(3) agile projects with at least 
four co-located developers and 
in progress for at least six months.   
Data collection was carried out in three Brazilian 
companies, from September 2010 to February 2011. The unit 
of analysis is a set of three development projects, one in each 
company. We interviewed, mostly via face-to-face meetings, 
18 team members within the 3 companies, including 
377 developers, project managers, and product owners, also 
considering different experience profiles. The researcher 
informed all participants of the main research goal, but did 
not give further details, which could have biased their 
opinions on the research subject. We encouraged 
interviewees to talk about gene
ral motivators in  the current 
project and company, as well as specific motivators in the 
agile environment. 
We used thematic analysis to analyze the data, a 
technique for identifying, anal
yzing, and reporting patterns 
(or themes) found in qualitative data [7]. To reduce the data, 
we dissected the text into ma
nageable and meaningful text 
segments using a coding framework. This is a common 
procedure in qualitative research. After all the text was 
coded,  we went through the text segments in each code (or 
group of related codes) and extracted the salient, common, or 
significant themes in the coded text segments. We next went 
through the selected themes a
nd refined them further into 
themes that are (i) specific enough to be discrete 
(nonrepetitive) and (ii) broad enough to encapsulate a set of 
ideas contained in numerous text segments [7].
  
Thematic analysis has limited interpretative power 
beyond mere description if it is not used within an existing 
conceptual framework [7].
 
We thus adopted the MOCC 
model [23], presented in Secti
on II, to classify each theme 
we found. We use both 
Motivators of software engineers
 and 
Motivational aspects of software engineering 
to interpret our 
themes. 
We also filtered results by frequency, reporting just 
motivators with at least two related mentions. 
Finally, we 
assigned <NEW> when the motivator was new in 
comparison to the MOCC model. 
A.
 
 Companies and Projects Profiles 
Company A is a large financial corporation with over 
500 IT employees, which had previously used plan-driven 
development processes. The company managers decided to 
adopt agile methods to increase team productivity, and they 
have been using them for two years. The organizational 
structure and coordination are pr
imarily vertical [11], where 
project managers usually impl
ement coordination processes. 
Project 1 is a re-development of
 an existing system for the 
financial market involving sever
al institutions. The project 
started in March 2010 and is estimated to last for 
approximately two years. The 
team adopted several XP [3] 
and Scrum [24] practices and used one-week iterations. 
Company B has been delivering e-commerce and 
infrastructure services for over ten years and has used only 
agile methods to develop software. It employs 
approximately 120 developers. 
The organizational structure 
and coordination are primarily horizontal [11], where 
coordination processes are usua
lly provided by an individual 
team member who communicat
es directly with other 
members or users on a one-to-one
 basis. Project 2 is a new 
development of an e-commerce service in a market with 
other competitors. The project also started in March 2010 
but does not have a specific dead
line, as they are developing 
software as a service, with continuous improvement and 
new functionalities. The project adopts several XP, Scrum, 
and Lean principles and practices. 
Company C is an important player in Internet content 
and access provision in Brazil. The organizational structure 
and coordination are primarily
 vertical [11], but the 
hierarchy is smaller than Company 1. The IT department 
employs approximately 200 developers and had also 
previously used plan-driven 
development processes. They 
have applied agile methods since 2008. Project 3 is the 
maintenance of a recommendation system for products from 
several virtual stores. The project adopts mainly Scrum 
practices and some XP and L
ean principles and practices. 
Table I summarizes the companies and projects profiles, 
describing part of their context. 
 
TABLE
 
I.
 COMPANIES AND PROJECT PROFILES
 
 Company A Company B Company C 
IT Size 
400 120 200 
Project focus 
Re-
development 
project: 
Financial 
system 
Product 
development: 
E-commerce 
service 
Product 
development: 
Recommendation 
system 
Method 
Scrum + XP 
Lean + Scrum 
+ XP 
Scrum 
Experience 
with agile 
methods 
2 years 10 years 2.5 years 
# Interviews 
3 full-time 
developers, 
1 part-time 
developer, 2 
product 
owners, 1 
scrum master, 1 
project 
manager 
Total = 8
 
1 project 
manager/ 
coach, 1 
product owner, 
3 developers 
Total = 5
 
3 full-time 
developers, 1 
QA, 1 
webmaster, 1 
scrum 
master 
Total = 5
 
IV.
 
R
ESULTS
 
We describe below results fr
om the systematic review 
and the multiple-case studies, focusing on answering our RQ 
posed in Section III. 
A.
 
Results of the Systematic Review 
At the end of the first step (filtering), we selected 7 studies 
[5, 8, 15, 17, 18, 20, 25]. After the snowballing phase, 5 
more studies were included [2, 14, 19, 21, 27]. Thus, we 
found and analyzed twelve papers. Table II presents the 
overall result after the four steps of our systematic review. 
Due to space limitations, we present here a summary of the 
results obtained from our review.  
The highlight finding is the 
fact that working with 
agile development motivates the developers themselves. 
Table II shows that 
Software
 
process
/
lifecycle
 
is
 
cited as 
motivator by seven authors. 
Conversely, one study reported 
evidence on the lack of confidence in agile methods [8] as a 
demotivator. In fact, some sel
ected studies [15, 18, 20, 25] 
just provide this (de)motivator as a result. Unfortunately, 
they did not provide an in-dep
th exploration, which would 
allow the extracting of underlyi
ng reasons on why software 
engineers found the agile lifecycle a (de)motivator. 
Teamwork
 
is cited as motivator by 4 papers, while one 
378  
TABLE
 
II.
 
M
OTIVATORS OF AGILE INDIVIDUALS FOUND IN THE LITERATURE 
 
General motivators 
Motivators in agile 
development 
Demotivators in 
agile development. 
Autonomy 
[14]  
Changing 
 [5] 
Development Needs Addressed (e.g. training 
opportunities to widen skills; opportunity to 
specialize)
 
[5], [17] 
 
Feedback 
[27]  
Good Management (senior management s
upport, team-building, good communication) 
[5], [14], [19]  
Work/life balance (flexibility in work times
, caring manager/employer, work location) 
 [17] 
Identify with Task (clear goals, personal inter
est, know purpose of task, how it fits in with 
whole, job satisfaction; producing 
identifiable piece of quality work) 
[2], [21] [17] 
Software process/lifecycle (software developm
ent, project initiation and feasibility studies, 
and maintenance) 
[5], [14], [15], [18], 
[20], [25], [27] 
[8] 
Problem Solving  
[14]  
Recognition of work done (for a high quality, good job done based on objective criteria) 
[2] [17] 
Rewards and incentives (e.g. scope for increased pay and benefits linked to performance) 
 [5] 
Sense of belonging/supportive relationships 
 [5] 
Teamwork 
[5], [14], [17], [27] [14] 
Variety of Work 
[17]  
 
author finds problems when th
e couple in pair programming 
has conflicting personalities. 
Good
 
Management
 
is cited 3 
times as motivator due to the open communication and 
workload balance in agile projects. 
Agile practices were not explicitly cited as a 
(de)motivator factor. Instead, they were related to many 
motivators, such as pair 
programming suppor
ting learning 
(
Development Needs Addressed)
 and team momentum 
(
Teamwork
). Other practiceswere cited as support for 
motivators such as code shari
ng, sustainable pace and self-
management.  
Our results are different from those published by 
Beecham et al. [6] and França et al. [10] in terms of number 
of citations. While 
Identify with task
 and 
Good Self Image
 
were the most cited motivators in [6] and [10] respectively, 
Software process/lifecycle 
was the most cited motivator 
factor in our study. Other aspect is about the quality 
assessment [4]. Using the same quality criteria proposed by 
Beecham [4],
 
seven papers present low quality, while three 
present excellent quality and reliability on the research. 
B.
 
General Motivators in Agile Teams 
 During the data analysis, we identified 33 general 
motivators in the three agile co
mpanies. We organized them 
into patterns and then classified using the MOCC model 
[23], seeking to standardize the 
description of each motivator  
using a common language. Finally, 11 motivators emerged 
from data as general motivators in agile teams, as shown in 
Table III. We ranked the motivators by their relative 
frequency in the results. The most frequent general motivator 
we found is 
technically challenging work
 (M1), in which 
work is not mundane and is technically challenging [12]. 
Despite being the most frequent motivator, it is definitively 
stronger in Company A. It is hard to precisely define the 
reasons for this specific result. However, considering the 
company context, there are some clues. First, the project in 
Company A involves many other financial institutions and it 
is the first agile project adopting the technology of 
automated acceptance tests instead of conventional 
document-based requirements speci
fication. The project is a 
priority for the company and the 
system has to interact with 
many legacy systems. This 
challenge probably provided 
special motivation for team me
mbers. Another consideration 
is that many team members we interviewed in Company A 
are new in the Company, or at least new in the business unit, 
which may provide more techni
cal challenges. This also 
might explain 
why 
Problem solving
 (M11) appeared only in 
Company A.  
Team working
 (M2), 
Identify with the task
 (M3), 
Employee participation/invol
vement/working with others
 
(M4), and 
Development needs addressed
 (M6) are 
motivators mentioned at
 least thrice. Except 
team working
 
(M2) and 
Development practices
 (M10), all of them are 
motivators not inherent to Soft
ware Engineering. They are 
intrinsic motivators related more
 generally to the work. Just 
one of them, 
Good work/life balance
 (M9), is an extrinsic 
motivator. Therefore, it seems that intrinsic motivators not  
necessarily related to Software Engineering are the most 
important motivators on the studied agile teams. 
 
Only one motivator appeared in the three companies: 
Development needs addressed
 (M6). It is described as 
existence of training opportunities to widen skills and 
opportunity to specialize [23]
. The interviewees stated 
knowledge sharing and high level discussions as the concrete 
path for specialization and training. Agile development 
promotes intensive communica
tion as a way to foster 
knowledge sharing and team 
building. Another issue
 
379 TABLE
 
III.
 
C
ROSS
-
CASE ANALYSIS OF GENERAL MOTIVATORS IN AGILE TEAMS
 
General Motivators 
Company A Company B Company C 
M1 Technically challenging work 

 

  
M2 Team working 

 

  
M3 
Identify with the task (clear goals, pers
onal interest, know purpose of task, how  
it fits in with whole, job satisfacti
on; producing identifiable piece of quality  
work) 

 
 
 
M4 Employee participation/invol
vement/working with others 

 

 
M5 Working in a sucessful product 

 

M6 
Development needs addressed (e.g. training opportunities to widen skills;  
opportunity 

M7 Autonomy 

M8 Equity 

M9  
 
Good Work/life balance (flexibility in wo
rk times, caring manager/employer,  
work location) 

M10 Development practices (object or
iented, XP and prototyping practices) 
 
M11 
Problem solving (the process of understanding and solving a problem in  
programming terms) 
 
 
mentioned was the company’s know how as a good way to 
specialize. This is a company’s intangible asset or 
intellectual capital that goes beyond the agile team. 
During the motivators classi
fication, we decided to 
describe a new motivator 
Working in a successful
 
product
 
(M5), not present in the MOCC model. In fact, the model 
describes a similar motivator named as “working in a 
successful company” [23]. In our results, interviewees were 
not only proud to work in a successful product, but also 
demonstrated a strong co
mmitment to the product 
performance in the market. If the product goes well, team 
members feel motivated. If a rival product threatened their 
product in the market, they be
have competitively. Thus, we 
noticed an impressive ali
gnment between agile team 
members and companies’ business goals, which give them a 
new motivator. This result appeared in Companies B and C 
only, which is somewhat e
xpected, since Company A was 
not developing a product.  
We noticed similarities between Companies A and C 
regarding motivators possibly related to the companies’ 
organizational structure. 
Employee participation/ 
involvement / working with others
 (M4), 
Autonomy
 (M7), 
and 
Equity
 (M8) emerged as motivators just in these two 
primarily vertical, hierarchical
 companies. These motivators 
seem to be promoted because 
of the agile team arrangement, 
since vertical structures are 
well-known inhibitors of strong 
involvement between employees, also limiting equity and 
autonomy [11]. Both companies were previously organized 
to segregate teams by their 
specialization. Now, the 
employees are working in 
whole teams 
[3], i.e., agile teams 
with all skills and functionalities needed for creating the 
product (developers, testers, designers, technical writers, and 
customers). In contrast to thei
r previous experience, this new 
organization seems to be a great and noticeable motivator. 
Those motivators did not appear in Company B, whose 
structure is horizontal and 
which embraces agile methods 
longer than the others. 
 
 
Finally, one development practice – 
whole team
 – was 
mentioned as a motivator in Companies A and B. The 
practice emerged without any 
specific question regarding 
agile methods, it appears in the context of general 
motivators. We believe that, in Company A, this motivator is 
related to the company structure (as mentioned before). 
Company B had just hired specialists in user experience (or 
user interface/UI), solving existent problems in the project. 
Thus, the team feels comfortable to deliver better software, 
because they had the needed capability. 
C.
 
Agile development in
fluence on Motivation 
We identified 38 motivators in
 the three agile companies, 
and classified them using the MOCC model [23]. Finally, 9 
motivators emerged from data as specific agile methos 
motivators in teams, as shown in Table IV. We called ‘agile 
motivator’ to stress that those 
motivators are originated from 
the question “What does motivate you in agile software 
development”? An immediate c
onsequence of this question 
is that all subsequent motivators will be strongly related to 
two MOCC motivators - Software process/lifecycle and 
Development practices. 
 
 The most frequent agile motivator is 
Feeling of 
progress/accomplishment (AM1)
, which is the individual 
perception of goal achievement, without any formal 
recognition. This factor is not present in the MOCC model. 
In the three studied companies,
 the interviewees mentioned 
such feeling as an important motivator when using agile 
methods. Frequent deploys based on frequent prioritized 
requirements, daily tasks performed in pairs, visibility of 
project progress through tracki
ng, and responding to changes 
were the specific agile practices mentioned in the context of 
the feeling of progress/accomplishment.  An interesting and 
surprising result is that most 
agile motivators appeared just 
in Company A. Despite the fact we interviewed more team 
members there, we notice that many agile motivators seem to 
be a reaction to the highly vertical and bureaucratic 
environment in the company. 
Lack of bureaucracy in the
 
 
380 TABLE
 
IV.
 
C
ROSS
-
CASE ANALYSIS OF SPECIFIC AGILE DEVELOPMENT MOTIVATORS IN AGILE TEAMS
 
Motivators  
Company A Company B Company C 
AM1 <NEW> Feeling of progress/accomplishment 

 

 

 
AM2 
Development needs addressed (e.g. training opportunities to widen skills;  
opportunity) 

  

 
AM3 <NEW> Lack of bureaucracy in the development process 

  

 
AM4 Technically challenging work 

 
 

 
AM5 
Good management (senior management support, team-building, good  
communication) 

 
 
AM6 Feedback (from the job, from supervisors, on goal accomplishment) 

 
 
AM7 Employee participation/invol
vement/working with others 
 
AM8 
Experiment (trying something new, e
xperimentation in order to gain  
experience) 
  
AM9 
<NEW> Elimination of waste (e.g
., Automated acceptance tests as  
executable requirements, don't have to execute tests manually all the time) 
 
development process (AM3) 
(new factor not present in the 
MOCC model)
, Good management (AM5), Feedback (AM6), 
Employee participation (AM7)
 are examples of agile 
motivators that predominate in Company A.  
Agile practices appeared addressing developer needs 
(AM2) of specialization a
nd training. Team members 
highlighted the constant lear
ning and knowledge sharing due 
to the adoption of the methodology. The result occurred in 
Companies A and C, both with
 specialized and separated 
teams in the past. Thus, agile 
practices helped the companies 
to overcome organizational silo
s, providing an environment 
for cross fertilization of knowledge. 
Another new motivator we found is 
Elimination of waste
(AM9), which is the use of practices that foster efficiency. 
An example is the use of automated acceptance tests as 
executable requirements, savi
ng time of specification and 
test execution. The result appeared in Company A, the only 
company that fully adopted automated acceptance tests. 
Surprisingly, Company B – that
 adopts Lean concepts – did 
not mention any motivator rela
ted to waste – an important 
principle in Lean Software Development [22]. 
Finally, Company B did not mention motivators 
specifically related to agile 
practices. We noticed, in the 
study, that most interviewees never worked before with 
another methodology. Thus, it seems that agile methods 
motivates more the team members that experienced other 
methodologies before, maki
ng possible a comparison 
between them. This process possi
bly leads to an increased  
motivation (in many dimensions),
 as shown on Table IV in 
Companies A and C. 
During the data analysis, we observed a relationship 
between technical agile prac
tices, such as Acceptance 
automated tests and Pair progr
amming, and some motivators 
(both from the MOCC model or
 from new motivators we 
found). Figure 2 shows a Kiviat 
chart with the relationship 
between agile practices identified as motivators and their 
underlying motivation factor. 
Acceptance automated tests
are 
related to five different motivators: 
Elimination of waste, 
Lack of bureaucracy, Technically challenging work, Identify 
with the task
, and 
Experiment
. The last three ones are 
strongly related to the adoption 
of a new practice, leading to 
challenges, experimentation in order to gain experience and,  
 
lastly, providing a perceptible gain in the quality of work 
(identify with the task). Finally, 
Pair programming
 is related 
to 
Change, Feeling of accomplishment/progress, 
and
 
Development practices in general
 (when the practice itself is 
mentioned as a motivator). 
 
 
Figure 2. 
 
Underlying motivators of agile technical practices  
V.
 
DISCUSSION
 
Our results from the systema
tic literature review on agile 
motivators, considering the number of citations, are partially 
different from Beecham et al.’s results on software 
engineers’ motivation [6]. In our
 systematic review the most 
cited motivators of agile practitioners were: (1) Using Agile 
Methods and (2) Teamwork, wh
ile Beecham [6] states: (1) 
Identify with Task and (2) Employee participation 
involvement or working with 
others. This evidence suggests 
that the most noticed motivators are different for agile 
projects and for software engineering in general. However, 
due to the limited number of studies found (12) and their
quality, this assertion should be better investigated in the 
future.  
Based in our systematic revi
ew results, we did not find 
any study focused on general motivators in agile teams. We 
381 believe that our case studies are the first ones. We aimed to 
understand motivation from a general point of view, not 
only asking specifically about agile methods. We believe 
this protocol is more likely to generate unbiased motivators 
regarding agile teams. 
We found 11 general motivators in the case studies. 5 
motivators confirm our systematic literature review: Team 
working (M2), Identify with 
the task (M3), Development 
needs addressed (M6), Autonomy (M7), and Problem 
Solving (M11). These motivators,
 therefore, are strong in 
agile teams. We also found 9 agile motivators, 3 of them 
confirmed the review results: Development needs addressed 
(AM2), Good management (AM5), and Feedback (AM6). 
The strongest result, therefore, is that agile methods address 
development needs of specialization and training 
(M6/AM2), since we found it twice in our case studies, and 
also in the review.  
7 motivators emerged only in
 our case studies; we did 
not find them in our systematic literature review. They are: 
Technically challenging work (M1), Employee participation 
/involvement/working with ot
hers (M4), Equity (M8), 
Development practices (M10), Technically challenging 
work (AM4), Employee participation / involvement / 
working with others (AM7), and Experiment (AM8). Our 
results suggest that those motivators are also important for 
agile teams and should be further investigated.  
In addition, we found 4 new motivators in our case 
studies: Working in a product that is successful (M5), 
Feeling of progress/accomplishment (AM1), Lack of 
bureaucracy in the development process (AM3), and 
Elimination of waste (AM9).
 They denote that agile 
development not only helps on 
a better alignment between 
IT and business (M5), but it increases the sense of 
contribution (AM1) and supports process improvement 
(AM3 and AM5). All of them 
motivate the team members. 
It is important to note that 
waste
 is the term used by team 
members during the interviews. It is not necessarily related 
to the Lean development concept.  
We found that agile teams have Good Work/life balance 
(M9), considered as a motivat
or. Conversely, McHugh et al. 
[17] found that teams feel stressed due to the frenetic pace 
of agile work, having to always deliver every day and 
sometimes working overtime when the pressure is very 
intense. Thus, there are variables influencing teams to 
consider or not agile methods good providers of life 
balance. Comparing our companies’ profiles to McHugh’s 
companies, the major difference that may explain the 
opposite results is the Length of time since agile 
implementation. Our teams are, 
at least, 2-year experienced 
on agile, while McHugh’s are between 9 months and 2 
years. Thus, experience in using agile may bring the balance 
needed to foster motivation. However, this should be better 
investigated in future studies.  
A.
 
Limitations 
 This study has some limitations, which exist in any 
research project. Considering the Systematic Review, the 
decision about reusing results of available Systematic 
Reviews and also being more restrictive since we added 
more exclusion criterion, may cause a loss of context of the 
whole research. In our snowba
lling process, we found 5 new 
papers from which four of th
em [2,14,1 9, 21] where not 
considered in the original Beech
am’s systematic review [6], 
while the paper [27] did not appear in França’s [10] 
extension. We do not know if they were not returned or 
even discarded by the researchers. 
  Qualitative findings are highly context- and case-
dependent.  To promote credibility, we adopted well 
established research methods and developed an early 
familiarity with the organizations culture through 
preliminary visits. Although we have used a purposive 
sampling of informants, we tried to include as many 
participants as possible from each team, considering 
similarities, dissimilarities, redundancies, and varieties to 
acquire greater knowledge of the wider group.
 
Despite the cases were carried out only in Brazil, we 
believe that our results can be used in the future for 
comparison with other countries. 
To promote transferability, 
we described the selection and characteristics of each case, 
including context and settings, data extraction, and the 
synthesis process. 
VI.
 
CONCLUSION
 
Agile development emphasizes the importance of the human 
aspects of developers [12]. 
Managing developer motivation 
has become critical to achie
ve successful agile projects. 
Motivation is, however, a complex topic, little studied in the 
agile development field. Our 
contribution was to provide a 
synthesis of the state of the ar
t of motivators in agile teams, 
through a systematic review. We
 also provided results from 
a multiple-case study on motivation factors in three 
Brazilian agile companies.  
Our results suggest that motiva
tion in the agile context is 
slightly different from the general view of motivation in 
software development. Some motivators become more 
important in agile teams, as well as new motivators emerge. 
We also noticed the importance of the context to establish a 
cause-effect relationship between agility and motivation. 
We call for research focused on a better description of 
context variables that capture
 relevant information to 
support motivation analysis in 
light of theoretical models. 
Finally, we found a relationship between past experience 
and motivation. Agile devel
opment seems to be more 
motivating for teams that worked before with other 
methods. We aim to better explore this finding in future 
studies.   
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
We thank the companies and 
their employees for their 
contribution to this project. This research is supported by 
FAPESP, Brazil, proc. 2009/10338-3, and CNPq, Brazil, 
proc. 76661/2010-2. 
382 R
EFERENCES
 
 
[1]
 
Agile Manifesto, “Agile manifesto”, available in 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org, 
2001. Last visit 02-02-2012. 
[2]
 
Asproni, G. “Motivation, Teamwork, and Agile 
Development,” Agile Times, vol. 4, Feb. 2004, pp. 8-15. 
[3]
 
Beck, K. and Andres, C. “Ex
treme Programming Explained : 
Embrace Change” 2
nd
 Edition. Addison-Wesley Professional. 
2004. 
[4]
 
Beecham, S., Baddoo, N., Hall, T
., Robinson, H. and Sharp H. 
“Protocol of a Systematic Literature Review of Motivation in 
Software Engineering,”  Tech. Report No. 452, Faculty of 
Eng.and Information Sciences, University of Hertfordshire. 
2006. 
[5]
 
Beecham, S., Sharp H., Baddoo, 
N., Hall, T and Robinson H. 
“Does the XP environment meet 
the motivational needs of the 
Software Developer? An Empi
rical Study,” Proc. of Agile 
2007, IEEE Computer Society Press, pp 37-45. 
[6]
 
Beecham, S., Baddoo, N., Hall, T
., Robinson, H. and Sharp, 
H. “Motivation in software engineering: A systematic 
literature review,” Inform. Softw. Technol., vol. 50, no. 9-10, 
pp. 860–878, 2008. 
[7]
 
Boyatzis, R. E., “Transform
ing qualitative information: 
thematic analysis and code development,” Sage Publications. 
1998. 
[8]
 
Conboy, K., Coyle, S., Xiaofeng W. and Pikkarainen, M. 
"People over Process: Key Challenges in Agile 
Development," Software, IEEE, vol.28(4), pp.48-57, July-
Aug. 2011. 
[9]
 
Demarco, T. and Lister, T., 
Peopleware – Productive Projects 
and Teams, Dorset House, 1999. 
[10]
 
França, A. C. C. and Gouveia, T.
 B. and Santos, P. C. F. and 
Santana, C. and da Silva, F. Q. B. "Motivation in software 
engineering: A systematic 
review update," Evaluation & 
Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE), 15th Annual 
Conference, pp.154-163, 11-12 April 2011. 
[11]
 
Galbraith, J. R., “Designing Complex Organizations,” 1
st
 
Edition.Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 
Boston, MA, USA. 1973. 
[12]
 
Tracy, H., Sharp H., 
Beecham, S., Baddoo, N.  and Robinson 
H. “What Do We Know about Developer Motivation?” IEEE 
Software, Vol. 25(4). IEEE 
Computer Society Press. 2008. 
[13]
 
Herzberg, F. The Motivation to Work, 2nd ed., Chapman & 
Hall, London, 1959. 
[14]
 
Law, A. and Charron, R. “Effect
s of agile practices on social 
factors,” Proc. Workshop on Human and Social Factors of 
Software Engineering (St. Loui
s, Missouri, May). HSSE '05, 
pp 1-5, 2005. 
[15]
 
Mannaro, K., Melis, M. and Marchesi, M. “Empirical analysis 
on the satisfaction of IT employees comparing XP practices 
with other software development methodologies,” Proc. of 
XP2004, pp. 166–174 2004. 
[16]
 
McConnell, S. “Problem programmers,” Software, IEEE vol. 
15(2), pp. 126-128, 1998. 
[17]
 
McHugh, O., Conboy, K. and La
ng, M. "Motivating Agile 
Teams: A Case Study of Teams in Ireland and Sweden," 
International Research Workshop on IT Project Management. 
2010 
[18]
 
Melnik, G. and Maurer, F. “Comparative Analysis of Job 
Satisfaction in Agile and NonAgile Software Development 
Teams,” Proc. XP2006, LN
CS 4044, pp32-40, 2006. 
[19]
 
Murru, O., Deias, R. and Mugheddu G. “Assessing XP at a 
European Internet Company,” IEEE Software,  vol. 20(3), pp. 
37-43, 2003. 
[20]
 
Oreg, S. and Nov O. “Explori
ng motivations for contributing 
to open source initiatives: The roles of contribution context 
and personal values,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 24( 
5), pp. 2055-2073, 2008. 
[21]
 
Poole, C. and Huisman, J. 
“Using Extreme Programming in a 
Maintenance Environment,” IEEE Software, vol. 18(6), pp. 
42-50. 2001. 
[22]
 
Poppendieck, M. and Poppendieck, T. “Implementing Lean 
Software Development: From Concept to Cash,” Addison-
Wesley, 2006. 
[23]
 
Sharp, H., Badoo, N., Beecham, S
., Hall T. and Robinson, H.  
“Models of motivation in softwa
re engineering,” Information 
and Software Technology , vol. 51(1), Butterworth-
Heinemann. 2009. 
[24]
 
Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. “Agile Software Development 
with Scrum,” 1
st
 Edition. Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ, USA. 2001. 
[25]
 
Tessem, B. and Maurer, F. “J
ob Satisfaction and Motivation 
in a Large Agile Team,” Proc. of XP2007, vol. 4536, pp 54-
61, 2007. 
[26]
 
West, W. and Grant, T. “Agile Development: mainstream 
adoption has changed agility”, Forrester, available from 
http://www.forrester.com/rb/Research/agile_development_ma
instream_adoption_has_changed_agility/q/id/56100/t/2, 
January 20, 2010. Last visit 02-02-2012.  
[27]
 
Whitworth, E. and Biddle, R. “Motivation and Cohesion in 
Agile Teams”, Proc. of XP 2007, LNCS, vol. 4536, pp. 62–
69. 2007. 
[28]
 
Yin, Robert K. 
Case Study Research: Design and Methods 
(Applied Social Research Methods)
. Sage Publications, Inc, 
2008
 
383