 Understanding Decision-Making in Agile Software Development:  
a Case-study  
 
Nils Brede Moe, Aybüke Aurum 
SINTEF ICT, Norway 
School of Information Systems, Technology and 
Management, University 
of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia 
nils.b.moe@sintef.no, aybuke@unsw.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract 
 
A challenge with introducing agile software 
development is changing the way decisions are made. 
In this paper, we discuss the decision making 
processes used in Scrum teams. We found that a 
prerequisite for introducing Scrum is the alignment of 
decisions on a strategic, ta
ctical and opera
tional level. 
In addition, specialisation can be a barrier for the 
decision-making process on
 the operational level, and 
that daily meetings ar
e important for preventing 
decision-hijacking. Also removing the hold-up problem 
makes it easier for develope
rs to participate in the 
decision-making process. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Agile software development represents a new 
approach for planning and managing software projects  
[11]. Agile development differs from the traditional 
plan-driven approaches as it puts less emphasis on up-
front plans and strict plan-based control and more 
emphasis on mechanisms for change management 
during the project [16]. Further, agile development 
relies on people and their creativity rather than on 
processes [8]. Leadership and collaboration, informal 
communication and an organic (flexible and 
participative, encouraging cooperative social action) 
organizational form are other characteristics of agile 
software development [17]. 
Cohn and Ford [10] have referred to a number of 
possible setbacks or errors that may occur when an 
organisation is making the transition from plan-driven 
towards agile processes. The problems are mainly 
caused by resistance to, or over-enthusiasm for, agile 
practices within a software development team. When 
changing from plan-driven to change-driven (agile), 
this may also impact several aspects of the 
organization including its structure, culture, and 
management practice [17]. Neither culture nor mind-
sets of people can be easily changed, which makes the 
move to agile methodologies all the more formidable 
for many organizations [7].  
One of the reasons for why agile development has 
attracted much interest is because of claims of many 
improvements on areas such as work performance, 
quality and work environment. However there is a lack 
of scientific support for many of these claims [11]. 
Especially management-oriented approaches are 
clearly the most under-resear
ched  area compared to 
it™s popularity in industry [11]. 
Software development processes depend 
significantly on team performance, as does any process 
that involves human interaction. Agile development 
relies on teamwork, as opposed to individual role 
assignment that characterizes plan-driven development 
[17]. A team following a plan-driven model often 
consists of independently focused self-managing 
professionals, while an agile team is supposed to be 
fully self-organized [16]. Tata and Prasad [22] claim 
that self-organized teams directly influence team 
effectiveness since it brings decision-making authority 
to the level of operational problems and, thus, increase 
the speed and accuracy of problem solving. Also, such 
teams are able to make decisions with economic 
consequences [14]. Introducing self-organizing teams 
and change the way project decisions are made, is 
probably one of the biggest changes when introducing 
agile software development [23]. To the best of our 
knowledge there are no studies that describe how this 
can be done in practice. 
This article presents the results of an empirical 
study, based on data collected from two software 
projects recently adapting Agile methods. The main 
objective of this paper is to provide insight into the 
decision making processes used in agile software 
teams. Our research question is: 
How does decision-making
 theory explain the 
challenges involved in in
troducing Agile development? 
 
34th Euromicro Conference Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-3276-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2008.55216 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
In Section 2, we describe agile teams, self-organizing 

teams and a model for decision-making. In section 3, 
we describe our research method in detail. In Section 4, 
we present results from a multiple-case study on the 

decision-making process in agile software teams. We 

discuss our findings in Section 5. Section 6 concludes 

and presents suggestions for future research 

 2. Background  
 In this section we present background information 
on agile development, and we use the literature to 

describe how self-organizing teams and decision-

making is related, and why this is important in agile 

development.   
 2.1. Agile Development and Scrum 
 Agile software development comprises a number of 
practices and methods [1, 9]. Among the most known 

and adopted agile methods are Extreme Programming 

(XP) [6] and Scrum [20]. XP focuses primarily on the 

implementation of software, while Scrum focuses on 

agile project management [2]. In this study the focus is 
on Scrum as Scrum encourages self-organizing teams 
and focuses on project management.   
The name "Scrum" was inspired by an article 
characterizing new product development teams in 
Japan, by Takeuchi and Nonaka 
[21], where ﬁself-
organizing project teamsﬂ was one of key 

characteristics.
 The Scrum-team is given significant 
authority and responsibility for many aspects of their 
work, such as planning, scheduling, assigning tasks to 

members, and making decisions [20]. Scrum focuses 

on project management in situations where it is 

difficult to plan ahead,
 with mechanisms for 
‚‚empirical process control™™; where feedback loops is 

the core element [20].  
Scrum and Agile development favour a leadership-
and-collaboration style of management where the 

traditional project manager™s role is replaced with the 

Scrum-master™s role of a facilitator or coordinator [1, 

9]. The Scrum-master is in charge of solving problems 

that stops the Scrum-team (5-9 people) from working 

effectively. The Scrum-master is often described as a 

coach or facilitator. He or she does not organize the 

team (designers and developers); the team organizes 

itself and makes the decisions concerning what to do. 

The Scrum-master works to remove the impediments 

of the process, runs and makes decisions in the daily 

meetings and validates them with the management 

[20]. Hence, Scrum-master 
need to work with the 
product owner side by side.  
Software is developed by the self-organizing team 
in increments (called "sprints"), starting with planning 

and ending with a review. The team coordinates on a 

daily basis. Features to be implemented are registered 

in a ‚‚backlog™™, and a product-owner decides which 

backlog items should be developed in the following 

sprint. These items are specifi
ed in a sprint backlog.  
The product backlog defines everything that is 
needed in the final product based on current 

knowledge. The backlog comprises a prioritized and 

constantly updated list of business and technical 

requirements for the system being built or enhanced. 

Backlog items can include features, functions, bug 

fixes, requested enhancements and technology updates. 

Multiple stakeholders can participate in generating 

product backlog items, such as customer, project team, 

marketing and sales, management and support [1]. 

Prioritizing the backlog is a complex communication 

and negotiation process; however the product-owner is 

the one responsible for the final prioritizing. During 

the planning-meeting (usually every second or forth 

week) the product-owner is responsible for presenting 

a prioritized product backlog.  
While the product backlog is constantly updated, 
the sprint backlog should not be changed during the 

sprint, unless critical business premises suddenly 

change or if the team somehow is not able to deliver as 

planned.   
 2.2. The Self-organizing Team 
 We use the label "self-organizing" teams as a 
synonym for "autonomous teams" and for "empowered 

teams". Guzzo and Dickson [
14] describe such teams 
as a group of employees who typically perform highly 

related or interdependent jobs, who are identified and 

identifiable as a social unit 
in an organization, and who 
are given significant author
ity and res
ponsibility
 for 
many aspects of their work, such as planning, 

scheduling, assigning tasks to members, and making 

decisions with economic consequences. 
Autonomous teams stimulate participation and 
involvement, and an effect of this increases emotional 

attachment to the organization, resulting in greater 

commitment, motivation to perform and desire for 
responsibility. As a result, employees care more about 
their work, which may lead to greater creativity and 

helping behaviour, higher productivity and service 

quality [12]. Self-management can also directly 

influence team effectiveness since it brings decision-
making authority to the level of operational problems 
and uncertainties and, thus, increase the speed and 

accuracy of problem solving [22].  
However, there is substantial variance in research 
findings regarding the consequences of such teams on 

such measures as productivity, turnover, and attitudes 
217 [14, 22]. Tata and Prasada [22] found that employees 
really need to affect managerial decisions for achieving 

the benefits of a self-managed team. It is important that 
the team do not experience symbolic self-management.  
Since the prioritizing of the backlog is a decision-
rich problem solving activity, it is valuable to look at 

the classical theories of decision-making to better 

understand backlog decisions which will explain in the 

following section. 
 2.3. Decision-making  
 Our experience show that the introduction of agile 

development in a plan-driven organization leads to 

changes in decision making process which may lead to 

organizational changes. Sin
ce every project decision 
affects both the product and sprint backlog, w
e will 
focus on the processes related decisions in these 
backlogs when studying the decision-making processes 
in agile software development.  
Although no theoretical perspective can fully 
explain all aspects of decision making process in 

teams, we have chosen to build on the work of 

Anthony [3] to investigate the behavioural aspects of 
decision makers in Scrum teams. Anthony [3] argues 
there are three levels of decision-making activities in 

organizations based on the purpose of the management 

activity: 
strategic planning, management control and 
operational control
. As such, we view the decision 
making process in Scrum teams at the strategic, tactical 
and operational level. 
We believe that in Scrum "strategic decisions" are 
primarily an organizational 
issue, "management control 
decisions" involve a project management view, 

whereas "operational control" decisions are about the 

implementation of features.  
Several researchers discuss the alignment of 
managerial decisions in organizations and point out 

how important to ensure that software applications are 

well aligned with business strategies of organizations 
[4, 18]. Here we assert that for a team to be able to 
self-organize, decisions on all levels in managerial 

activities must be aligned. Hence, the first aim of this 

paper is to examine the alignment of decisions between 

the three levels i.e. strategic, tactical and operational 

level.  
The introduction of self-organizing teams requires an 
agile team participating more in "management control" 
decisions. As explained in Section 2.2 
Scrum-master 
works with the product-owner which leads a constant 

communication between the management control and 

operational control decision makers. Hence, we argue 

that even though the product-owner is responsible in 

prioritizing the backlog, the team must be involved in 

this process and their opinions must influence the final 
prioritization if they are to be able to self-organize. The 
second aim of this paper is to 
study the negotiation 
process between management
 control and operational 
control which requires intense communication between 

the product owner and Scrum teams.  
The introduction of self-organizing teams also 
requires an agile team be responsible for all the 

"operational control" decisions. Hence, the third aim of 

this paper is to examine the decision making process at 

operational level among the Scrum team members. 
 3. Research Design and Methodology 
 The goal of this research is to provide insight into 
the decision making processes used in agile software 

teams; hence, it is important to study software 

development teams in practice. We will examine: 
• Aligning the decision-making process on the three 
management levels i.e. strategic, tactical and 
operational level activities. We will also study the 
negotiation process, in particularly between the 

product owner and the Scrum-master.  
• Decision-making on operational level activities. 
We report on a multiple-case holistic study [24], in 
which we studied one phenomenon in two projects.  
 3.1. Study Context  
 This study was done in the context of a larger action 
research program, where several companies have 

introduced elements from agile development in 

response to identified problems. For the two companies 

where the projects in this study are taken from, Scrum 
was introduced because they wanted to improve their 
ability to deliver iteratively and on time, increase the 

quality, improve the team-feeling and team 

communication. One of the companies is situated in the 

south of the Norway and the other is situated in the 

northern part, therefore we name the project ﬁSouthﬂ 
and ﬁNorthﬂ. The first author of this paper participated 
in the introduction and training of Scrum, and observed 

the companies that were using Scrum.  
 218 3.1.1 Project South. 
This project was carried out 
within a medium-sized software company with 

approximately 150 employees in four departments. The 
goal of the project was to develop a system for 
integrity management of pipelines both off-shore and 

on-shore. Today several customers are interested in 

buying the product, and so far three contracts has been 

signed. One of the biggest challenges in this project is 

to align requirements from potential customers from all 
over the world. Scrum was introduced one year after 
the project had started.
 The project consists of six developers in the core 
team working full time (one is a Scrum master), two 

GUI designers, one product-owner, and one project-

manager devoting half his time on this project. The 
Project-manager is in charge of traditional project 
management tasks and visiting customers together with 

the Product-Owner. The sprints usually lasted three 

weeks, ending on a Friday with a retrospective- and 

review-meeting. The next sprint was planned the 

following Monday. The team organized a 15 minute 
stand-up every morning to discuss project related 
issues. The Product-owner and project-manager 

usually joined every Scrum-meeting.  
Prior to Scrum, there was a problem in prioritizing 
what to develop first. The project involved developing 
a new system while concurrently trying to get input 
from the market department and potential customers, 

resulting in the team focusing on too many modules at 

the same time and not being able to deliver running 

software. The team had difficulties with prioritising 

their tasks as a result. At the same time of introducing 
Scrum there was a board-meeting deciding on what to 
develop first. 
Before introducing Scrum, one person was 
responsible for the architecture. He was seen as one of 

the experts. However, he mostly communicated with 

the Product-owner and less with the team. The team 
became frustrated as they felt they were missing the 
big picture. The architect left the company during the 

first Scrum-phase. 
   3.1.2 North. 
In this company, the whole development 
department with 16 developers were introduced to 
Scrum through a two day workshop. This was the first 

Scrum project in the company. The goal of this project 

was to develop a plan and coordination system. The 

project produced a combination of textual user-

interfaces and map-functionality. The company will 
also be responsible for maintenance and support after 
final
 installation. Six developers, 4000 hours, one
 Scrum-master, and a Product-owner were allocated to 

the project. The Product-owner was situated in another 

city. He acted as a representative for the customer who 

was the local government of a Norwegian city. The 
Scrum-master was a part of both the quality and 
marketing department, and has worked in the company 

for more than 10 years. The developers were highly 
specialised with corresponding division of work.
 Scrum was introduced at the beginning of the 
project. The length of each sprint was one month Œ 

except for a 2 month summer-sprint. The sprint started 

with a planning meeting and ended with a review 

meeting, where the developed functionality was 
presented. Shortly after the review meeting, the next 
planning meetings were conducted. Several 

retrospective meetings were also organized, but since 

the product owner was situated in another city, he did 

not attend all of these. The team organized a 15 minute 

stand-up every morning. The Product owner 
participated in some of these by telephone.  
 3.2. Data Sources and Analysis 
 In order to understand how Scrum was applied and 
how the introduction of Scrum affected and changed 

the developing process, we conducted semi-structured 

interviews which lasted from 20 to 50 minutes. 

Everyone in the project was interviewed. We focused 
on understanding the coordination of work, 
communication in the team, feedback-sessions, 

planning and estimation, and how decisions were 

made. We also observed the teams, using ethnographic 

observations (Participant observation [15]), during the 

introduction of Scrum, and during several of the stand-
up meetings. In this article we rely primarily on data 
from the interviews. 
All data from this study was imported into a tool for 
analyzing qualitative data called Nvivo 

(www.qsrinternational.com). The first author coded the 
material, looking for material related to how decisions 
were made in the project.  

 4. Decision-making in Agile Projects 
 
We now report our findings from the ﬁSouthﬂ and 
Northﬂ project, according to the previously identified 
aspects of decision-making.  
 4.1. Aligning Strategic, Management and 
Operational decisions 
 4.1.1 The South project.
 Prior to introducing Scrum 
there was no clear priority of what was most important 
and which feature had to be covered in the next release. 
The Scrum-master said: 
after introducing Scrum and 
delivering every three weeks, it™s easier to have a 

clearer focus on what to do. Everything can not be 

equally important. The product-backlog makes it 
219 easier for us to tell the 
Product-owner to prioritize 
what is most important. I think the problem is that he is 

talking to so many customers, and then his perspective 
constantly changes. 
The team perceived the prioritized 
backlog as a way of aligning all input to the project. 

However, combining the long-term and short-term 

perspective was still seen as challenging. One 

developer said: 
Now we are using the product-backlog, 
and that is enough for coordinating work and aligning 
the input from every stakeholder. It is still a problem 
with too much interruption from the market. They ask 

us to think in a long term, but they often interrupt us 

with new input from the market. But the situation has 

improved. The sprint and sprint-backlog also makes it 

easier to say ﬁnoﬂ. 
 Informing the team about the market-situation was 
still important, and this was done in the daily stand-up. 

The Project-manager said: 
It is now easier to 
communicate what is happening in the market. After a 

meeting with a potential customer I always use 1-2 

minutes informing the team about what happened in 
the next daily stand-up. 
The team considered this 
feedback important.  
However, exposing the team to new ideas had its 
drawbacks. For instance, a sudden change in scope by 

introducing new features during the sprint undermined 
the decisions made previously on the operational level 
as it made it difficult to deliver according to the sprint-

plan. In order to prevent introducing new ideas to the 

team in the middle of a sprint, the Scrum-master 

organized separate meetings with the Product-owner 

and Project-manager preparing the backlog for the next 
sprint.  
The Product-owner felt the process of discussing 
and making decisions together with the team was 

useful. While talking about the planning meetings he 

said: 
We have good and deep discussions in these 
meetings when we are estimating the tasks and 
deciding on what to do. It™s the person who knows 
most, that decides what to do.
 The frequent dialogue 
also resulted in early identification of the problems at 

the operational and managerial level activities. The 

Product-owner said: 
If the team get stuck, and do not 
know what to do because of missing or conflicting 
decisions, this is discovered
 early. Then we together 
decide what to do. Before
 Scrum, developers could use 
months before we discovered that there were problems 

we needed to discuss.   
Both the Product-owner and Project-manager had 
strong opinions of how work should be distributed in 
the team. The Product-owner argued that people should 

be specialised with corresponding division of work. 

There should be different people responsible for the 

DB, a GUI expert etc. He saw this as the most effective 

way of developing software. The Project-manager 
commented that: 
They often make other plans than I 
would expect them to do. That is fair enough. When I 

present my idea of who should do what, they often say 
ﬁnow, we can™t do it this wayﬂ. Then they agree on 
how to do it. As long as they deliver what is expected 

I™m satisfied. 
The Scrum-master said: 
Often it is 
obvious who should do what. However, we need to 

think of the consequences by letting the database 

person only work on the database. We then get to 
vulnerable, and it will reduce his job-satisfaction. We 
need to let people work on the things that motivate 

them. This is something we have changed after 

introducing Scrum. 
There was clear diversity in the 
perspective of how work should be coordinated, 

between the Scrum master and the project manager; 
however it was clear that the teams view was 
respected.  
In contrast, the traditional form of work in 
combination with highly specialised developers 

resulted in a lack of understanding of the product by a 

significant portion of the team members. This made it 
difficult for aligning strategic management and 
operational decisions. One developer said: 
Earlier the 
chief-architect took most of the decision himself. This 

was frustrating. Now we all participate. Also because 

of everything being in the backlog, everyone knows the 
long-term and short-term goal of the project. Earlier it 
was hidden in the architecture. 
In the literature this is 
referred as the hold-up problem [13]. The introduction 

of agile approach allowed the team members to have 

the long term perspective about the product 

development.
   
 4.1.2 The North project. 
The North project 
experienced different challenges. Although there was  

considerable communication by e-mail and telephone 

between the developers and the Product-Owner, the 

developers felt it was not sufficient, and that more was 
required to help them better understand how the system 
was going to be used. The geographical distance made 

the alignment process more difficult. In the planning 

meetings there were a lot of discussions about the 

intention of each feature and how the system was 
supposed to be used. It was obvious that this was 
important for being able to decide on what to do; 

however these discussions were time-consuming and 

seemed somehow to exclude the developers. The 

planning meeting usually ended in a discussion 

between the Scrum-master and Product-Owner. The 
team barely participated in the decision-making 
process at this level. It is thought that a lack of 

thorough discussions could be one of the reasons for 

important tasks being identified during and in the end 

of each sprint instead of at the beginning of each sprint. 

This again reduced the validity of the common 
220 backlog, making the developers focus more on their 
own plan. Since the planning had weaknesses and none 

of the developers felt they had the total overview, this 
probably was one of the reasons for design-problems 
discovered later.    
The company had not placed a customer-support 
process for software maintenance which caused a 

dilemma among the developers. If a developer was 

responsible for a module or system being developed, 
this developer would later be the one supporting the 
same solution. The developer would never know when 

the customer would make a call, and interrupt his/her 

work. The developers described this as the ﬁquagmireﬂ. 

One of the developers said: 
One of the problems with 
working here. If you ever get involved in developing a 
system you get stuck in the quagmire. And for every 
new project you are on, it gets worse. 
This approach was regarded as a competitive 
advantage by the company as they were fast handling 

the customer inquiries. However, these frequent 

interruptions annoyed the developers since they needed 
to find out themselves how to prioritize their resources. 
They were also allocated on several projects, so when 

there were problems in other projects this resulted in 

problems delivering according to the sprint plan. As 

one of the developers said: ﬁ
I do not like to be the one 
who decides which project not meeting the deadlineﬂ. 
After introducing Scrum, the team-members felt that 

they were more protected against external noise and 

the interruptions were not as bad as it used to be but it 

was still a major problem.  

 4.2. Decision-making on an Operational Level   
 
4.2.1 The South project. 
The developers usually 
coordinated themselves by the daily 
stand
-up. This was 
the primary meeting for operational level decisions. 

The Scrum-master said: 
When anyone gets trouble, and 
do not know what to do. We immediately discuss this in 

the team, and then together figure out what to do. If we 

can™t decide in the team, I discuss with the Product-
owner and the Project-manager. Last time we 
discovered that something was wrong in one of the 

modules, and that it would take 3 days to correct. The 

Product-owner then had to decide if we were going to 

solve the problem, or do it in the next sprint. 
In one sprint, one of the developers decided on to 
implement a feature without discussing with the other 
team members. The Scrum-master said: 
We divide 
tasks among us, and then people are responsible for 

implementing them. This usually works fine. However, 

in the last sprint one of the developers spoke with 
someone in the market about an issue. The developer 
used a couple of days changing a feature that was 
already finished, because she thought this was very 
important. While testing I found out what had 

happened and we had to redo what the he developer 
had done. 
Although Scrum facilitated decision making among 
developers, this was not the case for some team 

members. One experienced developer newly hired on 

the project said:
 They usually tell me what to do. I think 
I possess more knowledge than they realize, and that I 
get too simple tasks. I™m also missing a good overview 
of what we are going to deliver. Many of the discussion 

regarding the design were done without me, and I think 

there are several discussions I should have 

participated in. It™s probably too expensive if everyone 

is to participate in every meeting, but for me it is 
difficult to see dependences
 between the modules. The 
module is documented, but it is not easy to understand. 
  4.2.2 The North project. 
Each person worked on the 
module where he or she was seen as a specialist (e.g. 

user interface, map-interfaces or databases). There was 
a common understanding among managers and 
developers that this was the most efficient way of 

working. The scrum-master said: ﬁ
Let the person that 
knows most about the task solve it! It will take too 

many resources if several persons are working on the 
same module, and there is no time for overlapping 
work in this project. The tasks are delegated and 

solved the best possible way today. Maybe we can do 

more overlapping in the next projectﬂ.  
Because of the work being divided into modules, a 
developer typically created his own ﬁplanﬂ for this 
module, often without discussing it with the team. One 
of the developers decided to implement features for 

future projects without the knowledge of any other 

team member. As a result, this developer lost trust 

from his team and the Scrum-master started to give 

him direct instructions regarding work.  
In many cases, module specific problems were seen 
as personal problems, and therefore they were not 

reported or discussed in the group. It was also difficult 

to discuss problems because developers did not know 

what the other team members were doing. This again 
resulted in some of the developer™s not paying 
attention to what others were saying during the daily 

Scrum-meeting. One developer said: 
When it comes to 
the daily scrum, I do not pay attention when Ann is 

talking. For me it is a bit far off what she talks about, 

and I do not manage to pay attention. She talks about 
the things she is working on. I guess this situation is 
not good for the project.
 The Scrum-master eventually became aware of 
problems not being reported. His strategy was to make 

the team quickly solve each problem, as soon as it was 

discovered, by paying more attention to the nature of 
221 the problem and by discussing this within the team. 
However the developers felt the scrum-master was 

overreacting and creating a lot of noise as so began 
reporting even fewer problems. This again affected the 
decision process among the team members.  
 5. Discussion on D
ecision-making and 
Scrum 
 In this section we present our key observations in 
light of our research question:  
How does decision-making
 theory explain the 
challenges involved in intr
oducing Agile development? 
In the South project we found that Scrum might 
help in aligning the decisions on every level, since 

Scrum requires a prioritize product-backlog. The team 

claimed it was useful to get constantly feedback from 
the market during the daily-sprint, but it was also 
identified as a problem protecting the Sprint-backlog 

against new prioritizing during the sprint. Here the 

team deviated from the Scrum theory, which argues 

that the customer can participate in the sprint meetings, 
but is not allowed to influence the team in between the 
meetings [20]. In the North project, the company had 

no appreciation of the problem as the strategic and 

management activities were misaligned and the 

developers needed to decide which project to work on. 

The developers were aware that the commitments they 
made in the planning-meting would change during the 
sprint. Hence Scrum did not work as intended.  
On the operational level the South project experienced 
an improved situation, with everyone participating in 

the decision making since the architectural work was 

now divided among the team. They had eliminated 

their hold-up problem earlier on [13]. Problems were 

also discovered earlier and they were able to work on a 

prioritized backlog. However, even though the 

situation did improve an issue occurred where one of 

the developers felt they were not fully integrated in the 

team. In another similar case there were developers 

making decisions without informing the rest of the 

team Œ something referred to as decision hijacking [5]. 

In the North project there were problems with the 

decision-making process on the operational level. 

Team members felt that undertaking more 

responsibility in the decision-making process would 

result in maintenance work in the future which was not 

perceived as ideal. It was also difficult for the team to 

commit to the decisions made in the planning meeting 

because of the problems earlier described. In addition, 

the decision-making on the operational level was 

influenced by the highly specialised skills and the 

corresponding division of work since this resulted in 
the developers not knowing what the others were 
doing, and missing the total picture of the project The 

consequence of this was important task not being 

identified before late in the project and developers 

creating their own plan without discussing with others, 

and performing decision hijacking. 
The problems in the North project with an ad-hock 
decision-making process on the operational level also 

affected the alignment process, since the developers 
perceived their own plan as more important than the 
total plan. This is also known as a lack of team 

orientation [19]. For every team, particularly for a self-

organizing team, the team™s goals should be more 

important then the individual goals.  
 6. Conclusion and Future Work 
 This paper presented data from a multiple case-
study. We found that: 
• Not appreciating the problem with miss-alignment 
of strategic and management activities is a barrier 
when introducing Scrum. 
• Even though specialisation is important; this can 
result in a division of work, be a barrier for the 
decision-making process on the operational level, 

and a barrier to aligning decisions on the three 

management levels. 
• Daily meetings are important for preventing 
decision-hijacking. 
• Removing the hold-up problem makes it easier for 
developers to participate in the decision-making 

process. 
Changing the way of working is difficult, and when 
it involves a transition from specialized skills to 
redundancy of functions, it requires a reorientation not 
only by the developers but also by management. This 

change takes time and resources, and it must be solved 

to be able to succeed with Scrum. 
This study highlights several barriers with 
establishing a decision-making process, which is 
essential for succeeding when introducing agile 
development. Accordingly, further work should focus 

on investigating other barriers with introducing agile 

development. In addition, there is a need for more 

research on the decision-making process in mature 
agile teams. 
7. Acknowledgment 
 We appreciate the input received from the 
investigated companies, and from Torgeir Dingsøyr 

who participated in the data collection. This research is 

supported by the Research Council of Norway under 
Grant 174390/I40. 
222  8. References 
[1] P. Abrahamsson, O. Salo, J. Ronkainen, and J. Warsta, 
Agile software development methods - Review and analysis
, VTT Publications, 2002. 
 [2] P. Abrahamsson, J. Warsta, M.T. Siponen, and J. 

Ronkainen, ﬁNew directions on agile methods: a comparative 

analysis,ﬂ 2003, pp. 244-254. 
 [3] R.N. Anthony, 
Planning and Control Systems: A 
Framework for Analysis
, Harvard University, Boston, USA, 
1965. 
 [4] A. Aurum and C. Wohlin, ﬁA Value-Based Approach in 

Requirements Engineering: Explaining Some of the 

Fundamental Concepts,ﬂ in 
Requirements Engineering: 
Foundation for Software Quality
, 2007, pp. 109-115. 
 
[5] A. Aurum, C. Wohlin, and A. Porter, ﬁAliging Software 

Project Decisions: A Case Study,ﬂ 
International Journal of 
Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering
, Publisher, city, 2006, pp. 795-818. 

 
[6] K. Beck and C. Andres, 
Extreme Programming 
Explained: Embrace Chage (2nd ed)
, Addison-Wesley, 2004. 
 
[7] B.W. Boehm and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and 
Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed
, Addison-Wesley 
2003. 
 
[8] A. Cockburn and J. Highsmith, ﬁAgile software 

development: The people factor,ﬂ 
Computer
, Publisher, city, 
2001, pp. 131-133. 
 
[9] D. Cohen, M. Lindvall, and P. Costa, ﬁAn Introduction to 

Agile Methods,ﬂ in 
Advances in Computers, Advances in 
Software Engineering
, vol. 62, Zelkowitz, M.V., Ed. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2004. 
 
[10] M. Cohn and D. Ford, ﬁIntroducing an agile process to 

an organization [software development],ﬂ 
Computer
, Publisher, city, 2003, pp. 74-78. 
 
[11] T. Dyba and T. Dingsoyr, ﬁEmpirical Studies of Agile 

Software Development: A Systematic Review,ﬂ 
Information 
and Software Technology
, Publisher, city, 2008. 
 
[12] M. Fenton-O'Creevy, ﬁEmployee involvement and the 

middle manager: evidence from a survey of organizations,ﬂ 
Journal of Organizational Behavior
, Publisher, city, 1998, 
pp. 67-84. 

 
[13] R.F. Freeland, ﬁCreating holdup through vertical 
integration: Fisher Body revisited,ﬂ 
Journal of Law & 
Economics
, Publisher, city, 2000, pp. 33-66. 
 
[14] R.A. Guzzo and M.W. Dickson, ﬁTeams in 
organizations: Recent research on performance and 
effectiveness,ﬂ 
Annual Review of Psychology
, Publisher, city, 
1996, pp. 307-338. 
 [15] D.L. Jorgensen, 
Participant Observation: A 
Methodology for Human Studies
, Sage publications, 
Thousands Oak, California, 1989. 
 
[16] S. Nerur and V. Balijepally, ﬁTheoretical reflections on 

agile development methodologies - The traditional goal of 
optimization and control is making way for learning and 
innovation,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
, Publisher, city, 
2007, pp. 79-83. 

 [17] S. Nerur, R. Mahapatra, and G. Mangalaraj, ﬁChallenges 
of migrating to agile methodologies,ﬂ 
Communications of the 
ACM, Publisher, city, 2005, pp. 72. 
 [18] L. Neumann-Alkier, ﬁThink Globally, Act Locally Œ 
Does it Follow the Rule in Mu
ltinational Corporations? ,ﬂ 
5th 
European Conf. on Information Systems
, Cork, 1997, pp. 
541-552. 
 [19] E. Salas, D.E. Sims, and C.S. Burke, ﬁIs there a "big 

five" in teamwork?,ﬂ 
Small Group Research
, Publisher, city, 
2005, pp. 555-599. 
 [20] K. Schwaber and Beedle, 
Agile Software Development 
with Scrum
, Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 2001. 
 [21] H. Takeuchi and I. Nonaka, ﬁThe New New Product 
Development Game,ﬂ 
Harvard Business Review 64: 137-146 
Publisher, city, 1986. 
 [22] J. Tata and S. Prasad, ﬁTeam Self-management, 
Organizational Structure, and Judgments of Team 

Effectiveness,ﬂ 
Journal of Managerial Issues
, Publisher, city, 
2004, pp. p248 - 265. 

 [23] L. Williams and A. Cockburn, ﬁAgile software 
development: it's about feedback and change,ﬂ 
Computer
, Publisher, city, 2003, pp. 39-43. 

 [24] R.K. Yin, 
Case Study Research: design and methods
, Sage Publications, 2003. 

  223