 Investigating UML- and Ontology-Based Approaches  
for Process Improvement in Devel
oping Agile Multi-Agent Systems 
Thomas Moser, Klemens Kunz, Kamil Matousek, Dindin Wahyudin 
Institute for Software Technolo
gy and Interactive Systems 
Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria 
{TMoser, K.Kunz, Matousek, Dindin}@ifs.tuwien.ac.at 
 Abstract 
 Multi-agent systems (MAS) that link business and phys-
ical domains such as in production automation need to be 
reconfigured correctly and efficiently to adapt to new 
requirements. The standard UML-based approach only 

partly supports the reconfiguration process to capture 
agent classes and their instances, while ontologies allow 
modeling all aspects of MAS design in one common conti-
nuous model. 
In this paper we introduce a MAS development life 
cycle and focus on the product-specific reconfiguration of 

a system built mostly from reusable agents. We investigate 
the process variants based on (a) UML and (b) ontologies. 
We evaluate both process variants in a feasibility study 
using fundamental illustrative scenarios from an industrial 
production automation environment and derive lessons 

learned for process improvement in building sustainable 
MAS in the scope of production automation. 
Keywords: Process modeling and improvement, Software 
reuse and product lines, Agile Multi Agent System Devel-
opment. 
 1. Introduction 
 Global competition and e-commerce opportunities chal-
lenge many organizations to adapt their systems to rapid 
and unexpected changes of requirements. Systems for 
production automation, which link classical software in-
formation systems to systems that contain hardware ele-

ments, undergo a particularly challenging evolution [9]: 
Mechanical devices and electronic devices have increa-
singly more storage, faster computation and communica-
tion capabilities, which add to their potential utility with 
new degrees of freedom for design but also add to the 

complexity of system development and evolution [15]. 
Multi-agent systems (MAS) design [10, 11] can help 
encapsulate the complexity [1] by providing appropriate 
object views on the system parts, which can be supported 
with standard UML diagrams [7]. 
However, a major challenge is to support hardware and 
software reconfiguration processes with consistent models 
that minimize the risk of introducing and not finding de-
fects during the reconfiguration process as UML seems to 
provide only weak support for designing, changing, and 

verifying configurations in a way that allows efficient and 
correct adaptation to new requirements, new behavior, and 
new support technology. Due to requirements changes, 

software architects and developers want to easily reconfi-
gure the operational system while quality assurance (QA) 

personnel need to measure the system performance, identi-
fy defects and the potential impact of a defect [12].The 
current standard development approach using UML nota-
tion only partly supports the reconfiguration process to 
capture agent classes, their instances, and the configura-
tion. 
Recently the development of and improving tool sup-
port for ontologies for software engineering promises to 
effectively and efficiently incorporate all relevant MAS 

configuration models in one modeling space, providing 
less fractured and better integrated views [8] both for de-

signers and QA personnel to better prevent and detect 
defects early during reconfiguration. 
In this paper, we describe an ontology-based approach 
for the MAS development process that can provide conti-
nuous model views as needed for MAS reconfiguration in 

order to capture both classes and instances, even dynamic 
instances. We propose a concept to compare the benefits 
and limitations of ontologies to conventional UML-based 

development in the context of relevant MAS design and 
reconfiguration scenarios. For an initial empirical evalua-
tion, we suggest a set of development complexity and 
quality criteria and apply the concept to scenarios derived 
from the industry-relevant production automation informa-
tion system domain. The remaining part of this paper is 
organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes related work 
on agile MAS development. Section 3 motivates research 
issues and the application scenario. Section 4 outlines the 
UML- and ontology-based development approaches for 
MAS reconfiguration to compare these approaches. In 

section 5 we provide an initial evaluation of the concept 
and discuss the results. Section 6 concludes and suggests 
future research. 
  2. Related Work 
 Today software systems that support production auto-
mation face two major challenges: (a) fault-tolerant (safe) 
production systems grow more complex (e.g., larger sys-
tems, technology for more fine-grained control of produc-
tion elements, more degrees of freedom of the elements 
34th Euromicro Conference Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-3276-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2008.37224 involved) and thus are harder to model and verify for con-
sistency and (b) the systems have to deal with changes in 
their environment (e.g., failures, changes in configuration) 
in more sustainable and more responsive (i.e., agile) ways 

[10]. This section summarizes related work on these chal-
lenges for MAS development processes in the production 
automation domain. 
2.1. Reconfigurable Multi-Agent Systems 
Studies of mass production automation systems [4, 9] 
conclude that the design of modern systems should be 
proficient and responsive enough to efficiently manufac-
ture customized products for high-volume markets. This 
goal needs effective and efficient reconfiguration processes 
on the production floor, i.e., capabilities for stepwise ex-
pandability, integration of new components, and dynamic 

plan layout [14]. Multi-agent system (MAS) design can 
help address these goals on the software level [13]. These 
agents can model the states, behavior of and interfaces 

between actual entities in the system (like hardware, ma-
chines, and software systems) in a natural and flexible 
way.  While the idea of agents [14, 15] helps structuring a 
MAS, the flexible reconfiguration and design of the com-

munication among agents remains a challenge as the sys-
tem should react well to certain classes of failures, which 

are partly considered by MAS design and development 
methods [13, 16, 18]. 
2.2. Multi-Agent System Design for Reconfiguration 
For creating a MAS one has to address aspects on two 
levels (similar to a software product line process): (1) 
domain level: agent identification, data definition, behavior 

definition, coordination and communication definition [10] 

and (2) product level: iterative reconfiguration of system 
versions consisting of domain-level agents.  
New requirements often need design reconfigurations 
such as adding new agents, replacing agents or modifying 
the capability or cooperation of agents within the system. 
However, complexity aspects of a large system, such as 
communication paths between agents and the number of 
components to be handled, make the task to design the 

reconfiguration of the agents and layout error prone. 
Therefore MAS design methods need to provide capabili-

ties such as reusability of design components and know-
ledge, reconfiguration during run time, and incorporation 
of tool-supported QA.  
Current approaches to agent system design such as Gaia 
[18], Massive [7], Agent UML [13] and Tropos [11] are 

mostly goal driven: an agent system is designed by itera-
tively decomposing system goals until they can be as-
signed to individual agents. However, goal-driven design 
goal decomposition may lead developers to work out solu-
tions to common design problems without benefiting from 
past knowledge [16] resulting in duplicate effort, inconsis-
tent design, and poor traceability of the system design.  
One approach to provide reusable solutions to recurring 
MAS design problems is pattern-driven design [1, 3, 16]. 

In a pattern-driven approach [16] agent systems are devel-
oped starting from recurring design solutions and making 
them available as (domain-specific) patterns, later the 
designer can select appropriate patterns for their specific 
system application derived from a given set of patterns and 

pattern languages. In the production automation domain, 
patterns can describe agent roles, agent coordination, work 
orders, system failures and recovery activities. Some tasks 
can be supported by tools such as pattern documentation, 
requirement based selection, and patterns modeling tools. 
However, built-in support for the reconfiguration of an 
evolving system based on agent patterns is still not well 
understood. 
2.3. Approaches to Multi-Agent System Design 
The decomposition and transformation of the system 
from design to agent system implementation typically uses 
models in UML notation. In this UML-based approach 
descriptions of system such as agent identification, data 
definition, behavior definition, coordination and communi-

cation definition are captured and visualized in UML dia-
grams (e.g. use cases, class diagram and behavior dia-

grams). QA is performed by reviewing the UML models 
before implementation [2], test case generation derived 
from UML diagrams, according to model coverage criteria 

[12]. However, UML diagrams seem not well suited to 
capture relevant aspects of system reconfiguration such as 
agent class instances and the configuration of class in-
stances. Thus, in an UML-based approach, the configura-
tion of agents has to be represented with the aid ofexter-
nmodels such as an XML configuration file, since the 
configuration parameters need to be presented to the agents 
in a machine-readable way. In case of reconfiguration, the 
XML configuration file regularly has to be changed and 
reviewed for internal and external consistency. To find all 
dependencies and modifications necessary for a particular 

reconfiguration task is often error prone and can take con-
siderable effort. 
To address these challenging issues, in this paper we 
explore as alternative the use of ontologies to capture agent 
patterns and configuration information as input for the 

MAS reconfiguration process. Currently, ontologies are 
used in MAS design to capture the agent communications 
[6, 8] and for checking the consistency of UML models 
[5]. Ontologies allow storing the schema and data together 
within  a continuous model, preventing fractured views on 

several models and effectively supporting checks for in-
consistency and incompleteness regarding all involved 
models. Further, ontologies can be used both during design 
time and run time, which allows using the design informa-
tion at run time and also feeding back run time changes to 
225 the next cycle of design in an agile integrated and iterative 
process.   3. Research Issues & Application Scenario 
 Our research goal is to compare the properties of an on-
tology-based process for reconfiguration of MAS produc-

tion systems to the properties of a traditional UML-based 
process to better understand the strengths and limitations 
of these alternatives, provide guidelines for MAS design-
ers, and identify issues for further work. From the generic 
MAS reconfiguration process [19] we derive (a) a process 
variant based on a traditional UML-based modeling ap-
proach (with extensions that cover apparent limitations of 
UML) and (b) an ontology-based approach that promises 
to model important reconfiguration aspects in a continuous 
model. New development approaches for MAS design, 
such as the proposed ontology-based approach, are ex-

pected to bring benefits to software development like faster 
or more efficient development. To identify general proper-
ties of models selection, we worked with experts in soft-
ware development in the product automation domain.  
Later we derived the following criteria to compare the 
alternative approaches
.  Model complexity.
 For a given reconfiguration scenario 
we measure complexity as the number of ele-
ments/relationships that need to be developed or mod-
ified. A more complex system model is typically harder 
to handle for the system developer and designer, e.g., for 
the integration of the model elements, and traceability of 
the model elements along the life cycle as the system de-
veloper and designer has to find all dependencies and 
modifications necessary for a particular reconfiguration. 
 Modeling effort.
 In a scenario we measure the effort for 
the steps by determining the average effort for tasks that 
have to be applied to a certain number of elements de-
rived from the scenario. 
 Quality risk.
 We evaluate the risk level of introducing or 
not identifying relevant and typical reconfiguration de-
fects such as inconsistencies and incorrectness of models 
as on a Likert scale as low, medium, or high. Part of the 
risk assessment is the built-in support of an approach for 
QA that helps preventing or early identifying relevant 
classes of defects. 
The research application scenario in production automa-
tion is a typical MAS application from the industrial manu-
facturing domain [6].  Figure 1 shows a typical workshop 
layout where products are assembled from a number of 
product parts. The system consists of agents and compo-
nents (group of agents) such as storage areas, where parts 
(raw materials, semi-finished and finished products) are 
stored; assembly areas, where robots assemble the parts 
into products; and a finishing area, where the products are 
taken out of the system and delivered to another storage 
area or to a system for further development and shipment 
to the customer. The product parts and finished products 
are transported on pallets using conveyor belts. Intersec-
tions connect conveyor belts, a diverter is an intersection 
with one incoming and two outgoing conveyors; a junction 
connects two incoming to one outgoing conveyor. 
 Figure 1. Production automation scenario [6]. 
Note that key parts of the system can be redundant to 
increase system throughput capabilities and allow keeping 
the system running during maintenance/reconfiguration 
phases of a redundant system part. A key aspect is that 
system coordination can dynamically react to changes in 

resource availability and changes in system capabilities.
   4. Reconfiguration with UML & Ontology 
 
MAS reconfiguration is an essential capability for pro-
duction automation applications which need to be adjusted 
for maintenance and evolution, e.g., new work layouts or 
new technologies.
 Thus, this capability should be sup-
ported by repeatable processes that can be monitored, 

audited, and improved over time. 
In this section we refer to a generic MAS life cycle [19] 
that includes a reconfiguration process, and derive process 
variants for UML-based and ontology-based reconfigura-
tion. The generic MAS life cycle distinguishes between the 
domain level and production line level: The domain level 
represents the development activities for a reusable set of 
agents that can be used for a wide range of application 
scenarios. The production line level outlines the activities 
of actual system reconfiguration: reconfiguration analysis, 
reconfiguration implementation, and testing and simulation 
of new configurations. 
4.1. UML-Based Reconfiguration Process  
From the generic process in [19] we derive the UML 
variant in Fig. 2a. 
Step 1 Reconfiguration Analysis
 (1a) and Design (1b). 
The UML-based approach starts from the stakeholder 
226 requirements input with step 1a, reconfiguration analysis, 
resulting in a Use Case Model, which depicts the system 
functionalities as use cases and system failures as failure 
cases. This step concludes with QA of the use case model 

against the original requirements. 
In step 1b, system design, the designer identifies from 
this global system functionality model the agents needed to 

provide the functionality. The distinction of the reconfigu-
ration analysis and design step of the generic life cycle into 

two separate steps with additional QA cycles is expected to 
provide better quality of the final system, as it is possible 
to check the use case model against the reconfiguration 
requirements at an early stage of the life cycle, thus mini-
mizing the risk of missing requirements in the final system. 
Each agent is designed using a variety of UML models, 
depending on which aspect of the agent should be mod-
eled. For structural design class diagrams show basic pa-

rameters of an agent, like an identifying name and inter-
faces. Nevertheless, this method does not provide concrete 
insight into the agent class instances and the number of 

agent connections that makes sense in various situations. 
  Figure 2a. UML Rconfiguration LifeCycle with QA.  
Modeling of the overall system behavior is more diffi-
cult with UML diagrams, especially when dealing with a 
large number of agents. Thus a complete system sequence 
diagram is often large and surprisingly hard to handle and 
understand. Furthermore, UML does not provide methods 
to define the detailed configuration of agent instances. 
In the UML reconfiguration process typical defects are: 
inconsistencies between models and/or violated dependen-
cy relationships if a change is not consistently applied to 
all models, use case variants may be forgotten or interac-
tion effects not well understood. The QA cycles mainly 
consist of manually reviewing the models against the re-

quirements and against model aspects that need to stay 
consistent. External model checkers exist, but are often not 
well-integrated elements in the UML methodology. 
Step 2 Reconfiguration Implementation.
 From the 
UML models parts of the implementation can be generated 
automatically, like the basic structure of agent classes. The 
behaviour of the agents can partly be derived from the 

agent tool box, which provides reusable agents, with minor 
configuration-dependent modification; product-specific 
behaviour has to be implemented manually, although it is 

possible to transform some behaviour from state charts and 
sequence diagrams into code (e.g. failover behavior de-

rived from sequence charts). The implementation covers 
agent classes, not instances of agents, as the number of 
instances, configuration, and specific behaviour parameters 
are defined in the XML configuration file. 
Step 3 Reconfiguration Testing and Simulation
. For safety-critical systems, it is necessary to measure system 
quality and performance (e.g., remaining unresolved (un-
critical) defects, response to failure scenarios, and service 

levels; system throughput in different workload scenarios) 
of the new configuration. One approach is to perform lab 
monitoring using a simulation tool that represents relevant 
properties of the target system [10]. The successfully 
tested configuration can be deployed to the target envi-
ronment and be used as new current system configuration 
for step 1. Defects found during simulation and testing are 
reported to design or implementation as appropriate. The 

UML-based approach ultimately results in the XML confi-
guration file, which can be tested with a simulation tool. 

UML diagrams support testing of the configuration, as we 
can derive system test cases from the use case model and 
sequence charts; and agent unit test cases from state charts 

and sequence
 charts.
 4.2. Ontology-based Reconfiguration Process  
From the generic process in [19] we derive the ontology 
process variant in Fig. 2b. 
Step 1 Reconfiguration Analysis and Design
. Recon-
figuration requirements form the input of the reconfigura-
tion domain analysis step, which is composed of the tasks 
concept and relationship identification as well as use case 
analysis of ontology and agents. Domain test cases are 
created as additional output to be used in latter QA steps. 
System design is the next step, where agent toolbox 
concepts reusing other more general upper-level ontologies 

are taken as input, where both static and dynamic struc-
tures of the system ontology and software agents are de-

signed. The ontology contains static information on the 
production line components (called resources such as ro-
bots or pallets) and their structure, possible failure types, 
as well as some behavioural aspects like work orders de-
rived from business orders of customers, agents and re-

source status modeled by dynamically created and updated 
instances. Rules represent the reactive event processing 
components, which enable to directly manipulate ontology 
components and instances as well as to communicate with 
software agents via sending messages. 
227 The QA step after system design is used to ensure for-
mal consistency and validity of the design models by per-
forming type checks and semantic validation. Requirement 
satisfaction by the design is evaluated; expert reviews of 

the ontology structure are performed to identify and re-
solve inconsistencies. Further, the reasoning capability of 
ontologies allows expressing and enacting routine checks 

automatically on classes and instances. Issues and defects 
are reported back to reconfiguration analysis and design 

for resolution. 
Step 2 Reconfiguration Implementation. 
Implementa-
tion follows the system design, where the designed ontolo-
gy can be directly used as input and is in this step extended 
by concrete instances and their property values. In a pro-
duction automation environment additional programming 
can integrate the agent framework (e.g. JADE [8]), com-
munication (e.g., FIPA ACL language [15]) and logging 
capabilities. 
  Figure 2b. Ontology-based Reconfiguration Life Cycle 
with QA.  For QA the new configuration has to pass a static va-
lidity test, i.e. checking whether each agent has a consis-
tent interface (input and output) with other agents or com-
ponents. After implementation, software unit testing using 
domain and other test cases is performed. The reasoning 
capability of the ontology can be used to check the consis-
tency of the configuration both of classes and instances 

including their dependencies to other components and 
design patterns. This integrated capability helps to take 
away routine effort from QA personnel and also designers 
and implementers. Issues could be design defects that get 
reported to step 1, or configuration defects that feed back 

directly into the implementation step. 
Step 3 Reconfiguration Testing and Simulation
. The last step before deployment is system operation in a testing 
and simulation environment, where normal operation using 
inter-agent communication via messages is functional, 
ontology instances and property values are being dynami-
cally asserted and removed, and logical rules are being 
fired, when appropriate. Moreover, hardware failures can 
be simulated, monitored and possibly recovered with use 
of ontology and rules at run-time. Thus with an ontology 
approach similar model views can be used during design, 
implementation, and run time helping to ensure consistent 
models as input to the next reconfiguration cycle. 
  5. Evaluation Study and Discussion 
 This section reports on an initial evaluation of the 
process variants described in Section 4 based on a scenario 
taken from industry and discusses the results. We focus on 

the reconfiguration level process and investigate the 
enactment of the general process from the roles MAS de-
veloper and QA (a) using a traditional UML-based model-
ing approach (see Section 4.1) and (b) using an ontology-

based approach that promises to model important reconfi-
guration aspects in a continuous model (see Section 4.2). 

We conduct a feasibility study to investigate actual 
strengths and limitations of both approaches. In the study 
the roles were taken by 2 persons with good technical 
experience in the application area and UML/ontologies 
fitting to the process variant they were to enact. 
In this work we also identify typical defects that may 
occur in UML-based approach that should be addressed by 
the ontology-based approach. 
The subsections describe the scenarios and the results of 
modeling new configurations in the context of the system 
depicted in Figure 1 using both approaches. The research 
application context involved 7 agent classes with the fol-
lowing number of agent instances (see Figure 1): 25 con-

veyors, 6 junctions; 6 diverters, 6 index stations; 4 RFID 
readers, 3 robots, and one storage rack. We analyzed both 

approaches regarding model complexity; modeling effort 
and quality risk (see Section 3). 
Scenario 1
adding a conveyor: In order to increase 
the throughput of the system a new connection conveyor 
should be added, leading from the storage area to the as-
sembly area (redundant conveyor parallel to CC3 in Figure 

1). 
Scenario 2
 veyor removal: One connection con-
veyor should be removed from the system (e.g., CC3 in 
Figure 1). 
Scenario 3
change of conveyor direction: The direc-
tion of a connection conveyor should be changed (e.g., 
CC4 in Figure 1). 
Precondition for each of the reconfiguration scenarios is 
to conduct a dependency analysis to identify relevant de-
pendencies between agent instances. In this context, de-
pendencies exist with the direct neighborhood of an agent 
(e.g., in- and out-node of a conveyor), but also in design 
patterns where a group of agents cooperates (e.g., several 
conveyors can provide a loop to temporarily store pallets). 
Dependencies impact design changes and QA in both ap-
proaches similarly. 
228 5.1. Scenario - Change of a Resource Agent - UML 
This subsection describes the results of reconfiguration 
using the UML-based approach.  In order to identify, if 

adding, removing, and change direction of the conveyor 
has an impact on the system behaviour, we conduct a de-
pendency analysis to find out, which behaviour or which 
design patterns may be affected. This dependency analysis 
has to be conducted manually by analyzing existing design 
patterns. 
Just to give an example, adding a conveyor to the sys-
tem results in a small number of changes. The first step is 
to analyze the requirements for the new conveyor. If the 
conveyor does not need new functionality beyond the 
capabilities available from the agent tool box, we can take 

the agent as it is. In this case the only change is in the 
XML configuration file, which has to be extended by the 
new conveyor. 
However, if the conveyor is added as an additional re-
routing possibility because of higher work load in the sys-

tem, it is necessary to model the rerouting design pattern 
with additional sequence charts. It is also important to 
model the failure handing behaviour for the new conveyor 
with additional sequence diagrams. Also a new design 
pattern may be necessary. The changes made to the differ-
ent models and the newly created models result in at least 
one QA cycle (manual review) for each of the models. 
5.2. Change of a Resource Agent - Ontology 
This subsection describes the results of reconfiguration 
using the ontology approach. 
Scenario 1

adding a conveyor:
 The requirement to 
include a new conveyor in the system can be satisfied by 
creating a conveyor-supervising software agent, which is 
responsible for the proper behaviour and for scheduling of 

the underlying hardware conveyor. Further we add a new 
instance of 
Conveyor concept in the ontology and fill in its 
properties. Defects introduced during adding activities, 
e.g., a non-connected conveyor, can be prevented or found 
early by running the ontology reasoner with logical queries 
based on the system design and coordination patterns that 
are applicable to a conveyor. 
Scenario 2

conveyor removal
: In order to remove a 
conveyor from the system, the responsible software agent 
has to be destroyed, the instance of Conveyor concept, as 
well as the supervising agent instance, have to be removed 
from the ontology and all the machine agents supervising 
connected resources (e.g., intersections) have to delete the 

link to conveyor instances in the relevant ontology proper-
ty values. Defects introduced during the activities, e.g., a 

non-connected intersection or separated line clusters (par-
tially connected network) can be again prevented by run-
ning logical queries. Some of these situations can be re-

solved by changing the direction of a remaining conveyor. 
Scenario 3

change of the conveyor direction
: Chang-
ing the conveyor direction requires few actions to be per-
formed: The values of the conveyor properties 
inde
 and 
ou
 have to be exchanged and connected intersection 
agents have to change the intersection instance class from 
Diverter to Junction and vice-versa and shift the changed 

conveyor instance between its 
inConveyor 
and 
outCon-
veyor
 properties. Changing the conveyor direction can 
however cause defect situations when, e.g., the junction 

(i.e., new in-node) does not have the switching capability, 
so it cannot act as a diverter [19], or the direction change 

could cause the creation of a logistically unreachable sub-
system. After changing the hardware conveyor direction, 
all the software agents controlling diverter intersections 
perform recalculation of the shortest paths to the line nodes 
by running corresponding general logical rules. These rules 
are able to discover any unreachable nodes and issue warn-
ings. 
Logical reasoning, on the other hand, can effectively 
prevent the logical changing of the junctions to diverters as 
their switching behaviour is required and has to be denoted 
in the corresponding property value. Some of such defect 

situations might have a solution in changing the direction 
of another conveyor in the system
. 5.3. Comparison of UML- & Ontology Processes 
Table 1 provides a side-by-side view on complexities, 
effort, and risks encountered in the study scenarios (see 

[19] for a more detailed discussion). Process effort mea-
surements depend on several factors in addition to process 
and tool support (e.g., task selection and skill factors, ma-

turation of subjects), thus we present the effort ranges 
without consideration of statistical significance. We are 
well aware of the external validity limitations of such an 
initial study; however, such studies are important to moti-
vate the investment into more comprehensive empirical 
studies [17] in practitioner environments (for a more de-
tailed comparison see [19]). 
Overall both approaches were well suited to deal with 
the limited complexity of the initial evaluation scenarios. 
The main difference in evaluation between the two ap-
proaches is in the modeling effort, which is considerably 

higher for the UML-based approach than for the ontology-
based approach, which can be supported by automated 
reasoning.  Manual dependency checks and QA need con-

siderably more time and are also more error prone. A simi-
larity in the approaches is in the interdependency of effort 

for conducting the actual model changes and the number of 
models to be changed. However, in the UML-based ap-
proach we have to change more artifacts than in the ontol-
ogy-based approach. 
The quality risks of the UML-based approach depend 
mainly on the accuracy of the system designer. Especially 
the dependency analysis and QA tasks have to be con-
ducted carefully and completely to avoid mistakes, which 
may lead to system failures, which are only detected dur-
ing system operation. Thus, the quality risk is rated me-
dium. The quality risk for the ontology-based approach is 
229 rated low, because QA can be well supported with auto-
mated reasoning, which avoids the human factor and thus 
has a very low probability of missing inconsistencies. 
 Table 1: Comparison of UML-and Ontology-based 
approaches (times in minutes). 
 UML-Based Approach Ontology-based Approach 
Scenario  adding a conveyor 
Model comple
xi-ty umber of affected artifacts: 
6 umber of affected artifacts: 
4Modeling effort
 Model changes:
 50-60 min. 
Dependency analysis:
 80-90 
min. 
Quality assurance:
 160-180 
min. 
Model changes: 
35-45 minutes
Dependency analysis: 
50-60 
min.
 Quality assurance: 
25- 35 min.
Quality risk
 medium
 low 
Scenario 2 onveyor removal 
Model complexi-
ty 
umber of affected artifacts: 
7 umber of affected artifacts: 
4Modeling effort Model changes:
 60-70 min.
 Dependency analysis: 
80-90 
min. 
Quality assurance:
 160-180 
min.
 Model changes: 
25-35 min.
 Dependency analysis: 
50-60 
min.
 Quality assurance: 
25-35 min.
Quality risk medium low 
Scenario 3change of conveyor direction 
Model complexi-
ty 
umber of affected artifacts: 
10 umber of affected artifacts: 
3Modeling effort Model changes: 
90-100 min.
 Dependency analysis: 
80-90 
min. 
Quality assurance:
 160-180 
min.
 Model changes: 
25-35 min.
 Dependency analysis: 
50-60 
min.
 Quality assurance: 
25-35 min.
Quality risk medium low 
 Perceived strengths of the UML-based approach for re-
configuration were to help designers get an overview on a 
domain and identify components to work with: a) to pro-
vide well readable and understandable visualization for the 
designer and developer, especially for the software devel-
opment process of reusable assets (e.g., an agent tool box); 

and b) to provide a well understandable high-level over-
view on agent classes, their properties and of agents states, 
so behavior modeling can be focused to most relevant 
agents. 
Perceived weaknesses of UML-based approach for re-
configuration were a) to needs model extensions to the 
reconfiguration information, which leads to a fractured 
view (that needs to be compensated with appropriate QA 

methods, e.g., inspection of consistency between several 
models that capture partly overlapping aspects); b) could 

not well capture the agent instance and configuration in-
formation; c) had a higher error proneness due to the need 
for manual model reviews. 
The ontology-based approach seems to be stronger to 
keep an overview on all the detailed information and de-
pendencies on agents and instances over several iterations 

of reconfigurations in the context of a well-defined big 
picture. 
Perceived strengths of ontology-based approach for re-
configuration were a) to capture system configuration 
description (schema and data) in an integrated model; b) 

the integrated model allows tool support for QA checks 
(reasoning to conduct consistency and plausibility checks 
among the model aspects); c) to provide the source to 
explore the system structure using an ontology editor; and 
d) to provide a model that is directly usable both at design 
time and run time, enabling dynamic reconfiguration 
checks even at run-time (e.g., when handling of hardware 
failure scenarios). 
Perceived weaknesses of ontology-based approach for 
reconfiguration were a) higher complexity of the ontology 

model; b) to provide human readable visualization of rela-
tionships among entities and a general overview on a do-
main with generic standard tools; c) the challenge to un-
derstand the contribution of an ontology element without 
good understanding of the domain, the design task, and the 
overall ontology design. In addition it has to be stated that 
compared to traditional SE qualifications like data model-
ing using UML, ontologies are a fairly new topic. There-

fore, additional training or qualification of the involved 
software engineers is needed in order to allow the ontolo-
gy-based approach to be used in a efficient way. 
  6. Conclusion and Future Work 
 Multi-agent systems (MAS) in production automation 
need to be reconfigured correctly and efficiently to adapt 
to new requirements, new behavior, and new support tech-

nology. In this paper we focused on the reconfiguration 
process in the MAS development life cycle and investi-
gated the enactment of the general process as (a) an UML-
based approach with XML configuration extensions and 
(b) an ontology-based approach that models important 
reconfiguration aspects in a continuous model. For initial 
empirical evaluation, we applied the concept in fundamen-
tal scenarios derived from the production automation in-

formation system domain, and investigated complexity, 
effort, and quality risk for both approaches. 
Major results are: 1) The current standard development 
approach using UML notation only partly supports captur-
ing agent classes, the configuration and their instances. 

Modeling the interaction of instances (e.g., in design pat-
terns) with sequence diagrams can lead to a large number 
of diagrams even for relatively simple scenarios. UML 
diagrams are easy to follow and dependencies in UML 
diagrams can be well deduced. However, keeping several 
types of UML diagrams synchronized with each other and 
the actual system configuration can take considerable ef-
fort. 2) Ontologies allow modeling all aspects of MAS 

design in a common model, but contain considerably more 
entities and relationships than presented in UML diagrams 

modeling a similar scenario (as instances and their depen-

dencies are also modeled adding to the ontology complexi-
ty). Ontologies are essentially logical text-based constructs 
that can model many dimensions of relationships among 

element, thus a generic visualization is a major challenge, 
while logical reasoning can be well supported for depen-

dency analysis and consistency checking. Ontologies can 
230 directly contain the system configuration, lowering the 
synchronization risk. 
Overall both approaches were well suited to deal with 
the limited complexity of the evaluation scenarios. We 

found the UML-based approach particularly well suited to 
help designers get an overview on a domain and identify 
components to work with. The ontology-based approach 

seems to be stronger to keep an overview on all the de-
tailed information and dependencies on agents and in-

stances over several iterations of reconfigurations in the 
context of a well-defined big picture. 
For further work we see much promise in a systems de-
sign process combining the strengths of both UML and 
ontologies beyond the reconfiguration process described in 
this paper. The next steps in research should pursue the 

following directions: 
 Prototype a design process that uses UML to provide 
domain context and overview on system class level; 
ontologies to map design patterns to instances and tool 
support for QA; based on the success factors identified 

in the evaluation study, e.g., domain-specific visualiza-
tion for ontologies. 
 Propose methods and tool support for more effective 
and efficient dependency analysis and QA to mitigate 
the risk of defects and their impact on system quality 

and rework effort, e.g., test case generation from design 
patterns and instance information in the ontology and 

visualization support for QA. 
 Investigate the use of ontologies at run time to support 
checking the safety of agent instance states for more ef-
fective failure handling to further enhance agility and 
sustainability of the application system. Feeding back 
run time changes to the next cycle of design helps en-
sure information consistency in an agile process. 
 Propose the use of ontologies for providing a conti-
nuous data model during the life cycle of a system. 

Since ontologies are a fairly new topic in SE, tradition-
al data modeling methods like UML need to be ex-
tended by ontologies as a first step in order to guaran-
tee a higher acceptance rate of this new data modeling 
method. 
The software system level of production automation 
provides an industry-relevant application context for re-
search work and allows the evaluation of approaches that 
can be readily transferred to comparable mission-critical 
system domains where effective and efficient reconfigura-

tion is an important success factor. 
  
References 
[1] Aridor, Y., Lange, D., Agent Design Patterns: Elements of 
Agent Application Design, Second Intl. Conference on Auto-
nomous Agents, IEEE, 1998 
[2] Biffl, S., Mordinyi, R., Schatten, A.: A Model-Driven Archi-
tecture Approach Using Explicit Stakeholder Quality Re-

quirement Models for Building Dependable Information Sys-
tems, in Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on 
Software Quality, International Conference on Software En-
gineering (ICSE2007), 2007  
[3] Deugo, D., Weiss, M., and Kendall, 
L., Reusable Patterns for 
Agent Coordination, in: Omicini, A., et al (eds.), Coordina-
tion of Internet Agents, Springer, 2001 
[4] Felfernig, A.: Standardized Configuration Knowledge Repre-
sentations as Technological Foundation for Mass Customiza-
tion, IEEE Transaction on Engineering Management on; 2004 
[5] Guizzardi, G., Wagner, G., Guarino, N., van Sinderen, M.: 
An Ontologically Well-Founded Profile for UML Conceptual 
Models, in Proc. of 16th International Conference on Ad-
vanced Information Systems Engineering (CAISE 2004), 
Springer LNCS, 2004 
[6] Koppensteiner, G., Konzeption und Entwicklung einer 
Ontologie für ein wissensbasiertes Automatisierungssystem, 
Master Thesis, Vienna University of Technology, 2007.  
[7] Lind, J., Iterative Software Engineering for Multi-Agent 
Systems: The MASSIVE Method, 2001 
[8] Merdan, M.; Kordic, V.; Zoitl, A.; Lazinica, A.; Knowledge-
based Multi-agent Architecture, International Conference on 
Computational Intelligence for Modelling, Control and Au-

tomation, (CIMCA 06) p. 55, Sydney, Australia; 2006. 
[9] Mikkola, J. H.: Management of Product Architecture Mod-
ularity for Mass Customization: Modeling and Theoretical 
Considerations, IEEE Transaction on Engineering Manage-
ment on Mass Customization Manufacturing Systems vol 54 

no. 1, pp 57-69, 2007 
[10] Marik, V., Vrba, P., Hall, K., Maturana, F.: Rockwell Au-
tomation agents for Manufacturing,
 Int. Conf. on Autonom-
ous Agents, in Proc. 4th int. joint Conf. on Autonomous 
Agents and Multiagent Systems 2005. 
[11] Paolo Bresciani. Paolo Giorgini. Fausto Giunchiglia. John 
Mylopoulos. Anna Perini. TROPOS: An Agent-Oriented 
Software Development Methodology. In Journal of Auto-
nomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. May 2004 
[12] Reuys, A., Kamsties, E., Pohl, K., Reis, S.: Model-Based 
System Testing of Software Product Families, In Proceeding 
of the 17th International Conference on Advanced Informa-
tion Systems Engineering (CAISE 2005), Springer LNCS, 
2005 [13] Sellers, B., H, Giorgini, P.: Agent-Oriented Methodologies, 
Idea Group Publishing, 2005  
[14] Van Leeuwen, E.H., and Norrie, D.: Intelligent Manufac-
turing: Holons and Holarchies, Manufacturing Engineer, vol. 
76, no. 2, 1997, pp. 86-88. 
[15] Vrba, P., MAST: Manufacturing Agent Simulation Tool, 
Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, 2003. Pro-
ceedings. ETFA apos;03. IEEE Conference Volume 1, Issue , 

pp. 16-19 Sept. 2003  
[16] Weiss, M.: Pattern-Driven Design of Agent Systems: Ap-
proach and Case Study, In Proceeding of CAiSE 2003, Sprin-

ger-Verlag Berlin LNCS 2681, pp, 2003  
[17] Wohlin, C., Runeson, P., Höst, M., Ohlsson, M., Regnell, 
B., Wesslén, A.,: Experimentation in software engineering: an 
introduction, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, 
2000 [18] Wooldridge, M., Jennings, N., and Kinny, D., The Gaia 
Methodology for Agent-oriented Analysis and Design, Jour-
nal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2002 
[19] Technical Reportestigating UML- and Ontology-
Based Approaches for Developing Agile Multi-Agent Sys-
tems available at: http://qse.ifs.tuwien.ac.at/publication/IFS-
QSE-0712_UML+Ontology_for_MAS_Reconfiguration.pdf 
231