 Outlining a Model Integrating Risk Management and Agile Software DevelopmentJaana Nyfjord and Mira Kajko-Mattsson
 Department of Computer and Systems Sciences 
Stockholm University/KTH 
SE-164 40 Kista SWEDEN 
{jaana}{mira}@dsv.su.se 
  Abstract—Previous studies show that the agile development 
models implement very few risk management practices. In this 
paper, we present and evaluate a model
 integrating the risk 
management and agile processes. The results show that the 
model provides a valid solution to address the lack of risk 
management, however, only in certain types of agile projects.  
Keywords- software process, evaluation 
I. INTRODUCTION
 Controlling risks improves essential software 
development features such as product quality, planning 
precision and cost-efficiency [5]. For this reason, the 

inclusion of risk management in software development is an 
important factor to consider if one wishes to achieve project 
success [5]. Unfortunately, many software development 
models, both the traditional and agile ones, are not well 
aligned with the risk management process practices [3] [14].  
In our research, we have addressed this by outlining a 
model specifically aimed at aligning the agile process model 

with risk management. The model consists of two parts, (a) 
an integration model providing guidance for integrating the 
risk management and agile processes, and (b) an integrated 
model that places risk management in the agile process.  
In this paper, we present and evaluate the model. We do 
this by interviewing ten agile practitioners in the Swedish 
software industry. Our goal is to determine whether the 
proposed model is a valid solution to address the lack of risk 
management in agile development. 
This paper is structured as follows. Section II presents our 
research method. Section III describes the integration 
model. Section IV provides an overview of the integrated 
model and a practical example based on an industrial case. 
Section V presents the results of the evaluation in industry. 
Finally, conclusions and suggestions for future research are 
presented in Sections VI and VII.  
II. RESEARCH 
METHOD
 This section describes our research method. Section II.A 
presents the research steps. Section II.B describes the 
requirements against which the model is evaluated. Section 

II.C presents the studied organization and the interviewees.
 A. Research Steps  
As the first two steps, we studied the status of the agile 
and risk management processes in industry. It resulted in a 
synthesized agile and a synthesized risk management 

process model, respectively. They are presented in Figures 1 
and 2 and reported in [8] [9] and [10]. In this paper, they 
constitute a basis for outlining the integrated model.  
In the third step, we studied various agile development 
process scenarios in which risk management was executed. 
We did it within one software organization, SVT-I, to be 
described in Section II.C. The goal was to study risk 
management in the context of an agile process and to 

identify integration points between the two processes. Using 
these integration points, we created a simple integration 
model, which we then used for outlining the integrated 
model. The models are described in Sections III and IV, 
respectively.    In the fourth step, the models were presented to and 
evaluated by ten agile practitioners representing various 
companies in Sweden. Their profiles are described in 

Section II.C. The goal of the evaluation was to validate the 
proposed models. We did this by evaluating them against a 
set of requirements that they were expected to fulfill. The 
evaluation was conducted in the form of in-depth interviews. The requirements and the questionnaire are 
described in Section II.B.  
Finally, in the fifth step, we analyzed the evaluation 
results. It resulted in an evaluation of the validity of the 
proposed model but also suggestions for improvements. We 

present and discuss the results in Section V and VI.  
B. Evaluation Requirements and Questionnaire 
To be able to evaluate our models, we created a set of 
requirements. These requirements concerned the usability of 
the integration and integrated models, and the aspect of 
agility. They were the following:  
 The integration model should provide software 
organizations practical guidance on how to integrate their 
risk management and agile development processes. 
 The integrated model should provide a reference model  
34th Euromicro Conference Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-3276-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2008.77476   
   
 
   
    Figure 1. Synthesized agile process model [8][9] 
 for software organizations to examine their risk 
management practice 
 The solution should s provide guidance for reasoning 
about agility with respect to the need of risk management. 
    Using these requirements, we created an open-ended and 
semi-structured questionnaire consisting of 30 questions 
altogether. Due to space restrictions, we cannot present it in 
this paper. However, it may be provided on request. 
C. Profile of  SVT-I and the interviewees 
SVT-I (Svensk Television-Interactive) is a Swedish 
software organization that develops a web-based system for 
broadcasting TV programs on the Internet. It has 35 
employees. The studied team consisted of eight people; a 
product owner, a scrum master and six developers. The 
development process was Scrum [13] combined with the 

practices of Informative Workspace, Stories, Incremental 
Development, Test-Driven Development, 
and Pair 
Programming [1]. In our evaluation, we interviewed ten
 practitioners representing various organizations in the 
Swedish software industry using agile processes. The group 
included the following roles: consultant (4), developer (2), 
scrum master (2), product owner (1), and CEO (1). 
III.
 INTEGRATION 
MODEL 
 There is no general method or process for the integration 
of agile and risk management processes [1]. For this reason, 

we needed to create our own integration model. 
By studying various agile process scenarios in which risk 
management was executed at SVT-I, we were able to 
identify four basic integration points between the two 
processes. Using them, we created a simple integration 
model consisting of four basic integration points. We call 
them (1) 
Organizational Levels and Process Phases, 
(2)
 Roles and Responsibilities
, (3) Communication Channels, 
and (4) Process Aspects. 
Below, we briefly describe and 
motivate them:  
 Organizational Levels and Process Phases:
 A critical 
integration point involves the identification of 
when
 and 
where risk management takes place in the development 
process. The agile development process consists of several 
     
 Figure 2. Synthesized risk management model [10] 
 phases and it spans over several organizational levels. By 
finding out where risk management occurs clarifies the 

various points of integration between the two processes.  
 Roles and Responsibilities
: In the context of process 
integration, roles comprise a primary crossing point for the 

exchange of information between the two processes. 

According to standard risk management practice, risks 
should also be owned by various roles to ensure that they 
are effectively managed [12]. Hence, one needs to define 

appropriate roles and their responsibilities. 
 Communication Channels
: Agile development and risk 
management are communication intensive processes. The 
communication gets intensified if risks are managed across 
the whole organization and several processes and process 
phases. To achieve effective communication, one needs to 

designate appropriate communication channels. They 
integrate the processes and their phases by specifying the 
flow of communication on an organization-wide level. 
 Process Aspects: 
Processes are variable and dynamic. 
Their instances vary due to many different aspects affecting 
the process design. In this integration model, they are 
covered by some fundamental aspects of risk management 

as identified in [7]. Each of these aspects determines the 
magnitude of risk management required within the 
integrated process, thus aiding in adapting an instance of an 
integrated model to the specific situation at hand. The 
following aspects should be considered: 
o Risk definition: constitutes a control that there exists a 
comprehensible risk definition to facilitate the 
communication of risks within the organization. 
o Risk assessment:
 defines a control that there are 
guidelines for assessing risks effectively. 
 o Software lifecycle: 
defines a control for designating 
adequate risk management activities according to the 
varying needs of different software lifecycle phases.
 o Stakeholders, roles and responsibilities: 
defines a 
control for streamlining the degree of involvement of 
various stakeholders, roles and their responsibilities as 
determined by factors such as project size and risk profile.
 o Supporting tools/repositories: 
constitutes a control for 
considering the need of tools to support effective 
communication of risks and their management.
 o Template: constitutes a control for identifying the 
degree of formality of templates needed for recording 
risks and their management effectively. 
 o Product status: 
defines a control for determining the 
amount of risk management needed with respect to the 
product quality, business value and life expectancy.
 477   
   
 
      Figure 3. Overview of integrated model
   o Environment: 
constitutes a control for considering how 
to adopt risk management to the project’s cultural, social, 
political and physical context.
 o Organization: 
defines a control for considering 
organizational aspects such as people’s attitudes towards 
risks, organizational maturity, competency and training 
and their impact on a risk management program.
 o Measures: 
constitutes a control for determining the 
need for integrating the risk management process with 
other organizational processes, such as measurement 
processes, to provide useful information and feedback to 
the organization. IV. INTEGRATED 
MODEL 
 In this section, we describe the integrated model. We start 
with a model outline. We then describe its real-life scenario 
at SVT-I. 
A. Integrated Model 
The integrated model manages all risks encountered on an 
organization-wide basis. As depicted in Figure 3, the agile 
process covers three main development phases,
 Product 
Vision Planning, Product Roadmap and Release Planning, 

and Implementation 
[8][9]. 
Most of the risks undergo a complete risk management 
process within a phase. The ones that are not mitigated may 

have to be transferred to the next phase, and/or get reported 

to the Risk Management Forum (RMF)
. The forum is a 
function for coordinating risk management across the 
organization. It manages any risks that will have to be 

promptly disseminated, for instance risks concerning several 

teams. It consists of a cross-functional group represented by 
the roles responsible for or concerned with or capable of 
managing these kinds of organizations-wide risks.   
In the following, we provide a brief overview of the 
integrated model. It is described according to the integration 
model and its four integration points,
 (1) 
Process Phases 
and Organizational Levels, 
(2) 
Roles and Responsibilities, 
(3)
 Communication Channels, 
and (4)
 Process Aspects
.  1) Organizational Levels and Process Phases 
The integrated model covers the entire agile development 
process. This involves integration of risk management on 
two organizational levels: the Business
 and 
Engineering
 levels [8][9]. As depicted in Figure 1,
 the Business Level
 consists of the 
Product Vision Planning
 phase. The 
Engineering Level consists of 
Product Roadmap and 
Release Planning 
and Implementation
.   Product Vision Planning: This phase involves creating a 
product vision plan guiding the work carried out in 
subsequent planning, decision making, and development 
[13]. Risk management within this phase mainly concerns 
the identification and analysis of business related risks, such 
as budget and resource risks.  
 Product Roadmap and Release Planning
: Here, one first 
creates a high-level roadmap plan for the product releases 
which one then regularly revisits before the start of each 
new release [2]. The risk management in the 
Product 
Roadmap and Release Planning
 phase comprises risk 
identification, analysis and action planning. It involves both 
business and technical risks.  
 Implementation:
 Here, the team, product management 
and other stakeholders plan the work to be conducted in the 

coming iteration. The plan is then executed to deliver an 
increment of working product functionality [2]. Risk 
management in this phase primarily covers the monitoring 

and controlling of the risks that 
have been transferred to this 
phase from previous development phases. New risks are 
also continuously identified, analyzed and planned for 
during this phase. Risks are mainly of technical character. 
2) Roles and Responsibilities 
In the integrated model, we have identified several roles 
having various responsibilities with respect to risk 
management and its communication. Generally, however, 
the risks are owned by the roles in the phase where the risk 
is originally identified. The roles and responsibilities are: 
 RMF Members 
own all the organization-wide risks. Their 
main task is to supervise and coordinate all the organization-
wide risks and make decisions on them. However, they may 
delegate their management to other roles either within the 
Business 
or Engineering 
levels or both.  
 Business Manager
 is responsible for managing risks at the 
Business Level
. This role owns all the risks relevant for this 
level. However, he may delegate their management to the 

roles in the 
Product Roadmap and Release Planning
 or 
Implementation 
phase. The choice depends on the character 
of the risk and where in the organization it is most 
adequately managed. Still however, he keeps the risk 
ownership till the delegated risks get mitigated.  
 Product Manager 
is responsible for all the risks managed 
in the Product Roadmap and Release Planning phase. This 
role owns all the risks relevant for this level. However, 
similarly to the business manager, he may delegate their 

management to other roles in the organization, if needed. He 

still keeps the risk ownership till the risks get mitigated.  
 Team Leader and 
Team Members are responsible for 
managing risks within the 
Implementation
 phase. The team 
leader supervises the risk management. Usually, team 
478 members own the risks that concern the development tasks 
assigned to them. However, the team may also decide to 

delegate the risks to others in the organization depending on 
the risk and its management needs.  
3) Communication Channels 
An effective management of organization-wide risks rests 
on how risks are communicated within an organization. This 
is because, in the integrated model, risk management takes 
place throughout the entire development process. Hence, to 
warrant effective information flow, one needs define 
communication channels.  As depicted by the double-edged 

arrows in Figure 3, the integrated
 model identifies six main 
two-way 
Communication Channels. The difference between 
them concerns the different roles in each phase who act as 

the main senders and receivers of risk information.
 The 
communication channels are: (1) 
Product Vision Planning - 
RMF, (2)
 Product Vision Planning - Product Roadmap and 
Release Planning, (3)
 Product Roadmap and Release 
Planning - RMF, 
(4) Product Roadmap and Release 
Planning - Implementation
, (5) Product Vision Planning - 
Implementation, and (6)
 Implementation - RMF.
 4) Process Aspects 
Our study at SVT-I has helped us identify the impact of 
Process Aspects
 on the integrated model. This impact is 
materialized in the following process design guidance:  
 Risk definition is a main prerequisite for identifying risks 
and to communicate them effectively:
 The definition of risk 
is of high relevance for an effective communication on risk 
and hence for making decisions on when to perform risk 

management in software development.  
 Risk assessment results identify pertinent actions for 
performing risk-driven development:
 The risk classification 
and assessment techniques are important for
 knowing when 
and how to manage risks effectively in subsequent process 
phases. Hence, guidelines for assessing risks are needed. 
  The product’s software lifecycle stage aids in designating 
appropriate risk management actions:
 The portfolio of risk 
types and risk management activities differs considerably 
depending on whether a project concerns new development 
or maintenance of a legacy system. Hence, the process is 
adapted to the pr
evailing risk types and
 their prioritization. 
  Designation of and coverage of stakeholders, roles and 
responsibilities are determined by factors such as project 
risk profile, type and size: The coverage of stakeholder roles 
and the degree of their involvement depends on the type of 
project and its size, risk complexity, scope and criticality. 
  The use of supporting tools and repositories are 
determined by factors such as project risk profile, type, size 
and team distribution: 
The relevance of tools depends on 
the organization size, project needs and risk profile.  
 The formality of recording risk information varies by risk 
profile, project type, size, and team distribution:
 Templates 
provide relevant support for describing and communicating 
risks. However, the extent of using them and the degree of  
 Table 1. Mapping of risk management in agile phases 
   
     
    their formality varies with respect to project type, size, team 
distribution and risk severity.   
 Product status, life expectancy and business value help 
determining the amount of risk management process 
needed:
 Risks and their criticality vary by product status, life expectancy and business value. Hence, the amount of 
attention put into the risk management process varies.  
  Environment and the project’s physical context determine 
the formality of the risk management process: 
Large 
organizations generally need a more conventional risk 
management process due to the need of more coordination.
  Organizational maturity and training aids in adopting a 
risk management program successfully:
 Organizational 
maturity, such as people’s attitude towards risks, 
competency, and capability to perform risk management are 
of relevance for successful adoption of risk management. 
  Software development need be integrated with other 
organizational processes:
 The development and risk 
management processes need be integrated to provide useful 
feedback to the organization, especially in larger 
organizations. Hence, one needs guidelines for making such 
integration explicit.
  B. Integrated Model at  SVT-I 
At SVT-I, all organization-wide risks are managed by the 
Architectural Forum
 (AF).
 The 
AF corresponds to the 
RMF
 in our model. Risk management comprises a critical part of 
its function.  The purpose is to effectively coordinate risks 
that need attention on an organization-wide basis. For 
instance, the AF may coordinate the management of a 
critical technical risk identified in the 
Implementation
 phase 
having impact on the release schedule, and consequently, on 
the planned system integration and delivery.  
The AF consists of a group of roles that are represented 
by key personnel, such as business and product managers, 
team leaders, architects, and customers. They meet regularly 
on both an incident-driven and periodic basis (every three 

weeks).  The AF has its own risk management process. Some risks 
may be managed in their entirety within the forum. Some 
other risks may have to be delegated and/or managed in co-
operation with the appropriate role(s) active in the phase 

relevant for the risk. However, the 
AF keeps the principal 
ownership of these risks throughout their whole 
479 management. It has the utmost authority to sign them off. 
Regarding risk management in the 
Product Vision
 Planning phase, it mainly concerns business related risks. It 
is managed by business management. As depicted in Table 
1, the risks that are not fully mitigated at this level undergo 
at least the first two risk management phases, 
Risk 
Identification
 and 
Risk Analysis
. These risks will be further 
analyzed and managed in the subsequent phases. Some of 
them, however, may be reported to the 
AF, who also re-
analyses them to determine further measures. 
The risks managed in the 
Product Roadmap and Release 
Planning phase are owned and managed by the product 
manager. Initially, they comprise business risks.  
As the high-level product vision plan evolves into the 
product roadmap plan and finally into more detailed release 
plans, new risks may be identified, analyzed and planned for 
in this phase. The result is materialized in a risk list and a 
risk management plan, supervised by the product manager. 

At this stage, risks are still mainly of business character but 
technical risks may be identified as well. The risks are 
delegated to the appropriate candidates within the 
organization, if needed. However, the product manager still 
keeps the main ownership of the risks and is the only 
authority to sign-off the mitigated risks.  
The product manager may also transfer the identified 
risks to the 
AF for further action. These risks may concern 
schedule risks that should be further coordinated and 

communicated to others in the organization. The risks of 
technical nature concerning the implementation of certain 
system functionality get transferred to the 
Implementation 
phase, where they are further analyzed, planned for, and 

monitored and controlled by the team and its members.  
 As presented in Table 1, the mapping of risk 
management in the agile process shows that the risks that 
cannot be mitigated in the 
Product Roadmap Planning 
or 
Release Planning
 sub-phases mainly undergo 
Risk Identification 
and Risk Analysis
. In addition, the Release 
Planning phase involves
 Risk Management Planning
 for 
determining the actions needed to mitigate the identified 

risks for that release. 
The Implementation 
phase is performed by a team leader 
together with team members. We have identified a pattern of 
managing risks within this phase. As depicted in Figure 4, it 
is as follows: Iteration Planning 
mainly involves 
Risk 
Identification, Risk Analysis and Risk Management 
Planning. Risks are mainly monitored and controlled during
 Daily Status 
and Development 
in the
 Iteration 
Implementation 
phase. New risks may also be identified 
during 
Daily Status,
 which are then analyzed and planned 
for. The 
Iteration Completion
 phase involves 
Risk Sign-Off and Risk Post-Mortem Analysis.
  Below, we elaborate on 
this.  Risk management is continuously performed within an 
iteration. Risk monitoring, control and treatment are mainly 
    
 
 
    
   
   Figure 4. Mapping of risk management in the agile 
Implementation phase  conducted within the development activities. Risk 
monitoring, however, takes place via the so-called 
“checkpoints”, where one actively inspects the risk status. 

As illustrated in Figure 4, the main checkpoints are (1) 
Iteration Scoping
, (2) Task Planning, 
(3) 
Daily Status, (4) 
Development 
and (3) 
Iteration Completion
.  During the Iteration Scoping
 and 
Task Planning sub-
phases, one studies the known risks and identifies the new 

ones. One then analyzes them, and makes appropriate 
decisions. Some of the risks may already have become 
mitigated during the 
Iteration Planning.
 In this case, they 
are checked off from the risk list. For the remaining risks, 

one creates risk action plans. 
Usually, one risk concerns one task or feature to be 
implemented. Hence, the risk ownership is automatically 
assigned to each programmer or programmer pair being 
responsible for that task. In addition, the team leader has a 

supervising ownership for all the identified risks. The team 
leader has also the utmost responsibility for the remaining 
risks that cannot be assigned to the team members.  
During the iteration, risks are continuously monitored in 
the Daily Status
 phase. Here, one discusses the known risks
 and identifies the new ones.
 Some minor risks may even be 
analyzed and planned for, or even mitigated, during a 

meeting. For more serious risks, however, one arranges 
special sessions or new meetings, during which one 

analyzes risks and determines further measures. Between the 
daily meetings, the risks are monitored and controlled by the 
risk owners in the 
Development
 phase. They are also 
continuously supervised by the team leader.  
In the final checkpoint, that is, the 
Iteration Completion 
phase, one evaluates the product, the process and the risks. 
Regarding the risks, one goes through the list of all the risks 
and analyses how they have been monitored and controlled, 

whether they have been mitigated, and one identifies the 
effects of the risk management process. In this phase, all the 
480 mitigated risks get signed off and removed from the risk list. 
The business risks get signed off by the product owner, 

whereas all the other risks get signed off by the team. 
Regarding the unmitigated risks, they are still on the risk 
list. This list constitutes an input to the next iteration. 
As a final remark, SVT-I is in the process of scaling up 
the agile project with more teams. This implies greater 
communication burden among the teams, the various 
process levels and the 
AF. Regarding the communication 
among the teams, the organization is in the process of 
creating daily inter-team meetings corresponding to the 
Scrum of Scrum 
meetings [13]. During these meetings, the 
team leaders discuss status of their teams. If any major risks 
are identified, then they are reported to the 
AF. 
V. EVALUATION 
RESULTS
 In this section, we present the evaluation results. It is 
structured according the three requirements: the integration 
model, integrated model and the aspect of agility. 
A. Integration Model  
The majority of the interviewees stated that the 
integration model provided practical guidance on how to 
integrate risk management and agile development processes.  
Regarding the integration model, all the ten interviewees 
agreed that the four components were relevant and useful 
for integration. In their opinion, they identified the basic 
points of integration. None of them missed any points.  
1) Organizational Levels and Process Phases 
Overall, all the interviewees considered the
 Organizational Levels and Process Phases 
component
 a highly relevant integration point. The mapping of risk 
management in the agile process is useful to find out when 
and where risk management takes place. The interviewees 

were particularly positive about the fact that we made risk 
management explicit on an organization-wide basis.  
2) Roles and Responsibilities 
Overall, the interview results show evidence that the 
Roles and Responsibilities 
component comprises a valid 
integration point. The majority of the interviewees 

confirmed the need to identify the various roles responsible 
for managing risks. In this way, one may ensure that risks 
are managed effectively. It was also considered positive that 
we had not detailed the roles since they varied within 
different organizations. 
3) Communication Channels 
The role of Communication Channels 
raised most 
concern. However, more than half of the interviewees 
agreed with their function and verified their importance, 
while the other half was more reserved about their 

applicability in an agile context. The positive half stated that 
the channels were useful and relevant for integration as they 
defined the flow of risk communication throughout the 
organization. They ensure that risks are communicated in an 

organized way, and most importantly, that risk 
communication takes place. In addition, their establishment 
provides structure to the process allowing analysis of how to 

make it more cost effective, which is considered particularly 
important in larger organizations.  
The other interviewees were clearly negative about the 
use of the channels. The reason was that they conflicted 

with one of the fundamental ideas of agile development, that 
is, enabling collaboration and allowing people to be able to 
talk to anybody, whenever needed. Several of these 

interviewees also stated that in order for the 
Communication 
Channels
 to be useful, they would like to have more 
concrete suggestions and guidelines for how the 
communication of risks should take place in an agile way, 
for instance via Wikis or Story Walls.  
4) Process Aspects 
All of the interviewees confirmed that the 
Process 
Aspects was a valid component of the integration model
. They determined the need for risk management and they 
were useful for tailoring the process according to the needs 
identified in the specific context at hand. They were 

considered to constitute useful checklist items. However, it 
was also claimed that it was unclear how we intended each 
aspect to be used and how it would eventually impact the 
design of the integrated process. For this reason, it was 

suggested that our proposal included practical examples. 
B. Integrated Model 
Concerning the integrated model, all of the interviewees 
agreed that it provided a useful reference model against 
which they could compare notes. In addition, making risk 
management explicit on an organization-wide level raises 

the important issue of managing risks, which is sometimes 

down prioritized, neglected or even forgotten.  
The major criticism was that the integrated model did not 
allow one to compare 
how
 risk management was conducted. 
It only depicted 
when, where and by 
whom
 the process was 
performed. In this respect, its usefulness was considered 
limited to process engineers, business developers or any 
other roles involved in designi
ng or improving processes. 
The interviewees representing developers or other process 
executors did not find it very useful. Instead, they requested 
concrete guidelines for 
how
 to conduct risk management in 
an agile way. For instance, by introducing activities such as 

automated risk sign-offs in acceptance testing or analysis of 
risk management in the retrospective meeting at the end of 

each iteration. Another common criticism was that the integrated model 
conflicted with several agile principles, thus compromising 

agility. These conflicts primarily concerned the 
RMF
 and 
the Roles and Responsibilities
 integration point.  
Regarding the 
RMF, the majority of the respondents 
stated that it was too authoritative for agile development. It 

was also questioned whether it would be applicable in small 

agile projects. Concerning the constellation of the 
RMF
, several interviewees stated that it consisted of only a 
481 specific selection of people or roles, excluding certain team 
members and project stakeholders. It was argued that this 

directly conflicted with the agile principles of collaboration 
and customer involvement. For these reasons, it was 
suggested that the function of the
 RMF
 was modified. 
Rather than referring to it as a group of people only, it could 

take the form of either a tool or a group of people, or both 
depending on the needs of various organizations.  
In terms of a tool, it was suggested that the forum would 
take the form of a repository, such as a Wiki, that could be 
used for the organization-wide dissemination of risk 
information to be accessible on a daily basis. In terms of a 
group, it was proposed that the forum would be open for 
anyone concerned with the management of risks. Hence, we 

should remove any specification of roles for the 
RMF.
 Instead, it was proposed that the roles concerned with the 
risks at hand would gather on an incident-driven basis.  
Concerns were also raised by some interviewees who did 
not agree with the 
Roles and Responsibilities
 that we had 
suggested in the integrated model. In their opinion, the 
delegation of risk management to certain roles in the 
organization makes the integrated process too static. To 
resolve this, it was suggested that we re-emphasized the fact 
that it was the team that shared responsibility for managing 
risks in agile development instead.  This would better 
comply with the agile principles. Hence, we should make 

this explicit by removing all the roles and responsibilities as 
prescribed in the outline of the integrated model. 
Finally, there was one aspect considered to be particularly 
important by all of the interviewees. It was that the 
integrated model was described as an organization-wide 

process. This was something that none of the interviewees 

had seen before. Hence, it was regarded a very important 
contribution. Moreover, several interviewees also liked the 
fact that it was illustrated on a phase level giving a quick 

and useful overview of the integration of the two processes. 
C. Maintaining Agility 
Overall, the majority of the interviewees, although 
representing the agile community, stated that our solution 
maintained agility. This was primarily because we did not 
change the agile process itself, but only added risk 
management on top of the agile base. In addition, it was also 
stated to be of importance that the guidelines were general 

allowing an organization to adapt risk management in its 
own way. However, some concerns were raised. 
Adding anything to the agile process must be well 
motivated for. One needs to be very careful with adding 

things in order not to lose agility, especially since it is often 
done in competition with many other important 
development activities. Hence, it was suggested that we 

clarified the problem with risk management and identified 

when it should be added to the agile process.  
On the other hand, it was also claimed by the majority of 
the interviewees that risk management actually was a very 
important activity. Risks should be managed in all projects, 
at least in their organizations. Hence, our proposal for 

extending the risk management capability of the agile model 
was considered to be highly relevant for them. 
Finally, it was stated by several interviewees that the 
degree of agility differed between projects depending on 

factors such as project size, complexity and type of 
development. It was suggested that it would be useful if we 
clarified the type of projects that our solution primarily 
concerned. In this way, one would know when it was useful. 
VI.   CONCLUSIONS
 Generally, our evaluation results show that all the three 
requirements are fulfilled. Hence, we conclude that, within 
the scope of this research, integrating risk management and 
agile development provides a valid solution to address the 
lack of risk management in the agile model. However, our 
solution is considered valid only under circumstances where 

the inherent risk-driven nature of the agile development 
model is insufficient. 
The need of risk management depends on several factors, 
such as project size, type of development, product 

complexity and overall project risk profile. More 
specifically, the results show that the integration of risk 
management adds most value in agile development contexts 

with one or several of the following characteristics: (1) 
teams consisting of more than ten people, (2) distributed 

teams, (3) development of safety critical, security critical, 
embedded systems, complex systems, entirely new systems 
and/or innovative systems, (4) projects with high risk 
exposure, e.g. depending on factors such as the external 

environment, organization, product status, technology, 
schedule, and so forth. 
The integration of risk management was not considered 
necessary in smaller projects developing simple software 
where the team was co-located. In these cases, it was argued 
that the inherent risk-driven nature of the agile process itself 
allowed effective management of risks without adding risk 
management to it
. Below, we discuss the results of each of 
the three requirements, starting with the integration model. 
 A. Integration Model  
Regarding the proposed integration model, the 
interviewees agreed that it provided practical guidance for 
how to conduct integration. The four integration points were 
also considered relevant and useful. Hence, we do not 
modify the integration model. However, some concerns 

were raised regarding the usefulness of 
Communication 
Channels. Defining the flow of risk communication between 
various parts of the organization was not considered very 

useful unless guidelines for how to communicate risks in an 

agile way were provided. We consider this a very important 

feedback for extending our model.  
A similar comment concerns the 
Process Aspects
 integration point. Several interviewees requested that our 
482 proposal should include practical examples of its impact on 
the integrated process as well guidance on how to use them 
in the design process. We consider this a very important 
feedback for extending our model. 
B. Integrated Model 
The integrated model was considered to fulfill its purpose 
as a reference model. It was regarded useful for anybody 

interested in comparing their risk management practice. 
However, without providing guidelines on 
how 
to actually 
conduct agile risk management, its utility was considered 
limited. Hence, it was suggested that the integrated model 

was extended with guidelines on 
how to conduct agile risk 
management. This is also a very important advice for 

improving the model.  
Some other concerns raised involved the 
RMF
 function 
and the roles in the integrated model. They were considered 

to conflict with agile principles. We consider this feedback 

highly relevant. However, we do not modify our model due 
to this observation. We believe that they should be an option 
and not a must, as far as other forms of achieving good 

communication, collaboration and shared project 
responsibility for risk management on a continuous, 
organization-wide basis are practiced. For instance, the 
RMF could be part of already existing cross-organizational 
functions in an organization such as the 
Integrating Scrums
 as suggested by [13]. C. Maintaining Agility 
Our model provides a solution for extending the risk 
management capability of the 
agile model without changing 
the agile spirit. It also provides a simple tool for integrating 
the risk management process according to the needs at hand 
and a reference model for comparing notes. For these 
reasons, the interviewees agreed that agility would be 
maintained. However, it was also suggested how agility 
could be further enforced. For instance, it was proposed that 
any direct conflicts with agile principles, such as 
collaboration, were removed or further motivated. The 
reason argued was that adding any activities to the agile 
process must always be clearly justified.  
In response to these comments, we wish to emphasize 
that none of the current agile models explicitly describes 

how to extend the agile mode
l with risk management, or 
other processes. To fill in this gap, we therefore keep our 
model as originally described until other solutions are 

provided. We also lay emphasis on the fact that the model is 

tailorable to allow the user to maintain any degree of agility. 
In addition, we clarify that the model is not aimed at all 
projects. The projects and organizations primarily concerned 

by our solution are those with the characteristics listed 

above, such as projects with distributed teams or projects 

developing complex software, or projects which need to 
extend the risk management capability of their agile models 
for any other reasons not detected herein. 
VII.
 EPILOGUE 
 In this paper, we have outlined a model integrating risk 
management and agile software development. The proposed 
solution consists of an
 integration model and an integrated 
model. It is primarily targeted towards process engineers 
and business developers or other groups involved in process 
engineering and improvement.  
We have evaluated it in interviews with ten agile 
practitioners in the Swedish software industry. Based on the 
results, we can draw three main conclusions, (a) it is a valid 

solution for addressing the current lack of risk management 
in agile development, however only in certain projects and 
organizations, (b) the model needs to be further elaborated 

in terms of the guidance it provides, and (c) it needs be 

further investigated in terms of its applicability in practice.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 We would like to thank SVT-I and the
 ten interviewees for 
providing the empirical foundation to this research. Thanks 

also Prof. Paul Johannesson, KTH, for valuable feedback. 
REFERENCES
 [1] Armenta A.L and Gaono A., A Proposal of a Process Integration 
Model for Agile Software Development and Risk Management. Master 
Thesis, DSV, Stockholm University/KTH, Stockholm, Sweden, 2008. 
[2] Beck K., Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Chang
e. 2nd Ed. 
Upper Sadle River, NJ, Addison-Wesley, 2004.  
[3] Boehm et al., “Spiral Development of Software-Intensive Systems of 
Systems”. Proc. of International Conference on Software Engineering, 
USA, 2005. [4] Cockburn A., Crystal Clear: A Human-Powered Methodology for 
Small Teams. Upper Saddle River, NJ, Pearson Education, 2005. 
[5] Englund H., “A Case Study to Explore Risk Management Models”, 
Master’s Thesis, Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden, 1997. 
[6] IEEE 1540 
Standard for Lifecycle Processes - Risk Management.
 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., NY, 2001. 
[7] Nyfjord J. and Kajko-Mattsson M., “Commonalities in Risk 
Management and Agile Process Models”. Proc. of 2
nd International 
Conference on Software Engineering Advances, France, 2007. 
[8] Nyfjord and Kajko-Mattsson, “Degree of Agility in Pre-
Implementation Process Phases”. Proc. of International Conference on 
Software Process, Germany, 2008. 
[9] Nyfjord and Kajko-Mattsson, “Agile Implementation Phase in Two 
Canadian Organizations”. Proc. of 19
th Australian Software Engineering 
Conference, Perth, Australia, 2008. [10] Nyfjord and Kajko-Mattsson, “Software Risk Management: Practice 
Contra Standard Models”. Proc. of 2nd Conference on Research Challenges 
in Information Systems, Morocco, 2008. 
[11] Nyfjord J. and Kajko-Mattsson M., “Integrating Risk Management 
with Software Development: State of Practice”. Proc. of IAENG 
International Conference on Software Engineering, China, 2008. [12] Project Management Institute, "A Guide to the Project Management 
Body of Knowledge” (PMBoK). 3
rd Ed. ANSI/PMI 99-001-2004, PMI, 
2004. 
[13] Schwaber K., The Enterprise and Scrum
. Redmond, WA, Microsoft 
Press, 2007. [14] Sliger M., “Relating PMBoK Practices to Agile Practices” (Part 3 of 
4).  URL: http://www.stickyminds.com/sitewide.asp?Function=edetail& 
ObjectType=COL&ObjectId=11133&commex=1#4993. 
483