  Climbing the “Stairway to Heaven” 
A multiple-case study exploring barriers in the transition from agile development towards continuous 
deployment of software
 
 
Helena Holmström Olsson, Hi
va Alahyari and Jan Bosch 
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering 
University of Gothenburg/Chalmers 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
e-mail: [helena.holmstrom.olsson@gu.se], [h
iva.alahyari | jan.bosch]@chalmers.se 
 
 
 
 
Abstract
—Agile software development is well-known for its 
focus on close customer collaboration and customer feedback. 
In emphasizing flexibility, efficiency and speed, agile practices 
have lead to a paradigm shift in how software is developed. 
However, while agile practices have succeeded in involving the 
customer in the development cycle, there is an urgent need to 
learn from customer usage of software also after delivering 
and deployment of the software product. The concept of 
continuous deployment, i.e. the ability to deliver software 
functionality frequently to customers and subsequently, the 
ability to continuously learn from real-time customer usage of 
software, has become attractive to companies realizing the 
potential in having even shorter feedback loops. However, the 
transition towards continuous
 deployment involves a number 
of barriers. This paper presents
 a multiple-case study in which 
we explore barriers associated 
with the transition towards 
continuous deployment. Based on
 interviews at four different 
software development companies we present key barriers in 
this transition as well as actions that need to be taken to 
address these.  
Keywords-agile softwa
re development; customer 
collaboration; continuous integration; continuous deployment 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Today, software development is conducted in 
increasingly turbulent busine
ss environments. Typically, 
fast-changing and unpredictable markets, complex and 
changing customer requirements,
 pressures of shorter time-
to-market, and rapidly advanc
ing information technologies 
are characteristics found in most software development 
projects. To address this situation, agile practices advocating 
flexibility, efficiency and speed are seen as increasingly 
attractive by software development companies [1]. In 
emphasizing the use of iterations
 and development of small 
features, agile practices have increased the ability for 
software development companies to accommodate fast 
changing customer requirement
s and fluctuating market 
needs [1,2]. 
However, while many software development companies 
have indeed succeeded in adopting agile practices in parts of 
their organization, there are fe
w examples of companies that 
have succeeded in implementing 
agile practices to such an 
extent that software functionality can be continuously 
deployed at customer sites so 
that customer feedback and 
customer usage data can be efficiently utilized throughout 
development, delivery and deployment of software [3]. In 
order to advance the concept of agile development and move 
towards continuous deployment of software there are several 
steps that need to be taken. 
In this paper, we present a multiple-case study in which 
we explore four companies w
ithin the IT industry moving 
towards continuous deployment of software. While the 
ability to continuously deploy new functionality at the 
customer site creates new business opportunities and indeed 
extends the concept of agile development, it also presents 
challenges related to current 
customer collaboration models. 
As a result of our study, we identify barriers in moving 
towards continuous deployment of software – as well as 
actions that need to be taken to overcome these.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
the next section, we present the conceptual model that we 
use as a basis for our analysis. Section III discusses our 
research approach followed by a section presenting our case 
study findings. Section V presen
ts our key lessons learned, 
followed by the conclusions.  
II.
 
FROM AGILE DEVELOPMENT TO CONTINUOUS 
DEPLOYMENT OF SOFTWARE
 
Companies evolve their software development practices 
over time. Typically, there is a pattern that most companies 
follow as their evolution path. We refer to this evolution as 
the “stairway to heaven” and it is presented in Figure 1 
below. 
The phases of the “stairway to heaven” are discussed in 
more detail in the remainder of this section. As a summary, 
however, we see that companie
s evolving from traditional 
waterfall development (step A in Figure 1) start by 
experimenting with one or a few agile teams. Once these 
teams are successful and there is positive momentum, agile 
practices are adopted by the 
R&D organization (step B in 
Figure 1). At this point, product management and system 
integration and verification are still using traditional work 
2012 38th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-4790-9/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2012.54392 practices. As the R&D organization starts to show the 
benefits of working agile, system integration and verification 
becomes involved and the company can adopt continuous 
integration where system test takes place continuously and 
where there is always  a shi
ppable product (step C in Figure 
1). Once continuous integration is up and running internally, 
lead customers often express an 
interest to receive software 
functionality earlier than through the normal release cycle. 
What they want is to be able to deploy software functionality 
continuously (step D in Figure 1). The final step is where the 
software development company 
not only releases software 
continuously, but also collects data from its installed base 
and uses this data to drive an experiment system where new 
ideas are tested in segments of the installed base and the data 
collected from these customers is
 used to steer the direction 
of R&D efforts [4].  
Figure 1. “The stairway to heaven”, i.e. the typical evolution path for 
companies moving towards continuous deployment of software.  
A.
 
Traditional development 
In our discussion, we refer to traditional development as 
an approach to software deve
lopment characterized by slow 
development cycles, e.g. yearly
, waterfall-style interaction 
between product management, product development, system 
test and the customer and, finally, customer feedback
processes that are not necessar
ily well integrated with the 
product development process [5].
  Usually, project teams are 
large and competences are divided into disciplines such as 
system architecture, design 
and test. Development is 
sequential with a rigorous planning phase in the very 
beginning of each project. Typically, delivery to the 
customer takes place in the very end of the project and it is 
not until then that customers can provide feedback on the 
software functionality they have received. 
B.
 
Agile R&D organization 
The next step in the evolution is where product 
development, i.e. the R&D organization, has adopted agile 
practices, but where product management and system 
verification still work according to the traditional 
development model. Although so
meof the benefitswith 
agile practices are reaped, there is not necessarily short 
feedback loops with the cust
omer. As defined by Highsmith 
and Cockburn [6], a team should not be considered agile if 
the feedback loop with customers and management is six 
months or more.  
C.Continuous integration
A company employing continuous integration has 
succeeded in establishing practices that allow for frequent 
integration of work, daily builds and fast commit of changes, 
e.g. automated builds and automated test. Humble and Farley 
[7] define continuous integration as a software development 
practice where members of a 
team integrate their work 
frequently, leading to multiple integrations per day. The idea 
of automating test cases, builds, compilation, code coverage 
etc. allows teams to test and integrate their code on a daily 
basis which minimizes the time it takes from having an idea 
to actually implement the idea in
 software. At this point, both 
product development and system validation are working 
according to agile practices.   
D.
 
Continuous deployment 
At this stage, software functionality is deployed 
continuously, or at least more 
frequently, at customer site. 
This allows for continuous customer feedback, the ability to 
learn from customer usage data, i.e. real usage data, and to 
eliminate any work that doesn’t produce value for the 
customer. At this point, R&D,
 product management as well 
as the customersare all involved in a rapid, agile cycle of 
product development.  
E.
 
R&D as an ‘experiment system’ 
The final step on the “stairway to heaven” is where the 
entire R&D system responds and acts based on instant 
customer feedback and where actual deployment of software 
functionality is seen as a way of experimenting and testing 
what the customer needs. At
 this step, deployment of 
software is seen more as a st
arting point for further ‘tuning’ 
of functionality rather than delivery of the final product.  
F.
 
Summary 
In this section, we presente
d the typical evolution path 
for companies adopting agile pr
actices. It is important to 
realize, however, that there are different levels at which 
adoption of agile practices can take place. First, and as can 
be seen in our study, agile pr
actices are adopted at a team 
level. As will show, we found that teams are often 
significantly ahead of the or
ganization as a whole, in 
particular up to the stage of 
continuous integration. Second, 
agile practices are adopted at an organizational level where 
they evolve into an instituti
onalized approach to software 
development. In our paper, we focus on the organizational 
level in order to identify barriers that need to be addressed by 
the organization to further accel
erate. Finally, there is an 
ecosystem perspective on the adoption of agile practices. 
Many companies, and as can be seen in our study, interact 
closely with suppliers. Although an organization may 
operate at a high level in the presented model, achieving the 
same level of agility with suppliers requires a significant 
effort. 
In the table below, we focus on the organizational level. 
We summarize the involvement of each function in the 
organization, as well as the customer’s role. The ‘approach’ 
column refers to the different
 steps in the “stairway to 
heaven” (Figure 1).’T’ stands 
for traditional, ‘A’ for agile 
and ‘SC’ for short cycle. The table illustrates the transition 
towards continuous deployment a
nd a situation, if looking at 
the final step (E), in which all functions involved enjoy short 
feedback cycles and hence, the opportunity to experiment 
with an aim to continuously learn and improve. 
393 Approach PM R&D Validation Customer 
A 
T T T T 
B 
T A T T 
C 
T SC SC T 
D 
A SC SC A 
E 
SC SC SC SC 
Table 1. Summary of each step in the “stairway to heaven” (A-E) and 
how each organizational function (PM, R&D, Validation and Customer) 
work at this particular step. 
III.
 
RESEARCH APPROACH
 
A.
 
Research sites 
This paper reports on a multiple-case study involving 
four software development companies. All four companies 
are moving towards continuous deployment of software. In 
representing different stages in this process, we find these 
companies of particular interest for understanding the 
barriers that need to be addressed when moving towards 
continuous deployment of software. Below, the 
characteristics of each company are presented as well as their 
current mode of development, i.e
. at what step in the model 
(Figure 1) we place them. 
1)
 
Company A 
Company A is involved in developing systems for 
military defense and civil security. The systems focus on 
surveillance, threat detection,
 force protection and avionics 
systems. Often, the system 
solutions are developed through 
the use of microwave and antenna technology. Internally, the 
company is organized in differe
nt departments with systems 
engineering (SE) and quality assurance (QA) being the two 
departments included in this study. In relation to the model 
presented in Figure 1, this company is best described as a 
company doing traditional development but moving towards 
an agile R&D organization. Al
ready, there are a few pro-
active agile teams that work as 
inspiration for the rest of the 
organization and the attitude towards agile practices and 
continuous deployment of software is positive. 
2)
 
Company B 
Company B is an equipmen
t manufacturer developing, 
manufacturing and selling a vari
ety of products within the 
embedded systems domain. The 
products contain software 
running on micro-controllers that
 are connected via computer 
networks. The company structur
e is highly distributed with 
globally distributed developmen
t teams. Also, much of the 
development is done by suppliers
. In relation to the model 
presented in Figure 1, this company can be described as a 
company that is close to continuous integration. While parts 
of the organization are still to a large extent traditional and 
plan-driven, there are a numbe
r of pro-active teams that 
operate in a highly agile manner and continuous integration 
is already in place in between these teams. 
3)
 
Company C 
Company C is a manufacturer and supplier of transport 
solutions for commercial use.  The development organization 
involves coordination of a larg
e number of teams distributed 
both nationally and internationally. Similar to company B, 
the development organization is largely dependent on 
supplier organizations. In relation to the model presented in 
Figure 1, this company can be described as a company with 
parts of its R&D organization be
ing traditional and parts of it 
being highly agile. In similar w
ith company B, this company 
has continuous integration in place for some of the teams and 
the experience from these is used to pro-actively coach other 
parts of the organization in its transition towards continuous 
deployment. 
4)
 
Company D 
Company D is a provider of
 telecommunication systems 
and equipment, communications networks and multimedia 
solutions for mobile and fixed 
network operators. They offer 
end-to-end solutions for mobile communication and they 
develop telecommunication infrastructure components for a 
global market. The organization 
is highly distributed with 
globally distributed developmen
t and customer teams. In 
relation to the model presented in Figure 1, this company can 
be described as a company with established practices for 
continuous integration and with existing attempts to 
continuous deployment in place.
  During our study we could 
see that this company is very
 close to continuous deployment 
of software, making their experiences valuable for other 
companies trying to address the barriers that are present 
when moving towards continuous deployment of software. 
B.
 
Research method 
This study builds on a 6 months (July 2011 – December 
2011) multiple-case study and adopts an interpretive research 
approach [8]. It emphasizes so
ftware development as enacted 
by people with different values, different expectations and 
different strategies, as a result of their different frames of 
interpretation [9]. These frames act as filters enabling people 
to perceive some things but i
gnore others [10]. In particular, 
case study research is considered appropriate to investigate 
real-life contexts, such as fo
r example software development, 
where control over the context is
 not possible [12] and where 
there is an interest in accessing people’s interpretations and 
expectations in order to create a rich understanding of a 
particular context [8]. In our
 study, a multiple-case design is 
used to ensure that “the events and processes in one well-
described setting are not wholly idiosyncratic” [12]. In our 
study, the four case companies all represent different 
contexts with different prerequi
sites. However, they all share 
the same vision i.e. to enable customer feedback and 
customer usage data to feed into frequent delivery of 
software functionality and hence, move closer towards 
continuous deployment of software. In this way, they all 
represent interesting examples that well reflect our attempt to 
better understand the barriers that software development 
companies face when moving towards continuous 
deployment. 
C.
 
Data collection and analysis 
The main data collection method used in this study is 
semi-structured interviews with open-ended questions [13]. 
When doing interviews, there is the delicate task in balancing 
between passivity and over-directi
on of interviews [8]. In our 
study, we chose to have an interview protocol organized in 
four pre-defined themes, but allow for openness and 
flexibility within these themes. 
The themes were (1) current 
way of working, (2) curre
nt customer interaction 
394 mechanisms/models, (3) stre
ngths/weaknesses in current 
way of working, and finally a theme related to (4) an 
imagined future of continuous deployment and the barriers to 
get there. In total, 18 interviews were conducted. In company 
A and B we conducted five interviews in each company, 
involving software and func
tion developers, software 
architects, system engineers,
 configuration managers and 
project leaders. In compa
ny C and D we conducted four 
interviews in each company, involving software developers, 
component/system integrators, project/release managers, 
product line maintenance and a product owner. All 18 
interviews were conducted in English and each interview 
lasted for about one hour. During the interviews, we were 
two researchers sharing the responsibility, i.e. one of us 
asked the questions and one took notes. In this way, we had 
the opportunity to discuss the da
ta after each interview and to 
compare our different insights. In addition to the notes, all 
interviews were recorded in or
der for the research team to 
have a full description of what was said [8]. Each interview 
was transcribed and the transcriptions were shared among 
the three researchers to allow for further elaboration on the 
empirical material. In addition to the interviews, 
documentation review and fiel
d notes were complementary 
data collection methods, including software development 
documents, project management
 documents, and corporate 
websites and brochures. Also, e-mail correspondence was 
used as a follow-up to all interviews in order to clarify any 
misunderstandings in the transcription of interviews. 
D.
 
Validity and generalizability of results 
As noted by Maxwell (2005), qualitative researchers 
rarely have the benefit of previously planned comparisons, 
sampling strategies, or statisti
cal manipulations that control 
for possible threats. Instead, qualitative researchers must try 
to rule out validity threats after the research has begun by 
using evidence collected during the research itself to make 
alternative hypotheses or interp
retations implausible. One 
important aspect of validity is
 construct validity [13], which 
reflects to what extent the operational measures that are 
studied represent what the researchers have in mind, and 
what is reflected in the interview questions. To address this 
aspect, we started each interview with an introduction in 
which we shared our understanding of ‘continuous 
deployment’ with the interviewee. In this way, the 
researchers and the interviewee had a shared understanding 
of the concept already before the interview. With respect to 
external validity, i.e. to what
 extent it is possible to 
generalize the findings, our contribution is related to (1) the 
drawing of specific implications
 and (2) the contribution of 
rich insight [8]. Based on our 
interviews, we present findings 
and implications in a particular domain of action. While 
these implications should be regarded as tendencies rather 
than predictions [8], they might
 indeed prove useful for other 
similar organizations and contexts
. In relation to rich insight, 
our study brings together four 
empirical contexts that allow 
for a broad understanding of the concept of ‘continuous 
deployment’. Our study aims 
at capturing the typical 
evolution path for software companies moving towards 
continuous deployment, and the findings we present should 
be regarded as insights valuable for other companies 
interested in this evolution. 
IV.
 
CASE STUDY FINDINGS
 
In this section we present the interview findings from 
each company that was involved 
in our study. In particular, 
we present the barriers that each company experiences when 
climbing from one step to the next in the “stairway to 
heaven” (see figure 1). 
A.
 
Company A 
As mentioned earlier in this paper, company A is 
characterized as a company 
doing traditional development 
but with a strong interest in ag
ile practices. In our interviews, 
we learnt that company A has teams that are agile in nature 
and that these are used as inspiration for the larger 
organization. In our study, co
mpany A represents a company 
starting its journey way towards more agile practices and 
there are still many steps to take. While the attitude among 
the interviewees is positive, a
nd there is anticipation on the 
benefits that agile practices will bring, there are a number of 
barriers that need to be addressed  
One of the major barriers is the lack of a base product on 
which improvements can be continually done. This is 
reflected in the following quote by one of the software 
developers: 
“I think we could deliver better products if we 
had a better way of working with our products…we do not 
continually work with improving the products. We only work 
with the products when we have a customer and a customer 
project”. 
Another barrier is the current way of working which is 
sometimes insufficient when it comes to process. This is 
expressed by one of the configuration managers: 
“Sometimes 
we lack a proper process on how to deploy the builds to our 
internal systems…we do not really have a process on how to 
collaborate and exchange informa
tion in between teams”.
 
The common opinion is also that there is a need for 
automating the process to a larger extent than is done today. 
In addition to difficulties associated with the current way of 
working, old tools make work
 unnecessarily difficult and 
while people agree on that writing commands sometimes has 
its advantages, a nice graphical interface would make work 
easier and more efficient. The ba
rrier with having old tools is 
described by one of the software developers: 
“It is the 
software, the tools, the installation engine…it is 15 years or 
so…we don’t have any fancy tools”
. Finally, the business 
model is seen as a barrier itself as it gives a conservative 
impression with expectations se
t up front rather than being 
flexible and responsive towards emerging needs.  
To summarize, company A experiences several barriers 
when moving from traditional de
velopment (step A in figure 
1) towards agile development (step B in figure 1). These 
barriers are (1) the lack of a base product prohibiting 
continual improvement, (2) an 
insufficient process, (3) old 
tools, and (4) the current conservative business model. These 
barriers will be further elaborated on in section V where we 
also present actions to address these. 
395 B.
 
Company B 
 Company B has a number of agile teams and the 
organization is moving toward
s continuous integration. 
While our interviewees describe a number of initiatives 
supporting this move, they agree that there is much to be 
done in order to enhance flexibility and encourage more 
frequent delivery. One of the 
software architects reflects on 
this when saying: 
“If you want to change something it is 
difficult…you need to go through several steps involving 
several people and this will have a long lead time”.
 
According to our interviewees, there are a number of 
barriers that need to be addressed when transitioning from 
having agile teams to also have continuous integration in 
place. First, the company is depending on its many suppliers, 
a situation that makes development complex. “ 
Everything 
gets harder to do when you buy it from a supplier…our 
process depends on their process…some suppliers are fast 
and some are slow, but in general they have a negative effect 
on development speed
” (software developer). Accordingly, 
one of the project leaders mentions that: “
One thing that 
could indeed be improved is the communication with 
suppliers…it is sometimes slow
”. In addition, several of the 
interviewees mention that fitting different components from 
different suppliers takes time, so it is not only the 
development lead time that is l
ong but also the integration of 
components that is time-consuming. 
Another barrier which is mentioned by all interviewees is 
the fact that the company is still very hardware oriented in 
character and profile. There is a great deal of experience in 
hardware but not so much in software. One of the project 
leaders reflects on this when saying: “
We have experience in 
hardware, but our experience in software is not so rigorous. 
To some extent we are still a mechanic company and not a 
software company but we are slowly changing due to all 
software that is needed in our mechanical products
”. In 
similar, one of the software developers touches upon this: 
“
We are moving away from being a mechanical company to 
being more of a software company, but we still have many of 
the systems and processes from
 the mechanical part. In the 
mechanical part you do not update hardware each 
day…therefore, the lead-time that we are used to is slow and 
our background systems and processes are slow
”. In relation 
to the traditions and the experience within the company, the 
current ways of working are sometimes seen as problematic. 
One barrier that is often mentioned is the dependency 
between components and the dependency between 
component interfaces. This makes separation difficult and 
hence, development teams 
are highly dependent on each 
other. Furthermore, the interpretation of the current 
development process is different at different sites – a 
situation that makes it even 
more difficult to separate 
deliveries in a way that all 
involved parties agree with. 
Another common barrier is the testing activities. For 
example, one developer emphasizes the need for automatic 
testing while at the same time realizing that this is difficult in 
an embedded system involvi
ng hardware with slow 
development cycles. Finally, the broad variety of tools is a 
major barrier, a view that is shared among all the 
interviewees: “
I think one of the major weaknesses is that we 
have too many tools… we change tools all the time and 
learning a new tool is like 
learning a new language. If you 
have too many tools and updates
 it is like learning a new 
language with a new dictionary all the time
” (developer). 
The tool issue also brings problems that might affect the 
testing activities mentioned above. One of the developers 
stress this when saying: “
The tools are sometimes not mature 
enough to fill the purpose they were assigned to…sometimes 
they introduce so much problems that we have to deal 
with…you get uncertain with 
how they work and this means 
doing much more tests
”. 
To summarize, company B experiences several barriers 
when moving from agile devel
opment (step B in figure 1) 
towards continuous integration (step C in figure 1). These 
barriers are (1) communicati
on and coordination with 
suppliers, (2) company tradition of being hardware oriented, 
(3) component dependencies, (4) 
interpretation of the current 
process model, (5) testing activities, and (6) the broad variety 
of tools. These barriers will be further elaborated on in 
section V where we also present actions to address these. 
C.
 
Company C  
Several teams at company C work in an agile way and 
there are a number of teams that have established practices 
for continuous integration. As 
an organization, company C is 
moving towards continuous integration and there are several 
initiatives supporting this. Howeve
r, to make this transition 
there are a number of barriers to address. First, the 
dependency to suppliers is something that the interviewees 
find troublesome. “
The projects become complex due to the 
many suppliers…no development is really going on inside 
the company but instead we have to coordinate and integrate 
components from our suppliers
” (system integrator). The 
complexity is highlighted further by one of the software 
developers: 
“…then of course if you want to come to a 
situation in which you work in shorter loops, then all 
suppliers must also embrace this and see that it is good for 
them to have short loops and to abandon the waterfall 
projects. But as long as one supplier remains in the old 
paradigm then…yeah, they are a big part of the challenge
”. 
Moreover, the interviewees find it difficult to be flexible and 
work more agile in a world which is predetermined by fixed 
price models and where the business model can be difficult 
to adjust. One of the developers reflects on this:” 
People try 
to work agile and to stay flexible but this is very difficult in a 
world which is predetermined due to economics ruling
”. As 
it seems, the difficulty is not onl
y to navigate in the network 
of suppliers but also to adjust
 to the current business model.  
One major barrier at company C is the difficulty in 
getting an overview of the status
 of the projects. According 
to one of the software developers:
 “…the projects are in our 
mailboxes and it is very hard to get a picture of the status of 
the different projects
”. In general, the feeling is that the daily 
work could be much more efficient if only people made use 
of the tools that are available fo
r this. Also, there is the need 
for a connection in between the different systems so that 
information doesn’t have to be pushed out as is done today. 
Rather, our interviewees would like to see a situation in 
which information is transparent and in which it was 
available for anyone that needs it.  
396 In similar with company B, company C is dependent on 
hardware and many of its processes are adjusted in 
accordance with the hardware plat
forms. According to one of 
the developers this sometimes causes problems: “
I think a 
problem is that we are still focused on the hardware part of 
the product. We build our product [the hardware part] and 
for this we have some tools…this is a slow process compared 
to how fast you can change software
”. The interviewees 
agree that in order to change this they need a better hardware 
platform then what is availabl
e today. One of the developers 
emphasizes this when saying: “
We need a more stable and 
commoditized hardware platform in order to move towards a 
more ‘software-way-of-working
”. What seems to be a 
common opinion is that when functionality of the product is 
distributed between both hardware and software, the 
hardware part cannot be ignored
 or viewed as a computing 
resource only. At the same time, they agree that the overall 
process cannot be too heavily ta
ilored to fit the mechanical 
development process. Finally, all interviewees mention the 
test process as critical for the ability to move towards 
continuous deployment. To get more confident in the test 
suite and to be able to automa
te tests will be important as 
well as increasing the number of people that are dedicated to 
software testing. 
To summarize, company C experiences several barriers 
when moving from agile (step B in figure 1) towards 
continuous integration (step C in figure 1). These barriers are 
(1) dependency on suppliers, (2) current business model, (3) 
lack of transparency, (4) hardware oriented mindset and 
process and, (5) the test process. These barriers will be 
further elaborated on in sec
tion V where we also present 
actions to address these. 
D.
 
Company D  
At company D, agile processes have been around for 
several years and they have become widespread within the 
company. A large part of the organization is familiar with 
continuous integration and the company is pushing towards 
continuous deployment for at least parts of the product and 
for a segment of its customers. 
Here, the faster feedback loop 
to customers is regarded the major benefit. With continuous 
deployment customers get releases more often and software 
features can be deployed at cust
omer site on a more frequent 
basis than today. According to one of the release program 
managers faster feedback means cheaper development since 
the R&D organization can then spend time on developing the 
right things rather than corr
ecting mistakes in functionality 
that is not necessarily what the customer wants.  
However, in order to move further towards continuous 
deployment of software, there are a number of barriers to 
address.  The interviewees at company D all mention the 
complexity of the network and the many different 
configurations that their cu
stomers have. A very common 
challenge is when a customer wants a new feature but has an 
old version of the product to which this new feature has to be 
configured. Similarly, an upgrad
e of any kind is considered 
stressful by customers, somethi
ng that is highlighted by the 
release manager: 
“it is more difficult to guarantee minimal 
network impact if the confi
guration of the product is 
complex”
. From the interviews it is clear that customers still 
regard upgrades and new features as a challenge due to the 
risk of interfering with legacy. 
Another barrier is the internal 
verification loop which needs to be shortened and automated 
in order to meet up with the requirements that continuous 
deployment raises. As mentioned by one of the product line 
maintenance managers, more automated tests are needed in 
order to increase speed and frequency of delivery. Also, 
several interviewees highlight
 the importance of improving 
the quality on each build and to increase awareness on what 
effect each build has on the overall software package. In this, 
the teams would benefit fr
om knowing more about the 
quality status of the development projects, i.e. the current 
quality of features, the number of errors etc. If such 
knowledge could be better established, teams could respond 
faster and act more pro-actively towards customers. 
To summarize, company D experiences several barriers 
when moving from continuous in
tegration (step C in figure 
1) towards continuous deployment (step D in figure 1). 
These barriers are (1) network configuration and upgrade 
complexity, (2) internal veri
fication loop, and (3) quality 
status of builds/systems. These barriers will be further 
elaborated on in section V wher
e we also present actions to 
address these. 
V.
 
CLIMBING THE STAIRWAY TO HEAVEN
 
In this section the multiple-case study findings are 
discussed, leading to an unde
rstanding for key barriers that 
companies experience when moving towards continuous 
deployment. We use the model in Figure 1 to identify 
barriers in between the different steps, i.e. from traditional 
development to agile, from ag
ile development to continuous 
integration and, finally, from continuous integration to 
continuous deployment of softwa
re. Furthermore, and based 
on the case study findings, we identify actions that need to be 
taken to address these barriers and succeed in the transition 
towards continuous deployment of software. 
A.
 
From Traditional to Agile R&D 
As can be seen in our study, there are several barriers that 
need to be addressed wh
en moving from traditional 
development to an agile R&D or
ganization. For example, in 
company A, teams struggle with
 an insufficient process in 
which collaboration and information exchange is poorly 
supported. This situation, in combination with the lack of a 
product on which improvements can be continually made 
and a conservative business model, in which requirements 
are defined upfront, makes it difficult for teams to act agile. 
Moreover, old tools make development unnecessary 
complex and the developers express a situation in which the 
tools restrict rather than release activity. 
To address these barriers, there are a number of actions 
that need to be taken. As can 
be seen in literature, a first and 
challenging step is to introduce 
agile working practices into 
the organization and to get managerial support for such an 
initiative [14]. Company A shows on several initiatives that 
supports agile working practices and the general attitude is 
positive. Having a few agile teams that work as inspiration 
for the larger organization is one action that will have a 
positive effect on other teams. Fu
rthermore, and as  can be 
397 seen in our study, one of the major barriers is the difficulty in 
collaboration and information exchange, and as an action to 
address this barrier company A 
is organizing its development 
organization in smaller teams. As can be seen in previous 
research [15], cross-functional teams are critical to overcome 
barriers associated with collaboration and communication 
issues. In company A, cros
s-functional teams are being 
introduced and they will be one important step towards an 
agile R&D organization. Finally, companies strive towards 
having feature teams rather than
 component teams to shorten 
lead time and improve release frequency [15]. . Feature 
teams work with only a small part of the functionality and 
hence, respond quickly to changing requirements. . In 
introducing agile working practices and re-organizing the 
development team organizati
on, company A is addressing 
several of the barriers associated with the transition from 
traditional to agile software development.  
To summarize, the key focus area in the transition from 
traditional to agile R&D is the adoption of small and, cross-
functional teams. 
B.
 
From Agile R&D to Continuous Integration  
In our study, we have two companies moving from an 
agile R&D organization to con
tinuous integration. In doing 
so, there are several barriers to address. As can be seen in 
both company B and C, they st
ruggle with being dependent 
on suppliers which means that a lot of effort is put on 
communication and coordination 
with these. In addition, 
different interpretations of the current process model at 
different sites make the development process complex. Both 
companies are hardware orient
ed, meaning that a cultural 
shift is necessary in orde
r to move further towards 
continuous integration. In both these companies the 
mechanical part has been the ma
jor part of the process so far 
and while it will always be critical it will have to 
successfully co-exist with impor
tant software functionality in 
development of future products. As can be seen in our 
interviews, this cultu
ral shift is challenging and it requires a 
transformation of previous traditions and values. 
Furthermore, the companies find 
the variety of tools and the 
lack of transparency problematic. While company B notes 
that the many tools make lear
ning and efficiency difficult, 
company C finds the lack of transparency problematic. 
Finally, and as noted in literature [7], both companies 
emphasize the test activities as
 one of the major challenges 
when moving towards continuous integration. The need for 
automated test processes is well understood but still difficult 
to fully implement.  
To address the barriers mentioned above, the companies 
in our study mention a number of actions. What is most 
important, and something that is also noted in previous 
research [7,16], is the need to
 develop complete test suites 
including automated tests that are well integrated with 
system validation. In both co
mpany B and C development of 
automated tests is an on-going activity and the aim is to 
increase the number of automate
d tests significantly within a 
short period of time. Both co
mpanies find this the most 
important activity in order to
 consolidate the concept of 
continuous integration and make possible for a culture shift 
among developers who believe things “only when they see it 
happen” as mentioned by one of the developers in company 
C. Furthermore, and in order to reduce complexity, code 
needs to be checked into a ma
in development branch, i.e. the 
production line. If so, companies can avoid having several 
branches that will only add to the complexity and lead-time 
described by our interviewees. As a result of this, the 
transparency between teams will also improve and the 
barrier with lack of transpar
ency can be reduced. Finally, 
company B and C both touch upon the fact that lead-time is 
long and that the dependency on suppliers as well as 
mechanical parts is problematic. 
In order to at least to some 
extent address this situati
on, development needs to be 
modularized into smaller units, 
i.e. the build process needs to 
be shortened so that tests can be run more frequently and 
hence, quality can be reviewed at an earlier stage. This will 
allow for more frequent deliveries to customers and an 
opportunity to learn from cu
stomer feedback earlier. 
To summarize, the key focus area in this transition stage 
is to develop a fully automated testing infrastructure that 
continuously verifies the product as it evolves during 
development. 
C.
 
From Continuous Integration to Continuous Deployment 
Our last company, i.e. company D, is the company 
closest to continuous deployment of software. In this 
company, continuous integration is a well established 
practice and there are already attempts to involve pro-active 
customers in continuous depl
oyment of certain software 
functionality. However, there are a number of barriers that 
need to be addressed also for company D. What is most 
evident from our interviews is 
the complexity that arises in 
different network configurations 
at customer sites. While the 
product has its standard configurations there are always 
customized solutions as well as local configurations that 
cannot be fully counted for. 
Furthermore, the internal 
verification loop needs to be shortened in order to not only 
develop functionality fast but 
too also deploy it fast at 
customer site. Third, several of the companies mentioned 
lack of transparency as a barri
er when moving closer towards 
continuous deployment of software. Depending on company, 
this barrier takes different fo
rms but in common is the need 
to get an overview of the current status of development 
projects. This is evident in company D where one of the 
product line maintenance managers expressed a need to get 
better status reporting from teams in order to increase 
transparency and further improve speed.  
To address the barriers mentioned above, there are a 
number of actions that can be taken. In company D, one 
major action has been to invol
ve not only the R&D units but 
also the product management units
 in the vision of delivering 
smaller features more frequently
 to customers. In similar 
with introducing agile practices to different parts of the 
organization as the very fi
rst step when moving from 
traditional development to agile development, the transition 
towards continuous deployment requires involvement of 
different organizational units in order to fully succeed. 
Especially, product management needs to be involved as 
they are the interface towards customers. In company D, we 
learnt from product managers 
that their involvement was 
important and that their insi
ght into the R&D organization 
398 had increased when working towards continuous 
deployment. This is in line with previous research, which 
emphasizes the importance of having the R&D organization 
and the product management organization sharing the same 
goal when moving towards continuous deployment [3].  
Finally, finding a pro-active customer who is willing to 
explore the concept of continuous deployment is critical. 
Here, the concept of ‘lead customer’ is useful and what is 
important is to find mechanisms to facilitate for fast 
customer feedback and mechan
isms for translating this 
feedback into improved software functionality.  
To summarize, in transitioning towards continuous 
deployment the internal action is to involve product 
management in the short, agile cycle of product 
development. The external action is to develop a new 
engagement model with lead customers to facilitate for 
continuous deployment   
D.
 
From Continuous Deployment to Innovation System 
In this study, we have not been able to explore the final 
step in the “stairway to heaven”, i.e. the move from 
continuous deployment to R&D 
as an ‘experiment system’. 
Based on earlier research with other companies, we 
anticipate that the key actions in this transition are twofold. 
First, the product needs to be instrumented so that usage and 
other data can be automatically collected from the installed 
product base. Second, the overall R&D organization needs to 
develop the capability to effectively use the collected data to 
test new ideas with customers.  
In our future research, we see the transition between the 
final steps in the “stairway to h
eaven” as our main interest to 
explore further. 
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS
 
In this study, we explored how software development 
companies evolve their practices over time. Based on a 
conceptual model presented as the “stairway to heaven” we 
presented the transition process when moving towards 
continuous deployment of software. In doing so, we 
identified the key barriers for such a transition as well as 
actions that address these. 
While the details in our study relate to each specific 
company, there are a number of implications that we think 
apply to more companies than those we studied. First, the 
transition towards agile development requires a careful 
introduction of agile practices into the organization, a shift to 
small development teams and a fo
cus on features rather than 
components. Second, the transition towards continuous 
integration requires an automate
d test suite, a main branch to 
which code is continually delivered and modularized 
development. Finally, the move towards continuous 
deployment requires organizational units such as product 
management to be fully involved and a pro-active lead 
customer to work closely with when exploring the concept 
further.  
For the last transition, i.e
. from continuous deployment 
towards R&D as an ‘experiment system’ the barriers are still 
to be explored. While our study does not cover this final 
transition, we believe that th
e empirical insights presented 
will be important for companies 
with an attempt to reach also 
this final and highly innovative step. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
This study was funded by the So
ftware Center at Chalmers 
University of Technology and University of Gothenburg. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
N. D. Fogelström, T. Gorschek, M. Svahnberg, and P. Olsson, The 
Impact of Agile Principles on Market-Driven Software Product 
Development, Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: 
Research and Practice, 2010, Vol: 22, pp. 53-80. 
[2]
 
L. Williams and A. Cockburn, Agile Software Development: It’s 
about feedback and change, Comput
er, 2003,Vol: 36, Nr: 6, pp. 39-
43. 
[3]
 
A. Shalloway, J. R. Trott, and G. Beaver, Lean-Agile Software 
Development: Achieving Enterprise Agility, Addison-Wesley, 2009 
[4]
 
J. Bosch, Building Products As 
Innovation Experiment Systems, 
Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on Software 
Business (ICSOB 2012), to appear, 2012. 
[5]
 
I. Sommerville, Software Engineering, 6
th
 edition, Pearson Education: 
Essex, England, 2001.     
[6]
 
 J. Highsmith and A. Cockburn, Agile software development: the 
business of innovation, 
Computer
, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 120-127, Sep. 
2001. 
[7]
 
J. Humble and D. Farley, Continuous Delivery: Reliable Software 
Releases through Build, Test and Deplyment Automation, Addison-
Wesley: Boston, 2011. 
[8]
 
G. Walsham, Interpretive case studies in IS research: nature and 
method. European Journal of Information Systems, 1995, Vol: 4, p. 
74-81. 
[9]
 
R. Vidgen and X. Wang, Coevolving systems and the organization of 
agile software development, Information Systems Research,2009, 
Vol: 20, Nr: 3, pp. 355-376. 
[10]
 
N. Melao and M. Pidd, A Concept
ual Framework for Understanding 
Business Processes and Business Process Modelling, Information 
Systems Journal, 2000,Vol: 10, Nr: 2, pp. 105-129.     
[11]
 
R. K. Yin, Case study research, design and methods, 3
rd
 edition, Sage 
Publications: Newbury Park, 2003. 
[12]
 
M. B. Miles and A. M. Huberman, Qualitative Data Analysis, Sage 
Publications, 1994.    
[13]
 
P. Runesson and M. Höst, Guidelines for conducting and reporting 
case study research in software engi
neering, Empirical Software 
Engineering, 2009, Vol: 14, p. 131-164. 
[14]
 
P. Abrahamsson, Is Management Commitment a Necessity After All 
in III: Software Process Improvement?, In Proceedings of 
EUROMICRO 2000, Maastricht, The Netherlands, IEEE Computer 
Society, 2000, pp. 246-253.                                                                                          
[15]
 
C. Larman and B. Vodde, Scaling Lean and Agile Development: 
Thinking and Organizational Tools for Large-Scale Scrum, Pearson 
Education: Boston, 2009.      
[16]
 
P. Agarwal, Continuous Scrum: Agile management of SAAS 
Products, In Proceedings of the 4
th
 India Software Engineering 
Conference (ISEC), Thiruvananthapuram, February 32-26, 2011.  
 
399