  Customer-Specific Teams for Agile Evolution of Large-Scale Embedded Systems 
Helena Holmström Olsson 
Dept. of Computer Science 
Malmö University 
Malmö, Sweden 
helena.holmstrom.olsson@mah.se 
Jan Bosch 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Chalmers University of Technology 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
jan.bosch@chalmers.se 
Hiva Alahyari 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Chalmers University of Technology 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
hiva.alahyari@chalmers.se 
 
 
 
Abstract
—For more than a decade, agile methods have shown 
successful for increasing responsiveness to customer needs. 
Agile methods advocate close customer collaboration in the 
early phases of software development. However, research on 
how to maintain agile ways of working during software 
evolution is scarce. Based on a qualitative interview study, this 
paper explores how benefits of agile practices can be 
established and maintained in the evolution phase of software 
development. We direct our attention to large-scale software 
development of embedded systems where development 
companies struggle to meet the needs of a large customer base. 
The contribution of this paper is two-fold. First, we propose 
customer-specific teams as a way to reap the benefits of agile 
methods in the evolution phase of large-scale software 
development. Second, we confirm the use of these teams as 
successful for improving customer responsiveness, customer 
satisfaction and feature quality during software evolution. 
Keywords-agile methods, larg
e-scale software development, 
software evolution, customer-specific teams 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Market uncertainties, competitive pressures, and the 
constant need for shortened development cycles call for 
software development practices that are flexible, responsive 
and adaptive. During the last decade, a variety of agile 
methods designed to enhance development teams’ ability to 
respond to change have emerged. In emphasizing the use of 
iterations and development of small features, agile methods 
have increased the ability for software development 
companies to accommodate changing customer requirements 
[1]. In particular, agile methods have shown their capacity in 
involving customers during the requirements engineering, 
design and development. As can be seen in previous 
research, there are a number of techniques focusing on how 
to efficiently involve customers in the daily practices of 
software development [2, 3, 4], and in methods such as 
Scrum and Extreme Programming (XP) the customer is 
viewed as an important part 
of the software development 
team. 
However, while agile development methods, and 
implementation and adoption of systems developed 
according to agile practices are common [5], the notion of 
software evolution, and how 
to maintain close customer 
collaboration and responsiveness to customer requests after 
product deployment, is not extens
ively studied in the agile 
community. As noted in our previous research [6], despite 
successful accounts on how to involve customers in the pre-
deployment phases, there is still the need for ways to 
maintain this collaboration in the post-deployment phase in 
which software systems develop, grow and change. As part 
of this process, continuous corrections, adjustments and 
improvements need to be made to the system in order to 
address changing customer re
quirements, to address new 
customer groups and to cat
er for new technological 
innovations [7].  
In this paper, we address the need to involve customers 
and increase responsiveness in the software evolution phase. 
In particular, we direct our attention to large-scale software 
development where companies 
struggle to meet the needs 
and desires of a large customer base. We see that while close 
collaboration might be difficult to achieve with all 
customers, advantages can be
 achieved by having customer-
specific teams, i.e. designated 
development teams that work 
exclusively with one selected 
customer in order to quickly 
respond to their particular needs and requests. As a result, the 
company can benefit from the 
knowledge gained from this 
collaboration when responding to other customers. Based on 
interviews with three customer
-specific teams, two customer 
unit representatives and product, program, and integration 
managers at the market leading company in global 
telecommunication systems, we
 show that the use of 
customer-specific teams is a 
promising way of working in 
order to reap the benefits of agile practices in the post-
deployment phase of large-scale software development. 
The contribution of this paper is two-fold. First, we 
propose customer-specific team
s as a way to involve 
customers in the evolution phase of large-scale software 
development. Second, our study confirms the use of these 
teams as successful for improving (1) customer 
responsiveness, (2) customer satisfaction and (3) feature 
quality during software evolution. 
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we 
introduce agile methods. While outlining the advantages 
with these methods, we recognize that benefits have not 
necessarily been reaped in th
e software evolution phase. We 
describe the software evolution phase, the importance of 
customer involvement, and we
 introduce customer-specific 
teams. In section 3, we describe our research site and 
method. Section 4 presents the interview findings, and in 
section 5 we discuss these findings. Finally, section 6 
presents the conclusions.   
2013 39th Euromicro Conference Series on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-5091-6/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2013.4382 II.
 
BACKGROUND
 
A.
 
Agile software development 
During the last decade agile methods have dramatically 
changed the way software development is performed. Unlike 
traditional development methods characterized by sequential 
phases and heavy upfront planni
ng, agile methods deal with 
unpredictability and change by relying on people and close 
customer collaboration rather than
 formalized processes [8]. 
Agile methods are characteri
zed by short development 
cycles, collaborative decision-m
aking, rapid feedback loops, 
and continuous integration of code changes into the product 
baseline [9]. Today, many different agile methods are in use 
[10]. During the last decade, XP and Scrum have become 
well established in small-scale, as well as large-scale 
software development. While XP is basically a collection of 
well-known software engineering practices taken to the 
extreme [3], Scrum is a simple, low-overhead process for 
managing software development [11, 12]. While the 
principles underlying agile methods were originally 
developed for smaller software development organizations, 
evidence indicate that large soft
ware-intensive organizations 
operating in complex global development environments are 
in the process of deploying agile methods as part of their de-
facto approach to software development [13]. 
B.
 
Software evolution 
Software evolution is concerned with the changes to a 
software system after its 
deployment to a customer. 
Although software engineeri
ng practices traditionally 
focused on the pre-deployment phases in which rigorous 
requirements engineering activities take place, it has become 
clear that many relevant activities for a software system take 
place after commercial deployment 
of the system. Cook et al 
[14], describe all industrial soft
ware systems as systems that 
co-evolve with its context over 
time. As recognized already a 
decade ago [15], software evolution needs to be quick and 
responsive in order for compan
ies to stay competitive. For 
example, large-scale bus
inesses or governmental 
organizations have to respond fast to changing 
environmental or competitive conditions such as modifying 
systems to support new products or services. Likewise, to 
create systems assembled from different components and 
allow for a successful co-evolvement of these have become 
increasingly important in t
oday’s software evolution 
processes. Interestingly, th
e whole notion of software 
development is moving away from being regarded as an 
activity that takes place within the boundaries of an 
organization [16]. Instead, software development is 
becoming an activity that includes externally developed 
components and applications, as well as external 
stakeholders that increase the value of the core product. 
From a software evolution perspective this notion calls for 
mechanisms to include the 
surrounding environment in the 
evolution process, and a need to embrace the innovative 
capacity of a large customer base.  
While there are a number of approaches to support 
evolution of software [17], changing requirements still 
constitute a challenge. Often, they are seen as problematic 
and referred to as requirements volatility and requirements 
creep [18]. Clearly, a paradigm shift is required towards 
software evolution being the nor
m, rather than the exception 
in software engineering [19]. Also, and based on the 
shortcomings recognized in previous research, we need ways 
in which to better involve customers in this continuous 
modification and correction process where the majority of 
the system’s functionality evolve. 
C.
 
Customer involvement 
Customer involvement has been a prominent research 
topic in the field of information systems (IS) and Human 
Computer Interaction (HCI) for a long time, and there are 
several techniques, e.g. pr
ototyping techniques, focus 
groups, face-to-face meetings, workshops, customer 
segmentation and lead-user feedback etc., with which to tap 
into customer knowledge. R
ecently, agile methods have 
complemented already existing 
techniques with development 
and management practices 
that emphasize customer 
involvement and customer
 representation during 
developm
ent [11]. Contrary to these fields of research, 
customer involvement has not b
een a major research topic in 
the software engineering (SE) tradition and even though 
customers are considered critical
 for the success of a system, 
methods and techniques for how 
to efficiently involve them 
during development have not been the focus of attention 
[20]. Instead, SE research pr
ovides a rich body of knowledge 
on requirements engineering,
 and the involvement of 
customers is recognized as critical mainly in the pre-
development phases. As can be seen in Davis [21], one 
reason for the focus on requirements engineering is the fact 
that detecting an error during pre-development phases is far 
less expensive than detecting an error during the design and 
coding phase of a system. In addition to research on 
requirements engineering, ve
rification and validation is 
another characteristic of SE research.  Verification and 
validation is the process of checking that a software system 
meets the specifications set 
by the customer, and that it 
fulfills its intended purpose, i.e. a way to ensure and evaluate 
the quality of a software system
 [22]. While the concepts are 
tightly interrelated, they refer 
to different things. Boehm [23] 
succinctly explained the difference between them by saying 
that in validation you check if you build the ‘right product’, 
while in verification you check if you build the ‘product 
right’. Traditionally, these activities were placed at the end 
of the systems development cy
cle when major parts of the 
system were already built. However, and as a result of more 
complex systems, fast-c
hanging technology and the 
increasing costs related to discovering errors late in the 
process, verification and validation activities have become a 
way to continuously involve cust
omers in the checking of the 
system that is being built. 
As can be seen above, there is a number of ways to 
involve customers in the pre-
development and development 
phases of software development, and the agile methods have 
contributed to closer collabor
ation with customers [4, 11]. 
However, and as recognized both in SE research as well as in 
other domains, the software evolution phase in which 
continuous modification and corr
ection of the software is 
made is not fully explored in 
terms of customer involvement. 
In particular, knowledge on how to maintain agile ways of 
83 working closely with customers also after commercial 
deployment is lacking. Often,
 customer feedback tend to 
concern the current system and its weaknesses and hence, 
works as good input for correcting errors and maintain 
functionality, but not necessarily as rewarding input for 
extension, expansion and innovation of new functionality. To 
achieve this, more direct custom
er collaboration is needed to 
allow for development teams to continuously learn about 
changing customer behavior and expectations.  
D.
 
Customer vs. product needs 
Successful software systems have a significant number of 
customers and these customers tend to have many ideas on 
how the product can serve their needs. As can be seen in 
recent research, [24], management of ideas and innovation is 
critical for the success of software evolution. In this process, 
strategic customers are looking 
to enforce the inclusion of 
requirements that are important to them in the roadmap for 
the next release of the system. Typically, this leads to a 
tension between two conflicting interests. On the one hand, 
the development organization seek
s to achieve scale in terms 
of implementing as many new f
eatures to as many customers 
as possible. On the other hand, the development organization 
needs to show responsiveness to 
its customers, especially the 
most strategic ones, and seeks 
to minimize the delay between 
a customer request and the de
ployment of a solution meeting 
that request. In most organizations, the focus is on achieving 
scale. Therefore, customers th
at ask for unique solutions are 
viewed as problematic sin
ce customer-unique solutions 
usually cause disadvantages in terms of added complexity in 
product version control [25]. For the discussion in this paper, 
we introduce two concepts, i.e. the notion of ‘customer-
unique features’ and ‘customer-
first features’. A customer-
unique feature is a feature that will only have relevance to 
one specific customer, and the likelihood of any other 
customer requesting the same f
eature is low. Most often, 
these customer-unique features 
add complexity in terms of 
version control as well as maintenance and therefore, they 
are preferably kept outside the main product baseline. A 
customer-first feature, on the ot
her hand, is a feature that is 
requested by one customer, but that most likely will be 
requested by other customers in 
the future. A customer-first 
feature presents an excellent oppor
tunity to develop a feature 
in close collaboration with one customer and, through 
knowledge gained in this collaboration, reduce the amount of 
re-work needed when developing this feature to other 
customers. 
E.
 
Customer-specific teams 
Customer-specific teams are 
designated teams that work 
exclusively with one select
ed, and highly prioritized 
customer, in order to quickly
 respond to their particular 
needs and requests after product deployment. Customer-
specific teams have proven usef
ul for improving long-term 
relationships and for adding value to customers. As one 
successful account, LaNasa repor
ts on teams working closely 
with customers to enhance cu
stomer value and strengthen 
customer relationships [26]. 
These teams are organized as 
cross-functional teams with
 competencies spanning 
organizational boundaries. In pa
rticular, customer-specific 
teams engage with customers 
in order to improve, modify 
and enhance functionality in the post-deployment phase of 
software development and hence, allow for a development 
organization that can quickly 
respond to specific customer 
needs during the evolution phase of the system. The 
knowledge gained in working closely with one selected 
customer can then be transform
ed into generic value for a 
large customer base. Similar to agile teams [2] and to lean 
software development practices [27], an important feature of 
customer-specific teams is th
e close access to the customer 
and the short feedback loop between the team and the 
customer. W
ith the opportunity 
for direct customer contact 
on a daily basis, customer-sp
ecific teams can reduce cycle 
time resulting in significantly faster deliveries of 
improvements and new functionality.  
III.
 
RESEARCH SITE AND METHOD
 
A.
 
Research site 
This study was conducted in close collaboration with the 
world-leading provider of te
lecommunication systems. The 
company offers end-to end solutions for mobile 
communication and they de
velop telecommunication 
infrastructure components. 
The company is transforming 
their development organizati
on into development units 
including a number of agile, cross-functional teams 
involving software architects, 
designers, developers, testers 
etc. The intention is that the cross-functional teams are 
accountable for developing a complete feature from the 
formulation of requirements until release to the product 
baseline and deployment at customer site. As a result of this 
autonomous team structure, any 
cross-functional team can be 
allocated to a specific customer
 if needed, i.e. work as a 
customer-specific team, for a 
period of time. From being 
more of an experiment a few 
years ago, customer-specific 
teams have become a natural part of the development 
organization and a way to 
maintain close customer 
collaboration and responsiveness to customer requests also in 
the evolution phase of large-scale software development. 
The development organization involved in this study has 
about 30 cross-functional team
s that are located at two 
different development sites in
 different time zones. Each 
team consists of 7-8 members. To compile and manage 
releases, product and program management, feature 
integration management and release verification support the 
cross-functional teams. The teams are involved in 
development of one of the nodes in the 3G networks that 
includes a wide range of customer requested features as well 
as advanced support for mobility management. Today, the 
product contains about 5 million lines of code and its 
customers are mobile operators all over the world. 
B.
 
Research method 
Our paper reports on a six months (January – June 2012) 
case study [28]. During this time,
 we studied three customer-
specific teams serving different
 customers, two customer 
units with which two of the t
eams interact, and we involved 
program, product, and integration management at the main 
development site.  The main data collection method used 
was semi-structured interviews
 with open-ended questions 
84 [29]. In total, 17 interviews were conducted. In the three 
customer-specific teams we inte
rviewed the team leader, the 
system manager, the system designer and the function tester. 
At each customer unit we interviewed the person with which 
the customer-specific teams in
teract, and who has direct 
contact with the customer. Fi
nally, we conducted interviews 
with a program manager, a product manager and an 
integration leader at the main development site in order to 
capture the context in which 
the customer-specific teams 
operate. In our research, we explore the following questions: 
-
 
How can benefits of agile practices, i.e. close customer 
collaboration and responsiveness to customer requests, 
be established and maintained in the evolution phase of 
large-scale software development? 
-
 
In what way do customer-specific teams (CST) 
contribute to the evolution phase of large-scale 
software development? 
The research questions were formulated in close 
collaboration with company re
presentatives. All interviews 
were conducted in English and each interview lasted for 
about one hour. As part of our interview guide, we asked 
questions related to the fo
llowing themes: (1) software 
evolution and introduction of
 CST’s, (2) customer 
collaboration techniques and how 
CST’s contribute to these, 
(3) customer feedback loops and responsiveness to emerging 
requests, (4) customer satisfaction and understanding of 
customer needs, and finally (5) feature quality and 
prioritization of functionality. For each theme, we had 2-4 
questions and sometimes we also asked follow-up questions 
in order to clarify, or further 
explore, a particular topic. 
While the major part of the interviews were conducted on-
site and face-to-face with the different team members and 
managers, interviews with the 
customer unit representatives 
were telephone interviews involving representatives in the 
US and in Asia. During all interviews, we were two people 
sharing the responsibility, i.e. one researcher asking the 
interview questions and taking notes, and one company 
representative from the main development site focusing on 
taking notes and adding to the discussion if needed, i.e. if 
there were misunderstandings in company specific 
information and/or difficulties in understanding company 
specific abbreviations etc. To a
ddress the risk of bias, and the 
presence of a company representative having a negative 
impact on the interviews, we made sure that all questions 
were asked by the researcher and that the company 
representative took a passive role. In retrospective, the 
presence of the company representative was helpful in that 
misunderstandings could be easily addressed and whenever a 
problem occurred in terms of interpretation of content we 
could have a direct dialogue. After each interview the notes 
were shared among the three re
searchers as well as the two 
company representatives involved in the study. This allowed 
for further elaboration on the empirical material, as well as 
any clarifications that were needed. In addition, two 
workshop sessions were held with a larger group of company 
representatives at the main development site in order to 
share, discuss and confirm the interview findings. Finally, e-
mail correspondence was used as a follow-up in order to 
clarify any misunderstandings in
 the analysis of the data. 
In terms of data analysis, the open coding technique 
originating from grounded th
eory was adopted [30]. 
Grounded theory is a method 
involving both inductive and 
deductive thinking and typically, the researcher wants to 
discover the participants’ main concerns, how they 
understand a certain situation and how they try to resolve a 
problem they encounter. In the open coding process, written 
data from field notes or 
interview transcripts are 
conceptualized line by line by id
entifying codes. During our 
data analysis, the empirical 
material, i.e. the interview 
transcripts, were read through several times by all 
researchers. When reading, we looked for phrases, 
expressions, words etc. that 
described a certain phenomenon, 
a certain feeling or opinion, and we grouped those similar to 
each other together in categories (using different colors to 
keep different coding categories apart). For example, we 
found ‘quality aspects’ to be a reoccurring theme in several 
of the interviews, and there were many statements 
concerning the challenge of maintaining high quality 
code/architecture while also being fast and responsive to 
customers. All these aspects,
 i.e. expressions, experiences 
etc. around quality w
ere noted in the margins of the 
interview transcript, and later grouped together in a category 
that we named ‘feature quality’. In similar, statements and 
comments about interaction, response time and development 
cycles were coded and later grouped together in categories 
such as ‘customer collaboration’ and ‘customer feedback 
loops’. After iterating the text among the researchers, and 
after having grouped together expressions and statements 
concerning similar phenomena, we had categories with 
words and expressions describing ‘communication’, 
‘coordination’, customer satisfaction’, ‘customer 
collaboration’, ‘customer feedback loops’, and ‘feature 
quality’. These categories emerged as a result of the data 
analysis and as a result of working our way through the 
interview transcripts. The codes and the categories highlight 
the respondents’ concerns, their experiences and their 
profound knowledge of the specific situation.  
A problem that has been identified in relation to 
qualitative research is that different individuals may interpret 
the same data in different ways [31]. This problem was 
addressed in two ways. First, the grounded theory method of 
data analysis prescribes coding processes that provide a 
traceable, documented justification of the process by which 
conclusions are reached. Second, we used a ‘venting’ 
method, i.e. a process whereby results and interpretations are 
discussed with professional colleagues [32]. The findings 
were presented and discussed with academic colleagues and 
expert practitioners in detail af
ter each interview and at the 
two workshop sessions. 
C.
 
Validity and generalizability of results 
As noted by Maxwell [33], qualitative researchers rarely 
have the benefit of previously planned comparisons, 
sampling strategies, or statisti
cal manipulations that control 
for possible threats. Instead, qualitative researchers must try 
to rule out validity threats after the research has begun by 
using evidence collected during the research itself to make 
alternative hypotheses or inte
rpretations implausible. 
One 
important aspect of validity is construct validity [29] that 
85 reflects to what extent the operational measures that are 
studied represent what the resear
cher has in mind and what is 
reflected in the interview questions. To address this aspect, 
we started each interview with an introduction in which we 
shared our understanding of agile practices and software 
evolution with the interviewee. 
In this way, the researchers 
and the interviewee had a shared understanding of the topic 
before the interview. With resp
ect to external validity, i.e. to 
what extent it is possible to generalize the findings, our 
contribution is related to (1) the drawing of specific 
implications and (2) the contri
bution of rich insight [28]. 
Based on our interviews, we present implications in a 
particular domain of action.
 Our study brings together 
empirical insight that allows 
for a deep understanding of the 
domain, and the findings we pr
esent should be regarded as 
insights valuable for other comp
anies interested in how to 
maintain agile ways of working during software evolution. 
IV.
 
CASE STUDY FINDINGS
 
In this section, we present our interview findings. We do 
so by describing the experiences from the time before 
customer-specific teams were introduced, and until today’s 
situation in which these teams have become a natural part of 
the development organization. We summarize our interview 
findings in Table 
1
. In this summary, we confirm the use of 
customer-specific teams as
 successful for improving 
customer responsiveness, custom
er satisfaction, and feature 
quality in the evolution phase of large-scale software 
development. 
 
 
Customer responsiveness 
Customer satisfaction 
Feature quality 
Team A  

 
Faster feedback and response 

 
Closer to a specific customer 

 
Direct communication with a specific 
customer 

 
Eas
y
 to 
g
et in contact with the customer 

 
More frequent usability tests  

 
Strong support after delivery 

 
Regular meetings with customers and 
customer units 

 
Close interaction with customer units 

 
Continuous discussion about requirements 

 
Opportunity to discuss what customers 
really need 

 
More frequent acceptance tests 
Team B 

 
Give important customers what they want 

 
Bypass the normal heavy process 

 
Meet special demands 

 
Extra attention to customer 

 
Better understanding of how features will 
be used/not used 

 
Be pro-active, foresee and anticipate 
problems 

 
Customers feel they are in control of what 
they get 

 
Opportunity to test in advance and in direct 
contact with a specific customer 

 
Test in field – learn more about specific 
needs 
Team C 

 
Flexibility 

 
Faster deliveries 

 
Customer get a feature that is requested 
only by them 

 
Ada
p
t faster to customer needs  

 
Special treatment 

 
Tailor features 

 
Understand customer use of a feature 

 
Customers get what they want when they 
want it 

 
More adapted and flexible processes and 
testing procedures 
Customer 
Unit A 

 
Closer to developers 

 
Direct communication 

 
Short feedback loo
p
s 

 
Customers get extra attention  

 
Customers feel special 

 
Test directly in the field with a specific 
customer 
Customer 
Unit B 

 
Faster deliveries 

 
Customers decide when to get a feature  

 
Better understanding of how a feature will 
be used/not used 

 
Learn what requirements mean instead of 
having assumptions  
Product 
Mana
g
er 

 
Seamless interaction between developers 
and customers 

 
Additional opportunities to understand our 
customers 

 
Learn about specific needs 

 
Facilitate 
g
ood testin
g
 
Program 
Manager 

 
Closer and more responsive 

 
Less disruptive 

 
Focus on one customer 

 
Only value-adding development 

 
Bundle customer-specific features 
 
Integration 
Mana
g
er 

 
Special treatment for important customers 

 
B
yp
ass traditional release c
y
cles 

 
Better understanding of customers 

 
Develo
p
 the ri
g
ht thin
g
s immediatel
y
 

 
Daily discussions 

 
Better understandin
g
 of 
q
ualit
y
 
Table 1. Summary of the interview findings from the custom
er-specific teams, units, and managers included in the study.
A.
 
Experiencing traditional practices 
Our case company is involved in large-scale software 
development with a distributed
 team structure. For the 
purpose of this study, one development unit was involved 
and we got the opportunity to interview members of three 
customer-specific teams servi
ng different customers. The 
customer-specific team members we interviewed are 
physically co-located, i.e. all 
team members work in the 
same physical and geographical location. A few years ago, 
the unit was involved in projects of a typically traditional 
nature. At that time, project teams were large and 
development cycles were long. The development 
organization was separated into expert disciplines, e.g. 
architecture, design, test, and 
maintenance, and the different 
disciplines were usually kept apart, communicating mainly 
via hand-overs of code or 
documentation. At that time, 
development was sequential with a rigorous planning phase 
in the beginning of each project and a major characteristic 
was that customers were 
involved during requirements 
engineering. In most cases, a 
separate organization took over 
the responsibility for system evolution. The challenges the 
organization experienced at th
at point were the following: 
•
 
Changes in requirements caused major re-work 
resulting in an expensive evolution process. 
•
 
Considerable time was spent on communication and 
coordination between different organizations, 
disciplines and teams, which made the evolution 
process slow. 
•
 
Evolution was concerned only with correcting errors 
and bugs, i.e. things that could have been done right 
if developers had closer collaboration with the 
customer. 
86 •
 
Feedback loops were slow and by the time a request 
or a bug report reached the development team this 
team was already involved in another project. 
•
 
Teams had difficulties in responding to customer-
specific needs and requirements that emerged after 
product deployment.  
B.
 
Adopting agile practices 
 After experiencing the difficulties mentioned above, the 
organization started adopting ag
ile practices. A major change 
was the introduction of cross-f
unctional teams. Instead of 
having separate disciplines, the company re-organized into 
units in which a number of cross-functional teams operate. 
Each cross-functional team includes system design, 
development, test etc., allowi
ng for each team to take full 
responsibility for a feature. Even though there were problems 
in the beginning, such as for example difficulties in adjusting 
to working closely with other disciplines, challenges in 
taking full responsibility of a feature, and uncertainties in 
how to stay flexible while at the same time meet with project 
milestones, the teams quickly 
got used to an environment 
characterized by incremental delivery, minimal up-front 
planning and continuous adjustme
nt of plans. In taking full 
responsibility for the features they developed, the team 
members got the opportunity to stay involved during the 
entire development cycle of a feature and the problems 
associated with communication-
 and coordination in between 
disciplines decreased. In adopting agile practices, the 
company experienced a number of benefits such as shortened 
development cycles, closer 
customer collaboration during 
development of features, and more frequent deliveries of 
features. However, despite the adoption of agile practices, 
the company still experienced se
veral challenges in relation 
to software evolution: 
•
 
Even though development cycles were shortened, the 
company had difficulties in maintaining short 
feedback loops after product deployment. 
•
 
The adoption of agile practices did not resolve the 
issue of how to maintain flexibility to changing 
customer requests after product deployment.  
C.
 
Introducing customer-specific teams 
After having experimented with agile practices and cross-
functional teams for a few years, the company decided to 
introduce customer-specific team
s. Customer-specific teams 
are teams that work exclusiv
ely for a selected customer. 
Although the initial plan was to have the existing cross-
functional team structure cater
 for both generic development 
as well as customer-specific requests, the company decided 
to introduce a number of designated teams that could be 
allocated exclusively for one cust
omer if there was a need for 
improvement of functionality that was not part of the generic 
product. While the customer-sp
ecific teams operate within 
the existing structure and look as all other cross-functional 
teams in terms of competen
ce, they are intended to 
significantly improve the company’s ability to respond to 
customer-specific feature reque
sts that emerge during the 
evolution phase. The long-term goal is to transfer knowledge 
gained from working closely w
ith specific customers to the 
development of generic functionality that serves the large 
customer base. In this way, re-work efforts will decrease, the 
evolution process will become less expensive, and customer-
first features will be efficiently transferred to the main 
product as part of the conti
nuous modification and correction 
process. Our interviews show on a number of benefits 
associated with cust
omer-specific teams: 
•
 
Faster feedback and di
rect communication with 
customers resulting in in
creased responsiveness. 
•
 
Flexibility to bypass planned release cycles allow
ing 
for faster deliveries and deployment of functionality.  
•
 
Increased team and customer
 satisfaction, as teams 
and customers have di
rect communication. 
•
 
Reduced disruption of work tasks, allowing team 
members to focus on the needs of one customer. 
•
 
Seamless environment in wh
ich customers feel there 
is room for their ideas and their feedback. 
•
 
Opportunity to learn about feature usage, allowing 
development teams to antic
ipate customer needs. 
•
 
Flexible testing procedures directed towards one 
customer. 
•
 
Continuous dialogue between
 customers and teams 
about emerging and changing requirements. 
As part of our study, interviewees were asked to confirm 
the use of customer-specifi
c teams (CST) for increasing 
customer satisfaction, feature quality, customer 
responsiveness etc., on a scale 0-6 (0 = completely disagree 
and 6 = completely agree). In Figure 
1
, we summarize our 
findings by showing the numbers assigned by the three 
customer-specific teams as well as the management 
representatives. 
 
Figure 1. Team and management perspective on benefits with CST 
use during software evolution. 
While all interviewees emphasize the many benefits with 
customer-specific teams, 
they also mention a few 
drawbacks. First, they consider planning difficult, i.e. to 
find a balance between customer-specific and traditional 
roadmap teams. Also, customers sometimes view customer-
specific teams as an opportunity
 to discuss whatever needs 
or concerns they have, i.e. they use them as a general 
















87 support mechanism rather than an opportunity to increase 
speed in software evolution. 
V.
 
DISCUSSION
 
In this study, we explore the way in which benefits of 
agile practices can be established and maintained in the 
evolution phase of software de
velopment. Below, we discuss 
our findings as well as outline the characteristics of 
customer-specific teams.
 
A.
 
Reaping the benefits of agile practices 
Traditionally, activities related to software evolution are 
viewed as expensive, resource demanding and time 
consuming [34]. There is significant research on cost 
estimation, effort estimation models and ways in which the 
different phases of software evolution can be efficiently 
managed [35].  
In our study, we explore a company in which traditional 
practices was the norm for a long time. Large development 
projects, long development cycles and difficulties in 
handling changing customer requests after system delivery 
were familiar problems [22]. Also, and as is common in the 
area of software product lines [17], customer needs and 
requests of similar kind were grouped together in product-
specific requirements, resulti
ng in a number of different 
‘product families’. As time went by, however, the situation 
became too complex and the software evolution process was 
considered inefficient from both
 a developer, and a customer 
perspective. At this point in
 time, the evolution process 
focused on maintaining current functionality and only to 
some extent improving the product. As can be seen in our 
study, there are a number of pr
oblems associated with this 
approach, i.e. long feedback cycles, slow response time and 
difficulties in transferring customer-first features into generic 
functionality that serves a large customer base. 
To address this situation, the company adopted agile 
development practices by 
introducing cross-functional 
teams. Instead of a complex 
organizational structure for 
customer collaboration, these teams have access to all 
competences needed as well as closer, and more frequent, 
collaboration opportunities with the customers. As can be 
seen in studies on agile development [2, 4], common benefits 
include shortened development cycles, more frequent 
delivery of features, and as a result of this, opportunities for 
more frequent customer feedback
. In our study, we see that 
by introducing cross-functional teams with full responsibility 
for feature development, a numbe
r of benefits from agile 
development practices could be reaped, and instead of a 
discipline-oriented team struct
ure, the company succeeded in 
establishing an autonomous team
 structure that could better 
respond to emerging customer 
needs during development as 
well as evolution of features. 
B.
 
Customer-specific teams for agile software evolution 
While the adoption of agile practices addressed many of 
the problems experienced with
 traditional development, and 
significantly improved the overall situation at the company, 
the evolution phase remained a challenge. Especially, close 
customer collaboration was difficult to establish and 
maintain while at the same time achieving scale and 
responsiveness to requests from
 a large customer base. To 
further address this situation,
 customer-specific teams, i.e. 
teams that could be allocated to a specific customer for a 
period of time, were introduced. Based on findings from our 
study, we see that these teams 
significantly contributed to the 
evolution phase in the company we studied. First, team 
members and customer unit representatives highlight the 
many advantages of having a dir
ect contact that allows for 
fast feedback loops once the system is deployed. The idea of 
not being disrupted, and the oppor
tunity to focus on only one 
customer, is appreciated. The general feeling is that the way 
in which customer-specific teams allow for a close relation 
to a selected customer is sati
sfying, and with the opportunity 
to bypass the planned release cycle in order to deliver 
functionality more frequently, they add significantly to 
improved customer responsiveness during software 
evolution. Moreover, our interviewees recognize the 
opportunity to get continuous 
customer feedback on how 
functionality is used as a way for them to learn about feature 
usage. Managers involved in our study recognize the extra 
attention given to prioritized cu
stomers and they view this as 
important to enhance customer 
satisfaction. L
ikewise, and as 
critical in agile development [4], team members and 
customer unit representatives mention regular meetings, 
close interaction and continuous collaboration as vital for 
customer satisfaction after product deployment. 
Finally, the interview study reveals interesting findings in 
relation to customer-specific 
teams and the opportunity to 
improve feature quality. The interviewees mention the 
frequency of acceptance tests, the 
opportunity to test in field, 
and the possibility to adapt test 
processes as rewarding. Also, 
both team members and customer unit representatives 
acknowledge the increased opportunity to continuously 
discuss and negotiate emerging requirements. While testing 
and evaluation of functionality is often considered a bottle 
neck in software development 
[36], and an activity that is 
both complex and insufficient, the impression after having 
heard customer-specific team me
mbers talk about it is that 
testing, on the opposite, is highly rewarding and something 
they appreciate if only circumstances allow for a 
collaborative and customer-oriented process. 
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS
 
In this paper, we address the 
need to involve customers in 
the software evolution phase. In particular, we direct our 
attention to large-scale software development where 
companies struggle to meet the specific needs and requests 
of a large customer base. The contribution of this paper is 
two-fold. First, we propose cu
stomer-specific teams (CST) 
as a way to establish and maintain agile practices in the 
evolution phase of large-scale software development. By 
having designated teams worki
ng closely with selected 
customers many of the benefits
 characterizing agile practices 
can be reaped. Customer-specific teams increase flexibility 
and speed, and as a result, facilitate efficient knowledge 
transfer between customer-first requests and generic 
functionality of interest for th
e large customer base. In our 
study, we identify a number of 
CST characteristics that lead 
to positive effects during software evolution:   
88 •
 
CST’s have direct communication with 
customer units and allow for short feedback 
cycles and fast response to emerging requests 
after product release. 
•
 
CST’s have the opportunity to bypass the 
planned release cycle and adjust releases to one 
particular customer. 
•
 
CST’s have the ability to focus on one task 
without being disrupte
d by other customer 
requests. 
•
 
CST’s allow for a creative environment in 
which they continuously learn about customers 
and feature usage. 
Second, our study confirms cu
stomer-specific teams as 
successful for improving (1) cu
stomer responsiveness, (2) 
customer satisfaction and (3) feature quality during software 
evolution. While the findings in our study relate to one 
specific company, we believe th
at the insight provided, and 
the implications presented, offer relevance to other 
companies in similar contexts. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
N. D. Fogelström, T. Gorschek, M. Svahnberg, and P. Olsson, The 
Impact of Agile Principles on Market-Driven Software Product 
Development, Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: 
Research and Practice, 2010, Vol: 22, pp. 53-80. 
[2]
 
J. Highsmith, and A. Cockburn, Agile Software Development: The 
business of innovation, Software Management, September, 2001, pp. 
120-122. 
[3]
 
K. Beck, Embracing Change with 
Extreme Programming. Computer, 
1999, vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 70–77. 
[4]
 
C. Larman, C., Agile and Iterative Development: A Manager's Guide. 
Addison-Wesley, 2004. 
[5]
 
D. Mishra, D., and A. Mishra, Complex software project 
development: agile methods adoption, Journal of Software 
Maintenance and Evolution: Research
 and Practice, 2011, vol. 23, pp. 
549–564. 
[6]
 
H. H. Olsson, H. Alahyari, and J.
 Bosch, Climbing the “Stairway to 
Heaven”: A multiple-case study exploring barriers in the transition 
from agile development towards continuous deployment of software, 
In Proceedings of the 38th Euromicro Conference on Software 
Engineering and Advanced Appli
cations, September 5-7, Cesme, 
Izmir, Turkey, 2012. 
[7]
 
K. H. Bennett, V. T. Rajlich, and R. Mohamad Mazrul, Legacy 
System: Coping with success. IEEE Software, 1995, pp.19-23. 
[8]
 
A. Cockburn, Agile Software Devel
opment. Boston: Addison-Wesley 
2002. 
[9]
 
J. Highsmith, The great methodologies debate: Part 2, Cutter IT 
Journal, 2002, vol. 5. 
[10]
 
P. Abrahamsson, J. Warsta, M.
 Siponen, and J. Ronkainen, New 
Directions on Agile Methods: a comparative analysis. In Proceedings 
of the 25th International Conference on Software Engineering, 
Portland, Oregon, 2003, pp. 244–254. 
[11]
 
K. Schwaber, and M. Beedle, Agile Software Development with 
Scrum. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2002. 
[12]
 
B. Fitzgerald, G. Harnett, a
nd K. Conboy, Customizing Agile 
Methods to Software Practices. European Journal of Information 
Systems, 2006, vol 15, no. 2. 
[13]
 
[7] McMahon, P. E.: Extending Agile Methods: A distributed 
project and organizational improvement perspective, In Proceedings 
of the 17th Annual Systems and Software Technology Conference, 
Salt Lake City, UT, April 18-21, 2005. 
[14]
 
S. Cook, R. Harrison, M. M. Lehm
an, and P. Wernick, Evolution in 
Software Systems: Foundations of the SPE Classification Scheme. J. 
Softw. Maintenance & Evolution:
 Research. and Practice, 2006, vol 
18, no. 1, pp. 1–35. 
[15]
 
N. Chapin, J. E. Hale, Md. K. Khan, F. Ramil, and W-G. Tan, Types 
of software evolution and software maintenance, Journal of Software 
Maintenance and Evolution: Research
 and Practice, 2001, vol. 13, pp. 
3-30. 
[16]
 
J. Bosch, Software ecosystems; Taking software development beyond 
the boundaries of the organization, Editorial in the Journal of Systems 
and Software; Special issue on Software Ecosystems, 2012, vol. 85, 
no. 7. 
[17]
 
J. Bosch, Design and use of software architectures: adopting and 
evolving a product-line approach, Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[18]
 
C. Jones, Strategies for managing requirements creep, IEEE 
Computer, 1996, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 92-94. 
[19]
 
V. Rajlich, Changing the paradigm
 of software engineering, 
Communications of the ACM, 2006,
 vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 67
-70. 
[20]
 
J. Iivari, H. Isomäki, and S. Pekkola, The User – the great unknown 
of systems development: reasons, forms, challenges, experiences and 
intellectual contributions of u
ser involvement, Editorial in 
Information Systems Journal, 2010, vol. 20, pp. 109-117. 
[21]
 
A.M. Davis, Software Requirements, Prentice-Hall: New Jersey, 
1993. 
[22]
 
I. Sommerville, Software Engineering, 6th Edition, Pearson 
Education: Essex, England, 2001. 
[23]
 
Boehm, B.W. (1989). Software Risk Management. IEEE Computer 
Society Press. 
[24]
 
M. Neumann, A. Riel, and D.
 Brissaud, IT-supported innovation 
management in the automotive supplier industry to drive idea 
generation and leverage innovation, Journal of Software Maintenance 
and Evolution: Research and Practice, 2011, July. 
[25]
 
J. Bosch, Maturity and evolution in software product lines: 
Approaches, artefacts and organization, In Proceedings of the Second 
Software Product Line Conference (SPLC2), 2002, pp. 257-271. 
[26]
 
J.M. LaNasa, Building customer teams to deliver on your company’s 
value proposition, Velocity, 2002. 
[27]
 
M. Poppendieck, and T. Poppendieck, Lean Software Development; 
An agile toolkit, Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
[28]
 
G. Walsham, Interpretive case studies in IS research: Nature and 
method, European Journal of Information Systems, 1995, vol. 4, pp. 
74-81. 
[29]
 
P. Runesson and M. Höst, Guidelines for conducting and reporting 
case study research in software engineering, Empirical Software 
Engineering, 2009, vol, 14. 
[30]
 
J. Corbin and A. Strauss, Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded 
Theory Procedures and Techniques, Sage, California, 1990. 
[31]
 
B. Kaplan and D. Duchon, Combining qualitative and quantitative 
methods in IS research: A case study, MIS Quarterly, 1988, vol, 12, 
no, 4, 571–587. 
[32]
 
J. Goetz and D. LeCompte, Ethnography and Qualitative Design in 
Educational Research, Academic Press, Orlando, 1984. 
[33]
 
J.A. Maxwell, Qualitative research design: An interactive approach, 
Sage: Los Angeles, 2013. 
[34]
 
B. P. Lientz and E. B. Swanson,
 Software Maintenance Management, 
A study of the maintenance of computer application software in 487 
data processing organizations. Addison-Wesley, Reading MA, 1980. 
[35]
 
A. De Lucia, E. Pompella and S. Stefanucci, Effort estimation for 
corrective software maintenance, In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, 
Ischia, Italy, 2002. 
[36]
 
S. McConnell, Code Complete (2nd ed.). Microsoft Press, 2004, p. 
29. 
89