 Improving Software Process in Agile Software Development Projects: 
Results from Two XP Case Studies 
Outi SaloVTT Technical Research Centre of Finland P.O. Box 1100, FIN-90571 Oulu, Finland Outi.Salo@vtt.fiAbstractOne of the Agile princip
les is that software development teams should regularly reflect on how to 
improve their practices to become more effective. 

Some systematic approaches have been proposed on how to conduct such a self-reflection process, but little 

empirical evidence yet exits. In this paper, the 
empirical results are reported from two XP (Extreme 

Programming) projects where the project teams 
conducted “post-iteration workshops” after all 
process iterations in order to improve and optimize 
working methods. Both qualitative and quantitative 
data from the total of eight post-iteration workshops is 

presented in order to evaluate and compare the 
findings of the two projects. The results show the 
decline of both positive and negative findings, as well 

as the narrower variation of negative findings and process improvement actions towards the end of both 

projects. In both projects, the data from post-iteration workshops indicate increased satisfaction and learning of project teams.  1. Introduction AGILE methodologies and principles
1 place emphasis on incremental software development with 
short iterations, adaptation to changing requirements, 
close communication, and simplicity, for example. One 
specific agile principle closely relates to the software 

process improvement (SPI): “regular reflection of 

teams in how and where to improve”. Furthermore, 

agile proponents have noted that "each situation calls 

for a different methodology" [1, p. 184]. Thus, when 

using any of the agile approaches, continuous 
improvement, tuning and adjusting of the software 

development process is required. 
Although individuals and interactions are placed 
over processes and tools in the Agile Manifesto
2, at                                                           
1 www.agilealliance.org 2 www.agilemanifesto.org 
least Extreme Programming (XP) claims to be a 
disciplined process [2] and may actually be 
characterized as such fro
m a Capability Maturity 
Model for Software (The Software CMM) 
[3]viewpoint, for example. 
In the CMMI staged model, only the reaching of 
maturity level 2 (Managed) 
[4] includes, implementation of PPQA process area (Process and 

Product Quality Assurance), amongst six other process 

areas. For example, it includes the evaluation of 

performed processes and identification of lessons 

learned that could improve processes. In XP, some 

references can be found that display such activities. 

For example, in the death phase of XP it is instructed 

to "Imagine with the team how they would run things 

differently next time" [5, p. 137]. However, the XP 

practices[5], do not include detailed procedures on 
how to actually carry out such activities to improve the 

software development process.  
Recently, some systematic approaches have been 
proposed on how to improve the software development 

process in agile context for an individual project. Cockburn suggests a met
hodology-growing technique for "on-the-fly methodology construction and tuning" 

[1, p. 185] that embodies a reflection workshop 

technique for the mid- or post-increment workshops. 

Also, Dingsøyr and Hanssen [6] have suggested a 

workshop technique called postmortem reviews to be 

used as an extension for agile software development 

methods. It pursues on making good use of the 

experiences of project participants at the end of the 

short iterations to enhance the development process 

and also over the project boundaries.  However, only a very limited amount of empirical 
evidence can be found on applying team reflection 

workshops, lightweight postmortem reviews [6] or any 

other SPI efforts from agile software development 

projects. This paper presents a comparison of empirical 

results from two case studies (eXpert and zOmbie) 

conducted at the Technical Research Centre of 

Finland. Two consecutive projects adopted XP and 

conducted post-iteration workshops systematically 
Proceedings of the 30th EUROMICRO Conference (EUROMICRO™04) 
1089-6503/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 after each iteration to improve their software 
development process. The post-iteration workshops 

included elements from 
both the lightweight 
postmortem review t
echnique [6] and the methodology-growing techni
que [1] and focus on the 
project level SPI.  This paper presents the analysis of the post-iteration workshop data (i.e. number and content of negative 

and positive findings, and number of SPI actions) from 

the two case studies. The aim is to present the 

consistencies and deviations in the data of two 

somewhat similar, yet also divergent projects, and the 

underlying causes for such findings are also suggested. 

Thus, in this paper, the findings of the post-iteration 

workshops are discussed in the light of the different 
characteristics of the two case projects. Also, one goal 

is also to either support or evert the early conclusions 

previously drawn based on the eXpert case study [7].The focus of this paper is to analyze the quantitative 
and qualitative findings generated during the post-

iteration workshops and the quantity of the 

implemented process improvement actions. However, 

these two case studies do not offer extensive enough 
data for firm generalizati
ons, but some conclusions can 
be brought forward for further evaluation. This paper is composed as follows. The next section 
presents the research design including the method, the 

research target and settings, with the presentation of 

the similar and divergent characteristics of the two 

case studies. The paper continues by presenting the 
results and analysis of post-iteration workshops, and 

ends with a discussion and acknowledgements. 
2. Research Design In this section, the research method, data collection, 
and the research setting are described for both the 

eXpert and zOmbie projects. 
2.1. Research Method and Data Collection The research method used in this study was action 
research[8] that can be seen as one form of case study. 
The focus in action research is more on what 
practitioners do rather than what they say they do 
[9].The resulting knowledge should guide the practice 

[10]. In action research, the modification of reality 
requires the possibility to intervene [11]. In the post-iteration workshops the researchers’ acted in a role of a 
moderator and participated in the generation of 
positive and negative findings, and enhanced the process with the project team. Also, one role for 

researchers' was to provide the boundaries in which the 
project team was allowed to enhance the process. 
In both projects, quantitative and qualitative research data was collected on a) effort used on 
workshops, b) quantity of findings and c) their content 

and, d) quantity of suggested and actual process 

enhancements (i.e. action point
s) and e) their content. 
Furthermore, the developers maintained diaries to 
record their negative and positive perceptions. Also, a 
post-project workshop and a group interview were held for the project team at the end of both projects. 
2.2. Research Target: Post-Iteration Workshop 
techniqueThis research aims to study how a short iterative 
reflection session suits for self-adapting and improving 
the practices during an Agile software development 

project. Thus, the focus is SPI on project level.  The post-iteration workshop technique applied in 
both of the case studies was evolved by combining 
attributes from both of 
the existing reflection techniques (i.e., lightweight postmortem review and 
team reflection workshop 
techniques) as described in more detail in 
[7]. In short, as suggested in postmortem 
review technique, the problem-solving brainstorming 
method called the KJ method [12] was adopted in the 
post-iteration workshops for generating, collecting and structuring positive and negative experiences
. The project team recorded pos
itive and negative issues 
concerning the previous iteration on post-it notes. 
These notes were then grouped, and negative issues 

were discussed to generate process enhancements. 
Both existing techniques suggested prioritizing the 
negative findings and analyzing only the most 

important ones. However, in post-iteration workshops 

all the negative findings were considered as equal and 

all of them were included for further discussion. Then, 

the actual software process improvement actions 

(hereafter referred as SPI actions) were decided 
together with the project team and researchers. This 
data was collected in action point lists by the project 
team member during the post-iteration workshops. 
Finally, the previous action 
point list was revised to find out what improvements had actually taken place 
and which ones were not implemented for one reason 
or another. The quantitative as well as qualitative data from the 
post-iteration workshops is the central research data 
presented in this paper. This includes the positive and 
negative findings, and the implemented SPI actions.  
The results from the first case study (eXpert) were 
earlier reported in [7]. It was suggested that post-iteration workshops concretely help to improve and 
optimize practices, and enhance the learning and 

satisfaction of the project team. This argument is 

evaluated in this paper by strengthening the case with 
Proceedings of the 30th EUROMICRO Conference (EUROMICRO™04) 
1089-6503/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 the comparative analysis of eXpert and zOmbie case 
studies. Another target of this research is to seek out 

any consistencies and deviations between the two projects, and to find underlying factors behind them.  
2.3. Research setting The two case studies presented in this paper are the first ones in the ongoing series of Agile software 
development case studies at VTT Electronics. As this 
paper presents results from two case studies, i.e. 

eXpert and zOmbie, their characteristics need to be 
addressed in order to offer a framework for the 

interpretation of results. Thus, the similarities and 

divergences of the two projects are described in this 
sub-section.  Similarities of eXpert and zOmbie case studies 
Both case studies were conducted in a co-located 
development environment. 
In fact, the projects worked 
in exactly the same open office space. Also, the 
common tools that were not dependent on the 

developed application type were identical in the two 

projects. These included configuration management, 

data collection, and documentation tools. 
Intensive two-day training was given to both of the 
teams including XP practices, configuration 

management and data collection issues. The teams 

were advised to follow XP process as suggested by 
Beck [5] including planning game, small releases, 
metaphor, simple design, te
sting practices, refactoring, pair programming, collective ownership, continuous 
integration, 40-hour week, and coding standards. 

However, also other practices, such as SPI activities, 

were employed to support software development. 
The two projects had an identical calendar time 
(nine weeks) and length of working week (4-day week 

of 24-hours). As proposed by the 40-hour week rule, 

no overtime was recommended. The possible overtime 
was compensated in the following iteration. 
Differences of eXpert and zOmbie case studies 
Table 1. presents the central differences between the eXpert and zOmbie projects that should be taken 
into consideration when interpreting the data from 
post-iteration workshops. Table 1. Central differences of eXpert and zOmbie
Characteristic eXpert 
zOmbie Team size 4 developers 4 developers 
1 project manager 
Type of end product Intranet  
applicationMobileapplicationExperience in XP/Agile4 novice 1 experienced 
4 novice Experience in the end product development 
1 experienced 3 novice 5 novice Experience in coding 2 experienced 
2 novice 4 experienced 1 novice Iterations 3 x two weeks
3 x one week 1 x one week 3 x two weeks 
2 x one week Size of end product 10 000 LOC 7 000 LOC 
Software development 
toolsEclipseApache Tomcat 

MySQLJava +JSP Eclipse
Apache Tomcat 
MySQL
J2MEXP practices On-site
customer 
Off-site customer 
Firstly, the team size was slightly different. Both 
project teams included 4 software developers all being 
university students at the 
final stage of their information processing science studies. However, 
zOmbie employed also a project manager from the 

previous eXpert team to provide expertise on the Agile 

development approach and XP. The project manager 

worked a shorter week than the rest of the project 
team, i.e. 2/3 of their effort. Despite this, he 
participated in all the post-iteration workshops and 

thus is to be noticed in the quantity of the findings. Also, the end product being developed was 
divergent in the two projects. The eXpert team 

implemented an intranet application for managing 

research data of a Finnish research institute. The 

zOmbie team had a task to implement a mobile 

application for managing transactions in a stock 

exchange. Naturally, the distinct application types also 
caused some differences in the software development 
tools and languages (see table 1). Furthermore, the size 

of the end product varied from the eXpert’s 10000 

LOC to zOmbie’s 7000 LOC. 
Furthermore, experiences of the team members 
differed between the two projects. In eXpert, all the 
team was novice on using 
agile software development 
methods. The zOmbie project had the advantage that 

the project manager was one of the developers from 

the previous eXpert project. As such, he was a 

valuable inboard “coach” [5] for the zOmbie team and 
also may have influenced some of the project practices 

based on his experiences from eXpert. However, as 

mentioned earlier, all the actual SPI decisions were to 

be made solely in the post-iteration workshops.  
Proceedings of the 30th EUROMICRO Conference (EUROMICRO™04) 
1089-6503/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 The experiences of project teams varied in the end 
product development, as well as coding skills. In 
eXpert, one team member was experienced on the 

development of intranet applications, whereas the 

zOmbie team totally lacked knowledge on mobile 
software development. Vice versa, two of the four 
eXpert team members were experienced coders but in 

zOmbie, three of the developers plus the project 
manager could be regarded as experienced coders, and 
only one novice. In this context, novice on coding is regarded as "no industrial experience". Thus, zOmbie 
project had more advanced coders, but their experience 
in the end product development was lacking. 
The length of iterations was different in the two 
projects. Both projects consisted of six iterations. In 
eXpert, the project started with three two week 

iterations and finished with three one week iterations, 

the last one being a correctiv
e iteration. In zOmbie, the 
first and last two iterations lasted one week and the 

2nd, 3rd, and 4th iterations for two weeks each. As this 

paper involves analysis on the first four iterations of 
both projects, the difference in the length of first and fourth iterations should be noted in interpretations.  Probably the biggest difference strictly related to 
XP practices was the role of the customer. The eXpert 

project included an on-site customer working in the 
same office space with the software developers, as 

suggested by XP [5]. In the zOmbie project, however, 

one of the research targets was to study how an on off-

site customer would suit an XP project. This matter is 

out of the scope of this paper, but it is clearly one of 

the factors to be noted when comparing the findings of 

the case studies reported in this paper.  3. Case Study Results In this section, the analysis of the post-iteration 
workshop findings is presented 
with interpretations. Only the first four post-iteration workshops are 
included in this analysis. The fifth workshops in both 

projects concentrated on the experiences from the 

entire project instead on the previous iteration and, 
thus, are not comparable. However, these post-project 
workshops are valuable from the viewpoint of 

organizational level SPI and will be reported elsewhere in the near future. 3.1. Post-Iteration Workshop Findings Table 1 presents the costs of holding post-iteration workshops in terms of duration per workshop and the 
percentual effort spent on the workshops calculated 

from the total iteration effort. 
Table 2. Cost of post-iteration workshops DurationEffort % 
IterationeXpert 
zOmbie 
eXpert 
zOmbie 
12.68 h 2.18 h 5,5 % 7,8 % 
21.83 h 2.35 h 3,8 % 5,5 % 
31.0 h 1.63 h 2,1 % 3,0 % 
40.93 h 1.13 h 3,3 % 2,2 % 
Avg1.6 h 1.82 h 3.7 % 4.1 % 
Results show the tendency of the duration, as well 
as the percentual effort lowering from iteration to 
iteration in both of the projects. To explain the 
seemingly high effort percent
age in both cases, several 
explanatory factors can be found. First, it should be noted that each software developer worked a 24-hour 

week instead of 'normal' 40-hour week. In the latter 

case, the corresponding figures would be substantially 

lower. However, this requires an assumption that a 40-

hour week does not increase the duration of post-

iteration workshops. Also, in the zOmbie project, the 
project manager worked about a 16 hour-week, which 

also increases the percentual effort spent on post-
iteration workshops. Secondly, it should be noted that 
in both cases the shorter iteration (4th in eXpert and 
1st in zOmbie) causes the proportion of effort to rise 

even though the actual effort spent may even be lower.  
In Dingsøyr and Hanssen’s [6] study the effort 
spent on lightweight post
mortem reviews was around 
4.7% and the duration of one workshop was roughly 

1.4 hours (calculated from their data). Cockburn [1] 

estimates a minimal duration from two to four hours. 

In these two cases the average effort percentage was 

3.7% in eXpert and 4.1 % in zOmbie whereas the 

average duration in eXpert was 1.6 hours and 1.8 
hours in zOmbie. One interesting observation from 

table 2 is that in both projects the duration of the 

workshop has halved from the 2nd iteration to the 4th 

iteration. Furthermore, it can be presumed that the learning of 
the post-iteration workshop technique took some time 
during the first workshops and also affects the decline 

trend in effort and duration data. However, it can be 

seen in Table 2, that the duration of all but the first 
workshop was longer in the zOmbie project compared 

to eXpert. One reason for this is the clearly larger 

amount of negative findings (Figure 2), as well as the 

topics behind these findings (Figure 3). Thus, the 
discussion and decision-making during the post-

iteration workshops obviously took more time in 

zOmbie than in eXpert. The long duration of the first 

post-iteration workshop in eXpert project can be 

explained by the fact that the technique was applied for 
the first time and, thus, took some time for the 

moderator (i.e., researcher) to learn as well. 
Proceedings of the 30th EUROMICRO Conference (EUROMICRO™04) 
1089-6503/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 Quantitativedatafrom the four post-iteration
workshops is presented in the figures 1 and 2. Fig. 1. Number of positive findings from eXpert and 
zOmbie post-iteration workshops
The first four iterations of eXpertproducedatotal
of 93 positive findings whereas the corresponding
number in zOmbie was 102 (Figure 1). Thisisatotal
of 23.3 positive findings per person in eXpert and 20.4
inzOmbie.Inboth cases the trend seems to be a 

declineinpositive findings towards the end of the
project.One reason for this is thefrequentoccurrenceof
post-iteration workshops (one totwoweeksapart).
Thus, the project team may not always find it

necessarytorepeat neither the 
positive nor negativefindings-eventhoughthey still may be valid. In fact, 

onecomment made by a software developer during the

3rd post-iteration workshop in zOmbiewas:"The

charmof novelty is gone. Trifles don't make one so 

happy anymore". At the time, he foundithardtothink
ofany (new) positive findings. Thus, as the team gets
more accustomed to the adopted practices, their 

weaknesses and rewards may be taken for granted.
Fig. 2. Number of negative findings from eXpert and 
zOmbie post-iteration workshops
The first four iterations of eXpertproducedatotal
of 52 negative findings. The corresponding numberin
zOmbiewas91(Figure 2). It 
should be noted, that thezOmbie team had one "extra" team member yet the 
number of negative findings per personisstill

noticeably higher (13 in eXpert and 18.2 in zOmbie).
Also, the negative findings in both projectsseemto
follow the declining trend as in positive findings.This
supportstheargument of Cockburn [1], that the
changes needed in the process will be muchsmaller
after the second and subsequent increments. Also,the
trend lines in both positive and negative findingsindicatethattheduration 
of the iteration does notaffect the amount of findings thataregeneratedin

post-iteration workshops.0510
15202530354045R1R2R3R4
eXpert
zOmbie
The closer examination of theresearch data reveals 
thatas the topics causing negative findings became
fewerduring both projects they also drew closer to

each other (Figure 3). In other words, the criticism of 
the project team became more focused. 
0510152025R1R2R3R4
zOmbie
eXpert
Fig. 3. Number of topics behind negative findings TheabovezOmbiedata clearly supports the earlier
reportedeXpert case study results [7]. The declining
trends of negative findings and topics behindthem

(Figure 3) support the argument thattheprocess
actually adapted to the needs of the project team, and 
increased their satisfaction for the process [7].
0510
15202530354045R1R2R3R4
eXpert
zOmbie
Table 3 illustrates thecentraltopicsbehindthe
positive and negative findings in eXpert and zOmbie.
Table 3.Top five of the positive and negative findingsTop 5 positive findings Top 5 negative findings eXpert
zOmbie
eXpert
zOmbie
1Pairprogramming
Team spirit Time
trackingTesting2ShortiterationsWorking

environment
TestingTime/task
estimation
3ContinuousintegrationTechnical
environment
Code
commenting
Technical
environment
4On-sitecustomer
Planning gameEffort
estimation
Time

tracking5RefactoringPair
programming
Test-firstdevelopment
Off-site
customer
Interestingly,allthe top five positive topics in
eXpertfocusonthepractices of XP. In zOmbie, the 
Proceedings of the 30th EUROMICRO Conference (EUROMICRO™04) 
1089-6503/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 positive findings concentrated more on human and
environmental aspects. 
0510
1520
25R1R2R3R4
eXpert
zOmbie
The closer examination of the negativefindingsin
the two projects discloses some project specific
problem areas especially regarding the zOmbieproject.
Oneclearly emerging issue is the off-site customer that 
wasapplied in only the zOmbie project. 20% of the

negative findings in the first iteration related totheoff-
site customer that was too busy. Changing theoff-site

customer - which often may be impossible-solved

much of the problem in this case. Also, the 

communicationpractices with customers were 

improved throughout the project. Anotherclearly

project specific problem areain the zOmbie project 

wastesting in the mobile software development

environment. 12% of the 92 negative findings
throughout the project related tothisproblem.
Specifically, this problem related totesting(test-first)

intheclient side (i.e., simulator) environment and was 
not solved during the project. Also, the set-up of the
technical environment was found more complicated in

mobile software than in
 intranet applicationdevelopment as it required fire wall configurations and 

setting-up of IP server, for example. In zOmbie,8.7%

of the negative findings related toenvironmental
problems where as this topicresultedzerofindingsin

eXpert.Common in negative findings for both projectswas
the lack of clear exit-criteriafor tasks, i.e. criteria to

verifyifthe task is actually done. Also, data collection

wasfoundproblematic. Due to the research character

of the project, the collection of measurementdatawas

heavyand time tracking detailed. However, both of 

these findings appeared strongly after the first iterationand sharply lowered towards the end of the project.
Also,theimportanceof coding standards as well as 

theirproperusewasan issue that came up in both of 

the projects. Furthermore, the estimationoftaskswas

foundasclearlyproblematic in both of the projects. In 

zOmbie,15%ofallthe negative findings related to this

topic and 17% in eXpert.Twotopicsthatwere reported in only the eXpert
project were test-first and short iterations.Thetest-first
approach [13] was clearly problematic due to the fact 
thattherewasno expert available on this approach. In 
thelatterproject,however, the project manager was a 

member of the previous eXpert team and thushad
someexperienceandknowledge on this topic. In 

eXpert,the negative findings related to testing refer to
the decrease of motivationofthe external testing team
thatreflected on the development team as lack of 

testing results and feedback.Figure4presents the number of actual process 
improvements that were carried on after iterations.
Fig.4. Quantity of implemented software process 
improvementsAs it can be seen, the post-iteration workshops of
the zOmbie project implemented56improvement
actions whereas eXpert only 16. The thorough analysisof improvement actions and their effect is outofthe
scopeofthispaper.One reason for this is that the

existing project level SPI techniques lack a detailedprocedure for follow-up of SPI actionsaswellastheir

support with, for example,measurementdata.

However, quantitative data of SPI actions is interesting
in order to evaluate how thenumberofnegative

findingsineach workshop relates to the number of 

process improvements (Figure 5).
01020304050R1R2R3R4R1R2R3R4
eXpertzOmbie
Negative
Findings
Improvement
Actions
Fig. 5. Negative findingsvs.quantityof
implemented software process improvementsFigure 5 illustrates how thevariationbetweenthe
amount of negative findings and processimprovements
actionsis widest after the first iteration in both of the

case studies. For one, this data indicates that the 
projectteamswerecautious on making any process 

changes at the beginning of the project. One reasonfor

this was the novelty of themethodsandtechniques

used which made it impossible toevaluatewhetherthe

negativity was caused by the methoditselforthelack

of ability of the project team 
to apply it. Forexample,
Proceedings of the 30th EUROMICRO Conference (EUROMICRO™04) 
1089-6503/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 in eXpert, the test-first approach caused negative 
findings during the first two iterations but they actually 
turned into positive findings towards the end of the 
project as the project team learned to apply the 

technique. Learning was something that also took place during 
the post-iteration workshops. For example, some of the 

negative findings could be identified as 

misunderstandings or problems in communication. 

These issues needed no specific actions but were 

solved by discussion within the team. Also, it can be 
interpreted from Figure 5 th
at the implemented SPI 
actions influence in decreasing the amount of negative 
findings after the following iteration. This, again, 

implicates to the increased satisfaction of the project 

team to the enhanced process. For example, as the data 

collection tools were improved both in eXpert and 
zOmbie, the negative findings this topic were dried up. 
On the contrary, the SPI actions, though relatively 
small at times, seemed to produce positive findings on 
even the annoying topics such as data collection. 4. Conclusions and Further Work Agile principles suggest that the software 
development team should regul
arly reflect on how to 
become more effective and tune and adjust its 
behaviour accordingly. Some systematic approaches 

have been proposed on how to execute this self-

reflection process effectively but little empirical 

evidence yet exits. This paper presents a comparison of 

empirical results of two case studies where two known 

self-reflection approaches were combined [1, 6] and 

four post-iteration workshops were held in two XP 
projects. The goal was to study how the post-iteration 
workshop results from two affinite, yet divergent 

projects vary in order to st
rengthen the conclusions of earlier reported eXpert results [7], and to broaden the study to find coherences and deviations from the 
research data. The data incl
udes the quantity and quality of positive and negative findings from the post-
iteration workshops as well as quantity of the actual 

SPI actions made based on the findings. Though these 

two case studies do not offer extensive enough data to draw any generalizations, some conclusions can be 
brought forward for further evaluation. Firstly, several consistenci
es could be found on the data of the two projects. For one, the amount of both 
positive and negative findings decreased towards the end of the projects quite rapidly. This indicates the 
customization of the project t
eam to the new tools and 
practices and especially the decrease in negative findings refer to increased satisfaction of the project 

team towards the end of the project. In other words, 
the findings support the assump
tion that post-iteration 
workshops were effective on improving the process to 

suit the development team. Secondly, the correlation 

between the number of negative findings and the 

number of SPI actions clearly drew closer towards the 

end of the projects as the amount of needed 

improvements clearly lowered. This data also speaks 

for the successful adaptation of the software process 

and the effectiveness of post-iteration workshops.  Thirdly, the data from 
both projects show that the 
effort needed on post-iteration workshops clearly 
decreases from iteration to iteration. This somewhat 
indicates the learning of usi
ng the technique, but it also correlates to the increased satisfaction of the project 
team. The lower amount of negative findings in 

consecutive iterations shortened the time spent on 
discussion and decision-mak
ing concerning the SPI actions for next iteration. Also some deviations could be found when 
comparing the research data from the two projects. The 

zOmbie case study produced clearly a larger amount of 
negative post-iteration workshop findings. The 

underlying causes for this were found in several 
factors. One of these was the complexity of a project. 
In the mobile software development project (zOmbie) 

few clearly complex factors, such as environment 
setup and testing in mobile device were found to 

increase the amount of negative findings compared to 
eXpert. Also, one clear factor to increase the amount 

of negative findings was the off-site customer in 

zOmbie. Naturally, the larger amount of negative 

findings can also be seen in the longer duration of 

workshops in zOmbie. In other words, factors such as 
the complexity of project a
nd suitability of the used 
software process for the specific team effect on the 
time spent on post-iteration workshops and the amount 

of changes needed in the process. The effort used on post-iteration workshops 
decreases towards the end of the project in both case 

studies. It could be calculated to be as low as 2.2% 
(4th zOmbie workshop). When taking into 
consideration the shorter working week (i.e., 24 hours 

per week), the effort needed on post-iteration 

workshops is quite tolerable especially when 

considering the immeasurable value of increased 

satisfaction and learning of project team. Still, the 

effectiveness of post-iteration workshops in regard to 
effort and duration is somet
hing that should be further increased especially during the first iterations. On the 
research data presented, some normative base can be 
found to estimate how much effort should be allocated 

in organizations for holding post-iteration workshops.  According to the software developers of eXpert and 
zOmbie, the rapid visibility of
 the SPI actions and the 
Proceedings of the 30th EUROMICRO Conference (EUROMICRO™04) 
1089-6503/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 concrete possibility to influence the working practices increase the satisfaction of the project team. These 
strong implications of the benefit of the post-iteration 

workshops were found in the positive remarks made by 

both development teams in the final interviews. 
This paper does not repor
t the quality of the actual SPI actions made during the two case studies nor their 

effect on, for example, the quality of the end product. 

One reason for this is that the existing project level SPI techniques lack a detailed procedure for the follow-up 
of SPI actions, as well as their support with, for 

example, measurement data. Also, the existing 

techniques lack important aspects in enhancing the 

extensive learning in the future projects. Based on this 
observation, the post-iteration workshop technique has been evolved and is currently being applied for further 

evaluation in the two following case studies (bAmbie 

and uniCorn) at the VTT Technical Research Centre of 

Finland. Overall, based on the data presented in this paper, the second case study (zOmbie) is in line with the 

results of eXpert and, thus supports the early 
conclusions presented in [7]. Accordingly, the iterative workshop gathering is a concrete way to improve and 
adapt Agile software processes during the iterative 

cycles of software development
. Thus, post-iteration 
workshops should be regarded as a useful method to be 
included in Agile software development projects, 

especially if supplemented with follow-up and 

validation of process improvements. 
5. Acknowledgements 
The research work presented in this paper has been 
carried on in the ICAROS project funded by TEKES 

(National Technology Agency of Finland). Acknowledgement also to the eXpert and zOmbie 
teams for their thorough participation in the process 

improvement activities. Also, thanks to Dr. Pekka 
Abrahamsson for his co-operation and support, and 

Annukka Mäntyniemi for her valuable comments. 
6. References [1] A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development. Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
[2] K. Beck and B. Boehm, 
Agility through Discipline: A Debate. Computer, pp. 8, 2003. [3] M. C. Paulk, 
Extreme Programming from a CMM 
Perspective. Software, vol. 18, issue 6, pp. 19-26, 
2001.[4] S. E. I. (SEI), C
MMISM SE/SW/IPPD/SS Model, Version 1.1, Staged Representation (Technical Report CMU/SEI-2002-TR-012), Software 
Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 2002. [5] K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change. Addison Wesley Longman, Inc., 2000. 
[6] T. Dingsøyr and G. K. Hanssen, 
Extending Agile Methods: Postmortem Reviews as Extended Feedback. 4th International Workshop on Learning 
Software Organizations (LSO'02)), Chicago, 
Illinois, USA, 2002. [7] O. Salo, K. Kolehmainen, P. Kyllönen, J. Löthman, 
S. Salmijärvi, and P. Abrahamsson, 
Self-Adaptability of Agile Software Processes: A Case 
Study on Post-Iteration Workshops. To be published in the proceedings of 
the 5th International Conference on Extreme Programming and Agile 
Processes in Software Engineering (XP 2004), 
Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, 2004. 
[8] J. B. Cunningham, 
Case study principles for different types of cases. Quality and quantity, vol. 31, pp. 401-
423, 1997. [9] D. Avison, F. Lau, M. 
Myers, and P. A. Nielsen, Action Research. Communications of the ACM, vol. 42, pp. 94-97, 1999. [10] P. Oquist, 
The epistemology of action research. Acta Sociologica, vol. 21, pp. 143-163, 1978. [11] G. I. Susman and R. D. Evered, 
An Assessment of the Scientific Merits of Action Research
.Administrative Science Quarterly, vol. 23, pp. 582-

603, 1978. [12] R. Scupin, 
The KJ Method: A Technique for 
Analyzing Data Derived from Japanese Ethnology
.Human Organization, vol. 56, pp. 233-237, 1997. 
[13] K. Beck, 
Test-Driven Development By Example. 1st ed: Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
Proceedings of the 30th EUROMICRO Conference (EUROMICRO™04) 
1089-6503/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
