 Software Process Improvement in Agile Software Development: 
A Systematic Literature Review 
 
Célio Santana, Fabiola Queiroz 
Information Science Department 
Federal University of Pernambuco. 
UFPE. Recife, Brazil 
{casj, fqs3}@cin.ufpe.br 
Alexandre Vasconcelos 
Computer Science Department 
Federal University of Pernambuco. 
UFPE. Recife, Brazil 
amlv@cin.ufpe.br 
Cristine Gusmão 
Biomedic Engineering Department 
Federal University of Pernambuco. 
UFPE. Recife, Brazil 
cmgg@cin.ufpe.br
 
 
Abstract
—
It is recognized the relevance and importance that 
software process improvement (SPI) and agile development have 
gained in the field of software engineering. Both are approaches 
that increase the efficiency and effectiveness of a software 
development organization and to enhance software products. This 
paper aims to identify and characterize SPI in agile environments 
through a systematic literature review, including 423 papers 
published between 2001 and March/2013. The selected papers were 
classified according to SPI aspects. Distinct approaches to Agile 
SPI were identified, the most common is to adapt traditional 
approaches of SPI in agile environments, but there are novel 
approaches such as improving people behavior or 
even improving 
practices being innovative in SPI consideration. Conducting SPI 
initiatives in agile environments is quite different from the 
traditional one, becoming nece
ssary to adapt existing SPI 
approaches or creating new methods. The main discussion about 
agile SPI is: what the role of SPI in a context with people and 
interactions are more valued than process and tools?    
 
Keywords—Software Process Improvement; Agile Software 
Development; Systematic Literature Review. 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Software process has gained major attention of the 
community of software engineer
ing in the last three decades 
[1,2]. Software processes are human-centred activities and, as 
such, prone to unexpected or undesired performance and 
behaviours [3]. It is generally accepted that software processes 
need to be continuously assessed and improved in order to 
fulfil the requirements of the customers and stakeholders of the 
organization [3].  
Software Process Improvement (SPI) encompasses the 
assessment and improvement of the processes and practices 
involving software development [4]. SPI initiatives are, 
henceforth, referred to activities aimed to improve the software 
development process [5]. In recent decades, SPI has been 
widely studied in the context of “traditional” software 
development, and its strengths and weaknesses have been 
largely discussed [6].  
Another approach, which adoption is increasingly by 
software organizations, is the agile software development. This 
approach is based on velocity of respond to changes, providing 
competitive advantage. Agile processes should be light of 
artefacts and activities non-related to coding [7]. Considering 
the agile mindset, new challenges and opportunities for 
conducting SPI are also emerging [6].  
In this light, this paper provides a systematic literature 
review on Software Process Improvement in agile 
environments showing which subjects were studied and also 
raised from empirical data of primary studies. This paper is 
organized as follows. Background and related work is 
presented in Section 2 and our research methodology is 
presented in Section 3. In Section 4 we describe the results and 
answer our research questions. We present our conclusions in 
Section 5. 
II.
 
B
ACKGROUND
 
A.
 
Software Process Improvement on Agile Development 
From the mid-1990s onwards, agile software development 
principles and methodologies have been increasingly 
challenging the traditional view of software development and 
how SPI should be conducted. The main critiques to traditional 
SPI initiatives are the need of heavy bureaucracy and the 
innovation constriction [6].  
The traditional approach of software development 
emphasizes up-front contract negotiations where requirements, 
cost and schedule are fixed and the final product will be 
delivered at the end of the project lifecycle. Thus, extensive 
documentation and quantitative monitoring of the product 
development process plays a central role in traditional 
approaches of SPI [6].  
It has long been recognized the desire of customization and 
flexibility in working methods, as well as customer 
involvement and user participation. Agile methodologies are 
created to address some of these issues. Many of practitioners, 
method engineers, software engineers and process engineers 
want to create their own knowledge-oriented methods; 
documenting their own environment tools and design their 
software development processes [8].  
The continuous improvement in order to find the most 
suitable software process may not work well in environments 
susceptible to changes. In many cases, every individual 
software organization must develop its own practices of 
continuous self-improvement and establish an appropriate 
improvement infrastructure [9].  
It is argued that the SPI activities should be agile rather 
than following deterministic and normative based approaches. 
An agile approach to SPI would be flexible and responsive 
according local needs, encourage innovation, build projects 
around those who are motivated, encourage self-organizing 
2015 41st Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-1-4673-7585-6/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2015.82325 competent teams, and promote sustainable development of the 
processes [7].  
Traditional SPI methods often emphasize the continuous 
improvement of organizational software development 
processes, while the principles of agile software development 
focus on iterative adaptation and improvement of the activities 
of individual software development teams to increase 
effectiveness [6].  
Agile software development requires a highly untraditional 
approach to SPI, in which the process improvement knowledge 
of software developers and teams are acknowledged and 
valued. The focus of improvement is not in the processes of the 
company but in individual behaviour within individual teams 
[6]. 
B.
 
Related Work 
Unterkalmsteiner et al. presented a systematic literature 
review aimed to identify and characterize evaluation strategies 
and measurements used to assess the impact of different SPI 
initiatives. The found seven distinct evaluation strategies, 
whereas the most measured attribute was Quality (62%), 
followed by Cost (41%) and Schedule (18%). They conclude 
that evaluation validity of SPI initiatives is challenged by the 
scarce consideration of potential confounding factors and the 
inaccurate descriptions of the evaluation context. 
Measurements to assess short and mid-term impact of SPI 
initiatives prevail, whereas long-term measurements tend to be 
less used [5]. 
Pino et al. conducted a systematic review in order to 
analyse the existing approaches towards SPI focused on Small 
and Medium Enterprises (SME) considering case studies 
carried out in industry. They found that Capability Maturity 
Model Integration (CMMI) was the most used model in this 
companies (38%), followed by the Standard CMMI appraisal 
model for process improvement (SCAPMI) observed in 16% 
and ISO 9000 presented in 13% of the papers [10]. 
Pedreira et al. presented a systematic review of software 
process tailoring, analysing the existing approaches. The 
results presents that 33% of processes tailoring initiatives are 
informal, 35% occurs in organization level and 20% occurs in 
small and medium companies [11]. 
 Dybå, and Dingsøyr conducted a systematic review of 
empirical studies of agile software development. Few results 
were found about process improvement, just suggestions about 
self-improvement and improvement on general quality [12]. 
Dingsøyr et al. also conducted other systematic review 
Researches on agile software development and suggested that 
many aspects, such as, process improvement still needs further 
research [13]. 
III.
 
R
ESEARCH 
M
ETHODOLOGY
 
In this section we describe the design and the execution of 
the SLR. Furthermore, we discuss threats to the validity of this 
review. Figure 1 presents the twelve steps adopted in this 
research process. The steps are described in detail in following 
subsections.  
A.
 
Need For Systematic Review 
The motivation of this systematic review came after the 
investigation of Salo’s Thesis [6] and observation of the lack of 
researches about this subject pointed by Dingsøyr et al [13].  In 
order to determine if similar work had already been performed, 
we searched on: 
•
 
ACM Digital Library
1
; 
•
 
Google Scholar
2
; 
•
 
IEEE
3
; 
•
 
CiteseerX
4
; 
•
 
Springer
5
; 
 
Figure 1. Systematic review steps (based on [15])
 
We used the following generic search terms looking in the 
title, keywords, abstracts and full text, when permitted: 
Software Process Improvement
 based on [5] and [10]: 
“SPI” OR “Software Process Improvement” OR “Process 
Improvement”. 
Agile
 based on [12]: “Agile” OR “Scrum” OR “Extreme 
Programming” OR “XP” OR “Lean” 
SLR
 based on [5], [14] and [16]: "systematic review" OR 
"research review" OR "research synthesis" OR "research 
integration" OR "systematic overview" OR "systematic 
research synthesis". 
Our final generic search string was: 
Software Process Improvement Terms AND Agile Terms 
AND SLR Terms. We did not found any systematic review 
concerned in software process improvement. But, we could not 
consider starting a new review before elaborate the research 
questions and verify if other SLRs answer them. Detailed 
                                                          
 
1
 http://portal.acm.org 
2
 http://scholar.google.com 
3
 http://ieeexplore.ieee.org 
4
 http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu 
5
 http://link.springer.com/advanced-search 
326 ID Questio
n
 Aim 
RQ1 Which approaches are used in Agile-SPI? 
Identify which are the general approaches of agile SPI.
RQ2 
Which aspects could be extracted from agile SPI 
Initiatives? 
In 
w
hich categories/aspects of agile SPI could be 
defined/explained? 
RQ3 
What are the differences between traditional and agile 
SPI? 
Identify major differences between agile and traditional SPI and 
how these differences happen on organizations. 
RQ4 Could Traditional an
d
 agile SPI initiatives be blended?Are there initiatives to blend agile and traditional SPI?  
information can be found on the spreadsheet used to perform 
this SLR that is available online
6
. 
B.
 
Research Questions 
To attend our objectives, four research questions were 
elaborated in order to guide this SLR. They are presented in 
Table I as following. 
C.
 
Creation and Evaluation of
 a Review Protocol 
The reasons to develop a review protocol are: (i) to reduce 
potential researcher bias, (ii) avoid communication problems 
among researchers and (iii) permit a replication of the review 
in the future [15]. Our protocol will be incrementally presented 
in the following subsections in this Section 3. An experienced 
researcher in secondary studies in software engineering, which 
not participate of this work, evaluated our protocol. According 
his advices and our experiences along the process, we 
iteratively improved the design of the protocol.  
 
TABLE I. 
 
R
ESEARCH 
Q
UESTONS
 
D.
 
Pilot Selection and Extraction 
In order to avoid bias in this SLR, a pilot test was 
performed aiming to adjust the protocol. The Figure 2 presents 
the steps of the execution of the pilot. The first step of the pilot 
was to determine which researches are more important 
considering SPI in agile environments. In order to discover 
these papers, we answered to eight specialists about important 
references about agile SPI. This interview was performed in 
XP 2011 conference and there were no limitations about the 
quantity of sources. Table II summarizes the answers of the 
questionnaires. 
The step 2 was related to which search engines we would 
use. We decided to maintain the same engines used to find 
related SLR presented in section A. 
The step 3 was to define the search string. The first version 
of the string was based on that one used when seeking other 
SLRs. That string was adjusted until we find all papers 
indicated by specialists.  
Our final generic string was: (”SPI” OR “Software Process 
Improvement”) AND (“Agile” OR “Scrum” OR “Extreme 
Programming” OR “XP” OR “Lean” OR “DSDM” OR 
“FDD”) 
 
                                                          
 
6
https://www.dropbox.com/s/i187bai7chxf1us/Spreadsheet_S
LR_AgileSPI.xlsx?dl=0 
 
Figure 2. Pilot Test Steps 
 
The step four was to define the inclusion and exclusion 
criteria. The initial inclusion and exclusion criteria are based on 
a SLR performed by Beecham et al. [16], and after the 
adaptation, and some iterations on pilot our final 
inclusion/exclusion criteria were: 
E.
 
Inclusion Criteria 
•
 
IC 1 – The research is related to any aspect of SPI and 
Agile Development; 
•
 
IC 2 – The research is a primary study containing 
empirical results and is written in a scientific format. 
F.
 
Exclusion Criteria 
•
 
EC1 – The research is a secondary or tertiary study, or 
the paper presents primary results aiming to teach SPI 
or agile techniques. 
•
 
EC2 – The research is just an abstract or short paper 
presenting “unevaluated” new idea. Or the paper just 
publishes lessons learned or experience reports or 
papers without empirical results. Or the paper presents 
an expert opinion.  
•
 
EC3 – The research is not written in English; 
•
 
EC4 – The research is not related to agile SPI or does 
not answer any of the research questions. 
 
 
327 TABLE II. 
 
ANSWER OF SPECIALISTS ABOUT 
I
MPORTANT 
R
ESEARCHES 
ON 
SPI 
ID Author(s) 
Title 
Nº of 
indications 
1
 
Outi Salo [6] 
Enabling Software Process 
Improvement in Agile Software 
Development Teams and 
Organizations 
8  
2 
Brede Moe 
[17] 
From Improving Processes to 
Improving Practice 
6 
3 
Wan, Wang 
[18] 
Empirical Research on Critical 
Success Factors of Agile 
Software Process Improvement 
5 
4 
Stamelos, 
Sfetsos [19] 
Agile Software Development 
Quality Assurance 
4 
5 
Salo, 
Abrahamsson 
[20] 
Integrating agile software 
development and software 
process improvement: a 
longitudinal case study 
4 
6 Outi Salo [21] 
Improving software process in 
agile software development 
projects: results from two XP 
case studies 
3 
7 
Siakas, Elis, 
Eleni [22] 
Agile Methodologies and 
Software Process Improvement. 
1 
 
The goal of our pilot was to find all papers on search and 
include them after criteria evaluation. The search string was a 
little different from the original, and the criteria were not 
modified. 
G.
 
Primary Study Selection 
With the search string and criteria evaluated, we started the 
selection of the primary studies. The selection occurred in two 
phases: (i) select papers based on title, abstract or introduction 
and (ii) in selected papers accepted of the first phase, applying 
the inclusion/exclusion criteria considering all the document. 
Figure 3 presents a summary of our process selection. 
We found 8986 papers, where 1381 were duplicated. We 
did not download nine papers that we need further details 
(introduction) to take a better decision. And 7452 were 
discarded in the first step remaining 144 papers to second step. 
In second step, we analysed the 144 papers and applied the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria based on all text, and only 32 
were selected. The list of 31 selected papers is presented on 
appendix A of this document. 
H.
 
Data Extraction 
In this step two researchers extracted the data of all 31 
papers. Our first concern was to identify categories of agile SPI 
subjects. All categories and related research questions are listed 
in Table III. These categories were not chosen a-priori, they 
emerged along the extraction and the results related of each 
category will be presented in Section 4. These categories also 
answer our RQ2. 
I.
 
Quality Assessment 
The study quality assessment (Step 7) can be used to guide 
the interpretation of the synthesis findings and to determine the 
strength of the elaborated inferences [14]. However, as also 
experienced by Unterkalmsteiner [5], we found it difficult to 
assess to which extent the authors of the studies were actually 
able to address validity threats. Indeed, the quality assessment 
we have performed is a judgment of reporting rather than study 
quality.  
 
 
Figure 3 – Selection of papers.   
We used the same quality criteria adopted by Dyba and 
Dingsoir [12], but we did not follow the same process. While 
Dyba and Dingsoir used quality criteria to exclude studies, we 
just evaluated overall aspects of the research. Dyba and 
Dingsoir pointed eleven criteria and just observe if the aspect is 
present (yes) or absent (no). The summary of results of the 
quality criteria evaluation is presented in Table IV. 
TABLE III. 
 
A
GILE 
–
 
SPI
 
C
ATEGORIES
 
Category RQ. 
Addressed 
SPI Approaches
 
RQ1 / RQ3 
SPI Models / Initiatives 
RQ1 / RQ3 
SPI Related Models 
RQ3 
Process Assessments 
RQ1/ RQ3 / RQ4 
Process Tailoring 
RQ1 / RQ3 
Process Deploying 
RQ1 / RQ3 
Process Measurement 
RQ1 / RQ3 
Agile + Traditional SPI 
RQ4 
 
J.
 
Threats to Validity 
We decided to “jump” to the step 10, because the results of 
Synthesis (Step 9) and Conclusions (Step 10) will be presented 
in the next Sections. The threats that we find were: 
K.
 
Results Bias 
Result bias refers to the general practice of research in 
publish positive outcomes more than negative ones, when 
negatives are published [14]. We hope this threat have few 
impact on the results due our research questions being more 
related to discover aspects of agile SPI and not measure 
328 performance aspects. We did not restrict the sources but we 
have to balance the great number of literature sources and the 
quality of the sources in the intention of gather reliable 
information. Therefore we decided not to include “grey 
literature” (technical reports, work in progress, unpublished or 
not peer-reviewed publications) [14]. 
TABLE IV. 
 
Q
UALITY 
C
RITERIA
 
Quality Criteria 
Yes No 
1. Is the paper based on research (or is it 
merely a ‘‘lessons learned” report based on 
expert opinion)?  
31 
(100%) 
0 (0%) 
2. Is there a clear statement of the aims of the 
research? 
30 
(96,77%) 
1 (3,23%) 
3. Is there an adequate description of the 
context in which the research was carried out? 
22 
(70,96%) 
9 
(29,04%) 
4. Was the research design appropriate to 
address the aims of the research? 
23 
(74,19%) 
8 
(25,81%) 
5. Was the recruitment strategy appropriate to 
the aims of the research? 
8 
(25,81%) 
23 
(74,19%) 
6. Was there a control group with which to 
compare treatments? 
0 (0%) 
31 
(100%) 
7. Was the data collected in a way that 
addressed the research issue? 
20 
(64,51%) 
11 
(35,49%) 
8. Was the data analysis sufficiently rigorous?  
15 
(48,38%) 
16 
(51,24%) 
9. Has the relationship between researcher and 
participants been considered to an adequate 
degree? 
11 
(35,49%) 
20 
(64,51%) 
10. Is there a clear statement of findings? 
31 
(100%) 
0 (0%) 
11. Is the study of value for research or 
practice? 
29 
(93,54%) 
2   
(6,46%) 
General Results 
64,51% 35,49% 
 
L.
 
Threats to the identification of primary studies 
Since it is impossible to know all existing relevant papers 
about agile SPI we tried to identify some relevant works with 
experts and conduct a pilot to retrieve all indicated papers. But 
experts may fail and, our string is certainly incomplete, the 
terminology (search terms) could be slightly different in good 
papers may have biased the identification of primary studies 
regards our efforts to minimize it. 
M.
 
Threats to selection and data extraction 
One of the main aims of defining a review protocol is to 
reduce researcher bias [14], we defined objective criteria to 
include and exclude papers, used pair reviews, used third 
parties to “untie” conflicted papers, cross-check outcomes and 
avoid manual searches and snowballing process, but, this 
action just reduce bias due individual interpretations.  
Due the large amount of initially identified studies (8986) 
we found this strategy impossible to implement within the 
given timebox. We piloted the paper selection addressing two 
issues: (i) the selection criteria and the data extraction form 
were tested for appropriateness, (ii) the agreement between 
researchers could be assessed and discrepancies streamlined. 
But, even with piloting, many papers were discarded, in 
Google Scholar, for example, just 0,3% of the papers were 
selected as primary study suggesting a problem or with the 
search string or with the criteria. 
IV.
 
R
ESULTS
 
A total of 31 studies discuss agile SPI. Before presenting 
the results for each research question we provide the 
demographics data of the studies. 
A.
 
Overview of the studies  
The reviewed papers were published between 2002 and 
2012. Our First perceptions about research in agile SPI were 
the 3 directions followed along the years. In the first stage 
(2002-2005 – 9 papers) the foundations of agile SPI were still 
being proposed. Questions like: what is agile SPI? How agile 
was related with formal initiatives of SPI? How to measure and 
assess agility? And initial propositions of agile SPI methods 
were raised at that moment. 
The second stage comprehends the period between 2006-
2009 (14 papers) and it is highlighted by the experimentation 
of the “new ideas” in real environments. This stage also the 
moment where the 3 approaches to agile SPI already emerged, 
further details of these approaches will be presented in next 
subsection (RQ1). 
In the third stage (2010-2012 – 8 Papers) we found papers 
concerned in investigate SPI aspects such as tailoring, 
deploying and measurement. We also find papers presenting 
results related to specific practices of agile SPI combined to 
other methods such as lean and CMMI. 
Considering research methods, case studies (28, 90%) and 
industry reports (9, 29,7%) constitute a clear majority of the 
studies. Also interesting to observe is the lack of an adequate 
description of the applied research methodology prevented a 
categorization (9, 22%). Other interesting data is about the 
confidentiality of industry reports which represents 66% (6 
papers) of all industry reports. 
RQ1 - Which approaches are used in Agile-SPI? 
Salo [6] identified two major approaches for SPI which are: 
(i) Top-down: which primary goal is related to organizational 
procedures for improving the organisational software 
processes. The knowledge transfer is explicit and the external 
knowledge capture and inert knowledge transfer to support a 
learning paradigm and the basis for improvement are 
organisational goals and measurements. 
(ii) Bottom up: the primary goal is adapting the process to 
the contextual needs of individual project teams and improving 
the effectiveness of individual project teams. Based on Self-
organisation of teams using face-to-face communication to 
establish and update project knowledge in the participants’ 
heads rather than in documents. And the basis for improvement 
are based on contextual needs, experience and learning of 
software developers and regular team reflections. 
Primary studies presented both approaches of agile SPI. 
Considering top-down approach, the majority are related to 
blending agile and CMMI in process improvement initiatives. 
All of papers present evidences of how agile can satisfy CMMI 
requirements (even if this not represents an improvement in 
process). Other models are proposed by Patel and 
Rumachandran [P0031] and their agile maturity model and 
Pikkarainen [P0050] that proposes an agile-CMMI SPI 
approach to an automotive industry. 
Considering bottom-up approaches there are two mindset to 
conduct agile-SPI. (i) process improvement based on 
329 “improve” team behaviour and (ii) process improvement based 
on practice improvement. The researches on improve team 
behaviour started in 2004 with Salo [P0176]. The central idea 
is to improve the process by improving the team members 
behaviour to adjust how they should work together. This kind 
of SPI is also proposed in agile manifesto [23] in one principle 
“regular team reflections of software developers in order to 
become more effective”.
 
The other mindset is related to improving practices in order 
to delivery better software. The central idea is to improve the 
competence of team members to realize one task in a more 
effective and efficient way. Borjesson et al. [P0030] proposed 
the idea in 2006, but Moe`s work [P0110] is a rich reference 
about this kind of agile SPI. 
As answer to RQ1, we can suggest three agile SPI 
approaches. (i) the top-down one; which goal is to “fit” agile 
practise into any predefined model; (ii) the agile SPI based on 
improve behaviour; and (iii) the agile SPI based on improve 
practices. 
RQ2 - Which aspects could be
 extracted from agile SPI 
Initiatives? 
Based on Stamelos and Sfetsos [P0046], Salo [P0093] and 
Moe [P0110] we present, in Table V, aspects related to agile 
SPI. 
All of these aspects were researched and practiced in some 
level. Many studies of agile SPI models, standard process and 
assessments were excluded due to be: only ideas; non-scientific 
researches; or novel ideas published in short papers. Few 
papers  ([P0031, P0048, P0050 & P0054]) address these issues 
and clearly needs further research. 
The next four aspects are controversial because a 
considerable quantity of studies was found in our search, but 
the measurement, tailoring, deploying and knowledge transfer 
were not related to any kind of improvement. An example is 
the paper from Conboy & Fitzgerald [P0210], it was excluded 
from our study because it is not related to SPI. 
The last aspect seems to be more defined and, at the same 
time, divided. If the approach of agile SPI is top-down, the 
organization is the target. If the approach is bottom-up, the 
target seems to be the people (and teams), their interactions and 
capability. 
TABLE V. 
 
A
GILE 
–
 
SPI
 
C
ATEGORIES
 
ID Aspect 
1
 
Agile SPI models 
2 Standard process of agile SPI 
3 Assessments of agile SPI 
4 Process tailoring 
5 Process deploy 
6 Process measurement 
7 Knowledge transfer 
8 Organizational structure to SPI 
 
RQ3 - What are the differences between traditional and agile 
SPI? 
Considering the aspects suggested in Table V, the major 
difference is the goal of traditional and agile SPI. In traditional 
SPI, considering top-down or bottom-up approach, the goal is 
to elaborate a repeatable process that could be improved by 
lessons learned (maturity). agile SPI the process should be 
ready for changes, and its improvements means to improve 
process capability for changes. 
Standard processes, modelled by any language or model, 
which improvements are made based on improvement projects 
where the process is an asset is few considered in agile process 
development because, in that way, the process becomes one 
more artefact to be managed, maintained and mainly, changed. 
Agile SPI models should consider flexibility and embraces 
change, which becomes the next aspect, standard process for 
agile SPI almost useless. These standard process are only 
observed when agile is blended with rigorous methods such as 
CMMI. 
Assessment, and measurement, of any agile aspect is all 
right since that measures being related to teams and the final 
product not measuring the individuals or the process. Since, 
considering Bottom-up approaches, we raise one question: 
How to measure readiness to change? Or how to measure 
adaptability? What we should measure in order to capture these 
aspects? The measurements observed in agile process are 
related to compare what the team produced this iteration with 
previous one and evaluate what was wrong. Considering top-
down approaches, the measurement system tends to move in 
direction of the model that agile is blended, and consequently, 
this is not different from traditional (pure) approaches. 
Considering tailoring and de
ploying, again considering 
bottom-up approaches, it is pointless because if bottom-up 
approaches are related to improve behaviour or practices there 
is no standard process to tailor, or model to deploy. When agile 
teams perform retrospectives it is rare, to have any kind of 
process or model to deploy or tailor. In top-down approach, 
again agile SPI go towards the model that agile is blended. 
Knowledge transfer in agile SPI is based on communication 
face-to-face, informal and the learning is based on individual 
experiences. Traditional approaches consider that knowledge 
belongs to the organization and its transference to people is 
based on training and document use. Informal communication 
can occur, but it is performed in an unstructured way and do 
not free from bias. 
The organizational structure depends on which approach of 
agile SPI is used. It is top-down, the organization as whole, and 
the temporary teams of the projects are considered in the SPI 
scope, and it is similar to traditional approaches of SPI. If 
bottom-up approach is considered, the people and team are 
targets of the SPI initiative. 
RQ4 - Could Traditional and agile SPI initiatives be blended? 
There is no doubt that the question of this answer is yes. 
But, the real question raised here is: what we want in blending 
both SPI initiatives? It is contradictory to gain in the same 
process maturity (by repeating a “repeatable” process) with be 
ready for changes. How can we reach a high maturity in 
change our process? Certainly, is not repeating it indefinitely. 
330 Blend agile and CMMI, for example, could help so much 
traditional approaches to short the iterations size, and we can 
repeat the process more time, and learning more about it. This 
acceleration of the learning is good, but it not means as 
improvement of agility (readiness to change). But, what is the 
problem in not being agile? Any, we guess but we want to 
highlight the misuse of the term 
agility in many of these cases 
where the objective of SPI initiative is to learn faster and don`t 
be more flexible and adaptable. 
V.
 
F
INAL 
C
ONSIDERATION
 
Agile SPI is definitely a subject where new opportunities, 
challenges and perspectives could be addressed due its dual 
nature of embrace top-down and bottom-up approaches. When 
toward to top-down approaches the SPI initiative goal tends to 
be close that one proposed by traditional SPI methods. 
When considering bottom-up approaches we can view, in 
fact, the real challenges of how to get better teams and better 
products. The two bottom-up perspectives of agile SPI, 
improve behaviour of teams and improve practices, lays their 
foundations on individual and teams respecting the first value 
of agile manifesto [23]: “Individual and Interaction over 
Process and Tools” representing more suitable options to agile 
teams interested in get better. 
One question that still remains is: What is the purpose of 
agile SPI? We can infer that teams more ready to changes. But, 
if the client needs are not related to changes? In traditional SPI 
approaches the SPI initiatives are related to organizational 
issues, but, in agile process, the client is too much important 
and he is invited to work with/into the teams. In agile 
manifesto [23] we can find the assertive that agile methods 
were created to provide competitive advantage to the client. 
Since, which direction agile SPI should follow? Towards the 
client? Or towards the organization? All these questions raised 
in the conclusions were not answered by the primary results 
selected. 
The results of this review encourage further research on 
agile SPI, particularly on the conception of more agile 
approaches to SPI.  
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
D. I. K. Sjoberg, T. Dyba, M. Jorgensen, “The future of empirical 
methods in software engineering research.” Future of Software 
Engineering (FOSE), Minneapolis, 2007, pp. 358–378.  
[2]
 
N. Wirth, “A brief history of software engineering.” IEEE Ann. Hist. 
Comput, 2008; vol. 30, pp. 32–39. 
[3]
 
A. Fuggetta, “Software process: a roadmap.” In Proceedings Conference 
on The Future of Software Engineering, Limerick, Ireland, 2000, pp. 25–
34.  
[4]
 
D. N. Card, “Research directions in software process improvement.” in 
Proceedings 28th Annual International Computer Software and 
Applications Conference (COMPSAC), Hong Kong, China, 2004, p. 
238.  
[5]
 
M. Unterkalmsteiner, T. Gorschek, A.K.M. Islam., R. B. Permadi, R. 
Feldt, “Evaluation and Measurement of Software Process Improvement - 
A Systematic Literature Review”. IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering. 2011.  
[6]
 
O. Salo, “Enabling Software Process Improvement in Agile Software 
Development Teams and Organizations.” VTT publications, 2007.  
[7]
 
I. Allison, “Towards an Agile Approach to Software Process 
Improvement: Addressing the Changing Needs of Software Products.” 
In Communications of IIMA. 2005; vol. 30, pp. 67-76. 
[8]
 
K. Siakas, E. Georgidaou, E. Berki, “Agile methodologies and software 
process improvement.” IADIS (International Association for 
Development of the Information Society). 2005, pp. 412-417.  
[9]
 
A. Birk, H. Rombach. A Practical Approach to Continuous 
Improvement in Software Engineering. Software Quality. State of the 
Art in Management, Testing, and Tools, Berlin Springer. 2001. 
[10]
 
F. Pino, F. García, M. Piattini, “Software process improvement in small 
and medium software enterprises: a systematic review”. 
Software 
Quality Journal
, 
16
(2), 237-261. 2008.
 
[11]
 
O. Pedreira, M. Piattini, M. Luaces, R. Brisaboa, “A systematic review 
of software process tailoring.”  
ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering 
Notes
, 
32
(3), 1-6. 2007.
 
[12]
 
T. Dybå, T. Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile software development: 
A systematic review”. 
Information and software technology
,
50
(9), 833-
859. 2008.
 
[13]
 
T. Dingsøyr, P. Nerur, P. Balijepallyd, B. Moe, “A decade of agile 
methodologies: Towards explaining agile software development.” 
Journal of Systems and Software Volume 85, Issue 6, June 2012, Pages 
1213–1221. 2012. 
[14]
 
B. Kitchenham, S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing systematic 
literature reviews in software engineering,” Software Engineering 
Group, Keele University and Department of Computer Science, 
University of Durham, United Kingdom, Technical Report EBSE-2007-
01, 2007. 
[15]
 
J. Biolchini, P. Mian, A. Natali, T. Conte, G. Travassos, “Scientific 
research ontology to support systematic review in software engineering,” 
Advanced Engineering Informatics, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 133–151, Apr. 
2007. 
[16]
 
S. Beecham, N. Baddoo, T. Hall, H. Robinson, H. Sharp. “Motivation in 
Software Engineering: A systematic literature review.” 
Information and 
software technology
, 
50
(9), 860-878. 2008.
 
[17]
 
B. Moe, “From Improving Processes To Improving Practice: Software 
Process Improvement in Transition from Plan-driven to Change-driven 
Development”. 2011.
 
[18]
 
J. Wan, R. Wang. "Empirical Research on Critical Success Factors of 
Agile Software Process Improvement." 
Journal of Software Engineering 
and Applications
 3(12). 2010.
 
[19]
 
G. 
Stamelos, S. Sfetsos, Agile software development quality assurance. 
Igi Global, 2007. 
 
[20]
 
O. Salo, P. Abrahamsson. "Integrati
ng agile software development and 
software process improvement: a longitudinal case study." Empirical 
Software Engineering, 2005.
 
[21]
 
O. Salo, "Improving software process in agile software development 
projects: results from two XP case studies." Euromicro Conference, 
2004. Proceedings. 30th. IEEE, 2004.
 
[22]
 
K. Siakas, E. Georgiadou, E. Berki. "Agile methodologies and software 
process improvement." IADIS International Virtual Multi Conference on 
Computer Science and Information Systems. 26. 2005.
 
[23]
 
Agile Manifesto. Available in 
www.agilemanifesto.org
. Last access in 
Jan. 12. 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
331 A
PPENDIX 
A
 
–
 
S
ELECTED 
P
RIMARY 
S
TUDIES 
 
Paper 
ID
 
Title Authors
P0006 
A disciplined approach to adopting agile 
practices: the agile adoption framework.  
A Sidky, J 
Arthur, S Bohne 
P0008 
A framework to support the evaluation, 
adoption and improvement of agile 
methods in practice.  
A Qumer, B. 
Henderson-
Sellers 
P0023 
Achieving CMMI level 2 with enhanced 
extreme programming approach  
T. Kähkönen, P. 
Abrahamsson 
P0024 
Adapting PROFES for use in an agile 
process: an industry experience report  
A. Jedlitschka, 
D. Hamann, T. 
Göhlert 
P0030 
Agile improvement practices in software 
organizations  
A. Börjesson, F. 
Martinsson 
P0031 
Agile maturity model (AMM): A 
Software Process Improvement 
framework for agile software 
development practices  
C. Patel, M. 
Ramachandran 
P0033 
Agile meets CMMI: Culture clash or 
common cause?  
R. Turner, A. 
Jain 
P0040 
Agile process improvement: Diagnosis 
and planning to improve teamwork  
M. Ringstad, T. 
Dingsøyr, N. 
Moe. 
P0046 
Agile software development quality 
assurance  
I. Stamelos, S. 
Sfetsos. 
P0048 
Agile SPI: Software Process Agile 
Improvement, A Colombia approach to 
software process improvement in small 
software organizations  
J. Hurtado, F. 
Pino, J. Vidal, 
C. Pardo 
P0050 
AHAA-Agile, Hybrid Assessment 
Method for Automotive, Safety Critical 
SMEs  
M. Pikkarainen, 
F. McCaffery, I. 
Richardson 
P0051 
Am-quick: a measurement-based 
framework for agile methods 
customisation  
H. Ayed, N. 
Habra, B. 
Vanderose 
P0054 
An approach for assessing suitability of 
agile solutions: a case study  
M. Pikkarainen, 
U. Passoja 
P0055 
An approach for using CMMI in agile 
software development assessments: 
experiences from three case studies  
M. Pikkarainen, 
A. Mantyniemi 
P0057 
An evaluation of the degree of agility in 
six agile methods and its applicability 
for method engineering  
A. Qumer, B. 
Henderson-
Sellers 
P0060 
An iterative improvement process for 
agile software development  
O. Salo, P. 
Abrahamsson 
P0063
Applying agile and lean practices in a 
software development project into a 
CMMI organization  
M. Trujillo, H. 
Oktaba, F. Pino, 
M. Orozco. 
P0093
Enabling software process improvement 
in agile software development teams and 
organisations  
O.Salo
P0101
Examining the effects of agile methods 
and process maturity on software 
product development performance  
M. Rönkkö, J. 
Peltonen, C. 
Frühwirth 
P0110
From Improving Processes To 
Improving Practice: Software Process 
Improvement in Transition from Plan-
driven to Change-driven Development  
N.Moe
P0116
Implementing CMMI using a 
combination of agile methods  
J. Alegrıa, M. 
Bastarrica 
P0117
Improving agility and discipline of 
software development with the Scrum 
and CMMI  
K. Łukasiewicz, 
J. Miler 
P0122
Improving software process in agile 
software development projects: results 
from two XP case studies  
O.Salo
P0125
Integrating agile software development 
and software process improvement: a 
longitudinal case study  
O. Salo, P. 
Abrahamsson 
P0140
Mapping CMMI level 2 to scrum 
practices: An experience report  
J. Diaz, J 
Garbajosa, J. 
Calvo-Manzano 
P0163
Process Increments: An Agile Approach 
to Software Process Improvement.  
A. Abdel-
Hamid, M. 
Abdel-Kader 
P0176
Self-adaptability of agile software 
processes: A case study on post-iteration 
workshops  
O. Salo, K. 
Kolehmainen, P. 
Kyllönen, J. 
Löthman 
P0192
SPI agility: How to navigate 
improvement projects  
I. Aaen, A. 
Börjesson 
P0205
Towards an agile approach to Software 
Process Improvement: addressing the 
changing needs of software products  
I.Allison
P0206
Towards a better understanding of 
CMMI and agile integration-multiple 
case study of four companies  
M.Pikkarainen
P0224
Using Scrum to guide the execution of 
software process improvement in small 
organizations  
F. Pino, O. 
Pedreira, F. 
García, M. 
Luaces 
 
332