 Identifying Implicit Architectural Dependencies using 
Measures of Source Code Change Waves  
Miroslaw Staron
1)
, Wilhelm Meding
2)
, Christoffer Höglund
3)
,Peter Eriksson
2)
, Jimmy Nilsson
2)
,
and Jörgen Hansson
1)
1)
Software Center/Computer 
Science and Engineering 
Chalmers | University of 
Gothenburg 
miroslaw.staron@gu.se  
jorgen.hansson@chalmers.se
2)
Software Center/Ericsson  
wilhelm.meding/ 
peter.r.eriksson/ 
jimmy.p.nilsson@ericsson.com
3)
Software Center/Saab Electronic 
Defense Systems
christoffer.hoglund@saabgroup.com
ABSTRACT
The principles of Agile softwa
re development are increasingly 
used in large software development projects, e.g. using Scrum of 
Scrums or combining Agile and Lean development methods. 
When large software products are developed by self-organized,
usually feature-oriented teams, th
ere is a risk that architectural 
dependencies between software components become uncontrolled. 
In particular there is a risk that the prescriptive architecture 
models in form of diagrams are outdated and implicit architectural 
dependencies may become more frequent than the explicit ones.
In this paper we present a method for automated discovery of 
potential dependencies between software components based on 
analyzing revision history of software repositories. The result of 
this method is a map of implicit dependencies which is used by 
architects in decisions on the evolution of the architecture. The 
software architects can assess the validity of the dependencies and 
can prevent unwanted component couplings and design erosion 
hence minimizing the risk of post-release quality problems. Our 
method was evaluated in a case study at one large product at Saab 
Electronic Defense Systems (Saab EDS) and one large software 
product at Ericsson AB.   
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.3.3 [
Software Engineering
]: Software/Program Measurement 
–
 visualization techniques.
General Terms
Measurement, Documentation, Design. 
Keywords
Change impact analysis, change waves, measure, mining software 
repositories.  
1.INTRODUCTION 
The introduction of Agile and Lean software development 
principles has changed the practices in software industry in a 
number of ways. Agility and the 
focus on customer led to better 
products and ability of products to be delivered constantly (so 
called continuous delivery or continuous deployment). For large 
software development products these practices introduced new 
challenges. The principles led to multiple teams working in 
parallel and developing code for the common code base while 
working on distinct features. This kind of dynamics led to 
challenges in monitoring the evolution of the architecture and in 
particular the dependencies/links between components.   
The architecture of the software product under development can 
erode over time, i.e. the explicit and prescriptive architecture 
models, assumptions and constraints might change over time.  In 
the case of this research we consider the prescriptive architecture 
model as 
a model which is á priori cr
eated by architects to 
describe how the architecture should be realized
. Our focus is on 
the fact that this is an explicit 
model created by architects who á 
priori “design” the architecture and we contrast this model with 
a
descriptive model of the architecture of the same software 
product. The descriptive model shows how the architectural 
design has been realized, is created á posteriori and can be 
extracted from the existing design in a number of ways (e.g. by 
extracting component dependencies). 
In addition to architecture er
osion, the existence of implicit 
dependencies may lead to quality problems and delays of software 
delivery if unmonitored, uncontrolled and unmanaged. This paper 
addresses the problem of monitoring, controlling and explicitly 
managing the implicit dependencies between components by 
creating a method for identifying and monitoring of 
change 
waves
. A change wave is a chain of related changes of 
components in source code during a period of time. Based on 
analyzing revision histories and identifying related changes we 
can find components which change
 together in a large number of 
cases. By chaining these dependency pairs we could identify 
waves of changes and predict which components should be 
developed/tested/monitored together. We consider the pairs as we 
intend to visualize the dependencies between all components of a 
change wave, not only the first and the last.  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
conference
.
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-000
-
0/00/0004…$5.00.
2013 39th Euromicro Conference Series on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-5091-6/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2013.9325 The results of our research ar
e validated at two large industrial 
products from two different domains (defense and telecom). The 
validation showed that the change wave analyses were efficient 
support for architects in identifying dependencies between 
modules and predicting changes over time.   
The remaining of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
describes the main related work to our research. Section 3 
describes the specific challenges in
 architecture work in Agile and 
Lean software development which is a context of this study. 
Section 4 presents the case stud
ied in this paper. Section 5 
presents the results and Section 6 presents the conclusions and 
further work.  
2.RELATED WORK 
Ball and Nagappan [1] studied the impact or relative code churn 
measures on software quality at Microsoft. Their work, based on 
the source code of MS Vista and MS Windows Server showed 
that these simple measures can pr
edict defect-prone modules with 
high likelihood. A follow-up similar study was conducted by Bell 
et al. [2] at AT&T on a product with 18 releases. Bell et al. 
checked whether there are other metrics which could improve the 
results of predictions and came to conclusion that the churn
measures were indeed the strongest predictors. The metrics to 
collect were based on the results of the above studies.   
Zimmermann et al [3] introduced the methods for mining software 
repositories in order to guide how software should evolve. Their 
results were applied on a number of open source projects with 
good validation based on historical data. In our study we extend 
their concept of pairwise couplings to change waves and validate 
the results on a set of ongoing projects, i.e. not on historical 
analyses. Our initial visualization wa
s based on their visualization.  
Discovery of architectural dependencies based on runtime 
analyses was an important input to our work [4].Arias et al. 
presented a method for visualizing this kind of dependencies. In 
our work we were inspired by their approach and complement 
their work with another way of eliciting dependencies.  
An example of a metric of non-conformance of architectural 
design to the system can be found in [5] where the execution 
profiles are used to create component dependency maps. Our 
method complements such an analysis with the analysis of the 
development of the system. In our future work we plan to use both 
methods on the same system and compare the results.  
Project telemetry using tools like Hackystat [6] usually 
complement tools used for visual analytics [7] with continuous 
measurement. The results of this re
search resulted in a simple tool 
used at one collaborating company which combines the strengths 
of both tools 
–
 an early warning system. Together with recent 
studies of Buse and Zimmermann 
[8] these results provided a 
solid ground for establishing online measurements in our method. 
Buse and Zimmermann [8] reported on a survey conducted at 
Microsoft where information n
eeds were collected from 110 
Microsoft designers, project managers and architects. Defect- and 
code stability related information was among the top information 
needs 
–
 what the managers would like to know. Not only were 
these aspects important for the historical analyses, they were 
important for the future insights of the company. The survey from 
Microsoft shows that the indicators 
presented in our paper fill an 
important need in software industry.  
IBM has also identified metri
cs related to technical product 
development as important for Agile software development [9]. In 
the category of technical progress, the indicators should show that 
there is a growth of the product. Our dependency indicators take it 
one step further and show how “controlled” this growth is
 in 
terms of architectural and design dependencies.
Complementary measures to code stability should show the 
business aspects of software development, e.g. business value, 
which  is one of important measures which should be used by 
Agile teams and companies [10]. The awareness of how the team 
contributes to the value is an important driver for the success of 
Agile projects. What the authors of the cited article postulate is 
similar to what we intend to achieve 
–
 provide key information 
without introducing manual work overhead. The complementary 
focus of the cited article is on 
the customer value, whereas the 
focus of this article is on quality risk.  
Another important measure which is claimed to stimulate agility  
in software development teams, and thus complement the 
technical aspects of code stability, is the RTF (Running Tested 
Features) measure, popular in XP [11]. The metric combines three 
important concepts 
–
 the feature (i.e. a piece of code useful for the 
end-user, not a small increment that is not visible to the end user), 
execution (i.e. adding the value to the product through shipping 
the features to the customer), a
nd the testing process (i.e. the 
quality of the feature 
–
 not only should it be execute, but also be 
of sufficient quality). This measure needs to be combined with 
measures on how solid the design is and this is the goal of our 
indicator.   
A set of other metrics useful in the context of continuous 
deployment can be found in the work of Fritz [12] in the context 
of market driven software development organization. The metrics 
presented by Fritz measure such 
aspects as continuous integration 
pace or the pace of delivery of features to the customers. These 
metrics complement the two indicators presented in this paper 
with a different perspective important for product management. 
The delivery strategy which is an
 extension of the concept of 
continuous deployment has been found as one of the three key 
aspects important for Agile software development organizations 
in a survey of 109 companies by Chow and Cao [13]. The 
indicator presented in this paper is a means of supporting 
organizations in their transition towards achieving efficient 
delivery processes which are in line with the delivery strategy 
prioritized by practitioners in this survey.
3.ARCHITECTURE IN AGILE 
DEVELOPMENT  
Architecture development in software development is usually 
conducted by experienced architects and the larger the product, 
the more experience is required. As each type of system has its 
specific requirements the architectural design requires attention to 
specific aspects like real time 
properties or extensibility. For 
example in the telecom domain th
e extensibility and performance 
are the main aspects whereas in the automotive domain it is the 
safety and performance that is of the outmost priority. The 
architecture development efforts ar
e dependent to some extent on 
the software development process adopted by the company 
–
 e.g. 
the architecture development methods differ in the V-model and 
in the Agile methodologies. In the V-model the architecture work 
is mostly prescriptive and centralized around the architects 
whereas in the Agile methods the work can be more descriptive 
and distributed into multiple self-organized teams.  
326 As the introduction of Agile software development principles 
spread in industry, the architecture development evolved. As 
Agile development teams became self-organized the architecture 
work became more distributed and harder to control centrally 
[14]. The difficulties stem from th
e fact that Agile teams value 
independence and creativity [15] whereas architecture 
development requires stability, control, transparency and 
proactivity [16].
Figure 1 presents an overview on how the functional requiremnets 
(FR) and non-functional requirements (NFR) are packaged into 
work packages and developed as features by the teams. Each team 
delivers their code into the main branch. Each team has the 
possibility to deliver the code to any component of the product.  
Figure 1. Feature development in Lean/Agile methods.  
The requirements come from the customers and are prioritized 
and packaged into features by product management (PM) who 
communicates with the system management (SM) on the technical 
aspects of how the features affect the architecture of the product. 
The system management communicates with the teams (DM, 
Test) who design, implement and test (functional testing) the 
feature before delivering to the main branch. The code in the main 
branch in tested thoroughly by dedicated test units before being 
able to release [17].  
The method proposed and evaluated in this paper is based on 
mining software repositories to find situations where groups of 
components are updated within an arbitrary number of days. The 
working assumption is that the components which are often 
updated together (in this case within the same week) are usually 
dependent upon each other. The method uses basic statistics 
combined with simple visualizations to present the results to 
architects who can verify the results of the statistics.  
Examples of dependencies in
 the studies products are: 

Dependencies by-design 
–
 explicit in the architectural design 

Dependencies by-implicit 
–
 e.g. dependencies by-protocol 
–
when two components implement protocols that are 
somehow dependent, but the components are not explicitly 
connected in the diagrams 
The implicit dependencies are naturally more interesting than the 
explicit ones since they constitute risks for the overall internal and 
external quality of the product. The implicit dependencies have 
the tendency to become tacit knowledge over time and hard to 
maintain. 
They could lead to “forgetting” to update dependent 
components and thus defects detected late in the integration 
phases or system test phases. Therefore it is important to use 
automated measurement systems to identify, monitor and alert 
about these dependencies. The alerts give the teams the possibility 
to react and to prevent architecture erosion (through refactoring) 
or quality deterioration (through smarter testing).  
4.CASE STUDY DESIGN 
This case study was designed based on mixed flexible-fixed 
research design [18]. The design of the pilot study and the 
validation of the results were fixed, although we intended to 
adjust the method after the pilot study 
–
 thus making it mixed 
design. The sampling of the companies was done based on the 
size of their products and development methods used. Since the 
study was designed to be quantitative there was a need for large 
quantities of data, which dictated working with large companies 
developing large products. In this study we had the unique 
opportunity to work with 2 large companies 
–
 Saab EDS 
(development of software for defense systems) and Ericsson AB 
(development of telecom network equipment). The criteria for 
choosing the projects in these companies were: 

Use of source code for product development 
–
 although 
almost all companies execute projects in model-driven 
manner, we chose the projects where source code was the 
main artifacts, i.e. designers used programming languages 
like Java, C, C++ or Erlang for development.  

Initiated changes towards continuous deployment 
–
 the 
projects started changing their ways-of-working towards 
continuously deploying functionality to their customers.

Size of the product 
–
 the products developed should be of 
significant size (more than 100.000 LOC) and should be 
developed during a period of time longer than 1 year (with 
multiple releases since the beginning of the product 
lifecycle). 
Saab EDS developed embedded software and graphical user 
interfaces for gr
ound based radar system
s. The speci
fic product 
we worked on was part of a larger product developed by several 
hundred developers, designers, testers, analysts etc. The historic 
project developing the product was driven in increments and did 
not utilize cross functional teams. The project management did 
some manual metrics on trouble reports. 
The organization has since this project evolved into using more 
agile processes and cross functional teams. A lot of improvements 
and optimizations have also been done regarding software build 
and delivery times.  Also to improve customer value, market 
competitiveness and profit, Saab AB Electronic Defense Systems 
in Gothenburg is going through a Lean transformation.  
Ericsson AB developed large products for the mobile telephony 
network. The size of the organization was several hundred 
engineers and the size of the projects was up to a few hundreds
1
.
Projects were increasingly often executed according to the 
principles of Agile software development and Lean production 
system referred to as Streamline development (SD) within 
Ericsson [19]. In this environment various disciplines were 
responsible for larger parts of the 
process compared to traditional 
processes: design teams (cross-functional teams responsible for 
complete analysis, design, implementation, and testing of 
particular features of the product), network verification and 
integration testing, etc. 
The organization used a number of measurement systems for 
controlling the software development project (per project) 
described above, a number of measurement systems to control the 
quality of products in field (per product) and a measurement 
system for monitoring the status of the organization at the top 
level. All measurement systems were developed using the in-
1
 The exact size of the unit cannot be provided due to 
confidentiality reasons.  
327 house methods described in [20,21], with the particular emphasis 
on models for design and deployment of measurement systems 
presented in [22,23].
The needs of the organization had evolved from metric 
calculations and presentations (ca. 7 years before the writing of 
this paper) to using predictions, simulations, early warning 
systems and handling of vast quantities of data to steer 
organizations at different levels and providing information from 
project and line.These needs have been addressed by the action 
research projects conducted in 
the organization, since the 2006. 
4.1Metrics used in the study 
The base for calculating the strength of potential dependency 
between two components was the measure of 
number of common 
change burst (NoCB)
, which was defined as the number of bursts 
which contain both components. The measure is non-transitive 
and non-reflective.  
This measure can be illustrated based on change patterns in Figure 
2 and Figure 3, where the dots with different fill show changes in 
different components. The dot with 
the solid black fill shows the 
change in component A, which is chosen as the starting point for 
the first burst (the upper timeline), the skew-lined fill of the dots 
indicate the change event in another component (component B) 
which is included in the change 
burst of component A, but also 
can be seen as a starting point for the next change burst 
–
 as 
illustrated in the lower timeline.  
The time interval for the change burst is set arbitrary to one week 
in this example and could be adjusted. Choosing the interval of 
one week allows capturing check-in patterns of daily check-ins of 
some designers and once per week by others and anything in-
between.  
Figure 2 shows two change bursts originating in component A of 
a length of one week each.
Figure 2. Component change patterns with bursts originating 
in Component A, based on [1]
The NoCB (Number of Common Change Bursts) measure for 
pairs originating in Component A are: 

NoCB
A-B
 = 2: Component B changes in both change 
bursts originating at component A. 

NoCB
A-C
 = 2: Component C changes in both bursts 
originating at component A. 
These change bursts need to be complemented with the change 
bursts originating at component B, 
which is illustrated in Figure 3.
In the figure there are three bursts of size of one week which 
originate in component B.  
Figure 3. Component change patterns with bursts originating 
in Component B, based on [1]
The common change burst measures for the example in Figure 3
are: 

NoCB
B-A
=2: Component A changes in two bursts 
originating at component B.  

NoCB
B-C
=2: Component C changes in two bursts 
originating at component B. 
The numbers above show that the measure of common burst 
provide only a basis for calculating the 
strength of dependency 
(SoD)
 which has to take in
to the account also the total number of 
bursts for the originating component
. In order to calculate that 
strength of dependency we defined the 
total number of bursts 
(NoB)
. The definition of the strength of dependency is defined as:  
= 


100%
In the example the formula provides the following results for the 
dependency between component A and B: 


= 




100%=
2
2
100%=100%
The results for the entire example are: 

SoD
A-B
: 100% 

SoD
A-C
: 100% 

SoD
B-A
: 67% 

SoD
B-C
: 100% 

SoD
C-A
: 50% 

SoD
C-B
: 50% 
The data shows that changes in component A can potentially 
initiate changes in components B and C, while changes in 
component C do not cause changes in components A and B 
equally often. It could be visual
ized in a table to provide an 
overview 
–
Table 1, the colors indicate the strength of dependency 
for attracting the attention of the stakeholders to pairs of 
components which should be con
sidered first (the most intensive 
colors) as prescribed by [24].
Table 1.Strength of dependency visualized in a table 
In general, some of the dependencies which are found in this 
method could be explicit, i.e. ex
ist in the architecture diagrams, 
whereas some were implicit, i.e. not present in the diagrams. The 
latter are naturally more interesting for the architects and in the 
case study at Saab EDS and Ericsson we found that many of these 
dependencies were not explicit, which showed the value of the 
presented method.  
This tabular visualization can 
show interesting patterns of 
component dependencies as analyzed by Zimmermann et al. [3],
but it does not show the real change wave, i.e. the pattern how 
changes in the components spread over the system. For this we 
used a simple visualization of how the change flows presented in 
Figure 4. 
328 Figure 4. Visualization of change waves as a flow 
The bold lines in the diagram show the strongest dependencies 
while the dotted ones show the weakest ones. The dependencies 
correspond to the ones in Table 1. Focusing only on the strongest 
dependencies the diagram shows that component A usually is the 
component where changes originate and that they propagate to the 
other two components. Changes “back” to component A are not 
that often, which indicate lower dependency.  
In this study we used flows to identify change waves and when 
discussing them with the architects.  
4.2Data collection and analysis 
The process of data collection was as follows: 
1.Pilot at Saab EDS: Initially we evaluated the measures in a 
pilot study at Saab EDS where we calibrated the way in 
which the NoCB metric is co
llected, we defined the 
information model for this measure according to ISO 15939 
[25] and measuring the dependency for one large product. 
The results showed that the me
thod identified a number of 
implicit dependencies.  
2.Study at Ericsson: Based on the pilot study we decided to 
collect the dependencies from another large product from a 
different company 
–
 Ericsson. We also decided to use a 
different visualization technique to show the dependencies 
and we had the possibility to validate whether the 
dependencies are implicit or by-design with two main 
architects for the product. The 
results showed that there is a 
set of implicit dependencies and a pattern of change waves.  
3.Study at Saab EDS: Finally we used the method to make a 
map of dependencies for another product from the same 
product line at Saab EDS. The patterns of change waves 
were different, i.e. longer, than the change waves at 
Ericsson.  
We collected the data using 
scripts in Ruby and Perl and 
visualized the data using MS Powerpoint and MS Excel. The 
analysis of data was done through in
terviews, i.e. discussions with 
architects.   
5.RESULTS AND IMPACT 
The results from the pilot study at Saab EDS significantly 
influenced the method in terms of how the measures are 
calculated. In particular we experimented with different ways of 
calculating NoCB measure.  
5.1Pilot study at Saab EDS 
Before the case study was executed at both companies we 
conducted a pilot study at Saab EDS where we validated the 
approach and the empirical validity of the measures used in the 
study. In particular we validated the NoCB measure by 
investigating change wave from one component and interviewing 
the architect of the product.  
The setup of the pilot study was to investigate a number of 
components (identified á prio
ri by architects) and their 
dependencies to other components. The data was visualized using 
a bar chart as presented in Figu
re 5 where the size of the bar 
represents the strength of depende
ncy (SoD) of component on the 
x-axis to the arbitrary architect-c
hosen component (let us refer to 
it as Component 0). For confidentiality reasons the scales and 
names of components have been removed.  
Figure 5. Bar chart illustrating the strength of potential 
dependency of other components on Component 0  
Using the bar chart in Figure 5 we managed to attract the attention 
of the architects to Component 0 (not in the diagram) and 
Component 22 in the diagram. The largest bar represented a 
dependency which was not defined á priori, but appeared as a 
result of the dependency of these two components on a common 
protocol. This dependency showed that in practice the design of 
those two dependent components needed to be synchronized 
otherwise a risk of integration defects (hard and costly to find) can 
be significant.  
The next step in our analysis was to investigate dependencies 
originating from Component 22, which are depicted in Figure 6.
Figure 6. Bar chart illustrating the strength of potential 
dependency of other components on Component 22 
329 The chart shows that it is Component 0 which is the most 
dependent one on Component 22. That dependency was not 
explicit in the architecture diagram, but was confirmed by the 
architect 
–
 the architect was able to explain why these two 
components changed “together” and that there was indeed an 
implicit relationship between these component via a 
communication protocol.  
The results from the pilot study sh
owed that this type of analysis 
has a potential to find dependencies that were not explicit for the 
architects. This analysis was named as “change wave analysis” 
since it showed dependency between components based on the 
propagation of changes. It was also
 decided that we should extend 
this analysis to visualize dependencies between all components in 
one diagram to avoid the need for the first manual step 
–
 arbitrary 
choice of the initial component (Component 0).  
5.2Results from Ericsson and Saab EDS 
As defined in our research process the change wave analysis 
method was applied at two large products at two different 
companies. The results show that these two products have 
different architectural dependencies and that some of these 
dependencies were not explicitly known to the architects.  
Figure 7 presents the change waves identified in the study with 
different types of lines encoding strengths of the dependency 
–
bold (50-100%), normal (30-50%) and dotted (10-30%).  
Figure 7. Change waves for the product at Saab 
The waves starting from components A and B in Figure 7 are 
rather long and complex. For example, if component B changes, 
there is a significant chance that component R will change and a 
chance that components K and P might change.  
Disregarding the weakest dependencies, i.e. the dotted lines, the 
figure shows that there are still dependencies between 
components, for example, A-R, B-R and K-P-C. These 
dependencies should be used to plan testing of the system.  
In Figure 7 one component is different from the others 
–
component J 
–
 as it is not dependent on other components. The 
component was developed separately from others and no change 
waves originate from this component of lead to this component.  
Figure 8 presents the results of applying the change wave analysis 
for the product at Ericsson where we use different names for the 
components (C1-C26), emphasize the change waves and disregard 
the weakest dependencies (below 30%) since with these 
dependencies nearly all components were inter-connected.  
Figure 8. Change waves for the product at Ericsson 
The change waves presented in Figure 8 are shorter than in case of 
the product in Saab, but there are more “intra
-
component” waves 
–
 components C10 
–
 C26 in the right-hand side of the figure. This 
means that changes are usually contained within a single 
component, which might lead to a number of conclusions about 
the quality of the architecture and the ways-of-working at the 
company. One of the conclusions was that the architectural 
components ar
e rather independent from each other, which is 
caused by the fact that they are developed by geographically 
distributed teams.  
5.3Evaluation 
We identified a number of parameters which are worthy 
evaluation and discussion with the architects: 

Length of the burst
, for example one day, one week, one 
release.  

Branch filtering
, for example ignoring branch name, strict 
branch name (only changes in the same branch are 
calculated) or similarity of branches (using Levenshtein 
distance of one-5 characters). 

Time period for collecting the data
, for example complete 
product revision history, one release, one month.  
The first evaluation of the method was done during the pilot study 
with a focus group of two architects at Saab EDS. The evaluation 
was positive and the research team decided to continue to develop 
the method completely and apply it to other products. A number 
of implicit dependencies were found and discussed with the 
architects.  
The second evaluation was done through focus group interviews 
with two architects at Ericsson wh
ere the method has shown itself 
useful when: 
1.An explicit dependency on a common library was found. 
The dependency shown a pattern of all components which 
were affected by a library update 
–
 it was confirmed by the 
architects that this was indeed the case. This explicit 
dependency was found when running the method on a 
period of time of one release.  
2.A number of implicit dependencies of components were 
found when analyzing the flow diagrams. The diagrams 
were plotted based on the dependency data collected from 
the whole product lifecycle. An example of an implicit 
dependency was dependencies between state machines 
implementing similar/related protocols.  
330 3.By creating the dependency char
t for each release (i.e. using 
source code revisions only for the period of the release) we 
found how the development of product features affected the 
architecture of the product 
–
 the method pinpointed which 
components were changed as a result of implementing a 
number of features in the release. 
Capturing the explicit dependencies as in (1) showed that the 
method presented in this paper indeed identifies dependencies 
which exist in the product. Their analysis á priori indicated that 
the change in the library would spread throughout the system and 
affect numerous components.  
Discussing the implicit dependencies as in (2) showed that the 
method is a good support for the architects when evaluating their 
design decisions and understanding the structure of the system 
from a new perspective.  
Identifying dependency between component and features as in (3) 
showed that the method is an effective tool for the architects to 
evaluate the risks when implementing new features in the product 
and supporting the test planning. Understanding how the features 
affect components is a crucial element in managing the evolution 
of architectures and prevents design erosion. Since the method 
presented in this paper is automated, these analyses require minor 
effort for data collection and pres
entation, but require the attention 
of architects for analyzing the results and acting upon them.
5.3.1Recommendations for other companies 
Based on the experiences from using this method at two 
companies we identified a number of recommendations for 
companies willing to adopt this approach: 
a)Implicit dependencies identified using this method should 
be used as input for test planning and execution at the 
feature level and at the system 
level (at least). This input can 
result in smarter testin
g and thus identifying defects early.  
b)Change wave measures and analyses should be used by 
architects and designers to monitor the dependencies 
between components in the system. The dependencies can 
be formalized/documented in the diagrams in order to assure 
future maintainability of the system.  
c)The analysis of dependencies between components should 
be complemented with the analysis of dependencies 
between modules/files in th
e components. The inter-module 
dependencies are more useful for the designers who need to 
be alerted about which components should be updated based 
on the change wave.  
d)The analysis should be done on historical releases, but it 
should be used to predict how changes in components might 
spread in the new releases. Identifying the origin of the 
change wave should be communicated to designers who 
should take active decision whether the next component in 
the change wave should be updated 
–
 this decreases the risk 
of omitting important code updates that could result in 
defects later in the development process.  
In addition to the recommendations for the use of the method, 
together with the architects we found the following calibration 
parameters to be useful for a number of analyses: 
a)Length of change burst (one week in the example in section 
4.1) is the same as the length of the release 
–
 the analysis 
shows how features spread over components in reality, 
which might be different from the design. 
b)Length of change burst is 1 day 
–
 only the dependencies 
which are identified by small number of designer and can 
support efficient set-up of the cross-functional self-
organized team. 
c)Length of change burst > iteration cycle (including testing) 
–
 the results will include depe
ndencies which are not known 
by the designers and are found during testing (when a test 
case failed because 
a component is not changed or changed 
incorrectly).  
d)Filtering by branch name 
–
 if the bursts are filtered per 
branch as presented in Figure 2 in section 4.1 then the 
method identifies implicit although direct dependencies (e.g. 
correcting one defect or a single release). If the filtering is 
not done, then the method identifies more false-positives 
like dependencies between features developed for two 
distinct products in a product line. 
e)Using sliding time intervals 
–
 using the analysis month-by-
month or release-by-release provides the architects with the 
possibility of monitoring the evolution of architecture and 
identifying new implicit dependencies as they appear. If the 
analysis is done on the whole revision history, then the 
“new” dependencies are usually less visible as the “old” 
dependencies were present in the system for a longer time 
and are more strongly visible in the statistics.  
In our further work we plan to extend the set of recommendations 
useful for other companies based on the experiences which we 
collect over time. 
6.CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper we presented a method for identifying implicit 
architectural dependencies using 
revision history of source code 
change waves. The results from the evaluation of this method at 
two companies 
–
 Saab Electronic Defence Systems and Ericsson 
AB 
–
 showed that the method identifies both the explicit and 
implicit dependencies. The results showed that manipulating with 
three parameters of the method (time period, length of change 
bursts and branch filtering) results 
in identifying distinct types of 
dependencies like feature-component dependencies or 
dependencies of components through common libraries or 
protocols.  
The method is based on calculations which are relatively simple to 
replicate, but provide support for taking preventive measures from 
design corrosion or quality problems, not uncommon in large and 
long-live software products. The recommendations for other 
companies, which are based on the observations of how architects 
used the method, provide a starting point for using the method and 
initial guidelines on how to analyze the results.  
In our future work we plan to identify more analysis patterns and 
expand the scope of data mining to static code analysis methods, 
to filter out explicit dependencies and only include the implicit 
ones.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research has been carried out in the Software Centre, 
Chalmers, Göteborgs Universi
tet and Ericsson AB, Saab
Aktiebolag.
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Ball and N. Nagappan,
 "Use of relative code churn 
measures to predict system defect density," in 
27th 
331 International Conference on Software Engineering
, St. 
Louis, MO, USA, 2005, pp. 284-292. 
[2] R. M. Bell, T. J. Ostrand, and E. J. Weyuker, "Does 
measuring code change improve fault prediction?," presented 
at the Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Predictive Models in Software Engineering, Banff, Alberta, 
Canada, 2011. 
[3] T. Zimmermann, A. Zeller, P. Weissgerber, and S. Diehl, 
"Mining version histories to guide software changes," 
Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 
vol. 31, pp. 
429-445, 2005. 
[4] T. Arias, P. Avgeriou, and P. America, "Analyzing the 
Actual Execution of a Large Software-Intensive System for 
Determining Dependencies," in 
Reverse Engineering, 2008. 
WCRE '08. 15th Working Conference on
, 2008, pp. 49-58. 
[5] S. Sarkar, G. M. Rama, and R. Shubha, "A Method for 
Detecting and Measuring Architectural Layering Violations 
in Source Code," in 
Software Engineering Conference, 2006. 
APSEC 2006. 13th Asia Pacific
, 2006, pp. 165-172. 
[6] P. M. Johnson, "Requirement and Design Trade-offs in 
Hackystat: An In-Process Software Engineering 
Measurement and Analysis System," presented at the 
Proceedings of the First International Symposium on 
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement, 2007. 
[7] R. P. L. Buse and T. Zimmermann, "Information Needs for 
Software Development Analytic," presented at the ICSE, 
International Conference on Software Engineering, Zurich, 
Switzeland, 2012. 
[8] R. P. L. Buse and T. Zimmermann, "Information Needs for 
Software Development Analytics," presented at the 34th 
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 
2012 SEIP Track), Zurich, Switzerland, 2012. 
[9] N. Ward-Dutton. (2011, Software Econometrics: 
Challenging assumptions about software delivery. 
IBM.com 
podcast companion report
.
[10] D. Hartmann and R. Dymond, "Appropriate agile 
measurement: using metrics and diagnostics to deliver 
business value," in 
Agile Conference, 2006
, 2006, pp. 6 pp.-
134. 
[11] R. Jeffries. (2004). 
A Metric Leading to Agility
. Available: 
http://xprogramming.com/xpmag/jatRtsMetric
[12] T. Fitz. (2009). 
Continuous Deployment at IMVU: Doing the 
impossible fifty times a day
. Available: 
http://timothyfitz.wordpress.com/2009/02/10/continuous-
deployment-at-imvu-doing-the-impossible-fifty-times-a-day/
[13] T. Chow and D.-B. Cao, "A survey study of critical success 
factors in agile software projects," 
Journal of Systems and 
Software, 
vol. 81, pp. 961-971, 2008. 
[14] E. Richardson, "What an Ag
ile Architect Can Learn from a 
Hurricane Meteorologist," 
Software, IEEE, 
vol. 28, pp. 9-12, 
2011. 
[15] H. Sharp, N. Baddoo, S. Beecham, T. Hall, and H. Robinson, 
"Models of motivation in software engineering," 
Information 
and Software Technology, 
vol. 51, pp. 219-233, 2009. 
[16] D. E. Perry and A. L. Wolf, "Foundations for the study of 
software architecture," 
ACM SIGSOFT Software 
Engineering Notes, 
vol. 17, pp. 40-52, 1992. 
[17] M. Staron and W. Meding, "Monitoring Bottlenecks in Agile 
and Lean Software Development Projects 
–
 A Method and 
Its Industrial Use," in 
Product-Focused Software Process 
Improvement
, Tore Cane, Italy, 2011, pp. 3-16. 
[18] C. Robson, 
Real World Research
, 2 ed. Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishing, 2002. 
[19] P. Tomaszewski, P. Berander, and L.-O. Damm, "From 
Traditional to Streamline Development - Opportunities and 
Challenges," 
Software Process Improvement and Practice, 
vol. 2007, pp. 1-20, 2007. 
[20] M. Staron, W. Meding, G. Karlsson, and C. Nilsson, 
"Developing measurement systems: an industrial case 
study," 
Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: 
Research and Practice, 
pp. n/a-n/a, 2010. 
[21] M. Staron, W. Meding, and C. Nilsson, "A Framework for 
Developing Measurement Systems and Its Industrial 
Evaluation," 
Information and Software Technology, 
vol. 51, 
pp. 721-737, 2008. 
[22] M. Staron and W. Meding, "Using Models to Develop 
Measurement Systems: A Method and Its Industrial Use," 
presented at the Software Process and Product Measurement, 
Amsterdam, NL, 2009. 
[23] W. Meding and M. Staron, "The Role of Design and 
Implementation Models in Establishing Mature 
Measurement Programs," presented at the Nordic Workshop 
on Model Driven Engineering, Tampere, Finland, 2009. 
[24] X. Lai and J. K. Gershenson, "Representation of similarity 
and dependency for assembly modularity," 
The International 
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 
vol. 37, pp. 
803-827, 2008/06/01 2008. 
[25] International Standard Organization and International 
Electrotechnical Commission, "ISO/IEC 15939 Software 
engineering 
–
 Software measurement process," International 
Standard Organization / International Electrotechnical 
Commission,, Geneva2007. 
  
332