 From Agile Software Development to Agile Businesses 
Dr. Christoph Steindl IBM Global Services, Austria 
Christoph_Steindl@at.ibm.com 
Abstract 
Agile software development has proven to be a good 
fit for knowledge work in environments of high change 
rates, often resulting in hyper-productive teams. The 
bottom line seems to be that applying agile methods to 
software development projects reduces risk and time-

to-market while high quality is
 achieved at the same time. We show how agility can be useful well beyond 
the context of individual projects, first when managing 
a portfolio of projects of a company and second when 
maneuvering a company in the marketplace. 
Companies can become more demand-driven and 

value-driven by embracing agility on these three levels 

and benefit from agility over a wider spectrum. Agile 

businesses react fast on changed circumstances, are 
flexible, bring response to the market as fast as 
possible, are proactive, and sense the change. 
1. Agility on three levels 
Agile methods have been used on software develop-
ment projects successfully for a couple of years. Going 
back in history, iterative and incremental methods have 
already been used successfully for a couple of decades 
(see [17]). 
When something works well in a particular context, 
it may be worthwhile to apply it to the next bigger 
context, as well. The next bigger context to software 
development projects is the portfolio of projects that a 
company undertakes or plans to undertake. The yet 
next bigger context is the entire enterprise where the 
company is challenged by its competitors (see Fig. 1). 
At the project level, agile engineering and project 
management practices are well established and help to 

meet the project’s targets such as budget, schedule, 

functionality, and quality. At the portfolio of projects 
level, governance structures are used to align the 

projects with the business goals and to continuously 
assess and transform the portfolio. Individual projects 
undergo financial analysis and are evaluated against 
each other by means of return on investment (ROI), 
total cost of ownership (TCO), internal rate of return 
(IRR), net present value (NPV), payback period and 
break even. Techniques such as real options may be 

used if the environment is too uncertain to predict. At 
the enterprise level, mergers and acquisitions have 
once been a way to rapidly grow a company, but the 

resulting company may lose its focus and be less 
responsive afterwards. Other approaches may be more 
appropriate in the current economic situation. 

Companies establish vision statements and intellectual 
agendas, and derive their business strategy and IT 
strategy from these. 
These three levels are connected via iterations of 
{Assess – Plan – Develop Guidance / Perform – 
Measure} where the third step leads down to the next 
lower level. 
TargetsTechniques
Budget
Schedule
Functionality
Quality
Budget
Balanced Risk
Resource Utilization
  and Development
Revenue
Profit
Growth
Marketshare
Mergers & Acquisitions

Intellectual Agenda
Business Strategy
IT Strategy
Governance
Portfolio Management
Financial Analysis
ROI, TCO, IRR, NPV
Agile Engineering
  Practices
Agile Project
  Management Practices
Context / Level
From"embrace change"To"agile business"Enterprise
Portfolio of Projects
Project
Assess
Develop
Guidance
Plan
Measure
Assess
Perform
Plan
Measure
StrategiclevelTacticallevelOperationallevelFigure 1: The three levels with their targets 
and techniques For the three levels (single project, portfolio of 
projects, enterprise), agility brings similar yet different 
benefits, while agility changes its meaning from simply 

embracing change on the project level to business 

agility on the enterprise level. We see two approaches 
for companies to become agile across all three levels: 
“bottom up” by growing agile techniques that have 

been applied at the project level to wider parts of the 

business, and “top down” by defining a new vision and 
strategy for the business and then breaking it down 
from the strategic level to the tactical and operational 
levels. 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 In the rest of the article, we detail what has been 
achieved and what looks promising with respect to 
agility on the different levels. We continue with 
perspectives on IBM’s approach and give examples of 
solutions and offerings. Finally, we summarize the 
benefits of agility on these various levels. 
2. Agility at the project level 
Agile methods have traditionally had a strong focus 
on engineering practices for the development team and 
on project management practices. These practices have 
recently been enhanced by several financial ideas such 
as real options. Together these practices and the 

methodological guidance are very effective for typical 

software development projects with uncertain or 
changing business requirements and with technological 
uncertainties. 
2.1. Agile methods from a technical and project 
management point of view 
Agile methods like Scrum [23], XP [5], DSDM 
[11], Crystal [9], etc. cover all aspects of delivering 
software in an agile way. These methods are based on 

research and experience from Lean Manufacturing 
[26], from Lean Software Development [21] and from 
Knowledge Management [19]. 
2.2. Agile methods from a financial point of 
view 
In the early days of agile methods, the focus has 
been on engineering aspects: emergence of require-
ments, architecture, design, etc. Maybe as a conse-
quence of early and frequent delivery of software, 
another property of agility emerged: financial flexibi-
lity and options. Traditionally, a business case for a 

project contained a time series with the inflow and 

outflow of cash, the discounted cash flows (DCF), the 
net present value (NPV), the return on investment 
(ROI), and internal rate of return (IRR). For agile 
projects, with their frequent delivery of running softw-
are, the idea of real options (as an analogy to financial 

options, see e.g. [13]) came to the mind of agile 

thought-leaders: When you have a “call option” for a 
certain stock, you have the right to buy that stock for a 
pre-determined price. You pay for this flexibility, since 

it can pay off if the stock price rises. In a similar way, 

you pay for a “real option” in order to have the 

flexibility to use it to your favor. Such a real option 

may be the first iteration in a software development 
project where you do not yet know how the market will 
respond to your new software. If the market likes your 
idea, you are in a better position to proceed. The idea 
behind real options is used to valuate various possible 
approaches while there are still a lot of uncertainties. 
Another idea has been pursued in [10] with the 
“Incremental Funding Method”: a way to break down a 

project’s requirements into “minimum marketable 

features” (MMFs, as units of software value creation) 

with intrinsic marketable value (e.g. competitive 

differentiation, revenue generation, cost saving, brand 
projection, enhanced loyalty, etc.) and into “architect-
tural elements” (AEs) which have cost and duration but 

no associated revenues. In a next step, the dependen-

cies among the MMFs and AEs are identified, and the 

MMFs are evaluated (considering their tangible and 

intangible benefits, quantifying the value in terms of 
cost and revenue projections, taking into account their 
risks and duration), discounting the calculated values 
to present values, and determining financially attractive 

sequences for delivering the MMFs and AEs. 
This last step is where IFM differs greatly from 
previous agile methods: 
•XP uses a greedy approach to deliver the features 
first that have the highest value for the client. This 

can lead to a sub-optimal return for the entire 

project due to local optimization. 
•RUP [16] uses a risk-driven approach to deliver 
the features first that have the highest risk. This 
can – as well – lead to a sub-optimal return for the 

entire project, if the riskiest parts are not needed in 
the end. 
•IFM uses heuristics that look ahead to evaluate 
sequences of MMFs and AEs. This leads to the 
architecture being delivered incrementally, just as 
much as necessary to get optimal business value 

out of a project with commensurate investment. 
2.3. Benefits of agility on the project level 
At the level of a single project, the benefits are: 
•reduced risk by involvement of user and customer 

(with early feedback and regular synchronization) 
•reduced time-to-market by early and regular 
delivery of functionality 
•increased productivity by focusing on value-
adding features and value-creating activities 
•empowered team 
•increased quality, software with perceived and 

conceptual integrity 
3. Agility at the portfolio of projects level 
Let us next have a look at traditional portfolio 
management and then argue how agility comes to play. 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 3.1. Traditional portfolio management 
Within the scope of IT, a portfolio can be defined as 
the set of current and future components (which can be 
hardware, software, or services offerings, solutions, or 
projects, etc.) within a business area that addresses a 

market segment. Portfolio management can be defined 
as the collection, assessment, and management of a 
portfolio against selected business criteria. In the 

following, we shortly describe the typical activities: 
•Defining the portfolio: understand the business 
strategy; identify the portfolio sponsor; define the 
business decision criteria (revenue / benefits, 
costs, gross profit, etc.) with linkage to the 

business strategy (used to select components and 

to track & assess portfolio performance); identify 

initial risks (including component dependencies 

and resource capacity/demands) 
•Planning the portfolio: establish the portfolio 
management; develop the inventory of 

components and the resources to be managed; 

select and prioritize the components 
•Collecting/Improving the portfolio: collect 

(qualitative and quantitative) portfolio 
information; assess the portfolio components 
(health and contribution indicators, resource 
demands, risks); manage the portfolio (focusing on 

non-compliance with business objectives, basing 
actions on impact to overall portfolio – e.g. 
reallocate resources, cancel projects, sunset 
products); improving the portfolio (incorporate 

Lessons Learned); review the portfolio; assess 

portfolio management maturity 
The benefits of portfolio management are increased 
executive governance and a holistic approach: to 
ensure the portfolio continues to align with the 
business strategies, to provide a balanced portfolio 

(risk and value) within the organization’s capabilities 

and constraints, to validate that the business decision 

criteria established were accurate and that the expected 

results are realized, to ensure resource capacity can 
meet the demand, to take into account all the 
relationships between the components within a 

portfolio (direct dependencies, indirect dependencies, 
common sub-components), and to make decisions that 
are in the best interest of the overall portfolio strategy 
even if they are detrimental to any specific component, 
or favor one component over the other. 
3.2. Agile portfolio management 
We take the ideas from Lean Manufacturing and 
Lean Software Development as a guideline for indica-
ting areas that can benefit from agility within portfolio 
management (the items in the following list are the 

lean principles from [21] followed by the agile tools in 

the brackets): 
•Eliminate waste
 (Seeing waste, Value stream 
mapping): At the level of portfolio management, 
projects that are not aligned with the business 

strategy are waste. The process of defining, 
planning, and improving a portfolio needs to be 
stream-lined, e.g. unnecessary delays, inventory, 
etc. need to be identified and eliminated. 
•Amplify learning 
(Feedback, Iterations, Synchro-
nization, Set-based development): Rapid feedback 
based on actual data allows for fact-based decision 

making, synchronization of people from different 
levels (higher management, lower management, 
delivery) on the business strategy is crucial to 
continued alignment of IT with business. 

Synchronization within the team of portfolio 

analysts should happen very often (e.g. daily), 

synchronization of the analysts with the executives 
and the project team leaders should happen 
regularly (e.g. weekly to monthly). It is important 

to keep the feedback cycle short by breaking down 

the initiatives into small enough projects. 
•Decide as late as possible 
(Options thinking, The 
last responsible moment, Making decisions): 
Individual portfolio components are no longer 
judged in separation but within the context of the 

entire portfolio. It is easy to understand the 
dependencies of portfolio components on each 

other and the impact of one on the other if the 
actual data about them is automatically collected 
and aggregated. Playing around with options 
allows to develop future scenarios and to simulate 

possible outcomes without long delays. Decisions 
can be delayed as long as possible, but be made as 
soon as actual experience allows for fact-based 
decisions. 
•Deliver as fast as possible 
(Pull systems, Queuing 
theory, Cost of delay): The cost of delay can be 
considered not just for one project, but for a 

sequence or web of projects. An understanding of 
the critical path for realizing business benefits 
over several projects and frequent inspection can 
be used to adapt to changes in a holistic way, i.e. 

not by sub-optimizing a particular project, but by 

optimizing the portfolio of projects. 
•Empower the team 
(Self-determination, Motiva-
tion, Leadership, Expertise): With a shared 
understanding of the business strategy, middle 
management can work on breaking down the high-
level business strategy to tactical guidance for the 

projects, and project team members can intuitively 

align the project priorities with the business 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 strategy. Motivation increases if employees under-
stand the bigger context. In agile software 

development, there is no longer a single person 
responsible for activities like planning, estimating, 
etc. Rather the entire team accepts the responsi-
bility. For managing a portfolio, one can try to 
move the power of planning and monitoring the 

portfolio down one level from the portfolio 

analysts to the project team leaders by sharing the 
available information about the projects. This can 
lead to a much better understanding and to fewer 

battles amongst the project teams.  
•Build integrity in 
(Perceived Integrity, Concep-
tual integrity, Refactoring, Testing): Individual 

projects can be refactored (i.e. changing the 
delivery approach, changing the assigned 
resources, etc. while maintaining the externally 

visible results of the project, such as scope, cost, 

quality, etc.) to ameliorate the risk profile of the 

project. This can also be used to help troubled 
projects even at the expense of non-troubled 
projects, i.e. as a consequence of the refactoring, 

the previously non-troubled project acts e.g. as a 

donor of highly-skilled resources and suffers in its 
externally visible results to benefit the entire 
portfolio of projects. 
•See the whole 
(Measurements, Contracts): The 
holistic approach helps to avoid sub-optimization. 

Albert Einstein once said “Not everything that can 

be counted counts, and not everything that counts 

can be counted.” Start with a small set of 
measurements, collect the data and verify whether 
the measurements help to manage the portfolio, 
use short feedback loops to adapt the measurement 

system to the overall goals. On the portfolio of 

projects level, techniques like Critical Path 

Method (CPM) and Program Evaluation and 
Review Technique (PERT) can be used more 
effectively to understand and manage the sequence 
or the web of projects than on the project level to 
manage the internals of projects. 
3.3. Benefits of agility on the portfolio of 
projects level 
At the portfolio level, the benefits are: 
•reduced overall risk by managing a portfolio of 
projects, some with more risk, some with less 
•re-positioning with respect to the competitors 
during the course of the years 
•reduced complexity (e.g. due to a reduced number 

of applications, projects, etc. and due to removed 

duplicates) and reduced maintenance efforts 
•optimized utilization and development of the 
resources 
•understanding of the gaps between the current 
state and the desired state 
•improved responsiveness, flexibility, and producti-
vity 
4. Agility at the enterprise level 
For companies, to be more agile means to be more 
responsive, focused, variable, and resilient (see [20]). 
Becoming an agile business is not something that can 

happen all at once and will surely take an extended 

amount of time. In an environment of changes, all 

enterprise-wide undertakings should choose a 
“breadth-first” approach (where one first gets an 
overview, and then only selectively drills down to the 

details of the relevant parts) rather than a “big bang” 

approach (where one tries to get a detailed view of 

everything from the beginning, i.e. waterfall thinking). 
4.1. Analytical top down approach 
In the “top down” approach of becoming an agile 
business, the business takes the lead, and governance 

as well as continued alignment assures that the IT 

supports the business in the long term. Strategic 

initiatives may first break down the business into 

“business components” (logical grouping of the people, 

technology and resources that delivers specific 
business value and can operate independently) and then 
setup rules, principles and standards for the future 

business and IT architectures. 
Goals of strategic initiatives may be to: 
•show how well aligned the organizational 

capabilities are with the strategy 
•show how strongly the investments are aligned 

with the strategy  
•create a step-by-step integrated business and 

technology roadmap to address key issues and 
pain points  
•show where capabilities overlap on both the 

business and technology levels and provide a clear 
path to reconcile  
When the business has been broken down into 
business components, one may assess whether the 

business components lead to a competitive advantage, 
and whether the revenue contribution and costs are 
well-aligned. Coase’s Law [8] says that firms should 
perform only those functions internally that cannot be 
performed more cheaply by the market. This can lead 

to the question of sourcing, whether to insource 

business components (where the company 
differentiates from its competitors) that were 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 previously outside the enterprise, and whether to 
outsource other business components. Between these 

extremes, there are several variants. On the sourcing 
level, agility means to be able to scale up and scale 
down with the demand. 
4.2. Collaborative bottom up approach 
General Electric has institutionalized a program 
called “Work-Out” to learn and improve as an 
organization. Work-Out consists of three stages (see 
[25]):1.Plan: A senior business leader pulls together a 
small "design" team to agree on the key issues to 
be tackled, to identify participants, to 

communicate expectations of what people will do 

at the Work-Out event, and to prepare business 

leaders for their role. 
2.Conduct: The workshop (2-3 days) pulls together 
people from all over the enterprise. The main 

objective is to maximize the number of high-

quality ideas for change and to carve out a doable 

list of actions that will deliver fast results on the 
improvement opportunity. Ideas are generated in 
small groups. After presentation to the whole 
group, the fruitful ideas are developed further in 

small groups. At the end of the event, the ideas are 
presented to the business leader who decides about 

the idea on the spot. 
3.Implement: make accountability stick, manage the 
organization's cycle of energy, translate ideas into 
action and provide on-going management 
oversight and support. 
Work-Out has been very effective at eliminating 
waste, tearing down hierarchy and red tape, in creating 
an empowered workforce confident enough to envision 
and implement change whenever and wherever it is 

needed, changing the corporate culture to be more 

agile. 
4.3. Benefits of agility on the enterprise level 
At the enterprise level, the benefits are: 
•becoming more responsive, focused, variable, and 
resilient 
•integrating and optimizing across the value net and 
value chain 
•right-sourced business components (from 
insourcing to outsourcing) 
Companies can gain flexibility by considering 
various sourcing models, from simply augmenting the 

in-house staff with special resources to full outsourcing 

with transferring employees. 
5. Perspectives on IBM’s approach 
In the following, we try to give our view on IBM’s 
approach. We can only speak from our background and 

experience and will surely miss several offerings, tools 
and approaches (due to the size and diversity of IBM). 
5.1. On demand business 
In 2002, Sam Palmisano, Chairman of the Board 
and CEO of IBM, gave his definition of an on demand 

business as part of IBM’s new intellectual agenda: “An 
enterprise whose business processes – integrated end-
to-end across the company and with key partners, 

suppliers and customers – can respond with flexibility 
and speed to any customer demand, market opportunity 

or external threat.” [20] 
The ever-changing business environment with 
competitive Darwinism (i.e. survival of the fittest), 
continuous discontinuities, unrelenting financial 

pressures and unpredictable threats drives businesses to 

be more focused, responsive, variable, and resilient 

(from [14]): 
•Competitive Darwinism
: Due to increasingly 
transparent markets, competitive intensity is 
growing in severity as existing players and new 
entrants scramble to provide value to customers. 
Therefore, being 
focused
 means being committed 
to concentrating on differentiating competencies, 
using tightly integrated strategic partners to 
manage selected non-differentiating activities. 
•Continuous discontinuities
: The changes in 
customer demands, technological innovations and 

government regulations are increasingly sudden 

and dramatic. Therefore, being 
responsive
 means 
seeming almost intuitive in one’s ability to sense 

and respond rapidly to unpredictable changes in 

the market environment and the needs of all its 

constituents. 
•Unrelenting financial pressure
: The growth and 
predictability of revenues and margins becomes 
even more challenging due to economic 
uncertainties and demanding investors. Therefore, 

being 
variable
 means being able to adapt cost 
structures and business processes flexibly, in order 
to reduce risk and to do business at higher levels 
of productivity, cost control, capital efficiency and 
financial predictability. 
•Unpredictable threats: Pervasive dangers 
become real and prevalent as global firms see 
increased exposure to natural disasters, unstable 

geopolitics and other market shocks. Therefore, 
being 
resilient
 means being prepared for changes 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 and threats – be they technological, economic or 
political – enabling the business to continue 

operating with consistent availability, security and 
privacy. 
5.2. Offerings, Tools and Sourcing 
In the recent years, IBM has created several 
offerings on the various levels and gained extensive 
practical experience helping the clients on their way to 

on demand businesses. The following figure only 

represents our personal view. There may well be 
additional offerings, tools and sourcing variants that 
we are not aware of. We discuss the offerings in the 
following sub-sections and give pointers for additional 

information. 
  Enterprise
  Project
  Portfolio of
  Projects
Offerings / Tools
on demand business"responsive, focused,variable, resilient"CBM
SourcingStaff augmentation  Special teams    Co-sourcing      Outtasking        Selective outsourcing          Full outsourcingEASOMA
WJRPM
APM
LTASD
SOMA
Figure 2. Offerings, tools and sourcing  
5.2.1. IBM’s Component Business Modeling (CBM). 
CBM [4] is a technique for modeling an enterprise into 
non-overlapping and unique business components. 
Each business component is a logical grouping of the 
people, technology and resources that deliver specific 

business value and can operate independently. CBM 

creates a map of the essential “building blocks” of an 

organization into a tabular structure that can easily fit 
on a single page. One can then evaluate the business 
components for various properties and identify the 
components with the highest pressure for modification. 
5.2.2. IBM’s Enterprise Architecture (EA). 
EA [12] 
develops a description of how a business should be 
structured, in order to implement and support the 
business strategy of the organization. As such, the 
business architecture provides a bridge between the 
business strategy and the detailed definition of the 

main resources (process, knowledge, information, 

organization and technology) required to implement it. 
EA also defines a high level enterprise-wide IT 
Architecture which normally consists of three 

component parts: an Application Architecture, a Data 
Architecture and a Technical (Infrastructure) Architec-

ture. Additionally, EA performs a strategic gap 
analysis (current state vs. future state) and sets up a 
governance model in order to facilitate the transition. 
5.2.3. IBM’s Service-Oriented Modeling and 
Architecture (SOMA). 
SOMA [24] helps companies 
to implement a service-oriented architecture (SOA) 
with techniques for service identification (e.g. domain 

decomposition, goal-service modeling, existing system 

analysis), service specification and service realization 
(see [3]). 
5.2.4. IBM’s World Jam (WJ). 
WJ [27] engages all 
employees in a collaborative discussion forum for 72 
hours via IBM’s intranet. The idea is similar to GE’s 

Work-Out but implemented via the intranet. The 
difference is the distributed setting of the global 
community via the intranet. After the world jam 

sessions, the ideas are then consolidated. The critical 
point (when comparing with GE’s Work-Out), is to 
ensure that the ideas are acted upon and then to 

communicate the actions and results. 
5.2.5. IBM’s Rational Portfolio Manager (RPM). 
RPM [22] is an enterprise project management tool 
that covers all aspects of project management 

(planning, staffing, tracking, financials, collaboration, 
exceptions and reporting) for small, medium and large 
projects. It has extensive support for the management 

of portfolios (from an executive point of view) with 

OLAP functionality: It aggregates the data from 
various projects to the portfolio of projects view, 
presents the aggregated data in form of portfolio 
dashboards (reports, pivot tables, scorecards, bubble 
charts) and then allows to again drill-down to the 

underlying data. It collects and reports on current and 

historical project execution status and provides trends. 
5.2.6. IBM’s Application Portfolio Management 
(APM).APM [1] is an offering to continuously assess, 
transform and manage a client’s portfolio of 
applications to meet business needs and objectives. 

Management of application portfolios is divided into 
portfolio assessment and portfolio transformation. 
Typical recommendations at the end of the assessment 
are: retire, replace, restructure, reprioritize, or relocate 
an application. The assessment is embedded in a 

continuous cycle of {Assess – Plan – Transform – 

Measure}. The later parts of this cycle plans the 

transformation projects, performs them (which leads us 
down to the project level with agile software 
development or legacy transformation projects), and 

measures their results and their effect on the portfolio 

and enterprise. 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 5.2.7. IBM’s Accelerated Solution Delivery (ASD). 
ASD [2] is an example of large-scale co-sourcing. 
Since a couple of years, IBM has installed Accelerated 
Solution Delivery Centers with various clients. In these 
centers, shared teams (50% IBM, 50% client 
personnel) work in an agile way, with time-boxing, 
prioritized features, joint application design, co-located 

small teams of 4-8 persons, metrics to measure the 

improvements etc. A couple of teams (in some cases 
up to 80) work in parallel and synchronize on a regular 
basis. The results are typically a reduction of time-to-

market by up to 40%, a reduction of development costs 

by up to 30%, a significant reduction of defects, a 

significant increase in productivity and a reduction of 

employee attrition. In such centers, IBM initially 
brings in experience with implementing the ASD 
model and experienced resources; whereas the 

customer brings in the business knowledge. After a 
couple of years, the client can take over the entire 
center. 
5.2.8. IBM’s Legacy Transformation (LT). 
LT [18] 
provides a full range of offerings that are designed to 
address common legacy-related challenges and costs 

while helping to incrementally position the IT 

environment for new initiatives such as e-business on 
demand. Used individually or together, these offerings 
are focused on improving the management and 

maintenance of the portfolio. 
5.3. Evaluation to increasing the agility 
From the quoted offerings, only ASD is inherently 
agile (i.e. when looking at the delivery approach). It 
gives convincing evidence that agile software develop-
ment techniques can be used on a large scale. 
The other offerings (CBM, EA, SOMA, APM, and 
LT) can be performed in an agile or in a more 
traditional plan-driven way. They all help the 

companies to become more focused, responsive, 

variable and resilient, even if the individual projects 
are not performed in an agile way. It is interesting to 
understand that the delivery approach of a project does 
not necessarily have to be agile (at the project level) to 

deliver agile benefits at a higher level. Nevertheless, it 

may be worthwhile to trim the delivery approaches 
from an agile point of view. 
6. Conclusions Agility brings different benefits depending on the 
context in which it is applied. A simple statement like 
“embrace change” (from the project level, to quote 
Kent Beck) then means that an agile business reacts 
fast on changed circumstances, is flexible, brings 
response to the market as fast as possible, is proactive, 

and senses the change. 
There seem to be two important facets of agility: the 
delivery approach and the realized results and benefits. 

On the project level, teams use an agile delivery 

approach to reach their target and to become hyper-

productive (see [6]). On the portfolio of projects and 

enterprise level, the realized results and benefits are 
business agility with being more responsive, focused, 
variable, and resilient. It is well possible to reach agile 

results without applying an agile delivery approach as 

we have seen in section 5.3. 
We have two main conclusions: 
1.Simply using an agile approach on one level 
without considering the next bigger level, will not 

lead to the optimum return. One has to consider 

the next bigger context. 
2.Although agile results may be realized without an 
agile delivery approach, it may be worthwhile to 
move to an agile delivery approach (as we have 
exemplified in section 3.2), since it may 
significantly increase the productivity, etc. (see 

section 2.3). 
6.2. Inspiration and cross-fertilization 
In addition to what we have laid out, it seems 
valuable to perform Benefits Realization Analysis on 
the portfolio of projects level as well and to integrate 
other ideas from [7], e.g. Value Realization Feedback 
into portfolio management. 
It may as well be valuable to cross-fertilize across 
the different levels: 
•to use techniques from agile software development 
for portfolio management, e.g. work in pairs, 
distribute the power, stop the production line and 
determine the root cause 
•to use techniques from portfolio management for 
agile software development, e.g. apply rigorous 

financial analysis (with ROI, NPV, IRR, real 
options) not just to a portfolio of projects, but also 
to individual projects 
6.3. Areas of future research 
We do not expect a lot of radically new ideas on 
agile practices for software development and project 
management in the years to come but rather a 
consolidation of the best techniques and a clearer 
understanding for when (in which contexts and under 
which forces) to apply the techniques. We expect a lot 

of experience to be gained by using agile methods 
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 appropriately to deliver the results on a consistent basis 
and on a larger scale. 
When the delivery approach switches from plan-
driven (focusing on efficiency and optimization) to 

agile (focusing on innovation and adaptability), this 
also means to switch from conformance to plan to 
conformance to vision and value, i.e. the targets on the 

project level may be rearranged (see [15]). We can not 

yet tell whether such a switch fits as naturally to the 
portfolio of projects level as it fits to the project level. 
When the delivery approaches have become agile on 

all three levels, the connection between the levels may 

no longer be as plan driven as now (“Assess – Plan – 

Develop Guidance / Perform – Measure”). 
7. Acknowledgements 
We like to thank our colleagues Paul Grünbacher, 
Gottfried Luef, Peter Polndorfer and Pål Krogdahl for 
their feedback on early drafts of this article. 
8. References 
[1]Application Portfolio Management Services, 
http://www.ibm.com/services/us/index.wss/so/ams/a1000207/oi700 (last 
visited: 06/06/2005)
[2]Accelerated Solution Delivery Services, 
http://www.ibm.com/services/uk/index.wss/offering/ams/a1006861 (last 

visited: 06/06/2005)
[3]Arsanjani, A., “Service-Oriented Modeling and 
Architecture”, IBM developerWorks, 2004. 
[4]Banerjea, S., “Unlocki
ng the value of account 
opening with component business modeling”, IBM Institute 
for Business Value Study, 2004.  
[5]Beck, K., and C. Andres, 
Extreme Programming 
Explained: Embrace Change, 2nd Edition
, Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 2004. 
[6]Beedle, M., M. Devos, Y. Sharon, K. Schwaber, and 
J. Sutherland, “SCRUM: An extension pattern language for 
hyperproductive software development”, Proceedings of the 

1998 Pattern Languages of Programs Conference. 

[7]Boehm, B., “Value-Based Software Engineering”, 
Software Engineering Notes (vol 28 no 2), March 2003. 
[8]Coase, 
R.H., 
The Nature of the Firm
.[9]Cockburn, A., 
Crystal Clear: A Human-Powered 
Methodology for Small Teams
, Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 2004. 
[10]Denne, M. and J. Cleland-Huang, 
Software by 
Numbers: Low-Risk, High-Return Development
, Prentice 
Hall PTR, 2003. 

[11]DSDM Consortium and J. Stapleton, 
DSDM: 
Business Focused Development, 2nd Edition
, Addison-
Wesley, 2003. 

[12]Enterprise Architecture and Technology, 
http://www.ibm.com/services/us/index.wss/so/bcs/a1000297 (last visited: 
06/06/2005)
[13]Erdogmus, H., and J. Favaro, “Keep Your Options 
Open: Extreme Programming and the Economics of 
Flexibility”, in 
Extreme Programming Perspectives 
by 
Marchesi, M., G. Succi, D. Wells, L. Williams, and J.D. 
Wells, Pearson Education, 2002. 
[14]Hancock, R., P. Korsten, and G. Pohle, “On demand 
business: The new agenda for value creation”, IBM Institute 
for Business Value Study, 2004. 

[15]Highsmith, J., 
Agile Project Management
, Addison-
Wesley Professional, 2004. 
[16]Kroll, P., and P. Kruchten, 
The Rational Unified 
Process Made Easy: A Practitioner's Guide to Rational 
Unified Process
, Addison Wesley, 2003. 
[17]Larman, C., 
Agile and Iterative Development: A 
Manager’s Guide
, Addison-Wesley, 2004. 
[18]Legacy Transformation Services, 
http://www.ibm.com/services/us/index.wss/offerfamily/ams/a1009245 (last 
visited 06/06/2005)
[19]Nonaka, I., and H. Takeuchi, 
The Knowledge-
Creating Company: How Japanese Companies Create the 
Dynamics of Innovation
, Oxford University Press, 1995. 
[20]Palmisano, S., “An on demand business defined”, 
http://www.ibm.com/e-business/uk/about_ondemand/def.html (last visited: 
06/06/2005)
[21]Poppendieck, M., and T. Poppendieck, 
Lean Software 
Development: An Agile Toolkit
, Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 2003. 
[22]Rational Portfolio Manager, 
http://www.ibm.com/software/awdtools/portfolio/ (last visited: 06/06/2005)
[23]Schwaber, K., and M. Beedle, 
Agile Software 
Development with Scrum
, Prentice Hall PTR, 2001. 
[24]Service Oriented Modeling and Architecture, 
http://www.ibm.com/services/us/index.wss/rs/imc/a1008687 (last visited: 
06/06/2005)
[25]Ulrich, D., S. Kerr, R. Ashkenas, 
GE Work-Out
,McGraw Hill, 2002. 
[26]Womack, J., and D. Jones, 
Lean Thinking: Banish 
Waste and Create Wealth in your Company
, Simon & 
Schuster UK Ltd, 1996. 
[27]World Jam, 
http://www.research.ibm.com/SocialComputing/WorldJam.htm (last 
visited: 06/06/2005)
Proceedings of the 2005 31st EUROMICRO Conference on Software
 Engineering and Advanced App
lications (EUROMICRO-SEAA™05) 
0-7695-2431-1/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
