 Investigating Daily Team Meetings in Agile Software Projects 
        
Viktoria Gulliksen Stray 
University of Oslo 
Department of Informatics 
Oslo, Norway 
stray@ifi.uio.no 
   
 Nils Brede Moe              
SINTEF ICT 
Trondheim, Norway 
nils.b.moe@sintef.no 
 
   
 
Aybüke Aurum  
University of New South Wales  
School of Information Systems, 
Technology and Management.  
Sydney, Australia 
aybuke@unsw.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract
—An increasing amount of time is being spent at 
organizational meetings. One common type of meeting in 
software projects is the daily team meeting, which is the 
most important forum for coordinating and planning daily 
work. To better understand how software teams make 
decisions, communicate, and coordinate their work, we must 
uncover the micro-level interaction processes among the 
team members at these meetings. We analyzed 
transcriptions of eight daily meetings from two software 
development teams. The agile literature states that the daily 
meeting should focus on answering questions such as “What 
have I done? What will be done? What obstacles are in my 
way?” However, on average, only 24% of each of the 
meetings that we studied focused on this task. We found that 
35% of the meeting was spent on elaborating problem issues 
and discussing possible solutions. Very little time was used 
for coordinating tasks. Our results indicate that many 
project decisions are made in daily team meetings and that 
this quick decision making requires team members to be 
experts. These experts need to have a shared understanding 
of who is responsible for what and of the information and 
requirements needed to solve the tasks. 
 
Keywords: agile software development; daily meeting; 
stand-up meeting; Scrum; communication; coordination; 
decision-making; case study; software engineering  
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Team meetings are necessary for coordinating team 
members, tasks and tools. Through meetings, a software 
team coordinates the efforts of those who are part of the 
development process and their activities and goals with 
suppliers, clients, and other groups both outside and inside 
the organization. Furthermore, meetings help the team 
solve problems, make decisions, exchange information, 
and strengthen team orientation. Team meetings shape 
both team and organizational outcomes [5]. Several studies 
have found that team performance is linked to the 
effectiveness of teamwork coordination [4, 7].  
Recent development methods have argued that teams 
should conduct daily meetings [16, 20]. For example, agile 
software development (ASD) involves self-managing 
teams that rely on daily meetings to coordinate their work 
and make decisions. According to a recent survey, 78% of 
organizations that practice ASD conduct daily meetings 
[27]. The purpose of daily meetings in ASD is to 
synchronize activities, improve communication within the 
team, and create work plans for the coming 24 hours [22]. 
Accordingly, in addition to being a decision-making 
forum, the daily meeting is the most important
 
forum for 
exchanging information upon which decisions are based. 
Daily meetings are becoming more common in 
software projects, and where these meetings are used, they 
are probably the most important forum for the team to 
coordinate and plan the daily work. Still, to our 
knowledge, no studies have examined such meetings. 
Therefore, to better understand how software teams make 
decisions, communicate, and coordinate their work, we 
need to acquire more knowledge on how team members 
interact in such meetings. This goal led us to the following 
research question:
 
how do team members interact with 
each other at daily meetings?
 
 
To investigate this research question, we analyzed the 
transcripts of daily meetings at two companies. The aim is 
to understand how team members interact with each other, 
not to explore how team members’ personalities or team 
leadership affects the daily meeting. The remainder of the 
paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the 
background and relevant literature on daily meetings. 
Section 3 describes the research methodology. Section 4 
reports on the results from our case study. Section 5 
discusses our findings. Section 6 concludes and suggests 
future research. 
II.
 
B
ACKGROUND
 
Teamwork is critical for software companies, with 
meetings serving as an important means for sharing 
information and knowledge, coordinating activities, and 
combining team members’ expertise. A software 
developer usually spends several hours a week in various 
types of meetings, including planning meetings, 
retrospective meetings, review meetings, customer 
meetings, and daily meetings. Because research on 
meetings in the field of computer science is lacking, the 
next section (A) covers the relevant research on meetings 
conducted within the fields of psychology, management, 
and small group research. Section (B) introduces the 
notion of daily meetings and research that may be relevant 
to such meetings.  
2012 38th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-0-7695-4790-9/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2012.16274 A.
 
Meetings 
Rogelberg et al. [17] found that employees spend, on 
average, 5.6 hours in scheduled meetings during a typical 
work week. While meetings are necessary for building 
successful teamwork [5], several studies have reported that 
a great portion of time spent in meetings is perceived as 
ineffective [3, 12, 18].  
Kauffeld and Lehmann-Willenbrock [5] analyzed 
micro-level processes in team meetings to better 
understand what makes these types of meetings 
successful. Their results showed that team meetings with 
more functional interaction, such as problem-solving 
interaction and action planning, were associated with 
higher team productivity [5]. In addition, they found that 
positive procedural communication in team meetings (i.e., 
statements aimed at structuring and organizing the 
discussion) was positively linked to team success.  
Scholars have studied different meeting characteristics, 
such as the format and frequency of meetings. Bluedorn et 
al. [1] found that meetings where people stand (instead of 
sit) are shorter without lowering the quality of the 
decisions produced in the meeting. Luong and Rogelberg 
[9] found that frequent meetings, such as daily meetings, 
were potentially disruptive and that “the number of 
meetings an employee had per day was related to increased 
daily fatigue as well as greater subjective work load”. 
Additionally, Zijlstra et al. [31] found daily meetings to be 
problematic because “being interrupted several times has a 
greater effect than one interruption that takes longer”. 
B.
 
Daily meetings in agile software projects 
The practice of conducting daily meetings in software 
development teams became popular with the introduction 
of agile methods, such as XP and Scrum, where daily 
meetings are a mandatory practice. Daily meetings are 
now common in agile software projects [27]. 
In the context of Scrum, the daily meeting is often 
called the “Daily Scrum” [22]. The term
 
“Stand-up 
meeting” is also used to emphasize the fact that all 
participants should stand to avoid long discussions at the 
meeting [30]. The meeting is supposed to last no more 
than 15 minutes, and the purpose of the meeting is to 
improve communication, highlight and promote quick 
decision making, and identify and remove impediments 
[21]. According to Schwaber [22], the team members 
should discuss (1) what has been accomplished since the 
last meeting, (2) what is intended to be accomplished 
before the next meeting, and (3) which obstacles prevent 
the work items in the backlog from being accomplished. 
While no studies focus specifically on daily meetings, 
we found three studies that investigated daily meetings as 
one of several agile practices. In the first study, 
Pikkarainen et al. found that
 daily meetings were a good 
way to keep the developers, project leader, and customers 
aware of the project status and that they helped 
developers resolve design issues more quickly [14]. 
McHugh et al. found that daily meetings had a positive 
effect on communication inside a software development 
team [10]. Pries-Heje and Pries-Heje studied globally 
distributed teams and found th
at daily meetings are one of 
the four aspects of Scrum that provide coordination in 
particular and that the meetings allow all team members 
to interact and learn what the others are doing [15].  
In our earlier research, we found that the daily meeting 
was seen as an important forum for information flow in 
the project [24] and to defend decisions and show other 
team members that a great deal of work has been 
accomplished since the previous meeting [25].  
III.
 
R
ESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
 
The background for this study was a large research 
program on agile teamwork, where the first two authors 
worked closely with several agile software companies. 
 Because the goal of this study was to explore and 
provide insight into daily meetings in agile software 
development, it was important to study software 
development teams in practice. According to Yin, case 
studies are the preferred research strategy if a “...question 
is being asked about a contemporary set of events over 
which the investigator has little or no control” [29]. In this 
paper, we reported on a single case study [29] where we 
studied one phenomenon in two projects at two different 
software companies.  
When conducting the single case study, we followed 
the five-step process proposed by Yin: 

 
Case study design: objectives are defined, and the 
case study is planned.


 
Preparation for data collection: the procedures 
and protocols for data collection are defined.


 
Collecting evidence: data on the studied case are 
collected.


 
Analysis: the collected data are analyzed.


 
Reporting: the results are reported.

A.
 
Study Context 
The researchers had a long relationship with the two 
SME companies studied in this paper, which we named 
TeleLink and MapTech. We chose these two companies 
because they were both part of a research project on agile 
teamwork and fulfilled the selection criteria that made it 
possible to answer the research question. In particular, 
they had implemented all of the Scrum practices, and we 
were able to observe some of their teams over a period of 
one year. In particular, we studied their daily, 
retrospective, review, and planning meetings.  
Case studies can be based on any mix of quantitative 
and qualitative evidence, and having multiple sources of 
evidence ensures construct validity and achieves 
triangulation. In this study, we relied on the triangulation 
of our data sources, which is described in Section B. 
1)
 
TeleLink 
TeleLink is an international software company that 
specializes in telecommunications. The project that we 
275 studied aimed to develop a new system that would then be 
integrated with a larger software suite developed by the 
Finnish branch of the company. The project used Scrum 
with a sprint length of three weeks. The Product Owner of 
the project was located in Finland. The team consisted of 
eight people: a Scrum Master, four developers, two 
testers, and one technical document writer. At TeleLink, 
people worked regularly from home. Consequently, one 
or two team members attended the meetings by phone. 
The average number of years that the team members had 
been working at TeleLink was 13.3 years.  
 
2)
 
MapTech 
MapTech is a company that develops software systems 
for archiving and systems for planning and coordinating 
excavation work. The Scrum project we studied produced 
a combination of textual user interfaces and map 
functionality. Six developers, one Scrum Master, and a 
Product Owner were allocated to the project. The Product 
Owner, who was also responsible for testing, was situated 
in another city and attended the meetings by phone. The 
Scrum Master was a part of both the quality and 
marketing departments and had worked in the company 
for more than 10 years. The length of each sprint was four 
weeks.
 
B.
 
Study Design, Data Sources, and Analysis 
We observed several daily meetings at TeleLink and 
MapTech and analyzed eight of them in detail. The 
meetings were supplemented by notes, interviews, 
observations from other meetings, and other materials 
collected from both organizations over a period of one 
year.  
The meetings at MapTech were transcribed literally 
onto a computer during the observations by the second 
author, who is an experienced typist. The TeleLink study 
started after the MapTech study was finished, and because 
some of the team members at this company spoke in a low 
voice, we had to tape and transcribe the observed meeting. 
Because we collected the same type of data from both 
companies, we considered all our data as part of the same 
case study. We coded the transcripts using descriptive 
coding [19]. Descriptive code uses a word or a short 
phrase to identify the 
topic
 (as opposed to the 
content
) 
and is useful for answering questions such as “What is 
going on here?” Being with the teams for a year enabled 
us to understand the technical and business-related 
discussion, which is necessary for identifying a topic.  
We conducted an extensive set of iterative analyses for 
each of the eight transcribed daily meetings. In the first 
iteration, the first two authors together coded each 
meeting manually on hard-copy printouts. During the next 
iterations, the transcripts were coded and recoded 
electronically with the help of a tool called NVivo 
(
www.qsrinternational.com
), which is used to analyze 
qualitative data.  
The first two authors coded the micro-level processes 
by assigning a piece of text to a category (“node” in 
Nvivo). A category represents a topic on the content of 
the meeting. When categories were found to be 
conceptually similar in nature, we grouped them under 
more abstract, higher-order categories.  
The categories evolved through discussions of the 
transcripts. At the same time, we reviewed the literature on 
design meetings [13] and a recently validated instrument 
for group interaction analysis [5]. We discussed each 
statement thoroughly before assigning it to a category. All 
authors participated in discussing and agreeing upon the 
final eight categories; see Table I. 
We coded 100% of the words in the transcripts. That is, 
we coded all of the text and assigned each piece of text to 
Table I: Coding scheme  
No. Category Explanation Examples 
C1 The three 
Scrum 
questions 
What have I done since the last meeting? 
What will be done before the next meeting? 
What obstacles are in the way? 
Informing other members about the tasks the individual 
is working on. 
C2 Problem-
focused 
communication 
The major questions and problems that need to be addressed, 
including the elaboration of the issue and discussions of 
possible solutions to the problems. 
Discussing questions such as “How can we implement 
that feature? How do we integrate the components? 
What is the best solution to the identified problem?” 
C3 Clarification Explanations that make an earlier event, situation, or statement 
clear.  
Questions that someone asked to better understand an 
issue. 
C4 Criterion The reasons or arguments that evaluate an alternative solution 
or proposal. 
Arguments for a solution, customer requirements, and 
technical possibilities. 
C5 Coordination of 
tasks  
Delegation of tasks and assignment of responsibilities.  Discussing who should be involved in solving a task. 
C6 Meeting 
management 
Statements related to the orchestration of the meeting activity. Indicating that members hold off on discussions, asking 
someone to speak, and summing up the meeting. 
C7 Project 
management 
Statements concerning activities not directly related to the 
content of the meeting.  
Discussing the reporting of resources and hours and 
providing information about other meetings. 
C8 Digression   Discussions of side topics or interruptions related to things 
outside the content of the meeting. 
Telling a joke, interrupting because of technical   
problems with phone conference equipment, and other 
distractions. 
276 only one of the eight exclusive categories.  
When the coding of the transcripts was done, we 
identified the transitions and sequences among the 
categories to determine what type of categories led to 
what type of interaction.  
To identify the proportion of each category at a 
meeting, we used the number of words spent on a 
category and then calculated the percentages of the 
occurrence of different categories at the meetings. We 
believe that this classification is a valid method for 
identifying the proportion of each category because 
people were talking for most of the time at these 
meetings. We analyzed a total of 11,237 words from the 
eight meetings.  
IV.
 
R
ESULTS
 
We now report the results from analyzing the data on 
the team interactions during their regular daily meetings at 
MapTech and TeleLink.  
A.
 
Meeting Characteristics 
Table II summarizes the characteristics of the observed 
meetings. 
 
Table II: Meeting characteristics 
Company Length in 
minutes 
Total # of 
people in 
meeting  
# on 
phone 
MapTech 19 7 1 
MapTech 15 7 1 
MapTech 20 7 1 
MapTech 12 5 0 
TeleLink  14 6 0 
TeleLink 20 5 2 
TeleLink 21 8 2 
TeleLink 13 8 1 
Avg: 16.8 6.6 1.0 
 
The length of the daily meetings varied from 12 to 21 
minutes depending on the number of people who attended 
the meetings, the technical problems at the meetings, and 
most importantly, the amount of time spent on discussions 
related to 
problem-focused communication
 (C2). 
 
At three of the eight meetings, the Scrum Master 
announced that the daily meeting was officially over, but 
the meeting still continued, with the Scrum Master giving 
general information about the project or team members 
discussing among themselves. Thus, in reality, these 
meetings lasted longer than the time periods shown in the 
table. We also observed that people often arrived late for 
the meetings. As a result, the meetings seldom started on 
time. 
 
B.
 
Percentage of Words Devoted to Each Category 
The percentage of words devoted to each of the eight 
categories is shown in Figure 1. The two teams across the 
two organizations were remarkably similar in terms of the 
proportion of words they devoted to each category. 
The largest category at the meetings was 
problem-
focused communication (C2, Table I)
, accounting for 35% 
of the statements at the meetings. The discussions of 
problems and solutions usually involved several team 
members. We found that many decisions were made 
during these discussions. 
 
The three Scrum questions (C1),
 the second largest 
category, constituted, on average, 24% of the statements at 
the meetings. In this category, 53% of the statements 
described 
what was done since the last meeting
, 25% 
covered 
what will be done
, and 22% covered 
obstacles
.  
 
Figure 1. 
 
Proportion of each category in the meetings 
Project management
 (
C7
), which constituted 11% of 
the meetings, included discussions on the number of hours 
that had been spent on specific tasks, the number of hours 
that were left on a task, and the process of reporting these 
hours in the time reporting system. 
The teams spent 8% of the meetings on 
clarification 
(
C3
). Statements in this category mostly requested more 
information or asked a team member to explain their 
previous statement. There were, on average, six 
clarifications at each meeting, with three to nine 
clarifications per meeting. 
Coordination of tasks (C5) 
constituted
 
7% of the 
meetings. Both the Scrum Master and the team members 
were involved in coordinating tasks. Sometimes, tasks 
were directly assigned to a team member, and at other 
times, team members voluntarily took on responsibilities.  
The teams spent 6% of the daily team meetings on 
meeting management (C6)
. One example of meeting 
management is when the Scrum Master asks the team 
members to speak or to hold off on long discussions. 
Another example is when the Scrum Master leads the 
discussion back to the topic.  
Digression (C8) 
constituted 5% of the meetings
.
 We 
coded three types of digressions: (1) discussions of side 
topics; (2) trouble with meeting equipment, such as Wi-Fi 
or telephones; and (3) statements that lightened the 
atmosphere and often resulted in laughter at the meeting. 
Among the digressions, 40% lightened the atmosphere, 
277 32% were side topics, and 28% were statements about 
trouble with equipment. 
Criterion
 
(C4)
, which mostly concerned customer 
requirements, accounted for 4% of the statements made at 
the daily meetings. Two of the meetings we studied had no 
statements in this category. 
 
C.
 
Sequences of Categories 
We analyzed the interaction processes at the meetings 
and identified the various patterns of a sequence of 
interaction. While several patterns were identified, the 
pattern depicted in Figure 2 was the most common 
sequence of interaction at the meetings and was also the 
pattern that included all three Scrum questions (
C1
). 
 
 
Figure 2. 
 
The most common sequence of interaction in a daily meeting 
When following this pattern, a team member usually 
started by telling the team what he or she had done since 
the last meeting (
C1
) before continuing to discuss 
obstacles (
C1
). An obstacle often caused another team 
member to ask for clarification (
C3
) regarding the obstacle 
just explained. The resulting clarification often led to a 
discussion of the identified problem. When the discussion 
ended, the Scrum Master usually asked the team member 
to talk about what he or she planned to do (
C1
). We found 
that by describing what he or she planned to do, the person 
often triggered a new clarification, which again led to a 
new discussion about problems and solutions. This 
discussion often ended with the Scrum Master summing 
up the discussion and asking the next person to describe 
what he or she had done since the last meeting.  
Problem-focused communication 
(
C2
) was the 
category that accounted for the largest proportion of 
statements at all of the daily meetings. To better 
understand the daily meetings, one must understand how 
problem-focused communication
 was initiated at the 
meetings and allowed team members to discuss their major 
issues, problems, and solutions. We analyzed the 
transitions to problem-focused communication. The total 
number of transitions leading to this category was 46. 
Among the 46 transitions observed, the three most 
common transitions were 
clarifications
 (
C3
), 
obstacles
 
(
C1
), and 
coordination of tasks
 (
C5
) (Figure 3). Asking for 
a clarification was the most common reason why the team 
would end up in a problem-focused discussion. In the 
second most common transition, a team member would 
report on an obstacle, and the team or part of the team 
would then promptly commence a discussion of the 
problems (
problem-focused communication
). The third 
most common transition to 
problem-focused 
communication
 occurred when the team discussed how to 
coordinate tasks. When the team was discussing who 
should be engaged in solving a task, people clearly became 
aware of new challenges and problems.    
 
Figure 3. 
 
Transitions to problem-focused communication 
V.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
While the team meeting was intended to focus on 
answering 
the three Scrum questions
, we found that most 
of the meeting was spent on other types of interactions 
instead. During the meeting, the team members talked 
most often about 
problem-focused communication
. 
Problem-focused communication 
included 46% more 
words than the second biggest category, which comprised 
the three Scrum questions
. Further, we found typical 
patterns of interaction processes and transitions at the 
meetings. Our data also suggest that the discussions at 
daily meetings were similar across different organizations, 
both in terms of the number of words spent on a category 
and the sequential relations among the categories. 
In this section, we discuss our key observations in light 
of our research question: 
how do team members interact 
with each other at daily meetings? 
A.
 
Interaction categories and processes at daily meetings  
The literature has usually described daily meetings as a 
place for answering 
the three Scrum questions
. However, 
278 we found that this category only accounted for 24% of the 
statements at the meeting. From this point, we understand 
that, while the meeting was said to focus on answering 
the 
three Scrum questions
, most of the meeting was spent on 
other types of discussion.  
Because we found that the teams spent most of the 
meeting on 
problem-focused communication
, we argue 
that the daily meeting was mostly about making 
operational decisions. Although the number of issues and 
discussions of the major problems and solutions differed 
across the eight meetings, the average number of issues 
was similar for both organizations. The next section 
further describes the role of decision making at daily 
meetings. 
The percentage of statements at meetings spent on the 
coordination of tasks
 was surprisingly small (7%) given 
that one ostensible goal of the daily meetings was to 
coordinate activities for the next 24 hours. This finding 
indicates that daily meetings in agile software projects are 
not the primary meetings for coordinating tasks. Another 
explanation is that coordination is simple and requires 
little effort in such meetings, especially if the teams have 
been working together for a long time, which was the case 
in our study.  
Clarification
 was the main category that initiated 
problem-focused communication
. This finding 
demonstrates that clarification plays an important role in 
initiating problem solving. Our findings are in accordance 
with Olson et al. [13], who found that spending time on 
clarification was an important characteristic of 
collaborative design meetings. In the meetings we studied, 
clarifications
 constituted 8% of the statements made at the 
meetings. One reason for this relatively small figure was 
that clarification often consisted of relatively short 
questions, such as “Can you explain more?”  
We found that 
meeting management
 was important for 
structuring communication at the meetings. We observed 
that several longer discussions were cut short by the Scrum 
Master when he asked the team members to hold off on 
long discussions. We also observed that the Scrum Master 
frequently asked someone to speak. We believe that these 
requests made the Scrum Master more of a leader than a 
facilitator of the meeting and that it contradicted the self-
organizing nature the meeting could have had if the team 
members themselves had decided that the next person 
could speak.  
Only 5% of the meetings were spent on 
digressions
. 
The largest group of digressions was “Lightening the 
atmosphere”, which is often referred to as “Positive socio-
emotional communication” [5]. Kauffeld and Lehmann-
Willenbrock, who studied teams that have worked together 
for some time, found that positive socio-emotional 
communication was not positively connected to team 
meeting success [5].  
When a person was requested to speak, the interactions 
among the team members often followed the common 
pattern shown in Figure 2. Our analysis showed that team 
members often discussed obstacles that they faced before 
they talked about what they were going to do. In contrast, 
the Scrum literature indicates that the reverse should 
occur. Apparently, the team members perceived it more 
important to discuss obstacles than future work. 
Additionally, by addressing problems, the members could 
explain why they had not followed through on the 
previous day’s plans (i.e., the person felt the need to justify 
why he or she was having problems with progress). This 
technique is also known as self-justification [23]. 
B.
 
Decision making in daily meetings  
A successful problem-solving process is often 
characterized by a thorough definition and analysis of the 
problem [28], which can be time consuming. However, 
from our analysis, we found that most decision-making 
sessions could be as short as seconds or minutes. Daily 
meetings are characterized by limited time, uncertainty, 
and incomplete information. In such a context, it is 
difficult to discuss several solutions to a problem before 
making a decision.  
To understand the effect of decision making in a 
complex environment with time pressure, we use the 
theory of naturalistic decision making (NDM) [6, 11]. 
NDM describes how people use their experience to make 
decisions in complex, dynamic, real-time environments 
[11]. NDM postulates that experts can make good 
decisions under difficult conditions, such as time pressure, 
uncertainty, and vague goals, without having to perform 
extensive analyses and compare options. They are able to 
do so by employing their experience to recognize 
problems that they have previously encountered and for 
which they already developed solutions. Experts use their 
experience to form mental simulations of the problem 
currently being encountered and use these simulations to 
suggest appropriate solutions [11]. Accordingly, we argue 
that agile teams apply naturalistic decision making when 
conducting daily meetings.  
There are certain implications of viewing daily 
meetings as an NDM process. First, companies need to 
train their employees to develop domain-specific expertise 
and collaborative teamwork skills. Second, because NDM 
relies on highly trained experts, agile teams need to consist 
of experts, not novices. If there are novices in the team, 
companies need to determine how to move the novices 
through the stages until they become experts. Third, to 
make teams perform effective decision-making processes 
at such meetings, the team members need to have shared 
mental models; that is, they must have a shared 
understanding of who is responsible for what and of the 
information and requirements needed to solve the tasks 
[8].  
While using the daily meeting for frequent decision 
making under time pressure presents some challenges, 
problem-focused communication and knowledge sharing 
at such meetings are positively linked to team success [5]. 
The same is true of action planning, such as coordination 
of tasks. The three categories 
clarification
, 
criterion
, and 
meeting management
 are examples of what is called 
“positive procedural communication” and are positively 
linked to team meeting success [5]. Consequently, the 
279 daily meeting is important because it forces the team to 
spend time on interaction processes and categories that 
would support their success. 
  
Although spending time on solving and discussing 
problems is good for the team, one challenge might be that 
decisions are not documented. The teams that we observed 
did not document the decisions taken in the daily 
meetings. Because some decisions might be wrong and 
have major consequences, they should be recorded and re-
evaluated. In addition, we observed that people were 
sometimes absent from the meetings and thus missed 
important information because there were no minutes. 
Moreover, we did not observe team members updating 
each other on the outcome of the meeting.  
One explanation for the lack of documentation at these 
meetings could be the dominant “lean” mentality that has 
been advocated in agile development. This mentality aims 
to minimize unnecessary work and to avoid wasteful 
documentation in particular. While this concept has been 
misconstrued by many to mean “no documentation”, the 
idea is that the team should document what is absolutely 
necessary and nothing more [2]. None of the teams 
discussed the need for writing minutes.     
 
VI.
 
L
IMITATIONS 
 
One limitation of our study is that the presence of a 
researcher might have influenced the participants’ mental 
processes in the discussions. However, because we visited 
and observed the teams over a long period of time, the 
participants became used to being observed, and we 
believe that the meetings would have been the same 
without the researchers being there.   
In one company, we transcribed the meetings while they 
were happening. We realize that doing so might have 
influenced our results because the researcher might not 
have captured all of the words. However, if a few words 
were lost in this process, the loss would likely be equal for 
all categories and topics. Therefore, the omissions would 
not affect our results. The length of meetings listed in table 
II (Meeting characteristics) was not affected by these 
potential omissions.    
We studied only eight meetings from the two projects in 
the two companies. These meetings may not have been 
representative. However, by being in the company for a 
long period of time and observing several meetings, we 
believe we were able to pick typical meetings for data 
analysis.  
VII.
 
C
ONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK
 
This paper reported data from a case study with the aim 
of uncovering the categories of communication at daily 
meetings to better understand how team members interact 
at these meetings. Such knowledge is important for 
understanding the role of daily meetings in particular and 
teamwork in software projects in general.  
Most agile software development projects conduct 
daily meetings where each team member must answer 
the 
three Scrum questions
: “What have I done? What will be 
done? What obstacles are in my way?” We therefore 
anticipated that these questions would account for the 
largest proportion of statements at all of the daily 
meetings. However, this proportion comprised only 24% 
of the statements. The largest category was 
problem-
focused communication
, which focuses on understanding 
issues and problems and discussing solutions. This type of 
communication allows many decisions to be taken at the 
meeting. Further, we can understand the decision-making 
process at the daily meeting by using the theory of 
naturalistic decision making, which has implications for 
who is on the team and how a company organizes its 
training.  
Thus, returning to the question: 
how do team members 
interact with each other at daily meetings?
, we found the 
following: 
•
 
The daily meeting mostly centered on 
problem-
focused communication
.  
•
 
Discussing 
obstacles
 and 
what will be done
 triggered 
problem-focused communication
. 
•
 
The team performed a lot of quick decision making 
under time pressure without considering alternatives, 
which can be understood as naturalistic decision 
making. 
•
 
The Scrum master usually asked someone to talk and 
sometimes had to lead back to the topic.  
•
 
The team did not spend much time on coordinating 
tasks.  
 
The implications of these findings are as follows: 
•
 
The team must consist of highly trained experts with 
a shared understanding of tasks and goals. 
•
 
Discussing obstacles and what will be done 
(Questions 2 and 3 in Scrum) seems to be most 
important because it triggers problem-focused 
communication.  
•
 
To strengthen the self-managing agile team, the 
Scrum master should not ask people to speak.   
•
 
The team needs to identify how to document and 
follow up on important decisions. 
 
Our findings are based on only two software projects. 
Future research should analyze the interaction processes in 
other projects. In addition, the efficiency of meetings 
should be measured by interviews and questionnaires. 
More research is required to examine the relationship 
between interaction processes in meetings and long-term 
effects, such as the effects on team performance and 
organizational success.  
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
We appreciate the input received from the investigated 
companies. We are grateful to Professor Dag Sjøberg 
(UiO), who has given us important feedback and support, 
and to the reviewers who gave us valuable feedback. This 
research is supported by the Research Council of Norway 
through TeamIT, grant 193236/I40. 
280 R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
A.C. Bluedorn, D.B. Turban, and M.S. Love, “The Effects of 
Stand-Up and Sit-Down Meeting Formats on Meeting Outcomes,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 277-285, 1999. 
[2]
 
T. Dingsøyr, S. Nerur, V. Balijepally, and N.B. Moe, “A decade of 
agile methodologies: Towards explaining agile software 
development,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 85, no. 6, pp. 
1213-1221, 2012. 
[3]
 
S.M. Elsayed-Elkhouly, H. Lazarus, and V. Forsythe, “Why is a 
third of your time wasted in meetings?,” Journal of Management 
Development, vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 672-676, 1997. 
[4]
 
M. Hoegl and H.G. Gemuenden, “Teamwork Quality and the 
Success of Innovative Projects: A Theoretical Concept and 
Empirical Evidence,” Organization Science, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 
435-449, 2001. 
[5]
 
S. Kauffeld and N. Lehmann-Willenbrock, “Meetings Matter 
Effects of Team Meetings on Team and Organizational Success,” 
Small Group Research, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 130-158, 2012. 
[6]
 
G. Klein, “Naturalistic Decision Making,” Human Factors: The 
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 50, no. 
3, pp. 456-460, 2008. 
[7]
 
R.E. Kraut and L.A. Streeter, “Coordination in software 
development,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 
69-81, 1995. 
[8]
 
R. Lipshitz, G. Klein, J. Orasanu, and E. Salas, “Taking stock of 
naturalistic decision making,” Journal of Behavioral Decision 
Making, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 331-352, 2001. 
[9]
 
A. Luong and S.G. Rogelberg, “Meetings and More Meetings: The 
Relationship Between Meeting Load and the Daily Well-Being of 
Employees,” Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 58-67, 2005. 
[10]
 
O. McHugh, K. Conboy, and M. Lang, “Using Agile Practices to 
Build Trust in an Agile Team: A Case Study,” in Information 
Systems Development, Springer New York, 2011, pp. 503-516. 
[11]
 
P. Meso, M.D. Troutt, and J. Rudnicka, “A review of naturalistic 
decision making research with some implications for knowledge 
management,” Journal of Knowledge Management, vol. 6, no. 1, 
pp. 63-73, 2002. 
[12]
 
L. Myrsiades, “Meeting sabotage: met and conquered,” Journal of 
Management Development, vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 870-885, 2000. 
[13]
 
G.M. Olson, J.S. Olson, M.R. Carter, and M. Storrosten, “Small 
group design meetings: An analysis of collaboration,” Human-
Computer Interaction, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 347-374, 1992. 
[14]
 
M. Pikkarainen, J. Haikara, O. Salo, P. Abrahamsson, and J. Still, 
“The impact of agile practices on communication in software 
development,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 
303-337, 2008. 
[15]
 
L. Pries-Heje and J. Pries-Heje, “Why Scrum Works: A Case 
Study from an Agile Distributed Project in Denmark and India,” in 
AGILE Conference, IEEE, 2011, pp. 20-28. 
[16]
 
L. Rising and N.S. Janoff, “The Scrum software development 
process for small teams,” IEEE Software, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 26-32, 
2000. 
[17]
 
S.G. Rogelberg, D.J. Leach, P.B. Warr, and J.L. Burnfield, “"Not 
Another Meeting!" Are Meeting Time Demands Related to 
Employee Well-Being?,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 91, 
no. 1, pp. 83-96, 2006. 
[18]
 
N.C. Romano Jr and J.F. Nunamaker Jr, “Meeting analysis: 
Findings from research and practice,” in Proceedings of the 34th 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
IEEE, 2001, pp. 13. 
[19]
 
J. Saldaña, The coding manual for qualitative researchers, Sage 
Publications Ltd, 2009. 
[20]
 
B. Schatz and I. Abdelshafi, “Primavera gets agile: A successful 
transition to agile development,” IEEE Software, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 
36-42, 2005. 
[21]
 
K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, Agile Software Development with 
Scrum, Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[22]
 
K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, “The Scrum Guide.” 
http://www.scrum.org/scrumguides/ Scrum Allience, 2011. 
[23]
 
B.M. Staw and F.V. Fox, “Escalation: The determinants of 
commitment to a chosen course of action,” Human Relations, vol. 
30, no. 5, pp. 431, 1977. 
[24]
 
V.G. Stray, N.B. Moe, and T. Dingsøyr, “Challenges to 
Teamwork: A Multiple Case Study of Two Agile Teams,” Agile 
Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming: 
13th International Conference, Springer, 2011, pp. 146-161. 
[25]
 
V.G. Stray, N.B. Moe, and T. Dybå, “Escalation of Commitment: 
A Longitudinal Case Study of Daily Meetings,” Agile Processes in 
Software Engineering and Extreme Programming: 13th 
International Conference, Springer, 2012, pp. 153-167  
[26]
 
H. Takeuchi and I. Nonaka, “The New New Product Development 
Game,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 137-146, 
1986. 
[27]
 
VersionOne, “State of agile survey”. 
http://www.versionone.com/state_of_agile_development_survey/1
1/, 2011. 
[28]
 
G.M. Wittenbaum, A.B. Hollingshead, P.B. Paulus, R.Y. 
Hirokawa, D.G. Ancona, R.S. Peterson, K.A. Jehn, and K. Yoon, 
“The Functional Perspective as a Lens for Understanding Groups,” 
Qualitative Health Research, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 17-43, 2004. 
[29]
 
R.K. Yin, Case Study Research: design and methods, Sage 
Publications, 2003. 
[30]
 
J. Yip, “It's Not Just Standing Up: Patterns of Daily Stand-up 
Meetings.” 
http://www.martinfowler.com/articles/itsNotJustStandingUp.html, 
2011, pp. 1-17. 
[31]
 
F.R.H. Zijlstra, R.A. Roe, A.B. Leonora, and I. Krediet, “Temporal 
factors in mental work: Effects of interrupted activities,” Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 
163-185, 1999. 
 
 
281