 Agile Maturity Self-Assessment Surveys: A Case 
Study 
 
Ozan Ra

it Yürüm  
Department of Information Systems 
Middle East Technical University 
Ankara, Turkey 
oyurum@metu.edu.tr 
 
 
Onur Demirörs  
Department of Information Systems 
Middle East Technical University 
Ankara, Turkey 
School of Computer Science and Engineering 
University of New South Wales 
Sydney, Australia 
demirors@metu.edu.tr 
 
Abstract
ŠAgile software development methodologies have 
been widely adopted by the software industry during the last 
decade. Agility assessment is an approach to measure the success 
of this adoption as well as to satisfy the further demands. In 
response, a number of agile maturity self-assessment surveys 
have been developed. However, software organizations do not 
widely utilize existing self-assessment surveys. In this study we 
aim to identify the existing surveys and evaluate their strengths 
and weaknesses in agility assessment. Firstly, an exploratory case 
study is performed by using one of the surveys in order to 
determine the expected features of an agile maturity self-
assessment survey. Then, a comprehensive case study is 
conducted to measure the sufficiency of the mostly referenced 
agile maturity self-assessment surveys according to the 
determined features. The study results reveal that current 
surveys do not meet the expected features comprehensively.
 
KeywordsŠ agility assessment, agility self-assessment, agility 
surveys, agile maturity self-assessment, agile maturity self-
assessment surveys 
I.
 
INTRODUCTION 
Agile software development methodologies have been 
widely adopted by the software industry as a resolution for the 
problems of the waterfall and process oriented methodologies 
[1], [2]. Organizations have started to use these methodologies 
with the purpose of being responsive to change and quick 
delivery of working products. In order to reach these targets 
and make the most of the methods, organizations needed to 
adopt a set of new practices. Most of the time the degree of this 
adaptation determined the success of the organizations. One 
approach to measure the adaptation degree is to use the agile 
maturity assessment. These assessment methods help 
organizations know where they are and what the improvement 
points are for improving their agility. 
There exist different types of assessment methods for 
measuring agility of organizations. Some methods are based on 
traditional assessment approaches which require expert 
judgement. Others focus on self-assessment methods which 
aim to assess organizations™ agility quickly. 
The existing self-assessment methods are usually based on 
surveys. Some of these surveys were examined in a study 
conducted by Jalali et al.[3]. The study focused on descriptive 
features instead of qualitative properties of a survey. It was 
found that they have different focuses. The study also includes 
a case study on two of them which are Comparative Agility [4] 
and Thoughtworks Agile Assessment survey [5]. It was also 
found that these surveys give incompatible results as a measure 
of agility. Gondamoni and Nafchi have also evaluated these 
two surveys in their study [6]. According to them, these 
surveys have important drawbacks. They stated that while 
Comparative Agility includes practices that we are not sure 
about its suitability for a company, Thoughtworks Agile 
Assessment survey has insufficient number of practices to 
measure the agility. In addition to studies related to agility 
assessment surveys, the tools supporting the application of 
surveys were also examined in a different study [7]. In that 
study, tools were examined in terms of the features related to 
automation.  
 The existing studies provide limited evaluations about the 
surveys. They either focus on descriptive features or 
automation features without examining strengths and 
weaknesses of the surveys thoroughly by disregarding the 
content of surveys. In addition, the studies include outdated 
agile maturity assessment surveys such as Thoughtworks Agile 
Assessment survey [5] and Nokia Test [8]. All of these show 
that there is no up-to-date and comprehensive study that 
examines agility assessment surveys in detail.  
The purpose of our study presented in this paper is to 
identify the strengths and weaknesses of the surveys in agility 
assessment. To achieve this goal we performed an exploratory 
case study by using one of the agility assessment surveys in 
order to determine the expected features of an agility 
assessment survey. Then, we conducted a case study in one 
medium-sized media company with the mostly referenced 
agility assessment surveys to evaluate sufficiency of the 
surveys in terms of the expected features.  
Following the introduction, this paper is organized as 
follows: In section 2, we explain exploratory case study. In 
section 3, we detail the evaluation criteria obtained from 
exploratory case study. In section 4, we describe the case study 
design and conduct. In section 5, we present findings obtained 
2017 43rd Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications978-1-5386-2141-7/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEEDOI 10.1109/SEAA.2017.58392 during the case study in detailed way. Finally, in section 6, we 
provide conclusion and future work. 
II.
 
EXPLORATORY
 
CASE
 
STUDY 
The aim of the exploratory case study is to determine 
evaluation criteria in order to measure the capability of 
existing agility assessment surveys. We aim to find expected 
features of a survey. For exploratory case study, 


 
 
RQ 1: What are the strengths and weaknesses of the survey? 
RQ 2: What are the expected features of an agile maturity self-
assessment survey? 
 
In the following subsections, we explained how we designed 
and conducted the exploratory case study, and then presented 
findings. 
A.
 
Design of the Exploratory Case Study 
In the design of our exploratory case study, we adopted the 
following strategies:  
Survey Selection Strategy:
 We planned to select the survey 
which has the highest number of reference in academic 
publications in order to have a better idea about a commonly 
referenced survey. 
Case Selection Strategy:
 Our strategy was to select an 
organization which we had performed agility assessment based 
on AgilityMod [9] reference model. The reason for this 
selection was to perform the assessment quickly since we were 
able to identify weaknesses and strengths of the organization. 
Data Collection Strategy
: The assessor would take notes 
about the usage of selected survey by considering advantages 
and disadvantages of the survey while performing self-
assessment with the survey.  
Data Analysis Strategy:
 In order to answer the research 
questions, we decided to use content analysis strategy. For 
research question 1, we would collect the findings in categories 
which were weaknesses and strengths. For research question 2, 
we would use all items in both categories in order to determine 
the features that an agile self-assessment survey must have.   
Validation Strategy:
 After performing assessment, we 
planned to present the results to each assessor who had 
performed the assessment in the organization. 
B.
 
Conduct of the Exploratory Case Study 
From limited number of academic publication, 
Comparative Agility [4] is the most common agility 
assessment survey. It is citated in 7 academic papers obtained 
at the end of literature review in well-known databases: IEEE, 
ScienceDirect, Web of Science and SpringerLink. Therefore, 
we decided to use Comparative Agility in assessing the agility 
of the organization to be selected. 
Comparative Agility was developed by Mike Cohn and 
Kenny Rubin in order to compare organizations in terms of 
their agility according to 8 areas. Its aim is to give the agility 
position of an organization by comparing with its competitors. 
We selected an agility assessment performed on IT 
organization that the assessors assessed its agility.  We 
performed the agility assessment in an organization which is a 
solution provider for information and communication 
technologies in local and global market. It is located in Ankara, 
Turkey. A team developing an information system project was 
examined in terms of agility. The project was started one year 
ago and 600KLOC has been developed with PHP Language. 
The project team consists of 4 software developers, 1 test 
engineer, 1 product manager and 3 part-time business analysts. 
The assessment was performed by one of the assessors who 
took active role in the previous assessment. After completing 
assessment, the results were reviewed by another assessor who 
performed the previous assessment based on AgilityMod 
reference model [10]. The person who performs the assessment 
took notes about the advantages and disadvantages of 
Comparative Agility. 
Then, final findings to answer each research question was 
reviewed by an assessor who has at least ten years™ experience 
on process improvement and two years™ experience on agile 
software development methodologies. 
C.
 
Findings of the Exploratory Case Study 
We discuss the findings in two sub-sections: findings 
related to agility of the organization and findings related to 
Comparative Agility. 
1)
 
Findings Related to Agility of the organization 
Table 1 Agility Assessment Results 
 
Area
Teamwork 
Requirements 
Planning 
Technical 
Practices 
Quality 
Culture 
Knowledge-
Creating 
Outcomes 
Question
1
+0.86+0.11-1.83 +0.82 +0.15 +0.02+0.06-2.68
2
+0.94+1.40+0.94 -1.01 +1.39 +0.29-0.18-2.77
3
+0.60+0.22+0.83 -1.49 +1.11 -1.44+0.19+1.25
4
+0.72-0.13-0.05 +0.36 -1.83 -0.81+1.27
5
-0.16-1.62-1.64 +0.50 +0.20 +0.82+1.14
6
+0.98+0.97+1.08 +0.89 +1.06 +1.24
7
+1.15+1.00+0.54 +0.33 +0.89 
8
-0.91 +0.29 -2.15  
9
+0.51+0.27 -1.54  
10
-0.08+0.31   
11
+0.34+0.19   
12
-1.09-2.27   
13
-0.04+0.91   
14
+0.76
   
Average
+0.30+0.28-0.02 -0.34 +0.37 -0.25+0.02+0.08
393 The results obtained after assessment with Comparative Agility 
are shown in terms of standard deviation of item and area. 
They were automatically deduced from the analysis of 18757 
assessment results in database of the survey. From 8 areas, 5 of 
them are above average while 3 of them are below average. 
2)
 
Findings Related to Comparative Agility 
Comparative Agility is a five-point likert type survey. That 
is, each question can be answered by choosing one option from 
five options or one option ﬁNot Applicableﬂ. The assessment 
shows the remaining questions in term of percentage and the 
remaining time over 15 minutes in the survey. 
Assessment results show the standard deviation for each 
dimension and each question based on the answer of all 
organizations in the database. The deficient points which have 
negative standard deviation can be seen from the results. That 
is, an organization can identify improvement opportunities in a 
certain area in comparison to a benchmark set. However, there 
is no improvement suggestion about how to enhance their 
implementation in the organization. 
The results are shown with the number of standard 
deviation and explain what they mean. Moreover, there are 
scoring values in terms of standard deviation for each 
dimension and question. However, there is no general scoring 
value or agility level obtained with analysis of the assessment 
results for the organization. 
The questions are short enough to read and answer. 
However, there are some questions that can be considered as 
subjective. For example, the answer for the question ﬁThe team 
is more productive than beforeﬂ may be different according to 
team member who performs the assessment.  
The survey can be answered based on all types of agile 
methods since it focuses on generic agile methods rather than 
one specific agile method. It is suitable to be used by a single 
team member and does not allow multiple users to perform 
self-assessment. All of these findings obtained during 
assessment are listed as strengths and weaknesses of the 
survey. These findings answer our first research question in the 
case study. 
The strengths of the survey are listed below: 
•
 
Inclusion of eight areas consisting of diverse agile 
practices  
•
 
Performing assessment easily with 5 point likert scale  
•
 
Observability of improvement areas from assessment 
results 
•
 
Good explanation of scoring  
•
 
Scoring of each area of organization  
•
 
Asking one thing at a time  
•
 
Having short questions 
•
 
Being suitable for different agile software development 
methodologies 
 
The weaknesses of the survey are listed below: 
•
 
Not having improvement suggestions 
•
 
Not indicating general agility of organization 
•
 
Having subjective questions which cannot be measured  
•
 
Not allowing multiple team members to perform the 
assessment 
 
These items related with strengths and weaknesses of the 
survey are categorized by getting inspiration from the criteria 
in a study
 
[11] about the comparison of agility assessment 
models. These categorization answers our second research 
question in the exploratory case study. At the end of analysis, 
following 7 features are determined for an agile maturity self-
assessment survey to have. 
Table 2 Expected Features of an Agile Maturity Self-
Assessment Survey 
Feature Item 
Comprehensiveness - Inclusion of eight areas consisting of many 
practices 
Fitness for purpose-Performing assessment easily with 5 point 
likert type 
-Observing improvement areas from 
assessment results 
-Not having improvement suggestions 
Discriminativeness -Having meaning and explanation of scoring 
-Scoring of each area of organization 
-Not indicating general agility of 
organization 
Objectivity -Having some subjective questions which 
cannot be measured 
Conciseness -Asking one thing at a time 
-Having short questions 
Generalizability -Being suitable for each kind of agile 
software development methodology 
Suitability for 
multiple assessment 
-Not allowing multiple team members to 
perform assessments 
III.
 
EVALUATION
 
CRITERIA 
In this section, we detailed each feature that we had obtained 
at the end of the exploratory case study. 
A.
 
Comprehensiveness 
A self-assessment survey must include all agile practices. 
Therefore, we check whether a survey includes the practices in 
AgilityMod since it is the newest and the most comprehensive 
agility reference model [9]. Other than AgilityMod, there are 
some agility reference models [12]Œ[16]. However, according 
to Leppanen, other models are in beginner level [17]. In 
addition, other models do not meet completely the expected 
features such as scope, definition of agile levels, objectivity 
and completeness [11]. AgilityMod has been developed to be 
coherent with agile values and principles, based on the meta-
model of ISO/IEC 15504 [18] process assessment model. It 
includes 34 agile practices that an agile organization has to 
have. Therefore, each question or item in a survey is matched 
with the most suitable practice in AgilityMod. We rated this 
criterion based on surveys™ coverage of these 34 agile practices 
using following rating scale: 
•
 
Not Achieved: 0-5 agile practices are covered. 
•
 
Partially Achieved: 6-17 agile practices are covered. 
•
 
Largely Achieved: 18-29 agile practices are covered. 
•
 
Fully Achieved: 30-34 agile practices are covered. 
394 B.
 
Fitness for Purpose 
A self-assessment survey must be developed with the purpose 
of assessing team™s or organization™s agility and assisting 
organizations in software process improvement. Therefore, 
assessment must include questions or items that can be 
evaluated or checked. In addition, results must include 
deficiencies and improvement suggestions that guide the 
organizations on how to become more agile. Therefore, we 
consider following 3 criteria while performing the case study. 
 
1-
 
Questions or items can be marked with a tick or a circle.  
2-
 
Assessment results include deficiencies in detailed way. 
3-
 
Assessment results include detailed improvement 
suggestions. 
We shaped following rating scale according to these 3 sub-
criteria: 
•
 
Not Achieved: None of them is provided. 
•
 
Partially Achieved: Only one of them is provided. 
•
 
Largely Achieved: Two of them are provided. 
•
 
Fully Achieved: All of them are provided. 
C.
 
Discriminativeness 
A team or an organization must be able to make distinction 
between poor and good agility.  Therefore, they must be able 
to determine their levels of agility and assign a descriptive 
label or number to their agility. Therefore, an agile maturity 
self- assessment survey must meet following 3 criteria.  
 
1-
 
Assessment results include the meaning and explanation 
of scoring. 
2-
 
Assessment results include agility level of organization. 
3-
 
Assessment results include scoring of each area of 
organization. 
We shaped following rating scale according to these 3 sub-
criteria: 
•
 
Not Achieved: None of them is provided. 
•
 
Partially Achieved: Only one of them is provided. 
•
 
Largely Achieved: Two of them are provided. 
•
 
Fully Achieved: All of them are provided. 
D.
 
Objectivity 
At the end of a self-assessment, verifiable results must be 
produced. The judgment of the assessor must be at a minimum 
level. Therefore, each question must carry same meaning for 
everyone and must be measurable. We evaluated each 
question one by one to determine whether related question is 
measurable or not. Then, we determined the objectivity for 
each practice using four-point scale according to distribution 
of measurable questions in each practice.  Finally, we rated a 
self-assessment survey based on ratings of practices using 
following rating scale: 
•
 
Not Achieved: 0%-15% of practices are rated as 
ﬁFullyﬂ or ﬁLargelyﬂ. 
•
 
Partially Achieved: 16%-50% of practices are rated 
as ﬁFullyﬂ or ﬁLargelyﬂ. 
•
 
Largely Achieved: 51%-85% of practices are rated as 
ﬁFullyﬂ or ﬁLargelyﬂ. 
•
 
Fully Achieved: 85%-100% of practices are rated as 
ﬁFullyﬂ or ﬁLargelyﬂ. 
E.
 
Conciseness 
Each question in a survey must be short and ask only one 
thing. Therefore, we evaluated each question one by one to 
determine whether related question is clear or not. The 
questions that ask more than one thing or are long to read are 
determined as ﬁnot concisenessﬂ. Then, we determined the 
conciseness for each practice using four-point scale according 
t
o distribution of concise questions in each practice.  Finally, 
w
e rated a self-assessment survey based on ratings of practices 
using the same rating scale in determining objectivity. 
F.
 
Generalizability 
A self-assessment survey must be usable for all kinds of agile 
methods. Therefore, it must be developed with the purpose of 
assessing generic agile methods, not only one or two specific 
agile methods. The rating for generalizability is performed 
according to following rating scale: 
•
 
Not Achieved: No agile method is addressed 
•
 
Partially Achieved: Only one agile method is 
addressed. 
•
 
Largely Achieved: More than one agile method are 
addressed. 
•
 
Fully Achieved: Generic agile methods are 
addressed. 
G.
 
Suitability for Multiple Assessment 
In order to get more accurate results, assessment must be 
performed by different team members. Therefore, a self-
assessment survey must be developed to be suitable with 
multiple assessments. In order to prevent subjectivity, a self-
assessment survey must support multiple assessments by 
enabling team members fill surveys individually and 
analyzing results based on assessment of all team members. 
•
 
Not Achieved: Only single team member can fill 
survey 
•
 
Partially Achieved: More than one team member can 
fill survey and there is no analysis. 
•
 
Largely Achieved:  More than one team member can 
fill survey and it includes overall analysis. 
•
 
Fully Achieved: More than one team member can fill 
survey and it includes in depth analysis. 
395 IV.
 
THE
 
CASE
 
STUDY 
In this section, we explained how we designed and 
conducted the case study in order to answer following research 
questions. 
RQ 1: To what extent do surveys cover the features that are 
identified in the exploratory study? 
RQ 1.1: Do the surveys meet agile practices in 
AgilityMod? 
RQ 1.2: Are the surveys fit for purpose? 
RQ 1.3: Are the surveys discriminative enough to 
determine the agility? 
RQ 1.4: Do the surveys have objective questions? 
RQ 1.5: Do the surveys have concise questions? 
RQ 1.6: Can the survey be used for all kinds of agile 
methods? 
RQ 1.7: Are the surveys suitable for multiple assessment? 
A.
 
Design of the Case Study 
In the design of our case study, we adopted the following 
strategies:  
Survey Selection Strategy:
 We planned to make a literature 
review in order to determine agile maturity self-assessment 
surveys which are published as scientific papers. We also used 
search engines to determine commercial agility assessment 
surveys. The criterion for selection from those identified 
surveys is the availability and popularity of agile maturity self-
assessment surveys.  
Case Selection Strategy:
 Our strategy was to select an 
organization having assessment results about their agility 
assessment. Therefore, we planned to perform assessment on 
an organization that assessors had already assessed their 
agility. The reason of choosing such an organization was that 
we were smoothly able to reach evidences about weaknesses 
and strengths of the organization related to its agility. 
Therefore, an organization which had already assessed by 
professional assessors according to AgilityMod reference 
model would be selected. In addition, we planned to select a 
different organization from the organization in our previous 
exploratory case study. 
Data Collection Strategy:
 In order to collect data, we 
decided to use a spreadsheet consisting of aspects and practices 
of AgilityMod, a form consisting of 7 expected features and 
assessment reports. The assessor having experience on agility 
assessment based on AgilityMod reference model was 
expected to match each question or practices with the practices 
in AgilityMod and fill the form during the assessment. At the 
end of the assessment, the assessment report is obtained about 
the agility of the organization. We also planned to examine this 
assessment report in terms of expected features. 
Data Analysis Strategy:
 Our plan was firstly to write 
number of questions for each practice after finishing the 
assessment. Then, we aimed to calculate number of covered 
practices according to existence or absence of a question for 
each practice in order to determine comprehensiveness.  
In order to find the objectivity and conciseness, we 
concentrated to examine each question or item one by one in 
terms of objectivity and conciseness. Then, we would 
determine the objectivity and conciseness of the survey 
according to number of ﬁLargely Achievedﬂ, and ﬁFully 
Achievedﬂ questions. 
In order to find sufficiency of other features, we decided to 
develop a case description for each case. We would evaluate 
the case description and form including seven features with 
content analysis. That is, we would match the findings with the 
criteria, and then rate each criterion for a survey according to 4 
point scale mentioned in evaluation criteria section. 
 
Validation Strategy:
 After performing assessment with each 
survey, we planned to prepare assessment reports and discuss 
the results with an expert of both process improvement and 
agile software development methodologies. 
B.
 
Conduct of the Case Study 
According to literature review, 8 available self-assessment 
surveys were determined as the mostly referenced surveys.  
The following table shows the most popular surveys: 
Table 3 List of Agile Maturity Self-Assessment Surveys 
 
Name Survey 
Owner 
Type Number 
of 
Questions/
Items 
42-Point Test [19] Kelly Waters Yes/No 42 
Agile Karlskrona 
Test [20] 
Mark Seuffert Multiple 
Choice 
11 
Agility Questionnaire 
[21] 
Marcel 
Britsch 
6 point 
likert scale 
60 
Borland Agile 
Assessment [22] 
Borland 7 point 
likert scale 
12 
Comparative Agility 
[4] 
Mike Cohn 
and Kenny 
Rubin 
5 point 
likert scale 
65 
Depth of Kanban [23] Christophe 
Achouiantz 
5 point 
likert scale 
69 
Scrum Master 
Checklist [24] 
Michael 
James 
5 point 
likert scale 
42 
Scrum Self 
Assessment [25] 
Cape Project 
Management 
Yes/No 60 
 
 After that, we decided to perform the case study with an 
available organization that professional assessors had already 
performed assessment so that we could reach assessment 
results. From the organizations, we selected the organization 
which we have the most knowledge and resources about. As a 
result, we owned detailed assessment results with in-depth 
analysis about the agility of an organization. 
The organization is one of the leading media companies in 
Turkey with its 17 million unique visitors on its various 
internet platforms. An ongoing online video platform project 
including 9 software developers, 2 graphical user interface 
designers, 2 business intelligence analysts, 1 tester and 8 
content providers was assessed according to AgilityMod 
reference model. The evidences were collected from two 
project managers, a software team leader and a graphical user 
interface designer via interviews. The assessment results based 
396 on AgilityMod reference model showed that exploration and 
construction aspects of the organization were in first levels 
while its transition and management aspects were not 
implemented.  
During this study, agility assessment was performed again 
with each available agility assessment survey in the light of 
assessment results and the evidences collected from 
organization. Since we reached 8 agility assessment surveys, 
we performed 8 different assessments with the same 
organization in different times.  
As mentioned in data collection part, we took notes in a 
form according to seven evaluation criteria and examined each 
question to match them with the practices in AgilityMod. After 
finishing the assessment, we obtained an assessment result 
based on related survey if the survey supports to generate 
assessment result.  
We analyzed the forms, the spreadsheets, the assessment 
results, and case descriptions as mentioned in data analysis part 
in case study design section. Then, we rated each agility 
assessment surveys using the same rating approach [26] 
defined in ISO/IEC 15504 in terms of each evaluation criteria 
based on the definitions mentioned in evaluation criteria 
section.  
After rating assessment, the results were presented to an 
information expert who has at least 10 years™ experience on 
process assessment and 2 years™ experience on agile software 
development. 
C.
 
Validity Treats 
 The survey-based assessments were performed by one of 
the authors of this paper. He has assessment experience based 
on AgilityMod [9], CMMI [27] and ISO/IEC 15504 [18] since 
2014. However, he had not taken active role on the previous 
assessment process of the selected case based on AgilityMod 
reference model. Therefore, there was a possibility to assess 
agility of the case incorrectly. In order to avoid this possibility, 
he examined the expert-based case study results and evidences 
in detailed way before starting case study with each agile 
maturity survey. Since he has enough experience on agility 
assessment process, it was easy to understand and adopt the 
expert-based case study results. In addition, after performing 
survey-based assessments, the results were discussed with an 
expert of both process improvement and agile software 
development methodologies in order to eliminate any bias of 
the assessor. This increased the internal validity. Furthermore, 
external validity is very important in order to generalize the 
results. Therefore, sampling carries vital importance to 
represent all agile maturity self-assessment surveys. Thus, we 
selected agile maturity assessment surveys as many as possible 
since our aim is to evaluate the capability of the surveys. In 
terms of construct validity which refers to the degree of 
measuring what is expected to measure, we selected an 
organization having enough number of indicators for agility 
assessment so that we can increase the degree of measuring 
capability of the surveys. 
V.
 
RESULTS 
The following table shows the assessment results obtained 
at the end of the case study for each agile maturity self-
assessment survey according to determined features. 
Table 4 Case Study Results 
 
Survey / Criteria 
Comprehensiveness 
Fitness for Purpose 
Discriminativeness 
Objectivity 
Conciseness 
Generalizability 
Suitability for Multiple 
Assessment 
42-Point Test [19] PA PA PA FALAFALA 
Agile Karlskrona Test [20] PA PA LA FAFAFANA 
Agility Questionnaire [21] PA PA LA LALAFANA 
Borland [22] PA PA NA PALAFANA 
Comparative Agility [4] LA LA LA LAFAFANA 
Depth of Kanban [23] PA LA FA FAFAPANA 
Scrum Master Checklist [24]PA PA NA LAPAPANA 
Scrum Self Assessment [25]LA PA LA FAFAPANA 
 
Comprehensiveness:
 Assessment results show that there is 
no fully achieved survey in terms of comprehensiveness. In 
other words, they do not focus on all agility aspects 
sufficiently. Many of them concentrate on mostly management 
aspect. In addition, the surveys generally focus on specific 
aspect attributes such as iterative and learning whereas they 
disregard the attributes related with simplicity and technically 
excellence. There are only 2 surveys meeting largely the 
practices in AgilityMod. These surveys are Comparative 
Agility and Scrum Self Assessment, While Comparative 
Agility includes likert type questions, Scrum Self Assessment 
includes true/false questions. The common properties of both 
surveys are that they include sufficient number of questions for 
more practices when compared to others. 
  
Fitness for Purpose:
 Even though the surveys claim that 
they are developed with the aim of assessing agility of a team 
or an organization, there is no survey which meets fully the 
feature ﬁfitness for purposeﬂ. They do not generate assessment 
results that include the missing points and improvements 
suggestions. The purpose of the assessment is to guide the 
organization on continuous improvement as well as identifying 
problems. Almost all of the surveys focus to identify problems 
only. Therefore, many of the surveys are partly suitable for 
assessment purpose. There are only 2 surveys which largely 
achieves fitness for purpose. These are Comparative Agility, 
and Depth of Kanban. Both surveys do not include any 
improvement suggestion to increase the agility level of the 
organization. The common positive property of these two 
surveys is to support reporting of assessment. 
 
397 Discriminativeness:
 Assessment results show that only one 
of the surveys provides discriminativeness fully. This survey is 
Depth of Kanban. In the survey, there are defined agility levels 
that show the agility degree of an organization based on the 
specific scoring range. It includes four agility levels. These 
levels are ﬁNecessary for Sustainable Improvementsﬂ, 
ﬁImproving Sustainablyﬂ, ﬁExcellenceﬂ and ﬁLeanﬂ. All of 
these are indicated with colors in radar chart. In addition, the 
survey results include areas or features that give more specific 
results about the agility of the organization. In Depth of 
Kanban, these are related to 7 properties of Kanban: Visualize 
Effects, Improve, Feedback Loops, Explicit Policies, Manage 
Flow and Limit WIP. There are also some practices to increase 
the agility in the survey. Apart from this survey, half of the 
surveys are largely discriminative. Comparative Agility, Agile 
Karlskrona Test, Scrum Self Assessment, and Agility 
Questionnaire are largely achieved surveys in terms of 
discriminativeness. They do not include either agility level for 
the organization or scoring for areas/aspects of agility. The 
remaining are either partially achieved or not achieved. The 
general reason of not meeting discriminativeness fully is the 
missing comprehensive assessment methods in the surveys. 
Objectivity:
 Half of the surveys include measurable 
questions that lead to objectivity: 42-Point Test, Agile 
Karlskrona Test, Depth of Kanban, and Scrum Self 
Assessment. The scaling type of most of these surveys is true-
false. They are generally either checklists or marked as true or 
false. Only Agile Karlskrona Test has multiple-choice 
questions. From other surveys, Comparative Agility, Scrum 
Master Checklist, and Agility Questionnaire are largely 
achieved in terms of objectivity. They include questions related 
to especially productivity and efficiency such as ﬁthe team is 
more productiveﬂ or ﬁthe team produces higher quality 
productsﬂ. Only Scrum Master Checklist is partially objective. 
It includes the words leading to subjective answers such as 
ﬁgoodﬂ, ﬁbetterﬂ, and ﬁwellﬂ.  
Conciseness:
 There are 4 surveys that meet conciseness 
fully. These surveys are Comparative Agility, Agile Karlskrona 
Test, Depth of Kanban, and Scrum Self Assessment. They are 
asking one-question at a time. In addition, the lengths of the 
questions are short enough to answer. While 42-Point Test, 
Borland, and Agility Questionnaire are largely achieved in 
terms of conciseness, Scrum Master Checklist is partially 
achieved. These surveys include questions that connect two 
different things. An example from 42-Point Test is the item 
ﬁSoftware is tested and working at the end of each 
sprint/iteration.ﬂ Testing software and delivering working 
software are two different things that need to be considered 
separately. General property of them is that two different 
concepts are connected to each other with a conjunction such 
as and, but etc.  
Generalizability:
 Most of the surveys focus on generic 
methods rather than focusing on one specific method. From the 
surveys, three of them focus on only one agile software 
development method. These surveys are Depth of Kanban, 
Scrum Master Checklist and Scrum Self Assessment. That is, 
they are not generalizable to all agile software development 
methodologies. 2 of them which are Scrum Master Checklist, 
and Scrum Self Assessment are based on Scrum while Depth 
of Kanban is based on Kanban. In other words, these surveys 
are developed to be compatible with only one specific agile 
software development method. They are partially applicable to 
other methods since all agile software development 
methodologies share same principles. Apart from these three 
surveys, it is suitable to use other surveys in each kind of agile 
methodologies to assess organization™s or team™s agility. 
 
Suitability for Multiple Assessment:
 None of the surveys 
meets expectations fully for multiple assessment. Only one of 
the surveys is largely suitable for multiple assessment. The 
largely achieved survey is 42-Point Test. Even if the survey is 
text-based, it can be used for multiple assessment. In the 
explanation of 42-Point Test, it can be seen that it allows each 
team member of an agile team to fill the survey. In addition, it 
gives superficial information about the analysis. However, it is 
not possible to get detailed analysis from the survey. Other 
surveys do not support multiple assessment. They are only 
suitable for single agility assessment. In other words, no more 
than one team member can perform self-assessment with these 
surveys. 
VI.
 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, 8 widely available, most frequently 
referenced agile maturity assessment surveys are examined by 
means of a case study in terms of seven criteria determined at 
the end of an exploratory case study. These criteria are 
Comprehensiveness, Fitness for Purpose, Discriminativeness, 
Objectivity, Conciseness, Generalizability, and Suitability for 
Multiple Assessment. The case study results show that none of 
the agile maturity self-assessment surveys has fully satisfied 
the expected features. Especially, there is no survey meeting 
the expectations fully in terms of comprehensiveness, fitness 
for purpose and suitability for multiple assessment. There is 
only one survey which is suitable largely for multiple 
assessment. In addition, two surveys are largely comprehensive 
whereas two surveys are largely fit for the purpose. Only one 
of them (Comparative Agility) meets largely both features. 
Furthermore, the most disregarded feature is the suitability for 
multiple assessment where seven of the eight surveys do not 
have this feature while the most motivated feature is 
generalizability where five surveys had fully achieved scores. 
From the 8 surveys, Comparative Agility had 6 features 
which are largely or fully achieved. However, it also has 
significant improvement opportunities. It meets only two 
features which are conciseness and generalizability completely. 
The survey is largely comprehensive, fit for the purpose, 
discriminative, and objective. It requires increasing number of 
covered practices, a way to suggest practices for improvement, 
and having agility level definitions and more measurable 
questions. In addition, it is only suitable for single assessment. 
Therefore, it will be more helpful if it is used by an expert 
assessor.  
Other than Comparative Agility, many surveys focus on 4 
features even if these features are not fully achieved. These 
surveys are 42-Point Test, Agile Karlskrona Test, Depth of 
Kanban, Scrum Self Assessment, and Agility Questionnaire. 
When all surveys are examined, it is seen that almost all of 
them have at least one fully achieved feature. Therefore, all of 
398 the surveys are helpful in some degree based on the purpose of 
usage. 
 
As a further research, we are planning to widen the case 
study to all available agile maturity self-assessment surveys. 
Although not frequently referenced there are currently a 
number of surveys such as SAFe Team Self-Assessment [28], 
Scrum Checklist [29] and Agile Assessment [30] uncovered by 
this study.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by Scientific and Technological 
Research Council of Turkey (TÜB

TAK), grant number 
113E528.
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Aysolmaz and O. Demirörs, ﬁA Detailed Software Process 
Improvement Methodology: BG-SPI,ﬂ 
Commun. Comput. Inf. Sci.
, 
vol. 172, pp. 97Œ108, 2011. 
[2] A. Uskarc

 and O. Demirörs, ﬁDo staged maturity models result in 
organization-wide continuous process improvement? Insight from 
employees,ﬂ 
Comput. Stand. Interfaces
, vol. 52, no. March 2016, 
pp. 25Œ40, 2017. 
[3] S. Jalali, C. Wohlin, and L. Angelis, ﬁInvestigating the applicability 
of Agility assessment surveys: A case study,ﬂ 
J. Syst. Softw.
, vol. 
98, pp. 172Œ190, 2014. 
[4] M. Cohn and K. Rubin, ﬁComparative Agility,ﬂ 2008. [Online]. 
Available: https://comparativeagility.com/. 
[5] Thoughtworks, ﬁAgile Assessment,ﬂ 2010. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.agileassessments.com. 
[6] T. J. Gandomani and M. Z. Nafchi, ﬁAgility assessment model to 
measure Agility degree of Agile software companies,ﬂ 
Indian J. Sci. 
Technol.
, vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 955Œ959, 2014. 
[7] O. E. Adal

, Ö. Ö. Top, and O. Demirörs, ﬁEvaluation Of Agility 
Assessment Tools: A Multiple Case Study,ﬂ in 
16th International 
Conference, SPICE
, 2016. 
[8] J. Sutherland, ﬁScrumButt Test aka the Nokia Test,ﬂ 2009. [Online]. 
Available: http://jeffsutherland.com/ScrumButtTest.pdf. 
[9] Ö. Ö. Top and O. Demirörs, ﬁA Reference Model for Software 
Agility Assessment: AgilityMod,ﬂ in 
15th International Conference, 
SPICE
, 2015, pp. 145Œ158. 
[10] Ö. Ö. Top and O. Demirörs, ﬁAgilityMOD

: Software Agility 
Assessment Reference Model v3 . 0 Application

: Case Study 
Results,ﬂ Technical Report METU/II-TR-2014-40. Informatics 
Institute, Middle East Technical Universit, 2014. 
[11] Ö. Ö. Top and O. Demirörs, ﬁAssessment of Agile Maturity 
Models: A Multiple Case Study,ﬂ in 
13th International Conference, 
SPICE
, 2013. 
[12] C. Patel and M. Ramachandran, ﬁAgile Maturity Model ( AMM ): A 
Software Process Improvement framework for Agile Software 
Development Practices,ﬂ 
International Journal of Software 
Engineering
, vol. 2, no. I, pp. 3Œ28, 2009. 
[13] R. Benefield, ﬁSeven Dimensions of Agile Maturity in the Global 
Enterprise: A Case Study,ﬂ in 
System Sciences (HICSS), 2010 43rd 
Hawaii International Conference
, 2010, pp. 1Œ7. 
[14] J. Nawrocki, B. Walter, and A. Wojciechowski, ﬁToward maturity 
model for eXtreme programming,ﬂ in 
Proceedings 27th 
EUROMICRO Conference. 2001: A Net Odyssey
, 2001, pp. 233Œ
239. 
[15] A. P. G. Yin, ﬁScrum Maturity Model,ﬂ Technical University of 
Lisbon, 2011. 
[16] J. Packlick, ﬁThe Agile Maturity Map A Goal Oriented Approach to 
Agile Improvement,ﬂ 
Proc. - Agil. 2007
, pp. 266Œ271, 2007. 
[17] M. Leppanen, ﬁA Comparative Analysis of Agile Maturity Models,ﬂ 
in 
Information Systems Development: Reflections, Challenges and 
New Directions
, vol. 1, Springer New York, 2013, pp. 329Œ343. 
[18] ISO/IEC, ﬁISO 15504-5 Information Technology - Process 
Assessment - Part 5: An exemplar Process Assessment Model,ﬂ 
2006. 
[19] K. Waters, ﬁHow Agile Are You? (Take This 42 Point Test),ﬂ 2008. 
[20] Marberg Consulting, ﬁKarlskrona Test Online,ﬂ 2008. [Online]. 
Available: http://mayberg.se/learning/karlskrona-test-online. 
[21] M. Britsch, ﬁAssessing your Client™s Agility - An Agility 
Questionnaire,ﬂ 2014. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.thedigitalbusinessanalyst.co.uk/2014/07/Agile-
Questionnaire.html. 
[22] Borland, ﬁBorland Agile Assessment 2009,ﬂ 2009. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://borland.typepad.com/agile_transformation/2009/03/borland-
agile-assessment-2009.html. 
[23] C. Achouiantz, ﬁDepth of Kanban - A Good Coaching Tool,ﬂ 2013. 
[Online]. Available: 
http://leanagileprojects.blogspot.com.tr/2013/03/depth-of-kanban-
good-coaching-tool.html. 
[24] M. James, ﬁAn Example Checklist for ScrumMasters,ﬂ 2007. 
[Online]. Available: 
http://scrummasterchecklist.org/pdf/ScrumMaster_Checklist_12_un
branded.pdf. 
[25] I. Cape Project Management, ﬁScrum Self Assessment,ﬂ 2015. 
[Online]. Available: 
ht
tp:
//www.agileprojectmanagementtraining.com/Agile-Self-
Assessment/quiz.html. 
[26] ISO/IEC, ﬁISO 15504-2 Information Technology - Process 
Assessment - Part 2: Performing an Assessment,ﬂ 2003. 
[27] CMMI Product Team, ﬁCMMI® for Development, Version 1.3 
CMMI-DEV, V1.3,ﬂ 
Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie 
Mellon University
, no. November, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 2010. 
[28] Scaled Agile, ﬁTeam Self-Assessment - Scaled Agile Framework,ﬂ 
2008. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.scaledagileframework.com/?wpdmact=process&did=Nj
EuaG90bGluaw==. 
[29] Henrik Kniberg, ﬁThe Unofficial Scrum Checklist,ﬂ 2010. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.crisp.se/wp-
content/uploads/2012/05/Scrum-checklist.pdf. 
[30] P. Nowinski, ﬁAgile Assessment,ﬂ 2016. [Online]. Available: 
https://nowinskipiotr.wordpress.com/2016/04/29/agile-assessment/. 
    
 
399