 Information systems control alignment:
 Complementary andconﬂicting
 systems
 development controlsW. Alec Crama,*, M. Kathryn Brohmanb, Yolande E. Chanb, R. Brent GallupebaBentley University, Waltham, MA, United StatesbQueen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada1. IntroductionOrganizations continue to struggle with ineffective informationsystems (IS) processes, as demonstrated by ongoing IS securitybreaches [8,32], underperforming IS development efforts [1,26],and inconsistent service from third-party providers [2,15,40]. Inresponse, managers conﬁgure collections of IS controls thatattempt to balance these concerns alongside efforts to achieveproﬁtability and efﬁciency targets. However, the problem is thatmanagers responsible for overseeing IS processes typically struggleto effectively design, implement, monitor, and adjust controls thatare not performing as intended and not meeting organizationalobjectives [18,39,43,48]. We suggest that a possible explanationfor declining IS process performance is a misalignment among fourfundamental dimensions of control: the control environment (e.g.,the structural, strategic and cultural factors that inﬂuence a choiceof control), control mechanisms (e.g., the core characteristics of apolicy or procedure), socio-emotional behaviors (e.g., the responsethat employees have to control mechanisms), and controlexecution (e.g., the effectiveness and subsequent adjustmentsthat employees make to controls over time; [9,11–13,59]).The purpose of this paper is to examine the new concept of IScontrol alignment, which refers to the degree to which the controlenvironment, control mechanisms, socio-emotional
 behaviors,and control execution are mutually complementary within an ISprocess. In this context, we deﬁne a process as ‘‘a collection ofpractices inﬂuenced by the enterprise’s policies and proceduresthat takes inputs from a number of sources, manipulates the inputsand produces outputs’’ ([27], p. 19). We suggest that conﬂictamong any of these four control dimensions could result in stafffrustration, unnecessary bureaucracy, and/or a lack of organiza-tional agility. We pose the following research question: how do theunderlying characteristics of IS control dimensions complementand/or conﬂict with one another? This exploratory study employsa qualitative approach using in-depth case studies of the ISdevelopment process at three organizations to investigate howcontrols are conﬁgured and to what extent elements of the controldimensions are found to align/complement or misalign/conﬂictwith one another. We compare our results across the case studiesto identify patterns that correspond with conﬂicting, as well ascomplementary,
 control dimensions. Based on these observations,we propose two optimal patterns of IS control that the empiricaldata suggest are highly complementary.
 One pattern, correspond-ing to traditional characteristics, advocates for the integration ofa conventional control environment with preventive controlsthat leverage individual-oriented employee behaviors and a stablecontrol structure. A second pattern, which corresponds to agilecharacteristics, ﬁnds a high degree of complementarity between aInformation & Management 53 (2016) 183–196A R T I C L E I N F OArticle history:Received 23 March 2015Received in revised form 19 September 2015Accepted 30 September 2015Available online 22 October 2015Keywords:ControlAlignmentInformation systemsIS processSystems developmentA B S T R A C TThis study
 presents
 a new concept called
 information
 systems control
 alignment,
 which examines
 thedegree
 that the
 underlying
 characteristics
 of four main information systems
 (IS) control
 dimensions
 aremutually
 complementary.
 Using three
 case studies,
 our research
 uncovers
 two high-functioning
 controlpatterns
 – one with traditional
 characteristics
 and one with agile characteristics
 – that demonstrate
positive
 alignment
 among
 the
 control environment,
 control mechanisms,
 socio-emotional
 behaviors,
and execution
 of controls. By better understanding
 the circumstances
 that
 contribute
 to control
 conﬂicts,
organizations
 can be increasingly
 mindful of cultivating
 a complementary
 relationship
 among thecontrol dimensions
 when
 designing,
 implementing,
 monitoring
 and adjusting
 controls
 within
 ISprocesses.
 2015 Elsevier
 B.V.
 All rights
 reserved.
*Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: wcram@bentley.edu (W. Alec Cram),kbrohman@business.queensu.ca (M. Kathryn Brohman),ychan@business.queensu.ca (Y.E. Chan), bgallupe@business.queensu.ca(R. Brent Gallupe).Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information & Managementjo u rn al h om ep ag e: ww w.els evier.c o m/lo c ate/imhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2015.09.012
0378-7206/ 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. rapidly advancing control environment, detective control mecha-nisms, team-based employee behaviors, and an evolutionarycontrol structure. Our ﬁndings suggest that IS processes followingeither one of these complementary patterns will generate positiveperformance beneﬁts, whereas other patterns of control can lead toconﬂicts and declining performance.Consider the example of an established ﬁnancial institutionwith a well-run, traditional systems development process thatremains relatively unchanged over time and employs experiencedstaff members with expertise in waterfall development methods. Ifcompany managers decide to abandon their current developmentapproach for a set of procedures that adopts a highly iterative, agilephilosophy, IS control alignment would suggest that these newcontrol mechanisms would be at odds with the control environ-ment (i.e., a bureaucratic, highly regulated organization), socio-emotional behaviors (i.e., staff have comfort and familiarity withthe previous control mechanisms but not the new ones), andcontrol execution (i.e., a systems infrastructure that has little needfor rapid, ongoing adjustments). Refer to Appendices A and B foradditional scenarios that illustrate organizational examples ofstrong and weak IS control alignment and control systems.Existing research models provide important guidance in theselection of control mechanisms, including concepts such as aportfolio of control modes [34], control ambidexterity [58], andcontrol balancing [23]. Although each of these concepts provides avaluable approach to addressing IS control problems, nonesimultaneously considers all four of the fundamental controldimensions: the compatibility of control mechanisms with thecontrol environment, socio-emotional behaviors, and controlexecution. By introducing the concept of IS control alignment,the contribution of this study is to establish a holistic and inclusiveapproach that recognizes the inter-relatedness of IS controldimensions to address issues arising within IS processes, whileremaining complementary to past models. This perspectiveprovides a new lens that can contribute to more fully explainingwhy control mechanisms do not always operate as expected. Forpractitioners, the concept of IS control alignment can offerguidance when designing, implementing, monitoring, and adjust-ing controls. Rather than deciding on control mechanisms based ona limited set of factors (e.g., behavioral control should be usedwhen IS project activities are easily observable), control alignmentadvocates for a tailored, more dynamic approach that enhancescontrol performance by facilitating a complementary controlenvironment, control mechanisms, socio-emotional behaviors, andcontrol execution, while avoiding potential conﬂicts. In doing so,organizations may be increasingly able to avoid the control failuresthat have plagued systems development projects, as well as otherIS processes, in recent years.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The nextsection provides an overview of control concepts as well asalignment fundamentals. We then discuss in greater depth theconcept of IS control alignment, including its key components. Thisdiscussion is followed by a presentation of our data collection andanalysis methods. The ﬁndings are then presented, including case-speciﬁc details of the identiﬁed patterns of control alignment andmisalignment. Finally, we propose two high-functioning patternsof control alignment, discuss our ﬁndings relative to past IS controlresearch, and highlight a series of future research opportunities.2. Theoretical and conceptual foundationsOur research integrates fundamentals from the study of both IScontrol and alignment in establishing the new concept of IS controlalignment. We ﬁrst review the concept of control and itstheoretical underpinnings, then discuss alignment and introducerelevant past research that has been conducted in the ﬁeld. Theseconcepts are then integrated, and an overview of IS controlalignment is provided.2.1. ControlControl is deﬁned as the attempt to affect the behavior of others asa means to achieve goals [14,21,56]. Broadly applied, control is atopic of interest in a variety of managerial disciplines, includingaccounting, organizational behavior, strategy, and marketing[17,28,45,46].1This research concentrates on control withinorganizations, speciﬁcally on the execution and completion ofinformation systems processes. In this context, IS control is deﬁnedas the attempt to affect the behavior of others as a means to achieveobjectives related to the development, operation, and use ofinformation systems. This viewpoint is inclusive of both managerialmethods of controlling behavior (e.g., implementing an informa-tion security policy) and technical methods (e.g., software-basedsegregation of duties), which integrates the views of past research,including the studies by Orlikowski [44], Kirsch [34] and Tiwana[58].Although originating in early studies, such as those of Davis[14], Fayol [19] and Urwick [60], the fundamental tenants ofcontrol are commonly attributed to Ouchi’s [46] seminal work onthe topic. Based on a framework for categorizing different types ofcontrol mechanisms (e.g., behavior, output, clan), the theoryestablishes a series of relationships between managers and thecontrols they choose to implement to inﬂuence employeebehavior. Studies on control most commonly adopt one of twotheoretical perspectives: an agency perspective or an organiza-tional control perspective. The agency perspective focuses on theapproach taken by a principal (the controller) to implementspeciﬁc mechanisms that attempt to guide the divergent interestsand actions of an agent (controlee; [58,17]). Within IS research,ﬁndings suggest that a variety of factors such as IS project stage,performance objectives, employee behavior measurability andemployee knowledge drive the selection of particular controls[9,34,22,30,33]. Although this approach provides useful insightsinto selecting controls during particular situations (e.g., the type ofcontrols that are best suited to the early stages of an outsourcedsystems development project), it is less useful in understanding
the broader inter-relationships and implications of control choiceand the organization, its processes, and its employees.An alternative to the economics-based
 agency view of control isthat of the organizational perspective, which places primaryimportance on the cybernetic process of managerial monitoringand evaluating of information to respond with control adjustmentsto achieve organizational goals [17,38]. In contrast to an agency-based view that establishes controls as a managerial mechanism toalign principal and agent interests, the organizational perspectiveincreasingly considers managers as the nerve center, with controlsused to make adjustments to the ever-changing ﬂow of informa-tion within the organization. Recent studies including those byChua et al. [10], Gregory et al. [23] and Tiwana [58] consider issuesthat go beyond a traditional agency perspective by consideringhow controls work together and dynamically change over time.Such research establishes the importance of a more adaptive,dynamic view of control.To establish a broad baseline for understanding the range ofcontrol factors to be considered by managers who are responsiblefor overseeing controls, we draw on an established controlclassiﬁcation framework used in past research [11–13] thatrecognizes the key elements of both agency and organizational1It is also recognized that the study of control has a long research history withinthe ﬁelds of philosophy, psychology, sociology, physical sciences, and militarystudies. The focus of this research, however, is on modern management disciplines.W. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196184 control theory. The framework consists of four dimensions of IScontrol phenomena in organizations: the control environment,control mechanisms, socio-emotional
 behaviors, and controlexecution (Table 1). The model was adopted in this study becauseof its broad-based view, where each dimension focuses on a uniquecomponent of IS control. Because IS control alignment is a newconcept, an approach that has wide applicability is critical inestablishing our research foundation.The ﬁrst dimension, control environment, refers to theorganizational context associated with why a particular controlis chosen. Factors such as organizational strategy [47], companystructure [59], and process characteristics [34,33] have beenshown in past research to play a role in determining the mosteffective type of control, as described below. For example, Kirsch[33] suggests that the observability of employee activitiesoptimizes the use of behavior control, whereas the extent towhich employee activities can be measured is related to theappropriateness of outcome control. This area of IS controlresearch has uncovered an increasingly rich collection of factorsthat contribute to control choices, particularly in lieu of thechanging nature of IS control in the context of outsourcing [40] andinnovative approaches such as agile development [24].Control mechanisms is the second dimension and refers to thedeﬁning characteristics of the IS controls themselves. Within theinformation systems literature, this dimension has been exten-sively examined with respect to two general categories of control,formal and informal, and four underlying control modes:behavioral, outcome, clan and self-control [9,34,10]. These group-ings are commonly used as a classiﬁcation system to differentiatebetween uses of control mechanisms in particular circumstances.
For example, Rustagi et al. [50] examine formal controls inoutsourcing partnerships, Chua et al. [10] consider clan controls incomplex projects, and Tiwana [58] studies how formal andinformal controls are complements or substitutes for one another.Recent studies, such as Gregory et al. [23], have worked to expandthe traditional conceptualization of control mechanisms by furtherdistinguishing between the characteristics of control types(procedural, social, hybrid), control degree (tight, relaxed), andcontrol style (unilateral, bilateral).The third dimension is socio-emotional
 behaviors, which isconcerned with the socio-emotional response that employees haveto particular types of controls. Although much of the IS controlliterature focuses on a controller choosing a control mechanism forparticular circumstances that will derive organizational beneﬁts,the role of the controlee in the process is often overlooked. Studiesin this dimension consider how particular control characteristicsare associated with the degree of employee satisfaction [52],employee motivation [53], and a worker’s ability to be creative[20]. A subset of literature in this area considers the degree towhich individuals do not comply with controls, which can have asigniﬁcant negative impact on project or organizational perfor-mance [3,4,42].The ﬁnal dimension is control execution, which refers to theperceptions that a control is operating effectively and how theseperceptions drive control changes over time. Past studies, such asthose by Choudhury and Sabherwal [9] and Kirsch [35], establishthe importance of adjusting controls during the course of systemsdevelopment projects to address ineffective controls, changingproject stages, and evolving controller–controlee
 relationships. Inrecent years, additional context has been uncovered regardingcontrol execution, particularly with respect to the incrementaldecisions and actions taken by managers to respond to poorlyperforming controls, knowledge gaps, and inconsistent expecta-tions [13,23]. Although ineffective controls (e.g., a security policy isimplemented, but is not updated or enforced by management) arelikely to correspond to broader process performance (e.g., overallquality or efﬁciency; [54]), the control execution dimensionfocuses on the identiﬁcation of control inadequacies (e.g., asecurity policy is not preventing incidents due to a new form ofonline threat) and the resulting actions (e.g., periodic adjustmentsto the information security policy over time to account for newthreats).2.2. AlignmentThe second conceptual element in our study is that ofalignment, which refers to the ‘‘ﬁt, match, agreement, or similaritybetween two conceptually distinct constructs’’ ([16], p. 51). Withinthe ﬁeld of IS, the study of alignment has examined a group ofunique constructs using a range of approaches. Drawing fromChan’s [5] discussion of alignment within the IS discipline, threekey categories of alignment research are identiﬁed: strategic,structural, and cultural. A fourth category, project alignment, is anemerging area that will also be discussed.Strategic alignment refers to the degree to which businessstrategy and plans complement IS strategy and plans [6]. Strategicalignment is generally viewed as forming the most dominantsubset of alignment research within the ﬁeld and accounts for themost widely cited publications, including those by Chan et al. [7],Henderson and Venkatraman [25], and Reich and Benbasat[49]. The second category of IS alignment, structural alignment,refers to the degree of structural ﬁt between IS and the business;the degree of structural ﬁt is affected by the location of IS decision-making rights, reporting relationships, (de)centralization of IT, andthe deployment of IS personnel [6]. The focus on particularstructures when assessing this type of alignment varies within theliterature. One view considers the differences between formalstructures (e.g., mandated rules) and informal structures (e.g.,employee connections) when examining structural alignment[5]. Another view focuses on the degree of centralization in ISdecision making rights by a central IS group relative todecentralized groups [31]. The third category, cultural alignment,refers to the degree to which an organization or nation’s culture iscongruent with the organization’s IS strategy and objectives. WorkTable 1IS control dimensions (adapted from [11–13]).Control dimensions Control dimension description Control dimension exampleControl environment The factors that determine why a particular control ischosenA company’s hierarchical structure is most commonly associated withcontrols that rely on management oversight and reviewControl mechanisms The deﬁning characteristics of the controls A new systems development methodology is implemented that ispredominantly characterized by formal, preventive controls (e.g.,documented policies)Socio-emotional behaviors The social and emotional response that employees haveto particular controlsA new information systems policy that restricts the autonomy ofemployees and results in a decreased level of satisfaction is implementedControl execution The extent that a control is observed as operatingeffectively and the resulting control changes over timeIS controls are periodically evaluated by management, and adjustmentsare made to the control design where issues are identiﬁedW. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196 185 in this area examines the links between company or nationalcultures and other organizational characteristics [5,37]. Finally, amore recently emerging type of alignment is project alignment,which refers to the degree to which an IS project’s deliverables arecongruent with the organization’s IS strategy and projectobjectives [29]. Conceived from a process perspective, theachievement of IS project alignment is viewed as contributing tothe execution of organizational strategy [29]. Our research buildson these approaches to alignment by framing the controlalignment concept within the context of an IS process and withcontrol constructs as the core elements being aligned. We explainthis perspective in the following section.2.3. Information systems control alignmentA new concept
 that
 integrates
 the theories
 of control
 andalignment is proposed in this study: IS control
 alignment. AsVenkatraman
 [61] suggests, there
 are a variety
 of approaches
 toevaluating
 alignment
 between
 constructs,
 including
 matching,
covariation,
 gestalts,
 and pattern/proﬁle
 deviation.2We adopt apattern
 deviation perspective,
 which
 suggests that
 multiple
variables
 can
 be aligned
 with
 one another,
 where
 the degree
 ofalignment can
 be determined by deﬁning a set of ‘‘high-
functioning patterns’’
 either
 from theory
 or empirical
 data.
 Usingthis approach,
 IS control
 alignment
 represents
 the degree
 to whichthe control
 environment,
 control
 mechanisms,
 socio-emotional
behaviors, and
 control execution
 are
 mutually
 complementarywithin
 an IS process.
 Our results, which
 are outlined in detail
below, point to two
 high-functioning
 patterns
 – one withtraditional
 characteristics
 and one with
 agile
 characteristics
 –that correspond
 to positive
 alignment
 among the four control
dimensions. The identiﬁcation
 of these
 IS control
 alignment
patterns
 can aid organizations
 struggling
 with underperforming
IS controls
 by providing guidance
 on adjustments
 that
 can
 bemade
 to adopt control
 characteristics
 that
 complement
 oneanother.
IS control
 alignment
 is positioned
 in this research as aphenomenon
 that
 builds
 on past conceptualizations
 of ISalignment but is distinct
 in a number of fundamental
 ways.
First,
 IS control
 alignment
 focuses on aligning
 constructs (i.e.,
 IScontrol
 dimensions) that
 differ
 from past approaches,
 which
investigate
 the alignment
 of strategies,
 organizational
 structure,
culture,
 and
 project
 characteristics.
 By aligning
 these control
constructs,
 IS control
 alignment
 suggests
 that
 improved
 out-comes will result.
 Second,
 IS control
 alignment has a distinct
behavioral
 element that
 distinguishes
 it from past forms ofalignment research. Rather
 than
 considering
 the broader
organizational
 aspects
 of strategy
 or structure that
 drive
 thehigh-level
 direction
 of a company,
 control
 alignment takes
 alower-level
 view
 of the approaches
 used to intentionally
inﬂuence
 the behavior
 of employees during day-to-day
 process-
es. Finally, IS control
 alignment
 is considered distinct
 in themanner
 in which
 controls
 are viewed
 to rapidly
 change
 andevolve over time [9,34,35]. This type
 of alignment
 differs
 fromother forms
 that
 include aspects
 of change
 but tend
 to occurmore
 slowly
 over time (e.g.,
 structural,
 cultural).
 In the following
section,
 we further
 explain
 our approach
 to evaluating
 IS control
alignment and provide
 a description
 of the data
 collection
 andanalysis approach
 that
 we utilize.
 Two high-functioning
 patterns
that emerge from our
 analysis
 are then
 presented.
3. MethodologyOur study employs a qualitative approach based on three in-depth case studies to identify characteristics of the four controldimensions, evaluate the extent to which the dimension char-acteristics align with one another, and determine the positive and/or negative outcomes that result from the control alignment/misalignment. Based on interviews and company documents, aswell as the existing IS control literature, we iteratively develop aclassiﬁcation framework that distinguishes between the underly-ing characteristics of each of the four control dimensions. We thenuse the classiﬁcations as a foundation for identifying complemen-tary and conﬂicting elements of control, which allows us touncover the resulting positive and negative outcomes. Based onthese ﬁndings, we establish a set of two patterns (consistent withVenkatraman’s [61] pattern/proﬁle
 deviation approach) thatexemplify complementary control characteristics based on theempirical data. Our approach is discussed in greater detail below.In this research, we set the unit of analysis at the process level.Rather than restricting our focus to a narrow subset of controls,such as within a single project, this approach allows us to considera broader collection of controls across a range of related ISactivities. In this context, examples of a process-level unit ofanalysis include managing security, managing enterprise architec-ture, and managing systems development. The IS processinvestigated in this research is managing systems development,which is deﬁned as ‘‘establishing and maintaining solutions in linewith enterprise requirements covering design, development,procurement/sourcing
 and partnering with suppliers and vendors’’([27], p. 132). This process includes activities such as systemsconﬁguration, test preparation, testing, and requirements man-agement. The process was selected for investigation because ittypically represents a large proportion of IS department spendingand is also frequently associated with IS control issues that can becostly and risky to organizations [57]. Additionally, because muchof the IS control literature focuses on the information systemsdevelopment process, this area of focus can aid in extending pastwork in the ﬁeld, as well as enable comparisons with past ﬁndings.3.1. Classifying IS controlsThe ﬁrst step in evaluating IS control alignment is to establishthe deﬁning characteristics of each of the four control dimensionswithin the case study data. Case studies provide a rich andcontextualized examination of organizational phenomena [62],which allows for a detailed assessment of IS controls. Because thisstudy was exploratory in nature, the case sites were selected usinga sampling strategy that sought to establish variation in each case’sunderlying control components [62]. To obtain such variation,participating organizations that varied with respect to four factorswere sought: industry, company size, technical architecture, andsystems development approach. The three participating organiza-tions represent different industries (healthcare, insurance, andmanufacturing), sizes (small, medium, large), architectures (main-frame, client-server, web-based), and development approaches(waterfall, hybrid, agile).Case study data were collected using semi-structured inter-views with employees involved in the systems developmentprocess as well as the review of organizational documents. A totalof 20 interviews were conducted with senior management (e.g., VPSystems Development, Director of IT), middle management (e.g.,Project Manager, Development Manager), and staff (e.g., Develop-er), consisting of over 13 h of discussion and comprising 412 pagesof transcribed notes. Interviewees were selected based on theirparticipation in the systems development process and were askedquestions structured around the four control dimensions. For2Venkatraman [61] uses the term ‘‘proﬁle’’ to describe a coherent set ofalignment characteristics. We believe that a term more appropriate to controlalignment is ‘‘pattern’’ because it incorporates the notion of a proﬁle and theinherent variability that is possible in control alignment characteristics. We use theterm ‘‘pattern’’ in this paper.W. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196186 example, we asked participants about the types of controlmechanisms used in the systems development process.A total of 15 organizational documents (e.g., developmentspeciﬁcations, development plans, test plans, application architec-ture) were also collected, comprising 123 pages. The use ofmultiple data collection methods allows for triangulation, that is,the veriﬁcation of repeatability of an observation [55], whichresults in more convincing and accurate ﬁndings [62]. Thedocuments were used as a data source that could corroboratethe control-related data collected via interviews, as well ascontribute additional reﬁnements to the IS control classiﬁcationsbeing developed.Data coding was performed in three stages. First, wedescriptively coded the interview transcripts and documents intocategories corresponding to the four control dimensions notedabove: control environment, control mechanisms, socio-emotional
behaviors, and control execution. The objective of this exercise wasto establish the existence of a four-dimension model of controlwithin the empirical data. The coding process consisted of the ﬁrstauthor tagging text segments of each interview transcript anddocument with one or more codes [41]. To verify the validity andreliability of the coding approach, an independent researchassistant coded three interview transcripts and documents (i.e.,one transcript and document from each case study) into the IScontrol dimension categories. The coding exercise resulted in anaverage inter-rater agreement Kappa of 0.73, which corresponds toa ‘‘substantial’’ strength of agreement range, as deﬁned by Landisand Koch [36].The second stage of the coding process focused on anassessment of the underlying characteristics of each IS controldimension through the use of pattern coding, which employsinference making as a means to explain a theme or conﬁguration[62,41]. To better understand the deﬁning elements of eachdimension, two distinct lower-level classiﬁcations were estab-lished (i.e., eight classiﬁcations in total). Each classiﬁcationrepresents a unique grouping of control characteristics that isdistinct from its ‘‘paired’’ classiﬁcation and is established basedon justiﬁcation from the IS control literature.3Table 2 outlines theunderlying classiﬁcations used to analyze the collected data,including deﬁnitions and references from the literature that justifythe groupings. These classiﬁcations were developed iterativelythrough data analysis, discussion between the authors, andreferences to similar classiﬁcations that exist in the controlliterature. Establishing these divergent classiﬁcations provided anopportunity to distinguish between the data identiﬁed in thecontrol dimension coding and enhanced the ability to make cross-case comparisons. In total, 652 segments of text were coded duringthis exercise across all control classiﬁcations in both the interviewsand documents.The classiﬁcations used for the control environment dimensionare traditional and progressive. Traditional control environmentsemploy a high degree of process standardization (e.g., expectationsthat software will be developed to comply with a particularguideline), operate using a rigorous organizational structure (e.g.,job titles and responsibilities are carefully deﬁned) and haveleadership stability. Decision making in traditional environmentstends to be cautious, and managers are averse to accepting highlevels of risk. In contrast, progressive environments encouragemore risk-seeking, are more ﬂexible in their process activities (e.g.,openness to solving a problem in different ways), and are moreaccepting of innovation and technology-intensive initiatives.Control mechanisms are divided into preventive and detectiveclassiﬁcations. Preventive controls seek to limit the opportunity forissues to occur through means such as standard policies andprocedures. Such an approach tends to work most effectively whenTable 2IS control classiﬁcations.IS control dimension IS controlclassiﬁcationIS control classiﬁcation deﬁnition Past use of similar controlclassiﬁcationsControl environment Traditional Traditional control environments are characterized by processstandardization, established organizational structure, cautiousdecision making, and internal stabilityKling and Iacono [63]; McFarlan [64];Rao et al. [47]Progressive Progressive control environments are characterized by processﬂexibility, technology-intensive initiatives, risk-taking, andinnovationKellogg et al. [65]; Sia and Neo [66];Silva and Hirschheim [67]Control mechanisms Preventive Preventive control mechanisms are proactive attempts to avoidthe occurrence of an activity or incident that could potentiallyhave a negative effect on the achievement of organizationalobjectivesGopal and Sanders [68]; Phan et al.[69]; Kulp [70]; Nidumolu andSubramani [71]; Riehl [72]Detective Detective control mechanisms are procedures conducted toidentify whether an incident that could have a negative effect onorganizational objectives has occurredGopal and Sanders [68]; Nidumolu andSubramani [71]Socio-emotional behaviors Individual Individual socio-emotional behaviors refer to employees whoseresponse to controls is consistent with a prioritization ofindividual goals, the focus on individual rights, and an emphasison autonomyBoss et al. [4]; Fitzgerald [20]; Loveet al. [73]; Olsen [74]; Santana andRobey [52]; Morris and Marshall [75]Collective Collective socio-emotional behaviors refer to employees whoseresponse to controls is consistent with a priority on group goalsand the cohesion of groupsBaronas and Louis [76]; Kirsch et al.[77]; Kraut and Streeter [78];Orlikowski [44]; Stewart and Gosain[79]Control execution Stability Stable control execution is characterized by controls that areviewed as performing adequately within mature, well-establishedprocesses. Few adjustments to controls are required, and controlsare rarely addedFitzgerald [20]; Kirsch [33]; Kirsch [34];Kirsch et al. [80]Evolution Evolutionary control execution is characterized by theidentiﬁcation of areas for control improvement that requireremediation, as well as the associated adjustments and additionsto controls over timeChoudhury and Sabherwal [9]; Kirsch[35]; Kohli and Kettinger [81]; Harriset al. [24]; Jin and Montague [82]3We acknowledge that the dimension characteristics typically range across acontinuum (e.g., strongly traditional to moderately traditional), but for the sake ofsimplifying the analysis, only two categories for each dimension are utilized in thisstudy. When a dimension included examples of both underlying classiﬁcations (e.g.,traditional and progressive), we assigned the rating based on the degree of controlsin each category, which considers the number, frequency and intensity of controlcharacteristics [23].W. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196 187 managers are aware of what risks exist in a process and these risksremain relatively static. Control mechanisms can then bespeciﬁcally designed to minimize these concerns. In contrast,detective controls are concerned less with the prevention of issuesand focus instead on ensuring that issues that occur are identiﬁedand remediated though approaches such as management review.This approach is commonly adopted under circumstances in whichthere is rapid change within a process and new risks are regularlyemerging. Rather than attempt to prevent an ever-changing list ofconcerns, detective controls remain open to a broad range ofpotential problems and address them as they occur.Individual and collective classiﬁcations are deﬁned for thesocio-emotional behaviors dimension. Individual behaviors focuson employees who prioritize individual goals, rights, and autono-my. Under such circumstances, controls that allow employees toact independently are highly valued. For example, a manager mayassign a task to a subordinate, but employees classiﬁed in theindividual behavior category will prefer to execute the taskindependently. In comparison, collective socio-emotional beha-viors refer to employees who respond positively to controls thatare oriented toward group goals and cohesion. Employees in thisgroup respond best to controls that motivate team interactions andenhance communication between team members (e.g., pairprogramming in agile development).Finally,
 the control
 execution
 dimension
 consists of stable andevolutionary classiﬁcations.
 Stable
 control
 execution
 occurs whencontrols
 are perceived
 to perform in line
 with expectations
 andrequire
 few adjustments
 over time.
 For example,
 the data
 backupand recovery
 process
 in many
 companies is highly automated,
reliable,
 and
 does not commonly require signiﬁcant
 changes.
 Incomparison,
 evolutionary
 control
 execution
 refers to IS processes
that include controls
 that
 do not always
 work as intended
 and
 arefrequently
 adjusted.
 In many companies, information security
 is aprocess
 that
 commonly identiﬁes
 controls
 that
 are ineffective
 andrequire
 adjustments
 to stay current with
 frequently changing
risks.
The ﬁnal coding step examined evidence in the empirical datathat suggested either a complement (i.e., alignment) or conﬂict(i.e., misalignment) between two of the classiﬁcations across any ofthe four dimensions. The objective of this exercise was to identifythe classiﬁcations that appeared to be either complementary orconﬂicting, as well as to determine the positive or negativeoutcome of the alignment/misalignment.
 In line with our researchquestion, we focused on interactions between dimensions, ratherthan within a single dimension. Complementary (aligned) controlsrepresented a relationship between two or more of the controlclassiﬁcations that resulted in a positive organizational outcome.For example, if an interviewee commented that new systemsdevelopment methodology procedures (e.g., a preventive controlmechanism) had been broadly accepted by the systems develop-ment team (e.g., collective socio-emotional behaviors) andsoftware product quality had been enhanced (i.e., the alignmentoutcome), we would code the passage as an example ofcomplementary controls (i.e., preventive control mechanismsare complementary/aligned
 to collective socio-emotional beha-viors). In contrast, conﬂicting (misaligned) controls were repre-sented by a relationship between two or more of the controlclassiﬁcations that resulted in a negative outcome. For example, ifan interviewee commented that the highly standardized nature ofthe organization (e.g., traditional control environment) wasclashing with the implementation of team-based, monitoringcontrols (e.g., detective control mechanisms), which resulted inconfusion and diminished efﬁciency (i.e., the misalignmentoutcome), we would code the passage as an example of aconﬂicting control (i.e., traditional control environments con-ﬂict/misalign with detective control mechanisms).Our analysis focused on deriving insights from the data, and weremained open to evidence that suggested complementary orconﬂicting relationships among any of the classiﬁcations. Cases inwhich the classiﬁcations underlying the four control dimensionsare complementary to one another are considered representativeof control alignment, whereas control conﬂicts suggest controlmisalignment. A detailed cross-case analysis was conducted anddiscussed among the authors to identify patterns between thecontrol classiﬁcations and evidence of control alignment/misalign-ment. In considering the theoretical relationships that thesealignment/misalignment patterns were grounded in, we drew onthe principles of Venkatraman’s [61] approach, which seeks toestablish the ideal circumstances in a scenario that will maximizeperformance of the process. By beginning with the 16 possiblecombinations of the eight control classiﬁcations (Table 2) acrossthe four dimensions (Table 1), we followed Venkatraman’s [61]approach in constructing alignment patterns from the empiricaldata. In total, 52 instances of either complementary or conﬂictingcontrols were noted, which we analyzed for evidence of positivealignment or negative misalignment. We present our ﬁndings inthe following section.4. FindingsIn this section, we ﬁrst present a brief overview of each casestudy setting. We then highlight representative instances from theempirical data of control classiﬁcations that complement oneanother, as well as those that conﬂict with one another. We thendiscuss the implications of these observations in Section 5.4.1. The systems development process at HealthOrgHealthOrg4is a teaching hospital located in Canada. Approxi-mately 80 IS staff operate using a model that employs a coreinterface system that links together nearly 60 otherwise uncon-nected clinical and business applications. A mix of mainframe,client-server, and web-based systems are used at the organization.Historically, HealthOrg has employed a traditional waterfalldevelopment approach but has been piloting a customized agileapproach on a small number of selected projects. The teamresponsible for systems development consists of four main sub-groups: a patient records team, a web development team, adashboard/performance
 management team, and a databaseadministration team. In addition, a corporate project managementofﬁce (PMO) was recently added to the organization to overseeboth IS and non-IS projects.4.2. The systems development process at InsureCorpInsureCorp is a medium-sized insurance and ﬁnancial servicescompany providing life insurance, investment services, and groupbeneﬁts. InsureCorp employs approximately 750 staff members,with the IS department comprising approximately 120 staffmembers. The IS group focuses on both operational support(e.g., help desk, infrastructure maintenance, security) and ISproject work. InsureCorp has traditionally employed a mainframearchitecture but has also begun to adopt both client server andcloud-based architecture. The systems development process atInsureCorp was recently reorganized into four primary develop-ment competencies: business analysis, systems design, systemsdevelopment, and quality assurance. The competencies arerelatively siloed and sequential in nature, consistent with atraditional waterfall approach. After the reorganization, signiﬁcantcontrol structures were employed, which have since been scaled4Participant names have been disguised at the request of the organization.W. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196188 back after they were determined to be too restrictive. Approxi-mately 30–40 projects are ongoing at any one time at InsureCorp,10 of which are considered large projects that are strategic innature.4.3. The systems development process at LargeManLargeMan is a manufacturing company based in the UnitedStates and employs approximately 75,000 employees worldwide.Systems development activities are decentralized, with a range oflocations conducting tasks on particular systems used by the widerorganization. In the Canadian subsidiary, where our data werecollected, two key software applications related to business-to-business e-commerce transactions with distributors are developedand maintained by a local systems development team. Historically,LargeMan has employed a traditional waterfall systems develop-ment approach. However, the organization recently decided toexperiment with a more iterative approach for some systems. Pilotprojects have been conducted using an agile approach based on theScrum methodology.4.4. IS control alignment: Identifying complementary and conﬂictingIS control classiﬁcationsOur analysis focused on gaining insights from the empiricaldata that revealed both alignments (i.e., complementary controlclassiﬁcations across multiple dimensions resulting in positiveoutcomes) and misalignments
 (i.e., conﬂicting control classiﬁca-tions across multiple dimensions resulting in negative outcomes).As noted above, our analysis focused on the systems developmentprocess. The data presented below should be interpreted as anassessment of IS control alignment within a single processoperating in three separate organizations. These results arepresented in six groups5: (1 and 2) alignment and misalignmentbetween control mechanisms and the control environment, (3 and4) alignment and misalignment between control mechanisms andsocio-emotional behaviors, and (5 and 6) alignment and misalign-ment between control mechanisms and control execution. Eachgroup is explained in greater detail below, alongside representa-tive interviewee quotes.4.5. Positive outcomes from control mechanisms and controlenvironment alignmentAt LargeMan, multiple interviewees referred to situations inwhich the links between the control environment and controlmechanisms contributed to organizational beneﬁts. For example,interviewees noted two separate instances of business stake-holders requesting fast turnarounds on system modiﬁcations. Inboth cases, stakeholder expectations were exceeded relative toprior development approaches because of the increasingly agile-oriented control mechanisms in place. The development team wasable to quickly respond to the requests and rapidly implement thenecessary changes. In one instance, this response resulted in asigniﬁcant ﬁnancial beneﬁt to the line of business. This situationdemonstrates the alignment between a progressive controlenvironment and detective control mechanisms. The followingquotes describe the situations.[One of] our [lines of business] . . . needed something really quickbecause they were getting bazillions of calls into their call center toorder these [products]. And they came to our team and normally itwould have been, ‘yeah okay, we will get that to you in 3 months’and I think it was 2 weeks or in 1 week they had a working demo.And then in another week or two they had it rolled into productionand it was a $1.5M return on business value. So that example . . .actually [got] leaked into the [senior management] meeting, whichis like my boss and all of the upper management for global and thatactually came up in the middle of the meeting as an example. Andfrom there it has just kind of worked its way through . . . where thebusiness goes, ‘oh my gosh, you won’t believe what the Canadateam just did’. It is amazing, they were blown away. (DevelopmentManager, LargeMan)Essentially they said, ‘we want this one piece of functionality for aChina rollout’ and we said, ‘okay, but this is a big request and isgoing to take multiple sprints. Then 6 weeks later we called them upand said it is done because it took two sprints . . . so yeah it ismoving much faster than they are ready for so we end up with a lotof functionality that is in our back pocket that they have asked forbut they are not ready to turn it on. (Development Lead,LargeMan)HealthOrg interviewees also discussed an alignment betweenthe control environment and control mechanism dimensions butone related to different control classiﬁcations other than thosepertaining to LargeMan. As a hospital, HealthOrg was morestrongly characterized as having a traditional environment thatwas more risk averse and structured. Because of the need for highreliability and accuracy in systems, this type of environment wasviewed by interviewees as being most consistent with the use ofpreventive control mechanisms such as policies and proceduresthat actively anticipated and avoided negative issues fromoccurring. The following quote highlights this positive alignmentbetween a traditional control environment and preventive controlmechanisms.On the clinical side of the house increasingly you ﬁnd a lot ofdocumented protocols. What does that mean? Well when we cutinto somebody, before we do we ask them their name and we askthem which side they think that we are going to cut into. That mayseem odd but in the banking sector you don’t ask somebodywhether they intend to take the money from this account. . . . Imean maybe you do but you would not be asked ﬁve times beforethe money is actually extracted from the account. Here increasinglyyou are asked multiple times because there is recognition thatsystemic errors occur. That is it is not one point of failure but acombination of points of failure. So that is a classic example of aneed for internal control, process controls. Because the processesare inherently risky. Once you cut you can’t uncut. (Chief PrivacyOfﬁcer, HealthOrg)Evidence
 of complementary
 control
 mechanisms
 and
control
 environment
 was
 also noted at InsureCorp. Interviewees
highlighted
 the ﬁt between
 the established,
 structured
control
 environment
 and the ability
 to anticipate
 and
 plan
 fora ﬁnite collection
 of possible issues.
 By enacting
 control
mechanisms
 to prevent these
 issues, the development
 processwas
 considered
 to be more efﬁcient than
 attempting
 toactively
 monitor
 and react to unexpected
 issues
 that areunlikely
 to occur.
 Similarly
 to HealthOrg,
 a link was
 suggested
between
 a traditional control
 environment and preventive
control
 mechanisms. The
 interviewee quote below highlights
this perspective.
We do a lot of product projects and stuff like that. They are20 thousand or 50 thousand dollars [and] . . . typically they are veryreproducible. If you do a re-pricing you know it is going to take5Although we view IS control alignment as the degree to which all fourdimensions complement one another, in this section we present evidencesupporting the alignment and misalignment between pairs of dimensions to moreclearly focus on the key complementary and conﬂicting elements. However, wenote that each pair of dimensions is also part of the broader inter-relationshipbetween the remaining two dimensions, which can present additional opportu-nities for alignment or misalignment.W. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196 189 2 months and it is going to cost this amount of money and this whatyou know . . . they can budget the whole thing based on historicestimates. So right when you get to this charter stage the projectmanager can pretty much tell you what it will look like. And insome cases we have not even bothered with a charter. We have justbasically collapsed planning initiation down into one phase andjust come up with a project management plan with the costsbecause basically a charter is just a high level of projectmanagement. So it depends on the size of the project. Now whenI came into my role I realized that this is not formalized. It hasbasically taken a natural ﬂow so one of the initiatives that I kickedoff this year and we have just started this is the concept of right size.(Project Manager Director, InsureCorp)4.6. Negative outcomes from control mechanisms and controlenvironment misalignmentDespite instances
 of complementary
 between
 control
 mecha-nisms
 and
 the environment
 at InsureCorp, there was
 also
 evidenceof misalignment.
 For example,
 the systems
 development
 meth-odology,
 which
 had been undergoing a transition
 to a moreiterative,
 agile approach,
 was
 noted
 by interviewees
 as beingdisconnected
 from
 the
 linear,
 structured
 project
 management
approach. This ﬁnding suggests
 a partial
 departure
 from thepreventive
 control
 mechanisms
 noted above
 toward
 the inclusionof increasingly
 detective
 control mechanisms.
 This misalignment
with
 the control
 environment
 is noted in the following
interviewee
 quote.Because we don’t know everything right from the outset . . . there isa clash between the systems development lifecycle and what itpossible for it versus the project management lifecycle, which by itsnature is mandated to and thus wants to have target dates,deliverables, progress reports, and so on. And so there is sort of thisnatural tension that seems to happen between these twodisciplines, especially as we undertake more and more projects.(Manager, InsureCorp)Similarly, examples
 of control
 mechanism-environment
 mis-
alignments were
 noted at HealthOrg.
 In one case, an intervieweehighlighted the disconnect
 between
 the maturity of control
mechanisms
 and the clinical
 focus of hospital management.
 Incontrast
 to traditional
 organizations
 that have specialized
managers
 leading
 organizational
 initiatives,
 HealthOrg
 hadphysicians working
 in senior leadership positions. Despite
 thehigh level
 of patient care
 that
 these
 individuals could provide,
there was
 a degree of variability
 in their
 ability
 to advocate
 forthe appropriate
 level
 of controls,
 which
 resulted in increased
levels of organizational
 risk. The following quote highlights
 this
perspective.
Presumably
 information
 management
 is helping
 and
 not hinder-ing [the healthcare]
 process,
 not
 only
 on the administrative
 sidebut the clinical side [as well]. So it is a special
 case.
 It is not
 ﬁnance
and
 it is not manufacturing.
 It is a completely
 different type
 ofbusiness
 and on the
 one
 hand then,
 you might think,
 well
 gosh,
given
 the inherent riskiness
 of the sector and
 the fact
 that
 it hasbeen going
 for so many years
 it must be extremely
 mature
 in itscontrols. Ahhhh,
 evidence
 is probably
 not so. At least there
 are
varying levels
 demonstrably
 within the building, if not
 across
 thesector itself.
 One of the
 answers
 might be is because traditionallyhospitals have been
 run
 by clinicians and they are
 not
 trained
 . . .the same way administrators
 of banks
 are
 trained.
 The
 analogue
might be that in banking
 who
 do you
 want
 running
 the
 bank? You
want bankers
 running
 the bank. And in a hospital it is not so clearwhether you want doctors
 running
 the hospital. (Executive,HealthOrg)4.7. Positive outcomes from control mechanisms and socio-emotional
behaviors alignmentEvidence of alignment between control mechanisms and socio-emotional behaviors was noted at LargeMan. Building on theadoption of more detective, agile methods of systems develop-ment, employees were able to become much more involved in theplanning stages, which was viewed as contributing to a morededicated, integrated team. By choosing control mechanisms thatcomplemented the socio-emotional characteristics of employees,positive beneﬁts were recognized, as described in the followinginterviewee quote.Before [the adoption of agile methods] it used to be up to myself andmaybe . . . one other person on the team and you would come upwith a high level estimate and that is what was given to ourbusiness people . . . What I ﬁnd with this process is we sit down andwe ﬁgure out what we have and what we can do and everybodygets a say in how long they think that it is going to take and theneverybody in the room sits down and you break that story downinto individual tasks. So everybody gets to say . . . in how long thetask will take and at the end of the whole thing people feel that it isdoable and we can get it done. I think that they are more focusedand more committed. (Project Manager, LargeMan)At InsureCorp, the importance of balancing the controlmechanisms with socio-emotional behaviors was reinforced. Inthis case, interviewees recognized the importance of organiza-tional culture in determining the appropriate control mechanisms.In cases in which a company has a low tolerance for risk, preventivecontrol mechanisms are viewed as the best choice to best driveindividual compliance toward organizational goals by minimizingthe need to rely on individual employee trust. A key distinctionbetween internal and external projects was noted, suggesting thatdifferences were perceived to exist in the level of trust withvendors versus internal employees. The following intervieweequote discusses this link.I think that there are cultural aspects and I think culturally if youare in an organization where risk is high and trust is low the defaultapproach will be waterfall because I can get you to sign in bloodand if we ever get into a problem . . . when you are looking atexternal relationship, a requirements document it could be thebasis of a court case in a worst case scenario, right? (BusinessAnalysis Manager, InsureCorp)4.8. Negative outcomes from control mechanisms and socio-emotional behaviors misalignmentInstances
 of control
 mechanism
 and socio-emotional
 behavior
misalignments
 were also
 noted.
 At HealthOrg,
 a series
 of newcontrols
 (e.g.,
 periodic reviews
 and remediations
 of identiﬁed
risks) were
 met
 with
 strong
 resistance from staff. As a result,both executive
 and managerial
 inefﬁciencies
 were
 created
 tomonitor and attempt
 to enforce the new
 controls.
 In this
 case,
the detective
 controls
 were
 viewed
 as being
 misaligned
 with
the individual
 autonomy
 (i.e.,
 a socio-emotional
 behavior)
 ofemployees.
 The following interviewee quote
 explains thesituation.
I thought that there would be and in some cases in the beginningthere may have been some push back [to new controls]. ‘Yeah, Ihear you and thank you very much’. And if that happens, well whenit comes to the CIO being through . . . a risk report for this week andit is showing that we are still behind on the date that we said thiswould be completed. So he takes care of that too. The Directorsdon’t want the CIO sending messages to themselves or to a team,W. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196190 but that is the level of escalation that I need to take if they are notlistening. (Risk Manager, HealthOrg)Similar challenges were also noted at LargeMan. Although moststaff were strongly in favor of the move to agile-oriented controls, asmall group of senior developers with a background in traditional,waterfall approaches resisted the move. Concerns were raisedregarding new approaches, such as pair programming andbreaking down tasks into smaller activities, with which a fewmembers of the development team were uncomfortable. For theseteam members, the adoption of new control mechanisms resultedin decreased satisfaction and increased stress. This view isdiscussed in the following quotes.It is scary to think the thought of pair programming. Someone isgoing to be looking over my shoulder while I program, it is . . . forsome people it is daunting because whether or not they are self-conscious of their coding, they think that the person they are sittingwith is better than them. But eventually you just have to get overthose things and just go for it, but it is tough to tell someone whohas been here 15 years, ‘hey, let me look at your code’. (Developer,LargeMan)The one item that I am trying to ﬁgure out how to address is thatsome of the more senior developers just feel like they are notsatisﬁed. Just taking little tiny bits off the board . . . they wantsomething kind of meaty. (Development Manager, LargeMan)4.9. Positive outcomes from control mechanisms and controlexecution alignmentEvidence of alignment between control mechanisms andcontrol execution was noted at InsureCorp. Interviewees highlight-ed the desire for repeatability and consistency in executing theircontrols. Particularly with preventive controls such as policies andprocedures, InsureCorp managers focused on employing operatingstability. Ranging from steering committees to requirementsdocuments, controls were standardized, mandatory for systemsdevelopment initiatives, and remained stable and unchanged overtime. The following interviewee quotes highlight this viewpoint.You have a project steering committee and you want to have asystems development steering committee so that we can set thestage. ‘Here is what we are expecting to see from you’ and ‘what arethe opportunities for those improvements or you stop doing thisbecause it doesn’t make any sense and start doing this or change orcontinue this’, so that we are actually heading in the right direction.(Vice President, InsureCorp)When the group was formed I was appointed the manager of thegroup and one of the ﬁrst things that we did was put together abasic requirements document template which has served us onmost of the major projects that we have done since that time.(Manager, InsureCorp)At LargeMan, a similar transition to align detective controlmechanisms with evolutionary control execution had taken placeas a result of the new agile methodology. Due to these newcontrols, a more reactive, dynamic approach could be taken toadapt to new information and circumstances, which was consid-ered to incrementally improve project performance. In fact, projectperformance was perceived to increase over time because staffadapted to the new range of new information and perspectives thatwere able to be drawn upon. The following quote reinforces theimportance of aligning control mechanisms with socio-emotional
behaviors.Early in the process there was hesitation to say that it was better,but I think over time people are realizing that we are not hittingthose peaks where we are absolutely crunching to get things done.But with that small amount of accountability comes a whole bunchmore just by virtue of the fact that they now have a voice in theprocess. So [on] things like the sprint retrospectives, we get manypeople piping up and saying things who were very silent on theteam before. It feels like they have more control over how we dothings and how we can best utilize our skills to produce value.(Development Manager, LargeMan)4.10. Negative outcomes from control mechanisms and controlexecution misalignmentAt HealthOrg, evidence of a misalignment between controlmechanisms and control execution was noted. Regarding the pilotevaluation of the new agile development approach, intervieweesnoted the challenges in balancing management’s comfort withreliable, repetitive processes with increasingly adaptive andﬂexible controls. This view suggests a misalignment betweenstable control execution and detective control mechanismsbecause of a disconnect between established managementexpectations and how the controls actually operate. Such amisalignment can cause confusion and frustration, as noted inthe following interviewee quote.And of course there is always the struggle that management wantsa plan, right? And they want to see progress and so it is difﬁcult [formanagement] . . . to understand that an agile process can changethings along, but it takes time to get it right. And to have code that isbug free. And so it can be negatively perceived a little bit, as well astaking too long. Why is it taking too long? Why are there still bugs?Why is it still not working? And you almost want to hide it fromthem until we have it right. Or that we are not making change fastenough. (IT Manager, HealthOrg)Evidence of control mechanism-execution
 misalignment wasalso noted at InsureCorp. Complaints arose from the businessregarding how long it was taking to deliver IT projects, and theformal, document-intensive development methodology wasviewed as a contributing factor. Because of the lack of ﬂexibilityin scaling the controls up or down for particular projects,InsureCorp’s ‘‘one size ﬁts all’’ approach was not complementaryto the evolving needs of the business, which increasingly neededrapid delivery of technology solutions. The following quotedescribes the situation.Right now what we are seeing the last 3 months or so we are gettinga lot of pressure from our business partners because we havetraditionally been working in the waterfall method and it is notgood enough anymore. Things are taking way too long. Businessrequirements, 30 sessions, a 60-page document, which has whatsigniﬁcance at the end of the game. (Vice President, InsureCorp)This section has presented evidence from three case studies onthe ways that the identiﬁed control classiﬁcations across fourdifferent control dimensions can complement or conﬂict with oneanother. In the next section, we discuss how these insights can beintegrated into a model that can be used to guide organizationstoward IS control alignment and how this approach can bepositioned in light of recent research in the ﬁeld.5. DiscussionThe results presented in the preceding section provideempirical insights into how the classiﬁcations underlying the fourcontrol dimensions complemented and conﬂicted with oneanother within the systems development process. Our ﬁndingssuggest that although some of the control classiﬁcations arecomplementary to one another, conﬂicts exist with otherW. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196 191 classiﬁcations. Based on the results from our three case studies, wepropose two high-functioning
 patterns (Table 3) that consolidatethe complementary classiﬁcation relationships that exist acrossthe control dimensions. Although each of our case studiesdemonstrates different instances of control alignment andmisalignment, these two patterns represent a baseline formaximizing the complementarity elements of the control dimen-sions, while minimizing the conﬂicting elements. That is, eachpattern is supported by empirical data supporting positiverelationships among all four classiﬁcations. This approach is inline with Venkatraman’s [61] approach to alignment, whichsuggests that high-functioning patterns can be constructed basedon empirical results. Table 4 summarizes the inter-dimensionrelationships that were identiﬁed in the Findings section byidentifying the case studies and underlying classiﬁcations thatcorrespond to both the traditional pattern (e.g., preventivemechanisms and traditional environment) and the agile pattern(e.g., detective mechanisms and progressive environment). Furthersupport for the patterns is provided in Table 4 by identifying thecase studies in which evidence of control classiﬁcations conﬂictswas identiﬁed (e.g., detective mechanisms and traditionalenvironment). By consolidating these observations, the twopatterns in Table 3 were established.The traditional IS control alignment pattern integrates struc-tured organizational factors (i.e., traditional control environment),effective anticipation and prevention of process issues (i.e.,preventative control mechanisms), a hierarchical delivery ofcontrol in which individuals are tasked with responsibilities fromsupervisors (i.e., individual socio-emotional
 behaviors), and arelatively static collection of controls (i.e., stable control execu-tion). In contrast to the focus on the structure and stability of thetraditional pattern, the agile pattern instead assumes ﬂexible anduncertain organizational factors (i.e., progressive control environ-ment), an inability to predict control issues and thus a reliance ondetection (i.e., detective control mechanisms), team-based processdelivery in which collaboration and communication is key (i.e.,collective socio-emotional behaviors), and a constantly changingcollection of controls (i.e., evolutionary control execution).Although we remained open to other possible combinations ofcontrol classiﬁcations that could result in additional patterns, ourdata indicated that conﬂicts existed between the remaininggroupings, which could lead to sub-optimal performance (right-hand column in Table 4). However, because IS control alignmentconsiders the degree to which control dimensions complement oneanother, we are careful to note the possible range of misalignmentsrelative to the two high-functioning patterns. Pattern deviationsuggests that the most beneﬁts will accrue for a process thatcomplies exactly with the pattern conﬁguration but also thatperformance will become relatively stronger the closer a process isto complying with a high-functioning pattern, even if it does notfully meet all classiﬁcations [61]. Therefore, alignment theorysuggests that a systems development process characterized by atraditional environment (traditional pattern), preventive mecha-nisms (traditional pattern), individual socio-emotional behaviors(traditional pattern), and evolutionary execution (agile pattern)(i.e., three traditional classiﬁcations, one agile) will perform betterthan a process characterized by a traditional environment(traditional pattern), preventive mechanisms (traditional pattern),collective socio-emotional behaviors (agile pattern), and evolu-tionary execution (agile pattern; i.e., two traditional classiﬁcations,two agile).These two patterns can act as a guide for organizations seekingto reduce the conﬂicts between control dimensions within their ISprocesses in circumstances in which controls are being designed,implemented, monitored or adjusted. Because past researchrecognizes the dynamic nature of IS controls, the patterns donot suggest that IS controls should remain static but rather that theoverarching characteristics (i.e., classiﬁcations) of controls withineach dimension will be increasingly complementary with otherdimensions when they follow one of the patterns.The IS control alignment concept that we present in this study isone of a variety of perspectives that can aid in understanding howIS controls are designed, implemented, monitored, and adjusted inorganizations. We suggest that our results provide a supplement toother perspectives, such as portfolios of control [34], controlambidexterity [58], and control balancing [23], by providing aunique lens through which to view IS control phenomena (seeTable 5).A portfolio of control modes [34] is a popular perspective in theresearch literature that draws on Ouchi’s [46] conceptualization ofcontrol into formal (behavior and outcome modes) and informal(clan and self-modes) groupings. Control portfolios are collectionsof control mechanisms that are selected based on factors such astask characteristics, role expectations, and project-related knowl-edge. IS control alignment is consistent with the control portfolioconcept in that it positions the key factors (task characteristics,Table 4IS control alignment patterns.Control dimension relationships Support for traditionalpattern classiﬁcationsSupport for agile patternclassiﬁcationsSupport for non-pattern conﬂictclassiﬁcationsControl mechanisms–Control environment HealthOrg (preventivemechanisms + traditionalenvironment)LargeMan (detectivemechanisms + progressiveenvironment)InsureCorp (detectivemechanisms + traditional environment)Control mechanisms–Socio-emotional behaviors InsureCorp (preventivemechanisms + individualsocio-emotionalbehaviors)LargeMan (detectivemechanisms + collectivesocio-emotionalbehaviors)HealthOrg (detectivemechanisms + individual socio-emotionalbehaviors)Control mechanisms–Control execution InsureCorp (preventivemechanisms + stableexecution)LargeMan (detective mechanisms + evolutionary execution)HealthOrg (detective mechanisms + stableexecution)Table 3IS control alignment patterns.IS control alignment pattern Control environment Control mechanisms Socio-emotional behaviors Control executionTraditional Traditional Preventive Individual StableAgile Progressive Detective Collective EvolutionaryW. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196192 etc.) as the control environment dimension, whose aims is to alignwith the control mechanisms dimension. IS control alignmentdiffers in that it also considers the degree of alignment with socio-emotional behaviors and control execution. For example, consis-tent with a control portfolio approach, LargeMan adopted an agiledevelopment control mechanisms due in part to control environ-ment factors such as the need to respond quickly to customerrequests. However, IS control alignment highlights that these newcontrol mechanisms also had a positive effect on employees (i.e.,socio-emotional behaviors) and were in a state of ongoingadaptation since implementation (i.e., control execution). Thatis, control alignment adopts a broader, more holistic view thatconsiders how the act of choosing controls can be aligned (i.e.,alignment between control environment and control mechanisms)but also how compatible controls are with employee well-being(i.e., alignment between socio-emotional behaviors and controlmechanisms) and changes over time (i.e., alignment betweencontrol execution and control mechanisms).Control ambidexterity provides another perspective thatconsiders the extent to which control mechanisms are comple-ments to or substitutes for other control mechanisms [58]. Buildingon Kirsch’s [34] control portfolio concept, control ambidexterityexamines formal and informal control interactions within thesame portfolio. Findings suggest that informal control mechanismscomplement formal behavior control mechanisms but act as asubstitute for formal outcome control mechanisms. For example,control ambidexterity could provide useful insights into theexamination of control mechanisms at LargeMan, where behaviorcontrols and outcome controls have recently given way to anincreasing number of informal controls (e.g., clan-based agilemethods, such as self-determining teams). In contrast to alignmentconsiderations within the control mechanisms dimension alone,we consider IS control alignment representative
 of the comple-mentary relationship among the control environment, controlmechanisms, socio-emotional behaviors, and control executiondimensions. In the context of LargeMan, this view includes how theuse of agile control mechanisms complemented the organizationalstructure, employee characteristics, and ongoing organizationalchange. In this respect, control alignment and control ambidex-terity are not inconsistent with one another; rather, they examinecontrol compatibility at different levels.A third perspective is control balancing, which suggests thatcontrol mechanisms are conﬁgured based on the categorizations ofcontrol type (procedural or social), control degree (tight orrelaxed), and control style (unilateral or bilateral). Drawing onpast views of the modiﬁcation of controls over time, such as theview of Choudhury and Sabherwal [9], control balancing arguesthat a series of sequential phases that provide an opportunity forincremental adjustments of control type, degree, and style istriggered. At LargeMan, control balancing could provide insightsinto the steps taken during the transition from waterfall-oriented
control mechanisms to agile-oriented control mechanisms. Bothcontrol balancing and control alignment consider the link betweencontrol mechanisms and control execution; however, controlalignment also considers links to the control environment andsocio-emotional
 behaviors (e.g., complements between Large-Man’s agile control mechanisms and the organizational structureand employee characteristics). Similarly to the comparison tocontrol portfolios, the control alignment concept offers a moreholistic, multi-dimensional
 view than control balancing.In general, we perceive IS control alignment as providing acomplementary perspective to control portfolios, control ambi-dexterity, and control balancing. However, control alignment isdistinct in its higher-level, holistic view of all four controldimensions, similarly to control portfolios and control balancing,which consider the relationships between two dimensions andcontrol ambidexterity that examines a single dimension. Althougheach of these perspectives provides valuable insights, controlalignment contributes a unique view by considering the degree towhich the four dimensions are simultaneously compatible withone another. From a research standpoint, this framework providesa new way of considering the complex relationships betweencontrol phenomena. This multi-dimensional view provides ameans to more fully explain why control mechanisms can rangefrom highly effective to decidedly weak. For practitioners, theconcept of IS control alignment and the classiﬁcation framework(Table 2) can provide a guideline to consider when designing,implementing, monitoring and adjusting controls. Rather thandeciding on controls based on relationships with a limited set offactors, control alignment suggests that organizations should morefully consider a holistic approach that encourages the controlenvironment, control mechanisms, socio-emotional
 behaviors, andcontrol execution to be mutually complementary.6. ConclusionThis research was motivated by the ongoing challengesexperienced by organizations in controlling their informationsystems processes and the opportunity to improve how controlsare designed, implemented, monitored, and adjusted. Issues ofsecurity breakdowns, outsourcing disputes, and failing develop-ment projects demonstrate the failure of IS controls to aid in theachievement of objectives for organizations. Despite controls beingrecognized as an important driver of process performance, littleguidance is currently provided to managers to establish a holisticapproach that encourages different dimensions of IS control tocomplement one another. Motivated by this practical problem, thisexploratory study draws on control and alignment theory toTable 5IS control perspective comparison.IS control perspective Summary of IS control perspective Comparison to IS control alignmentPortfolio of control modes [34] Based on task characteristics, role expectations, andknowledge, formal or informal control mechanisms areselected to form an integrated portfolioControl portfolios recognize the close relationship between thecontrol environment (e.g., task characteristics) and controlmechanisms but does not directly consider the importance ofsocio-emotional behaviors or control executionControl ambidexterity [58] Considers the extent to which formal and informal controlsact as complements or substitutes for one anotherWhereas control ambidexterity essentially examines how controlmechanisms align with other control mechanisms, IS controlalignment considers how control mechanisms align with thecontrol environment, socio-emotional behaviors, and controlexecutionControl balancing [23] Control mechanisms are conﬁgured based on thecategorizations of control type (procedural or social),control degree (tight or relaxed), and control style(unilateral or bilateral), which are incrementally adjustedthrough a series of sequential phasesBoth control balancing and control alignment consider the linkbetween control mechanisms and control execution; however,control alignment also examines links to the control environmentand socio-emotional behaviorsW. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196 193 investigate how different dimensions of IS controls complement orconﬂict with one another. Our data-driven results suggest thatinstances of both control alignment and misalignment arewidespread. We propose two high-functioning patterns of controlthat consolidate a unique collection of control classiﬁcations thatour empirical ﬁndings suggest are mutually complementary.
 Thecontrol alignment concept extends past perspectives of IS controlby advocating for a holistic, multi-dimensional
 integration ofcontrol elements.As with any research initiative, this work is subject tolimitations. First, we recognize that control classiﬁcations otherthan the ones we employed could be used to distinguish betweenthe control dimensions. Although the classiﬁcations we use arewell established in the literature (Table 2), employing additionalclassiﬁcations, such as a tight versus relaxed control degree [23],could generate a more complex, multi-dimensional view ofalignment, which could also contribute to the ongoing theoreticaldevelopment of the control alignment concept. Second, althoughwe attempted to select case study organizations that represented arange of industries, sizes, and systems development approaches, itis unclear how the IS control alignment concept may translate toother types of organizations. It is possible that particular industriesor companies within highly regulated environments or highlyvolatile environments may already operate at an extreme level oftraditional or agile control alignment. Such companies could havelittle opportunity for improvement or for differentiating them-selves from competitors who also operate at a highly effectivedegree of alignment. Finally, the cross-sectional perspective ofcontrol alignment that our study presents would be enhanced byadopting a more longitudinal view. Consistent with past views onstrategic alignment [6,51], the exploratory view of controlalignment that we adopt in this study is consistent with theconcept of an ongoing, dynamic phenomenon. By tracking howalignment evolves over time, further insights can be gained intohow this view can be evaluated and improved in organizations.Several research paths stem from this study. First, because ofthe ongoing innovations and growing importance of IS processesoutside of systems development, a more comprehensive exami-nation of controls within areas such as information securitymanagement or enterprise architecture may be desirable. Byapplying IS control alignment concepts to a wider range of ISprocesses, researchers may uncover unique aspects of IS controlsthat do not exist in a development context, and practitioners canimprove controls in other important areas of their organizations.Future research could also seek to reﬁne the approach used in thisstudy by further considering additional patterns to the two wepropose. Considering the addition of supplementary
 controlclassiﬁcations could also aid in developing the speciﬁcity of theelements that complement or conﬂict with one another. Finally,although this research outlines the ﬁrst steps in the developmentof the IS control alignment concept, an even more tangible andscalable tool that could be used by practitioners to measure andrespond to IS control alignment issues would be of signiﬁcantvalue. Such a tool could take the form of a survey for collectinginformation on the control dimensions and classiﬁcations within aparticular IS process, which could then aid managers in identifyingareas that represent control misalignments
 and provide usefulguidance in making adjustments that could bring controls backinto alignment.The objective of this study was to consider how the new conceptof IS control alignment could aid in uncovering control dimensionsthat complement and/or conﬂict with one another. Using a casestudy approach at three organizations, we identify the coreelements of IS control within the systems development processand propose two distinct patterns of IS control alignment. Ourﬁndings suggest that control dimensions will complement eachother when they are grouped by classiﬁcations of either agile ortraditional attributes. By adopting a more mindful approach todeveloping collections of controls that complement one anotheracross all four dimensions, organizations can position their ISprocesses to avoid the control failures that have diminished pastlevels of IS process performance.References[1] C. Barclay, Towards an integrated measurement
 of IS project performance:
 theproject performance scorecard, Inf. Syst. Front. 10, 2008, pp. 331–345.[2] J. Bayuk, Vendor due diligence, ISACA J. 3, 2009, pp. 1–5.[3] K.M. Bijlsma-Frankema,
 A.C. Costa, Consequences and antecedents of managerialand employee legitimacy interpretations
 of control: a natural open systemapproach, in: S.B. Sitkin, L.B. Cardinal, K.M. Bijlsma-Frankema (Eds.), Organiza-tional Control, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2010.[4] S.R. Boss, L.J. Kirsch, I. Angermeier, R.A. Shingler, R.W. Boss, If someone is watchingI’ll do what I’m asked: mandatoriness,
 control, and information security, Eur. J. Inf.Syst. 18, 2009, pp. 151–164.[5] Y.E. Chan, Why haven’t we mastered alignment? the importance of the informalorganization structure MIS Quart. Exec. 1 (2), 2002, pp. 97–112.Appendix A. Strong IS control alignment scenarioStrong IS control alignment scenarioAccountAssure is a midsized accounting company that provides audit, tax, andconsulting services to a variety of local organizations. The company ischaracterized by a very traditional, hierarchical structure that abides by veryrigorous, documented processes. Last year, AccountAssure initiated a projectto implement a new application to be used by staff conducting accountingengagements with clients. The new application, to be developed internally,would replace another application created by the company 10 years ago. Theproject was carefully planned out, with the necessary budgets, timelines,stafﬁng, and development approach documented and approved byAccountAssure partners prior to commencement. Using careful managerialoversight, the project was monitored using a series of checkpoints throughoutits duration. IS staff were familiar with the process because the developmentapproach had remained unchanged since the last system was developed. Thestaff felt that the process produced good-quality results on a timely basis andwere reluctant to try out any of the new, iterative approaches to developmentthat had emerged at other companies. The new software was delivered withinthe planned timeline and budget constraints. In a post-implementationreview, the Internal Audit group attributed much of the project’s success tothe similarities between the highly structured environment, the nature of thecontrols in place, the employee expectations, and the stable collection ofcontrolsAppendix B. Weak IS control alignment scenarioWeak IS control alignment scenarioCall-All is a midsized company that provides outsourced call center services to arange of clients. The company is characterized by a very traditional,hierarchical structure that abides by very rigorous, documented processes.Last year, Call-All initiated a project to implement a new web-basedinformation system that would allow the company to manage client datamore easily. Much of the business that the company had previously done onan older, legacy system would transition to this new platform. Theorganization’s IS staff did not have much experience with web-baseddevelopment, and there was uncertainty about the new system’srequirements, which seemed to change regularly. In the tradition of thecompany, highly structured, rigorous procedures were put in place to designand test the system. Months went by, and the project slipped further andfurther behind schedule as new features were introduced and the processbecame bogged down in bureaucracy. The IS staff became frustrated that theirdevelopment approach was not able to adapt to the rapid changes within theproject and complained to management that an iterative approach may bemore suitable. After investing 12 months and nearly one million dollars, theproject was discontinued, and the old system remained in place. The InternalAudit department was asked to perform an evaluation of the project andfound that the disconnect between the highly structured environment, thenature of the controls in place, the employee expectations, and the project’space of change were responsible for the failure of the initiativeW. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196194 [6] Y.E. Chan, B.H. Reich, IT alignment: what have we learned? J. Inf. Technol. 22,2007, pp. 297–315.[7] Y.E. Chan, S.L. Huff, D.W. Barclay, D.G. Copeland, Business strategic orientationinformation systems strategic orientation, and strategic alignmnet, Inf. Syst. Res. 8(2), 1997, pp. 125–150.[8] T. Chenoweth, R. Minch, S. Tabor, Wireless insecurity: examining user securitybehavior on public networks, Commun. ACM 53 (2), 2010, pp. 134–138.[9] V. Choudhury, R. Sabherwal, Portfolios of control in outsourced software devel-opment projects, Inf. Syst. Res. 14 (3), 2003, pp. 291–314.[10] C.E.H. Chua, W.-K. Lim, C. Soh, S.K. Sia, Enacting clan control in complex ITprojects: a social capital perspective, MIS Quart. 36 (2), 2012, pp. 577–600.[11] W.A. Cram, Information
 systems control: a review and synthesis of the literature,in: Proceedings of the Seventeenth
 Americas Conference on Information Systems,Detroit, MI, 2011, Paper 197.[12] W.A. Cram, Examining Information Systems Control Alignment in Organizations(Ph.D diss.), Queen’s University School of Business, 2013.[13] W.A. Cram, M.K. Brohman, R.B. Gallupe, Hitting a moving target: a process modelof information systems control change, Inf. Syst. J. 2015, (in press).[14] R.C. Davis, Industrial Organization and Management,
 Harper, New York, 1940.[15] D. Durkee, Why cloud computing will never be free, Commun. ACM 53 (5), 2010,pp. 62–69.[16] J.R. Edwards, The study of congruence in organizational behavior research:critique and a proposed alternative, Org. Behav.
 Human Decis. Process. 58,1994, pp. 51–100.[17] K.M. Eisenhardt, Control: organizational and economic approaches, Manag. Sci.31 (2), 1985, pp. 134–149.[18] F. Farahmand,
 Risk perception and trust in the cloud, ISACA J. 4, 2010.[19] H. Fayol, General and Industrial Management, Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons, London,1949.[20] B. Fitzgerald, Formalized systems development methodologies: a critical per-spective, Inf. Syst. J. 6, 1996, pp. 3–23.[21] E.G. Flamholtz,
 T.K. Das, A.S. Tsui, Toward and integrative framework
 of organi-zational control, Acc. Organ. Soc. 10 (1), 1985, pp. 35–50.[22] A. Gopal, S. Gosain, The role
 of organizational controls and boundary spanning insoftware development outsourcing:
 implications for project performance, Inf.Syst. Res. Artic. Adv. 2009, pp. 1–23.[23] R.W. Gregory,
 R. Beck, M. Keil, Control balancing in information systems
 devel-opment offshoring projects, MIS Quart. 37 (4), 2013, pp. 1211–1232.[24] M.L. Harris, R.W. Collins, A.R. Hevner, Control of ﬂexible software developmentunder uncertainty,
 Inf. Syst. Res. 20 (3), 2009, pp. 400–419.[25] J.C. Henderson, N. Venkatraman, Strategic alignment: leveraging informationtechnology for transforming organizations, IBM Syst. J. 32 (1), 1999, pp. 472–484.[26] R.M. Henry, G.E. McCray, R.L. Purvis, T.L. Roberts, Exploiting organizationalknowledge in developing IS project cost and schedule estimates:
 an empiricalstudy, Inf. Manag. 44 (6), 2007, pp. 598–612.[27] ISACA, COBIT 5. Rolling meadows, ISACA, 2012.[28] B.J. Jaworski, Toward a theory of marketing control: environmental context,control types, and consequences, J. Mark. 52 (3), 1988, pp. 23–39.[29] T.A. Jenkin, Y.E. Chan, IS project alignment – a process perspective, J. Inf. Technol.25 (1), 2010, pp. 35–55.[30] J.J. Jiang, G. Klein, H.-G. Hwang, J. Huang, S.-Y. Hung, An exploration of therelationship
 between software development process maturity and project per-formance, Inf. Manag. 41 (3), 2004, pp. 279–288.[31] G.S. Kearns, R. Sabherwal, Strategic alignment between business and informationtechnology: a knowledge-based view of behaviours, outcome, and consequences,
J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 23 (3), 2006, pp. 129–162.[32] L. Khansa, D. Liginlal, Quantifying the beneﬁts of investigating informationsecurity, Commun. ACM 52 (11), 2009, pp. 113–117.[33] L.J. Kirsch, The management of complex tasks in organizations: controlling thesystems development process, Org. Sci. 7 (1), 1996, pp. 1–21.[34] L.J. Kirsch, Portfolios of control
 modes and is project management, Inf. Syst. Res. 8(3), 1997, pp. 215–239.[35] L.J. Kirsch, Deploying common systems
 globally: the dynamics of control, Inf. Syst.Res. 15 (4), 2004, pp. 374–395.[36] J.R. Landis, G.G. Koch, The measurement of observer
 agreement for categoricaldata, Biometrics 33 (1), 1977, pp. 159–174.[37] D.E. Leidner, T. Kayworth, A review of culture in information systems research:toward a theory of information technology culture conﬂict, MIS Quart. 30 (2),2006, pp. 357–399.[38] N.B. Macintosh, Management Accounting
 and Control Systems: an Organizational
and Behavioral
 Approach, Wiley, New York, 1994.[39] M. Mahring, IT Project Governance: Stockholm School of Economics (Doctor ofPhilosophy Dissertation),
 2002.[40]
 J.-Y.
 Mao,
 J.-N.
 Lee,
 C.-P.
 Deng,
 Vendors’
 perspectives
 on trust and control
in offshore
 information
 systems
 outsourcing,
 Inf. Manag.
 45 (7),
 2008,
 pp.
482–492.
[41] M.B. Miles, A.M. Huberman, Qualitative Data Analysis, Sage Publications,
 Thou-sand Oaks, 1994.[42] R. Narayanaswamy, V. Grover, R.M. Henry, The impact of inﬂuence tactics ininformation system development projects: a control-loss perspective, J. Manag.Inf. Syst. 30 (1), 2013, pp. 191–225.[43] J. Natovich, Business process management systems: the internal control perspec-tive, ISACA J. 2009, p. 6.[44] W.J. Orlikowski, Integrated information environment or matrix of control?. thecontradictory implications of information technology
 Acc. Manag. Inf. Technol. 1(1), 1991, pp. 9–42.[45] W.G. Ouchi, The transmission
 of control through organizational hierarchy, Acad.Manag. J. 21 (2), 1978, pp. 173–192.[46] W.G. Ouchi, A conceptual
 framework for the design of organizational controlmechanisms, Manag. Sci. 25 (9), 1979, pp. 833–848.[47] M.T.
 Rao,
 C.V.
 Brown,
 W.C.
 Perkins,
 Host
 country
 resource
 availability
 and
 informa-
tion
 system
 control
 mechanisms
 in multinational
 corporations:
 an empirical
 test
 ofresource
 dependency
 theory,
 J. Manag.
 Inf.
 Syst.
 23 (4),
 2007,
 pp.
 11–28.
[48] V. Raval, Risk landscape of cloud computing, ISACA J. 1, 2010.[49] B.H. Reich, I. Benbasat, Factors that inﬂuence the social dimension of alignmentbetween business and information technology
 objectives, MIS Quart. 24 (1), 2000,pp. 81–113.[50] S. Rustagi, W.R. King, L.J. Kirsch, Predictors of formal control usage in IT out-sourcing partnerships, Inf. Syst. Res. 19 (2), 2008, pp. 126–143.[51] R. Sabherwal, R. Hirschheim,
 T. Goles, The dynamics of alignment: insights from apunctuated equilibrium model, Org. Sci. 12 (2), 2001, pp. 179–197.[52] M. Santana, D. Robey, Perceptions of control during systems
 development: effectson job satisfaction of systems professionals, Comput. Pers. 16 (1), 1995, pp. 20–34.[53] J.-Y. Son, Out of fear or desire? Toward a better understanding of employees’
motivation to follow IS security policies Inf. Manag. 48 (7), 2011, pp. 296–302.[54] J.L. Spears, H. Barki, User participation in information systems security riskmanagement,
 MIS Quart. 34 (3), 2010, pp. 503–522.[55] R.E. Stake, Multiple Case Study Analysis, The Guildford Press, New York, NY, 2006.[56] A.S. Tannenbaum, Control in organizations: individual adjustment and organiza-tional performance, Adm. Sci. Quart. 7 (2), 1962, pp. 236–257.[57] The
 Canadian
 Institute
 of Chartered
 Accountants,
 20 Questions
 Directors
 Should
 Ask
about
 IT Projects,
 The Canadian
 Institute
 of Chartered
 Accountants,
 Toronto,
 2007
.[58] A. Tiwana, Systems development ambidexterity: explaining
 the complementaryand substitutive roles of formal and informal controls, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 27 (2),2010, pp. 87–126.[59] A. Tiwana, M. Keil, Control in internal and outsourced software projects, J. Manag.Inf. Syst. 26 (3), 2009, pp. 9–44.[60] L. Urwick, The Elements of Administration,
 Harper, New York, 1944.[61] N. Venkatraman, The concept of ﬁt in strategy research: toward verbal andstatistical correspondence,
 Acad. Manag. Rev. 14 (3), 1989, pp. 423–444.[62] R.K. Yin, Case Study Research:
 Design and Methods, Sage, Thousand Oaks, 2009.
[63] R. Kling, S. Iacono, The control of information systems developments afterimplementation, Commun. ACM 27 (12), 1984, pp. 1218–1226.[64] F.W. McFarlan, Portfolio approach to information systems, Harv. Bus. Rev. 59 (5),1981, pp. 142–150.[65] K.C. Kellogg, W.J. Orlikowski,
 J. Yates, Life in the trading zone: structuringcoordination across boundaries in postbureaucratic organizations, Org. Sci. 17(1), 2006, pp. 22–44.[66] S.K. Sia, B.S. Neo, Reengineering
 effectiveness and the redesign of organizationalcontrol: a case study of the Inland Revenue Authority of Singapore, J. Manag. Inf.Syst. 14 (1), 1997, pp. 69–92.[67] L. Silva, R. Hirschheim,
 Fighting against windmills: strategic information systemsand organizational deep structures, MIS Q. 31 (2), 2007, pp. 327–354.[68] R.D. Gopal, G.L. Sanders, Preventative and deterrent controls for software piracy, J.Manag. Inf. Syst. 13 (4), 1997, pp. 29–47.[69] D.D. Phan, J.F. George, D.R. Vogel, Managing software
 quality in a very largedevelopment project, Inf. Manag. 29, 1995, pp. 277–283.[70] S.L. Kulp, T. Randall, G. Brandyberry, K. Potts, Using organizational controlmechanisms to enhance
 procurement efﬁciency: how GlaxoSmithKline improvedthe effectiveness of E-procurement, Interfaces 36 (3), 2006, pp. 209–219.[71] S.R. Nidumolu, M.R. Subramani, The matrix of control: combining process andstructure approaches to managing software development, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 20(3), 2003, pp. 159–196.[72] J.W. Riehl, A management framework for systems users, Inf. Manag. 5, 1982, pp.323–337.[73] P.E.D. Love, Z. Irani, C. Standing, M. Themistocleous, Inﬂuence of job demands, jobcontrol and social support on information systems professionals’ psychologicalwell-being, Int. J. Manpow. 28 (6), 2007, pp. 513–528.[74] M.H. Olson, New information technology and organizational culture, MIS Q. 6 (4),1982, pp. 71–92.[75] S.A. Morris, T.E. Marshall, Perceived control in information systems, J. Org. EndUser Comput. 16 (2), 2004, pp. 38–56.[76] A.-M.K. Baronas, M.R. Louis, Restoring a sense of control during implementation:how user involvement
 leads to system acceptance, MIS Q. 1988, pp. 111–124.[77] L.J. Kirsch, D.-G. Ko, M.H. Haney, Investigating the antecedents of team-based clancontrol: adding social capital as a predictor, Org. Sci. 21 (2), 2010, pp. 469–489.[78] R.E. Kraut, L.A. Streeter, Coordination in software development, Commun. ACM 38(3), 1995, pp. 69–81.[79] K.J. Stewart, S. Gosain, The impact of ideology on effectiveness in open sourcesoftware development teams, MIS Q. 30 (2), 2006, pp. 291–314.[80]
 L.J. Kirsch,
 V. Sambamurthy,
 D.-G.
 Ko, R.L.
 Purvis,
 Controlling
 informationsystems
 development
 projects:
 the view
 from
 the client, Manag.
 Sci.
 48 (4),2002,
 pp.
 484–498.
[81] R. Kohli, W.J. Kettinger, Informating the clan: controlling physicians’ costs andoutcomes, MIS Q. 28 (3), 2004, pp. 363–394.[82] K.G. Jin, R. Montague, Continuous communication control disruptors
 duringsystems development, Syst. Pract. Action Res. 16 (6), 2003, pp. 393–420.W. Alec Cram is Assistant Professor of Information and Process Management atBentley University. Alec graduated from Queen’s University in 2002 and worked asan IT Audit Manager at Deloitte before earning his MSc (2009) and PhD (2013). HeW. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196 195 joined the faculty at Bentley in 2013. Alec’s research focuses on how informationsystems governance and control initiatives can contribute to improving theperformance of organizational processes. His work has been published or isforthcoming in the Information Systems Journal, the European Journal of InformationSystems, and the Journal of Information Systems.M. Kathryn Brohman is Associate Professor & Distinguished Faculty Fellow ofManagement Information Systems at Queen’s University. Kathryn’s researchinterests are in the areas of data warehouse usage and data strategy, net-basedcustomer service systems, and project management. Her work has been publishedin the Harvard Business Review, Decision Sciences, Communications of the ACM andMIS Quarterly Executive and presented at leading conferences in her ﬁeld. Kathrynjoined Queen’s from Terry College of Business at the University of Georgia, whereshe had been teaching project management since January 2001 and informationresource management since January of 2000. Kathryn completed her PhD inBusiness Philosophy from the University of Western Ontario, Richard Ivey School ofBusiness in 2000.Yolande E. Chan is Associate Vice-Principal (Research) and E. Marie ShantzProfessor of Management Information Systems at Queen’s University. She holds aPhD from Ivey Business School, Western University; an M.Phil. in managementstudies from Oxford University; and S.M. and S.B. degrees in Electrical Engineeringand Computer Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Dr.Chan’s research focuses on knowledge management, innovation, informationtechnology (IT) strategy, and business-IT alignment. Dr. Chan’s work has beenpublished in numerous academic journals, including MIS Quarterly, InformationSystems Research, Journal of Management Information Systems, Journal of StrategicInformation Systems, Journal of Information Technology, Journal of the Association forInformation Systems and MIS Quarterly Executive.R. Brent Gallupe is Professor of Management Information Systems at Queen’sUniversity. Brent is the founding director of Canada’s ﬁrst electronic group-decisionsupport laboratory at the Queen’s Executive Decision Center. Brent advises bothprivate- and public-sector organizations on the development and use of groupsupport technologies for management teams. His reputation for being at theforefront of information technology has earned him frequent invitations to lectureat universities in New Zealand, the United States and France. He earned an MBA atYork University and a PhD in Business Administration at the University ofMinnesota. His work has been published in academic journals, including MISQuarterly, Journal of Applied Psychology, Sloan Management Review, Academy ofManagement Journal, and Information and Management.W. Alec Cram et al. / Information & Management 53 (2016) 183–196196