 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    iiiBy the time our June 2014 issue is printed, 
some of you will be heading to Tel Aviv for the 
22nd European Conference on Information 

Systems. Three of our editorial team members 

will be present: senior editors Bill Kettinger and 

Philip Yetton and senior editor and former editor-

in-chief, Carol Brown. Bill will be representing 

MISQE at the Meet the Editors panel session. I 
hope that some of you will have the opportunity 

to talk to Bill, Philip or Carol about your research 

MISQE™s mission.On the subject of conferences, please consider 
presenting some of your research in the Practice-
based Research Minitrack at HICSS 2015 on the 
lovely island of Kauai in January. The submission 
deadline is June 15. For instructions, visit
 http://
www.hicss.hawaii.edu/hicss_48/apahome48.htm
 or feel free to e-mail me with questions. 
Our partnership with SIM is highly visible in 
this June issue, with two of the papers stemming 

from research sponsored by the SIM Advanced 

Practices Council (APC). One of these papers 

provides four tactics that organizations can 
use to generate capital from the chaos that is 
social media. Munir Mandviwalla from Temple 
University and Rick Watson from the University 

of Georgia develop a strategic framework 

comprising the four tactics of Listening and 
Branding, Mining and Deciding, Conversing and 
Sharing, and Co-creating and Innovating. The 
proper tactic depends upon an organization™s 

strategy and capital-creation goals. The paper is 

a must-read for anyone thinking about what they 
need to do, and avoid, with organizational social 
media uses.The second paper sponsored by the APC 
is about the use of IT, and in particular, idea 
generation and evaluation systems, to aid 
collaborative engineering and innovative 
problem solving. Written by Gert-Jan de Vreede 
of the University of Nebraska at Omaha, the 
paper provides evidence and analysis from 
two organizations that sought to improve 
collaborative engineering with IT. Vreede details 
the ideation innovation processes in both 
organizations and makes suggestions to others 
interested in applying collaboration engineering 
processes.
This issue also includes two research articles 
accepted from our regular submission pipeline. 
In the article, ﬁEmbracing System Complexity in 

a Shared Service Center Collaboration,ﬂ authors 

Arthur Tomasino, Jane Fedorowicz, and Christine 

Williams from Bentley University and August 

Gentner and Todd Hughes from Winnebago 

County, Illinois, describe how a local government 

was able to embrace the complexity of aligning 

the processes of independent departments in 

the development of a criminal court and case 

management system. The root of the system 
complexity was in the shared services spanning 
multiple independent departments. The lessons 
from their case study have implications well 
beyond the boundaries of government agencies, 

for any organizations wishing to manage 

complexity in order to achieve performance gain 
through shared services.
The second research article, by Sabine Matook 
from the University of Queensland and Likoebe 
Maruping from the University of Louisville, 

presents a competency model for customer 
representatives in agile software development 
projects. With the rise in agile methods has 
come the concomitant need for customer 

representatives with both explicit and implicit 

responsibilities for helping ensure that customer 
needs are met in a timely manner. Matook and 
Maruping™s CR competency model, derived 
from 31 interviews with developers, testers, 

business analysis, project managers and customer 

representatives, provides a tool for organizations 
to improve the agile development process.
In closing, I would like to send out a special 
thanks to Leslie Willcocks, who is stepping 
down after over seven years of service as Senior 

Editor. Leslie™s service has been of great value to 
MISQE and to the many authors whose papers 
he helped shape for publication. We hope that he 
will continue to serve as an author of outstanding 
MISQE papers and wish him the best of success with his many editorial responsibilities.
Dorothy E. Leidner
Editor-in-Chief

(Dorothy_Leidner@baylor.edu)
Editor™s Comments