 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive   77Lack of a Competency Model for Customer  Representatives in Agile Development Projects1,2 In dynamic business environments, where customer requirements change frequently, agile 
development methods have emerged as a viable and effective approach for information systems 
development (ISD) projects to create working software that meets those requirements.
3 One of the primary means by which agile methods produce software functionality that is 

closely aligned with customer requirements is through the role of a designated customer 

representative (CR). This role has different names in different agile methodsŠe.g., on-site 

customer in Extreme Programming (XP)
4 or product owner in Scrum
5Šbut whatever the title, 
the person appointed is expected to assist the ISD team with development while ensuring that 

customer requirements are met. 
1  Varun Grover is the accepting senior editor for this article.
2  The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful feedback of the senior editor and the reviewers. The authors also thank Alan 
Dennis and Arun Rai for providing insightful feedback on earlier versions of this article.

3  Agile development is an iterative approach to ISD that emphasizes the production of working software in small releases. See 
Fowler, M. and Highsmith, J. ﬁThe Agile Manifesto,ﬂ 
Software Development
 (9:8), 2001, pp. 28-35 for a discussion of the underlying philosophy of agile development.
4  Beck, K. ﬁEmbracing Change with Extreme Programming,ﬂ Computer (32:10), 1999, pp. 70-77; and Beck, K. Extreme 
Programming Explained: Embrace Change
, 2000, Addison-Wesley.
5  Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. 
Agile Software Development with Scrum,
 2005, Prentice Hall; and Pichler, R. ﬁCommon Product 
Owner Traps,ﬂ 2010, 
Scrum Alliance, available at http://www.scrumalliance.org/community/articles/.
A Competency Model for Customer 
Representatives in Agile Software 

Development ProjectsIn an agile software development project, customer representatives (CRs) have explic
-it and implicit responsibilities that facilitate the creation of software to meet evolv
-ing customer needs in a timely manner. We describe a competency model for effective 
CRs that was developed following interviews with four agile development teams. The 

model comprises 10 competencies grouped within three competency areas: Business, 

Socio-Relational and Systems. We provide recommendations for CIOs on how to use 

the model as a tool for communication, education and training, performance assess
-
ment and diagnostics.1,2Sabine Matook

University of Queensland 

(Australia)
Likoebe M. Maruping

University of Louisville (U. S.)
 78    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2)CRs are assigned explicit and implicit 
responsibilities within an agile ISD project.
6 Failure to satisfy these responsibilities has 
adverse effects on development outcomes, 

leading to substantially increased development 

costs, delayed software releases and erroneously 

implemented business functionality.
7 Broad 
consensus exists among practitioners and 

academics about the importance and impact of 

the CR role in agile ISD projects: 
ﬁThe success of 

agile development hinges on – customers who will 

actively participate in the development process.ﬂ
8 Given the importance of the CR role, it comes as 

a surprise how little is formally known about 



about the competencies CRs require so they can 

effectively perform the role and carry out the 

assigned responsibilities. 
Information about required competencies is 
normally captured in competency models through 

detailed descriptions of the required skills, 

knowledge, attitudes and traits a person needs 

to effectively perform a particular organizational 

role.
9 Databases for competency models, such as 
the U.S.-based
 Occupational Information Network 
(O*Net) or the U.K.-established 
Skills Framework 
for the Information Age,
 offer a plethora of 

models for all kinds of occupations. Yet no such 

framework or competency model currently exists 

for CRs in agile ISD. This gap may exist because 

the CR role is not a classic job role for which an 

organization™s HR department externally recruits. 
6  These responsibilities include, for example, providing 
requirements and performing acceptance tests, as well as liaising 
and maintaining trust with various organizational stakeholders. See 

Martin, A., Biddle, R. and Noble, J. ﬁThe Customer Role in Practice: 

Three Studies,ﬂ Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference,
 2004, pp. 42-54.
7  In a study of agile ISD projects in the U.S. and New Zealand, Hoda and colleagues found that important business functionality was 
erroneously implemented when CRs did not prioritize requirements 
and delayed responses on how to implement requirements. See Hoda, 
R., Noble, J. and Marshall, S. ﬁThe Impact of Inadequate Customer 
Collaboration on Self-Organizing Agile Teams,ﬂ 
Information and Software Technology 
(53:5), 2011, pp. 521-534.
8  Nerur and colleagues came to this conclusion when researching the challenges that an organization faces in migrating to agile 

methods. See Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R. and Mangalaraj, G. 

ﬁChallenges of Migrating to Agile Methodologies,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (48:5), 2005, pp. 72-78. However, they note that 

identifying such a suitable CR is not an easy task.
9  See McClelland, D. C. ﬁTesting for Competence Rather than 
Intelligence,ﬂ American Psychologist (28), 1973, pp. 1-14. This is the 
seminal work about the elements of competency models, but the HR 

the creation of such a model more of an art than a science.For classic job roles, organizations typically 

rely on a competency model for advertising 

and interviewing for a position. The fact that a 

CR is only temporarily assigned to an agile ISD 

project might be another reason why no such 

competency model exists. 
However, without a CR competency model, 


can emerge about the knowledge, skills, attitudes 

and general dispositions that CRs need to have. 

Left unmanaged, this can make the involvement 

of a designated CR in an agile ISD project 

counter-productive and, as mentioned above, can 

adversely affect the project, the ISD team and the 

customer. 

competency model for CRs that is based on key 

activities they perform to satisfy the different role 

responsibilities in agile ISD. The research for this 

article comprised interviews with representatives 

in four agile ISD teams in two Australian 

companies. To preserve their anonymity, we 

refer to them as Sparkasse and Werkstatt. (The 

Appendix contains further information about the 

research method.) The competency model was 

developed from the interview data and includes 

three broad competency areas: 
Business, Socio-
Relational
 and Systems,
 each of which includes 
a set of competencies. This multi-dimensional 

competency model can be used by CIOs as a 

tool for identifying, communicating, evaluating, 

educating and training employees to ensure their 

effectiveness in the CR role. 
Different Responsibilities of Customer Representatives in Software Development ProjectsDifferent Forms of Customer 
Representative in Software 
Development ProjectsCustomers have long participated in ISD 
projectsŠeven before the emergence of agile 

methods. However, as illustrated in Table 1, CRs 

play a more prominent role in agile development 

than in traditional approaches and, therefore, 

a CR has the potential to have a far greater 

 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    7910The key difference with agile development 
stems from the openness to changing 
requirements coupled with short development 

cycles that lead to differences in how knowledge 

is created and transferred between the ISD team 

and the customer.
11 Because intensive face-to-face 
communication is the preferred 
modus operandi
 
in an agile projectŠwhere knowledge is mostly 

tacit and needs to be contextualized with minimal 

documentation12Šprominent agile practitioners 
advocate having a dedicated and co-located CR. 

While co-location is required in XP, other agile 

methods are not so prescriptive. This is largely 

because agile academics and practitioners 

caution that insistence on a full-time CR may 

cause customers 
ﬁto supply the person who is most 

expendable.ﬂ
13 10 The comparison in the table is based on Nerur, S., Mahapatra, 
R. and Mangalaraj, G., op. cit., 2005, expanded by Dybå, T. and 

Dingsøyr, T. ﬁEmpirical Studies of Agile Software Development: A 

Systematic Review,ﬂ 
Information and Software Technology 
(50:9-10), 2008, pp. 833-859.
11
  Sarker, S. and Sarker, S. ﬁExploring Agility in Distributed 
Information Systems Development Teams: An Interpretive Study in 

an Offshoring Context,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
 (20:3), 2009, pp. 440-461.
12  See Highsmith, J. and Cockburn, A. ﬁAgile Software 
Development: The Business of Innovation,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer (9:34), 2001, pp.120-122, which describes communication patterns between 
the agile ISD team and the customer representative.
13  See Boehm, B. and Turner, R. 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: 
A Guide for the Perplexed,
 2004, Addison-Wesley, p. 44.
Customer Representative 
Responsibilities in Agile Development 
ProjectsIn agile ISD projects, CRs face a broad set 
of responsibilities that are either explicitly or 

implicitly assumed to be part of the CR role. As 

Figure 1 illustrates, the explicit responsibilities 

of CRs relate to providing requirements and 

evaluating software quality.
14
scope and outlining the functionality of the 

software has traditionally been a CR task. 



portrayed as a collaborative process between the 

CR and ISD team, which allows shared mental 

models to emerge.
15 Similarly, evaluating the 
outcomes of an ISD project after delivery has also 

traditionally been performed by the customer. 

Yet, with the agile model, these activities are 

undertaken repeatedly in each cycle, allowing 

for changes to the software throughout the 

project. In the eyes of the customer department, 

the CR becomes the logical choice for these 

responsibilities because of the frequent 

interactions and co-location with the ISD team. 
In addition to explicit responsibilities, the 
CR has two key implicit responsibilities: liaising 
14  For a discussion of the explicit CR responsibilities, see Martin, A., Biddle, R. and Noble, J., op. cit., 2004; and Ramesh, B., Cao, 
L. and Baskerville, R. ﬁAgile Requirements Engineering Practices 
and Challenges: An Empirical Study,ﬂ 
Information Systems Journal 
(20:5), 2010, pp. 449-480.

Chakraborty, S., Sarker, S. and Sarker, S. ﬁAn Exploration into the 

Process of Requirements Elicitation: A Grounded Approach,ﬂ 
Journal 
of the Association for Information Systems 
(11:4), 2010, pp. 212-249.
Table 1: Customer Representation in Traditional and Agile Software Development
10




































 80    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2)with other organizational stakeholders (top-
management, steering committees, funders 

and other departments) and maintaining 
trust with the ISD team, the customer and the 

larger organization.
16 Liaising with various 
organizational constituents ensures their points 

of view are considered and their requirements for 

the system being developed are understood. Such 

liaising also obtains support for, and commitment 

to, the project. Maintaining trust leads to 

cooperative behaviors, a reduced need for 



confront performance problems. Trusting in the 

CR requires believing the person is competent, 

acts with integrity in the interests of the ISD 

project and exhibits consistent behaviors.
17
responsibilities, CRs are expected to perform 

various activities within an agile ISD project. 

However, academic writings and practitioner 

reports lack comprehensive accounts of the CR 

role and what CRs need to do in an agile project. 

Such an understanding is crucial if the ISD 

community is to understand which competencies 

a CR should possess. Thus, insights into CR 

activities are a key prerequisite to developing a 

competency model for CRs.
16  For details on the implicit responsibilities of CRs in agile projects, see Martin, A., Biddle, R. and Noble, J., op. cit., 2004.

17  McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L. L. and Chervany, N. L. ﬁInitial 
Trust Formation in New Organizational Relationships,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Review (21:3), 1998, pp. 473-490.The Need for a  CR Competency ModelCompetency models are detailed descriptions 
of the skills and knowledge (overt competencies), 

and attitudes and traits (covert competencies) 

necessary to be effective in an organizational role 

or position.
18 Competencies describe abilities 
and the expected behaviors needed to perform 

an activity or process in a competent manner.
19 Companies traditionally use competency models 

for recruitment, appraisal, training and staff 

planning. These models make it possible to 

determine how well a person performs in a role 

and to outline learning needs to improve the 

effectiveness of the position holder.
20 Over the years, different approaches have 
emerged for developing competency models, 

including:  Developing the model from scratch for a 

particular job Adjusting an existing competency 

model for a similar position within the 

organization

for HR Professionals,ﬂ Human Resource Management
 (35:1), 1996, pp. 7-18.
19  Skills express what a CR should be able to doŠi.e., a learned capability; knowledge expresses what a CR should knowŠi.e., facts, 
concepts and information; attitudes express how the CR feelsŠi.e., 
values and beliefs; and traits express a CR™s dispositions and physical 

characteristics. However, so far no accepted distinction between the 

terms has surfaced in management research.
20  Lucia, A. D. and Lepsinger, R. 
The Art and Science of 
Competency Models, 1999, Jossey-Bass.Figure 1: CR Responsibilities in Agile Development Projects
 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    81 Creating a model using extensive pre-
populated competency libraries from 

which a set of competencies is chosen. 
Irrespective of the approach used, details on 
the role™s activities need to be known before the 

associated competencies can be derived. When 

starting from scratch, these activities are obtained 

through extensive interviews and observations. 
The other two approaches rely on existing 
competency models of similar job positions that 
are then altered for the new role. 
IS researchers have developed competency 
models with a particular focus on skills for roles 
such as IT managers, service providers or general 
IT professionals. These models are based on 
publicly available job advertisements, in-depth 

interviews or existing skill libraries. Lee and Lee 

examined 555 job advertisements of Fortune 

500 companies to create a library of skills for 

IT managers, with categories such as technical 

skills, business skills and systems skills.
21 Recently, Hawk and colleagues collaborated 

with the Society for Information Management 

to elicit and compare the skillsets required of IT 

service providers and their customers. Through 

interviews with senior IT executives, they were 

able to identify four different categoriesŠ

technical skills, project management skills, 

business domain skills and sourcing (i.e., buying 

and selling).
22 These studies showed that IS 
roles, even managerial ones, require technical 

and business skills. A study by Chakraborty and 



used by user representatives in the requirements-


23 However, the agile development literature has 
ignored the need for a broader mix of skills and 

knowledge for CRs. This underscores the need for 

a competency model for CRs. In an effort to create 

this competency model, based on empirical data 

gathered from four agile ISD projects, we now 

present the key CR activities categorized under 
21  Job advertisements were the main data source used in Lee, S. M. and Lee, C. K. ﬁIT Managers™ Requisite Skills,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (49:4), 2006, pp. 111-114, whereas a questionnaire with 



ﬁBusiness Competence of Information Technology Professionals: 



MIS Quarterly (28:4), 2004, pp. 673-694.
22  Hawk, S., Kaiser, K. M., Goles, T., Bullen, C. V., Simon, J. C., 
Beath, C. M., Gallagher, K. P. and Frampton, K. ﬁThe Information 

Technology Workforce: A Comparison of Critical Skills of Clients 

and Service Providers,ﬂ Information Systems Management (29:1), 2012, pp. 2-12.
23  See Chakraborty, S., Sarker, S. and Sarker, S., op. cit., 2010.
the explicit and implicit responsibilities, and 

subsequently derive the CR competency model.
CR Activities in Agile Development ProjectsThe explicit and implicit CR responsibilities in 
ISD projects and the associated 11 CR activities 
are described below and summarized in Table 2.
Explicit CR ResponsibilitiesManaging Requirements.
 An explicit CR 
responsibility is to perform activities that are 
focused on managing the software requirements. 

As our study data shows, this includes providing, 

clarifying and prioritizing requirements. The CR 





that later, in collaboration with the ISD team, 

are decomposed into more detailed user story 

cards. We also found that CRs™ ongoing clarifying 

and prioritizing activities provide clarity on 

the meaning of requirements and how best to 

implement them. Drawing on their business-



and explain complicated but essential product 

features. Our interviewees mentioned that 

misinterpreted or misunderstood requirements 

would delay the project due to the need to rework 

erroneously implemented requirements, resulting 

in extra project costs. 
ﬁAs soon as you get into the documentation, 

that™s always going to be open to 

interpretations, so there™s nothing better 

than clarifying and simplifying with 

communication; so that™s the key, I guess, for 

things to have a high quality.ﬂ 
(Developer, 
Werkstatt Team 2)
ﬁWe do need to have more details in some 
of the stories, because otherwise developers 

could think that™s what the business wants, 

and not quite get it right.ﬂ 
(Project manager, 

Sparkasse Team 2)
Managing the list of requirements and 
deciding on the priorities of each requirement is 

driven by the importance of a feature. We found 

that CRs perform this activity through a process 

of critical thinking based on their understanding 

of how the business operates (domain and 

process knowledge). Occasionally, when faced 
 82    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2)with various alternatives or when the CR was 
not sure about a requirement, he or she also 

needed to consult with the relevant customer 

department. 
ﬁWe [developers] would go to him [the CR] 

and say we™d like to do it this way, and then 

he would take that, listen to our feedback 

and then he would say, okay, I need to take 

this away and double-crunch it and think 
about it. And we knew that when he said 
that, that he had to think about it. And that 
he had to go back to his old role and pass it 

through his team, his business people, and 


fact, that type of communication works for 
us.ﬂ 
(Developer, Sparkasse Team 1)
The CR™s decision-making process about 
prioritizing and reprioritizing requirements 

involves weighing alternatives and requires 
that CRs have a good understanding of the 
possibilities that the agile ISD method providesŠ
that is, to make changes throughout the project. 

CRs also need to understand what they can expect 

from the ISD team in a single iteration. 
ﬁI think I have a good understanding of 

what™s possible from them [the ISD team], 

so I don™t have unrealistic expectations. We 

are very good at talking about what the 

drivers are and how we make the decision 

about what™s important. So that helps my 
decision-making process as well.ﬂ 
(CR, Sparkasse Team 2)
. Managing Quality.
 Within an agile ISD project, 
assessing and approving the quality of the 

software is traditionally a customer responsibility, 
which is achieved through constant and frequent 
feedback loops. There are two types of feedback 
loops: planned acceptance testing and ad-hoc 
Table 2: CR Activities in Agile ISD Projects







1) 

2) 

3) 





4) 



5) 















6) 



7) 


8) 















9) 


10) 


11) 


 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    83commenting.24 Acceptance testing is a formal 
agile development practice where the CR tests the 
software to make sure that the requirements are 

included and have been implemented according 



described acceptance testing as a straightforward 

activity that involved a 
ﬁlot of testing, signing off 

the cards and approving them for deployment.ﬂ 

(CR, Sparkasse Team 2) However, when defects 



activity requires the CR to enforce quality 

standards, to reason with the ISD team and insist 

on immediate corrective action. The rationale for 

this behavior was explained as follows: 
ﬁThe implication appears to be that if it™s a 

change, it has to get reprioritized, if it™s a 


prioritized. So that™s why we always try and 
say, no, it™s not a change.ﬂ 
(CR, Sparkasse 
Team 2)
In addition to planned acceptance testing, 
CRs also provide impromptu feedback during an 
agile development iteration. Agile practices such 

as daily stand-ups, co-location and wandering 

through the rows of paired programmers 

(where two programmers work together at the 

workstation) provide opportunities for such ad-

hoc interactions. CRs found the ad-hoc feedback 

 It represents a chance to control and 



an ongoing basis to ensure adherence to 

development goals
 It does not require the CR to wait for 

the scheduled feedback opportunity of 

acceptance testing to evaluate the software
 The exchanged knowledge (via ad-hoc 

comments) is advanced compared to the 

information in the original user story card 

and, therefore, educates CRs on alternative, 

and potentially better, ways to implement 

a requirement. 
Interview data from developers showed that 
they too appreciate the spontaneous feedback 
and the related pre-evaluation of their work 
24  It is important to note that acceptance testing focuses on how well the software meets the requirements set out in the story cards. This is separate from unit testing, which is focused on ensuring the 
proper functioning of the software code (e.g., making sure data inputs 
are processed correctly, the application does not crash and the output 

is accurate).



delays for the ongoing iteration and, when 

feedback is supportive, instills a sense of personal 



good relationships between the CR and the ISD 

team are essential, as is the CR™s awareness about 

communicating the ad-hoc feedback in a nuanced 

and sensitive manner. Overly critical comments 

can inadvertently lead to adverse effects such as 

developers ﬁshutting downﬂ or ceasing to invite 

ad-hoc feedback. 
Implicit CR ResponsibilitiesLiaising with Diverse Organizational 
Stakeholders.
 Liaising with stakeholders is a 

time-intensive activity for CRs, which requires 

them to have a broad and diverse network of 

organizational contacts to which they can turn. 

Our data suggests that successfully engaging 

with stakeholders requires the CR to be savvy 

in creating support for the project, obtaining 

consensus on key requirements and ensuring that 

nothing stands in the way of achieving the project 

goals. Interviewees explained that, although the 

CR represents one customer department, he or 

she also needs to consider requirements from 

other associated departments to guarantee, for 

example, regulatory compliance and software 

security. 
ﬁ... as a CR, I should be able to liaise with 

multiple people. So there will be product 

teams, and security, fraud and legalŠ

it™s my responsibility to make sure that 

everything goes into the project from the 

business – ﬂ 
(CR, Sparkasse Team 1)
While interacting with others, the CR is in 
a good position to remove any roadblocks that 
might impede project progress. Identifying 
roadblocks and how to resolve them requires 
close collaboration with the ISD team and other 

part of the CR. ﬁ– if they™re hitting any roadblocks that 
they think will be an issue, it™s working with 

the team to make sure that we get around 

that roadblock.ﬂ 
(CR, Werkstatt Team 1)
When liaising with organizational 
stakeholders, CRs also perform resource-related 

activities on behalf of the ISD team. Although 
 84    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2)the team needs and appreciates the support 
of the CR for additional resources, neither 

the traditional ISD literature nor the agile ISD 

literature has paid much attention to this implicit 

CR responsibility. We found that CRs are actively 

involved in allocating resources to development 

iterations and are instrumental in facilitating 

additional resources when circumstances 

demand it. CR support for resource requests 

provides additional credibility for the request. To 

good relationships with them and must possess 

an active network because, without these, the 

CR has no access, and his or her opinion may not 

hold much sway. 
ﬁI™m very good friends of the CIO and IT 

program director, and we™ve had some 

pretty tough conversations together – 

about resourcing, about agile and what™s 

going on with the team. – Thus, I would 

say – I need a resource, we need to make 

this happen, so they [senior management] 

will juggle that and get me an extra tester 

for a couple of weeks to make it happen.ﬂ 

(CR, Werkstatt Team 2)
Managing Trust with the ISD Team and 
the Wider Organization.
 The second implicit 
responsibility of CRs is to maintain trust with 

the ISD team and the wider business. Trust is 

important for maintaining cooperation and a 

continuing focus on working toward project 
goals. To achieve this, the CR performs activities 

ability to deliver), empathizing (caring for the 

team™s interests) and evangelizing (trumpeting 

the team™s achievements).
25 It is essential that 
CRs convincingly communicate the trust they 

have in the team™s ability to deliver. The close 

ties established through frequent interactions 

and co-location can make this possible. We found 

that the social bonds and the CR™s empathy are 

crucial for facilitating project progress, especially 

when tasks are challenging, the team lacks an 

understanding of the commercial reasons for 

certain decisions and fatigue sets in. 
25  In fact, Nelson notes that nothing affects productivity and 
quality in ISD projects more than the ISD team™s motivation. 

Nelson, R. R. ﬁIT Project Management: Infamous Failures, Classic 

Mistakes, and Best Practices,ﬂ MIS Quarterly Executive (6:2), 2007, pp. 67-78.ﬁIt™s communicating back to them [the 

ISD team] the success story of why it was 

important to deliver on that day. I have 

to change their mindset to convince them 

that commercially we are going down the 

right path.ﬂ 
(CR, Werkstatt Team 1)
In summary, CRs in agile ISD perform several 
activities (which were listed in Table 2) beyond 
those suggested in the academic literature and 
practitioner reports.
26 This means, in turn, that 
the explicit and implicit responsibilities of CRs 
are also much broader and more diverse than 

emphasize the importance of the CR role in 
agile ISD projects, they also allude to the many 

different competencies required of CRs to master 

these responsibilities.
CR Competency Model for Agile Development ProjectsProcess for Deriving CR Competencies
understanding of what this role encompassesŠ

the tasks, actions and responsibilities of CRs in 

agile ISD projects. This understanding enabled 

us to derive the CR competencies that would 

allow an assigned CR to effectively undertake the 

role and hence perform the activities expected 

by the agile ISD team and other stakeholders. 

Our data analysis suggests that CRs need a set 

of competencies for the different explicit and 

implicit activities. In deriving the competencies, 

we analyzed the interview data to seek out 

connections made by interviewees between a 

CR activity and the competency (e.g., ability, skill 

and knowledge) necessary for performing the 

activity. We found that these connections were 

made in three different ways:
1. An interviewee directly mentioned an 

ability, skill or competency as important 

for undertaking the CR role. For example, 

a tester from Werkstatt Team 2 stated: 

ﬁWhat actually we look for over there is 

more communication skills.ﬂ
 We therefore 
26  For more information, see Sillitti, A., Ceschi, M., Russo, B. 
and Succi, G. ﬁManaging Uncertainty in Requirements: A Survey 

in Documentation-driven and Agile Companies,ﬂ 
11th IEEE 
International Software Metrics Symposium (METRICS 2005),
 Como, 
Italy, September 19-22, 2005, pp. 10-15.
 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    85noted communication skills as important 
for CRs.
2. An interviewee described an activity 
and added an expectation of a CR 
ability, competency or skill that the 
CR would need to possess to perform 

that activity. For example, the CR from 

Sparkasse Team 1 stated that the team 
ﬁ– had expressed [to the CR] that we 
need decisions and we need them quick–ﬂ 
when requirements described on the 

story cards were ambiguous or did not 

the CR needs management
 competency 
and coordination
 skill because he or she is expected to perform the activity of 

clarifying a requirement.
3. An interviewee described an activity and 

explained how (i.e., by which abilities, 
skills or knowledge) the CR was able 
to perform the activity. For example, a 

developer from Sparkasse Team 1 made 
a connection between the CR activity 
of clarifying a requirement 
and the CR competence of 
problem solving 
and the related skill of
 analytical thinking 
by 
stating: ﬁWe would go to him [to the CR] 
with a requirement issue ... then he would 

take that, listen to our feedback and then 
he would say, okay, I need to take this away 
and double-crunch it and think about it. 

And we knew that when he said that, that 
he had to think about it.ﬂ
 From this analysis, we derived a rich 
repertoire of abilities, skills and knowledge 
relating to CR activities. Through multiple rounds 

of discussions within the research team, the 

abilities, skills and knowledge were sorted and 

grouped by the two researchers in an effort to 

cluster similar ones together and to separate 
different ones. As a result, we arrived at a 
cohesive set of 10 CR competencies within three 
competency areas that include multiple skills and 

knowledge. 
Overview of the Three CR Competency 
Areas Our CR competency model for agile 
ISD projects has three competency areas: 

Business, Socio-Relational and Systems. The 

different abilities that are important to 
several CR activities.
27 CRs will need to use 
the competencies in concert because there 

is no singular link between an activity and a 

competency. 
1. Business Competency Area.
 This competency area represents the business and 

management aspects of the CR competency 

model. It captures CR competencies that are 

relevant for representing the customer™s 

environment and the managerial competencies 

to manage a project. This area contains three 

competencies that express the nature of the 

business and closely related business topics:
 Domain competency:
 The ability to 

understand the broad function of the 

business department, its performance 

metrics and the business processes 

supported
 Resource mobilization competency:
 The ability to access and allocate the resources 
necessary for the agile development 
project to progress
 Management competency:
 The ability 
to direct and administer the agile 

development process to create the 
software that meets business needs.
2. Socio-Relational Competency Area. 
This competency area represents the social and 
people aspects of the CR competency model. 

It emphasizes that the process of developing 

software for a customer is as much a social 

process as it is a technical one. The competencies 

included in this area are sometimes referred to 

as ﬁsoftﬂ to capture their inherent socialness. 

The three competencies in this area highlight 

the importance of relationships in human 

interactions: 
 Relationship-building competency:
 The 
ability of the CR to establish and maintain 

interpersonal relationships with ISD team 

members27  It is important to point out that we only focus on skills and knowledge, as these two components of a competency are overt 
characteristics that are actionable for a company when compared to 
attitudes and traits. We recognize that there is no clean one-to-one 

mapping of competencies to areas, and, subsequently, of skills and 

knowledge to competencies. We grouped the skills and knowledge 


are expected to be most relevant. 86    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2) Negotiation competency:
 The ability to 
leverage relationships with the ISD team 

and with other stakeholders to achieve 

project-related ends while taking account 

of different stakeholder interests
 Motivation competency: 
The ability 
to boost and channel the ISD team™s 

morale to overcome challenging project 

situations.3. Systems Competency Area.
 The Systems 
competency area represents the systems and 

technology aspects of the CR competency 

model. The competencies included in this area 

capture the skills and knowledge needed to 
conceptualize and build the software, thereby 
solving technology-related problems that emerge 
during the process. The four competencies 
included in this area capture the CR™s abilities 
regarding the agile development process but do 
not include technical aspects of constructing the 
software: 
 Development method competency:
 The ability to understand the process 
by which agile methods transform 
requirements into a functioning software 
system
 Problem-solving competency:
 The ability to work with the ISD team and 

other stakeholders to identify and 

implement solutions to problems with the 

development process or software product 
 Evaluation competency:
 The ability to 

understand and enforce core metrics for 

implemented requirements
 Delivery strategy competency:
 The ability to determine and set the amount and pace 
of feedback loops (acceptance tests).
The related skills and knowledge for each of 
the three competency areas are listed in Table 
3. We now describe each area, competency and 

related skills and knowledge in more detail.
Business Competency AreaThe Business competency area captures 
the skills and knowledge a CR should possess 

to assist the ISD team with the project and to 

assess the software product for the customer. 

The CR needs to know what the customer 

department wants implemented in the software 

to support business operations (domain
 competency). Competencies that relate to 

resource-mobilization activities and the general 
Table 3: Skills and Knowledge in the Three Competency Areas

Area


1. 



2. 

3. 




1. 

2. 

3. 


1. 

2. 



3. 

4. 
 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    87management ability of the CR are also included 
in the Business competency area. As discussed 

below, these three competencies enable the CR to 

perform a variety of activities.
Domain Competency.
 The two main 
activities enabled by the domain competency 

are: 1) Managing requirements (identifying, 

clarifying and prioritizing requirements) 

and 2) Managing quality (acceptance testing 

and providing ad-hoc feedback). The domain 



the functions and processes of the customer 

department. It is the responsibility of the CR to 

manage the requirements, and this means the 

CR must have intimate knowledge of the core 

business processes, how they are inter-related 

(e.g., process sequencing, interdependence) 

and their function (e.g., value-adding processes, 

mission critical processes). Furthermore, the 

CRs need knowledge about his or her functional 

area, including what type and format of data 

is needed in the department, the department™s 

position in the organizational value chain, which 

other departments depend on and consume 

the outputs produced, and the reporting 

structures and strategic objectives. Equipped 

with this knowledge, the CR can identify, clarify 

and prioritize the requirements for the team. 

In addition, it enables the CR to provide ad-

hoc feedback; the CR need refer only the most 



department.
Resource Mobilization Competency.
 The main activity enabled by the resource 

mobilization competency is liaising with 

diverse organizational stakeholders (acquiring 

and allocating resources). This competency 

involves accessing and disbursing the resources 

necessary to support the agile ISD project. 

The iterative nature of agile ISD requires 

conscientious budget allocation to ensure 



as well as future iterations. Hence, when CRs 

perform their resource-allocation activities, 

they need to have knowledge about what 

resources are available for the project (i.e., funds, 

personnel, equipment) and how best to allocate 

them to the tasks for the current development 

cycle. Additionally, because agile software 

development is open to changes in requirements, 


therefore needs the skills to marshal additional 

resources, either by supporting the ISD team in 

its requests for extra resources or by carrying 

out this activity on his or her own. 
Management Competency.
 The four main 
activities underpinned by the management 

competency are: 1) Managing requirements, 

2) Managing quality, 3) Liaising with diverse 

organizational stakeholders (coordinating tasks 

and people so that roadblocks for the ISD team 

are overcome) and 4) Managing trust with the 

ISD team and the wider organization (obtaining 

project support). This competency requires the 

CR to have a broad set of skills and knowledge 

to enable him or her to direct and administer 

the agile development process (decision 

making, coordination, monitoring and control). 

Although the skills and knowledge related to 

this competency are general in nature, they are 

crucial if an agile ISD project is to achieve its 

goals. Given the rapid pace at which development 

occurs and the need to balance the interests 

of various stakeholders, decision-making and 

coordination skills are necessary. Monitoring 

and control skills are important to ensure that 

development efforts remain aligned with project 

objectives. Organic approaches to development, 

such as agile ISD, are prone to veering off-course 

if not carefully monitored. Thus, to effectively 

master the responsibilities associated with the 

assessment of project deliverables, the CR must 

be capable of determining when requirements 

have not been implemented as agreed and 

subsequently take actions to rectify the issues.
Socio-Relational Competency AreaThe Socio-Relational competency area 
includes three competencies and their related 

skills and knowledge. Agile ISD is positioned as 

a relational process, and emotions can run high 

when the pressure to deliver is on. Indeed, a 

core tenet of agile development is an emphasis 

on people and interactions over processes 



morale, frustration and counter-productive 

motives can emerge and have adverse effects 

on project progress. Failing to be attuned to 

relational issues can easily derail a project. These 

competencies in the Socio-Relational area enable 

the CR to perform the activities below.
 88    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2)Relationship-Building Competency.
 The 
three main activities enabled by the relationship-
building competency are: 1) Managing quality 

(providing ad-hoc feedback), 2) Liaising with 

diverse organizational stakeholders (removing 

roadblocks and obtaining project support) and 

3) Managing trust with the ISD team and the 

wider organization (motivating, empathizing 

and evangelizing). This competency involves 

establishing and maintaining interpersonal 
relationships with agile ISD team members 
and colleagues in the business department and 

the wider organization. Building relationships 

enhances the collaboration experience in agile 

ISD because team members are more willing 

to share their ideas and build on each other™s 

comments and actions.28 Empathy (e.g., caring 
about team members who work long hours) and 

close relationships build trust between the ISD 

team and the CR. This is important since the CR 

is the main interface between the ISD team and 

the customer department. Being skilled in this 



responsibility of stakeholder liaison where he or 

she needs to rely on strong, close relationships 

to be able to remove roadblocks and obtain 

additional project resources. 
We have included communication under the 
relationship-building competency even though it 

is also a crucial skill for CRs in almost all of their 

activities. CRs need to be able to communicate 

well when managing requirements and quality. 

Communication skills are also necessary to 

engage and create trust among everyone of 

importance to the ISD project.
29 Negotiation Competency.
 The negotiation 
competency underpins three main activities: 

1) Managing requirements (prioritizing 

requirements) 2) Managing quality 

(acceptance testing) and 3) Liaising with 
28  A laboratory study on digitally enabled teams found that, 
when strong team relationships have been established, improved 
idea exchange and integration patterns emerged. See Robert, L. P., 

Dennis, A. R. and Ahuja, M. K. ﬁSocial Capital and Knowledge 

Integration in Digitally Enabled Teams,ﬂ 
Information Systems 
Research
 (19:3), 2008, pp. 314-334.
29  Our decision to include communication skills in the Socio-Relational competency area is consistent with the literature on 
human behavior and interpersonal communication that considers 
this skill as inherently human and tightly linked to the individual. 
For further reading on this topic, see Watzlawick, P., Bavelas, 

J. B., Jackson, D. D. and O™Hanlon, B. Pragmatics of Human 
Communication: A Study of Interactional Patterns, Pathologies, and 

Paradoxes, 1967, W. W. Norton and Company.
diverse organizational stakeholders (removing 

roadblocks and obtaining project support). This 

competency provides CRs with the ability to 

leverage established relationships with the ISD 

team and other stakeholders to achieve project-

related ends. 
In any given organization, there are often 
multiple interests that divert resources and 

attention from an agile development project. 

Hence, CRs need to be able to discern and 
support these varying interests, especially as 
they may be convergent in some respects and 

divergent in others. Consequently, skills that 

contribute to an active use of the CR™s network 

are highly desirable, as they will facilitate the 

CR activities of liaising with stakeholders and 

developing trust. 
The negotiation competency also enables CRs 


to understand how to get support from other 

stakeholders for the project by tapping into the 

CR™s existing social network. For example, during 

acceptance testing activities, the CR needs to 

negotiate with, and persuade, the ISD team about 

not moving the implementation of a requirement 

to a subsequent development iteration. 
Important skills underlying the negotiation 
competency include the perceptiveness to sense 

the demands of various stakeholders, the ability 

to persuade to convince, and the diplomacy 

to balance motives and interests. CRs also 

need these skills when interacting with CIOs 

or departmental managers about additional 

resources and when acting as an evangelist for 

the ISD team and its achievements to attract 

attention and support (e.g., additional project 

resources) from more distant stakeholders. 

Without negotiation competency, CRs would 

be less capable of performing certain activities 

comprehensively (e.g., prioritizing, acceptance 

testing and resource allocation). 
Motivation Competency.
 The motivation 
competency underpins two main activities: 1) 

Liaising with diverse organizational stakeholders 

to overcome project impediments and 2) 

Managing trust with the ISD team and the wider 

organization (motivating and empathizing). 

A CR™s motivation competency is important 

because it enables the CR to boost and channel 

the agile ISD team™s morale in challenging 

situations.  June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    89Based on our data, an implicit responsibility 
of CRs is to motivate ISD team members to 
continue with their development efforts in 

situations when they doubt the possibility 

of succeeding or question the rationale for 

continuing. During these challenging moments, 

team morale can be tested, creating the need 

for a boost. A competent CR is capable of 

being motivational when necessary and of 

compromising when the situation demands 
it. Being able to inspire people might be seen 
as a higher level of motivational skill, but it is 

a skill we believe is important for CRs in agile 

development projects because of the nature of 

such projects. The high receptiveness to change, 

evolving requirements and the evolutionary 

delivery schedule of agile projects create an 

environment of uncertainty, making it easy for 

the agile ISD team to lose focus, get side-tracked 

and give up. A CR who can instill enthusiasm and 

inspire the ISD team to believe in its strengths 

and abilities is important for achieving project 

outcomes.
Systems Competency AreaDepending on the agile development 
approach chosen, CRs are partially or fully 

assigned to an ISD team. With a full-time 

assignment, CRs are completely embedded in 



to them. Thus, CRs with knowledge and skills 

of the development method would be better 

prepared for the role. Once the agile ISD project 

is underway, and the CR is comfortable with 

the development domain, more development-

focused competencies are needed. These 

competencies include problem solving, 

evaluation and the delivery
 strategy competency. 
They support the CR in performing the activities 

discussed below.
Development Method Competency.
 The development method competency underpins 

two main activities: 1) Managing requirements 

(identifying, clarifying and prioritizing 

requirements) and 2) Managing quality 

(acceptance testing and providing ad-hoc 



for CRs to have an understanding of the process 

by which agile development methods transform 

requirements into a functioning system. It also 

includes knowledge about concepts, such as the 
evolutionary nature of the development method, 



upfront, and recognizing that changes are 

possible and welcomed. For activities relating 

to the CR™s explicit responsibilities, knowledge 

of the development method prepares the CR for 

his or her role and also provides understanding 

of issues such as why the team needs rapid 

feedback before it can proceed. 
In addition, CRs need knowledge about 
system operations and the system in general 
to appreciate how the developed software 
integrates with the organization™s larger IT 
landscape. These considerations are important 
for CRs when performing testing and also when 
providing ad-hoc feedback and prioritizing 
requirements. For example, a lack of awareness 
about dependencies between features can lead 
to poor decisions about the order in which inter-
related features are implemented.
Problem-Solving Competency.
 The 
three main activities underpinned by the 
problem-solving competency are: 1) Managing 
requirements (clarifying and prioritizing 
requirements), 2) Managing quality (providing 

ad-hoc feedback) and 3) Liaising with diverse 

organizational stakeholders (removing 
roadblocks and acquiring additional project 
resources). This is an important CR competency, 
as it encapsulates the ability to work with the 

ISD team and other stakeholders to identify 

and implement solutions to problems with the 
development process or software product. 
Although research and practice show that the 

unanticipated problems inevitably arise from 

it. Resolving these problems as they arise and 
estimating the downstream implications requires 
CRs to have deductive and inductive reasoning 
skills, as well as the skills for creative and 
analytical thinking. These skills are especially 
important for CR activities that cannot be 
rehearsed ahead of time, such as providing 
ad-hoc feedback or clarifying a requirement 
on the spot. Creative thinking and coming up 
with unconventional solutions has proven to 
be helpful when the CR is trying to remove 
roadblocks for the team to ensure barrier-free 
development. 
Evaluation Competency.
 The evaluation 
competency underpins the activity of managing 
 90    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2)quality (acceptance testing and providing ad-hoc 


and enforce core metrics for implemented 

requirements. This competency is important 

when CRs manage quality and, thus, perform 

activities such as acceptance testing and 

approval of implemented functions. Indeed, 

the iterative and fast-paced nature of agile ISD 

demands that CRs be able to regularly verify 

whether implemented functions pass acceptance 
tests and do so in a timely manner. Failure to 
do so can result in delays for the entire project 

as the story card gets put on hold, needs to be 

reprioritized and potentially moved into a future 

iteration. 
Important skills that enable CRs to 
competently undertake evaluation include 

attention to detail and general knowledge about 

how to perform an evaluation. CRs also need to 

have fortitude when evaluating the outcome 

of software development, so they can enforce 

acceptance standards. This skill is also important 

for the negotiation competency (part of the 

Socio-Relational competency area) because CRs 

may develop workplace friendships due to the 

close working environment with the ISD team 

(i.e., co-location). These friendships may impair 

the CR™s willingness to insist on adherence to 

acceptance standards, causing the CR to accept a 



foremost have fortitude when negotiating. 
Delivery Strategy Competency.
 This competency underpins three main activities: 

1) Managing requirements (clarifying and 

prioritizing requirements), 2) Managing 

quality (acceptance testing and providing ad-

hoc feedback) and 3) Liaising with diverse 



of the project (removing roadblocks and 

acquiring or allocating resources). It also 

provides the ability to set the amount and pace 

of feedback loops. As our data illustrates, CRs 

receive numerous requests to prioritize story 

cards, perform acceptance tests and sign off on 

completed cards. In addition, CRs are expected to 

provide ad-hoc feedback to a multitude of people 

(e.g. developers, testers, business analysts) so 

as not to impede development progress in the 

time frame established. To add to the demands, 

CRs are also asked to interact with various 
stakeholders throughout the organization for the 


Taken together, these demands mean 
that CRs are expected to perform numerous 

activities that may overwhelm and ﬁparalyzeﬂ an 

unprepared CR. CRs thus need planning skills 

so they can be more deliberate about when and 



that are essential for the successful completion 

of a project. Competent CRs draw upon self-
regulation skills when establishing a rhythm for 
performing acceptance tests and signing off on 

story cards. Self-regulation skills enable them 

to better decide the amount of work they can 

accept so that each activity is still given its due 

attention.
The CR Competency Model in 
SummaryIn this study, we have developed a 
competency model for CRs in agile ISD projects. 

This model includes the competencies necessary 

to effectively perform the activities associated 

with explicit and implicit CR responsibilities, as 



the competency model in Figure 2 illustrates, 

the competencies are grouped into three areas 

that represent different aspects of the CR roleŠ

Business, Socio-Relational and Systems.
To adequately meet the demands of the 
explicit and implicit responsibilities in agile ISD, 

the three competency areas need to be integrated 

into the CR role. No area or competency 

dominates, but CRs cannot be effective in their 

role if they lack one of the competency areas. 

However, within one area, it might be possible 

to balance gaps in a competency with strengths 

in another competency. Undoubtedly, CRs will 

need to draw on different sets of skills and 

knowledge, depending on the activity they are 

performing at any point in time during the 

project. Thus, CRs cannot possess only some of 

the skills and knowledge and expect to effectively 

perform the role. Fortunately, some of these 

competencies, particularly those relating to the 

Systems competency area, can be developed 

and honed through experiential learning (i.e., 

learning by doing) in an agile ISD project.
30 This 30  See Chakraborty, S., Sarker, S. and Sarker, S., 2010, op. cit., 

user representatives during the course of a project. June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    91form of competency development is intrinsically 
motivated and not based on institutional 



skills and knowledge that can be integrated 

with their existing skillset. For example, 



may be used by the ISD team for managing 

requirements. If the CR lacks such knowledge, 

he or she can learn through observation or 

active participation in the estimating and 

planning process. The agile ISD team can 

actively support the learning process a CR goes 

through by, for example, teaching the CR about 

the missing competencies at the beginning of the 



hand experience can subsequently be leveraged 

as the CR fully participates in these activities.
Recommendations for CIOs on How to Use the CR Competency ModelThe CR competency model provides a 
roadmap for organizations on how to effectively 

manage this unique role. CIOs can use the 

model as a tool when interacting with different 
constituents (e.g., business managers, the larger 

organization and CRs) to improve the agile 

development process. 
1. Use the Competency Model as a 
Communication ToolThe competency model can be used by 
CIOs to communicate the knowledge and 

skills expected of someone in the CR role. The 

three competency areas and their associated 

competencies reduce ambiguity about the 

abilities and expertise that the CR needs to 

possess. The competency model can also be 

used as an aid to departmental managers as they 

go about selecting potential candidates for the 

CR role. As no descriptions of the competencies 

required for the CR position have previously 

been published, CIOs can use the competency 

model to explicitly and comprehensively 

communicate the desired competencies to 

departmental managers as they begin the 

search. 
Using the competency model as a 
communication tool enables CIOs to highlight 

an important message to departmental 

managers: Do not pick the most dispensable 
Figure 2: CR Competency Model in Agile Software Development Projects
 92    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2)person; rather, pick the most competent person. 
It is understandable that departmental managers 

want to keep their ﬁbestﬂ people in their 

designated work roles. After all, what manager 

wants to lose his most productive asset to an 



seen? A natural tendency is therefore to assign 

an employee whose absence would have the 

least impact on the day-to-day functioning of 

the business department. However, as the CR 
competency model indicates, business-domain 
knowledge is an important part of the value 

that a CR brings to agile ISD projects. Our study 

suggests that assigning the most competent 



for the customer department that will yield long-



that accurately meets the department™s needs. 

Assigning a less competent employee can cause 

long-term problems, such as mis-implementation 

of requirements, system release delays and 

increased development costs (e.g., due to re-

work)Šoutcomes that have all been shown to 

be disruptive to the functioning of the customer 

department.
312. Use the Competency Model as an 
Education and Training ToolThe competency model can be leveraged 
to identify training needs and create training 

programs that prepare and educate CRs for 

their role. Formal education and job tenure 

provide employees with knowledge and skills 



on their personality, some CRs may already 

possess Socio-Relational competencies. 

However, it is unlikely that someone working in 

a business department will possess the skills 

and knowledge necessary to support agile 

ISD projects, such as a working knowledge of 

the agile method or duties related to software 

testing. Thus, the competency model can serve 

as a preliminary checklist to determine training 

needs for the assigned CR. Indeed, it would be 

desirable for CIOs to develop a pool of potential 

ﬁagile-readyﬂ CR candidates from which to 

draw when agile ISD projects are conceived. 

With such a pool in place, a situation in which 


31  See Nelson, R. R., op. cit., 2007; and Hoda, R., Noble, J. and Marshall, S., op. cit., 2011.
role encompassesŠan experience that can have 

disastrous consequences for the CR and the agile 

ISD project teamŠwould be avoided. 
On a broader scale, the CIO can use the 
competency model as the basis for an enterprise-

wide training program on how to become an 

effective CR within an agile ISD project. Thus, 

the three competency areas can serve both as 

a blueprint for the development of program 

content and materials, and as the basis for 
creating an integrated learning plan with other 
training programs. By adopting a more general 

approach to training programs, the broader 

workforce in the company would improve its 

skillset and knowledge. Regardless of whether 

participants in such programs are ever assigned 

to the CR role, this organizational learning and 

education would equip them with the Socio-

Relational competency area skills such as 

negotiation, communication and interpersonal 

skills, which are also important for other 

organizational positions. 
Training and education based on the CR 
competency model will not only better prepare 

employees to assume the CR role, it will also 

provide them with greater competence for 

their organizational roles. They will therefore 

be in a better position to add value in ways 



department (e.g., getting the most critical system 

functions developed early and facilitating greater 

responsiveness of the ISD team to the customer 

department™s needs) and the ISD team.
In creating the training program for CRs, 
it is tempting to assume they need technical 

knowledge to be able to add real value to 

the agile ISD project. But as our competency 

model suggests, this assumption is invalid. 

Potentially, a CR with technical knowledge can 

get bogged down in solving technical problems 

instead of focusing on the business aspects of 

the development process. Other roles within 

the ISD team (e.g., developer and analyst) 

should concentrate on the technical aspects of 

implementing business requirements. The CR is 



implicit responsibilities, which requires only a 

broad understanding of the agile development 

process, not detailed technical knowledge. The 

CR primarily requires a general understanding 
 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    93of the process by which requirements are 
transformed into system functions.
3. Use the Competency Model as a 
Tool to Change the Organizational 
CultureEven though agile ISD has proliferated 
into the mainstream, most managers and 

employees in business departments know little 

about it beyond the ﬁagileﬂ label. Indeed, agile 

development may even have the reputation 
of ﬁcowboy programmingﬂŠwhich managers 
fear because it suggests a lack of planning 

and control. CIOs can use the CR competency 

model to demonstrate that agile ISD is not an 

unstructured free-for-all approach to developing 

software, but instead requires a comprehensive 

set of competencies to undertake and complete 

the project. In fact, empirical academic studies 

and anecdotal evidence show that business 

managers, and those who work for them, who 

have experienced an agile ISD project are quick 

to sing the praises of agile development. The CR 

competency model can help to build a culture 

of support for an agile method beforehand and 

thus lower the hurdles that CIOs need to clear 

to get buy-in (e.g., budget, developer resources, 

a competent CR) for the next agile ISD project 

from business departments and the broader 

organization. 
In contrast to traditional ISD, agile approaches 
view the business domain and system 

development as an integrated whole. But a 

majority of organizational cultures rarely see 

things this way. Rather, business functions and 

IT departments tend to be seen as distinct and 

separate entities that engage in arms™-length 

transactions. Indeed, as mentioned earlier, a core 

tenet of agile ISD is an emphasis on people and 

interactions over processes and documentation. 



counter-productive motives emerge and can have 

adverse effects on project progress. Failing to be 

attuned to relational issues can easily derail a 

project. 

what organizations can do to move closer to 

a more integrated view. Ensuring that more 

employees have the CR competencies can be 

a useful tool for changing the organizational 

culture and, consequently, how business 
functional areas relate to IT departments in a 


4. Use the Competency Model as a 
Performance-Assessment ToolFor traditional job roles, HR departments 
use competency models for assessing role 

performance in a structured and coherent 

manner through the creation of standardized 

criteria. CIOs can leverage the competency 

model as a mechanism for assessing how well 

CRs are performing their role responsibilities. 



metrics by which CRs can be assessed. For each 





the CR™s actual activities should be assessed 

against these levels.
32 At the discretion of 
departmental or IT management, it may even 

be possible to give rewards and bonuses for the 



the competencies. Giving rewards to CRs for 

superior performance in agile ISD projects allows 

CIOs to use the competency model not only as an 

assessment tool, but also as a motivational device 

to obtain the CR™s commitment to the project and 

its goals. 5. Use the Competency Model as a 
Diagnostic ToolFinally, CIOs can use the CR competency 
model during and after an agile ISD project to 

determine the extent to which an employee 

assigned as the CR is leveraging the necessary 

competencies to facilitate project success. In 

this way, CIOs can employ the CR competency 

model as a diagnostic tool to determine where 

adjustments need to be made for the CR to 

better serve the needs of the agile ISD project. 





an employee™s time and that departmental 

managers often underestimate the time 

commitment involved in performing this role 
32  For more details on best practice in HR for translating competency models into an assessment tool, see Stevens, G. 
ﬁA Critical Review on the Science and Practice of Competency 

Modeling,ﬂ Human Resource Development Review
 (12:1), 2013, pp. 86-107. 94    MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2014 (13:2)effectively.
33 Being mindful of these demands, CIOs, together with CRs, can use the competency 
model to diagnose the stresses and activities 

that place intensive time demands on the CR. 

Overloading the CR may result in withdrawal 

behaviors (e.g., burnout, stress, tardiness).
Using the competency model as a diagnostic 
tool may well result in the model being revised 

to incorporate experiences from ongoing agile 

development practice in the organization. 
Competency models are not static frameworks. 


regularly in collaboration with different 

stakeholders (e.g., CR, ISD team, business 

department). For example, it might be necessary 

to add additional competencies to the model as 

the agile method evolvesŠfor example, when the 

method changes by adopting practices from Lean 

or DevOps methods.
34 Concluding CommentsThe customer representative (CR) 
participates in agile ISD projects by carrying 

out explicit and implicit responsibilities that 

contribute toward the creation of systems that 

meet evolving customer needs. When performed 

effectively, the CR role can enable agile ISD teams 

to rapidly produce the desired functionality. 
Competency libraries such as O*Net provide 
descriptions of competencies for software 

project roles (e.g., developer, project manager, 

systems analyst) but up until now, a competency 

model for an effective CR has not existed. Given 

the need for a clear delineation of the essential 

competencies necessary to perform the CR role, 

this article has developed a competency model 

for CRs in agile ISD projects. The competency 

model is derived from the activities performed 

by CRs and is partitioned into three competency 
33  See Martin, A., Biddle, R. and Noble, J., op. cit., 2004. One 
result of these case studies is the insight that the CR has a stressful, 
high-pressure role that may not be sustainable over long periods of 
time. 
34  Lean development focuses on the production of software in the 
ratios and indices; see Schmidt, J. and Lyle, D. 
Lean Integration: An 

Integration Factory Approach to Business Agility, 
2010, Addison-
Wesley. 
DevOps blends software development and operations into a cohesive whole intended to improve collaboration between the two initially 
DevOps for Developers, 2010, Springer.
areas: Business, Socio-Relational and Systems. 

This model provides a versatile tool for CIOs 

and business managers to recruit, evaluate and 

support suitable employees for the CR role in 

agile ISD projects.
Appendix: Research MethodOur research was performed in Australian 
companies that developed software using 

an agile method. As part of our study, we 
interviewed four agile software teams and 
related managerial roles (e.g., program 
managers, executive managers) in two 
companies to explore the role of the customer 
representative (CR). These two companies were 

early adopters of agile methods in Australia and 


provider that maintains its own agile educational 
facility to teach and tailor its XP and Scrum-
based approach. It is listed on the Australian 
Stock Exchange. The other is also listed on the 

Australian Stock Exchange and is an online 
provider and the industry market leader for 
online accommodation and travel. Since the 
company™s foundation in 2000, an agile in-house 
method based on XP and Crystal has been used. 
In each company, software development 
took place for an in-house customer that had 

assigned a full-time resource (the CR) from its 
business unit to be placed with the development 
teams for the duration of the project. To respect 

the companies™ wishes for anonymity when 
publishing the results, we use two aliases: 

and Werkstatt for the online accommodation 
provider.
Over a period of four months in 2010, we 
conducted 31 interviews with developers, 
testers, business analysts, project managers, 
CRs and other members of the respective 
organizations. These interviews were our main 
data source for this research. Face-to-face 
interviews were conducted by two researchers. 
During the interviews, the researchers took 
notes to allow for follow-up questions, and also 
to ensure a common understanding among the 
researchers. Interviews were recorded and 
subsequently transcribed. 
 June 2014 (13:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive    95When analyzing the data, we followed 
standard academic procedures
35 to ensure the 

and consistent and can be repeated), credible 





and can be transferred to another context). We 

therefore implemented various procedures, 

such as extensive engagement with the teams, 



with study participants during multiple site visits 
six months later and creating clear audit trails to 
demonstrate how the data was collected.
About the AuthorsSabine MatookSabine Matook (s.matook@business.uq.edu.au) 
is a senior lecturer in Information Systems at the 

UQ Business School, University of Queensland in 

Brisbane, Australia. She received her Ph.D. from 

the Technische Universität Dresden, Germany. 

Her research interests are on the IT artifact, social 
35  See, for example, Lincoln, Y. S. and Guba, E. G. 
Naturalistic Inquiry,
 1985, SAGE Publications; and Miles, M. B. and Huberman, 
A. M. Qualitative Data Analysis,
 1994, SAGE Publications.media and agile information systems development. 

Her work has appeared in the 
European Journal of 

Information Systems
, Information and Management
, 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems
, 
International Journal of Operations & Production 

Management
 and Decision Support Systems.
 Likoebe M. MarupingLikoebe Maruping (lmaruping@gmail.com) is 

an Associate Professor of Computer Information 

Systems in the College of Business at the University 

of Louisville. His research is primarily focused 


processes through which software development 
teams improve software project outcomes under 
dynamic project conditions. His research has 

been published in premier information systems, 

organizational behavior and psychology journals 

including MIS Quarterly
, Information Systems 
Research
, Organization Science
, Journal of Applied 
Psychology
 and 
Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes
. Likoebe currently 

serves as associate editor for 
MIS Quarterly
, which 
named him ﬁReviewer of the Yearﬂ in 2009.
 CopyrightofMISQuarterlyExecutiveisthepropertyofMISQuarterlyExecutiveanditscontentmaynotbecopiedoremailedtomultiplesitesorpostedtoalistservwithoutthecopyrightholder'sexpresswrittenpermission.However,usersmayprint,download,oremailarticlesforindividualuse.