 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
RESEARCH 
ARTICLEARE TWO HEADS BETTER THAN ONE FOR SOFTWAREDEVELOPMENT?  THE PRODUCTIVITY PARADOX OFPAIR PROGRAMMING1By:
VenuGopal BalijepallyCollege of Business
Prairie View A&M University

Prairie View, TX 77446

U.S.A.

vebalijepally@pvamu.edu
RadhaKanta Mahapatra
College of Business Administration

University of Texas at Arlington

Arlington, TX 76019-0437

U.S.A.

mahapatra@uta.edu
Sridhar NerurCollege of Business Administration

University of Texas at Arlington

Arlington, TX 76019-0437

U.S.A.

snerur@uta.edu
Kenneth H. PriceCollege of Business Administration

University of Texas at Arlington

Arlington, TX 76019-0437

U.S.A.

price@uta.edu
1Carol Saunders was the accepting senior editor for this paper. AbstractExtreme programming is currently gaining popularity as an
alternate software development methodology.  Pair program-

ming, a core practice of this methodology, involves two pro-

grammers working collaboratively to develop software.  This

study examined the efficacy of pair programming by com-

paring the performance effectiveness and affective responses

of collaborating pairs with those of individual programmers

treated as nominal pairs.  In a controlled laboratory experi-
ment involving student subjects, proxies for entry level

programmers working on entry level tasks, two factors were
manipulated:  programming setting (collaborative pair versus

individuals) and programming task complexity (high versus

low).  Participants who worked in the individual condition

were randomly combined into nominal pairs.  The perfor-

mance and affective responses 
of the collabor
ating pairs were
then compared with those of the best performers and the

second best performers of each nominal pair.  Results indi-

cated that programming pairs performed at the level above

the second best performers and at the level of the best

performers in each nominal pair.  This relationship was found

to be consistent across both levels of task complexity. 

Consequently, there was no evidence of an ﬁassembly bonus

effect,ﬂ where the performance of a collaborating pair

exceeds the performance of its best member working alone. 

While this finding may appear counterintuitive due to the

general perception of two heads being better than one, it is

consistent with the findings in small group research.  When

affective responses were considered, programming pairs

reported higher levels of satisfa
ction than those of the best
and second-best performing members in nominal pairs.  They

also showed higher levels of confidence in their performance
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 91-118/March 2009
91 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
compared to those of the second-best members.  But the
confidence levels of pairs were no different from those of the

best performing members in nominal pairs.  Theoretical and

practical implications of these findings are presented.Keywords:  Software development, agile methodology, pair
programming, group problem solving, nominal group, team

performance, assembly bonus effect
IntroductionIn the present knowledge economy driven by technological

innovation, the ubiquity and growing importance of software

products and services are all too evident.  Despite some fluc-

tuations due to business cycles, organizations are continuing

to invest in software products and services to stay afloat in a

hyper-competitive business environment.  For instance, sales

of software in the United States grossed $217.7 billion for

2007 (excluding embedde
d and bundled softwa
re), registering
a healthy 7.1 percent growth over the previous year.
2  Basedon Forrester Research projections, software purchases

globally were also expected to grow similarly at 7 percent for

2007 (ITPro 2007).Despite the tremendous strides made in software develop-
ment, as evidenced by the rich array of methods, tools, and

techniques, about 19 percent of all software projects are never

completed, while another 46 percent are categorized as ﬁchal-

lenged.ﬂ  These challenged projects are operational, but over-

budget, over the time-estimate, and completed with fewer

features and functions than originally specified (Rubinstein

2007).  The growing frustration spurred by the dismal success

rates of software projects, coupled with the imperative for

responsiveness and agility, has ushered in an array of

development methods that differ appreciably from traditional

software practices.  Several software luminaries, who were

seeking alternatives to the traditional plan-driven software

development, came together in 2001 to draft the Agile

manifesto,
3 heralding agility in software development.  These
new methods, labeled 
Agile Development Methodologies
, aim
to expeditiously deliver software of high-quality and value to

customers by emphasizing the following: (1) collaborative

and empowered teams unfettered by rigorous processes;
(2) simplicity of design and minimal critical specifications,
while documenting only what is absolutely necessary;

(3) active involvement of preferably colocated customers; and

(4) inevitability of change and an understanding that it may be

leveraged through rapid iterations, feedback, and constant

reflection on the consequences of actions (Cockburn 2002;

Cockburn and Highsmith 2001; Highsmith and Cockburn

2001).  A singularly distinctive feature of these methods is the

premium they place on collaborating and self-organizing

teams (Cockburn 2002).  SCRUM, eXtreme Programming

(XP), Dynamic Software Development, Adaptive Software

Development, Crystal Methods, and Feature-Driven Develop-

ment are some of the more popular agile methods.  The

growing popularity of agile methodologies can be gauged

from a recent survey of software developers, where 69 percent

of respondents indicated that their organizations are using

agile methods and another 7.3 percent hinted that they should

be going agile in the next year (Ambler 2007).
Among the agile methodologies, 
eXtreme Programming (XP),
is by far the best documented and the most popular (Orr

2002).  XP is a collection of proven and not-so-proven prac-
tices of software development, combined into a coherent

methodology.  Proponents of XP insist on implementing all of

the 12 core practices together, as they form a coherent system,

compensating for the lack of significant up-front design and

documentation (Beck 1999).  Despite gaining increasing favor

among software developers, empirical research that sheds

light on the efficacy of the core principles underlying such

methods is still evolving.
XP stipulates pair programming as a core practice, where two
programmers, sharing the same computer, work collabora-

tively on all aspects of software development (Williams and

Kessler 2000).  This practice of programming in pairs has

attracted some research interest in the academic community. 

The oft-cited works of Nosek (1998) and Williams (2000)

suggest that programming pairs not only outperform indi-

vidual programmers on quality, but also produce fewer

defects, are more confident of their solutions, and derive

greater satisfaction from the problem solving/programming

activity.  Other benefits to pairing reported by Williams

included enhanced learning, higher problem solving skills,

and improved team building.  Pairing programmers of varying

technical abilities is considered particularly beneficial for

cross training and redistribution of technical expertise within

project groups (Fruhling and de Vreede 2006).Several other studies have also a
ttested to benefits of pair pro-
gramming, such as enhanced software quality in large-scale

software projects, reduced code defects, better designs, and

enhanced predictability in development time and program size
2ﬁNational Economic Accounts: GDP 
Expanded Detail Table,ﬂ Bureau of
Economic Analysis, August 2008 (htt
p://www.bea.gov/national/pdf/dpga.
pdf).
3ﬁManifesto for Agile Software 
Development,ﬂ Agile Alliance, 2001
(http://www.agilemanifesto.org).
92MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
(Canfora et al. 2007; Cao et al. 2004; Nawrocki and Wojcie-
chowski 2001; Phongpaibul and Boehm 2006; Xu and Rajlich

2006).  A recent meta-analysis of studies comparing the effec-

tiveness of pair programming over individual programming

reported moderate benefits in
 terms of quality and reduction
in time to completion (Dybå et al. 2007).  That study further

reported a moderate increase in effort (person-hours) when

developers pair up.  Another recent study also attests to the

benefits of pair programming and strongly advocates it as a

pedagogical tool in programming courses (McDowell et al.

2006).Some other studies, however, claim that pair programming is
less efficient than reported by previous studies (e.g., Arisholm

et al. 2007; Nawrocki and Wojciechowski 2001).  These

studies could neither find pair superiority in software quality

(Arisholm et al. 2007; Heiberg et al. 2003; Madeyski 2006)

nor uncover reduction in code defects (Hulkko and Abra-

hamsson 2005; Nawrocki and Wojciechowski 2001; Van-

hanen and Lassenius 2005).  Table 1 summarizes the findings

from previous studies on the effectiveness of pair pro-

gramming over individual programming.  Consistent with

prior literature (e.g., Nosek 
1998; Williams et al. 2000), we
use the terms pair programming and collaborative program-

ming interchangeably in this paper.
Despite these efforts to illuminate the question of whether
pairs outperform individuals in programming tasks, the

findings may be considered tentative at best, due to differ-

ences in research design and methodological rigor across

these studies.  While experimental controls, randomization

and research rigor are typically
 consistent across studies in
other disciplines such as social psychology, variations across

these factors in software development research make it

difficult to compare the findings.  For instance, some pair

programming studies used student homework assignments as

experimental tasks, where laboratory controls would not be

feasible (e.g., Canfora et al. 2005; Phongpaibul and Boehm

2006; Vanhanen and Lassenius 2005; Williams 2000).  In

addition, some have used repeated measure designs, where

same subjects worked individually and in pairs (e.g., Canfora

et al. 2007; Canfora et al. 2005; Müller 2005), while others

have employed quasi-experimental designs for the assignment

of subjects to treatments (e.g
., Arisholm et al. 2007).  The
approach to partner selection also differed considerably,

ranging from self-selection by pairs (Canfora et al. 2005;

Williams 2000) to matching pairs on abilities such as GPA or

experience levels (Nawrocki and Wojciechowski 2001;

Phongpaibul and Boehm 2006).  Yet another source of varia-

tion is the unit of analysis employed in these studies.  For

example, certain studies used the programming team as the

unit of analysis (e.g., Baheti et al. 2002; Heiberg et al. 2003;
Phongpaibul and Bo
ehm 2006; Vanhanen and Lassenius
2005), whereas others used a dyad.There is, therefore, a dearth of 
controlled
 experimental studies
that seek to establish the efficacy of this important practice. 

A review of the extant literature on pair programming also

shows scant attention to behavioral and social theories that

have the potential to reveal factors paramount to the success

of pairs.  While a few studies have drawn on theoretical

insights from cognitive perspectives, for example, the theory

of human problem solving (Newell and Simon 1972) and

distributed cognition theory (Flor and Hutchins 1991) or from

Maslow™s (1943) theory of individual needs and motivation,

none, to the best of our knowledge, has considered the

spectrum of factors that behavioral theories deem necessary

for an adequate explanation of group, and by extension,

paired-programming performance.
Additionally, current studies on pair programming are not
making the most rigorous comparison when contrasting paired

with individual programmers.  These studies compare the

performance of a programming pair
 with that of an average
individual.  A pair could be expected to outperform an indi-

vidual in problem solving based on pure probabilities alone,

as there is a higher chance for a pair to have a competent pro-

grammer who could code the solution.  A more rigorous and

practically relevant comparison would be between a collabo-

rating pair and the best and second best members of a nominal

pair.  Nominal pairs are randomly created pairs of individuals

that have worked alone, but whose efforts are conjointly

considered.  These pseudo-pairs allow researchers to directly

assess the potentially positive impact of interaction on perfor-

mance when individuals work collaboratively, using an equal

man-hour comparison.  When the performance of a dyad or

larger group exceeds the performance of its best member, it is

referred to as 
assembly bonus effect
 in the social psychology
literature (Collins and Guetzkow 1964).  In light of prior evi-

dence suggestive of programming pair superiority over aver-

age individuals in achieving higher software quality (Nosek

1998; Williams 2000), it would be interesting to see how

software quality achieved by programming pairs would mea-

sure up to this new benchmark.
In summary, given the increasingly social nature of software
approaches, it is critical to have a good grasp of the factors

that affect group performance in a software development con-

text.  With increasing acceptance and popularity of XP and

other agile methodologies, there is a need to investigate the

efficacy of the core practices such as pair programming,

which have large cost and productivity implications for the

software development community.  While there is some evi-

dence suggestive of higher satisfaction (Nosek 1998; Wil-
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
93 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Table 1.  Research Findings on the Effectiveness of Pair Programming 
Positive FindingsNegative/Neutral Findings
Software Quality
ŁEnhanced quality (Nosek 1998; Williams 2000)

ŁEnhanced quality in large software projects (Cao et al.
2004)ŁEnhanced quality of software designs (Canfora et al.
2007; Williams 2000)ŁReduced defects (Phongpaibul and Boehm 2006)
ŁNo differences in the package level quality metrics (Madeyski 2006)
ŁNo differences in proportion of corre
ct solutions (Arisholm et al. 2007)ŁNo differences in percentage of correctly implemented test cases in a given
time (Heiberg et al. 2003)ŁHigher defects in pair so
lutions (Vanhanen and Lassenius 2005)ŁNo differences in errors uncover
ed in acceptance tests (Nawrocki and
Wojciechowski 2001)
ŁNo differences in defect dens
ity (Hulkko and Abrahamsson 2005)
ŁNo effect on the thoroughness or effectiveness of testing when using test
driven development (Madeyski 2007)
Development Effort
ŁEffort comparable if required to produce programs of
similar level of correctness (Müller 2005, 2006)ŁNo productivity differences (Hulkko and Abrahamsson
2005)ŁReduced development effort in student programmer
group (Phongpaibul and Boehm 2006)ŁReduced effort (time spent) (Canfora et al. 2005)
ŁRequired more effort to perform the task correctly (Arisholm et al. 2007)
ŁPair lower in productivity (sum of 
implemented use cases divided by effort)
(Vanhanen and Lassenius 2005)ŁRequired more development effort in professional programmer group
(Phongpaibul and Boehm 2006)ŁNo differences in time to completi
on (Arisholm et al. 2007; Nawrocki and
Wojciechowski 2001; Rostaher and Hericko 2002)
ŁPair programming as in XP less effi
cient (Nawrocki and Wojciechowski 2001)
Task ComplexityŁReduced time to completion on low complexity tasks
for experienced programmers (Arisholm et al. 2007)ŁFlexible pair programming beneficial for large scale
projects with complex software development (Cao et

al. 2004)ŁIncreased correctness of solution on complex tasks for
junior programmers (Arisholm et al. 2007)ŁMost useful for learning and complex tasks (Hulkko
and Abrahamsson 2005)ŁNo reduction in time taken to solve mo
re complex tasks correctly (Arisholm et
al. 2007)ŁNo effect of task complexity on the effort between pairs and individuals
(Vanhanen and Lassenius 2005)Others
ŁHigher adherence to coding standards due to peer
pressure (Cockburn and Williams 2001)ŁHigher enjoyment with 
problem solving process(Nosek 1998; Vanhanen and Lassenius 2005;
Williams 2000)ŁHigher confidence in solu
tions (Nosek 1998; Williamset al. 2000)ŁEnhanced learning due to cross training (Williams
2000; Williams et al. 2000)ŁImproved team building (Williams 2000)

ŁCollaborative and supportive environment fostered
(Cao et al. 2004)ŁHigher problem solving skills (Williams 2000)

ŁEnhanced predictability of development time and
program size (Nawrocki and Wojciechowski 2001)
ŁLower adherence to coding standards but
 has higher comment ratio (Hulkkoand Abrahamsson 2005)94MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
liams 2000) and higher confidence in solution (Nosek 1998)
among programming pairs compared to average individual

developers, it remains to be seen whether pairs would be more

satisfied and more confident relative to the best and second-

best members of nominal pairs.
The primary objectives of this study are (1) to examine the
efficacy of pairs vis-à-vis individuals in programming tasks;

(2) to study the effect of pairing on affective reactions of

programmers, including their satisfaction and confidence in

performance; and (3) to explore how programming task

complexity impacts performance and affective reactions.  In

examining these questions, we incorporate research findings

and a methodological framework from group performance

studies (Laughlin and Ellis 1986; McGrath 1984; Steiner

1972), a literature that has a long standing and respected tradi-

tion in social psychology.  Thus, this research, while retaining

a cognitive orientation consistent with MIS studies (e.g., Flor

and Hutchins 1991), makes the following contributions:
1.It introduces behavioral theories and perspectives on
individual versus group problem solving to theoretically

guide and explore the phenomenon of pair programming. 

Specifically, in this study, we draw from theories on

social facilitation, social loafing, individual and group

information processing, and the rich body of empirical

evidence from social psychology.
2.Employing a procedure consistent with recent research
designs on group performance in social psychology (e.g.,

Laughlin, Zander et al. 2003), it implements a rigorous

comparison between pair performance and the perfor-

mance of the best and second best individuals working in

nominal pairs.  This mode of comparison allows us to

shed light on an enduring research question in group per-

formance, the 
assembly bonus effect
.  This effect, which
enables a group to perform above the level of its best

member working alone, is yet to be studied in the context

of pair programming.
3.Using a multivariate approach, it examines affective
outcomes (participant 
satisfaction and 
confidence inperformance) of pairs and individuals to complement
software quality.4.It examines the contingent effect of task complexity on
the relative performance effectiveness of programming

pairs and individuals working in nominal pairs.
The remaining sections of the paper are organized as follows. 
First, an overview of the theoretical literature that forms the
framework for the research questions is provided.  Second,
the hypotheses of the study are described.  Third, the research

methodology is outlined, followed by a description of the

results.  Fourth, the results are discussed along with impli-

cations for practice and future research directions.  Finally,

conclusions are drawn.Research Framework
Our research questions focus on the relative efficacy of pair

versus individual programming on performance (
softwarequality) and the moderating effect of 
task complexity on thisrelationship.  Additionally, we examine the relative efficacy

of pair versus individual programming on developers™

affective responses to the task (i.e., participant 
satisfaction
and confidence in performance
).  Figure 1 showcases the
overall research model of this study.
In this report, we use the terms 
pair, dyad,
 and 
group inter-
changeably, depending on the literature being examined.  Pair

has its origins in the IS literature (Beck 2000; Williams and

Kessler 2000), while dyads and groups are more commonly

found in the sociology/social psychological literatures (e.g.,

Nixon 1979).  More importantly, however, we treat these

entities as similar, based on their properties.  There are dif-

ferences between pairs (dyads) and groups, which include

voting to arrive at decisions, the possibility of coalition

formation, majority and minority opinions splits and influence

attempts, and the impact of the loss of a group member

(Simmel 1950).  However, pairs (dyads) and groups of larger

size are also similar in many ways, including task inter-

dependence, the need to agree/produce a single outcome to

represent the interests of the members, the importance of

mutual interaction and influence in making decisions and

solving problems, the possibility of a shared identity, and a

role structure characterizing status and work differences

among members.  These facets are often used to define

boundary conditions differentiating groups from individuals,

and theorists consider thes
e facets as characteristics of
ﬁgroupsﬂ of size two or larger (see Forsyth 1999; McGrath

1984).  Thus, pairs or dyads are considered to be similar to

larger size groups, based on broad similarities in social

behavior (Levine and Moreland 1998).  As such, research on

task groups is appropriate to provide a guiding framework for

the current research on programming pairs or dyads.  Addi-

tionally, a methodology emphasizing nominal group perfor-

mance as a baseline index to evaluate the impact of program-

ming pairs is context free and appropriate, irrespective of the

size of the programming group that is being considered.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
95 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Figure 1.  Research ModelTable 2. Important Task Attributes Defined in Group Task Typologies
Task AttributeDescription
Unitary 
Divisible Task cannot be divided among group members (Ste
iner 1972); for example, tug of war.
Task can be divided into subtasks, each of which 
can be performed by a different member of the
group (Steiner 1972); for example, painting a house.Maximizing 
Optimizing Emphasis on quantity of group perfo
rmance (Steiner 1972); for example, generating several ideas.Emphasis on quality of group performance (Steiner
 1972); for example, generating the best idea.DisjunctiveConjunctiveRequires only one member of the group to perform 
the task for the task to be completed.  The
potential of the group is defined by its best performing member 
(Steiner 1972); for example, puzzleswith yes/no or either/or solutions.

Requires each group member to contribute for the task to be completed.  Group performance islimited by its worst performing member (Stei
ner 1972); for example, product assembly line.
JudgmentalIntellective Task with no correct answers. Group response is 
defined by the consensus evolved over the
evaluative, behavioral, or aesthetic preferences of the group members (Laughlin 1980).  Alsoreferred to as decision-making tasks (McGrath 1984); for example, jury task.
Tasks with intuitively compelling or demonstrably 
correct answers based on a 
verbal or quantitativeconceptual system (Laughlin 1980); for ex
ample, math, analogy and word problems.
Task
DemonstrabilityThe ease with which the correct answer could be verified. 
Conditions determining task demonstrability (Laughlin and Ellis 1986):
ŁGroup evolves consensus on a concept
ual system defining the problem.
ŁGroup has sufficient information to solve the problem.

ŁGroup member suggesting the correct response 
has sufficient ability, motivation and time to
demonstrate it to other members.ŁOther group members are able to recognize 
the correct response once proposed by any one
member.H1H3H2H4  
Perceptual Outcomes
Task 
Complexity
Programming 
Setting:  
Individuals or Pair*
Satisfaction
Software quality
Confidence in 
Performance
*1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
H1H3H2H4  
Perceptual Outcomes
Task 
Complexity
Programming 
Setting:  
Individuals or Pair*
Satisfaction
Software quality
Confidence in 
Performance
*1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
96MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Framing Programming Tasks in Termsof Group Task Typologies Task type has been central to understanding the contingent
nature of small group performance.  Early group task typol-

ogies (e.g., Laughlin 1980; McGr
ath 1984; Steiner 1972) have
been invaluable in explaining how task characteristics influ-

ence group performance.  Table 2 summarizes important task

attributes from these task typologies that are relevant to the

programming context.  Following Steiner™s (1972) task typol-

ogy, programming tasks have characteristics of disjunctive

tasks, which require one group member to perform the task

for the task to be completed.  Additionally, programming

tasks are typically unitary (not easily divisible among group
members) and 
optimizing (quality of output rather than speed
is emphasized).  Therefore, even if one member of the pair

can solve the problem or perform the task, the pair has the

potential to successfully complete the task.
Programming tasks also share some characteristics with tasks
that are labeled as intellective tasks (Laughlin 1980).  These

are essentially disjunctive tasks, but with demonstrably

correct answers.  Examples in
clude mathematical, vocabulary,
and analogy problems.  As with intellective tasks, program-

ming tasks may vary in the ease with which the correct

answers can be verified.  When solutions are easily verifiable,

recommendations proposed by one member may be quickly

adopted by the other.  Increase in solution verifiability is

likely to reduce potential decision conflict and enhance the

accuracy of the proposed solution.Forces Affecting Dyad PerformanceAccording to the distributed cognition framework (Flor and

Hutchins 1991), an information processing perspective, pro-

grammers are likely to accrue performance benefits when they

work together.  Through interaction, dyad members are able

to search through a larger space of alternatives, sharing

memory for old plans, while jointly producing ambiguous

code segments with fewer defects (Flor and Hutchins 1991). 

Active communication, involving perspective taking and per-

spective making (Boland and Tenkasi 1995), is an essential

part of this process.  This facilitates the complex cognitive

processing necessary to achieve quality solutions.  If one

views programming as completing a large set of interrelated

disjunctive tasks, pairs can benefit from a large resource pool. 

For example, group problem solving can be facilitated by

individual members who hold different and unique sets of

information (Hinsz et al. 1997).
When working on intellective problem solving tasks with
large information processing requirements, groups typically

outperform average individuals (Hill 1982), with group

performance approaching that of its most capable member, or

even exceeding it in some rare cases (e.g., Laughlin, Zander

et al. 2003).  Demonstrability of task is critical to group

problem solving performance.  Laughlin and colleagues argue

that if sufficient information is available within a group,

problem solving is facilitated when: (1) there is a group con-

sensus on the conceptual system needed to solve the problem;

and (2) group members have the time, ability, and motivation

to demonstrate the correct response to other members.  This

also entails that group members are able to recognize the cor-

rect solution once it is proposed by any member in the group

(Laughlin and Ellis 1986).  Task demonstrability is also

defined in Table 2 for easy reference.We argue that programming tasks have moderate demon-
strability.  When pairs are asked to work collaboratively on a

programming task, they are expected to have sufficient

information concerning the problem definition, but need to

explore class libraries and API (application programming

interface) documentation for technical guidance during code

development.  The partners could typically arrive at a con-

sensus on a conceptual system leading to the solution.  How-

ever, if programming pairs are to perform at their maximal

levels, it is critical that members have the ability to identify

and utilize the competencies of their partners (Bonner 2004;

Bonner et al. 2002).  While no explicit competency informa-

tion is typically provided, the process of coding, compiling,

and debugging, inherent in programming tasks, should help

dyad members get a sense of the relative competencies of

their partner.  In addition, XP practices require the pair to

interchangeably play the roles of driver and navigator during

code development.  This will further enable each member to

assess the relative strengths of the partner.  This process of

role interchange also facilita
tes perspective taking and per-spective making, thus leading to more systematic integration

of member skills.  Additionally, when and if program compi-

lation provides quick proof of a ﬁtruth-winsﬂ approach (a

social combination process where a member with the correct

solution is necessary and sufficient for the correct group

response), one could expect that solution to be adopted

(Laughlin and Ellis 1986).However, there may also be elements of programming that
represent what McGrath (1984) labels as decision-making

tasks.  For example, deciding whether efficiency versus main-

tainability considerations of programming algorithms and

structures are more critical may not be based on facts, but on
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
97 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
the values, beliefs, and attitudes about the merits of alternate
solutions.  When these types of judgments are involved,

moving forward requires a consensus.  Thus, we argue that

programming tasks are not pure intellective tasks, but involve

some decision-making component.  Consequently, we con-

sider the overall demonstrability of programming tasks to be

moderate and not as high as found in pure intellective tasks,

where solutions are easily verifiable.There are other processes that reflect motivation, coordina-
tion, and cognitive concerns that can influence the level of

group performance achieved.  Social loafing and social facili-

tation are two such processes that potentially inhibit pair

performance.
Social loafing occurs when individuals working together in
groups exert less effort than when they work individually

(Karau and Williams 1993).  Factors that promote social

loafing include a perception that one™s efforts are dispensable

(Harkins and Petty 1982), a reduced responsibility for the

final outcome (Petty et al. 1977), and the inability to identify

an individual™s contributions to the group™s effort (Williams,

Harkins and Latane 1981).  We would argue, however, that

productivity losses due to social loafing in pair programming

may be minimal.  Considering the fact that the programming

task is highly meaningful to programmers, we expect loafing

to be minimized (Brickner et al. 1986).  Additionally, pro-

gramming procedures stipulated in XP may also discourage

loafing (e.g., pairs taking turns at the keyboard).  When

working especially on nonroutine task components, which are

a substantial part of most programming tasks, dyad members

experience less redundant effort and, therefore, less feeling of

dispensability of their effort (Harkins and Petty 1982).  We

expect that while working in dyads, rather than larger groups,

dyad members are more likely to be continually aware of the

effort put in by each other, thus making their contribution

more identifiable, thereby 
increasing personal responsibilityfor the final outcome (Latane et al. 1979).  Therefore, we

anticipate social loafing effects to be minimal when XP

programming procedures are used.
Research on social facilitation has reported that in the
presence of another observant individual, performance in

well-learned tasks is enabled, while performance in novel or

more complex tasks is hampered (Aiello and Douthitt 2001;

Harkins 1987; Zajonc
 1965).  Since the 
observer could beevaluating the performance, or simply be a source of cogni-

tive distraction, working in the presence of a partner could

hinder performance.  In pair programming, however, the

partner is an equal stakeholder in the problem solving activity,

actively collaborating and engaging in the problem situation

(Williams and Kessler 2000).  Consequently, we do not

expect loss of performance due to the presence of a partner.
Performance Expectation in Pair Programming
The preceding discussion indicates that multiple factors affect
the performance of programming pairs.  One way to evaluate

the performance of a programming pair is to compare it

against those of its members working alone.  An assembly

bonus effect is said to occur when group performance is

greater than the performance any of its members could

accomplish alone, or by a combination of individual efforts

(Collins and Guetzkow 1964).  This is also referred to as

synergy, in work team effectiveness (Hackman 1987) and
brainstorming (Dennis and Valacich 1993) literatures.  In a

disjunctive task, such as programming, an assembly bonus

effect is realized when the performance of a pair exceeds that

of its most competent member.  Other standards of compari-

son include whether the programming pair will perform at or

below the level of its most competent member (Laughlin,

Bonner and Altermatt 1998; Laughlin, VanderStoep and

Hollingshead 1991).  When considering performance below

the most competent member of the pair, more fine grained

comparisons could include whether performance is at or

above the level of the least competent member of the group

(Laughlin, Bonner and Altermatt 1998; Laughlin, Vander-

Stoep and Hollingshead 1991).  Research has demonstrated

that performance above the most competent member of the

group is quite rare, as groups may have difficulty avoiding

certain process losses inherent in collaborative work (Hill

1982).  Small group research scholars caution that such

effects, when found, are usually modest, and every such claim

needs careful evaluation, as it is easy to underrate group

potential and thereby overstate group performance (Kerr and

Tindale 2004).  Studies that have demonstrated performance

above the most competent member of the group on intellec-

tive tasks, the type of task we most closely associate with

programming tasks, used groups consisting of three or more

members (e.g., Laughlin, Bonner and Miner 2002; Laughlin,

Zander et al. 2003).  To our knowledge, there is no empirical

evidence of performance above the best member when

problem solving dyads are considered.  Hence, we do not

expect this to occur in pair programming.  However, empirical

evidence from small group research also documents that

group performance typically exceeds the performance of the

least competent member (Laughlin, Bonner and Altermatt

1998; Laughlin, VanderStoep
 and Hollingshead 1991). 
Consequently, based on these findings, we would expect pair

performance to exceed that of the second best (least

competent) member, but not the best member of a nominal

pair.  Therefore, our first hypothesis isHypothesis 1:  While working on a task using XP
procedures, programming performance of a collabo-

rating pair measured in terms of software quality
98MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
will be higher than the performance of the second-
best member of a nominal pair.Pair Programming Satisfactionand ConfidenceResearch findings suggest that group work, in general, is
more enjoyable compared to working alone (Garibaldi 1979). 

Researchers argue that, in part, this is a consequence of

humans being a ﬁgroup-seeki
ng speciesﬂ (Forsyth 1999). 
Group membership fulfills multiple social and emotional

human needs (Levine and Moreland 1998).  There is also

considerable evidence that working in groups has a positive

impact on factors related to perceptions of performance. 

Compared to individuals working alone, group members tend

to have higher goal commitment, more positive attitude

toward goal attainment, and report higher 
satisfaction with
their performance (Hinsz and Nickell 2004).  Group members

tend to be more satisfied with their performance, even when

their performance does not differ from that of individuals

(Hinsz 1995).  Similarly, research on brainstorming suggests

that perceptions of performance are higher when group

brainstorming is contrasted with individual brainstorming

(Paulus et al. 1993).  Also, on problem solving tasks, group

members tend to report higher confidence in their solutions

(Sniezek 1992; Stephenson and Wagner 1989).
In the IS literature, higher levels of 
satisfaction have also
been reported when pair programming was compared with

individual programming (Nosek 1998; Williams 2000;

Williams et al. 2000).  In these studies, indexes measuring

perceptions of satisfaction and performance were aggregate

measures, when participants worked in groups.  These mean

scores were then compared with the average scores of

individuals working alone.  Although mean levels of confi-

dence and satisfaction were higher in pairs compared to those

of average individuals, these levels may not be uniformly

higher when compared to those of individual members of

nominal pairs.  However, consistent with the trend in the

literature, we predict higher levels of 
satisfaction and
confidence in performance,
 when pairs are contrasted with
individuals working alone.  Specifically, we expect the satis-

faction and confidence levels among pairs to be higher than

those of the best and the second-best members of the

independently working nominal pairs.  Therefore, our next

hypotheses stateHypothesis 2A:  In a collaborating pair working
with XP procedures, the mean satisfaction with the

programming task will exceed the level reported by

the best member of a nominal pair.Hypothesis 2B:  In a collaborating pair working
with XP procedures, the mean satisfaction with the

programming task will exceed the level reported by

the second-best member of a nominal pair.Hypothesis 3A:  In a collaborating pair working
with XP procedures, the mean confidence in per-

formance will exceed the level reported by the best

member of a nominal pair.Hypothesis 3B:  In a collaborating pair working
with XP procedures, the mean confidence in per-

formance will exceed the l
evel reporte
d by the
second-best member of a nominal pair.Moderating Effect of Task Complexity
Complexity of a task emanates from an increase in infor-

mation load, information diversity, and rate of information

change (Campbell 1988).  This can potentially influence the

process losses and process gains when individuals work

collaboratively on tasks of differing levels of complexity.  On

the inhibitory side, task demonstrability decreases with

increasing complexity, thus making the correct solution less

obvious, even when identified by one of the dyad members. 

Thus, in discussing the merits of alternate solutions, the com-

munication requirements increase dramatically, placing extra

demands on the time and effort of the dyad.  The member

with the correct solution could easily get overruled by the

partner and the dyad could end up exploring wrong leads and

dead ends.  We, however, argue that potential process gains

of collaborative working outweigh these process losses. According to human information processing literature, with
increasing task complexity, there is a corresponding increase

in the complexity of information needed to solve the problem. 

Consequently, there is an increase in the number of informa-

tion sources accessed (Bystrom and Jarvelin 1995).  The per-

formance of an independently working individual increases

with increasing task complexity when the task demands are

lower than the cognitive capacity of the individual, beyond

which it starts to deteriorate (Schroder et al. 1967).  In groups,

higher levels of task complexity are associated with higher

levels of participation by members in decision making and

boundary spanning activities (Ito and Peterson 1986).  So,

programming pairs could respond to increasing task demands

with increased collaboration and intense information seeking

activities.  Pairs, with their ability to process larger amounts

of information relative to independently working individuals

(Hinsz et al. 1997), are thus likely to be more effective as task

complexity increases (Laughlin, Bonner and Altermatt 1998).
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
99 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Also, as we have argued earlier, the XP process is designed to
facilitate pair performance through role assignment (such as

driver and navigator) and role swapping between partners.  In

addition, the distributed cognition view attributes several

benefits to pairing, including sharing of goals and plans,

searching through larger space of alternatives, and joint

production of ambiguous problem components (Flor and

Hutchins 1991).  These are particularly helpful when a pair

works on more complex tasks.  Such benefits are maximized

when there is division of labor in a collaborative interaction

system with efficient communication.  For instance, a pro-

gramming pair implementing some new application program-

ming interfaces (APIs) or interfacing with legacy applications

could benefit immensely if the navigating partner is able to

look up the documentation and constantly feed options to the

implementing partner.  Advocates of pair programming have

long speculated that the performance benefits of pairing

should be higher for more complex tasks due to greater infor-

mation processing capacity in pairs (Williams et al. 2000). 

Consequently, we expect collaborating pairs to be less

affected by task complexity than independently working

members of nominal pairs.  Therefore, our next hypothesis is
Hypothesis 4: Task complexity will more adversely
influence the performance of the best person in a

nominal pair than the performance of a collab-

orating pair.MethodExperimental DesignA laboratory experiment, employing a 2 × 2 factorial design,

was conducted to examine the effects of different modes of

programming (individual versus pair) and task complexity

(low versus high) on outcomes of 
software quality, satisfac-tion, and confidence in performance
.  The experiment simu-
lated a software development task.  In the individual program-

ming condition, participants worked independently, while in

the paired programming condition, participants worked

interdependently on the programming tasks.  A total of 122

subjects participated in the study.  They were randomly

assigned to the pair condition or the individual condition,

resulting in 30 dyads and 62 individuals.  Two of the subjects

assigned to the individual condition were subsequently

dropped from the analysis because of incomplete responses. 

The remaining 60 subjects, who worked independently, were

randomly combined into 30 nominal pairs for statistical

analysis.  Consequently, 30 collaborating pairs and 30

nominal pairs were involved in the research design.  The best

(most competent) and the second best (least competent)
members of each nominal pair were identified based on their
actual performance on the experimental task.  The second

factor of interest was task complexity, which was varied at

two levels (high versus low).  The task of low complexity

involved modifying five methods in two classes, while the

more complex task involved modifying seven methods in five

classes.  The difference between the complexities of the two

experimental tasks, therefore, emanated primarily from the

multiplicity of solution paths (Campbell 1988).  The two

programming tasks designed and used for this purpose are

described in Appendixes A and B.For the purpose of analysis, the combination of programming
setting and task complexity resulted in a 3 (programming

setting:  collaborating pairs versus best nominal group mem-

bers versus second best nominal group members) × 2 (high

task complexity versus low task complexity) factorial design. 

There were 15 replications in each of the six cells of the

design.ParticipantsThe participants were drawn from undergraduate and graduate

students enrolled in Information Systems courses at a large

public university in the United States.  Knowledge of the Java

programming language was a requirement for participating in

the experiment.  Inclusion of graduate along with under-

graduate students was partly dictated by logistical considera-

tions, as the available subject pool with programming skills in

Java was relatively small.  We, however, viewed this as a

positive factor because it resulted in a pool of participants

with diverse skills and abilities.  Participation in the study was

voluntary.  Subjects earned class credit for their participation. 

Subjects were also included in a lottery to win one of three

prizes, each of $50 value.  To motivate them further to

perform well, they were informed that an amount in cents,

equal to their performance scores, would be contributed by

the experimenter to a charity.  Subjects who were unwilling

to participate, or had participated in a previous semester, were

provided with alternative home assignments by their

respective instructors.The mean (standard deviation) age of the experimental
subjects was 27.50 (6.39) years.  The experiment was con-

ducted over three semesters and the distribution of subjects

across the three semesters was as follows:  Spring Œ 49 (40.8

percent), Summer Œ 25 (20.8 percent), and Fall Œ 46 (38.3

percent).  In each semester, participants were randomly

assigned to treatments to make the number of participants

nearly equal in each 
of the four treatment conditions.  The
demographic characteristics of 
the experimental subjects are
described in Table 3.100MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Table 3.  Demographic Details of Experimental SubjectsDemographic Variable
Number ofSubjectsPercentage
GenderMale
Female
893174.225.8Subject statusUndergraduate
Graduate992182.517.5Subject CitizenshipU.S.
Other countries813669.230.8Programming experience 0 Œ 1 year

1 Œ 2 years

2 Œ 4 years

> 4 years
4430
20
2237.925.9
17.2
19.0Java experience 0 Œ 1 year

1 Œ 2 years

2 Œ 4 years

> 4 years
85246
173.320.75.1
0.9Experimental Setting, Procedures,and Manipulations
The experimental setting was the research lab of the college
of business.  All eight cubicles in the laboratory were insu-

lated and contained laptop computers loaded with Java JDK5,

Java documentation, and Notepad, to simulate the Java

development environment.  The laptops were standalone,

hence, subjects had no access to resources on the Internet.After being seated in the experimental laboratory, participants
were informed that they would be working on a programming

task involving application development in Java.  The subjects™

participation involved working on a warm up task for 15

minutes and on an experimental task for 2 hours.  The warm

up task was used for familiarizing subjects with the computers

and the experimental setting.  For the programming pairs, the

warm up task also afforded the opportunity to practice

working collaboratively.  The main experimental task lasted

for 2 hours, which was determined based on feedback pro-

vided by subjects during the pilot test.Stopwatches were used to time the beginning and end of the
warm-up task and the main experimental task.  This was to

ensure that participants worked for the same amount of time
on the experimental task.  If participants were not able to
complete the task during the assigned time of 2 hours, their

work was still collected and performance assessed.  After

completing the experimental task, each subject filled out a

questionnaire, which was designed to collect responses to

some of the dependent measures, manipulation check ques-

tions, and demographic data items.  Each experimental

session lasted for a total of 3 hours.Pilot TestPrior to the main experiment, a pilot test was conducted to test

the experimental protocols of all four treatment conditions. 

At the end of the pilot, participants™ judgments on the lab

setting, programming environment, experimental task, and

adequacy of time were elicited.  Based on this feedback,

appropriate changes were made to the scripts, and duration of

sessions, as well as to the logistics of the experiment. 
Manipulation of Independent Variables
For treatment groups involved in pair programming, written

instructions were provided on how they should work collabo-
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
101 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
ratively, as stipulated in XP (Williams et al. 2000).  These
instructions included how one of them would be working as

the driver at the keyboard, while the partner would play the

role of the navigator.  Instructions also described the trans-

ferring of the keyboard to the partner, and switching roles of

driver and navigator at frequent intervals.  To encourage

active communication between partners, they were informed

that the cubicles were insulated and that they could converse

freely without any fear of disturbing others.  To ensure that

the procedures were enacted and collaborating pairs switched

roles, the experimenter visited collaborating pairs every 15

minutes to remind them of these requirements.  A log of such

visits was maintained to help verify experimenter™s com-

pliance with this procedure.  In the individual programming

conditions, participants worked alone in cubicles.  The experi-

menter visited with these subjects at roughly 30 minute

intervals to ensure that instructions were being followed. 

Short breaks were provided to all participants in a staggered

manner, as needed, to prevent interaction among participants

from across treatments.
Dependent VariablesThree dependent variables were measured:  
software quality(SQ), satisfaction (S), and confidence in performance (CP). Software quality represents the assessment of the quality of
the task performed by the individual, or the pair, on the

programming task.  It is reflective of how well the code

satisfied the requirements stipulated in the problem statement

and produced correct results.  To rate the solution qualities of

the two experimental tasks, two separate assessment rubrics

were designed by one of the authors.  The solutions were

evaluated on a scale of 0 to 125.  Points were awarded based

on correctness of constructors, methods and their parameters,

code generalizability, comment statements, code indentation

etc.  Two Information Systems doctoral students, not directly

connected with the study, were trained as raters.  The assess-

ment rubrics were further refined based on their experience in

scoring software quality during the pilot test.  Copies of the

software quality assessment rubrics can be found in

Appendixes C and D.  For the main experimental tasks, the

two raters independently evaluated the code developed by

each participant (or pair).  In about 5 of the 120 cases, the

scores assigned by the raters differed significantly.  These

were reconciled through discussion.  The final judgments of

software quality by the raters were highly correlated (Pearson

correlation = 0.983).  To reduce any possible source of bias,

the average of the scores by the two raters was used as a

measure of 
software quality.Satisfaction represents affective response of the individual to
the overall task.  This measure was adapted from Bhattacher-

jee (2001).  The participants responded to the question ﬁHow

do you feel about your overall experience of working on the

programming task today?ﬂ using Likert scales ranging from

(1) very dissatisfied to (7) 
very satisfied, (1) 
very displeasedto (7) very pleased, (1) very frustrated to (7) very contented,and (1) absolutely terrible to (7) 
absolutely delighted.  Items
were summed and the mean score was used as the measure of

satisfaction (Cronbach™s  = 0.934).Confidence in performance 
represents the strength of the
participant™s belief about the quality of his/her programming

solution.  The measure for this variable (Cronbach™s 
 =0.945) was adapted from existing literature (Brewer and

Kramer 1986; Jourden and Heath 1996).  It was designed to

capture the subject™s broad perception of his/her performance

(quality of solution), to afford comparison with the more

objective performance measure of software quality. 

Participants responded to the statement ﬁHow do you feel

about the quality of your programming solution?ﬂ using

Likert scales anchored by (1) 
not at all confident
 to (7) 
veryconfident and (1) 
not at all certain
 to (7) 
very certain. Participants also responded to the question ﬁImagine that we

selected ten results at random from those who participated in

this task.  How would your performance rank among these ten

results?ﬂ and ranked their performance on a Likert scale

ranging from (1) 
worst result out of ten
 to (10) 
best result out
of ten
.  As two items measured 
confidence in performance
 on
a 7-point Likert scale and one item on a 10-point Likert scale,

a summated scale was created for 
confidence in performance
by adding the standardized individual items and then again

standardizing the resultant summated variable.  The resultant

confidence in performance
 measure had a mean of 0 and
standard deviation of 1.Control VariableProgramming ability is an important variable that can influ-
ence a participant™s performance.  To minimize the influence

of this variable on performance, 
programming ability was
measured and used as a covariate in the analysis.  The index

of programming ability was determined for each subject by
computing his/her weighted average GPA in all Information

Systems courses taken at the university.  In this computation,

grades in programming and analysis and design courses (the

analysis and design course offered at the university involved

implementation of a project in Java) were given twice the

weight as those in other IS courses.102MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Table 4.  Factor Loadings of Perceptual Dependent MeasuresItemSatisfaction
Confidence in
PerformanceCommunality
Estimate hi210.8430.3620.843
20.8970.2800.883

30.8430.3000.801

40.8390.3510.827

50.3230.8860.889

60.3410.9190.961

70.3490.9140.956
Eigenvalue 
j3.2732.887
Total
6.16Variance Explained46.75%41.24%87.99%
Preliminary AnalysisTo check whether the scales measuring participant satis-
faction and confidence were independent, exploratory factor

analysis was conducted using orthogonal (Varimax) rotation. 

The items loaded highly on the right constructs, and had low

loadings on other constructs, 
thus suggesting high convergent
and discriminant validity.  
Satisfaction and 
confidence in
performance had Eigenvalues of 3.27 and 2.89 respectively,
and the two-factor solution represented 88 percent of the total

variance.  These results, therefore, confirmed 
satisfaction and
confidence in performance
 to be distinct factors.  Table 4
summarizes the results of factor analysis.
Success of Experimental Manipulations
To verify the success of the experimental manipulation of

collaborative working (i.e., the treatment group), the experi-

menter™s log of visits to remind the collaborative pairs to take

turns was checked.  This confirmed that the experimenter

delivered the instructions and that the subject did comply.
A two-item scale was used to verify the success of the mani-
pulation of task complexity.  Participants responded to the

question ﬁHow do you feel about the main programming task

you performed, as compared to the warm-up task?ﬂ using

Likert scales from (1) 
very easy to (7) 
very difficult and (1)
very simple to (7) 
very complex.  Both items were summed
and the mean scale score was computed (
 = 0.87).  Among
nominal pairs, participants in each pair were grouped by their

software quality scores into the best and the second-best
performing members.  The ANOVA procedure was used in a

3 programming setting (collaborating pair × best nominal pair
member × second-best nominal pair member) × 2 
task com-
plexity (high task complexity × low task complexity) factorial
design to verify the success of 
task complexity
 manipulation. 
Results indicated a main effect of 
task complexity
 manipula-
tion for the scale measuring perceived complexity (F = 11.17,

p < .01).  Participants in the high task complexity conditions

perceived the task to be more complex (M = 5.09), compared

with participants in the low task complexity conditions (M =

4.28).  No other main or interaction effects were significant,

thus confirming that the experimental manipulation of 
taskcomplexity was successful. In addition, we also obtained independent evaluations of the
tasks by two experts.  Both experts hold academic positions

and have several years of experience in teaching Java pro-

gramming.  One of the experts also has significant industry

experience, having served as director of technology processes

at a large multinational corporation prior to joining academia. 

Neither of the experts had anything to do with the experi-

mental tasks.  On the same set of questions indicated above,

these experts also perceived the two experimental tasks to be

different in complexity (M = 5.75 for high complexity task

and M = 3.75 for low complexity task) relative to the warm-

up task, providing further evidence of the success of the

experimental manipulation.
Analysis and Results
Among the dependent measures, 
software quality
 was mea-
sured as a group level construct for collaborating pairs, as

each pair developed a single programming solution.  The per-

ceptual measures of participant 
satisfaction and 
confidence inperformance were measured individually for each member of
the collaborating pair and then averaged.  Among nominal
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
103 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
pairs, participants in each pair were classified by their soft-
ware quality scores into the best and the second-best per-

forming members.  To test the significance of experimental

manipulations, MANCOVA procedures were used in a 3 
pro-gramming setting (collaborating pair × best nominal pair
member × second-best nominal pair member) × 2 
task com-
plexity (high task complexity × low task complexity) factorial
design, with 
programming ability used as a covariate.  Testing
for MANCOVA significance across dependent measures,

before doing individual ANCOVA analyses, guards against

inflated type I error (Hair et al. 1998).  When MANCOVA

tests are significant, ANCOVA procedures are recommended

to determine which dependent variables are significant. 

Based on ANCOVA effects, a priori t-tests with Bonferroni™s
correction were used to examine the pattern of mean dif-

ferences and to test specific hypotheses.  Bonferroni™s cor-

rection helps control for inflated type I error due to multiple

comparisons.
As the experimental sessions were performed over three
semesters, we conducted separate one-way ANOVA analyses

to check for any systematic biases.  The tests revealed no

significant differences across semesters among the dependent

measures of 
software quality
 (F(2, 87) = 0.54, p = 0.58),
satisfaction (F(2, 87) = 0.46, p = 0.63), and 
confidence inperformance (F(2, 87) = 1.01, p = 0.37), providing assurance
against any time-ordered effects.  In terms of MANOVA

assumptions, presence of significant correlations among

dependent measures was satisfied based on Bartlett™s test for

sphericity (
² = 798.481, p < 0.01).  The linearity assumption
was satisfied as no nonlinear relationships were evident in the

scatter plots matrix of the dependent measures and the

covariate.  Based on Martinez and Iglewicz tests, the

normality assumptions were satisfied for the dependent

measures of 
software quality (I = 0.93, p > 0.05), 
satisfaction(I = 0.98, p > 0.05) and 
confidence in performance
 (I = 0.95,
p > 0.05).  The assumption of equal variance across treatment

groups was also satisfied, based on modified Levine test for

software quality (F = 2.185, p = 0.063), 
satisfaction
 (F =
0.863, p = 0.509), and 
confidence in performance
 (F = 0.795,
p = 0.557), along with the assumption of equality of

covariance matrices (Box™s M = 31.730, p = 0.528).  It is

pertinent to note that F test in ANOVA models is robust

against violations of normality (Neter et al. 1996).  Also,

when sample sizes are roughly equal in all of the treatment

cells, as is the case here, the effect of any violation of unequal

variance assumption is minimal on the inference tests based

on F-distribution (Hair et al. 1998; Neter et al. 1996).MANCOVA procedures, used to examine the impact of the
independent variables across the set of dependent variables

(software quality, satisfaction, and confidence in perfor-
mance), indicated that
 programming setting (collaborating
pairs × best nominal pair members × second-best nominal pair
members) had a significant effect on the set of dependent

measures (Wilke™s Lambda = 0.64, F = 6.90, p < 0.01), as did

task complexity
 (Wilke™s lambda = 0.91, F = 2.79, p = 0.046),
and programming ability (Wilke™s Lambda = 0.80, F = 6.70,
p < 0.01).  There was no significant interaction of 
pro-gramming setting × 
task complexity
 on the set of dependent
measures (Wilke™s Lambda = 0.93, F = 1.04, p = 0.40). 

Given the overall significance of the MANCOVA model,

ANCOVA analyses were then conducted for each of the

dependent measures.  
Programming ability was again used as
a covariate in all of the analyses.  The individual ANCOVA

results for the three dependent measures are summarized in

Table 5.  Table 6 shows the means and standard deviations of

dependent measures for the three conditions of 
programmingsetting.  Figures 2 and 3 provide a graphical representation of
the marginal means for these conditions.
Software QualityHypothesis 1 predicted software quality scores to be higher
for collaborating pairs, compared with the second-best

members of nominal pairs.  Based on ANCOVA procedures,

there was a significant main effect of the programming setting

on software quality (F(2, 83) = 12.73, p < 0.01).  T-tests were
performed with Bonferroni™s correction to check whether the

pattern of mean differences was consistent with H1.  Table 7

summarizes marginal means and results of the planned

comparisons for Hypotheses 1 to 3.  Hypothesis 1 was sup-

ported as software quality for collaborating pairs (M = 62.52)
was significantly higher than that of the second-best members

of nominal pairs (M = 43.38) in a one-tailed test of marginal

means (p < 0.01).  Although not explicitly hypothesized, we

did additional tests to more precisely locate the performance

of the collaborating pair, relative to the performance of the

best member of the nominal pair.  Consistent with our expec-

tation, there were no differences between the 
software qualityscores of collaborating pairs (M = 62.52) and those of the best

members of nominal pairs (M = 73.03) in a two-tailed test of

marginal means (p = 0.16).  
Hypothesis 4 predicted that task complexity
 × 
programmingsetting interaction influences 
software quality.  Specifically,we expected 
task complexity
 to more adversely affect the
software quality
 of the best members of the nominal pairs
than that of the collaborating pairs.  However, there was no

support for Hypothesis 4, as ANCOVA procedures (Table 5)

suggested that the interaction effect of 
programming setting
× task complexity
 on 
software quality was not significant
(F(2, 83) = 1.73, p = 0.18).  The pattern of relationship

between programming setting and 
software quality was,
therefore, not affected by 
task complexity
.  There was a signi-
104MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Table 5.  One-Way ANCOVA Results for The Dependent Measures
SSdfMSFp-value
Software Quality (SQ)

Programming Setting (PS)13437.29426718.64712.7310.000*
Task Complexity (TC)4510.39914510.3998.5470.004*

Programming Ability (GPA)
10813.705110813.70520.4900.000*
PS × TC1826.7552913.3781.7310.183

Error43802.99583527.747

Total396338.00090

Model R Squared = 0.425 (A
djusted R Squared = 0.383)
Satisfaction (S)

Programming Setting (PS)14.89027.4453.4070.038*
Task Complexity (TC)3.61113.6111.6530.202

Programming Ability (GPA)
8.50318.5033.8910.052
PS × TC1.87920.9400.4300.652

Error181.364832.185

Total1552.54790

Model R Squared = 0.136 (A
djusted R Squared = 0.073)
Confidence in Performance (CP)

Programming Setting (PS)11.20025.6007.7810.001*
Task Complexity (TC)1.63611.6362.2730.135

Programming Ability (GPA)
3.89313.8935.4160.022*
PS × TC1.31320.6570.9120.406

Error59.736830.720

Total78.09989
Model R Squared = 0.235 (A
djusted R Squared = 0.180)
*significant at p = 0.05Table 6.  Means and Standard Deviations for the Dependent Measures
MeasuresNominal PairsCollaborating PairsBest PersonƒSecond-Best PersonLowComplexityHighComplexityMean
LowComplexityHighComplexityMean
LowComplexityHighComplexityMean
Software Quality  (Range 0Œ125)

Mean77.40072.600
75.00047.63337.267
42.45073.76749.200
61.483SD21.70624.603
22.92724.16122.137
23.37128.51930.619
31.644n1515
301515
301515
30Satisfaction (Range 1Œ7)
Mean4.0173.383
3.7003.4173.550
3.4834.7174.092
4.404SD1.4831.700
1.6001.7641.240
1.5001.1811.557
1.395n1515
301515
301515
30Confidence in Performance (Standardized Scores)Mean0.118-0.087
0.157-0.597-0.551
-0.5740.578-0.020
0.279SD0.8460.985
0.9080.9890.675
0.8320.7690.912
0.883n1515
301515
301515
30ƒThe best (most competent) person and the second best (least com
petent) person of each nominal pair were determined based on the
ir software quality scores.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
105 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Figure 2.  Marginal Means of Software Quality
Figure 3.  Marginal Means of Satisfaction and Confidence in PerformanceProgramming Setting & Software Quality
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Software Quality
8070605040(a)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
Programming Setting, Task Complexity & Software Quality
321Estimated Marginal Means 
of Software Quality
807060504030Task
Complexity
Low
High
(b)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
Programming Setting & Software Quality
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Software Quality
8070605040(a)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
Programming Setting & Software Quality
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Software Quality
8070605040(a)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
Programming Setting, Task Complexity & Software Quality
321Estimated Marginal Means 
of Software Quality
807060504030Task
Complexity
Low
High
(b)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
Programming Setting, Task Complexity & Software Quality
321Estimated Marginal Means 
of Software Quality
807060504030Task
Complexity
Low
High
(b)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Satisfaction
4.6
4.4
4.2
4.0
3.8
3.6
3.4
Programming Setting & Satisfaction
(a)
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Satisfaction
5.0
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4.0
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
Task
Complexity
Low
High
Programming Setting, Task Complexity & Satisfaction
(b)
Programming Setting, Task Complexity & Confidence
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Confidence
.8.6.4.20.0
-.2

-.4
-.6
-.8
Task
Complexity
Low
High
(d)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair

3 ŒCollaborating pair
Programming Setting & Confidence
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Confidence
.4.20.0
-.2

-.4
-.6
-.8
(c)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair

2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Satisfaction
4.6
4.4
4.2
4.0
3.8
3.6
3.4
Programming Setting & Satisfaction
(a)
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Satisfaction
4.6
4.4
4.2
4.0
3.8
3.6
3.4
Programming Setting & Satisfaction
(a)
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Satisfaction
5.0
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4.0
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
Task
Complexity
Low
High
Programming Setting, Task Complexity & Satisfaction
(b)
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Satisfaction
5.0
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4.0
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
Task
Complexity
Low
High
Programming Setting, Task Complexity & Satisfaction
(b)
Programming Setting, Task Complexity & Confidence
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Confidence
.8.6.4.20.0
-.2

-.4
-.6
-.8
Task
Complexity
Low
High
(d)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair

3 ŒCollaborating pair
Programming Setting, Task Complexity & Confidence
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Confidence
.8.6.4.20.0
-.2

-.4
-.6
-.8
Task
Complexity
Low
High
(d)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair
2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair

3 ŒCollaborating pair
Programming Setting & Confidence
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Confidence
.4.20.0
-.2

-.4
-.6
-.8
(c)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair

2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
Programming Setting & Confidence
321Estimated Marginal Means
of Confidence
.4.20.0
-.2

-.4
-.6
-.8
(c)
Programming Setting
1 ŒBest programmer in nominal pair

2 ŒSecond-best programmer in nominal pair
3 ŒCollaborating pair
106MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Table 7.  Marginal Means and Planned Comparison Tests for Hypotheses 1, 2 and 3
Measure
Nominal PairCollaboratingPairHypothesesp value
Best Member
Second-best
Member123
Software Quality SQ73.03343.38362.
517H1:  SQ3 Œ SQ2 > 00.002*
Satisfaction S3.6453.5094.433
H2A:  S3 Œ S1 > 00.043*
H2B:  S3 Œ S2 > 00.018*
Confidence in CP-0.022-0.5560.
299H3A:  CP3 Œ CP1 > 00.150
Performance H3B:  CP3 Œ CP2 > 00.000*
*significant at p = 0.05ficant main effect of 
task complexity
 on 
software quality (F(1,
83) = 8.55, p < 0.01).  A t-test with Bonferroni™s correction on

marginal means suggested the mean 
software quality score
was lower (p < 0.01) for the high complexity task (M = 52.56)

compared with the low complexity task (M = 66.73).
SatisfactionBased on ANCOVA analysis (Table 5), there was also a

significant main effect of 
programming setting
 on 
satisfaction
(F(2, 83) = 3.41, p = 0.04).  Hypotheses 2A and 2B predicted

satisfaction levels of collaborating pairs to be higher than
those of the best and the second-best members of nominal

pairs.  Both hypotheses were supported.  The 
satisfactionreported by the collaborating pairs (M = 4.43) was signi-

ficantly higher than those expressed by the best (M = 3.65, p

= 0.04) and the second-best (M = 3.51, p = 0.02) members of

nominal pairs in one-tailed t-tests of marginal means. 

Although we did not have any prior expectation, the inter-

action of programming setting × 
task complexity
 on 
satisfac-tion was not significant (F(2, 83) = 0.43, p = 0.65).Confidence in PerformanceANCOVA results indicated a significant main effect of
programming setting manipulation on 
confidence in perfor-
mance (F(2, 83) = 7.78, p < 0.01).  Hypotheses 3A and 3B
predicted 
confidence in performance
 levels to be higher for
collaborating pairs compared with those of the best and the

second-best members of nominal pairs.  There was no support

for Hypothesis 3A, as the confidence levels reported were not

significantly higher for the collaborating pairs relative to the

best members of nominal pairs in a one-tailed t-test of

marginal means (p = 0.15).  However, there was support for
Hypothesis 3B, as collaborating pairs had significantly higher
confidence levels compared with the second-best members of

nominal pairs in a one-tailed t-test (p < 0.01).  Although we

did not have any prior expectation, the interaction of

programming setting × task complexity on confidence levels

of participants was not significant (F(2, 83) = 0.91, p = 0.41).
To summarize, four main hypotheses in all were fully sup-
ported.  Two hypotheses (Hypothesis 3A and 4) were not sup-

ported.  The results of hypothesis testing are summarized in

Table 8.  A complete discussion of the results and the plau-

sible reasons for exceptions are presented in the next section.
DiscussionIn this paper, we examined the effects of paired programmers

on performance outcomes by contrasting them with individual

programmers, whose efforts were combined into nominal

pairs.  The nominal pairs in this study were pairs that were

randomly created.  Members of each nominal pair worked

alone, but their efforts were conjointly considered.  To the

best of our knowledge, no previous IS study has attempted to

compare the performance of collaborating programming pairs

with that of nominal pairs.  When performance of collabo-

rating pairs is contrasted with an equal number of individual

programmers, as in previous IS studies, the comparison

inherent in such designs is between pair performance and the

performance of an average individual programmer.  Pairs are

expected to outperform average individuals based on pure

probabilities alone.  By using the same number of program-

mers in the individual condition as in the paired condition

(e.g., 30 pairs and 60 individuals) and by statistically

grouping the individual programmers into nominal pairs (e.g.,

30 nominal pairs), this study created an equal man-hour

comparison between programmers working collaboratively in 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
107 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Table 8.  Results of Hypotheses Testing
HypothesisResultExplanation
1Software Quality
Programming performance of a collaborating pairmeasured in terms of software quality will be higher

than the performance of the second-best member of anominal pairSupported (p < 0.01)
A collaborating pair outperforms thesecond-best member of an independently
working nominal pair.
2Satisfaction
A.The mean satisfaction with the programming task
of a collaborating pair will exceed the level reported

by the best member of a nominal pair.Supported(p = 0.04)
A collaborating pair is more satisfied thaneach member of an independently working

nominal pair.B.The mean satisfaction with the programming task
of a collaborating pair will exceed the level reported

by the second-best member of a nominal pair.Supported (p = 0.02)
3Confidence in Performance
A.The mean confidence in performance of a collabo-
rating programming pair will exceed the level

reported by the best member of a nominal pair.Not Supported(p = 0.15)
A collaborating pair is only as confident of
its performance as the best member of an
independently working nominal pair, but

more confident than its second-best
member.B.The mean confidence in performance of a collabo-
rating programming pair will exceed the level

reported by the second-best member of a nominalpair.Supported (p < 0.01)
4Moderating Effect of Task Complexity
Task complexity affects t
he performance, in terms ofsoftware quality, of the best 
member of a nominal  pairmore adversely than that  of a collaborating pairNot Supported (p = 0.18)
Task complexity affects the performance of
collaborating pairs and nominal pairs in
similar ways.
pairs and those working alone.  This is consistent with recent
designs used in the social psychology literature (Laughlin,

Zander et al. 2003).  Drawing not only from the IS field, but

also from the literature on social and cognitive psychology,

hypotheses comparing collaborating pairs with nominal pairs,

in terms of performance outcome and affective responses,

were derived.  The findings are generally supportive of the

research model and the main hypotheses.
Software QualityThe results indicated that while working on a programming

task, performance, in terms of 
software quality, of a collabo-
rating pair is higher than that of the second-best programmer

of a nominal pair working independently, but is not different

from the performance of the best member of the nominal pair. 

Therefore, no 
assembly bonus effect
, where pair performance
exceeds that of the most competent member of a nominal pair,
was found among the participants in this study.  Although
consistent with our expectation, it runs counter to some of the

earlier findings in XP literature where there is a popular and

general perception of pair superiority over individuals.  Such

perceptions may stem from the known superiority of groups

over average individuals in problem-solving tasks, and is

perhaps enhanced by the positive affect experienced by group

members during collaborative work (Hinsz and Nickell 2004).
Our results, on pair programming performance, are in line
with the general finding in small group research that groups

rarely outperform the best individual of a statistical aggregate

(Hill 1982; Kerr and Tindale 2004).  Additionally, Laughlin

and colleagues suggested that in intellective problem solving

tasks, a group size of three is necessary for the group to

outperform the best individual of a nominal group (Laughlin,

Hatch et al. 2006).  The consistency of our finding with the

research evidence from small group studies provides assur-

ance regarding the plausibility and robustness of the under-

lying effect.108MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Despite the popular perception among the software commu-
nity of pair superiority, performance above the most compe-

tent member of a collaborating pair may be difficult to

achieve in pair programming because of the nature of the pro-

gramming task itself.  As brought out earlier, programming

tasks do have intellectual components with correct solutions,

but the demonstrability of such solutions decreases with

increasing task complexity.  In addition, there are decision-

making aspects to programming tasks that involve inherent

tradeoffs and require evolving a consensus on a preferred

approach.  This also adds to the coordination overhead, thus

affecting pair performance.  Evidence from group brain-

storming research suggests that collaborating groups fall short

of producing as many ideas as an equivalent number of indi-

viduals in nominal groups (Mullen and Salas 1991).  In what

is termed as production blocking, wait periods involved in

turn taking could cause cognitive interference (Diehl and

Stroebe 1987).  Similar production blocking processes may be

at play when programmers switch roles in working with XP

procedures, thus reducing potential gains from collaboration. 

One possible way for the pairs to reduce this interference is to

develop effective work routines over long periods of working

together.Task ComplexityPerformance differences between collaborating pairs and the

best as well as the second best performers in nominal pairs

were found to be consistent across tasks of different levels of

complexity.  That is, task complexity was not found to have

a moderating effect on these relationships when software

quality was considered.  Instead, task complexity had a direct

effect on participants:  those (both individuals and pairs)

working on tasks of high complexity scored lower on software

quality relative to participants working on tasks of low

complexity.
With increasing task complexity, performance of a collabo-
rating pair could theoretically improve up to the point where

it matches the cognitive capacity of the pair.  Beyond this

point, performance would be expected to deteriorate.  It is

possible that in the present study, the more complex task used

was beyond this optimal cognitive capacity for some groups,

and hence the hypothesized moderating effect of task

complexity was not evident.  The observed direct effect of

performance deterioration of participants working on the more

complex task also supports our speculation in this regard. 

However, this issue needs to be further investigated in future

studies.  Satisfaction and ConfidenceThe results of this study suggest that collaborating pairs were
more satisfied than the best and the second-best members of

nominal pairs.  These findings are consistent with empirical

evidence from IS and small group research that group work is

more satisfying.  It is interesting to note that members of

collaborating pairs showed higher levels of satisfaction,

irrespective of their performance as measured in terms of

software quality.Collaborating pairs also had more confidence in their per-
formance than did the second-best members.  However,

collaborating pairs reported only as much confidence in their

performance as the best members of nominal pairs.  The

confidence levels were in correspondence with the perfor-

mance levels, as collaborating pairs outperformed the second-

best members of nominal pairs in software quality achieved,

but not the best members.  This is suggestive of realism in the

confidence judgments of programming pairs.  Findings in

small group research suggest that groups tend to have more

positive illusions of their performance than do individuals

(Jourden and Heath 1996).  Our findings indicate that, at least

in the programming context, pairs are able to avoid this over-

performance bias.  The ability to make realistic confidence

judgments augurs well for programming pairs, because pairs

would then accurately judge their performance and appro-

priately respond to changing situational requirements.
LimitationsThe types of software developers simulated in this study were

entry-level programmers engaged in systems development in

organizations.  One concern when using student subjects

would be with regard to their representativeness of the target

population.  The average self-reported programming experi-

ence of the subjects involved in this study was 1.92 years,

with 38 percent reporting 2 or more years of programming

experience.  This alleviates so
me concerns that our partici-
pants were unfamiliar with programming demands.  Another

issue is that student programmers, as participants, may have

difficulty remembering the syntax of the programming

language.  However, we did provide access to online docu-

mentation, although it is hard to say if they were more or less

motivated to use such documentation than participants in

other situations.  Also, it is not uncommon to find student

subjects being used as surrogates for practitioners in other IS

studies (see, for example, Bodart et al. 2001; Khatri et al.

2006; Kumar and Benbasat 2004).  Other issues concern the

many complex situational variables of the work place that are

not present in the more sterile laboratory environment. 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
109 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
However, we would suggest that the underlying cognitive and
behavioral processes reflected in these findings operate very

similarly in the workplace.  Al
so, social psychologists, who
have examined the effectiveness of individuals and groups on

problem-solving tasks, have reported similar results (e.g.,

Laughlin, Gonzalez et al. 2003; Laughlin, VanderStoep and

Hollingshead 1991).Another potential limitation of the paper is the use of GPA as
an index of programming ability.  However, it must be

mentioned that, when the GPA was calculated, courses that

involved programming in Java were given twice as much

weight as other classes.  This weighted GPA, rather than a

straightforward one, was a covariate that significantly

accounted for the variance of both 
software quality (p < 0.01)
and confidence in performance
 (p < 0.022), thus lending
credence to our approach.Some researchers have suggested that pair performance
improves after an initial jelling period (Williams et al. 2000). 

This was not simulated in the present study, except for

working on a warm-up task of 15 minutes duration.  This

study also did not measure task completion time.  It would be

a useful dependent measure in a study where performance is

defined as successful completion to a particular standard.  As

software quality was conceived as a continuous measure, time

to completion was used as a control factor in our study, with

all participants provided with a maximum time of 2 hours for

task completion.
Implications for Research and PracticeThis study has made valuable contributions to research in the

domains of software development, IS group problem-solving,

and social psychology.  For software development research in

general, and agile development in particular, this study has

suggested that when working on software maintenance tasks,

irrespective of task complexity, the performance of a

programmer pair exceeds that of the second-best member of

a nominal group, but does not exceed that of the best member.
Furthermore, this study has introduced the concept of the
nominal group and the performance of its best member as a

new benchmark for evaluating group problem solving tasks in

software development.  Nominal group design, which is

widely used in social psychology studies, offers a rigorous

approach to compare group performance with the perfor-

mances of individuals.  For instance, in four-member groups,

comparison is possible between performance of the group and

the performances of best, second-best, third-best, and fourth-

best members of a nominal group.
In the social psychology literature, understanding the rela-
tionship between the task type, skills and abilities of the group

members, and the performance of the group has been of

enduring interest.  Typically, the tasks used in these studies

fall into either end of an intellectiveŒjudgmental continuum.

When the task is highly intellective, as in studies by Laughlin

and his colleagues (e.g., Laughlin, Bonner and Miner 2002;

Laughlin, Hatch et al. 2006; Laughlin, Zander et al. 2003), a

truth-wins social combination process (where a group™s

response is the correct response if any one member can solve

the problem) often defines the group™s performance.  With

increasing task complexity, the correct solution becomes less

obvious where other social combination processes, such as

truth-supported (where a pair can come up with a correct

response only if both members can agree on the correct solu-

tion), define group performance.  Programming tasks, while

combining multiple disjunctive subtasks which might facili-

tate the contributions of multiple members, however, also

combine intellective with decision-making task components,

where consensus, rather than identification of the correct

response, defines the solution.  By examining group problem

solving on a programming task, this paper has extended this

stream of research into a type of task that is complex, with

multiple and conjoint elements.  In addition, this type of task

also comprises a core activity performed by employees in

many organizations, and thus has high practical relevance. 

The idea of nominal groups is relatively new in studies

involving group problem solving and, unlike the tradition of

other established concepts in group theory, the cumulative

body of research on nominal groups is relatively small.  Our

study would no doubt be a useful addition to this growing

body of work.For enhancing the practice of pair programming in organi-
zations, this study has made several contributions.  First, pair

programming helps a pair to produce software of superior

quality compared with that of its less competent member, and

that pair performance in this dimension is comparable to its

best member working individually.  Thus, there is no down-

side to pair programming, in terms of the quality of software

produced, although the cost of an additional programmer

needs to be critically examined.  It is said that for effective

software development, developers™ experience of building

systems is important in both agile and traditional software

development groups.  However, individual competency of

developers is a critical success factor for agile development

methodologies (Cockburn and Highsmith 2001).  We would,

therefore, speculate that an organization using pair program-

ming as a practice could benefit more by pairing programmers

from its available pool of those who rank above and below the

median, in terms of abilities.  This could be viewed as an

insurance mechanism to achieve software quality comparable

to that produced by the top half performers.
110MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Second, pair programming contributes to increased 
satisfac-tion over independent working.  Higher satisfaction of pro-
gramming pairs has implications for reducing employee turn-

over in general, and improving re
tention of best performers in
particular.Third, based on the findings of this study, there is an impera-
tive need to critically evaluate pair programming as a com-

mon XP practice for all aspects of software development. 

Consistent with the general finding of several decades of

small group research, this study has shown that pair perfor-

mance cannot exceed the performance of the best programmer

in the dyad working alone.  So, while pair programming is

definitely an option when working on mission critical aspects

of software development, the use of this practice needs to be

carefully evaluated so that expectations do not exceed the

typical benefits of the strategy.Future Research DirectionsThis study has introduced a new performance benchmark,

performance above the best member working alone, for

judging agile software development procedures.  It would be

useful in future studies to see how this performance bench-

mark could be breached, if at all.  The quest for the  
assemblybonus effect
 in pair programming would be an interesting and
rewarding research program to pursue.  This entails an exami-

nation of individual differences between members of pairs, as

well as an investigation of agile software development issues

related to tasks, context, and process.The programming tasks used in our study were software
maintenance tasks, where subjects made enhancements to an

existing code.  Among various software development tasks,

such as design, implementation, testing, and maintenance,

maintenance tasks may have the lowest creative potential. 

That is, they may provide a cl
ass of problems that are more
likely to have a verifiable component relative to design or

implementation tasks.  Consequently, it would be interesting

to see whether these findings would replicate to other types of

software development tasks.  While we found the main effect

to be consistent across tasks of two levels of complexity, it

would be of interest to compare across, say, more than two

levels of complexity, as we speculate a nonlinear moderating

relationship for task complexity.
Solution demonstrability increases the likelihood that pairs
will adopt the correct answer suggested by one of its mem-

bers.  This process involves not only task characteristics, but

also person characteristics, as the dyad member suggesting a

solution should have the ability, motivation, and time to
demonstrate the correct answer to the partner.  A recent case
study finding suggests that noviceŒnovice pairs, relative to

novice solos, are more productive than expertŒexpert pairs,

relative to expert solos (Lui and Chan 2006).  Examining such

performance effects of pairing programmers with different

combinations of abilities, or even personalities, would be an

exciting avenue to pursue with interesting insights to be

gained.ConclusionsThis study makes significant contributions to understanding

the performance effectiveness of pair programming by

demonstrating, through a controlled experiment, that pair

performance typically cannot exceed the performance of its

best member working individually.  No effect was evident for

task complexity on this relationship.  In terms of the affective

outcomes, pairs were more satisfied than both the best and the

second-best members of nominal pairs, Also, pairs were more

confident in their performance, compared to the second-best

members of nominal pairs, but not the best members.  These

results were obtained by contrasting collaborating pairs with

nominal pairs, based on an equal man-hour comparison.
With the advent of agile methodologies, software develop-
ment is undergoing an extreme makeover.  Software practice

is in need of robust research findings to wade through the

methodological quagmire facing the software development

community.  An enlightened perspective is, however, needed

that stresses rigorous and generalizable research to avoid

deleterious consequences, such as wasted developer produc-

tivity, software project failures, and operational disruptions

caused by defective software.  In attempting to achieve this

ideal, this paper makes a valuable contribution to the current

discourse on collaborative practices in agile development

methodologies in general, and the practice of pair program-

ming in particular.
AcknowledgmentsThe authors thank Radhika Sant
hanam and James Teng for theirvaluable comments.  The authors are also grateful to the anonymous

reviewers, the associate editor, and Carol Saunders for their con-

structive feedback and suggestions 
on earlier versions of this paper.
ReferencesAiello, J. R., and Douthitt, E. 
A.  2001.  ﬁSocial Facilitation from
Triplett to Electronic Performance Monitoring,ﬂ 
Group Dynamics
(5:3), pp. 163-180.MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
111 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Ambler, S.  2007.  ﬁSurvey Says...Agile Has Crossed the Chasm,ﬂ
Dr. Dobb™s Portal: Architecture & Design, July 2

(http://www.ddj.com/architect/200001986).Arisholm, E., Gallis, H., Dybå, T., and Sjøberg, D. I. K.  2007.
ﬁEvaluating Pair Programming w
ith Respect to System Com-
plexity and Programmer Expertise,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering (33:2), pp. 65-86.Baheti, P., Gehringer, E., and St
otts, D.  2002.  ﬁExploring the
Efficacy of Distributed Pair Programming,ﬂ in 
Extreme Pro-
gramming and Agile Methods Œ XP/Agile Universe 2002
,D. Wells and L. Williams (eds.), Heidelberg:  Springer-Verlag,

pp. 208-220.Beck, K.  1999.  ﬁEmbracing Change with Extreme Programming,ﬂ
IEEE Computer (32:10), pp. 70-77.Beck, K.  2000.  
Extreme Programming Explained:  Embrace
Change, Reading, MA:  Addison Wesley.
Bhattacherjee, A.  2001.  ﬁUnde
rstanding Information Systems Con-
tinuance:  An Expectation-Confirmation Model,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly
(25:3), pp. 351-370.Bodart, F., Patel, A., Sim, M
., and Weber, R.
  2001.  ﬁShould
Optional Properties Be Used in Conceptual Modeling?  A Theory

and Three Empirical Tests,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
(12:4), pp. 384-405.Boland, R. J., and Tenkasi, R. V.
  1995.  ﬁPerspective Making and
Perspective Taking in Communities of Knowing,ﬂ 
OrganizationScience (6:4), pp. 350-372.Bonner, B. L.  2004.  ﬁExpertise 
in Group Problem Solving:  Recog-
nition, Social Combination, and Performance,ﬂ 
Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice (8:4), pp. 277-290.Bonner, B. L., Baumann, M. R., 
and Dalal, R. S.  2002.  ﬁThe
Effects of Member Expertise on Group Decision-Making and

Performance,ﬂ 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes
 (88:2), pp. 719-736.Brewer, M. B., and Kramer, R. M.  1986.  ﬁChoice Behavior in
Social Dilemmas:  Effects of Social Identity, Group Size, and

Decision Framing,ﬂ 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy (50:3), pp. 543-549.Brickner, M. A., Harkins, S. G., 
and Ostrom, T. M.  1986.  ﬁEffects
of Personal Involvement:  T
hought-Provoking Implications for
Social Loafing,ﬂ 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
(51), pp. 763-770.Bystrom, K., and Jarvelin, K.  1995.  ﬁTask Complexity Affects
Information-Seeking and Use,ﬂ 
Information Processing &Management (31:2), pp. 191-213.Campbell, D. J.  1988.  ﬁTas
k Complexity:  A Review and
Analysis,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Review (13:1), pp. 40-52.Canfora, G., Cimitile, A., Garcia, F., Piattini, M., and Visaggio,
C. A.  2007.  ﬁEvaluating Perform
ances of Pair Designing in In-
dustry,ﬂ 
Journal of Systems and Software
 (80:8), pp. 1317-1327.
Canfora, G., Cimitile, A., and Visaggio, C. A.  2005.  ﬁEmpirical
Study on the Productivity of the Pair Programming,ﬂ in 
ExtremeProgramming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering
,H. Baumeister, M. Marchesi a
nd M. Holcombe (eds.), Berlin: 
Springer, pp. 92-99.Cao, L., Mohan, K., Xu, P., and 
Ramesh, B.  2004.  ﬁHow Extreme
Does Extreme Programming Have to Be?  Adapting XP Practices

to Large-Scale Projects,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 37
th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
, LosAlamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press.
Cockburn, A.  2002.  ﬁAgile Software Development Joins the
‚Would-Be™ Crowd,ﬂ Cutter IT Journal (15:1), pp. 6-12.Cockburn, A., and Highsmith, J.  
2001.  ﬁAgile Software Develop-ment 2:  The People Factor,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer
 (34:11), pp.
131-133.Cockburn, A., and Williams, L.  2001.
  ﬁThe Costs and Benefits of
Pair Programming,ﬂ in 
Extreme Programming Examined
,G. Succi and M. Marc
hesi (eds.), Boston:  Addison Wesley, pp.
223-243.Collins, B. E., and Guetzkow, H. G.  1964.  
Social Psychology of
Group Processes for Decision-Making, New York:  Wiley.
Dennis, A. R., and Valacich, J. S.
  1993.  ﬁComputer Brainstorms: 
More Heads Are Better than One,ﬂ 
Journal of Applied
Psychology (78:4), pp. 531-537.Diehl, M., and Stroebe, W.  1987.  ﬁProductivity Loss in Idea-
Generating Groups:  Tracking Down the Blocking Effect,ﬂ 
Jour-nal of Personality and Social Psychology (53:3), pp. 497-509.Dybå, T., Arisholm, E., Sjøberg, D. I. K., Hannay, J. E., and Shull,
F.  ﬁAre Two Heads Better than One?  On the Effectiveness of

Pair Programming,ﬂ IEEE Software (24:6), pp. 12-15.Flor, N. V., and Hutchins, E. L. 
 1991.  ﬁAnalyzing Distributed Cog-
nition in Software Teams:  A 
Case Study of Team Programming
During Perfective Software Maintenance,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the
4th Annual Workshop on Empirical Studies of Programmers
, J.
Koenemann-Belleveau, T. G. Moher,
 and S. P. Robertson (eds.),
Norwood, NJ:  Ablex Publishing, pp. 36-63.Forsyth, D. R.  1999.  
Group Dynamics, Belmont, CA:  Wadsworth
Publishing.Fruhling, A., and de Vreede, G. 
 2006.  ﬁField Experiences with
eXtreme Programming:  Developing an Emergency Response

System,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (22:4), pp.
39-68.Garibaldi, A. M.  1979.  ﬁAffec
tive Contributions of Cooperative
and Group Goal Structures,ﬂ 
Journal of Educational Psychology
(71:6), pp. 788-794.Hackman, J. R.  1987.  ﬁThe
 Design of Work Teams,ﬂ in 
Handbookof Organizational Behavior
, J. W. Lorsch (ed.), Englewood
Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice-Hall, pp. 315-342.Hair, J. F., Anderson, R. E., Ta
tham, R. L., and Black, W. C. 1998.
Multivariate Data Analysis
, Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Harkins, S. G.  1987.  ﬁSocial 
Loafing and Social Facilitation,ﬂ
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology (23:11), pp. 1-18.Harkins, S. G., and Petty, R. E. 
 1982.  ﬁEffects of Task Difficulty
and Task Uniqueness on Social Loafing,ﬂ 
Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology (43:6), pp. 1241-1229.Heiberg, S., Puus, U., 
Salumaa, P., and Seeba, A.  2003.  ﬁPair-
Programming Effect on Developers Productivity,ﬂ in 
ExtremeProgramming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering
,112MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
M. Marchesi and G. Succi (eds
.), Berlin:  Springer-Verlag, pp.
215-224.Highsmith, J., and Cockburn, A.  
2001.  ﬁAgile So
ftware Develop-ment 1:  The Business of Innovation,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer (34:9), pp.
120-127.Hill, G. W.  1982.  ﬁGroup Versus Individual Performance:  Are N
+ 1 Heads Better than One?,ﬂ 
Psychological Bulletin (91:3), pp.
517-539.Hinsz, V. B.  1995.  ﬁGoal Setti
ng by Groups Performing an Addi-
tive Task:  A Comparison with Individual Goal Setting,ﬂ 
Journalof Applied Social Psychology (25:11), pp. 965-990.Hinsz, V. B., and Nickell, G. S.  2004.  ﬁPositive Reactions to
Working in Groups in a Study of Group and Individual Goal

Decision Making,ﬂ Group Dynamics (8:4), pp. 253-264.Hinsz, V. B., Tindale, R. S., and Vollrath, D. A.  1997.  ﬁThe
Emerging Conceptualization of Groups as Information Pro-
cessors,ﬂ 
Psychological Bulletin (121:1), pp. 43-64.Hulkko, H., and Abrahamsson, P.
  2005.  ﬁA Mu
ltiple Case Study
on the Impact of Pair Programming on Product Quality,ﬂ 
Pro-ceedings of the 27
th International Conference on Software
Engineering, St. Louis, MO, pp. 495-504.Ito, J. K., and Peterson, R. B.  
1986.  ﬁEffects of Task Difficulty and
Interunit Interdependence on In
formation Processing Systems,ﬂ
Academy of Management Journal (29:1), pp. 139-149.ITPro.  2007.  ﬁIT Spending Growth Expected to Slow,ﬂ 
ITPro NewsBriefs, January/February, p. 7 (http://csdl2.computer.org/comp/
mags/it/2007/01/f1006.pdf).
Jourden, F. J., and Heath, C.  
1996.  ﬁThe Evaluation Gap in Perfor-
mance Perceptions:  Illusory Perceptions of Groups and

Individuals,ﬂ Journal of Applied Psychology
 (81:4), pp. 369-379.
Karau, S. J., and Williams, K. D. 
 1993.  ﬁSocial Loafing:  A Meta-
Analytic Review and Theoretical Integration,ﬂ 
Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology (65:4), pp. 681-706.Kerr, N. L., and Tindale, R. S.  2004.  ﬁGroup Performance and
Decision Making,ﬂ 
Annual Review of Psychology
 (55:1), pp.
623-655.Khatri, V., Vessey, I., Ram, S., and Ramesh, V.  2006.  ﬁCognitive
Fit Between Conceptual Schemas and Internal Problem Repre-

sentations:  The Case of Geospatio-Temporal Conceptual Schema

Comprehension,ﬂ IEEE Transactions on Professional Communi-
cation (49:2), pp. 109-127.Kumar, N., and Benbasat, I.  2004.
  ﬁThe Effect of Relationship
Encoding, Task Type, and Complexity on Information Represen-

tation:  An Empirical Evaluation of 2D and 3D Line Graphs,ﬂ

MIS Quarterly (28:2), pp. 255-281.Latane, B., Williams, K. D., and Harkins, S. G.  1979.  ﬁMany
Hands Make Light the Work:  Th
e Causes and Consequences of
Social Loafing,ﬂ 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
(37:6), pp. 822-832.Laughlin, P. R.  1980.  ﬁSocial Co
mbination Processes of Coopera-
tive Problem-Solving Groups on Verbal Intellective Tasks,ﬂ in

Progress in Social Psychology
, M. Fishbein (ed.), Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum, pp. 127-155.Laughlin, P. R., Bonner, B. L., and Altermatt, T. W.  1998.
ﬁCollective Versus Individua
l Induction wth Single Versus
Multiple Hypotheses,ﬂ  (75:6), pp. 1481-1489.
Laughlin, P. R., Bonner, B. L., a
nd Miner, A. G.  2002.  ﬁGroups
Perform Better than the Best 
Individuals on Letter-to-Numbers
Problems,ﬂ 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes
 (88:2), pp. 605-620.Laughlin, P. R., and Ellis, A. L.  1986.  ﬁDemonstrability and Social
Combination Processes on Mathematical Intellective Tasks,ﬂ
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
 (22:3), pp. 177-189.
Laughlin, P. R., Gonzalez, C. M., and Sommer, D.  2003.  ﬁQuantity
Estimations by Groups and Indi
viduals:  Effects of Known
Domain Boundaries,ﬂ Group Dynamics (7:1), pp. 55-63.Laughlin, P. R., Hatch, E. C., Silver, J. S., and Boh, L.  2006. 
ﬁGroups Perform Better Than the 
Best Individuals on Letters-to-
Numbers Problems:  Effects of Group Size,ﬂ 
Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology (90:4), pp. 644-651.Laughlin, P. R., VanderStoep, S. 
W., and Hollingshead, A. B.  1991.
ﬁCollective Versus Individual Induction:  Recognition of Truth,

Rejection of Error, and Coll
ective Information Processing,ﬂ
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
 (61:1), pp. 50-67.
Laughlin, P. R., Zander, M. L., Knievel, E. M., and Tan, T. K. 
2003.  ﬁGroups Perform Better Than the Best Individuals on

Letters-to-Numbers Problems:  Informative Equations and Effec-

tive Strategies,ﬂ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
(85:4), pp. 684-694.Levine, J. M., and Moreland, R. L.  1998.  ﬁSmall Groups,ﬂ in
Handbook of Social Psychology
, D. T. Gilbert and S. T. Fiske
(eds.), New York:  McGraw-Hill, pp. 415-469.Lui, K. M., and Chan, K. C. C.
  2005.  ﬁPair Programming Produc-
tivity:  Novice-Novice vs. Expert-Expert,ﬂ 
International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies (64:9), pp. 915-925.Madeyski, L.  2006.  ﬁThe Impact
 of Pair Programming and Test-
Driven Development on Package Dependencies in Object-
Oriented DesignŠAn Experiment,ﬂ in 
Product-FocusedSoftware Process Improvement
, J. Munch and M. Vierimaa
(eds.), Heidelberg:  Springer-Verlag, pp. 278-289.Madeyski, L.  2007.  ﬁOn the Effects of Pair Programming on
Thoroughness and Fault-Finding Effectiveness of Unit Tests,ﬂ in
Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, J. Munch and
P. Abrahamsson (eds.), Heid
elberg:  Springer-Verlag, pp.
207-221.Maslow, A. H.  1943.  ﬁA Theory of Human Motivation,ﬂ
Psychological Review
 (50:4), pp. 370-396.McDowell, C., Werner, L., Bullock, H. E., and Fernald, J.  2006. 
ﬁPair Programming Improves Student Retention, Confidence, and

Program Quality,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (49:8), pp.
90-95.McGrath, J. E.  1984.  
Groups:  Interaction and Performance
,Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice-Hall, Inc.Mullen, B., and Salas, J. C. 
 1991.  ﬁProductivity Loss in
Brainstorming Groups:  A Me
ta-Analytic Integration,ﬂ 
BasicApplied Social Psychology (12:1), pp. 3-23.Müller, M. M.  2005.  ﬁTwo Cont
rolled Experiments Concerning the
Comparison of Pair Programming to Peer Review,ﬂ 
Journal of
Systems and Software (78:2), pp. 166-179.Müller, M. M.  2006.  ﬁA Prelimin
ary Study on the Impact of a Pair
Design Phase on Pair Progra
mming and Solo Programming,ﬂ
Information and Software Technology (48:5), pp. 335-344.MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
113 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Nawrocki, J., and Wojciechowski, A.  2001.  ﬁExperimental
Evaluation of Pair Programming,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 12
thEuropean Software Control and Metrics Conference, 
London, pp.
269-276.Neter, J., Kutner, M. H., Nachtsheim, C. J., and Wasserman, W. 
1996.  Applied Linear Models, Chicago:  Irwin, 1996.Newell, A., and Simon, H. A.  1972.  
Human Problem Solving
,Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice-Hall.Nixon, H. L.  1979.  
The Small Group
, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice-Hall.
Nosek, J. T.  1998.  ﬁThe Ca
se for Collaborative Programming,ﬂ
Communications of the ACM (41:3), pp. 105-108.Orr, K.  2002.  ﬁCMM Versus Ag
ile Development:  Religious Wars
and Software Development,ﬂ 
Agile Project Management
Executive Report 
 (3:7), Cutter Consortium, Arlington, MA.Paulus, P. B., Dzindolet, M. T., Po
letes, G., and Camacho, L. M. 
1993.  ﬁPerception of Performance 
in Group Brainstorming:  The
Illusion of Group Productivity,ﬂ 
Personality & Social Psychology
Bulletin (19:1), pp. 78-89.Petty, R. E., Harkins, S. G., Willia
ms, K. D., and Latane, B.  1977. 
ﬁThe Effects of Group Size on Cognitive Effort and Evaluation,ﬂ

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin (3), pp. 575-578.Phongpaibul, M., and Boehm, B.  
2006.  ﬁAn Empirical Comparison
Between Pair Development and Software Inspection in

Thailand,ﬂ in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, pp. 85-94.Rostaher, M., and Hericko, M.  2002.
  ﬁTracking Test First Pair Pro-
grammingŠAn Experiment,ﬂ in 
Extreme Programming andAgile Methods Œ XP/Agile Universe 2002
, D. Wells and L.
Williams (eds.), Heidelberg:  
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, pp.
3-19.Rubinstein, D.  2007.  ﬁStandish
 Group Report:  There™s Less Devel-
opment Chaos Today,ﬂ 
Software Development Times
 (http://
www.sdtimes.com/content/article.aspx?ArticleID=30247).
Schroder, H., Driver, M., and Streufert, S.  1967.  
Human Informa-tion Processing, New York:  Holt, Rinehart and Winston.Simmel, G. (ed.).  1950.  
The Sociology of George Simmel
, New
York:  The Free Press.
Sniezek, J. A.  1992.  ﬁGroups under Uncertainty:  An Examination
of Confidence in Group Decision Making,ﬂ 
OrganizationalBehavior & Human Decision Processes
 (52:1), pp. 124-155.Steiner, I. D.  1972.  
Group Process and Productivity, New York: 
Academic Press.
Stephenson, G. M., and Wagner, 
W.  1989.  ﬁOrigins of the
Misplaced Confidence Effect in Collaborative Recall,ﬂ 
AppliedCognitive Psychology (3:3), pp. 227-236.Vanhanen, J., and Lassenius, C.  
2005.  ﬁEffects of Pair Program-
ming at the Development Team Level:  An Experiment,ﬂ in

Proceedings of the International Symposium on Empirical

Software Engineering, Noosa, Australia, pp. 336-345.Williams, K. D., Harkins, S. G., and Latane, B.  1981.  ﬁIdentifi-
ability as a Deterrent to Social Loafing:  Two Cheering Experi-

ments,ﬂ 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
 (40), pp.
303-311.Williams, L.  2000.  
The Collaborative Software,  unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Utah.
Williams, L. A., and Kessler, R. R.  2000.  ﬁAll I Really Need to
Know About Pair Programming 
I Learned in Kindergarten,ﬂ
Communications of the ACM (43:5), pp. 108-114.Williams, L. A., Kessler, R. R., Cunningham, W., and Jeffries, R. 
2000.  ﬁStrengthening the Ca
se for Pair Programming,ﬂ 
IEEESoftware (17:4), pp. 19-25.Xu, S., and Rajlich, V.  2006.  ﬁEmp
irical Validation of Test-Driven
Pair Programming in Ga
me Development,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the
5th IEEE/ACIS International Conference on Computer and
Information Science, Honolulu, HI, pp. 500-505.Zajonc, R. B.  1965.  ﬁSocial Facilitation,ﬂ 
Science (149), pp.
269-274.About the AuthorsVenuGopal Balijepally
 is an assistant professor of MIS in the
College of Business at Prairie View A&M University, Texas.  He

received his Ph.D. in Information Systems from the University of

Texas at Arlington and Post Gr
aduate Diploma in Management
(MBA), from the Management Development Institute, Gurgaon,

India.  His research interests include software development, social

capital of IS teams, knowledge ma
nagement and IT management.
His research publications appear in 
Communications of the ACM
,Communications of the AIS
, and various conference proceedings
such as the Americas Conference on Information Systems, the

Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, and the

Decision Sciences Institute.RadhaKanta Mahapatra 
is an associate professor of Information
Systems at the University of Texa
s at Arlington.  He holds a Ph.D.in Information Systems from Texas A&M University.  His research

interests include software de
velopment methodologies, knowledgemanagement, data mining, web-ba
sed end-user training, and IT
management.  His research publicati
ons appear in such journals as
MIS Quarterly, Communications of the ACM, Decision Support

Systems, Information & Management, Database for Advances in

Information Systems, Communica
tions of the AIS, Journal of
Database Management, Journal of 
Computer Information Systems,
and International Journal of Production Research.
  He received the
Distinguished Research Publica
tion Award and the Distinguished
Professional Publication Award 
from the College of Business
Administration of the University of Texas at Arlington.
Sridhar Nerur
 is an associate professor of Information Systems at
the University of Texas at Arlington.  He received his Ph.D. from

the University of Texas at Arlingt
on.  His research interests include
software development, citation an
alysis, reuse, maintenance, and
philosophical aspects of systems de
velopment.  He has published in
the MIS Quarterly, Strategic M
anagement Journal, Communications
of the ACM, Database for Advances in Information Systems, Com-

munications of the AIS, Information Systems Management, Informa-

tion Management & Computer Security
, and in various conferenceproceedings.  He is an associate editor of the 
European Journal of
Information Systems.114MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Kenneth H. Price
 is a professor of Mana
gement and Organizational
Behavior at the University of Texas at Arlington.  He received his

Ph.D. from Michigan State University in Industrial-Organizational

Psychology.  His research publications appear in
 Management
Science, Academy of Management 
Journal, Journal of Management,
Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, Journalof Applied Psychology, Journal of
 Information Systems, Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, Group and Organizational Studies,
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, Human Resource Manage-

ment Review, Behavioral Research in Accounting, The Accounting
Review, and Theory and Decision.
  He is a past associate editor of
the International Journal of Conflict Management and was a guesteditor and is currently a member of the Editorial Board of

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes.Appendix ATask of Low Complexity (Student Grades)
You are to complete an application that involves a Student cla
ss.  An initial effort at creati
ng the Student class resulted in 
Student.java.
Complete the methods in the Student class.  A brief description of these methods follows:ŁStudent(String id, String name)
 Œ constructor for the Student class.  The two parameters are for initializing the student™s id and name.
ŁgetScores()
 Œ A student has two exam scores. This method prom
pts the user for the score on each of the exams. 
ŁcomputeAverage()
 Œ This method computes the average of the two exam scores and returns the value.ŁcomputeGrade()
 Œ The purpose of this method is to co
mpute a letter grade based on the average of the two exam scores.  The grade
calculation is 
Œaverage score >
 90.0 is an ﬁAﬂŒaverage score between 80.0 and 89.99 is a ﬁBﬂ

Œaverage score between 70.0 and 79.99 is a ﬁCﬂ

Œaverage score between 60.0 and 69.99 is a ﬁDﬂ

Œaverage score < 60.0 is an ﬁFﬂ

Notice that the method returns a character.ŁtoString() 
Œ This method is used to convert a student 
object to a String.  It returns a Student r
ecord as a string that contains the id, n
ame,
average score, and letter grade.
After you implement these methods, complete
 the StudentTest.java application.  The 
application creates three students objects a
nd adds them
to the array.  It then gets the exam scores for each of the 
students.  Finally, display the three students in the following for
mat:
IDNameAverageGrade
Example:
Assume that we have the following student objects:Student 1:  studentID = ﬁ111ﬂ, name = ﬁDoug Waltersﬂ, examOneScore = 90.0, examTwoScore = 80.0Student 2:  studentID = ﬁ222ﬂ, name = ﬁGarry S
obersﬂ, examOneScore = 92.0, examTwoScore = 100.0Student 3:  studentID = ﬁ333ﬂ, name = ﬁViv Richardsﬂ, examOneScore = 80.0, examTwoScore = 78.0The output is 111Doug Walters85.00B
222Garry Sobers96.00A

333Viv Richards79.00C
MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
115 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Appendix BTask of High Complexity (Movie Rental Application)
Summary of task:  Provide a way to keep a list of movies and a way to display a movie, given its title.  Assume that movie titles are unique.An incomplete application is available to
 fulfill this task.  The application displa
ys three options: (1) Add Movie; (2) Displa
y Movie; and
(3) Exit.  These options have not been implemented. It is your
 responsibility to implement them.  A brief description of each o
ption follows:ŁAdd Movie:  This option should prompt the user for a title, create a m
ovie object using the title, and then add the movie to a list of
movies maintained in another class. ŁDisplay Movie
:  This option asks for a title, retrieves the movie and disp
lays its title.  If the given title is not found, it should displa
ya message to that effect.
ŁExit: Exits the application.Modify the Movie class to include the following instance variables:
ŁCategory
 Œ which tells you what type of movie 
it is.  This could be ﬁComedy,ﬂ ﬁMystery,ﬂ ﬁWestern,ﬂ ﬁClassic,ﬂ ﬁAction,ﬂ etc.
ŁRating Œ indicates the rating of the movie (e.g., PG, PG-13, R, NC-17, etc.)
Write appropriate constructor(s) and methods to handle these changes.Modify the addMovie method in the user interface to reflect thes
e changes.  In other words, 
the method should 
now get title, ca
tegory, and
rating, and then create a movie object with those values.
Modify the displayMovie method in the user interface to 
display title, category, and rating of the retrieved movie.
Add a menu option called About.  Make it the third option and make 
Exit the fourth option.  The About option displays a message that reads
as follows:Movie list application programmed by 
your name116MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Appendix CSoftware Quality Assessment Rubric for Task of Low Complexity
Session _____ Room ________
SNoDescription
MaxPointsPointsScoredRemarks
IStudent class evaluation
AStudent(String id, String name)
ŁProper parameters

ŁVisibility:  public

ŁNo return type

ŁMethod name:  same as class name (i.e. Student)

ŁShould only initialize id and name of student

ŁFor name, this.name = name should be used
10BgetScores()
Łvisibility:  public

Łreturn type:  void

Łassignments 
20Give 5 additional points if the getScores() method is generic. That is, it asks the
user for the number of courses and then gets that many exam scores.
5CcomputeAverage()
10DcomputeGrade()
12EtoString()10IIStudent Test Class Evaluation:
ACreating three student objects
 (to be put in the array called students):
A1Option 1:
Solution is hard coded. 
E.g., students[0] = new St
udent(ﬁ111ﬂ, ﬁViv Richardsﬂ);9A2Option 2:
Generic solution using loop:  Example..
for(int i = 0; i < students.length; i++)

{//code for initializing}14BGetting the exam scores for each
B1Option 1:  No loop
9B2Option 2:  With loop (generalizable):14
CDisplaying the three students:
C1Option 1:  Hard coded solution (no loop,
 don™t use toString() concept etc.):  20Points
Use the following criteria for evaluation:

Łoutput format

Łaccuracy of results
20C2Option2:  Generic solution. They use a loop and
System.out.println(studentObject).
25IIIGoing beyond requirements:
Maintainability considerations Œ 
Łappropriate comments

Łindentation
5Total
125MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
117 Balijepally et al./The Productivity Paradox of Pair Programming
Appendix DSoftware Quality Assessment Rubric for Task of High Complexity
Session _____ Room ________
SNoDescription
MaxPointsPointsScoredRemarks
IMovie class evaluation
AAdd 2 String variables for category
 and ratingIf data type is wrong, deduct 3 points
5BAdd a constructor:
public Movie(String title, String category, String rating)
{
this.title = title;
this.category = category;

this.rating = rating;

}
Check for:  return type (none for c
onstructor), variable names Œ deduct somepoints if they are incorrect. 
10CAdd gettor/accessor methods for category and rating
5DAdditional points if toString() is implemented5
IIDisplay of menu Œ if correct5
IIIAddMovie class evaluation
AGet title, category, rating (5 points each)
15BCreate a movie object:
B1Make sure they have a reference to 
MovieCollection in the UserInterface classORThey could handle this by making t
he add and get methods static in theMovieCollection class5B2Movie object created with proper parameters
10CAdding the movie Œ proper call to MovieCollection™s ﬁaddﬂ method
5IVImplementation of Display Movie Option
AAdding a ﬁgetﬂ method to the MovieCo
llection that takes the title as aparameter and return a movie object10A1if they display ﬁTitle not
 foundﬂ when movie is not found.
5A2Additional points if they use exceptions10
BGetting/reading the title
5CDisplaying the movie
10C1Additional points if toString() is implicitly used5
VﬁAboutﬂ option implementation5
VIExit Œ if correct5
VIIGoing beyond requirements:
Maintainability considerations Œ 
Łappropriate comments

Łindentation
5Total
125118MIS Quarterly Vol. 33 No. 1/March 2009
 